The Five BOOKS OF M. MANILIUS, Containing a SYSTEM OF THE Ancient Astronomy
AND ASTROLOGY: Together with The Philosophy of the STOICS.

Done into English Verse with Notes. By Mr. THO. CREECH.

Nunc autem quid est sine his cur vivere volimus? Mihi vero cum his ipsis vix:
His autem detractis, ne vix quidem.

Cicero ad Var. LONDON, Printed, and Sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster. 1700.



AN ACCOUNT OF MANILIUS.
SIR,
THE Campaign being over, and Councils not yet begun, the World is very much at
quiet; nor can I find News enough to fill a Letter: But to keep up our usual
Correspondence, I send you an Account of an old Latin Poet, very little known,
though as worthy your Acquaintance, as many of those who are in Credit. He lay
buried in the German Libraries, not heard of in the World, till Poggius
Published him from some old Manuscripts found there; and though Vid. Not. ad
Lucianum.
Burde Cotzus, thinks Lucian consulted this Poet when he wrote his little
Treatise of Astrology; though Julius Firmizus is By Scaliger and Huetius.
accused as an ungrateful Plagiary, for not acknowledging from whom he
Transcribed the chiefest parts of his Books; yet there is no good Evidence,
that any one Writer mentioned this Author before Poggius. Pliny is supposed to
speak of him as a Not. Hist. lib. 36. cap. 10.
Mathematician, and Gerbertus, as an Gerbertus Rhemensis Bishop of Ravenna, and
afterward Pope of Rome, Epist. 130. Age vero, Te solo conscio, ex tuis
sumptibus fac mihi scribantur Marcus Manilius de Astrologia, Victorinus de
Rhetorica, etc.
Astrologer; but concerning the Poet, there is as dead a silence as if he had
never been; nor can his greatest Admirers find any Character of him in old
Writers.

Yet it must be owned, that he is an Author of some considerable Age; for the
Manuscripts which Poggius, Bonincontrius, Scaliger, and Franciscus Junius used,
were ancient: Tanaquil Faber, Spanhemius, and the severest Critics allow him
to be as old as Theodosius the Great, and pretend to find some particular
Phrases in him, which are certain Characters of that Time.

Others, who believe they have very good Reasons to place him higher, find it
very difficult to account for this universal silence: What they offer, is
either bare May-be and Shift, and scarce ever amounts to a tolerable Reason:
It Is true, they say, he is not mentioned by Ovid in his De Ponto, lib. 4. Ep.
16.
Catalogue of Poets, and no wonder, since he did not begin to write before the
This Huetius affirms, but is undoubtedly mistaken.
Banishment of Ovid, and Published nothing before his Death; Perhaps he was one
of those Young Men, -- Ovid. ibid.
Quorum quod inedita cura est
Appellandorum nil mihi juris adest.
or his Fame did not reach so far as Pontus: Otherwise they are confident there
are too many Graces in his Poem to be neglected; at least, the singularity of
his Subject would have deserved to be taken notice of, as well as that of
Aptaque venanti Gratius arma dedit. Ovid. ibid.
Gratius. But why Quintilian does not propose him to his Orator, though he
encourages him to Instit. lib. 10. Cap. 1.
read Macer and Lucretius, and Instit. lib. 1. cap. 10.
affirms, that a competent skill in Astronomy is necessary to make him perfect
in his Profession? Why the following Philologers never use his Authority, though
it might very often have been pertinently cited by Gellius and Macrobius? Why
the Grammarians and Mythologists, seem to be altogether unacquainted with his
Writings? They confess these are Questions not easy to be answered.

Of this Poet, who is acknowledged by all Parties to have lain very long
unknown, and about whom, since he first appeared in the World, so many
Controversies have risen, I am now to give you an account.

His Name is commonly said to be Marcus Manilius, which in some Copies of his
Poem is shortened into Manlius, in others softened into Mallius: This variation
is inconsiderable, and the common fault of unaccurate Transcribers; but Praef.
Bonincontrius affirms, that the Title of his very Ancient Copies was, C.
Manilii Poetae illustris Astronomicon; and that he had seen a Medal, in which
was the Figure of a Man, but in a Foreign Habit, with a Sphere placed near his
Head, and this Inscription, C. MANILI. Lib. de Poet. Hist. dial. 4.
Lilius Gyraldus mentions another of the same stamp; But that these Medals
belonged to this Poet, may be as easily denied, as it is affirmed, or rather, as
it is conjectured: However all Parties agree, that the most Ancient Copies
constantly bear the Title of Manilius; but whether the Books of Poggius and
Bonincontrius, which call him Caius, or those of Scaliger and others, in which
we find Marcus written, are to be followed, is submitted to every Man's
Discretion; the Matter is not of any Consequence, nor a fit Subject for
Dispute, because impossible to be determined: Though if Conjecture may be
admitted, I should fancy that it is more probable a Transcriber may err, when
he puts M. before Manilius, than when he writes a C. because in the former
case, the Sound of the following Word, which is the most considerable in the
Title, and consequently the chiefest in his Thoughts, may pervert him; but in
the latter, He has no temptation to mistake. This M. or C. Manilius, was born
a Roman, and lived in Rome when Rome was in her Glory; commanding the biggest
part of the known World, and full of the greatest Men that ever any time
produced: For the same Age that saw Manilius enjoyed Varro, Lucretius, Cicero,
Caesar, Virgil, Varius, Horace, and (to close the Catalogue) Augustus. In the
beginning of this Astronomical Poem that Emperor is Lib. 1. v. 7.
invoked, that very Emperor who was the Lib. 1. v. 10.
adopted Son of Julius Caesar, who Lib. 1. v. 906.
beat Brutus and Cassius at Philippi, Lib. 1. v. 918.
overthrew Pompey the Great's Son, Lib. 4. v. 763.
who sent Tiberius to Rhodes, Lib. 1. v. 896.
who lost three Legions in Germany under the Command of Varus; who Lib. 1. v.
912.
routed Anthony and Cleopatra at Actium, and saved the Roman Empire by turning
that overgrown dissolute Republic into a well regulated Monarchy. Here are so
many Characters, that the Person cannot be mistaken, not one of them agreeing
to any but the first Great Augustus. So that this Author lived in that Age to
which He pretends by so many very particular Circumstances, or else He is a
most notorious Cheat, and one of the greatest Impostors in the World.

It seems Not. in Lib. 6. Lucretij.
Tanaquil Faber thought him to be so, since without giving any Reason He brings
him down as low as the time of Theodosius: De Art Gram. lib. 2. cap. 26.
Vossius was once of the same Opinion, having observed, as He then thought,
some Measures, Words and Phrases peculiar to that Age, and therefore He
concludes against Scaliger, that Julius Firmicus did not follow Manilius, but
Manilius wrote in Verse what Firmicus had published in Prose under the Reign of
Constantine the Great: But upon second Reading this Lib. de Poet. Lat.
Critic altered his first Sentiments, and allows him to be as ancient as the
Poet himself desires to be thought. Phys. Sect. 2. lib. 6. cap. 2. Ptolomaeus,
Firmicus, Manilius primarij hujus Artis Script^res. vid. etiam p. 717. and page
740.
Gassendus often quotes him, and always sets him after Firmicus, as may be seen
in many places of his Writings; but gives no reason why he constantly observes
that order: But Gevartius, who had studied and designed to publish Notes upon
this Author, says in a Letter to Mr. Cambden, vid. Cambd. Epist. p. 260.
I have been long acquainted with this Writer, and know him well, but cannot,
with Scaliger and other learned Critics, allow him to be as ancient as
Augustus, for in my Notes I will demonstrate that he lived in the Age of
Theodosius and his Sons Arcadius and Honorius, and that he was the same with
Manlius Theodorus, upon whose Consulship Claudian writes a Panegyric, in which
he mentions his Astronomicon. The same thing he asserts in his Comments upon
Vid. Not. in Statij. lib. 3. Syl. Carm. 3.
Statius, and promises to do Wonders in his His Electa were almost finished A.
D. 1618. vid. Cambd. Epist. p. 259.
Electa upon this Subject; what his performance was I do not find taken notice
of by any of the Critics, nor am I concerned for it, being certain that he
failed in his Attempt, because it was ridiculous and rash: Yet the learned
Ezechiel Spanhemius endeavors to support this Conjecture of Gevartius, De
praestantia and Vsu Numismatum. page 643.
and tells us, that sub Armis, a Phrase familiar to Manilius, as lib. 1. v. 795.

-- Matrisque sub Armis
Miles Agrippa suae --
Lib. 4. v. 656.

-- Regnum sortita sub Armis. And in another place, -- Quumque ipsa sub Armis
Pax agitur --
was used in the time of Theodosius, as appears by the following passage in
that Emperor's Code, Cod. Theod. l. 38. t. 1. de Decur.
Quicunque sub Armis Militiae munus Comitatense subierunt. Scaliger himself
unwarily gave a very great advantage to this Opinion, when he Not. ad Manil.
affirmed, that the word Decanus, which Manilius uses, was brought from the
Camp, and that a Sign which governed ten Degrees was called Decanus, because an
Officer who commanded ten Men in the Army had the same Title: But Sal. de An.
Climact. p. 560.
Salmatius, who discovered the Mistake, (for Decanus was not heard of in the
Roman Camp before the time of Constantine the Great) has so well corrected it,
or rather Not. ad lib. 4. v. 298.
Huetius has given so good an Account of that Word, that though an Argument
drawn from it may be strong against the Critic, it will never be of any force
against the Author. It is almost needless to mention the Exceptions of those
Critics who think his Style impure, or, as they please to speak, too barbarous
for the Age he pretends to; Indeed Lib. de Poet. 3. Dial. 4.
Gyraldus endeavors by this very Argument to prove he was no Roman born: But
Scal. Proleg. in Manilium. p. 3.
Scaliger laughs at him for his Attempt, tells him that he does not distinguish
between Idiotisms and Barbarisms, and that Vitruvius (to whom he should have
added Lucretius) might be called barbarous as well as he: Praef. ad Not.
Franciscus Junius commends the propriety of his Language, Not. ad Aug. script.
Salmatius and Vid. Not. in Manil.
Huetius have approved many passages which lesser Critics thought to be
impure; And the accurate Vossius, De Poet. Lat.
after he had studied and considered him well, found nothing in him
inconsistent with the Age of Augustus, and the Politeness of his Court. Indeed
most of the Instances that are produced upon this head, do not fasten on the
Author himself, but on the Transcribers and Publishers of his Writings. There
ought to be a new Edition of his Astronomicon, and I do not despair of seeing
one which will have a pure genuine Text, and free that Text from many of his
Interpreters Comments, especially from the Notes of the miserable wretched The
Editor of Manilius in usum Delphini.
Fayus.

You see, Sir, I have brought this diffused Controversy within a very narrow
Compass; Tanaquil Faber and Gassendus keep their (if they had any) Reasons to
themselves. Their Authority I confess had been persuasive, had they considered,
and after a fair hearing determined the Controversy; but an incident
declaration, and an unweigh'd Sentence concerning the Age of any Writer ought
not to be submitted to, but appealed from: And therefore if I can show the
Observation of Spanhemius to be unconcluding, and refute the bold Conjectures
of Gevartius, I shall leave Manilius in possession of that Age, which he so
often, and with so much assurance claims. And here I am sure we should not have
been troubled with Spanhemius's Observation, had he been pleased to consider,
that sub Armis, and sub Armis Militiae, being very different from one another,
might be used in very different Ages of the Empire; and that he argues very
ill, who says, the one was known in the Time of Theodosius, and therefore the
other was not common in the Court of Augustus: It Is certain that it was, for
Virgil (whom Manilius often imitates) has -- Sedet circum castella sub Armis,
-- Equitem docuere sub Armis
Insultare solo --
And in another place, -- Ludunt Belli simulachra sub Armis. And this Virgil
himself borrowed from Ennius, who says, Ter me sub Armis malim vitam cernere. I
could produce more Authorities, were not these sufficient to secure Manilius
from Spanhemius's Observation.

But Gevartius, as he is bolder, so he is much more unhappy in his Conjectures;
he fixes upon the Man, and says this Manilius is Mallius Theodorus, celebrated
by the Poet Claudian; for the Author of this Astronomicon, is in many of the
old Copies called Mallius, and this Mallius Theodorus, was a good Astronomer,
and a Writer of great Industry and Reputation: But did Gevartius ever meet with
the Astronomicon, under the Title of Fl. Mallius Theodorus? Or of Fl. Mallius
and not always of C. or M. Manlius, Mallius or Manilius? Does Claudian commend
the Poetry of his Consul, or mention his Acquaintance with the Muses? or could
a Poet forget, or not celebrate that Talent which he himself must look upon as
a very great Perfection, and the Age would have highly valued, had he been the
Author of this Poem? Does he say he wrote Books of Astronomy, knew the Depths
of Astrology, and was admitted into the Councils of the Stars? Here was a large
Field for that luxuriant Wit to have wantoned in, and it cannot be thought he
would have concealed the deserts of his Patron when he studied to commend him:
But instead of this he praises his Justice, Integrity, Clemency and Honor; he
extols his Eloquence, and prefers the sweetness of it before all the delicate
Charms of Poetry and Music.

De Mallii Theod. Consul. v. 251.
Ut quis non sitiens Sermonis Mella politi
Deserat Orpheos blanda Testudine cantus?
And though all the Muses are concerned for him, and busy in his Service, yet he
is devoted to none of them but Ura^ie, who assisted him in his Astronomical
Diversions.

ibid. 274.
Uranie redimita comas, qua saepe Magistra
Mallius igniferos radio descripserat Axes.
Gevartius very well observes that this Consul Mallius was an Astronomer.

ibid. v. 126.
Invenit aetherios signantem pulvere cursus,
Quos pia sollicito deprendit pollice Memphis:
Quae moveant momenta polum, quam certus in Astris
Error: Quis tenebras Soli causisque meantem
Defectum indicat numerus. Quae linea Phoeben
Damn, et excluso pallentem fratre relinquat
That he published some admired Books ibid. v. 332.
Consul per populos, idemque gravissimus Author
Eloquij, duplici vita subnixus in aevu^
Procedat, libris pariter, fastisque legendus.
But how does it appear that Astronomy was his Subject, when Claudian himself
tells us it was the Origin and Constitution of the World? He represents him as
well versed in all the several Hypotheses of the Natural and Moral
Philosophers, acquainted both with the Physics and Ethics of the Greeks, and
able to discourse of their Opinions very properly, and very elegantly in Latin.

ibid! v. 84.
Graiorum obscuras Romany floribus Arts Irradias -- But when he speaks of his
Writings he says he described the Origin and Disposition of the World, Ibid.
v. 65.
and gave very convincing proofs of his own Wit, Capacity, and Judgment, by his
exact account of the beautiful Order, and regular Contrivance of that wonderful
Machine.

Ibid. v. 253.
Qualem te legimus teneri Primordia Mundi.
Scribentem, aut Parts Animae per Singula, Talem
Cernimus, et similes agnoscit Pagina mores.
From these Verses and other passages in Claudian, as -- ibid. v. 101.
Quae vis animaverit Astra,
Impuleritque Choros, quo vivat Machina motu;
it may be inferred that this Consul Mallius, was as to Natural Philosophy a
Stoic, and built his World according to the Hypothesis of that Sect, and
therefore wrote something very like what we find at large in the first Book,
and hinted at in several passages of the other Books of Manilius. But this
being the least part of our Author, and subservient to his greater and general
design, it must not be supposed that Claudian should enlarge only upon this,
and leave his whole Astrology untoucht; unless we think Claudian as ridiculous
as that Painter would be, who being to fill his Canvas with a noble Family
should draw a single Servant, or paint only a Finger or a Nail when he had a
large beautiful Body to represent.

I have been the more particular in this matter, because Gevartius pretends to
demonstration, though to confute his conjecture it had been sufficient only to
observe, that it is the most ridiculous thing in the World to imagine that
Mallius a Man well known both for his personal Endowments and public
Employments, who had been Governor of several Provinces, and at last Consul
should publish a Treatise under his own Name, and yet in almost every Page of
the Book endeavor to persuade his Readers it was written four hundred years
before. For it must be granted that the Prince whom he Lib. 1. v. 7.
invokes in the beginning of his Poem, who is styled Patriae Princepsque
Paterque, who is deify'd whilst lib. 1. v. 9. et 924.
alive, and (not to repeat the other particulars I have already reckoned up)
whose lib. 2. v. 509.
Horoscope was Capricorn, was the first Great Augustus, and therefore there is
no need of calling in the Authorities of Car. lib. 1. Od. 2. Hic ames dici
Pater atque Princeps.
Horace, Virg. Ec. 1. et Georg. 1.
and (...) Aug. cap. 94.
Suetonius to prove it.

This last Character puts me in mind of another Objection that may be drawn
from F. Harduin's de Number. Herod. p. 9.
Observation, for he says that Suetonius was himself deceived, and has
deceived all those who have thought Capricorn was concerned in the Nativity of
Augustus: For if this be true all the Pretenses of Manilius are ruined; but
since that Writer does not back his Assertion with any Reasons, I shall not
submit to his bare Authority, nor wast my time in guessing what Arguments he
may rely on, being not bold enough to conjecture what the daring Author may
produce. Having thus fixed the Age of this Author, and proved him to have lived
in the time of Augustus Caesar, I shall venture farther to affirm that he was
born under the Reign of that Emperor, not only a Roman, but of illustrious
Extraction, being a branch of that noble Family the Manilij, who so often
filled the Consul's Chair, and supplied the best and greatest Offices in the
Roman Commonwealth. And here I must oppose many of the Critics, and be
unassisted by the rest: For Proleg. in Manil. p. 2.
Scaliger confesses, that from his own Writings, it cannot be known what
Countryman he was, and no other Authors give us any Information. Bonincontrius
and Gyraldus endeavor to prove from the Medal already mentioned, that he was
no Roman; the Learned Vid. Sir Edward Shirburn's Preface to the Sphere of
Manilius.
Isaac Vossius thinks he was a Syrian, and all who look upon him to be the same
with that Manilius mentioned by Pliny, Not. Hist. lib. 35. cap. 17. say he was
a Slave: Only Petrus Crinitus De Poet. Lat.
affirms, he was Nobly Born, and Mr. Tristan will Hist. Com. Tom. 1.
have him to be that Manilius, of whom Pliny gives a very Honorable Character,
in the Tenth Book and Second Chapter of his Natural History; where he says, He
was of Senatorian Dignity, an excellent Scholar, and (If we believe Mr.
Tristan) a very good Astronomer. But since Crinitus does not prove what he
says, and Mr. Tristan but conjectures at best, and upon Examination, will be
found to be very much mistaken in his Conjectures, therefore I cannot expect
any assistance from either of these Authors. Now it is not certain that the
Gentleman whom Pliny speaks of in the Second Chapter of his Tenth Book was
Named Manilius. Copies differ, and in the M. SS. of Salmasius Vid Salmatium ad
Solinum, p.
he is called Mamilius: Pliny does not say one word of his skill in Astronomy;
he only Vid Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 10. cap. 2.
affirms, That he was the first of all the Romans who wrote concerning the
Phoenix, that never any Man saw it feed, that in Arabia it is Sacred to the
Sun, that it lives 660 Years, and that with the Life of this Bird is
consummated the Conversion of the Great Year, in which the Stars return again
to their first points, and give significations of the same Seasons as at the
beginning: And all this any one may write who is in an entire Ignorance of the
Courses and Influence of the Stars: But when Mr. Tristan farther observes that
Pliny insinuates, besides a particular respect, a kind of Intimacy and
Acquaintance between this Manilius and himself, he gives us a very convincing
Argument against his own conjecture: for there is good reason to believe this
Manilius the Poet died before Augustus, and therefore could not be intimate
with Pliny.

To set this whole matter in its due light, I shall, as the learned and
ingenious Sr. Edward Shirburn has already done in his Preface to the Sphere of
Manilius take a view of those, who have been by the name of Manilius delivered
down to Posterity as Men of Letters, and then consider which of all those, or
whether any one of them was this Manilius the Poet.

Of that Manilius whom Pliny mentions in the second Chapter of his tenth Book I
have already said enough; and about that Manilius, whom Varro De Ling. Lat.
lib. 4. et 6.
cites, I shall not be concerned, there being no ground to think he was the
Author of this Poem. Sir Edward Shirburn's pref.
Pliny lib. 35. cap. 17. tells us of one Manilius surnamed Antiochus, who with
Publius Syrus, and Staberius Eros were brought to Rome, all three of Servile
Condition, but persons of good Literature. His words are these, Pedes Venalium
trans mare advectorum [Creta] denotare instituerunt Majores; Talemque Publium
[Syrum] mimicae Scenae conditorem, et Astrologiae consobrinum ejus Manilium
Antiochum, item Grammaticae Staberium Erotem, eadem navi advectos videre
Proavi. Our Ancestors used to mark with Chalk the Feet of those Slaves who were
brought over from beyond Sea to be sold; And such an one was Publius [Syrus]
the Founder of the Mimick Scene, and his Cousin German Manilius Antiochus of
Astrology, and Staberius Eros of Grammar; whom our great Grandfathers saw in
that manner brought over in one and the same Ship: This Manilius Laurentius
Bonincontrius (who near two ages ago commented on our Author) conceives the
same with Manilius who wrote this Astronomical Poem, to confirm which opinion
he produces the evidence of a Silver Medal in his possession whereon was the
figure of a Man, in an Exotic Habit with a Sphere placed near his Head, and
this Inscription MANILI: The same is affirmed says Lilius Gyraldus by Stephanus
Dulcinus, and the said Gyraldus farther assures us that a familiar Friend of
his, one Nicolaus Trapolinus, had another Medal of the like Stamp and
Inscription.

But against this opinion of Bonincontrius and Gyraldus, Scaliger opposes a
double Argument, one drawn from the seeming inveracity of that supposed
Evidence; no such Medal being at this day to be found in the Cabinets of any,
no not the most curious Antiquaries; the other from the reason of Time, for
Manilius Antiochus being brought to Rome in the beginning of Sylla's days (for
he was brought in the same Ship with Staberius Eros, who opened his Grammar
School in Rome whilst Sylla was alive) must needs, if he were the Author of
this Poem have been 120 Years old when he began to write, this piece being
written in the latter years of Augustus. Besides, the Author in the Proem of
this work wishes for long life to complete his intended Poem, and therefore
certainly he was not of that Age, it being ridiculous for a Man to wish for
long life, when he is at the Extreme already.

The same Pliny, lib. 36. cap. 10. speaks of one Manilius a Mathematician, who
when the Obelisk which Augustus erected in the Campus Martius for finding out
the Hours of the day by the Shadow of the Sun, with the Increase or Decrease of
the Days and Nights, placed a gilded Ball, Cujus Vertice Umbra colligeretur in
semetipsam, alia atque alia incrementa jaculantem Apice, ratione (ut ferunt) a
capite hominis intellecta, says Pliny, who commends the design.

To this Person Scaliger conceives this work may with fairer probability be
ascribed than to the former; which Opinion is by diverse other judicious Men
embraced.

The excellently learned Isaac Vossius conceives yet, that the Manilius
Antiochus, and the Manilius Mathematicus before mentioned are not two distinct
Persons, but one and the same under different Titles and Appellations, and the
very Author of the Poem we now publish, whose particular Sentiments upon this
Subject, and Arguments confirming the same, he was pleased not long since to
impart to me, by his most obliging Letter, in answer to some Queries by me
propounded in one of mine to him upon occasion of my intended publication of
this piece, which for the Readers satisfaction, I shall here make public, though
not in his own words, yet as near as may be in his own Sense.

And first in answer to Scaliger's Argument drawn from Reason to Time, against
Manilius Antiochus, upon the supposition of Staberius Eros (one of the Three
before mentioned) set open his Grammar School in the time of Sylla ninety five
years before the death of Augustus; and that therefore Manilius could not
probably be (according to Scaliger's Computation) less than 120 Years old at
the time when this Poem was written; he urges by way of reply, that Suetonius
(from whom Scaliger takes the ground of his Argument) does not say that
Staberius Eros opened his School in Sylla's time, but that he taught gratis the
Children of those who in Sylla's time were proscribed. The Words of Suetonius
are these, Sunt qui tradunt tanta eum (Staberium) honestate praeditum, ut
temporibus Syllanis Proscriptorum liberos gratis, et sine mercede ulla in
Disciplina receperit. How long that was after the times of Proscription will be
needless here to declare; and that Manilius was not so old as Scaliger
conceives, when this piece was written, may be made out from this, that he was
the Cousin German of Publius Syrus, who that he was brought a young Boy to his
Patron, Macrobius affirms, from whom likewise, and from the Verses of Laberius
it may be collected, that he was but a Youth when he came upon the Stage
against Laberius, which was but a little before the death of Julius Caesar and
Laberius also; to whom he succeeded on the Mimick Stage in the second year of
184 Olympiad, that is in the Year of Rome 711, as Eusebius testifies. And
therefore seeing it is, manifest that Manilius published this Poem soon after
the Varian Defeat, which happened in the Year 762 of Rome, it is as evident
likewise that between the Youth or Adolescence of Manilius, and the time
wherein he wrote this piece, there could not pass above one and fifty Years,
and consequently there is no reason to assign so great an Age to Manilius, as
Scaliger here does, since perhaps he was not seventy years old when he had
finished this his Astronomical Poem.

As to what Scaliger subjoyns touching Manilius his wish for long life together
with a cheerful old Age, and the Inference he thence makes that he could not
reasonably be thought to be old then, who wished he might live to be so. The
Argument is but weak, for Senium is one thing, and Senium Annosum is another;
Nor does he simply wish for Vitam Annosam, but Vitam Annosam quae conjuncta sit
cum molli Senecta, which may be wished for even by those who are very old.

As for the name of Antiochus, he seems to have taken it from the famous
Philosopher Antiochus Ascalonita, often mentioned by Cicero, Plutarch, Sextus
Empiricus, and others, whose School not only Cicero, but Varro, Brutus, and
diverse others are said to have frequented, and in all probability this our
Manilius also, as being not only of the same Nation, but happily born in the
same Town ( Ascalon.) So that it may seem no wonder if after the manner of
those times, he took upon him the Name of his worthy Tutor and Instructor. For
that he was a Syrian is not only manifest from his Consanguinity with Publius
Mimus, but may likewise be collected from the Title or Inscription of this
work, which is an ancient and excellent Manuscript in the Possession of Vossius
is this M. MALLII POENI ASTRONOMICON DIVO OCTAVIO QUIRINO AUG. That the
Phaenicians were by the Romans called POENI is manifest out of Horace, Cicero
apud Nonium, and our Author in this very Poem; he concludes therefore than this
our Manilius, or (as he is rather pleased to call him) Manlius was a
Phaenician, and in all probability Native of the same Town as Antiochus his
Tutor, whose name he assumed.

From this Dedication of his Work to Augustus, by the Name of Quirinus, as the
Inscription shows, will appear the Error of those, who who imagine the same to
be Dedicated to Tiberius, or some later Roman Emperor: And the Reason of
attributing the Name of Quirinus to Augustus, may be made clear from the Words
of Suetonius, Censentibus quibusdam Romulum appellari oportere quasi et ipsum
conditorem Urbis, etc. Dion likewise tells us (...), That Augustus Caesar
extremely desired to be called Romulus: and Joannes Philadelphensis (Scripto de
Mensibus in Aug.) (...) Octavianus Son of Octavius was after his great
Victories honored with diverse Names, for by some he was called Quirinus, as
another Romulus, etc.

As to that Manilius styled by Pliny Mathematicus, he conceives that titular
distinction to make no difference in the Person, but that he is the same with
the former, further adding, Omnino existimo et illum quoque de nostro Manilio
accipi debere. And whereas Salmasius affirms that the name Manlius or Manilius
is not to be found in that place of Pliny in any ancient Manuscripts, he makes
it appear that Salmasius is extremely mistaken by the testimony of several
ancient Manuscript Copies of Pliny in his Possession, one of which was written
above 8 or 900 Years ago, in all which the Word Manlius is found, though with
some small difference in writing of the name. Nor does he think the name of
Marcus prefixd to Manilius ought to be scrupled at, upon the Account that none
of the Manlian Family after the 360th Year from the building of Rome could or
did use that Praenomen, seeing the prohibition as Cicero intimates is only to
be understood of the Patrician Race, Now that this Manilius, or (as he calls
him) Manlius was before his Manumission a Slave, not only the place of Pliny
already cited, but the very Agnomen of Antiochus sufficiently demonstrates, for
as much as a Greek Agnomen joined to a Roman Name is always a most certain
Token of a Servile Condition.

Thus far Sir Edward Shirburn, who is very much inclined to rest satisfied with
this rational discourse of the incomparable Vossius, and thinks others should
be so too; but upon examination it will appear that Scaliger's Objections are
still in force, and that Vossius's his reasonings are all to little purpose. It
must be granted that the Agnomen Antiochus proves that Manilius to be of
Servile Condition, though there is no need of this Argument, since Pliny in very
express Terms asserts that he is so: It Is likewise true that that Manilius was a
Syrian, being a near Kinsman to Publius Syrus, and brought to Italy in the same
Ship with him: But that that Manilius the Syrian was the same with Manilius the
Poet, is a Question that still returns, and will not, I fear, be determined by
the Title of that ancient and excellent Manuscript of Vossius: For if instead
of M. MALLII POENI, we read M. MALLII POETAE, which is found in other
Manuscripts, (and every body knows there is so little difference in the traits
of the Letters of those two words in ancient Copies, that they may very easily
by Ignorant Transcribers be mistaken for one another) then the Evidence drawn
from this Inscription is lost: Besides that Title is not to be regarded, it not
being written by the Author but affixt by some heedless Copyer of the Poem: For
it is Divo Octavio, whereas Augustus was never styled Divus though often Deus
before his Death, and the Writer of the Astronomicon, as will by and by appear,
died before Augustus.

To speak out what I think will not be denied, Manilius the Author of this Poem
was young when he wrote it, and died young; and therefore cannot be that
Manilius Antiochus whom Scaliger reckons to be 120, and Vossius is forced to
confess was 70 years of Age about the time Varus was defeated by the Germans.
The first part of this Assertion may be demonstrated from almost all the Pages
of his Book, in which we meet with many things that are not to be accounted for
on the Hypothesis of Sixty: He is too fierce and fiery for that Age, and bounds
every Step he takes: In a Man of years when we find a Warmth we feel it to be
regular, he never starts, his Pace is equal, and seldom varies but when his
Subject forces him to a more than ordinary quickness.

Judgment appears all through, and a strength well governed: When he rises he
does not affect to climb but to walk, like a sober Traveller, who knowing his
own force seeks the easiest ascent, when his Ground is uneven, or he is obliged
to take the advantage of a Prospect. But it is not so in Youth whose Fancies as
well as Passions are impetuous; that pleases them most which is most daring,
finding they have strength they use it to the utmost, and when at last they
sink they seem rather worn out, than tired. I cannot compare the Spirit of
Poetry possessing a Youth, of a strong generous Imagination and vigorous
Constitution, to any thing better than to a Flame seizing on the Body of a
Meteor, the whole Mass blazes, and mounts upon a sudden; but its motion is all
the way uneven, and it quickly falls in a despicable Gelly: He that looks on
the Latin of Manilius will see that I do him no Injury when I compare him to
this Meteor, for even when he is obliged to give rules, and is tied almost to a
certain form of words, he struggles against those necessary Fetters, he reaches
after the strongest Metaphors, uses the boldest Catachresis, and against all
the rules of Decency labors after an obscure Sublime, when he should endeavor
to be plain, intelligible and easy: But as soon as he has room to get loose,
how wildly does he rove? he is not free but licentious, and strives to err
greatly. It Is needless to produce particulars, since they are so visible in the
Prefaces, Fables, and Descriptions through his Books: And upon the whole it may
be affirmed, there are so many boldnesses scattered through his Poem, and so much
of Toysomness just by them, that a Man may read his Youth in his writings, as
well as his Contemporaries could do it in his Face.

I would mention and enlarge upon his conspicuous Vanity, and from thence
endeavor to support the Judgment I have already passed; but that I consider
that fault when it has once possessed a Man is not to be cooled by all the
Frost and Snow of Age: Yet from the Vanity of Manilius I think a particular
Argument may be drawn to prove him to be young, for he had a design to rival or
perfect the inimitable Virgil. This is evident from the Preface to his third
Book: -- Lib. 3. v. 22.
Romanae Gentis Origo,
Totque Duces Orbis, tot bella, tot otia, et omnis
In Populi unius leges ut cesserit Orbis
Differtur --
For here it is plain he had this mighty project in his head, and after he had
prepared himself by this Astronomical Poem, raised his Fancy and got a good
turn of Verse, was resolved to prosecute it with his utmost vigor; he saw the
vastness of the design -- Lib. 3. v. 21.
Spatio majore canenda
Quam si tacta loquor --
Yet he hoped to live to finish it, though in the beginning of this Poem he
wishes for old Age that he might complete the Work he then had in hand; yet
having gone through the most difficult part of it sooner, and with more ease
than at first he thought he should have done; he sets up for new Schemes and
thinks he shall have years enough before him prudently to begin, and Strength
succesfully to carry on so great an Undertaking. In this very Preface he
reckons up a great many other Subjects fit to employ a Poet, but in express
terms lays them all aside. Colchida nec referam, etc.
Non annosa canam, etc.
But the Roman History is in his Thoughts though he will not begin to write, till
his greater leisure gives him opportunity to do it.

These two Observations persuade me, that Manilius was Young when he began this
Poem, and that he died Young, and did not live to finish his design, or
accurately Revise what he had written, will I think be very evident from what
follows: It cannot be denied, that this Poet had advanced very far in his Work,
whilst Tiberius was at Rhodes, for in his fourth Book, he gives this Character
of that Island: Lib. 4. v. 761.
Virgin sub casta felix Terraque Marique,
Et Rhodos, Hospitium recturi Principis Orbem,
Tuque domus vere solis, cui tota sacrata es,
Cum caperes lumen magni sub Caesare Mundi.


Now Dion Cassius, p. 634.
Tiberius retired to Rhodes, when C. Antistius and L. Balbus, were Consuls; he
continued there Seven Vell. Paterculus, lib. 2. cap. 99.
Years, and returned in the Consulship of P. Vinicius and P. Alfinius Varus;
and yet in the first Book we meet with the lib. 1. v. 894.
Description of the Prodigies that appeared before the defeat of Varus in
Germany which happened when Poppaeus Sabinus and Q. Sulpicius Camerinus were
Consuls, about eight years after the Return of Tiberius from Rhodes: What shall
we say then? was the fourth Book written and published before the first? or
would the Poet have strained for that Complement to Rhodes after the Varian
Defeat? with what Propriety could that Island be called Hospitium recturi
Principis Orbem, or with what Truth could it be said to contain the most
glorious Luminary next to Caesar, when that imagined Star had not for many
years been in that Horizon, and now shone in other quarters of the World? No,
this had been Banter and inexplicable Riddle: But if we suppose Manilius to
have had this Work under his hand several years, to have revised it, and added
what he thought would adorn his Poem, then we can easily give an account why
his fourth Book should appear to be eight years younger than his first: A
little before Tiberius's return from Rhodes he wrote his fourth Book, after
that he composs'd his fifth, and sixth which is now lost; then at several times
revising his Work, and about the time of the Varian Defeat being upon the end
of his first Book, he added to his discourse of Comets a short Account of those
prodigious Meteors that then appeared, and which Historians Dion Cassius, lib.
56.
tell us were the most amazing that were ever seen: Soon after this he died
before he had corrected the fourth Book, as appears from the Character which in
that Book he gives the Island Rhodes, and which his last and finishing hand
could not have left there.

These Observations will help us to give some tolerable account of the other
difficulties relating to this Author, for to any one who enquires why the first
Book is more correct than the rest? why the Impurities of Style the Critics
charge upon him are for the most part picked out of the four last Books? I would
answer, we have only the first and rude Draughts of them; and that as Poets and
Painters are said to be very near allied, so they agree in nothing more than
they do in this, that though in their Scetches we see the Master, yet we may
find something that the Finisher would correct: To him who asks why there is no
mention of this Poet in any of the Ancients, I would reply, That Manilius
having left an unfinisht Piece, his Family was studious both of his Credit and
their own, they carefully preserved the Orphan, but would not expose it: In
that Age when Poetry was raised to its greatest highth, it had argued the
utmost Fondness or the extremest Folly in a Noble Family to have published a
crude uncorrect Poem, and thereby engage their Honors to defend it.

Besides, Augustus who was infinitely jealous of his reputation ( -- Si palpere
recalcitrat undique tutus, says Horace who knew his Temper very well) would not
have born the too officious Complement of being invoked, unless the Poem had
been as correct as Virgil's Georgicks, and fit for his Genius to inspire. Lucan
afterward suffered for the like Complement, though indeed upon a far different
account: He lost his Life for pretending to be inspired by Nero, when he made
better Verses than the Emperor himself; his Flattery to Nero was too great, as
this of Manilius to Augustus had been too little, and a Defect in such
Addresses was as dangerous under the wise, as an Excess in them was under the
vain Emperors of Rome.

You are sufficiently tired, I fear, with this long Discourse about Manilius
full of guesses and conjectures, yet I cannot dismiss this Subject without
adding something concerning his Quality, and place of Birth. His Quality he
carries in his name, the Manilij being one of the best Families in Rome, which
so often filled the Consul's Chair, and was employed in the greatest Offices of
that Commonwealth. Indeed some have affirmed that he was of Servile Condition,
and being made free, according to Custom, took the name of his Patron: But
since I have already proved, that he was not the Manilius Antiochus in Pliny,
there is no reason left for any one to say he was a Slave; he himself very
expressly, I think, declares himself to be a Roman born, for in his fourth Book
he shows a Concern for the Interests of the Roman Commonwealth down as low as
the Age of Hannibal. Lib. 4. v. 40.
Speratum Hannibalem nostris cecidisse catenis: which he could not with any
Propriety have done, had his relation to that State commenced so lately, or had
his Ancestors had no Interest in the then Losses or Victories of Rome. And
seeing he was born a Roman, and of the Family of the Manilij, we may farther
from some other Evidences conclude that he sprung from a very considerable, if
not one of the noblest Branches of it; for if we reflect that though he died
young, yet he had been well instructed in the several Hypotheses of the Ancient
Philosophers, accurately taught the Doctrine of the Stoics, led through all the
intricate mazes and Subtilties of Astrology, that he was acquainted with the
Mathematics, knew all the Mythology of the Ancients, and had run through the
Greek Poets, we shall find in him all the signs of a very liberal and costly
Education, and consequently of a considerable Quality, or at least a great
Fortune. But if we reflect farther that he was conversant at Court, and
acquainted with the modish, and nicest Flattery of the Palace, that he made his
Complements in the same Phrase that the most intimate and finished Courtier ever
used, we may raise another probable Argument that his Quality was great: Now
this reflection may be supported by one observation made on the Complement he
pays Tiberius when at Rhodes: He styles him Lib. 4. v. 764.
Magni Mundi Lumen, using the very same Word, which we meet with in Velleius
Paterculus, who wrote all Court Language, upon the very same occasion. Lib. 2.
cap. 99.
Alterum Reipublicae Lumen is Tiberius, and he retired to Rhodes, ne Fulgor
suus orientium Juvenum, C. et L. Caes. obstaret initiis, says that Historian.

As to his place of Birth, since we find him at Rome when he wrote this Poem,
Lib. 4. v. 7^5.
Qua genitus cum fratre Remus hanc condidit Urbem: and no Author settles him
any where else, it may with some show of Probability be concluded, that he was
born in that City, in which we are certain he both studeid, and led his life:
But if we consider farther that he takes all occasions to show his respect for
Rome, that with Zeal he mentions those extravagant Honors which the Flattery
Italia summa, quam rerum maxima Roma Imposuit terris, Coeloque adjungitur Ipsa.
Lib. 4. v. 692.
of Asia, and the Vanity of her own Citizens had put upon her, we shall find so
much Veneration in his Writings, that it could not well rise from any other
Spring than that Piety which Men of generous Sense and Spirit always retain for
the Places of their Birth.

To close this Discourse, I have proved this Author was not the Manilius
Antiochus mentioned by Pliny, Not. Hist. lib. 35. cap. 17. Nor that Manilius
lib. 10. cap. 2. and that both Vossius and Mr. Tristan are very much mistaken
in their Conjectures. There remains another Manilius whom the same Lib. 36.
cap. 10.
Pliny, commends for his Skill in Mathematics; this Mathematician Scaliger
thinks to be the same with the Poet, because he lived in the time of Augustus,
and was conversant in the same Studies with our Author; These I must own are
not convincing proofs; but as there are no good Arguments for, so there are no
Objections against his pretenses, and therefore he still stands fairest for the
Person.

This Manilius of a Noble Family, born in Rome, and living in the Age of
Augustus, had a liberal Education suitable to his Quality and the time in which
he lived: his Writings show him to be well acquainted with the Principles of
the several Sects of Philosophers, but addicted to the Stoics, whose
Hypothesis in all its out-lines bears a very near resemblance to some of the
Theories that are now in Fashion. The Modern Philosophers build Worlds
according to the Models of the Ancient Heathens, and Zeno is the Architect.

The Stoics Principles were in short these: They say there is one Infinite,
Eternal, Almighty Mind, which being diffused through the whole Universe of well
ordered and regularly disposed Matter, actuates every part of it, and is as it
were, the Soul of this vast Body: The Parts of this Body they say are of two
Sorts, the Celestial, viz. the Planets and the fixed Stars, and the Terrestrial,
viz. the Earth, and all the other Elements about it: The Celestial continue
still the same without any Change or Variation; but the whole Sublunary World
is not only liable to Dissolution, but often has been, and shall again be
dissolved by Fire: From this Chaos which, because it is made by Fire, they call
Fire, they say another System would arise, the several particles of it settling
according to their respective Weights: Thus the Earth would sink lowest, the
Water would be above that, the Air next, and the Fire encompass the other
Three: But because all the Earthy parts are not equally rigid, nor equally
dispersed through the Chaos, therefore there would be Cavities and Hollows in
some places fit to receive the Water, and to be Channels for Rivers: In other
places Hills and Mountains would rise, and the whole System appear in that very
form and figure which it now bears. They farther add, that this Infinite Mind
has made one general decree concerning the Government of the lower World, and
executes it by giveing such and such Powers to the Celestial Bodies, as are
sufficient and proper to produce the designed Effects: This Decree thus
executed they call Fate, and upon this Principle their whole System of
Astrology depends: That some things happened in the World which were very
unaccountable every days Experience taught them; they learned also or pretended
to have learned from very many accurate, and often repeated Observations, that
there was a constant Agreement between those odd unaccountable Accidents and
such and such Positions of the Heavenly Bodies, and therefore concluded that
those Bodies were concerned in those Effects: Hence they began to settle Rules,
and to draw their scattered Observations into an Art; And this was the State of
the Hypothesis and Astrology of the Stoics, (I must call it so for distinction
sake, though, neither the Hypothesis it self, nor the Astrology built upon it was
invented by Zeno, but delivered down to him and his Scholars by the Chaldeans
and other Philosophers of the East) 'till the Greeks ambitious of making it
appear their own, endeavored to establish support and adorn it with their
Fables, and by that means made that which before seemed only precarious, (as
all Arts which are drawn from bare Observation and not from any settled
Principles in Nature must appear to be) ridiculous Fancies, and wild
Imaginations: But I do not design an Account, nor a defense of the Astrology of
the Ancients: You know, Sir, it has been spoken against and derided on the one
Hand, and supported and applauded on the other by Men of great Wit, Judgment,
Piety, and Worth: and he who shall take a View of it, will always find enough
in it to divert his leisure, if not to satisfy his Curiosity, and raise his
Admiration.

This is the Hypothesis which Manilius endeavored to explain in Latin Verse:
Had he lived to revise it, we had now had a more beautiful and correct piece;
he had a Genius equal to his Undertaking, his Fancy was bold and daring, his
Skill in the Mathematics great enough for his Design, his Knowledge of the
History, and Acquaintance with the Mythology of the Ancients general: As he is
now, some of the Critics place him amongst the Judicious and Elegant, and all
allow him to be one of the useful, instructive, profitable Poets: He hints at
some Opinions which later Ages have thought fit to glory in as their own
Discoveries. Thus he defends the Fluidity of the Heavens against the Hypothesis
of Aristotle.

He asserts that the fixed Stars are not all in the same concave Superficies of
the Heavens, and equally distant from the Center of the World: He maintains
that they are all of the same Nature and Substance with the Sun, and that each
of them has a particular Vortex of his own; and lastly he affirms that the
Milkie Way is only the undistinguished Luster of a great many small Stars,
which the Moderns now see to be such, through the Glass of Galilaeo: In short, we
do not give him too great a Character, when we say he is one of the most
discerning Philosophers that Antiquity can show.

In my Version I have endeavored to render this Author in^^lligible and easy,
and therefore have been sometimes forced to take a larger Compass than a strict
Translation would allow; and have ^dded some Notes to make him ^ess obscure:
Amongst those Notes y^u will find one relating to the Th^ory of the Earth,
which I must desire you to lay aside, it being written and printed several
years ago, and before I had well considered the weak unphilosophical
Principles, and pernicious Consequences of that vain Hypothesis.

And now, Sir, you are near the End of this long Letter, give me ^eave to tell
you, that I have not tired ^ou half so much, as at first I designed to do;
having left unsaid a great many things relating both to the Author and his
Writings: Those perhaps will appear at the Head of a Latin Edition of his
Works, which I shall think my self obliged to undertake, unless a very learned
Gentleman, from whom I have long expected it, frees me from that trouble, and
obliges the World with his own Observations.

I am Your Humble Servant, T. C.
All Souls, Octo. 10^^ 96.
MANILIUS. The First Book.
After a short Account of his Design, and a complemental Address to Augustus,
he begins, 1. With the Rise and Progress of Astronomy, and other Arts: 2.
Discourses of the several Opinions concerning the Beginning of the World: 3.
Describes the Order of it: 4. Proves the Earth to be the Center of the World:
5. Proves it to be round: 6. Asserts the Soul of the World: 7. Reckons up the
Signs of the Zodiac: 8. Describes the Axis: 9. The Northern Constellations:
10. The Constellations between the Tropicks and the South-pole: 11. Explains
the Figures of the Constellations: 12. Asserts Providence against Epicurus: 13.
Discovers the Bigness of the World: 14. Treats of the movable and immovable
Circles: 15. Makes a long description of the Milky-way: 16. Reckons up the
Planets: 17. Discourses of Comets and Meteors, and concludes that they presage.

STars conscious of our Fates and Arts 1 Divine, The Subject of the Poem.

The wondrous work of Heaven's first wise design,
In numerous Verse I boldly first enclose;
Too high a Subject, and too great for Prose.
At what the Ancients with a wild amaze
And ignorant wonder were content to gaze,
My Verse brings down from Heaven, designed to show
Celestial secrets to the World below:
What yet the Muses Groves never heard, I sing,
And bring unusual offerings to their spring.
Rome's Prince and Father, The Invocation.
Thou whose wide command
With awful sway is stretched over Sea and Land,
Who do deserve that Heaven thy Love bestowed
On thy great Father, Thou thy self a God,
Now give me Courage, make my Fancy strong,
And yield me vigor for so great a Song.
Nor does the World this curious search refuse,
It kindly courts the daring of my Muse,
And will be known; whilst You serenely reign,
Instruct our Labor, and reward our Pain.
Wings raise my Feet, I Am pleased to mount on high
Trace all the Mazes of the liquid Sky,
Their various turnings, and their whirls declare,
And live in the vast regions of the Air:
I Will know the Stars, which yet alone to gain
Is knowledge mean, unequal to the Pain;
For doubts resolved it no delight affords,
But fills soft empty heads with rattling words:
I Will search the Depths, the most remote recess,
And flying Nature to Confession press;
I Will find what Sign and Constellation rule,
And make the difference 'twixt the Wise and Fool;
My Verse shall sing what various Aspect reigns
When Kings are doomed to Crowns and Slaves to Chains.
I Will turn Fate's Books, there read proud Parthia's doom,
And see the sure Eternity of Rome.
Two Temples raised with sacred Incense shine, The Difficulty.

I bow at Nature's and the Muses shrine;
Both aids I need, for double Cares do throng,
And fill my Thought; the Subject and the Song:
And whilst I Am bound to Verse with Orbs immense
The World rouls round me, and distracts my sense;
Vast is my Theme, yet unconceiv'd, and brings
Untoward words scarce loosned from the Things.
Who first below these wondrous secrets knew?
Who stole that knowledge which the World withdrew?
Whose soaring mind those Airy mazes trod
And spite of Heaven desired to seem a God!
Open the Skies, and teach how Stars obey,
And run their race as Nature marks the way,
Their Power and Influence, what directs their Course
What whirls them round, and what confines their force.
First Mercury disclosed these mysteries, I. The Rise and Progress of Astronomy,

By Him we view the Inside of the Skies,
And know the Stars, and now Mankind admires
The Power, not only Luster of their Fires:
By Him all know how great, how just and wise,
And good is the Contriver of the Skies;
At whose Command the Stars in order met,
Who times appointed when to rise and set;
That Heaven's great secrets may lie hid no more,
And Man instructed gratefully Adore.
Nature disclosed her self, and from her Springs
Pure streams derived o'erslow'd the Minds of Kings,
Kings next to Heaven, who over the East did sway,
Where swift Euphrates cuts his rapid way,
Where 2 Nile overflows, and whence the Whirl restores
The Day to Us, and passing burns the Moors.
And next over Priests, whose constant Cares employed
In public service did obleige the God,
His Presence did their holy minds inspire
With sacred flames, and raised their fancies higher,
Till by degrees to due perfection wrought
He made himself the Object of their thought:
Such were those wondrous Men who first from far
Looked up, and saw Fates hanging at each Star:
Their thoughts extended did at once comprise
Ten thousand revolutions of the Skies,
They marked the Influence, and observed the Power
Of every Sign, and every fatal Hour;
What Tempers they bestowed, what Fortunes gave,
And who was doomed a King, who born a Slave;
How Aspects vary, and their change creates,
Though little, great variety in Fates.
Thus when the Stars their mighty Round had run,
And all were fixed whence first their Race begun,
What Hints Experience did to search impart
They joined, and Observation grew to Art;
Thus Rules were framed, for by Example shown
They knew what would be, from what had been done;
They saw the Stars their constant Round maintain
Perform their Course, and then return again;
They on their Aspects saw the Fates attend,
Their change on their Variety depend;
And thence they fixed unalterable Laws,
Settling the same Effect on the same Cause.
Before that time Life was an artless State
Of Reason void, and thoughtless in debate:
Nature lay hid in deepest Night below,
None knew her wonders, and none cared to know:
Upward men look, they saw the circling light,
Pleased with the Fires, and wondered at the sight:
The Sun, when Night came on, withdrawn, they grieved,
As dead, and joy'd next Morn when he revived;
But why the Nights grow long or short, the Day
Is changed, and the Shades vary with the Ray,
Shorter at his approach, and longer grown
At his remove, the Causes were unknown:
For Wit lay unimprov'd, the desert plains
Were unmanur'd, nor fed the idle Swains:
Even Gold dwelt safe in Hills, and none resigned
Their lives to Seas or wishes to the Wind;
Consigned their search, they knew themselves alone,
And thought that only worthy to be known:
But when long time the Wretches thoughts resin'd,
When Want had set an edge upon their Mind;
When Men encreast, and Want did boldly press,
And forced them to be witty for redress;
Then various Cares their working thoughts employed,
And that which each invented all enjoyed.
Then Corn first grew, then Fruit enricht the grounds,
And barbarous noise was first confined to sounds:
Through Seas unknown the Sailer then was hurled,
And gainful Traffic joined the distant World:
Then Arts of War were found, and Arts of Peace,
For Use is always fruitful in increase.
New hints from settled Arts Experience gains,
Instructs our Labor, and rewards our Pains:
Thus into many Streams one Spring divides,
And through the Valleys rouls refreshing Tides.
But these were little things compared, they knew
The voice of Birds, in Entrails Fates could view;
Burst Snakes with charms, and in a Bullock's blood,
See Rage appeased, or fear an angry God.
They called up Ghosts, moved deepest Hell, the Sun
Could stop, and force a Night upon his Noon;
Then make him rise at Night, for all submit
To constant Industry, and piercing Wit.
Nor stopped they here, unwearied Industry
Rose boldly up and mounted through the Sky,
Saw all that could be seen, viewed Nature's Laws,
And young Effects still lying in their Cause.
What wings the Lightning, why from watery Clouds
The Thunder breaks, and roars the wrath of Gods.
What raises Storms, what makes the Winds to blow,
Why Summer's Hail's more stiff than Winter's Snow:
What fires Earth's Entrails, what does shake the Ball,
Why Tempests rattle, and why Rain does fall:
All this she viewed, and did their modes explain,
And taught us to admire no more in vain.
Heaven was disarmed, mad Whirlwinds ruled above
And Clouds and Vapors thundered instead of Jove.
These things explained, their hidden Cause known,
The Mind grew strong, and ventured boldly on;
For raised so high, from that convenient rise
She took her flight, and quickly reached the Skies;
To every Constellation Shapes and Names
Assigned, and marked them out their proper frames
Then viewed their Course, and saw the Orbs were moved
As Heaven did guide, and as the World approved;
That Chance was baffled whilst their Whirls create
The interchang'd Variety of Fate.
This is my Theme, never yet in Numbers wrought,
Assist me, Fortune, and improve my thought;
Equal my Mind to my vast task; prolong
My life in ease, smooth as my flowing Song;
That while my Muse is working over the Heap,
And forms this Chaos to a pleasing shape,
I may with equal care, and equal heat,
Declare the Little and disclose the Great.
But now since Fate and Verse do jointly flow
From Heaven, and both rule equally below.
First let my Muse whole Nature's Face design,
Its Figure draw, and finish every Line.
Whether from Seed it never 3 began to be, II. Different Opinions about the
beginning of the World.

Secure from Fate, and from Corruption free;
Knew no Beginning, and no Ending fears,
But was, and will be, as it now appears.
Or huddled 4 Chaos by a wondrous Birth
Archt the vast Sky and fixed the solid Earth;
And when this shining World once raised its Head
To Shades Infernal banished Darkness fled.
Or whether unseen 5 Atoms blindly thrown
Composed it, and as Years whirle nimbly on,
It must dissolve, and as it first was wrought
From almost Nothing, fall to almost Naught.
Or rose from working 6 Fire's enlivening Rays,
Which form Heaven's Eyes, and live in every Mass.
In Thunder roar, and in the Lightning blaze.
Or whether 7 Water which combines the Frame
Composed, and keeps it from the loosning Flame.
Or whether 8 Water, Air, and Flame and Earth
Knew no beginning, no first seeds of Birth;
But first in Being from themselves arose,
And as four Members the vast God compose;
In which Thin, Thick, Hot, Cold, and Moist and Dry,
For mutual Actions mutual parts supply.
From whose agreeing disagreement springs,
The numerous odd Variety of Things.
These Qualities to act provoke the Seed,
Make Vital Elements and Bodies breed.
What 'twas at first, III. The Order of the Frame.
and whence the All began
Is doubted, and the Doubt too deep for Man;
And let it be, but whencesoe'er it came
Its Face is certain, it is an ordered Frame.
Upward the 9 Flame on active Pinions fled,
To Heaven's high Arch it raised its shining Head,
There stopped as weary grown, and round the Frame
For Nature's Bullwark rolled a Wall of Flame.
Then liquid Air spread through the empty space
Less light and active took the second place.
But next the Flame the lightest parts aspire
To waste themselves, and feed the greedy Fire.
The heavyer Water makes an humbler Claim,
And lies the third in order in the Frame;
That Vapors rising may, like Seed, repair
What Fire destroys, and feed decaying Air:
Weight sank round Earth to the remotest place,
And floating Sand in clinging Mud's embrace
Stuck fast, whilst Seas squeezed out flowed over the Mass:
As those grew limpid, and diffused the Waves,
Through spacious Hollows and descending Caves
Rocks started forth, their Heads the Mountains reared,
And Earth surrounded by the Flood appeared.
Lowest of all, and in the midst it lies
Compassed by Seas, and covered by the Skies.
The Place does fix it, for still rising higher
The other Elements equally retire,
And that by falling stops its farther fall,
And hangs the midst and lowest of them all,
Its parts to one fixed point press jointly down,
And meet, and stop each other from moving on.
For did not Earth hang midst the airy space, IV. The Earth lies in the midst
of the World.

How could the Sun perform his constant race?
Drive on the Day, fall headlong down the West,
Force up the Stars, and rise again at East?
How could the Moon her usual Round maintain,
Rise, set, and rise near the same point again?
Or He that leads the Stars at Night return
To East again, and usher forth the Morn?
But since Earth did not to a Bottom fall,
But hangs, and yielding Air surrounds the Ball,
The way is open, and no stop to force
The Stars return, or to impede their course.
For who can think that when the 10 Sun does rise
He Is born anew, or when He sets He dies?
That when one Day He has displayed his Light
His Race is finished, and goes out at Night?
Since He the same does every Morn appear,
And as He drives a Day He whirls a Year.
From the same East He comes with equal pace,
To the same West He still directs his Race;
And not one Change is seen in Nature's Face.
The same Moon shines, and at a certain Day,
Her light increases, and Her Horns decay.
The track she made Nature does still pursue,
Nor like a Novice wanders in a new.
Phoebus still warms those signs where first he shone,
And Day goes round with one eternal Sun.
Thus proved: because by just Degrees the Hours
In different Countries are the same with Ours.
The Eastern Nations view the rising Fires
Whilst Night shades us, and lazily retires.
And as to distant West we nimbly run,
That still removes, nor can we reach the Sun.
No East begins, no West his race does bound,
But he drives on in one continued Round.
Nor is it wondrous that one single Ball
Should hang, since it is the Nature of the All.
No prop supports, but as their motions prove,
The whole World hangs, and all that whirls above.
The Sun does drive his Race through yielding Skies,
Wheel round the liquid Bound, and set and rise.
Through Ether, Moon and Stars direct their Race,
Like these Earth unsupported keeps its place,
Though no fixed Bottom props the weighty Mass.
Well then, V. The Earth is round.
the Earth hangs midst the yielding Air
Not stretched into a Plain, but every where
It rises and declines into a Sphere.
In other Parts this Figure Nature drew,
The Sun and Stars, if we exactly view,
Seem round, the Moon is varied every Night,
Nor with an equal Face receives her Brother's Light.
This proves her round since different rays adorn,
Now shape, now bend, now fill her borrowed Horn,
This Form's Eternal and may justly claim
A Godlike Nature, all its parts the same;
Alike and equal to its self it is found,
No End's and no Beginning in a Round.
Naught can molest its Being naught control,
And this enobles and confines the Whole.
Hence every Country sees not every Sign, First Argument.

What Sailer views the bright 11 Canopus shine
Over Egypt's Shores, and when its Rays appear
Who sees the little Circles of the Bear?
For Earth still rising to a Round denies,
A larger Scene, and bounds our feeble Eyes.
This Truth the 12 Moon confirms when deep in Night
Earth interposes, Second Argument.
and diverts her Light,
She does not all the World at once surprise,
But now seems dark to these, now other Eyes.
The Eastern Parts first view her darkened Face,
Then over the South she rolls her broken Rays;
And then still pressed by the obscuring shade,
She hears the Western Brass resounding to her Aid.
Now if the Earth were flat the darkened Moon
Would seem to all Eclypst as well as one.
At once presenting to the common view
Her gloomy looks, and prove this fancy true.
But since its Figure's round, dim Cynthia's beams
By just degrees must visit the Extremes;
Not all at once; she must divide the Skies,
And while she sets to some, to others rise.
For in the mighty Concave whirled above
She rising must, and must declining move;
Now climb this rising, and her Glories show,
Then sink again, and scatter Beams below.
This proves (nor shall the subtlest Wits escape
These twining Reasons) the disputed Shape.
By various Animals this Globe's possessed,
The Common House of Man, of Bird, and Beast;
The Northern 13 parts rise high, the Southern fall
Beneath our Fee, the Adverse of the Ball.
Yet as it lies its surface a Flat,
Though false, its bigness does improve the Cheat,
And take the Roundness off, though every where
It rises and declines into a Sphere.
Hence when with setting Beams the Sun withdrawn
Beholds our East, they see the Morning dawn;
And when their Toils He with his Light restores,
Sleep sits on Us, and gently eases Ours.
The Sea 14 runs round, VI. God the Soul of the World.
and with its circling Waves
The Flood at once divides, and joins the Halves.
To that vast Frame in which four parts conspire
Of different form, Air, Water, Earth and Fire,
United 15 God the World's Almighty Soul
By secret methods rules and guides the Whole;
By unseen passes He himself conveys
Through all the Mass, and every part obeys.
To proper Patients He kind Agents brings
In various Leagues binds disagreeing Things.
Makes some Powers act, and some receive their Force;
And thus whilst Nature keeps her Vital Course,
Though different Powers the several Things divide,
The World seems One, and all its parts allied.
Now Constellations, VII. The Signs of the Zodiac.
Muse, and Signs rehearse,
In order, let them sparkle in thy Verse.
Those which obliquely bound the burning Zone,
And bear the Summer and the Winter Sun,
Those first: then those which roll a different way
From West: nor Heaven's Diurnal whirl obey:
Which Nights serene disclose, and which create
The steady Rules, and six the Laws of Fate.
First Aries, glorious in his Golden Wool,
Looks back, and wonders at the mighty Bull,
Whose back-parts first appear: He bending lies
With threatening Head, and calls the Twins to rise,
They clasp for fear, and mutually embrace;
And next the Twins with an unsteady pace
Bright Cancer rolls: Then Leo shakes his Mane:
And following Virgo calms his Rage again:
Then Day and Night are weighed in Libra's Scales,
Equal a while, at last the Night prevails,
And longer grown the heavyer Scale inclines
And draws bright Scorpio from the Winter Signs:
Him Centaur follows with an aiming Eye
His Bow full drawn and ready to let fly:
Next narrow Horns the twisted Caper shows,
And from Aquarius Urn a flood overflows.
Near their loved Waves cold Pisces take their Seat,
With Aries join and make the Round complete.
Now view the point where turn the shining Bears, VIII. The Axis.

And from their height look down on other Stars.
Which never set but only change their Sites
To the same point; and whirl the meaner Lights;
Thither the Axis runs, whose adverse Poles
Bears the poised World, and Heaven about it rolls;
No solid substance that the weight might bear
But an imagined Line stretched through the Air;
Begun from either Pole the Line extends
Earth's Center through, and in the other ends.
For since the frame turns round, that fancied Line
Which cuts the middle, too minutely thin
By turning round it self to measure space,
But still confined to one imagined place,
Is called the Axis; cause unapt to move
It sees Stars whirl, the shining Planets rove,
And swiftly measure the vast space above.
Fixed near the Pole appear those friendly Stars
Well known to wretched greedy Mariners; IX. The great Bear.

Which guide their Sails, and which direct their Oars,
When mad for gain they fly to foreign Shores.
(Whilst Heaven it self befriends their Avarice,
What Pleas may wretched Mortals make for Vice?)
Seven equal Stars adorn the greater Bear,
Which measure larger Circles of the Sphere,
And teach the Grecian Sailers how to steer.
The smaller Bear, The little Bear.
though less in size and light
In narrower Circles she commands the Night,
Yet Tire prefers, for through the Ocean tossed
They sail by her and find the foreign Coast;
These stand not front to front, but each does view
The others Tail, pursued as they pursue.
Betwixt and round these two the Serpent twines, The Serpent.

At once divides, and to their place confines;
Secure from meeting they are distinctly rolled,
Nor leave their Seats, and pass the dreadful fold:
These keep the Vertex, but betwixt the Bear
And shinning Zodiac where the Planets Err,
A Thousand Figured Constellations roll,
Some near the Zodiac, some placed near the Pole:
Whose differing Powers by tempering Skies combined
Make Seasons fruitful, and refresh Mankind.
First near the North, Hercules.
as conscious of his shame
A Constellation kneels without a Name;
And next Boots comes, Boots.
whose ordered Beams
Present a Figure driving of his Teams.
Below his Girdle, near his Knees, He bears
The bright Arcturus, Arcturus.
fairest of the Stars.
Behind his Back the radiant Crown is viewed, The Crown.

And shines with Stars of different magnitude;
One placed in the front above the rest displays
A vigorous light, and darts surprising rays.
This shone since Theseus first his faith betrayed,
The Monument of the forsaken Maid.
Nor far from these distended Lyra lies, The Harp.

Well strung, the sounding glory of the Skies.
This Orpheus struck when with his wondrous Song
He charmed the Woods, and drew the Rocks along;
When Hell obeyed, when Death resigned her Chain,
And loosed his dear Eurydice again;
This gained it Heaven, and still its force appears,
As then the Rocks it now draws on the Stars.
The Planets dance, and to the tunefull sound
The Heaven consents, and moves the fatal Round.
Next Ophiuchus strides the mighty Snake, Ophiuchus.

Untwists his winding Folds, and smooths his Back,
Extends its Bulk, and over the slippery Scale
His wide stretched Hands on either side prevail:
The Snake turns back his Head, and seems to rage,
That War must last where equal Powers engage.
Next view the Swan, The Swan.
whom Jove advanced above,
That Form's reward by which He caught his Love.
When shrouded in the fair deceitful shape,
He cheated trusting Leda to a Rape:
Now graced with Stars his Wings stretched over the Skies.
And next the Swan the shining Arrow flies: The Arrow.

The towering Eagle next does boldly soar, The Eagle.

As if the thunder in his Claws he bore:
He Is worthy Jove, since He, a Bird, supplies
The Heaven with sacred Bolts, and arms the Skies.
Next raised from Seas the Dolphin's Tail appears, The Dolphin.

The Glory of the Flood and of the Stars.
Whom while the Horse (one radiant Star does grace
His generous Breast) pursues with eager pace, The Horse.

His Legs before, as running, He extends,
But closed in fair Andromeda he ends. Andromeda.

Her Perseus joins, her Foot his Shoulder bears
Proud of the weight, Perseus.
and mixes with her Stars.
Five splendid Stars in its unequal Frame
Deltoton bears, The Triangle.
and from the shape a Name;
But those that grace the sides dim Light display
And yield unto the Basis brighter Ray.
Next with her Cepheus Cassiopeia shines, Cepheus and Cassiopcia.

Her posture sad, and mourns amongst the Signs;
She sees her Daughter chained, the rolling Tide
The Monster spout, and curses her old Pride:
She fears that Perseus will inconstant prove,
And now in Heaven forget his former Love;
But He attends, and bears the Gorgon's head,
His Spoil, and witness of a coming aid.
Near the bent Bull a seat the Driver claims, Heniochus.

Whose skill conferred his Honor and his Names,
His Art great Jove admired, when first he drove
His rattling Carr, and fixed the Youth above.
Next stormy Hoedi shine which shut the Main, The Hoedi.

And stop the Sailers hot pursuit of gain.
Then shines the Goat, The Goat.
whose Brutish Duggs supplied
The Infant Jove, and nursed his growing Pride.
From that wild Food He did to Heaven aspire,
Fierce Thunder throw, and dart the blasting Fire.
Then mindful of her Care the grateful God
Repaid her with those Skies which she bestowed.
Then Pleiades and Hyades appear, The Pleiades and Hyades.

The sad Companions of the turning Year.
Born by the Bull they lead they Tempests forth,
And close the Constellations of the North.
Farewell cold North, X.
thy Ice benums my Muse,
I fly from Thee, and warmer Regions choose;
Betwixt the Tropicks of the Traveling Sun,
I Will trace the Signs that burn the torrid Zone,
Then pass those bounds and view the Stars that roll
Between cold Caper and the lower Pole.
First next the Twins, Orion.
see great Orion rise,
His Arms extended stretch over half the Skies:
His stride as large, and with a stately pace
He marches on, and measures a vast space.
On each broad Shoulder a bright Star's displayed,
And three obliquely grace his hanging Blade.
In his vast Head immerst in boundless spheres
Three Stars less bright, but yet as great, he bears.
But farther off removed, their Splendor's lost,
Thus graced and armed He leads the Starry Host.
Next barks the Dog, The Dog Star.
and from his Nature flow
The most afflicting Powers that rule below,
Heat burns his Rise, Frost chills his setting Beams,
And vex the World with opposite Extremes.
He keeps his Course, nor from the Sun retreats,
Now bringing Frost, and now increasing Heats:
Those that from Taurus view this rising Star,
Guess thence the following state of Peace and War,
Health, Plagues, a fruitful or a barren Year.
He makes shrill Trumpets sound, and frightens Peace,
Then calms and binds up Iron War in Ease.
As he determines, so the Causes drawn,
His Aspect is the World's supremest Law.
This Power proceeds from the vast Orb He runs,
His Brightness equals or exceeds the Sun's.
^ut far removed he through the distant space
^arts feeble splendor from his Azure face.
Yet others He excells, no fairer Light
Ascends the Skies, none sets so clear a bright.
Next Procyon view, Procyon.
view, and next the nimble Hare,
Then Argo sailing through the liquid Air; The Hare.

Advanced from all the Dangers of the Tides, Argo.

Which first she stem'd, she now securely rides.
Heaven is her Port, and now she rules the Floods,
A Goddess made for saving of the Gods.
Close by the Serpent spreads; The Serpent.
whose winding Spires
With ordered Stars resemble scaly Fires.
Next flies the Crow, The Crow.
and next the generous Bowl
Of Bacchus flows, The Cup.
and chears the thirsty Pole.
The Centaur next in double shapes expressed,
A Humane Body joins a Horse's Breast.
The World's great Temple next, The Altar.
and Altar lies
Graced with the Gifts of conquering Deities,
When Earth-born Giants did the Skies invade,
The lesser Gods implored the greater's Aid;
His Power Jove doubted when he viewed from far
The threatening force of the unequal War.
When He inverted Nature's Frame beheld,
That Earth rose upward, and that All rebelled.
That Hills on Hills heaped, raised their threatening Head,
And frighted Stars approaching Mountains fled;
When impious Armies at a monstrous Birth
Broke through the Bowels of the gaping Earth,
Of disagreeing Forms, and frightfull Makes,
Vast Humane Bodies twisted into Snakes.
Ever this no Danger and no fear was known,
And wanton Jove sat idly in his Throne.
But lest some greater Power (soft ease betrayed
His Mind to doubt) should yield the Rebels aid,
He raised this Altar, and the Form appears
With Incense loaded, and adorned with Stars.
Next on his Belly floats the mighty Whale
He twists his Back, The Whale.
and rears his threatening Tail;
He spouts the Tide, and cuts the foaming Way,
Wide gapes his Mouth, as eager on his Prey;
Such on Andromede He rusht, and bore
The troubled Waves beyond their usual shore.
Next Swims the Southern Fish, The Southern Fish.
which bears a Name
From the South Wind, and spreads a feeble Flame.
To him the Floods in spacious windings turn, The Floods.

One Fountain flows from cold Aquarius Urn;
And meets the other where they join their Streams
One Chanel keep, and mix the Starry Beams.
Betwixt the Eclyptick and the latent Bears
Whose creaking Axis turns the rolling Spheres,
Those stranger Skies are painted with these Stars.
Which ancient Artists in their wondrous Lines
Transmit to Fame, and call the Southern Signs.
The other part lies hid, the vast abode
Of unknown Nations, by our Feet untrod.
From the same Sun they take their common Light,
But different Shades: in an inverted site,
Their Signs of the left Hand 16 set, and rise of the right.
Their Skies as large, their Stars as splendid run,
Equal in the rest, but are excelled by One,
By Caesar's Star which does over us preside,
Earth's present joy, and Heaven's future pride.
For that the lower Pole resemblance bears
To this Above, The Southern Pole.
and shines with equal Stars;
With Bears averse, round which the Draco twines,
At once divides them, and at once consines,
That there as many Constellations move,
We must believe from what we find above.
For Fancy, which decaying Sense supplies,
Not only feigns a Vertex like to This,
But all resembling Beauties of the Skies.
These are the Stars which scattered over the Pole
In different Places fixed complete the Whole;
But raise thy thought from sense, XI. The Figures of the Constellations only
fansied.
nor think to find
Such Figures there, as are in Globes designed;
Nor think that Stars set close compose the Frames,
Or that the Signs are all continued Flames.
For then we soon should see the World expire,
Frail Nature could not bear so great a Fire;
Some Places vacant conscious of her State
She leaves, unable for so vast a Heat.
For it is her kind intent alone to show
By certain Stars, those Signs that rule below;
Such notice give, and such fair hints impart;
As Men may take, and may improve to Art:
The Stars mark out the Shapes, the lower Beams
Answer the high, the middle the extremes.
Fancy those parts that lie obscured between,
For it is enough that some of them are seen:
But chiefly then when Cynthia's beams are clear,
And full, but few, though still the same, appear;
And whilst the vulgar fly, their place possess;
Nor lose their Light, nor mingle with the Less.
Yet these still keep one Course, They still pursue
Their constant track nor vary in a New.
From one fixed point they start, their Course maintain
Repeat their whirl, and visit it again:
And this is strange, and this does more surprise
Than all the other wonders of the Skies,
That such unwieldy frames their signs should draw,
As moved by Reason, and confined by Law;
No change in distance nor in site appear,
Though great their Number, long the rolling year.
A most convincing Reason drawn from Sense, XII. Providence against the
Epicureans.

That this vast Frame is moved by Providence.
Which like the Soul does every Whirl advance;
It must be God, nor was it made by Chance;
As Epicurus dreamt, He madly thought
This beauteous Frame of heedless Atoms wrought,
That Seas and Earth, the Stars and spacious Air
Which forms New Worlds, or does the Old repair,
First rose from these, and still supplied remain,
And All must be, when Chance shall break the Chain,
Dissolved to these wild Principles again.
Absurd and Nonsense! Atheist use thine Eyes,
And having viewed the order of the Skies,
Think, if Thou can, that Matter blindly hurld,
Without a Guide should frame this wondrous World.
But did Chance make, and Chance still rule the Whole
Why do the Signs in constant order roll?
Observe set Times to shut and open Day,
Nor meet, and justle, and mistake their Way?
Perform their Course as if by Laws confined,
None hasten on, and leave the rest behind.
Why every Day does the discovering Flame,
Show the same World, and leave it still the same?
Even then when 17 Troy was by the Greeks o'er-thrown,
The Bear opposed to bright Orion shone;
She near the Pole in narrow Rounds did move,
He faced her then, and measured the vast space above.
And even at Night when Time in secret flies,
And veils himself in Shades from humane Eyes;
They by the Signs could know how fast He fled,
And in the Skies the hasty Minutes read.
How many Towns have fallen, what well built States,
Since Troy, have sunk below oppressing Fates?
How many Times has sporting Fortune hurld
The Chance of Rule and Slavery through the World?
How has she now reverst Troy's ancient Doom,
And built her Relics greater up in Rome?
Revived old Ilium does new Spoils enjoy,
And Greece now bends beneath the Fate of Troy.
Why should I count how often the Earth has mourned
The Sun's retreat, and smiled when he returned?
How often he does his various Course divide
'Twixt Winter's Nakedness and Summer's Pride?
All Mortal Things must change. The fruit full Plain,
As Seasons turn, scarce knows her self again;
Such various forms she bears: large Empires too
Put off their former Fance, and take a new.
Yet safe the World, and free from Change does last,
No Years increase it, and no Years can waste;
Its Course it urges on, and keeps its Frame,
And still will be, because 'twas still the same.
It stands secure from Time's devouring Rage,
For it is a God, nor can it change with Age.
And that the Sun never drives the rising Day
From North to South, nor leaves the beaten way;
That weary grown He still falls down the West
At Night, nor turns his Horses to the East;
That Light by just Degrees the Moon adorns,
First shows, then bends, then fills her borrowed Horns,
And that the Stars in constant order roll,
Hang there, nor fall, and leave the liquid Pole;
It Is not from Chance; The Motion speaks aloud
The wise and steady conduct of the God.
These equally disposed in Order lie,
Make various Shapes, and chequer all the Sky.
Above them naught; To the World's Top they rose,
Painting the Roof of Natures Common House;
Which in a wide Embrace does all contain,
The spacious Air, the Earth, and raging Main;
These Set in order, and in order Rise,
As West drives down, or East brings up the Skies.
But now how vast the Arch, XIII. The bigness of the World.
how next immense
The Zodiack's Round, though far removed from Sense,
Plain Reason shows; whose Active Force can pierce,
The deep Recesses of the Universe.
No Bars can stop it, through the World it flies,
And Heaven it self lies open to its Eyes.
As great a space as Earth, and humble Seas
From Heaven divide, so great two Signs possess.
The World's 18 Diameter by Art is found,
Almost the third Division of the Round.
Therefore as far as four bright Signs comprize,
The distant Zenith from the Nadir lies.
And two thirds more almost surround the Pole,
The Twelve Signs measure, and complete the Whole.
But since the Earth hangs midst the spacious All,
The Solid Center of the Liquid Ball,
Therefore as far as ever our Eyes can pass
Upward, or downward, could they pierce the Mass,
Till bounding Sky the wearied Sight confines,
Is equal to the distance of two Signs.
And six such spaces the vast Round complete
Where All the Signs their constant Whirls repeat,
And each lies distant in an equal Seat.
Nor must you wonder such Varieties
Of different Fates from the same Stars should rise.
Since great their Empire, and unlike their force,
Their Seats so large* and so immense their Course.
Thus far advanced my towering Muse must rise, XIV.

And sing the Circles that confine the Skies,
Describe the track, and mark the shining Way,
Where Planets Err, and Phoebus bears the Day.
One toward the North sustains the Shining Bear
And lies divided from the Polar Star; The Northern Polar Circle.

Exactly 19 six divisions of the Sphere.
Another drawn through Cancer's Claws confines, The Tropical Circle of Cancer,
or Summer Solstice.

The utmost Limits of the Fatal Signs;
There when the Sun ascends his greatest height
In largest Rounds He whirls the lazy Night.
Pleased with his Station there He seems to stay,
And neither lengthens nor contracts the Day.
The Summer's Tropic called. --
It lies the fiery Sun's remotest Bound,
Just five Divisions from the other Round.
A third twines round, The Equinoctial.
and in the midst divides
The Sphere, and see the Pole on both its sides.
And there when Phoebus drives, He spreads his Light,
On all alike, and equals Day and Night.
For in the midst, He does the Skies divide,
And chears the Spring, and warms the Autumn's Pride.
And this large Circle drawn from Cancer's Flame,
Just four Divisions parts the Starry Frame.
Another Southward drawn exactly sets
The Utmost Limits to the Sun's retreats; The Tropic of Capricorn.

When hoary Winter calls his Beams away,
Obliquely warms us with a feeble Ray,
And whirls in narrow Rounds the freezing Day.
To Us his Journey's short, but where He stands
With Rays direct, He burns the barren Sands.
To wisht-for Night he scarce resigns the Day,
But in vast Heats extends his hated Sway.
The last drawn round the Southern point confines
Those Bears, The Southern Polar Circle.
and lies the Utmost of the Lines.
Wise Nature constant in her Work is found:
As five Divisions part the Northern ^ound;
From the North point, This Southern Round appears
Just five Divisions distant from its Bears.
Thus Heaven's divided, and from Pole to Pole
Four Quadrants are the Measure of the Whole.
The Circles five, by these are justly shown,
The Frigid, Temperate and the Torrid Zone.
All these move Parallel, they set, they rise,
At equal Distance moving with the Skies;
Turned with the Orbs the common Whirl repeat,
Are fixed, nor vary their allotted Seat.
From Pole all round to Pole two Lines expressed, The Colure.

Adversely drawn, which intersect the rest
And one another; They surround the Whole,
And crossing make right Angles at each Pole:
These into four just parts, by Signs, the Sphere
Divide, and mark the Seasons of the Year.
One drawn from Heaven's high top descends from far, The Aequinoctial Colure.

And cuts the Serpent's Tail, and the dry Bear:
The Equinoctial Scales, the Snake's Extremes,
And next the Southern Centaur's middle Beams;
Then thwarts the Adverse Pole, and next divides
The mighty Whale, and parts its scaly sides;
Bright Aries point, and splendid Trigon past,
The fair Andromeda below the Waste,
And next her Mother's Head it cuts, and then
The Pole, and closes in it self again.
Cross this, The Solsticial Colure.
and from the Pole does first appear
The Other, through the forefeet of the Bear,
And through its Neck; (which when the Sun retires
First shines, and spreads black Night with feeble Fires)
Then parts the Twins and Crab, the Dog divides,
And Argo's keel that broke the frothy tides.
And then the Pole and other Circle crossed
To Caper turns contracted in his Frost:
The Eagle cuts, and the inverted Lyre,
Black Dracos folds --
The hinder Paws of the Bear, and near the Pole
It Is Tail, and closing there compleats the Whole.
These Rounds immovable, their site the same,
Here Seasons fix, nor vary in the frame.
Two more are movable: The Meridian.
one from the Bear
Described surrounds the middle of the Sphere,
Divides the Day, and marks exactly Noon
Betwixt the rising and the setting Sun:
The Signs it changes as we move below,
Run East or West, it varies as You go;
For it is that Line, which way soever we tread,
That cuts the Heaven exactly over our head,
And marks the Vertex; which does plainly prove
That it must change as often as we move.
Not one Meridian can the World suffice,
It passes through each portion of the Skies;
Thus when the Sun is dawning over the East
It Is their sixth hour, and sets their sixth at West:
Though those two hours we count our days extremes,
Which feebly warm us with their distant Beams.
To find the other Line cast round thine Eyes, The Horizon.

And where the Earth's high surface joins the Skies,
Where Stars first set, and first begin to shine,
There draw the fancied Image of this Line:
Which way soever you move 'twill still be new,
Another Circle opening to the view;
For now this half, and now that half of Sky
It shows, its Bounds still varying with the Eye.
This Round's Terrestrial, for it bounds contains
That Globe, and cut the middle with a Plain;
It Is called the Horizon, the Round's design,
(For it is to bound) gives title to the Line.
Two more Oblique, The Zodiac.
and which in adverse Lines
Surround the Globe, Observe: One bears the Signs
Where Phoebus drives and guides his fiery Horse
And varying Luna follows in her Course.
Where Planets err as Nature leads the Dance,
Keep various measures undisturbed by Chance;
Its highest Arch with Cancer's beams do glow,
Whilst Caper lies, and freezes in the low:
Twice it divides the Equinoctial line,
Where fleecy Aries, and where Libra shine.
Three Lines compose it, and the Eclyptick's found
In The midst; and all decline into a Round.
Nor is it hid, nor is it hard to find,
Like others open only to the Mind;
For like a Belt with studs of Stars the Skies
It girds and graces; and invites the Eyes:
To twelve Degrees its Breadth, to thrice sixscore
Its Length extends, and comprehends no more:
Within these bounds the wandering Planets rove,
Make Seasons here, and settle Fate above.
The other Round from Bears opposed begun
Runs adverse to the Chariot of the Sun, XV. The Milky way.

It leaves the Pole, and from its Round retires,
And cuts inverted Casiopeia's Fires:
Thence still descending and obliquely drawn
It passes through the Body of the Swan,
Then Cancer's fires, the headlong Bird of Jove,
The Line and Zodiac where the Planets rove:
And thence in various windings turns to meet
The other Centaur, and entwines his feet:
And thence to mount through Argo's Sails begins,
The Line, and lowest portion of the Twins;
Then joins the Driver, and from thence ascends
Over Perseus, and to Cassiopeia tends,
There it is received in her inverted Chair,
In her the Round begins, and ends in Her.
Twice cuts the Tropicks, Zodiac and the Line,
And is as often cut by those again.
Nor need we with a prying Eye survey
The distant Skies to find the Milky way,
It must be seen by All, for every night
It forcibly intrudes upon our sight,
And will be marked for shining streaks adorn
The Skies as opening to let forth the Morn.
And as a beaten Path that spreads between
A trodden Meadow, and divides the Green.
Or as when Seas are plowed behind the Ship,
Foam curls on the green surface of the Deep.
In Heaven's dark surface such this Circle lies,
And parts with various Light the Azure Skies.
Or as when Iris draws her radiant Bow
Such seems this Circle to the World below.
It all surpriseth, our inquiring sight
It upward draws, when through the Shades of Night
It spreads its Rays, and darts amazing Light.
Fond Men the sacred Causes strive to find,
And vainly measure with a feeble Mind:
And yet they strive, they madly whirl about
Through various Causes, still condemned to Doubt.
Whether the Skies 20 grown old, Various Opinions about the Milky way.
here shrink their Frame,
And through the Chinks admit an upper Flame.
Or whether here the Heavens two Halves are joined
But odly closed, still leave a Seam behind:
Or here the parts in 21 Wedges closely pressed,
To fix the Frame, are thicker than the Rest,
Like Clouds condensed appear, and bound the Sight,
The Azure being thickened into White.
Or whether that old 22 Tale deserves our Faith,
Which boldly says, that this was once the Path
Where Phoebus drove; and that in length of Years
The heated track took Fire and burnt the Stars.
The Color changed, the Ashes strewn the Way,
And still preserve the marks of the Decay:
Besides, Fame tells, by Age Fame reverend grown,
That Phoebus gave his Chariot to his Son,
And whilst the Youngster from the Path declines
Admiring the strange Beauty of the Signs;
Proud of his Charge, He drove the fiery Horse,
And would outdoe his Father in his Course.
The North grew warm, and the unusual Fire
Dissolved its Snow, and made the Bears retire;
Nor was the Earth secure, each Country mourned
The Common Fate, and in its City's burned.
Then from the scattered Chariot Lightning came,
And the whole Skies were one continued Flame.
The World took Fire, and in new kindled Stars
The bright remembrance of its Fate it bears.
Thus Fame, nor must the softer Fable die
That Juno's Breast overflowing stained the Sky,
And made that Milky way, which justly draws
Its Name, the Milky Circle from its Cause.
Or is the spacious Bend serenely bright
From little Stars, which there their Beams unite,
And make one solid and continued Light?
Or Souls which loosed from the ignoble Chain
Of Clay, and sent to their own Heaven again,
Purged from all dross by Virtue, nobly rise
In Ether wanton, and enjoy the Skies.
Great Atreus Sons, Tydides fixed above,
And stout Achilles equal to our Jove;
With three-ag'd Nestor: He that bravely stood
The Dangers of the Land and of the Flood.
Ulysses, Nature's Conqueror, enjoy
The Skies deserv^d; with all the Chiefs at Troy.
Jove's Son Sarpedon, He that Lycia swayed:
The black Merione, the Martial Maid,
Had Fate stood Neuter, Troy's securest Aid.
With all those Kings that Greece or Asia bore,
Or Pella 23 greatest in her Conqueror.
Next these the grave and prudent Heroes rise,
Whose solid Riches lay in being Wise;
There good Zeleucus, stout Lycurgus shine,
Solon the just, and Plato the Divine.
His Master next, whose Blood unjustly spilt
On Athens still reflects a real Guilt.
Next Persia's Scourge who strewn the joyful Flood
With Xerxes fleet, and checked the growing God:
Who broke his Force, when Neptune bore the chain,
And proved his juster Title over the Main.
Here Romans joined, the greatest Crowd, reside,
The Kings, ever Tarquin stained the Throne with Pride.
The Horaces our Army in our Wars,
The Town which he defended, Cocles bears;
Next Clelia rides, the brightest Maid in Fame,
And Scevola more glorious by his Maim.
Then He on whom the Helping Crow bestowed
A Name, and in the Figure brought a God.
Camillus who the Stars deserved to gain
For saving Jove, when Thunder roared in vain;
Patient of wrongs, and whilst alive adored,
The Founder of that Rome that He restored.
Next Brutus sits, and next, unlearned in Fear,
The fierce Revenger of the Pyrrick War,
Papyrius shines; The Decii, over their Foes
In Triumphs Equal, Rivals in their Vows.
Fabritius, Curious, for their Country bold,
Alike in Courage, and too great for Gold.
Marcellus, Sword of Rome, the third that bore
A Royal spoil, and Cossus graced before:
Next Fabius sits, who left the Common way
To Victory, and Conquered by Delay.
Livy and Nero glorious for the fall
Of haughty Carthage in her Asdrubal.
The Scipio's Africks Fate both joined in One,
The latter ending what the first begun.
Pompey by Thrice the Conquered World adored,
Before God Caesar stoopt to be our Lord:
The famed Metelli; Tully, Rome's defense,
Deserving Heaven for precious Eloquence.
The Claudian Race, and the Emilian Line
With Fortune's Conqueror great Cato shine.
But Venus Julian race, who drew their rise
From Heaven* return again and fill the Skies;
Where great Augustus, with his partner Jove
Presides, and views his Father fixed above.
Quirinus joins him, and is pleased to see
The Caesar's grow Rome's Founders more than He.
The highest Arch contains the greater Gods,
The Godlike Heroes fill these next Abodes;
Those generous Souls, that ran an equal race
In Virtues Paths, and claim a second place.
Thus far my Muse has with success been crowned,
Or sound no stops, or vanquished those she found.
And thus encouraged now she boldly dares
To sing the Fatal compacts of the Stars.
But stop thy flight, sing all the Fires that shine
And influence too, and finish thy design.
Seven Fires refuse the Worlds Diurnal force, XVI. The Planets.

From West to East they roll their proper Course.
Cold Saturn, Jove, fierce Mars, the fiery Sun,
With Mercury 'twixt Venus and the Moon.
Some swift* some slow, they measure different Years,
And make the wondrous Music of the Spheres.
But these are constant, XVII. Meteors.
these adorn the Night,
Whilst Others seldom shine and then affright.
For few have viewed a Comet's dreadful train,
Which Wars foretells, and never shines in vain,
Soon catch on Fire, and die as soon again.
The Reason's this; when days serenely fair
Have chased the Clouds, and cleans'd the lower Air,
And mists breathed out from Earth rise through the Sky,
The moister parts are conquered by the Dry.
And Fire enticed by the Convenient Mass
Descends, and lights it with a sudden blaze:
But since the Body's thin, the Parts are rare
And Mists, like smoke, lie scattered through the Air;
As soon as ever begun, the feeble fire
Must waste, and with the blazing Mass expire.
For did they long exist, their constant Light
Would seem to bring new Day upon the Night;
Whole Nature's Course would change, and from the Deep
The Sun would rise, and find the World a-sleep.
But since in various Forms the Mists must rise, Several sorts of Meteors.

And shine in the same Figures over the Skies,
These sudden Flames thus born by Chance at Night,
Must show as much variety of Light.
Some equally diffused, Stella Crinita.
like flaming Hair,
Draw fiery Tresses through the Liquid Air.
And straight the Mass that fiery Locks appeared
Grows short, Barbara*
and is contracted to a Beard.
Whilst some in even and continued streams,
Are round like Pillars, Trabs.
or are squared like Beams.
And some with Bellied Flames large Tuns present, Pithetes.

Alike in shape, and equal in extent.
Some tied in knots like hairy Curls are spread, Bostruchias.

A narrow Covering over the Comets Head.
The Meteor Lamp in parted Flames appears, Lampadias.

The Sheaf uneven shakes her bended Ears.
But still when wandering Stars adorn the Night, Stipulae ardentes.

The falling Meteors draw long trains of Light. Stella cadens.

Like Arrows shot from the Celestial Bow,
They cut the Air, Acontiae.
and strike our Eyes below:
Fire lies in every thing, in Clouds it forms
The frightfull Thunder, and descends in storms.
^t passes through the Earth, in Aetna raves,
And imitates Heaven's Thunder in its Caves.
^n hollow vales it boyls the rising Floods,
^n Flints it is found, and lodges in the Woods,
^or tossed by storms, the Trees in Flames expire,
^o warm are Nature's parts, so filled with Fire.
Therefore when Mists, which wandering Flames retain,
^ursue and catch, and leave as soon again,
Blaze over the Skies when through the parted Frame
The Meteors break in one continued Flame,
Or when midst Rain, or through a Watery Cloud
Quick Lightning flies, or Thunder roars aloud,
Wonder no more; for over the spacious All
Is fire diffused, and must consume the Ball.
When eating Time shall waste confining Clay,
And fret the feeble Body to decay.
Thus far through paths untrod my Muse has gone,
Found different Causes, but not fixed on One,
Such various Flowers in Nature's field invite
Her gathering Hand, and tempt her greedy sight;
That drawn by many she scarce one enjoys,
Lost in the great Variety of Choice.
For Earthy Mists involving Seeds of Flame
May rise on high, Different Opinions about Meteors.
and fiery Comets frame;
Or little Stars by Nature joined in One
May shine, though undiscovered when alone.
Or they are constant Stars, whose Natural Course
The Sun over powers by his prevailing Force,
Draws from their Orbs, and shadows by his Light,
Then frees again, and opens to our sight.
Thus Mercury, thus Venus disappears,
Then shines again, and leads the Evening Stars.
Or God in pity to our Mortal state
Hangs out these Lights to show approaching Fate; Comets presage.

They never idly blaze, but still presage
Some coming Plague on the unhappy Age.
No Crop rewards the cheated Farmer's toil,
He mourns, and curses the ungrateful Soil;
The meagre Ox to the successless Plow
He yoaks, and scarce dares make another Vow.
Or wasting Plagues their deadly Poisons spread,
Increasing the large Empire of the Dead.
Men die by Numbers, and by heaps they fall,
And mighty Cities make one Funeral.
On groaning Piles whole huddled Nations burn,
And Towns lie blended in one Common Urn.
Such Plagues Achaia felt, The Plague of Athens.
the fierce Disease
Laid Athens waste, and spoiled the Town in Peace.
It bore the helpless Nation to the Grave,
No Physic could assist, no Vows could save;
Heaps fell on Heaps, and whilst they gasp'd for Breath,
Heaps fell on those, and finished half their Death.
None nursed the Sick, the nearest Kinsmen fled;
None stayed to bury, or to mourn the Dead.
The Fires grown weary died beneath their Spoils,
And heapt-up Limbs supplied the place of Piles.
Vast Emptiness and Desolation reigned,
And to so great a People scarce one Heir remained.
Such are the Plagues that blazing Stars proclaim,
They light to Funerals their unlucky Flame.
They show not only private Plagues to come,
But threaten Mortals with the Day of Doom.
When Piles Eternal Heaven and Earth shall burn,
And sickly Nature fall into her Urn.
They sudden Tumults, Wars.
and strange Arms declare,
And when close Treach'ry shall start up to War.
When faithless Germans did of late rebel,
And tempt their Fate, when Generous Varus fell,
And three brave Legions blood the Plains did drown,
Over all the Skies the threatening Comets shone.
Even Nature seemed at War, and Fire was hurld
At Fire, and Ruin threatened to the World.
These things* are strange, but why should these surprise,
The Fault is Ours, since we with heedless Eyes
View Heaven, and want the Faith to trust the Skies.
They Civil-Wars foretell, and Brothers rage,
The Curse and the disgraces of an Age.
Never more Comets drew their dreadful Hair
Than when Philippi saw the World at War.
Scarce had the Plains drunk up the former Blood,
On scattered Bones and Limbs the Romans stood
And fought again; disdaining meaner Foes,
(A wretched Conquest where the Victors lose)
Our Empire's power did its own self oppose;
And great Augustus over the slaughtered Heaps
Pursued bright Victory in his Father's steps.
Nor did the Rage end here, the Actian fight,
That bloody dowry of a wanton Night,
Remained, and raised by Cleopatra's Charms
The headlong Nations ran again to Arms.
The Chance for the whole World was thrown again,
And the Skies Ruler sought upon the Main,
Then War obeyed a Woman, Timbrels strove
With Thunder, Isis with the Roman Jove.
Nor stopped it here, but the degenerate Son
Stained all the Glory that his Father won.
The Seas great Pompey freed He seized again,
His Pirates lay like Tempests on the Main.
The Relics of the Wars, the Impious Slaves
Were armed for fight, and ravaged over the Waves.
Till the torn fleet di'd all the Seas with Blood,
And Asia's Chains revenged the injured Flood.
Let this, O Fates! suffice; Let Discord cease,
And raging Tumults be confined by Peace.
Let Caesar triumph, let the World obey,
And long let Rome be happy in his Sway.
Long have him here, and when she shall bestow
A God on Heaven enjoy his Aid below.
The End of the First Book.
NOTES.
1 Whether Divinas is to be rendered Divining or Divine is not yet agreed by the
Interpreters of the Poet; by rendering it Divine, Manilius is freed from a
redundancy of Words, and the Origin of Astronomy, which he so often inculcates
in other places, is hinted at: beside, Divinus seldom signifies Divining, but
when a Substantive follows which determines it to that sense, as Divina
imbrium, and the like, and in that case I find Milton venturing at it in his
Poem: -- Divine of future Woe.

2 It seems very plain that this whole description respects only the Eastern
Kings, and therefore Manilius must be reckoned amongst those who believed the
head of Nile to be in the East; and lest he might be thought to have forgotten
the Egyptians, I am inclined to think he includes them under the Priests, to
whose care Astronomical Observations were peculiarly committed.

3 This was the Opinion of Xenophanes, Melissus, Aristotle and others; and
Pliny thus concludes in the second Book cap. 1. of his Natural History: It Is
reasonable to believe that the World is a Deity, eternal and immense, that
never had a beginning, and never shall have an end. As absurd an Opinion as
ever was proposed, and repugnant to all the Appearances of Nature; look upon
the Rocks on the Sea shore, and having observed their continual wearing,
consider how few thousands of years they must have stood: direct thy eye to
Heaven, and view the several changes in that which was thought impassible; and
in short, reflect on the essential vileness of matter, and its impotence to
conserve its own being; and then I believe you will find reason to put this
Opinion amongst those absurdities which Tully has allotted to one or other of
the Philosophers to defend.

4 This blind fancy we owe to the Phoenicians, who (if Philo Biblius's
Sancuniathon may be trusted) taught that the Principles of the Universe were a
Spirit of dark Air, and a confused Chaos; this Spirit at last began to Love,
and joining with the Chaos, produced (...) or slime, and thence fashioned the
World. And hence likely the more sober part of the Greek Philosophers, (for
they were but borrowers of Learning) who required two eternal principles, the
one active and the other passive, such as Plato, Anaxagoras, etc. took their
notions, and having added some few new ornaments, vented them for their own.

5 The Philosophy of Epicurus is too well known to need any explication.

6 The Opinion of Heraclitus, concerning which see the first Book of Lucretius.

7 Thales the Milesian endeavored to establish this by Arguments drawn from
the Origin and Continuation of most things: The seminal Principle of Animals
is humid, Plants are nourished by mere Water; Fire it self cannot live without
Air, which is only water rarefied, and the Sun and Stars draw up vapors for
their own nourishment and support. These were the considerations upon which he
grounded his Opinion; and hence it is easy to guess that he kept up the credit
of his School rather by those riches which he gained by his lucky conjecture at
the scarcity of Olives, than by the strength of argument and reason.

8 The Assertion of Empedocles, agreeable to which Ovid sings, Quatuor aeternus
genitalia Corpora Mundus
Continet --.


9 There is something in this scheme of Manilius so like the ingenious
conjecture of the excellent Author of the Theory of the Earth, that what
reflects on the one must have an influence on the other, and when the fiction
is confuted the serious discourse will find it self concerned: The Stoics held
the material part of their Deity to be changeable, and that too as often as the
fatal Fire prevailed, and reduced the Elements into one Chaos; in such a
confusion the Poet supposes the first matter of his World, and then makes the
different parts separate, and take proper places, according as they were light
or heavy: agreeable to this Opinion the Theory of the Earth supposes a Chaos,
which he defines to be a Mass of Matter, fluid, consisting of parts of
different sorts and sizes, blended together without any union or connection. The
solid and heavyer parts of this Chaos descend to the Center, by their own
weight, and there fixing and growing hard, compose the inward Body of the
Earth; the lighter parts fly upward, and being continually agitated, make that
Body which we call Air; the middle sort being somewhat heavyer, and not so much
agitated, cover-over the solid interior Body of the Earth; and its fat and
oily parts rising, and swimming on the surface, stop and detain those heavyer
particles which upon the first separation were carried up by the Air, and
afterward according to their several degrees of Gravity fell back again toward
the Center: These particles sticking in this oily matter, made a soft crust,
which in time being hardened by the Sun and those breezes which always attend
its motion, became the habitable Earth. This Earth thus formed was solid, and
without Caverns, nor had it any inequalities on its surface; as to its site,
its Axis was parallel to the Axis of the Ecliptic, both its Poles being
equally inclined to the Sun; and as to its figure it was Oval. These are the
few easy principal parts of that excellent Hypothesis, settled on the obvious
notions of Gravity and Levity, and on the acknowledged Nature, and allowed
Motion of a Fluid. And from these so many curious propositions are naturally
deduced, so many difficulties concerning Paradise and the Flood happily
explained, and all set off with that neatness and aptness of expression, and
that variety of curious thought, that I am very much inclined to believe that
Nature was never so well dressed before, nor so artificially recommended. And it
is pity that the first acknowledged Principles of Philosophy will not allow it
to be true. Inherent Qualities are now generally exploded, as unphilosophical,
not to be understood, and unfit to explain the Phenomenon of Nature. The
Acceleration of a heavy Body in its descent (beside a thousand other Arguments)
quite overthrows Gravity both as an accident of Aristotle, and as essential to
Matter, according to the fancy of Epicurus; so that this motion proceeds only
from external impulse, and depends upon the present order of the World. So that
Philosophy will not allow the supposition of Gravity or Levity in a confused
Chaos, since it can sufficiently demonstrate that they are neither inherent
qualities, nor essential to matter, and that it is in vain to look after them,
before the system of the World was settled in the present order. From this hint
it is easy to infer that the supposed Chaos would have still continued such,
the solid Parts would have been agitated this or that way indifferently by the
restless particles of the Fluid, but there could have been no orderly
separation, because no Principle of it.

But suppose such a separation, why must the outward Crust of the Globe be
without Caverns in its Body, and Inequalities on its Surface? What Law of
Nature does necessarily prove that in such a confusion the solid parts must be
equally dispersed through the Body of the Air? If we trust our Eyes, and look
upon a Dust raised by the ruin of a House, or only consider what Confusion is,
it will be very hard to find such a regular and orderly disposition. And since
these solid Bodies may be unequally dispersed, and every one of them tends to
the Center by a direct Line, whenever they settle, the Body which they compose
must be unequal in its surface.

Yet to let this Difficulty pass, its Figure according to this Hypothesis will
be much more Oval than common observation will allow, for since it is said to
be Oval because the Motion of the Equator is swifter than that of the Polar
Circles, the figure must be almost as much Oval, as the Circle of the Equator
is bigger than the Circle of the Pole; there being nothing to hinder the utmost
effect of this motion but the weight of the Fluid endeavoring to reduce it
self to a Level, which of what moment it will be in this Case I leave to be
considered.

And as for its site, that renders the torrid and the frigid Zones unhabitable;
intolerable Heats still burning the former, and the continual gathering and
dropping of the vapors making the others too cold and moist to entertain
either Man or Beast. And this one concession, I am afraid, spoils most part of
the Contrivance; for these portions of the Crust could never grow hard, being
continually moistened by the Vapors, and so little exposed to the Sun, or that
breeze which attends its motion: And therefore, whenever Vapors were drawn
from the Abyss in the Torrid Zone, these parts of the Arch being not firm
enough to sustain themselves, must sink in; and those Vapors that were
imprisoned between the surface of the Abyss and the solid part of the Crust of
the Earth, might have found an easy passage through this soft portion of the
Crust, and therefore could not contribute to the general dissolution of the
Frame. Besides, from such a muddy Fountain what could be expected but streams
unwholesome and corrupted, and unfit for that end for which they were designed,
and for that use, to which sacred Scripture tells us they were employed?

A great many other inconveniences in Nature may be observed to follow this
Contrivance; but because this Hypothesis was not set up for its own sake, but
to give an intelligible account of Noah's Flood; I shall close these reflections
with a few considerations upon that.

And first the Author pleads for an universal Flood, it being inconsistent
with the demonstrated Nature of a Fluid, that Water should stand up in Heaps
fifteen Cubits above the tops of the highest Mountains. This I am willing to
admit, though there is no reason why Omnipotence might not be immediately
concerned in this, since he himself confesses, that the forty days Rain cannot
according to his Hypothesis be explained by any Natural Cause that he can find
out.

Secondly, He compares the height of the Mountains and the Depth of the Sea,
and having as to both made allowable suppositions (though the Course of the
longest River, even the Nile it self, will not prove its head to be above three
foot higher than its mouth) he infers that eight Oceans will be little enough
to make an universal Deluge: The Waters above the Firmament are exploded; the
Rain would afford but the hundredth part of such a Mass of Water, unless the
showers were continual, and over the face of the whole Earth, and the Drops
came down ninety times faster than usually they do. (Though here a Man would be
apt to think from the expressions in Genesis, The Windows of Heaven were
opened, that there was somewhat very extraordinary in this Rain, and that all
those required conditions were observed.) The Caverns of the Earth, if they
threw out all the Water they contained, could afford but little in comparison
of the great store that was required; And if the whole middle region of the Air
had been condensed, still there had not been enough, because Air being turned
into Water fills only the hundredth part of that space which it formerly
possessed. Though all the other ways by which some have endeavored to explain
the Flood, were demonstrably insufficient, yet this last which gives an account
of it from so natural and easy a Cause as the condensation of the Air deserved
to be considered a little more; but it is the Art of a Disputer to touch that
least which presses most on that Opinion which he would advance. For it being
allowed that Air by natural Causes may be changed into Water, and a Vacuum in
this very Chapter being excluded, it necessarily follows, that as much Air as
rises fifteen Cubits higher than the tops of the Mountains is sufficient to
make such a Deluge as is described to have been in Noah's time. Because where
there is no Vacuum, there can be no contraction into a less space, and every
particle of Matter, whatever form or schematism it puts on, must in all
conditions be equally extended, and therefore take up the same Room. But
suppose a Vacuum, or (as it happens in our imperfect condensations) that a
hundred cubical feet of Air would make but one foot of Water, yet sure the
Region is large enough to make amends for this disproportion: Now since Nature
is sufficient for condensation, and since its powers may be considerably
invigorated for the execution of the Almighty's wrath; why must it be thought
so difficult to explain a Deluge? and why should an excellent Wit waste it self
in fashioning a new World, only to bring that about which the old one would
permit easily to be done? It is above the Province of Philosophy to make a
World, let that be supposed to have been formed as it is revealed, it is enough
for us to search by what Laws it is preserved; and a system erected on this
foundation will be agreeable both to Reason and to Religion.

10 He explodes the Opinion of Xenophanes, and the Fancy of Epicurus. Vid.
Lucretius's fifth Book.

11 Canopus is a Star in the Southern Keel of the Ship Argo, of the first
magnitude: These particulars as to the Appearance of the two Stars are not
mathematically true, yet serve well enough for the Poets design, sufficiently
proving the roundness of the Earth.

12 This Argument being taken from the Eclipse and not from the increase or
decrease of the Moon, the Poet must be understood, not as to diverse moments of
Time, for the Moon at the same instant is seen Eclipsed by all to whom she
appears above the Horizon, but as to the diversity of Hours at which the
Eastern or Western People reckon the Eclipse to begin or end.

13 This is to be understood in respect of those who inhabit the Northern
Hemisphere, to whom the North Pole is still elevated.

14 It was the Opinion of the ancient Poets, and some others, that the Sea was
as a Girdle to the Earth, that it ran round it as an Horizon, and divided the
upper Hemisphere from the lower.

15 Release this Soul from that union which the Stoics foolishly assigned, and
then to hold a Soul of the World and Providence is all one.

16 Manilius is not constant in his Position; most commonly as a Poet he turns
his face to the West, and then the North is on his right hand, and the South on
the left: sometimes as an Astronomer he turns his face to the South, and this
is the position in this place.

17 Alluding to the two Verses in Homer's sixth Iliad, (...)
(...).


18 Demonstrated by Archimedes in his (...), Prop. 3. That the Circumference of
every Circle exceeds three times the Diameter thereof by a part that is less
than 1/7th, and greater than 10/70.

19 Eudoxus divided the Sphere into sixty parts, and this division Manilius
follows, and according to that describes the Position of the Celestial Circles.

20 The Opinion of Diodorus.

21 Macrobius reports Theophrastus to be the Author of this Fancy.

22 From Plutarch we learn that Metrodorus and others asserted this, and
Achilles Tacius fixes this foolish Opinion on Oenopides Chius.

23 The learned Mr. Hayns dislikes Scaliger's reading, which I have followed,
and thinks that he meant that Pella was a Woman; a more solemn foppery was
never met with, and this Note, beside a great many others, may serve to credit
the Dauphin Editions of the Classick Authors.

MANILIUS. The Second Book.
Manilius takes care frequently to tell his Reader that he is the first that
ever ventured on an Astrological Poem; He seems mightily pleased with his
undertaking, hugs it as his Firstborn, and the Son of his strength, and is
very troublesome in acquainting us with the pains which he suffered at its
Birth; and then reckons up the Beauties of the Child, and what great hopes he
conceives of it: If ever he deserved Scaliger's Character, that he knew not
when to leave off, it must be acknowledged that this is the Case in which it
may be chiefly applied: We need look no farther than the beginning of this Book
to be satisfied in this matter; He spends about sixty Verses in reckoning up
the chief Subjects of Homer, Hesiod, Theocritus and others; all which being
laid aside, he declares his design to be wholly new; and then begins, 1. To
prove the World to be one Animal: 2. The Influence of the Heavens: 3. He
Describes the several species of the Signs. 4. The various configurations or
aspects of the Signs; and tells us what are Trines, what Quadrates or Squares;
what Hexagons or Sextiles; and what are Right and Left in each of these. 5.
What Signs are said to be conjoined, what not, and what opposed; to what Sign
each part of Man's body is appropriate; what Signs are said to hear, what to
see one another; what are friendly, and what not. 6. The friendly and
unfriendly aspects of the Signs, and the various aspects of the Planets in the
Signs. 7. The Twelfths or Dodecatemoria of the Signs and Planets. 8. The twelve
Celestial Houses, and assigns to each its proper Planet.

IN lasting Verse the mighty Homer sings
The Trojan Wars, Homer.
the King of fifty Kings,
Stout Hector's brand, the bloody dreadful Field,
And Troy secure behind the Hero's Shield:
Ulysses wanderings, and his traveling years,
In time and glory equal to his Wars:
How twice with conquering Fleets he plough'd the Main,
Whilst Scylla roared, and Neptune raged in vain.
And how at Home he fixed his tottering Throne,
Redeemed his honor, and secured his Son:
Usurping Woers felt his thundering Sword,
And willing Nations knew their Native Lord.
His Subjects these, and from his boundless Spring

MANILIUS. The Second Book.
Manilius takes care frequently to tell his Reader, that He is the first who
ventured on an Astrological Poem: He seems mightily pleased with his
Undertaking, hugs it as his Firstborn, and the Son of his Strength: He at
large acquaints us with the Pains which He suffered in bringing it to
Perfection, and then reckons up the Beauty of the Child, and what great Hopes
He conceives of it:' If ever he deserves Scaliger's Character, That he knew not
when to leave off, it must be principally then when He speaks of himself and
his own Performance. We need look no further than the Beginning of this Book to
be satisfied in this matter: He spends about Sixty Verses in reckoning up the
chief Subjects of Homer, Hesiod, Theocritus, and other Poets, all which being
laid aside. He declares his Design to be wholly new, and then begins, 1. To
assert, that the whole Word is Animate, and God the Soul of it 2. The Influence
of the Heavens. 3. He reckons up the several kinds or sorts of Signs, as, 4.
Male and Female Signs: 5. Human and Brute Signs. 6. Single and Double Signs. 7.
Pairs. 8. Double Signs made up of different Species. 9. Signs Double by Place,
viz. Those that immediately precede the Four Tropic Signs. 10. Signs of
Natural or Unnatural Postures. 11. Day and Night Signs. 12. Earth and Water
Signs. 13. Fruitful and Barren Signs. 14. Signs of different Postures. 15.
Maimed and entire Signs. 16. Season Signs. 17. He sings the various
Configurations or Aspects of the Signs: As, 18. Trines. 19. Quadrates or
Squares; shows what are to be accounted Right and what Left in these Figures:
And, 20. Adds several Cautions concerning Squares and Trines. 21. He describes
the Intercourse or Agreement of Trines and Quadrates. 22. Of Hexagons or
Sextiles, of which he gives a particular Account. 23. Of Contiguous Signs. 24.
Of Unequal Signs. 25. Of Opposites. 26. He shows what Gods are the Guardians of
each Sign. 27. The Signs for the several parts of the Body. 28. What Signs See,
Hear, Love, or Hate each other. 29. He makes a short Digression about
Friendship. 30. He treats of the Friendly and Unfriendly Aspects. 31. Of the
Dodecatemoria, or Twelfths. 32. Of the Dodecatemoria of the Planets, and
proposes two ways to find them. 33. He describes the Celestial Houses,
assigning them their Proper Charges and their Titles, together with the Planets
which presided in them; and then concludes this Second Book.

THE mighty Bard in lasting Numbers sings
Ilium's long Wars, Homer.
the King of fifty Kings;
Brave Hector's Brand, the bloody dreadful Field,
And Troy secure behind the Hero's Shield.
He sings Ulysses, and his wandering Years
^n Time and Glory equal to his Wars:
He sings how twice He conquering plough'd the Main
Whilst Scylla roared, and Neptune raged in vain,
And how at Home He fixed his tottering Throne,
Redeemed his Honor, and secured his Son:
Usurping Woers felt his thundering Sword,
And willing Nations knew their Native Lord.
His Subjects these, from whose 1 abundant Spring
^ucceeding Poets draw the Songs they sing;
from Him they take, from Him adorn their Themes,
and into little Channels cut his Streams, ^ich in his store --
Next Hesiod sings the Gods Immortal Race, Hesiod.

^e sings how Chaos bore the Earthy Mass;
^ow Light from Darkness struck did Beams display,
and Infant-Stars first staggered in their way:
^ow Name 2 of Brother veiled an Husband's Love,
and Juno bore unaided by her Jove:
^ow twice-born Baccbus burst the Thunderer's Thigh,
and all the Gods that wander through the Sky.
Hence He to Fields descends, manures the Soil,
Instructs the Plowman, and rewards his Toil:
He sings how Corn in Plains, how Vines in Hills
Delight, how Both with vast Increase the Olive fills:
How Foreign Graffs th'Adulterous Stock receives,
Bears stranger Fruit, and wonders at her Leaves:
An useful Work, when Peace and Plenty reign,
And Art joins Nature to improve the Plain.
The Constellation's Shapes 3 some make their Themes, Eratosthenes.

Sing whence they came, and how adorned with Beams,
Andromeda enjoys kind Perseu's Aid,
The Sire unbinds, the Mother mourns the Maid:
Callisto ravished now the Pole surveys,
Nor grieves to change her Honor for her Rays:
The Little Bear that rocked the mighty Jove,
The Swan whose borrowed Shape concealed his Love
Are graced with Light, the Nursing Goat's repaid
With Heaven, and Duty raised the Pious Maid;
The Lion for the Honors of his Skin,
The squeezing Crab, and stinging Scorpion shine
For aiding Heaven, when Giants dared to brave,
The threatened Stars; and Thunder failed to save:
And now the Fish ignoble Fates escape
Since Venus owed her Safety to their Shape:
The Ram having passed the Sea, serenely shines,
And leads the Year, the Prince of all the Signs.
Thus whilst by Fables They the Stars advance,
They vainly make the Heaven one large Romance;
Earth fills the Sky, the Mass ignobly reigns,
And Heaven's upheld by that which it sustains:
Fables absurd, which Nature's Laws reject,
To make the Cause depend on the Effect.
The sweet Theocritus with softest Strains
Makes piping Pan delight Sicilian Swains; Theocritus.

Through his smooth Reed no Rustic Numbers move,
But all is Tenderness, and all is Love;
As if the Muses sat in every Vale,
Inspired the Song, and told the melting Tale.
Some Birds, Macer.
some Wars of Beasts, or Serpents write,
Snakes in their Poems hiss, and Lions sight:
Some Fate in Herbs describe, Nicander.
some Sovereign Roots,
Or see gay Health spring up in saving Fruits:
One breaks through Nature's stubborn Bars, Some old Poet who described Hell.
invades
The rest, and sacred Silence of the Shades,
Turns up the inside of the World, and Night,
And brings Eternal Darkness into Light.
Of every Subject now the Muses sing,
And Floods confused come tumbling from their Spring,
Yet dry as fast, nor can Parnassian Streams
Suffice the Throngs that crowd to common Themes.
I seek new Springs which roll refreshing Waves
Through Plains untrod, and Purls in hidden Caves,
Kept pure for Me, which Birds did never profane,
And thirsty Phoebus often has sought in vain:
My Verse shall be my Own, not stolen, but wrought;
Mine, not the Labor of Another's Thought.
My Vessel's trimmed, though never launched before,
I spread my Sails, and boldly leave the Shore:
I Will sing how God the World's Almighty Mind
Through All infused, 1. The World an Animal, and God the Soul of it.
and to that All confined,
Directs the Parts, and with an equal Hand
Supports the whole, enjoying his Command:
How All agree, and how the Parts have made
Strict Leagues, subsisting by each others Aid;
How All by Reason move, because one soul
Lives in the Parts, diffusing through the whole.
For did not all the Friendly Parts conspire
To make one Whole, and keep the Frame entire;
And did not Reason guide, and Sense control
The vast stupendous Machine of the whole,
Earth would not keep its place, the Skies would fall,
And universal Stiffness deaden All;
Stars would not wheel their Round, nor Day, nor Night,
Their Course perform, be put, and put to flight:
Rains would not feed the Fields, and Earth deny
Mists to the Clouds, and Vapors to the Sky;
Seas would not fill the Springs, nor Springs return
Their grateful Tribute from their flowing Urn:
Nor would the All, unless contrived by Art,
So justly be proportioned in each part,
That neither Seas, nor Skies, nor Stars exceed
Our Wants, nor are too scanty for our Need:
Thus stands the Frame, and the Almighty Soul
Through all diffused so turns, and guides the whole,
That nothing from its settled Station swerves,
And Motion alters not the Frame, but still preserves.
This God or Reason, 2. The Influence of the Heavens.
which the Orbs does move,
Makes Things below depend on Signs above;
Though far removed, though hid in Shades of Night,
And scarce to be descried by their own Light;
Yet Nations own, and Men their Influence feel;
They rule the Public, and the Private Will:
The Proofs are plain. Thus from a different Star
We find a fruitful, or a barren Year;
Now Grains increase, and now refuse to grow;
Now quickly ripen, now their growth is slow:
The Moon commands the Seas, she drives the Main
To pass the Shores, then drives it back again:
And this Sedition chiefly swells the Streams,
When opposite she views her Brother's Beams;
Or when she near in close Conjunction rides
She rears the Flood, and swells the flowing Tides;
Or when attending on his yearly Race
The Equinoctial sees her borrowed Face.
Her Power sinks deep, it searches all the Main,
Testaceous 4 Fish, as she her Light regains,
Increase, and still diminish in her Wain:
For as the Moon in deepest Darkness mourns,
Then Rays receives, and points her borrowed Horns,
Then turns her Face, and with a Smile invites
The full Effusions of her Brother's Lights;
They to her Changes due proportion keep,
And show her various Phases in the Deep.
So Brutes, whom Nature did in sport create,
Ignorant both of themselves, and of their Fate,
A secret Instinct still erects their Eyes
To Parent Heaven, and seems to make them wise:
One at the New Moons ^ rise to distant Shores
Retires, his Body sprinkles, and adores:
Some see Storms gathering, or Serenes foretell,
And scarce our Reason guides us half so well.
Then who can doubt that Man, the glorious Pride
Of All, is nearer to the Skies allied?
Nature in Man capacious Souls has wrought,
And given them Voice expressive of their Thought;
In Man the God descends, and joys to find
The narrow Image of his greater Mind.
But why should all the other Arts be shown,
Too various for Productions of our own?
Why should I sing how different Tempers fall,
And Inequality is seen in All?
How many strive with equal Care to gain
The highest Prize, and yet how few obtain?
Which proves not Matter sways, but Wisdom rules,
And measures out the Bigness of our Souls:
Sure Fate stands fixed, nor can its Laws decay,
It Is Heaven's to rule, and Matter's Essence to obey.
Who could know Heaven, unless that Heaven bestowed
The Knowledge? or find God, but part of God?
How could the Space immense be e're confined
Within the compass of a narrow Mind?
How could the Skies, the Dances of the Stars,
Their Motions adverse, and eternal Wars,
Unless kind Nature in our Breasts had wrought
Proportioned Souls, be subject to our Thought?
Were Heaven not interessed to advance our Mind,
To know Fate's Laws, and teach the way to find,
Did not the Skies their kindred Souls improve,
Direct, and lead them through the Maze above;
Discover Nature, show its secret Springs,
And tell the Sacred Intercourse of things,
How impious were our Search, how bold our Course,
Thus to assault, and take the Skies by force?
But to insist on tedious Proofs in vain,
The Art defends it self, the Art is plain;
For Art well grounded forces to believe,
It cannot be deceived, nor can deceive;
Events foretold fulfill the Prophecy,
What Fortune seconds, how can Man deny?
The Proofs are Sacred, and to doubt would be
Not Reason's Action, but Impiety.
Whilst on these Themes my Songs sublimely soar,
And take their Flight, where Wing never beat before;
Where none will meet, none guide my first Essay,
Partake my Labors, or direct my way,
I rise above the Crowd, I leave the Rude,
Nor are my Poems for the Multitude.
Heaven shall rejoice, nor shall my Praise refuse,
But see the Subject equaled by the Muse;
At least those favored few, whose Minds it shows,
The Sacred Maze, but ah! how few are Those!
Gold, Power, soft Luxury, vain Sports, and Ease
Possess the World, and have the luck to please:
Few study Heaven, unmindful of their state,
Vain stupid Man! but this it self is Fate.
My Subject this, and I must this pursue,
This wondrous Theme, 3.
tho read, and praised by few;
And first the Signs in various Ranks dispose,
As Nature prompts, or their Position shows:
Six Male from Aries, 4. Male and Female Signs.
from the Bull comprise
(See how he rises backward in the Skies)
Six Female Signs; but intermixed they fall
In order turned, 6 one Female, and one Male.
Some Signs bear 7 Humane Shapes, 5. Humane and Brute Signs.
some Signs expressed
In single Figures bear the Form of Beast:
These Shapes direct us, and from those we know
How each inclines, what Tempers Signs bestow;
Their Figures will not let their Force escape,
Their Tempers are agreeing to their Shape.
These Signs are Single, 6. Single and Double Signs.
now observe the 8 Pairs,
Double Shapes confess a double Force in Stars:
And each Companion still in each creates
A Change, and vast Variety in Fates:
Ambiguous Force from both expressed combines,
No Single Influence flows from Double Signs.
What Powers, or good or bad, one Part displays,
They may be altered by the others Rays: 7. Pairs.

Two of this kind in all the round of Sky
Appear, the Pisces and the naked Gemini:
These different Powers, tho both Pair Signs, possess,
Because their Parts Position disagrees;
For tender Gemini in strict embrace
Stand closed, and smiling in each others Face:
Whilst Pisces glide in two divided Streams,
Nor friendly seem, nor mix agreeing Beams.
Thus tho in Both two parts compose the Frame,
In Form alike, their Nature's not the same.
These Pairs alone an equal Frame can boast, 8. Double Signs of different
Species.

No stranger parts are mixed, no parts are lost
From their due Form; whilst other Pairs are joined
Of Natures disagreeing in their kind;
Such is the Goat, he twists a Scaly Train,
The Centaur such, half Horse, and half a Man.
Observe this well, in these Mysterious Arts
Whether the Signs are framed of different parts,
Or only Pairs, it much imports to know,
For hence comes great Variety below.
Midst double Signs the Pious Maid may claim
A place, 9. Double Signs by Place.
not from the Figure of her Frame,
But 'cause in Her the Summer's Heats decay,
And gentler Autumn spreads a weaker Ray.
But to be short; the same account defines
That Double still precede the Tropic Signs,
Because in those two Seasons mixed unite
Their Powers, and make them double by their Site.
Thus of the Twins the one the Bull requires,
The other feels the Crab's unruly Fires;
One sees the fading Flowers, and Spring decline,
The other Boy leads on the hottest Sign:
But naked both, for both feel scorching Rays
As Summer comes, or as the Spring decays.
Thy Face, bright Centaur, Autumn's Heats retain,
The softer Season suiting to the Man;
Whilst Winter's shivering Goat afflicts the Horse
With Frost, and makes him an uneasy Course.
Thus thou midst double Signs might doubly claim
A place, both from thy Seat, and from thy Frame:
The like in Pisces is observed, one brings
The Winter's end, the other leads the Springs;
In them Spring's Dews, with Winter's Rage combine,
Both moist, and both agreeing to the Sign:
How wise, and how obliging in her Grants
Is Nature's Bounty suited to our Wants!
With Moisture she the Watery Signs supplies,
And they enjoy their Ocean in the Skies.
But there is War, Sign disagrees with Sign,
And Three rise adverse to the other Nine:
Bull's Back, Signs of natural or unnatural Postures.
Twins Feet, Crab's Shell do first appear,
And stop the progress of the rising year;
Whilst others in their usual Postures rise,
Nor show unnatural Figures in the Skies:
Since then through adverse Signs the Summer's Sun
Makes way, no wonder that he drives so slowly on.
How vast this Knowledge, and how hard to gain,
The Subject still increasing with the Pain;
Yet my swift Muse, like Larks on towering Wings
Mounts to the Skies, and as she mounts she sings:
She sees Signs various in her Aerie Flight
Some Signs of Day, and other Signs of Night:
Not so Day Signs and Night Signs.
distinguished Cause those Signs maintain
Those times distinctly, and then choose to reign:
For then as Years roll round, the Circling Lights
Would all be of one kind Day's all, or all the Night's.
But 'cause wise Nature in her first Designs
By Laws Eternal fixed them to these Times:
The Centaur, Lion, and the golden Ram,
Fish, Crab, and Scorpio with his venomed Flame
Or near in Site, or in an equal space
By two alike divided, are the Day's:
The rest the Night's. But who can hope to see
Opinion's join, or find the World agree!
Some with the Ram begin, and thence convey
The Five in Order following to the Day.
The rest from Libra are to Night confined:
Whilst others sing Male Signs affect the Light,
And Female safely wanton in the Night.
But others, this is plain from common sense, demand
Some Signs for Earth and Water Signs.
Sea, and other Signs for Land:
Thus watery Pisces, and the Crab retain
Their proper Nature, and respect the Main:
The Bull and Ram possess their old Command,
They led the Herds, and still they love the Land,
Though there the Lion's Force their Rest invades,
And poysnous Scorpio lurks in gloomy Shades;
The Danger is despised, the Ram, the Bull
Keep Land, so powerful is the Lust of Rule:
The Twins, the Centaur, and the Scales dispose
In the same Rank; and join the Maid with those.
Of middle Nature some with Both agree,
One part respects the Land, and one the Sea:
The double Goat is such, whose wild Command
Now Sea affects, and now enjoys the Land:
And young Aquarius pouring out his Stream
Here spreads a watery, there an Earthy Beam.
How shall these things, yet they reward thy pain,
Reason's in All, and nothing's framed in vain:
The Crab Fruitful and Barren Signs.
is fruitful, and a numerous Brood
Pierce Scorpio yields, and Pisces fill the Flood;
The Lion's barren, and no Vows can gain
The Maid; Aquarius spends his Youth in vain,
Ah too removed, too far disjoined to prove
The fruitful Pleasures of increasing Love!
'Twixt these two kinds a Third nor fruitful Beams
Nor Barren spreads, but joins the two Extremes:
The Goat all Beast above, and Fish below,
The Centaur glorious in his Cretian Bow,
The Scales that Autumn's Equinoctial rule,
The Twins, and Ram, to whom we join the Bull.
Nor must you think it undesign'd, a Cast
Of busy Nature as she wrought in haste;
That some show running Signs of different Postures.
Postures in their frame,
The Lion, Centaur, and the turning Ram;
Erected some, Aquarius rears his Head,
The Twins are upright, and the pious Maid:
Some crouching Signs a lazy Posture show,
Thus Taurus bends, as wearied by the Plough;
The Scales pressed down appear, and Caper lies
By his own Frost contracted in the Skies:
The Crab and Scorpio flat are found, they show
The Postures there which they maintain below,
Whilst watery Pisces low, and gently glide
In Streams divided, always on their side.
But search minutely, and you find a Maimed and entire Signs.
Maim
In many Signs, the mighty Bull is lame,
His Leg turns under, Scorpio's Claws are lost
In Libra's Scales, nor can the Centaur boast
A Form complete, though we distinctly find
One Eye, the other's lost, and Cancer's blind.
Thus Heaven to wretched Mortals sends Relief
By these Examples it corrects our Grief,
Since Signs, on which our Fates depend, do share
The like Misfortunes, which we grieve to bear.
The different Season Signs.
Seasons likewise share the Signs,
From Pisces Spring, and Summer from the Twins,
From Centaur Winter, Autumn from the Maid begins:
Each has three Signs, and as the Seasons fight
In the Years Round, so these lie opposite.
Nor is it sufficient that my Muse defines
The Kinds, and Figures of the Single Signs,
They work by Compact, they their Beams unite
To mutual Aid determined by their site.
From Aries rightways draw a Line, to end
In the same Round, and let that Line subtend
An equal Triangle; now since the Lines
Must three times touch the Round, and meet three Signs,
Where e're they meet in Angles those are The various Configurations or Aspects.
Trines. See Fig. 1.

Because they are at equal distance seen
On either side, and leave three Signs between.
Thus Aries sees on either side below
The Lion roar, and Centaur draw his Bow:
The Bull with Caper and the Maid are found
In Trine: Thus fix the others of the Round.
Signs Left and Trines.
Right are in the Trines agreed;
The Left still follow, and the Right precede;
The Maid is Left, and Caper to the Bull
Is Right: Thus fix the others by this Rule.
Tr: 1. Tr: 2. Tr: 3. Tr: 4.



Q: 1: Q: 2: Q: 3:



But more, in Quadrates; not in Trines alone
Signs Right and Left are by Position shown;
In Quadrates.
Quadrates: See Fig. 2.
which to know, the Round divide
By Squares exactly equal on each side;
Where Angles close the Perpendiculars
There lie the Signs agreeing in the Squares.
To give an Instance then, observe the Site,
The narrow Goat sees Libra on the Right,
Oth' Left the Ram, at equal distance lies
The Crab, and on the Left sees Libra rise,
To make a Square agreeing in the Skies.
This single Instance all the rest declares,
And shows that twice six Signs compose three Squares.
But now should any Cautions concerning Squares and Trines.
think their Skill designs
The Squares aright, and well describes the Trines,
And that they hit the Rule when e're they' give
Four Signs to Squares, to Trines allotting Five;
And thence presume to guess what mutual Aid
The Signs afford, they will find their Work betrayed:
For though on every side five Signs are found
To make the several Trines that fill the Round,
Yet Births in each Fifth Sign no Fates design
To share the united Influence of the Trine.
They lose the Thing, though they preserve the Name,
For Place and Number still oppose their Claim:
For since the Round where Phoebus guides his Reins
Three hundred, and thrice twenty parts contains,
One third of those, as we the Round divide
By Trines, to every Trine must make one side;
But Sign apply to Sign, not Part to Part,
This Number's lost; and therefore false the Art.
For tho Three Signs appear to interpose
Between the Two in which the Angles close;
Yet take the Scheme as it is exposed to sight,
And join the utmost parts of Left and Right;
Then count the number; on the slightest view
You Will quickly find it much exceeds the true:
Thrice fifty parts it holds, and thus one Line
Defrauds the other, and destroys the Trine;
And therefore though the several Signs retain
The Name of Trines, they claim the Parts in vain.
The like Mistake, when you design a Square,
Thy Art may baffle, and elude thy Care;
For as the Round we by Degrees divide
To every Quadrate Ninety make one side:
Now from the first from which begins the Line,
Toth' last degree of the succeeding Sign
If you count on, twice sixty parts prepare
To crowd upon thee, and deform the Square:
Or from preceding Signs last parts descend
To Signs succeeding, let the Reckoning end
In The first Degree of those: the space consines
But sixty parts, the number of Two Signs;
Thus count from Fourth to Fourth, Degrees too few,
Or else too many will thy Work pursue,
Elude thy Skill, and prove the Scheme untrue.
Then take Advice, nor from my Rules depart
Nor think thy Figures well designed by Art,
'Cause Four in Squares, Three equal Lines in Trines
In Angles meeting there divide the Signs;
For in all Trines the single sides require
Sixscore Degrees to make the Scheme entire
Squares ninety ask: but more or less proclaim
The Figure, faulty, and destroy the Frame.
And where the several Lines in Angles close,
They there the Trines, or else the Squares dispose*


Sext: 1: Sext: 1:



These mutual Aid by Nature's Laws convey,
And jointly act with an agreeing Ray.
And therefore every Birth, that Squares or Trines
Enjoys, not always carries all the Lines;
And though the Signs the name of Squares may gain,
Or Trines, they never shall their Force obtain:
They cannot jointly act, their Rays unite,
Tho Trines they seem, and show like Squares to sight:
For wide the difference, whether those Degrees,
The Line takes up, which to it Art decrees;
Or from the Numbers, which the Circle fill,
Detracting somewhat, it cludes thy Skill:
For then of Signs too many or too few
It will possess; and make the Scheme untrue.
Thus far of these: 21. The Intercourse of Trines and Squares.
But now expect to share
More vigorous Influence from the Trine than Square;
For Lines that measure Squares remotely tend,
And almost close with the Celestial Bend;
But those that make up Trines to Earth repair,
Downwards they shoot, See Fig. 3.
from Signs the Influence bear,
And with a nearer Ray infect our Air.
From Signs Alternate little Friendship's due, 22. Of Sentiles

Asquint they look, and with a partial view;
The Line that measures them obliquely drawn,
Through various Angles goes not freely on; See Fig. 4.

Many its stops, in every other Sign
The Angle closing still diverts the Line;
Forward it darts, but soon it meets a Bound,
And six times broak, it leisurely creeps round:
From Taurus stretched to Cancer, thence it bends
To Virgo's Sign, and thence to Scorpio tends;
Cold Caper meets it next, and thence it goes
To Aries, upward then to Taurus flows,
Where, whence it first began, we find the Figure close.
The Other, for the Round contains no more,
Meets all the Signs the Second mist before;
Then passing those already sung, go on,
To all the Others let the Lines be drawn,
And equal Angles make the other Hexagon.
You see their Site, and thus Oblique they lie,
And view each other with a squinting Eye,
Too near, because thus placed, for mutual Aid,
Which freely flows in Lines direct conveyed.
High in the Concave Signs Alternate lie,
The Lines that mark them almost touch the Sky
And therefore far from Earth through distant way
They dart their Influence with a feeble Ray.
And yet some Intercourse in these we find,
For Signs Alternate are alike in Kind;
In the first He^agon six Males are found,
With Females only is the Second crowned:
Thus Nature works, and, when the Place denies,
Sex makes Agreement, and unites the Skies.
In Concord no Contiguous Signs agree, 23. Of Contiguous Signs.

For what can love when it is denied to see?
They to themselves, which they behold alone,
Their Passion bend, and all their Love's their own
Alternately of different Kinds they lie,
One Male one Female fill the Round of Sky. 24. Of Unequal Signs.

From Signs unequal any way remove
All Thoughts of Union, they are averse to Love:
Thus never think between the Sixths to find
An Intercourse, nor hope to see them kind;
Because the Lines, by which we mark their place,
In length unlike stretch through unequal space.
For take the Zodiac, See Fig. 4.
from the Ram begin,
And thence on either side extend the Line
To meet the Sixth from Aries, then dispose
A Third, and let the Three in Angles close;
Between the Two first Lines Four Signs are found,
The Third includes but One, for that fills up the Round.
But more, 25. Of Opposites.
the Signs opposed in Site, that lie
With Beams directly darting through the Sky;
Though much removed they seem, yet mix from far
Their friendly Influence, or declare for War;
As the Sun's Aspect and the Planet's Fire
For Peace determine, or to Rage inspire.
These Signs 21 adverse would you distinctly note?
Let Summer's Crab oppose the Winter's Goat.
The Scales the Ram where Day and Night appear
Equal in adverse Seasons of the Year: See Fig. 4.

The Fish oppose the Maid, the watery Vrn
With adverse Fires sees raging Leo burn.
When Scorpio fills the highest Arch of Skies,
Then bending Taurus in the lowest lies,
And when the Centaur sets the Twins arise.
Yet though in Site opposed these roll above,
Yet joined by Nature or by Sex they love:
Thus Males to Males strict Leagues of Friendship bind,
And Female Signs to their own Sex are kind.
The Fish and Maid opposed are friendly Signs,
For Nature couples what the Place disjoyns:
But Nature sometimes yields, the Trines prevail,
And Females Females fight, and Males the Male:
Though Female both the Goat the Crab defies
Winter in this, in that the Summer lies;
Here Snow makes white, and Frost binds up the Fields;
There Sweat o'reflows and Winter's Rigor yields;
Here Day exults, there Night extends her Sway,
And Winter's Darkness equals Summer's Day:
Thus Nature sights, nor must we hope to find
The Signs of disagreeing Seasons kind.
Though differing Seasons hold the Scales and Ram,
They are half Friends, and mix agreeing Flame:
In this gay Flowers the painted Beds adorn,
This fills the Plains, and stores the Barns with Corn*
Their Days and Nights in equal Balance meet,
Not vexed with too much Cold, nor too much Heat:
They Summer's Wars and Winter's Rage compose,
Nor will these Seasons let their Signs be Foes.
Thus are the several Aspects taught --
These things considered, 26. The Guardians of the Signs.
press no more Divine*
And know the Gods the Guardians of each Sign
Whom Nature ordered to control their Course,
Direct their Influence, and assist their Force:
Great Powers are Godlike, we at least assign
Gods to great Powers, to make them seem Divine
For where Things want, high Titles there bestow
Admired Worth, and makes them great in show.
Pallas the Ram 2^, and Venus guides the Bull,
The Twins share Phoebus, and enjoy his Rule;
The Crab is Mercury's, and Jove divides
His Mother's Servant, and the Lion guides:
Ceres the Maid, for this her Sheaf declares,
And fighting Scorpio owns the God of Wars:
Juno pours out the Vrn, and Vulcan claims
The Scales, as the just Product of his Flames:
The frozen Goat kind Vesta's Aid requires,
She cheers his cold, and warms him with her Fire*
Diana draws the hunting Centaur's Bow,
And mighty Neptune now is proved to know
The Fish above, which He had fed below.
And now that Reason guides, that Gods do move
The various Orbs, and govern all above,
Must needs erect thy Mind, it must impart
Strong Inclinations to pursue the Art;
Since Man securely may his Thoughts advance,
And hope to find, when undisturbed by Chance.
Now learn what Signs the several Limbs obey, 27. Signs for the several parts
of the Body.

Whose Powers they feel, and where Obedience pay.
The Ram defends the Head, the Neck the Bull,
The Arms, bright Twins, are subject to your Rule:
In The Shoulders Leo, and the Crab's obeyed
In The Breast, and in the Guts the modest Maid:
In The Buttocks Libra, Scorpio warms Desires
In Secret Parts, and spreads unruly Fires:
The Thighs the Centaur, and the Goat commands
The Knees, and binds them up with double Bands.
The parted Legs in moist Aquarius meet,
And Pisces gives Protection to the Feet.
But Stars have proper Laws, 28. Signs that See, Hear, Love, or Hate.
and Signs maintain
An Intercourse, and Compact in their Reign;
Some Hear each other, some each other See,
Some fight and Hate, whilst some in Leagues agree:
Some Foreign Passions cautiously remove,
But make Themselves the Object of their Love.
Thus Signs in Sex by Nature closely joined
Are Foes, whilst Signs in Sex opposed are kind;
And Signs, whose opposite Position tends
To Disagreement, breed the greatest Friends.
When God ordained this mighty Frame to rise,
He settled these Affections in the Skies,
That some might Hear, and some each other See,
Some Hate and fight, and some in Leagues agree;
Some Love themselves alone; All this appears
In Men, who take their Tempers from the Stars.
The Ram, as it becomes the Prince of Stars,
Is his own Council, See Fig. 5. 6, 7, and 8.
and Himself he hears;
He Libra sees, but unsuccessful proves
In loving Taurus, for in vain he Loves;
Taurus (for Aries finds but cold returns
For all those Fires with which he freely burns;
Nay more, by Treachery all his Love's repaid)
Sees, Hears the Fishes, and adores the Maid:
Thus from the Tyrian Pastures lined with Jove
He bore Europa, and still keeps his Love:
The Twins see Leo, and they hear the Vrn
Pouring out his Streams, but for the Fishes burn.
The Crab (as Caper adverse in the Skies)
First makes himself the Object of his Eyes;
He loves Aquarius Vrn, and then repays
The friendly Goat by harkening to his Rays.
The Lion sees the Twins embracing Fires,
He hears the Centaur, and the Goat admires:
Mischief the Maid for Sagittarius brews,
She hears the Scorpion, and the Bull she views.
But Libra hears her self, her Mind applies
To following Scorpio, to the Ram her Eyes:
The Scorpion sees the Fish, the Maid he hears;
To Leo Sagittarius bends his Ears;
To young Aquarius he his Eyes resigns,
His Love prefers the Maid to other Signs.
The Goat admires, and loves himself alone,
(For since at 23 Caesar's Birth Serene he shone;
What Glory can be greater than his own?
Loves





He hears the Crab: Aquarius hears the Twins,
And sees the Centaur, and amidst the Signs
The towering Crab alone his Mind can move,
And is the only Object of his Love.
Whilst Pisces to the Bull their Ears apply,
And view the Scorpion with a longing Eye.
These Powers the Tempers of their Births define,
Each carries the Affection of his Sign;
These love to See and love to Hear create,
And all the Intercourse of Love and Hate:
Hence some embrace, and some as odly fly
Each other; Love and Hate, but know not why.
Thus far of single Signs: But Trines engage
With Trines, and all the Heaven is full of Rage:
Signs War in Bodies, and in Parties fight,
As adverse in their Manners, as in Site:
The Ram, Lion, Centaur joined in Trine oppose
The Heavenly Scales, and to their Trine are Foes.
And this on two Accounts; Three Signs to Three
Shine opposite, and who can hope to see
Two differing Natures, 24 Man and Beast agree?
For he that holds the Scales Celestial, bears
A Humane Shape, a Brute the Lion wears,
And therefore yields, for Reason's Force controuls
Brute Strength, and Bodies still submit to Souls.
The Lion conquered to the Skies was thrown,
And fleecy Aries flead before he shone;
The Centaur's Forepart still commands the rest,
So much the Humane Form exceeds the Beast.
No wonder therefore that with great Success
The Scales fight Aries, and his Trine oppress.
But this we may in one short rule comprise,
For view the Signs that fill the round of Skies,
And those that are in Humane Forms expressed
Are conquering Foes to all the shapes of Beast.
But yet their Hate not equally extends,
Signs have their proper Foes, as well as Friends;
The Ram's Productions Friendly Leagues refuse
To all the Fishes, Maid, or Scales produce:
What Scorpio, Cancer, Pisces, Scales create
Are Foes to Taurus, and his Births they hate:
Whilst those Productions that the Twins design
Are Enemies to Aries, and his Trine.
Against the Crab and Bull the Goat declares,
And Virgo too, and Libra feels his Wars:
Nor shall (could I write curious Verse, my Muse
To show her Art in Precepts would refuse;
I teach an Art, and it is by all confessed
Instruction when it is plainest than it is best:)
The furious Lion roused with desperate Rage
With fewer Enemies than the Ram engage.
The double Centaur with his threatening Bow
Affrights the Maid, the Bull that bends his Brow,
With Caper, and with Pisces is her Foe.
Over Libra's Sign a Crowd of Foes prevails,
The Icy Goat, the Crab which square the Scales,
With those of Aries Trine consent to hate
The Scales of Libra, and her Rays rebate.
Nor does the Sign of fiery Scorpio find
Foes less in number, or of better Mind;
The Urn, Twins, Lion, Bull, the Scales, the Maid
He frights; and they of him are equally afraid:
Nor can the Centaur's Bow his Peace defend,
The Twins, Vrn, Virgin force his Sign to bend
By Nature's Law, nor are the Scales his Friend.
The same oppress thy Sign with equal Hate
Contracted Caper, and thy Force rebate.
Whilst those that are in Brutal Forms expressed
Afflict the Vrn, and all his Trine molest.
The neighboring Fish the Vrn with Hate pursues,
And those the Maid, and those the Twins produce.
And those that own the Centaur's angry Star
He treats as Foes, and still afflicts with War.
These Rules are true, but somewhat else defines
The Friendship and the Enmity of Signs:
Thus Thirds are Foes, for with a squinting Ray
They view each other, and their Hate convey:
Signs opposite, whatever place they fill
Averse to Peace, and are unfriendly still:
Thus Sevenths their adverse Sevenths are doomed to loath,
And Thirds from both, and which are Trines to both:
Nor is it strange that Trines unfriendly prove
When Kin to Signs that are averse to Love.
So many sorts of differing Signs dispose
Men's Tempers, 29. A short digression concerning Friendship.
and produce such Crowds of Foes;
Look over the World, see Force and Fraud increase,
Rapine in War, and Treachery in Peace;
But look for Truth and Faith, the Search were vain,
No Mind is Honest, and no Thoughts are plain:
What bulky Villainies bestride the Age!
What Envy pusheth on Mankind to rage!
Envy not to be dispossessed, her Throne
Is firmly fixed, and all the World's her own!
Friends kill their Friends, a Husband stabs his Wife,
Sons sell their Father's and their Mother's Life;
Bold Atreus feasts, and at the barbarous sight
The Sun retires, and leaves the World to night.
Whilst Brothers poison, with a smiling Face
They mix the Cup, and kill where they embrace:
No place is safe, no Temple yields Defense
Against secret Stabs, or open Violence;
And many a slaughtered Priest profanely dies
On the same Altar with his Sacrifice.
Those most betray who kindness most pretend,
And Crowds of Villains skulk behind the Name of Friend.
The World's infected, Wrong and Fraud prevails,
Whilst Honesty retires, and Justice fails;
Nay Laws support those Crimes they checked before,
And Executions now affright no more.
For disagreeing Stars that Men produce,
Their Tempers fashion, and their own infuse:
Hence Peace is lost, pure Faith we seldom find,
Kind Leagues are rare, and then but feebly bind;
For as the Signs above, so Things below
Do differing Minds and Inclinations show;
They form Men's Thoughts, and the obedient Clay
Takes disagreeing Tempers from their Ray.
Hence it is that Friendship is so thinly sown,
It thrives but ill, nor can it last when grown;
Rare it is Production: and the World pretends
To boast but one poor single pair of Friends:
One Pylades and one 25 Orestes name,
And you have all the Instances of Fame;
Once Death was strove for, 'twas a generous Strife,
Not who should keep, but who should lose a Life
Was their Dispute, contending to deny
Each other the great Privilege to die.
The Surety feared his guilty Friend's return,
The Guilty Friend did his own Absence mourn;
Careless of Life, impatient of Delay,
He broak through hindering Friends that choked his way,
And ran to Danger: Here they disagreed,
One hoped to free, One feared to be so freed.
But now if you would know what Signs dispose
To Leagues, and Peace, and friendly Thoughts disclose;
The Ram's bright Births you may securely join
As Friends to the Productions of his Trine:
But the Ram's Births are more sincerely plain,
They give more Love than they receive again
From thine fierce Leo, or than his can show
That strides through Heaven, and draws the Cretan Bow:
For it is a Sign of thoughtless Innocence,
Exposed to Harms, unpracticed in Defense;
Unused to Fraud or Wrong, but gentle, kind,
And not more soft in Body than in Mind.
The others carry Fierceness in their Ray,
Their Nature's brutish, and intent on Prey;
Ungrateful still, nor can they long retain
A sense of Kindness, and unjust for Gain:
But though by Nature these are both inclined
To frequent Quarrels, yet expect to find
More Force in that which is of double kind,
Than in the Single Lion: Hence increase
Some sudden Heats, but intermixed with Peace.
The Bull and Goat are equally inclined
To mutual Friendship, both alike are kind;
The Bull's Productions love fair Virgo's Race,
Yet frequent Jarrs disjoin their close Embrace.
The Scales and Vrn one friendly Soul inspire,
Their Love is settled, and their Faith entire;
To both their Births the Twins productions prove
The surest Friends, and meet an equal Love.
The Crab and Scorpion to their Births impart
A friendly Temper, and an open Heart;
Yet Scorpio's (Fraud amongst the Stars is found)
Though Friends they seem, yet give a secret Wound.
But those whom Pisces watery Rays create,
Are constant neither in their Love, nor Hate;
They change their Minds, now quarrel, now embrace,
And Treachery lurks behind their fawning Face.
Thus Signs or Love, or Hate: and These bestow
Their differing Tempers on their Births below.
Nor is it enough to know the Signs alone,
The Planets Stations must be justly known, 30. The friendly and unfriendly
Aspects.

And all Heaven's parts, because the Site and Line
And Aspect change the Influence of the Sign:
Thus when Opposed the Signs this Influence bear,
In Trine a different they are known to share,
In Sextile this, another when in Square.
And thus the Sky now gives, now takes away
The Influence, now it points, now blunts the Ray
Here Hate infects them, when they thence remove;
They lose that Hate, or change the Rage to Love.
For Signs, or when they rise, or culminate,
Or set, send down a different sort of Fate.
To Hatred Signs opposed in Site incline,
The Quadrates Kinsmen aid, and Friends the Trine;
The Reason's obvious: The Celestial Round
Observe, See Fig. 1.
there Signs of the same kind are found
In each fourth place: In each fourth Sign appear
The several Seasons that command the Year;
Thus Aries gives the Spring, flat Cancer glows
With Summer's Heat; the generous Bowl o'reflows
In Libra, Caper scatters Winter's Snows.
Besides, by Signs in double Forms expressed
Each fourth Celestial place is found possessed,
Two Fishes glide; two smiling Boys embrace,
A double Figure we in Virgo trace,
The Centaur's double with a single Face.
Next Simple Signs with their refulgent Stars
Fill each fourth space, and still are found in Squares.
Without a Rival Taurus fills his Throne,
The dreadful Lion shakes his Mane alone,
The26 unbodied Scorpion no Companion fears,
And still the Vrn a simple Sign appears.
Therefore to each fourth place the Stars assigned
In Time agree, in Number, or in Kind;
This makes them Kindred Signs, and these preside
Over Kinsmen's Minds, and their Affections guide.
But those four Signs on which the Hinges move
Belong to Neighbors, and direct their Love.
The other Square with all its Stars attends
On Guests, Acquaintance, and remoter Friends.
Thus all the Signs as they are placed obtain
Their Rule, and with unequal Vigor reign.
For though the Site and Form of Squares they bear,
They work not like the other Signs in Square;
For whilst the Cardinals more Force confess,
The rest, which we from Number named express
Double or Simple Signs, still work with less.
The Line extended through the larger space
With Trines determines, Trines. See Fig. 1.
and makes out their place,
Presides over Friends, whose mutual Faiths supply
The room of Blood, and draw a closer Tie:
For as it measures a long space, to join
The distant, stretching out from Sign to Sign.
So those, whom Nature does in spite remove,
It brings together; and knits in Bands of Love.
And these before the others most commend,
For though the nearest Kinsmen often pretend
Deluding Kindness; who deceives a Friend?
No Sign nor Planet serves it self alone,
Each blends the others Virtues with its own.
Mixing their Force, and interchang'd they reign,
Signs Planets bound, and Planets Signs again.
All this my Muse shall orderly reveal,
And keep the Method she begun so well;
She Will sing what Parts the several Signs require,
In what the Planets spread commanding Fire;
This must be shown, if in your search for Fate
The Signs of Love you would know from those of Hate.
Now with expanded Thought go on to know
A Secret great in Use, 31. Dedecatemorion.
though small in show;
For which our scanty Language, poor in words,
No single fit expressive Term affords,
But Greek supplies, a Language born to frame
Fit Words, and show their Reason in the Name.
It Is Dodecatemorion 27, thus described --
Thrice ten Degrees with every Sign contains
Let Twelve exhaust, that not one part remains;
It follows straight that every Twelfth confines
Two whole, and one half Portion of the Signs:
These Twelfths in Number, as the Signs, are Twelve,
And these the wise contriver of the Frame
Placed in each Sign, that all may be the same.
The World may be alike, each Star may guide,
And every Sign in every Sign preside;
That all may govern by agreeing Laws,
And friendly Aids be mutual as their Cause.
And therefore Births; over which one Sign aspires,
In Powers are various, different in Desires;
Males follow Females, and from Man deprest
Weak Nature sinks, and errs into a Beast:
For all on Signs depend, in which succeed
The different Twelfths, and vary in the Breed.
Now whose, and how disposed, the Muse must sing,
And draw deep Knowledge from its secret Spring;
Lest this unknown you should from Truth decline,
Mistaking the changed Influence of the Sign:
Each Sign's first Twelfths is by its self possessed,
The others shared in Order by the rest;
Each has its Twelfth, they take their equal Shares,
(Ambition is a Vice too mean for Stars)
Thus every Sign has for its proper Throne
Two whole, and one half Portion of its own;
Of other Signs that roll in order on
Each takes as much, till all the thirty parts are gone.
But there are many sorts, to find the true
Wise Nature orders we must all pursue;
This is her Will: Tho partial Search may fail,
Yet He Is secure of Truth who seeks for All.
For Instance, 32. The Dodecatemoria of the Planets.
grant it were thy great Concern
To know the 28 Planet's Twelfths; securely learn;
I Will show the Method: As you count the Signs,
First mark that Sign's Degree where Phoebe shine
And views the newborn Child; that multiply
By Twelve: (because Twelve Signs adorn the Sky)
Observe the Product, and from thence assign
To those gay Stars where Phaebe's found to shine
Thrice ten Degrees: Then go in Order on,
Assigning Thirty till the Number's done;
And where the Number ends there fix the Moon:
That is her Twelfth. The following Planets lie
In following Twelfths, and there enjoy the Sky.
Another Method claims my next Essay,
Another differing from the former way;
This too I must explain, its Rules impart,
And fix the subtle Niceties of Art,
First take the 29 Sun's true place, and that confessed,
Observe the Portion by the Moon possessed:
Count those Degrees the middle Space contains,
Take all the Thirtys thence, and what remains
Dividing into Twelfths, from thence assign
To those gay Stars in which the Moon does shine
One Twelfth: To Signs that orderly come on
Apply their Twelfths, till all the Number's done,
And where the number ends there fix the Moon.
That is her Twelfth. The following Planets lie
In following Twelfths, and there enjoy the Sky.
The Task's not done: The Muse must next unfold
A nicer thing, in fewer Numbers told:
Which less in show and in extent appears,
Yet than the Greater more of Force it bears:
In every 30 Twelfth a Twelfth the Planets claim,
The Thing is different though we use the Name;
It Is thus described. Five half Degrees do lie
In every Twelfth, Five Planets grace the Sky,
And every Planet in its proper Course
One half Degree possessing there exerts its Force.
It Is useful therefore to observe the Sign,
And mark the Twelfth in which the Planets shine;
For where the Planets, as they roll their Course,
A Twelfth possess, they there exert their Force.
These must be jointly sung: yet these belong
To future Thoughts, and claim another Song:
It Is now enough that I have clearly shown
Things hid before, and made their Uses known;
Let it suffice, that I have brought the Muse
Materials proper, and prepared for Use:
When all is ready, let her build the Frame,
And raise a lasting Monument of Fame:
The single Elements distinctly known
Thee sees her Way, and may go safely on;
And all the Parts described the Verse will roll
With freer Force, and orderly erect the whole.
For as to Boys at School we first propound
The Letters, show their Form, and teach their Sound,
And then go on, instruct them how to Spell,
And join their Letters in a Syllable;
Then to frame Words, and thence their Fancies raise,
To bind these words in Verse, and reach the Bays.
And as the Boys proceed, they find their past,
And first Acquirements useful to their last;
For Precepts without Method got by pain,
Prove empty, and the labor is in vain:
So since my Songs Fate's dark Intrigues rehearse,
Their Influence show, and bind the Stars in Verse;
Since they mount high, and from the Signs above,
Bring down the God, and open hidden Jove:
All must be taugth, and I must first impart
The Elements peculiar to this Art;
That thence, as she proceeds, my laboring Muse
May draw Materials, and go on to Use.
And as wise Builders, who design a Town,
First clear the Field, and cut the Forest down,
And straight new Stars behold as new a Sun:
From Ancient Seats, and Hospitable Glades
The Beasts are forced, and Birds forsake their Shades.
Some Stones for Walls, some Marble square for Shrines,
And suit Materials to their great Designs;
And when they have provided sit Supplies
For future Art, the Piles begin to rise;
Nor does the interrupted work disgraced
By any stop, accuse their foolish haste:
So I, that raise this mighty Work, must choose
Materials proper to employ my Muse,
Bare fit Materials; and not build one part
'Till all lies ready to complete the Art;
Lest whilst my Thoughts the noble work pursue,
As all Materials lay exposed to view,
They start surpised, and stop amazed with new.
Be careful then, XXXIII. The Celestial Houses.
and with a curious Eye,
Observe the 31 four fixed Hinges of the Sky;
One constant point their settled place defines,
Although they vary in their moving Signs:
One fixed in the East, The Hinges. See Fig. 10.
where with a gentle Ray
The Sun views half the Earth on either way,
And here brings on, and there bears off the Day.
One in the West, from whose declining steep
The Sun falls headlong, and enjoys the Deep:
The Third in Heaven's high point, where midst the Course
Bright Phoebus stops, and breaths his weary Horse;
He stands a while, and with an equal Ray,
Views East and West, and then drives down the Day.
Opposed to this, the Fourth securely lies,
The immovable Foundation of the Skies;
The lowest point, to which with steady Rein
The Stars descend, and whence they mount again:
These Points in Fate the greatest Interest claim,
Because they settle, and support the Frame;
In these fixed Points were not the Quarters tied.
Oth' Top, oth' Bottom, and on either side,
The Ball would cleave, the whirls would dissipate
The agitated parts; and break strong Fate.
Now different Powers these several Hinges grace
And vary with the dignity of Place; The Medium Coeli.

The chiefest that which on the Top does lie,
And with a narrow limit parts the Sky,
There Glory sits in all her Pomp and state,
The highest place requires the highest Fate;
Thence Places, Dignities, Preferments flow,
And all that Men admire and wish below;
High Honors, Offices, in Suits success,
Right to make Laws, and Power to give Peace;
Thence Scepters, and supreme Command accrne,
And Power to give them, where Rewards are due.
The next, The Imum Coeli.
(though lowest and contemned it lies)
The fixed, and sure Foundation of the Skies,
Great in effect, although it seems but small;
It governs Wealth, and Wealth's the stay of all:
It rules Estates, it shows what Mines contain,
What secret Treasures we may hope to gain,
Without this Power the other Fates were vain.
As great in Power is that where Beams display
Their rising luster, The Horoscope. or Eastern Point.
and renew the Day;
The Greek (no other scanty Tongues afford
A single proper and expressive Word)
Names this the Horoscope.
This governs, Life, and this marks out our Parts,
Our Humors, Manners, Qualities, and Arts;
This when and where the Birth is born declares
And guides the various Virtues of the Stars:
By this they are settled, and as this defines
The Birth, enjoys the influence of the Signs.
The Last, The Western Point.
the Point, whence Stars descending fall,
And view the lower surface of the Ball;
This rules the Ends of things, this Point declare
The Period, and Result of all Affairs;
This governs Marriage, and on this depends
Religion, Recreation, Death, and Friends.
These Points considered, Their Powers distinctly seen,
Observe the Spaces that are placed between;
The Points are little, but the Spaces large,
And every space has a proportioned Charge.
First then the Space that rising from the East The intermediate Spacers.

Mounts upward, is by Infancy possessed,
There Childhood plays: From thence the Western space
Gay Youth demands, and fills the second place.
Next from the Western Point a space descends, See Fig. 9.

Through under Heaven, and in the Lowest ends;
There Manhood, having past the various Maze
Of Infancy and Youth, compleats its Race:
To finish this; The space that upward tends,
And creeping slowly over the steep Ascends
To join the Round at East, is made the way
Of feeble Age and flitting Life's decay.
But more all Signs, whatever Form they bear,
The several Virtues of their Stations wear;
With good or hurtful Powers those points their Ray,
The Places govern, and the Signs obey:
Hates



They turn the Round, and as they wheel their Course,
The Place now gives, and now takes off their Force;
For as the Planets through the stations Err,
Those Places their own Ifluence transfer;
And force them, whilst within their bounds, to take
Their ruling Virtues, and their own forsake.
Hence now they smile, and now severely frown
With Foreign Influence that Commands their own:
Here sovereign send, there shower malignant Rays,
And spread the fatal Venom of their Place.
That station which above the East does lie, The Twelfth and Sixth Houses.

The Third in order from the middle Sky,
^s an unhappy Seat; destructive still
To all Events, and too replete with Ill.
Nor is this bad alone, the Seat that lies
Below the Western Hinge opposed to this,
^s like it: Nor does this that Seat surpass,
(...) Virtue of its Dignity of Place,
^s near the nobler Hinge: See fig 9th.
But both decline,
^^om both begin a wretched Round of time,
^f Labor full, for here you fall, and there you climb.
Nor is the World with better stations blessed The Second and Eighth Houses.

Above the West, nor yet below the East,
that hangs above, this downward seems to bend,
^his in the neighboring Hinge still fears an end,
that unsustain'd is eager to descend. See fig. 9th.

Unhappy Seats! Here Typho rules alone
And fills a dark inhospitable Throne:
^his Typho Earth produced, when Giants strove
^o Conquer Heaven, and shook the Throne of Jove.
When Monsters rose, and at a wondrous Birth
In bigness equal to their Mother Earth,
Vast Sons broke forth: But Thunder stopped their Course,
And tumbling Mountains dashed the Rebels Force.
Typhorus fell: Earth was too weak to save,
And War and He lay buried in one Grave;
Yet now he heaves in his Aetnean T^^^b,
And Earth still fears new struglings in her Womb
That next Heaven's topmost point, The Eleventh house
which rises high,
Almost it is equal in the middle Sky
With fairer Hopes, and better Fortune blessed,
Erects its Head, and much excells the rest;
Placed near the highest Hinge, it rises higher,
This Empire's Seat, and almost fills desire:
It Is Title, the exalted Place may claim
A glorious Patron, and as great a Name,
Is Happy; Happy, if that word can fill
The Greek Expression and commend my skill.
Here Jove presides in all his Pomp and State, See fig. 9th.

And to this ruling Fortune trust thy Fate.
Opposed, and next the bottom of the Ball
There lies a Seat as wearied with its fall; The fifth House. See fig. 9th.

And yet prepared, though with a world of Pain
For other Labor, and to mount again:
About to bear, and destined to obey
The Hinge's Power, submitting to its sway;
Yet pressed not by the World, it gives a Scope
To haughty Thoughts, and still permits to hop^
In Greek Demonie: But our scanty Tongue
Affords no proper word to grace my Song:
Yet mind this station, it thy Thoughts may clai^
Observe its Patron, nor forget the Name:
Though troublesome it seems, no toil refuse
The Labor's great, but equaled by the Use.
In The Ninth, The third and ninth Houses.
and Third gay strength and health Delight,
Or Sickness arms its venomed Darts for fight;
Why Contraries should thus these Seats possess
It Is hard to find, but Phoebus aids my guess;
The mighty Patrons, whom these Seats obey, See fig. 9.

In one determined time bear different sway
And Day succeeds the Night, and Night the Day.
That Seat which next the Highest Hinge does lie
The first declining from the middle Sky
The Sun possesses: The ninth House.
From his Rays we draw
Our state of Health, He gives our Bodies Law:
Its Title God.
Opposed to this, The third House.
which first begins to rise
From Heaven's low bottom, and brings up Skies,
A Seat appears just tipped with Light, and guides
The Starry Night, in this the Moon presides.
The Moon that sees her Brother's adverse Ray,
That looks up to him as he guides the Day.
And imitates his Influence the wrong way:
She rules our Bodies, but her Face derives
Moist rotting Powers, and wastes the Health He gives.
It Is Title Goddess: But how mean these words
Compared with those, expressive Greece affords?
But as for Heaven's high top, The tenth House.
the utmost point
Of Rising, and beginning of Descent,
Where 'twixt the Eastern rise, See fig. 9.
and Western fall
Jove hangs the Beam at which He weighs the Ball;
This Venus graceth, here she seats her Throne,
And in the World's high Face erects her own;
That Face, whose awful force Mankind admires,
And yields Obedience to her pleasing Fires:
Her Charge is Marriage, for what else can prove
The Office of the beauteous Queen of Love?
Pleasure's her aim, yet she forgets her Ease,
And puts on Providence on design to please.
Fortune's the station's Name; observe the Place;
My Muse grows weary, and contracts her pace,
Refusing to expatiate in her Race.
But now go on, The fourth House.
the lowest point of all
The fixed Foundation of the solid Ball,
Which looking upward, sees the circling Light,
And lies it self immerst in deepest Night,
Is Saturn's Seat; See fig. 9.
though once he ruled above,
Enjoyed that Power, and filled the Throne of Jove;
But thence thrown down, he makes his last retreat
To this low place, and fills this humble Seat:
Himself a Father, He pretends to bear
Respect to Fathers, and makes Age his care:
This only station double Cares enlarge,
For Sons and Fathers Fortune are its charge:
Severe and thrifty; This the Greeks proclaim
Demonium, its power expressing in its Name,
Now turn thine Eye, The first House.
and view the Eastern Plain,
The space whence Stars renew their Course again;
Where moistened Phoebus from the Floods retires,
Climbs up, and shakes the Water from his Fires,
Then gathers Beauties, whose enlivening Heat
First strike thee, See fig. 9.
Mercury, and refresh thy Seat.
O happy Seat, on whom the Art that sways
Over Heaven it self, bestows its 32 Authors rays!
The Fates of Children this is doomed to bear,
And all the Hopes of Parents are its care.
One Seat remains, The seventh House.
from whose declining steep,
The Stars fall headlong, and enjoy the Deep,
Which turns the World, and now can only trace
The back of Phoebus, that once viewed his Face:
No wonder Nature does this Seat bequeath
To Pluto, and inexorable Death;
For here the Day expires, this draws the light
From all the World, and buries Day in Night,
Nor is this all its care, on this depends,
Faith, solid Constancy, and Friends,
So great that Place's power, which waste the Ray,
Which takes in Phoebus, and puts out the Day.
The stations these, to which in constant Course
The Stars arriving give and take new Force,
Where Planets touching as they wheel their round,
Mix foreign Powers, and with their own confound:
Admitted once they make the Seat their own,
And turn Usurpers in another's Throne.
But this, if Fate my Life and Health prolong,
Shall make the 32 subject of a future Song:
Now ends the Book, which has described at large
The Heavenly Houses, Guardians, and their Charge;
For which the Masters of the Art have found
A proper Name, but of a foreign Sound;
It Is Octotopos.
With mighty labor I these Rules prepare,
Forgetting Pleasure, and possessed with Care:
So hard it is in numerous Verse to close
Unwieldy Words, and smooth uneven Prose.
The End of the Second Book.
NOTES.
1. Manilius having mentioned the chief Arguments of Homer's Poems, concludes
with a high Character, stiling him the Fountain of all Poetry. Ovid. Amor. lib.
3. El. 8. to the same purpose, A quo, ceu Font perenni,
Vatum Pieriis ora rigantur Aquis*
And Longinus (de sublim. Sect. 13) says not only Stesichorus and Archilocus,
but Herodotus the Historian, and Plato the Philosopher, owe their chiefest
Beauties to that Poet.

2. Several Poems of Hesoid are lost, and Scaliger with other Critics
conjecture, That Manilius refers us to those lost Poems: But I think this and
the preceding Verse ought to be Corrected, (of this Correction perhaps I may
give an account in a Latin Edition of this Author) and then they will be found
in those pieces of Hesiod that are now extant.

3. Eratosthenes a Greek Poet, flourished in the time of Ptolemy Euergetes,
about the 138 Olymp. He wrote of the Stars and Constellations, and gave an
account of all the Fables relating to them: I have not time to explain all
these Fables and therefore shall only direct where they may be found.
Concerning Perseus, Andromeda, her Father Cepheus, and her Mother Cassiopeia,
vid. Ovid. Metam, lib. 4. ver. 665. Concerning Callisto, or the great Bear,
Ovid. lib. 2. ver. 405. The Fable of the Little Bear may be found in Diodorus
Siculus, lib. 4. Of the Swan in the First Book of Manilius. Of the Goat in the
First Book of Manilius, and in Casaubon's Animadversions on Athenaeus: The Maid
or Erigone, is said to be the Daughter of Icarus, who upon the Death of her
Father, hanged her self. The Nemean Lion being slain by Hercules, was placed
amongst the Stars for his shining Skin. The Crab for pinching Hercules when he
fought the Hydra: The Scorpion for Killing Orion, or rather, for assisting the
Gods against the Giants. The Stories of Venus taking the shape of a Fish when
she fled from the Giant Typho, and of the Ram who swam over the Hellespont with
Phryxus and Hell on his Back, are well known, and may be found in Manilius,
and Seldom de Diis Syris.

4. This was a Fancy of the Ancients, which some are not ashamed, after
Experience has so often Confuted it, to maintain still.

5. The Elephants do so, if we believe Pliny: Not. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 1.

6. Aries is Male. Gemini M. Leo M. Libra M. Sagittarius M. Aquarius M. Taurus
Female. Cancer F. Virgo F. Scorpius F. Capricornus F. Pisces F.
7. The Humane Signs are Gemini, Libra, Virgo, Aquarius. The Brute, Aries,
Taurus, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Leo, Cancer, Scorpius, Pisces.

8. Of Double Signs some are Pairs, as Gemini, and Pisces: Others are made up
of two different Species, such as Sagittarius and Capricornus.

9. The Tropic Signs are Aries, Libra, Cancer, and Capricorn.

10. Their Position is unnatural; but this, as well as the foregoing
Differences, will be easily understood upon view of the Signs upon a Globe.

11. Concerning Day and Night Signs, there are different Opinions: Some fancy
that Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, are the Days, and the other six
the Nights. Others teach that the Male and Female are the same with the Day and
Night Signs. But the Opinion that Manilius follows is this. Aries is a Day
Sign, Taurus, Gemini, Night. Cancer, Leo, Day. Virgo, Libra, Night. Scorpius,
Sagittarius, Day. Caper, Aquarius, Night. Pisces Day. So that begin with
Pisces, and then you find two Day Signs together, and then two Night Signs, and
so in Order.

12. The Water Signs are Pisces and Cancer. The Earth Aries, Taurus, Leo,
Scorpio, Gemini, Sagittarius, Libra, Virgo: Capricornus and Aquarius belong to
both Earth and Water.

13. The fruitful Signs are Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces. The Barren are Leo, Virgo,
Aquarius. The remaining six are partly Barren, partly Fruitful.

14. The Running Signs are Leo, Sagittarius, Aries: The standing or Erected
Signs, Aquarius, Gemini, Virgo. The Crouching Signs, Taurus, Cancer, Libra,
Scorpius, Caper, Pisces.

15. The Maimed signs, Taurus, Scorpius, Sagittarius, Cancer.

16. The Season signs are Pisces, belonging to the Spring. Gemini to Summer.
Virgo to Autumn; and Sagittarius to Winter.

17. Suppose in the Zodiac Circle Twelve Signs, and in every Circle 360 Parts
or Degrees, and 30 of these Degrees to belong to each of the Twelve Signs.
Begin at any of the Signs, for instance, Aries; and in this Circle inscribe a
Triangle, all whose sides are equal; it is evident that the Arch of the Circle
which each of these sides subtends, contains 120 Parts or Degrees; and
therefore between that Sign from which you begin to draw each side of this
Triangle, and that to which you draw it, there must be Three Signs. But see
Fig. 1st.

18. To show what Signs are to be accounted Right, and what Left, the Poet
mentions only the Trine of Taurus: Yet it is sufficient, upon View of Fig. 1st.
direction for all the rest.

19. To know the Quadrate, begin from any sign, and in the Circle inscribe a
Square, all whose sides are equal; the Angles show the Signs, and what are
Right or Left, you may find that in Quadrates, as you did in Trines.

20. The meaning of all these Cautions concerning Trines and Quadrates, is in
short, this, You must reckon by Degrees, and not by Signs; for if you reckon by
Signs, the Figures, as Manilius shows at large in each particular, will not be
equilateral. See Fig. 1st. and 2d.

21. The Signs which have an Opposite aspect are, Aries. Taurus. Gemini.
Cancer. Leo. Virgo. Libra. Scorpius. Sagittarius. Capricornus. Aquarius. Pisces.


22. The Guardians of the Signs. Of Aries. Taurus. Gemini. Cancer. Leo. Virgo.
Libra. Scorpius. Sagittarius. Capricornus. Aquarius. Pisces Pallas. Venus.
Phoebus. Mercurius. Jupiter. Ceres. Vulcan. Mars. Diana. Vesta. Juno. Neptune.


The Reasons of this Assignment are to be taken out of the Old Fables.

23. Whether Capricorn was in the Horoscope of Augustus, when he was Born, or
when he was Conceived, Is disputed: However it is certain, Augustus took
Capricorn for his Sign, and many times its Figure is found upon his Coins. vid.
Sueton. vit. Aug. cap. 94. and Spanhemius de Nummis. p. 210.

24. See the Figures of these Signs on a Globe.

25. Pylades and Orestes being taken Prisoners, Orestes was condemned to Die,
but was allowed to go and settle some Affairs, upon Condition that Pylades
would stay behind, and engage his Life for his return: Pylades becomes Surety:
Orestes goes, settles his Affairs, and returns at the Day appointed.

26. So called, because in the Sign Scorpius we see nothing but the Claws.

27. The Dodecatemorion is the Twelfth part, or two Degrees and an half of a
Sign. Every Sign containing Thirty Degrees; for Twelve times two and an half
make Thirty. Scaliger gives this Instance. Let the proposed Degree be the
Thirteenth Degree of Gemini, multiply Thirteen by Twelve, the Product is one
hundred fifty six: Of these give Thirty to Gemini the proposed Sign, Thirty to
Cancer, Thirty to Leo, to Virgo Thirty, and Thirty to Libra: There remain Six,
and therefore the Dodecatimorion of Gemini is in the Sixth Degree of Scorpius:
But this instance does not seem to agree with the Doctrine of Manilius.

28. Scaliger affirms, that Manilius proposes two ways to find the
Dodecatemoria or Twelfths of the Planets; Huctius says he gives but one: This
Dispute will be best determined by observing the Poet himself, and illustrating
his Doctrine by two Instances: Let the Moon be in the Sixth Degree of Aries,
multiply six by Twelve, the Product ^s Seventy two: Out of this Seventy two
give the first Thirty to Aries, the second to Taurus, and ^hen there remain
Twelve; and therefore the Dodecatemorion of the Moon is in the Twelfth Degree
of Gemini, that is, in the Second of the Five half Degrees of the
Dodecatemorion of Gemini.

29. To this Method Scaliger applies this Example: Let the Sun be in the
Thirteenth of Gemini, the Moon in the Twenty Third of Scorpius, the Arch of the
Zodiac between the two Planets, contains one Hundred and Sixty Degrees: In
this Number there are five Thirties, which being taken away there remain Ten;
divide these Ten by Twelfths, or two and an half, the Quotient is four
Twelfths, or Dodecatemoria; of which give one to Scorpius, another to
Sagittarius, a third to Capricorn, and the fourth falling in Aquarius, shows
the Moons Dodecatemorion to be in the twenty third Degree of that Sign.

30. The third sort of Dodecatemorion is this. In every Dodecatemorion or
Twelfth, there are five half Degrees, and the Planets (which the Ancient
Astrologers counted but five, not reckoning the Sun and Moon amongst the
Planets) have in each Dodecatemorion or Twelfth, one half Degree assigned to
every one of them.

31. From this Verse to the end of this Book, Manilius treats of the Twelve
Celestial Houses, which he divides into the Four Cardines or Hinges, and the
Eight Spaces that lie between these Hinges: The Hinges are the Eastern Point,
the Middle Point, the Western Point and the lowest point of Heaven: The Spaces,
etc. but see Fig. 10.

32. Manilius in the beginning of his first Book tells us Mercury was the
Inventor of that Art, which he intended for the Subject of his Astrological
Poem.

33. Either the Poet never finished this Part which he here promises, or it is
now lost.

MANILIUS. The Third Book.
Manilius begins this Third Book as he did the Second, reckoning up and
slighting the several Subjects which have employed other Poets, and declaring
his Design to be new and difficult: Then he proceeds to show, 1. That the
Twelve Signs of the Zodiac are the chief Disposers, and principal Governors
of Fortunes. 2. That there are Twelve Lots belonging to these Twelve Signs. 3.
He names and describes these Lots: The first is Fortune: The Second Warfare and
Traveling: The Third, Civil Employments: The Fourth, Pleadings, and all the
concerns of the Bar: The Fifth, Marriage Acquaintance, Guests: The Sixth,
Plenty, Wealth, and the means of preserving it. The Seventh, Dangers: The
Eighth, Nobility, Honor, Reputation: The Ninth, Children, Education. The
Tenth, Manners, Institution, Family. The Eleventh, state of Health, Physic:
The Twelfth, Wishes, and the ends of them. 4. He teaches how to suit these
Lots, Labors, or Athla to the several Signs, when the Birth belongs either to
Day, or Night. 5. He proposes Rules how to find the Horoscope. 6. Refuting the
Method prescribed by the Chaldaeans. 7. And showing how to find the different
lengths of Days and Nights, together with the several Risings and Settings of
the Signs in order to find the Horoscope. 8. He resumes the Dispute against the
Chaldaeans, and subjoins an Account of the several lengths of Days and Nights,
in the three different Positions of the Sphere, Direct, Oblique, and Parallel.
9. He proposes another way to find the time of the Signs Rising and Setting.
10. He particularly Discourses of the Days Increase from Capricorn to Cancer.
11. He shows what are the proper Years, Months, Days, and Hours of the Signs,
and Confutes the Opinion of some Astrologers concerning them. 12. He sings how
many Years belong to each Sign, and station. 13. And Concludes the Book with an
Account of the Tropic Signs.

I am not to Answer for the Astronomy, it is enough if I have made the Poet
speak intelligible English.

Whilst I new ways attempt my grovelling Name
To raise from Earth, and wing my Flight for Fame;
Through Woods untrodden whilst I take my way,
Ye Muses lead; for I extend your Sway
To larger Bounds, and make the World obey.
No Heaven's besieged, no Thunder thrown from far
Intombs the Giants, and concludes the War:
No fierce Achilles tells brave Hector's Spoil,
Nor Priam bears the Hero to his Pile.
No barbarous 1 Maid betrays her Father's trust,
Nor tears her Brother to secure her Lust.
No Bulls breath Fire, no Dragons guard the Prize,
Nor from the poysnous seed Armed Harvests rise:
No Youth returning here renews the Old,
Nor treacherous Presents carry Flame in Gold.
Nor will I sing the Babes Medea bore,
Got by much Guilt, but ah! destroyed by more.
The Theban Siege, the highest Pride of Fame,
Nor how the Town by Thunder saved from Flame
Lost whilst it 2 conquered; nor how Spartans fought
Round old Messana, shall enlarge my thought.
No Sons 3 and Brothers shall be joined in one,
Nor Mother bear a Granchild in a Son;
No Murdered Babes 4 shall feast their injured Sire,
Nor Days break off, and frighted Suns retire.
None shall defy the Sea, the Floods enslave,
Sail over the Mountains 5, and walk over the Wave:
No Asian Kings. And thee, O mighty Rome,
Thy Arms, thy Conquests, and thy World overcome
Thy Laws, thy Wars, thy Leagues my Verse refuse,
Those claim the leisure of a greater Muse.
Smooth Seas the Artless Sailer safely tries,
And Flowers undressed in fruitful Gardens rise;
He works securely, who in Gold designs,
When even the rude unpolisht Metal Shines;
On specious Subjects common Wits compose,
For where the Matter takes, the Fancy flows;
And every vulgar Author writes with ease,
Secure of Credit, where the Themes can please.
This way some take to Fame: Through Words unknown,
And things abstruse my Muse goes boldly on,
Observes all Interchange of Times, compares
The fatal turns, and views the Leagues of Stars,
Things so remote, so intermixed, and wrought
With Parts in Parts; they are too fine for thought.
To know them is too much, but to explain
How great! to bind in Verse shows more than Man.
Then come, who e're thou art that bring'st a Mind
To know high Truth, and patient Thoughts to find;
Hear solid Reason, and go on to gain
True serious Knowledge, but neglect the vain:
No Kings at Aulis sworn, no tales of Troy
With Priam's tears, or Helen's fatal Joy,
Nor hope sweet Verse, and curious turns to find,
I Will leave thy Passions, and instruct thy Mind:
And though some Words of foreign Stamp appear,
Seem harsh, untuned, uneasy to thy Ear;
This is the Subject's not the Writer's fault,
Some things are stiff, and will not yield to thought;
I must be plain: And if our Art has found
Expressions proper, it neglects the Sound.
Thy Mind well purged from vainer Cares compose,
For now my Muse is eager to disclose,
The nicest Secrets; which observed, impart
Fate's Laws, and prove the surest Guides to Art.
When Nature ordered this vast Frame to rise, 1.

Nature, the Guardian of these Mysteries,
And scattered Lucid Bodies over the Skies;
When she the Concave, whence directly fall
Straight Lines of Influence round the solid Ball,
Had filled with Stars; and made Earth, Water, Air,
And Fire, each other mutually repair;
That Concord might these differing parts control,
And Leagues of mutual Aid support the whole;
That nothing which the Skies embrace might be
From Heaven's supreme Command and Guidance free,
On Man the chiefest Object of her Cares
Long time she thought, then hung his Fates on Stars;
Those Stars, which placed in the Heart of Heaven, display
The brightest Beams, and share the greatest sway;
Which keep a constant Course, and now restrain
The Planets Power, now yield to them again;
Thus sometimes ruling, sometimes ruled, create
The strange and various Intercourse of Fate.
To these her Powers wise Nature's Laws dispense
Submitting all things to their Influence: 2. The twelve Lots of the twelve
Signs.

But then as Emperors their Realms divide,
And every Province has its proper Guide,
So it is in Signs; they have not equal Shares
Of common Power, each Fortune claims its Stars.
Our Studies, Poverty, Wealth, Joy and Grief,
With all the other Accidents of Life
She parcels out; to proper Stars confines
The Lots in number equal to the Signs.
These graced with proper Names and Place contain
The various Fortunes incident to Man,
Yet so contrived, that they are always found
In the same 6 Order, in the fatal Round.
Yet are not Lots thus fixed to Signs to lie
Possessing the same 7 Station in the Sky;
And from one place directing down to Earth
An equal Influence work on every Birth;
But still the Time of every Birth confines
These Lots to Seats, and makes them change their Signs,
That every Lot from every Sign may flow,
And vary the Nativity below.
But lest Confusion too much Change produce,
And make the Art too intricate for Use;
It Is ordered thus: --
That when the Birth's first Minute has decreed
The first Lot's Station, then the rest succeed
In following Signs; each Fortune takes its Seat
In proper Order, till the Round's complete:
Take these short Rules till flowing Verse dilate,
Unfolding all the Mysteries of Fate.
These Lots which thus decreed to Signs contain
The various Fortunes incident to Man;
As Planets join with a malignant Ray,
Or Kind; or as the rolling Skies convey
To different Hinges, so the Fortune spreads,
And well or ill the whole Design succeeds:
Their Names and Kinds obliging Muse rehearse, 3.

And sing their Titles in no vulgar Verse,
That late Posterity with Joy may throng
To Themes unknown, and crowd to learn my Song.
Fortune's the first: First Lot.
This Name our Art bestows,
And what it signifies the Title shows.




Here House is found, with all that may conduce
To House, Vid. Fig. 11
either for Ornament or Use:
What train of Servants, what extent of Field
Shall aid the Birth, or give him room to build:
When large Foundations may be safely laid,
Or Houses roof'd; if Friendly Planets aid.
Warfare's the next: Second Lot.
And it is in This decreed
How every Native shall in Arms succeed:
What Dangers wait them when abroad they roam,
To pick up Follies which they miss at home.
Civil Employments in the Third we find, Third Lot.

Tho those too justly may be styled a kind
Of Warfare; when two different Interests jarr,
Opposed in sides, and make a sort of War.
Here Is Patronage, and here our Art descries
What breaks its bands, what draws the closer ties,
Shows what Rewards our Services may gain,
And how too often we may court in vain:
All this as Planets friendly Aids conspire,
Or temper Signs with their unlucky Fire.
Proceed, my Muse, Fourth Lot.
for in the next appear
The Court Concerns, and Fortunes of the Bar,
The pleading Patron with the fearful Throng
Of trembling Clients hanging on his Tongue.
The smooth Perswader who shall teach the Laws,
And settle Right, whilst Truth supports the Cause;
For from this Lot the Planets Rays dispense
The various Powers of winning Eloquence.
The Fifth to Marriage Sacred yet pretends
To Guests, Fifth Lot.
Acquaintance, Company, and Friends;
Here we discern the Common League that binds
The Equal Souls, and joins agreeing Minds.
But in the sixth, Sixth Lot.
rich Plenty takes her Throne,
With Preservation: And from this it is known
What stores of Wealth shall come, how long their stay,
As Planets tamper with their ruling Ray:
The Seventh in horrid Dangers shall engage
The Birth, Seventh Lot.
if Planets not correct its Rage.
The Eighth Nobility pretends to claim, Eighth Lot.

Where Honor sits with her attendant Fame;
Where Family erect maintains her Place,
And smiling Favor with her winning Face.
The Ninth the doubtful Lot of Children bears
With all the Pious Parents hopes and Fears, Ninth Lot.

The Tutor's Industry, and Guardian's Cares.
The next to this the Act of Life contains, Tenth Lot.

And shows how far a good Example reigns:
How by their Masters formed Slaves take their way
To Tasks assigned, and cheerfully Obey.
The following is a Lot of high concern, Eleventh Lot.

For hence the state of strength and Health we learn,
When grieved, we live obnoxious to Disease,
Or free from Sickness, and consigned to Ease:
Let none who value Health, this Lot refuse,
When they would time for wholesome Physic choose;
For hence we are with most exactness taught
To gather Drugs, or mix the saving Draught.
The Last, Twelfth Lot.
and which the Round concludes, contains
The End of all our Wishes and our Pains,
Shows if to what our several Aims address
Obtained, shall crown our Studies with Success;
Whether with fauning Arts we court the Great,
Or shunning Crowds, to Privacy retreat;
Whether we Plead at the Contentious Bar,
Or Plough the Sea, and gather Wealth from far;
Or tear the Earth, to crowd our stores with Grain,
Or bring unruly Bacchus to the Press again.
For these, if Planets prosper the Effect,
You may fit moments, and fit Days expect
From this one Lot, and all the rest neglect.
These Planets 8 Powers, and how their Rays infuse,
Or Good, or Bad, shall then engage my Muse,
When their Effects she Sings --
But now lest hudled things confusedly wrought,
Distract thy Mind, and discompose thy Thought;
Let Verse in Method orderly impart
The single naked Elements of Art;
And since my ventrous Muse has bound in Rhyme,
The various Labors of the Round of Time,
(What Greece calls Athla, happy Greece in Song,
Are now called Labors in a meaner Tongue)
Which to Twelve Lots conveniently assigned
Determine all the Fortune of Mankind:
Her Theme pursuing, IV. How the Lots are to be suited to the Signs.
she will next comprise
The several Signs with which the Labors rise;
For to one Seat they are not always tied,
Nor from one Sign at every Birth preside;
They change their station, as the Round they move,
Yet still their Order is the same above.
But lest you should imperfect Schemes complete,
Nor justly suit each Labor to its Seat;
First find the place by Fortune's Lot possessed,
( Fortune the first, and Leader of the rest)
That done, to following Signs in order join
The Lots, and give each Labor to its Sign:
And to secure thy search for Fortune's place
Two Rules shall guide thee, and enfold the Maze.
The moment known when first the Birth began, When the Birth belongs to Day.

The Planets joined to Signs to form the Plan,
And Scheme erected for the future Man;
If then the Sun with an exalted Ray
Above the East and West commands his way,
Then safely fix, and give the Birth to Day:
But if through lower Skies he wheels the Light,
The Day resigns, and yields the Birth to Night.
This settled, if the Birth belongs to Day,
The Rule is short, and not obscure the Way;
From that Degree, where then the 9 Sun presides,
To that Degree where gloomy Luna rides:
Count through the following signs, and as you pass,
Exactly mark what Numbers fill the space:
Thence from the Eastern point, which artful Greece
Has styled the Horoscope, an equal number of Degrees,
Following the circling Zodiac as it bends,
Count through the Signs; and where the Number ends,
There fix the Seat of Fortune; thence confine
In order, every Labor to its Sign.
But if when Night her sable Wings has spread,
The Birth starts forward from his Genial Bed; When to Night.

In different manner, then thy Numbers range,
With Nature's Order, let thy 10 Method change;
The Moon, who imitates her Brother's Light,
And governs in her own Dominion, Night,
Observe: Thence through the Signs in order run,
To find how far she is distant from the Sun.
The Native's Horoscope be next thy Care,
And from that Point, begin to count as far
As those Degrees permit thy Thoughts to pass;
And where they stop, there settle Fortune's place.
And then to following Signs the rest confine
In order, every Labor to its Sign.
Perhaps these Precepts may appear too nice, V. How to find the Horoscope

For who can find the Horoscope in Skies
Immense, still circling with impetuous force,
In Motion restless, and so swift in Course?
Yet this not rightly fixed, our Art can boast
No certainty, and all our Labor's lost:
As wretched Travelers are doomed to stray,
When those mistake, who should direct the Way.
Because the Points which all the rest control,
Misplaced at first, must influence the whole,
And since the rouling Skies move swiftly on,
A different Face is every moment shown,
The Scheme must be uncertain, and the Birth unknown.
Yet though of greatest Use, it is hard to gain
This Knowledge; and our Search is often in vain:
For who can in his narrow Breast comprise
The World immense, and who observe the Skies,
Which with eternal Revolutions move,
And Circling, measure the vast Orb above?
What Diligence can e're describe its Face,
What Art can fix in so immense a space?
Those Points where East and West exactly fall,
Which Crowns the Top, and which supports the Ball? VI. The Chaldaeans refuted.

I know the Method, the 11 Chaldaean Schools
Prescribe, but who can safely trust their Rules?
To each ascending Sign, to find their Powers,
They equal time allow, that time two Hours:
And then from that Degree, from which the Sun
Begins to start, his daily Course to run,
Two Hours to each succeeding Sign they give,
Still thus allowing, 'till their search arrive
At the Degree and Sign they seek, for where
The Number ends, the Horoscope is there.
But false the Rule; Oblique the Zodiac lies,
And Signs as near, The first Argument against the Chaldaeans.
or far removed in Skies,
Obliquely mount, or else directly rise:
In Cancer, so immense his Round, the Ray
Continues long, and slowly ends the Day;
Whilst Winter's Caper in a shorter Track
Soon wheels it round, and hardly brings it back:
Aries and Libra, equal Day with Night,
Thus middle 12 Signs to the Extremes are opposite
And Signs Extreme too, vary in their Light.
Nor are the Nights less various than the Days
Equal their measure, only Darkness sways,
In Signs 13 adverse to those that bore the Rays:
Then who can think when Days and Nights are found,
In length so differing through the Yearly Round,
There should be given to every Sign in Skies,
An equal Space, an equal Time to rise?
But more than this: The 14 Hours no certain space
Of time contain, The Second Argument.
but vary with the Days:
Yet every Day in what e're Sign begun,
Beholds six Signs above the Horizon,
Leaves six below; and therefore Rules despise,
Because the Hours no equal time comprise,
Which give two Hours to every Sign to rise.
The Hours in number Twelve divide the Day,
And yet the Sun with an unequal Ray
Now makes a shorter, now a longer stay.
Nay farther, though you many ways pursue
To find their length you will never meet the true, VII. How to find the different
lengths of Days and Nights, and to find the Horoscope.

But thus: Take all that space of time the Sun
Meets out, when every daily Round is Run,
Let equal Portions next that time divide;
And then those Portions orderly applied
To Days, will show their length, from thence appears
Their varying Measures through the rouling Years.
The Standard this, by which our Art Essays
Winter's slow Nights, and tries the Summer's Days.
This must be fixed, when from the Autumnal Scales,
The Day declines, and Winter's Night prevails:
Or in the Ram whence Winter's Nights retire
The Hours restoring to the Summer's Fire:
In those two Points, the Day and Night contain
Twelve equal Hours. For with an even rein
The Sun then guides, and whilst his Care does roll
Through Heaven's midd Line, he leans to neither Pole:
But when removed, he to the South declines,
And in the 15 Eighth Degree of Caper shines,
The Winter's hasty Day moves nimbly on,
Nine 16 Hours and half; so soon the Light is gone.
But Night drives slowly in her gloomy Carr,
Takes fourteen Hours and half for her unequal share;
Thus twice twelve Hours in Day and Night are found,
To fill the natural Measure of the daily Round.
Thence Light increases still, as Nights decay,
'Till Cancer meets her in the Fiery way,
And sets sure bounds to her encroaching sway.
Then turns the Scene, and Summers day descends
Through Winter's Hours, still losing as it bends:
And then the Days of equal length appear,
With Nights, 'th' adverse Season of the Year,
And Nights with Days: For by the same Degrees
That once they lengthened, now the Times decrease,
These Times our Art can show, but these belong
To future Rhimes, and claim another Song.
Thus measure those, who live where fruitful Nile,
With Summer Torrents swollen o'reflows the Soil;
Whose seven large Mouths; the Skies can boast no more
Of Planets, The rising and Setting of the Signs first. By Stadia: and Hours.
vomit with impetuous Roar,
And beat the Ocean from the foaming Shore.
Now learn what 17 Stadia, learn what times in Skies
Signs ask to Set, and what they claim to Rise:
Observe, short rules my Muse, but full she brings,
And Words roll from Her, crowded up with Things.
For Aries, Prince of all the Signs comprise
Full forty Stadia, for his time to rise,
But Eighty give him when He leaves the Skies:
One Hour, and one third part his rise compleats,
This space of time, He doubles when He sets.
The following Signs to Libra rising, claim
Eight Stadia more, and Setting lose the same.
And thus in order following Signs require
Still sixteen Minutes more to raise their Fire,
And lose as much, when setting they retire:
Thus signs to Libra, 18 as they rise increase;
And thus they lose when they descend to Seas:
For all the Signs that do from Libra range,
Take equal measures, but the Order change;
For Signs adverse to equal times engross,
But setting Gain, and still arise with loss.
Thus Hours and Stadia which bright Aries gets
When rising, Libra loses when she sets;
And all the time, which when He leaves the Skies,
The Ram possesses, Libra takes to rise:
By this Example, all the rest define,
The following imitate the leading Sign.
This rightly fixed, if you these Rules pursue,
The Horoscope lies open to thy view;
Securely work, since you can fix in Skies
The times, and Stadia, for the Signs to rise:
From that Degree and Sign, in which the Sun
Begins to start, his daily Course to run,
Count fairly on, and all the work is done.
Another method, if you this refuse,
Shall lead thee right, Another Method.
and be as plain to use:
For if the Horoscope you seek by Day,
Observe these Rules, which show the surest Way;
First find what 19 Hour, the Birth is born, and then
Add five to that, and multiply by Ten:
Add five, for every Hour the Signs ascend
Thrice five Degrees, in the Celestial Bend:
This done, take that Degree in which the Sign
Then rouls the Sun, and to this Number join;
From this whole Sum, one Thirty parts applied
To the Sun's Sign, nor to the rest denied,
As following they in order lie, will show
The thing you sought for, and design to know:
For where the Number ends, that Sign and Part
Is Horoscope: Thus speak the Rules of Art.
By Night your search demands a different way;
To the Nights Hour, 20 add all the twelve of Day,
From this whole Sum the Thirty parts apply
To following Signs as they in order lie;
And where the Number ends, that Sign and Part
Is Horoscope: Thus speak the Rules of Art.
Thus you may find the Horoscope in Skies,
And though Oblique the Circling Zodiac lies,
This Point determined, you may fix them all,
What Crowns the Top, and what supports the Ball:
The Signs true Setting, and true Rising trace,
Assign to each their proper Powers and Place,
And thus what stubborn Nature's Laws deny,
Our Art shall force, and fix the rolling Sky.
Nor is over all the Earth, VIII. Third Argument against the Chaldaeans.
the length of Night,
And Day the same; they vary with the sight;
Nor, would the Ram alone and Scales agree,
In Day and Night; in every Sign would be
The Equinox, if as these Rules devise,
Two Hours were given to every Sign to rise.
In that Position where Direct's the Sphere, The length of Days and Nights in a
Direct Sphere.

And in the Horizon both Poles appear;
The Day maintains an equal length to Night,
And that Usurps not on the others Right:
No Inequality in Skies is found,
But equal Day, and equal Night goes round.
Those Days and Nights which Spring and Autumn bear,
They see unvary'd through the rolling Year,
Because the circling Sun in every Sign
Runs round, and measures still an equal Line;
Whether through Cancer's height he bears the Day,
Or through the Goat opposed He bends his way,
The Day's alike, nor do the Nights decay.
For though Oblique the Zodiac Circle lies,
Yet all the Zones do at right Angles rise
Still Parallel; and whilst the Sphere is Right
Half Heaven is Hid, and half exposed to sight.
Hence take thy way, In an Oblique Sphere.
and over Earth's mighty Bend
From this midst Region move to either End,
As weary Steps convey thee up the Ball
By Nature rounded and hung midst the All
To either Pole; whilst you your way pursue
Some parts withdraw, and others rise to view.
To you thus mounting as the Earth does rise
So varies the Position of the Skies,
And all the Signs that rose Direct before
Obliquely mount, and keep that Site no more;
Oblique the Zodiac grows, for whilst we range,
Tho fixed its place, yet ours we freely change;
It Is therefore plain that here the Days must prove
Of different Lengths, since Signs obliquely move,
Some nearer roll, whilst some remoter rove,
And measure still unequal Rounds above.
As nearer to the Arctick Round you go
The Hours increase, On this side the Arctick Circle.
and Day appears to grow;
The Summer Signs in ample Arch invade
Our Sight, the Winter lie immerst in Shade;
The more you Northward move, the more your Eyes
Their Luster lose; they set as soon as rise:
But pass this Round, Beyond the Arctick Circle.
as you your way pursue,
Each Sign withdraws with all its parts from view,
Then Darkness comes, and chaces Light away,
And thirty Nights excludes the Dawn of Day:
Thus by degrees Day wastes, Signs cease to rise,
For bellying Earth still rising up denies
Their Light a Passage, and confines our Eyes.
Continued Nights, continued Days appear,
And Months no more fill up the rouling Year.
Should Nature place us where the Northern Skies
Creak round the Pole, In an erect or parallel Sphere.
and grind the propping Ice;
Midst Snows eternal, where the impending Bear
Congealed leans forward on the frozen Air;
The World would seem, if we surveyed the whole,
Erect, and standing on the nether Pole.
Its sides, as when a Top spins round, incline
Nor here nor there, but keep an even Line,
And there Six Signs of Twelve would fill the sight
And never setting at an equal Hight,
Wheel with the Heavens, and spread a constant Light.
And whilst through those the Sun directs his way
For long Six Months with a continued Ray
He chaces Darkness, and extends the Day.
But when the Sun below the Line descends
With full Career, and to the lower bends,
Then one long Night continued Darkness joins,
And whilst he wanders through the Winter's Signs
The Arctick Circle lies immerst in Shade,
And vainly calls to feeble Stars for Aid:
Because the Eyes that from the Pole survey
The bellying Globe, scarce measure half the way,
The Orb still rising stops the Sight from far,
And whilst we forward look, we find a Bar:
For from the Eyes the Lines directly fall,
And Lines direct can never surround the Ball;
Therefore the Sun to those low Signs confined
Bearing all Day and leaving Night behind,
To those that from the Pole survey denies
His cheerful Face, and Darkness fills their Eyes:
Till having spent as many Months, as past
Through Signs, he turns, and rises to the North at last:
And thus, in this Position of the Sphere
One only Day, one only Night appear
On either side the Line, and make the Year.
What different sorts of Days and Nights are known
In all Positions thus my Muse has shown;
Her Work goes on, and she must next comprise
What Signs appear, what Times they claim to rise
In all Positions of the moving Skies:
That when you follow Art, and boldly press
To find the Horoscope, a just Success
May meet thy search, and into knowledge raise thy guess.
But who can all their various times rehearse?
Compute so much, and state Accounts in Verse?
Therefore this part let general Rules define,
Let those that follow my advanced Design
Apply them right, but let the Rules be mine.
Wherever placed; 9. Another way to find the Trine the Signs Rising and
Setting by Hours.
by these few Rules proceed,
By Nature settled, and by Art decreed;
First count how many 21 Hours complete the Night
Or Day, when Cancer in the Summer's height
Bears Phoebus, and short darkness bounds the light.
Day's Hours by Six divide, one sixth devise
To following Leo as his time to rise:
Night so divided too one Sixth bestow
On Taurus, that his rising time will show:
But then observe the difference of the time
Which Leo takes, and which the Bull to climb,
That into Three divide, and thence apply,
Beside the time which Taurus takes to mount the Sky,
One single Third to Naked Gemini.
The like to Cancer, and the like Account
To fiery Leo as his time to mount;
Then reckon all, you will find the Sum the same
Which from the first Division to Leo came,
When one sixth part of Day was given to raise his Flame.
By the same Method Virgo's time define:
But this Condition runs through every Sign,
The following keeps those Hours the Sign before
Obtained to rise, and vulgarly adds more:
As these an orderly Increase maintain,
So Signs from Libra still decrease again;
But different Order they observe in Skies,
The Hours these claim to Set, those take to Rise.
But if you count by Stadia, By Stadia.
change the Name,
But keep the Method, for the Rule's the same:
Seven Hundred Twenty Stadia fill the Round,
No more in Day, no more in Night are found:
Hence take as many as complete the Night,
When glowing Cancer in the Summer's hight
Bears Phoebus, and short darkness bounds the light.
The rest by Six divide, one Sixth devise
To fiery Leo as his time to rise;
Night's Stadia so divide, one Sixth bestow
On Taurus: Take the Difference twixt the Two,
That Sum divide by Three, and thence apply,
Beside the Stadia Taurus takes to mount the Sky,
One single Third to naked Gemini.
Thus to the rest proceed, but still confine
To following Signs the Stadia of the former Sign,
With one Third Part's Increase; till Libra's Ray
This Reckoning stops, and shows another way:
For Signs from Libra different Rules comprise,
A different Order they observe in Skies,
The Stadia others claim to Set they take to Rise.
Those Stadia too in which the rest ascend
These Winter Signs in slowly setting spend.
Thus having fixed the Stadia, now pursue
The Horoscope, it is open to thy view;
From that Degree in which the Sun does mount
Observe my Method, and begin to count;
Give proper Hours to every Sign to rise,
And proper Stadia to ascend the Skies,
Work by those Rules which I have shown before,
Securely work, for you can err no more.
By what advance the Winter Months increase, 10. How Days increase from
Capricorn (...) Cancer.

(For they advance not by the same Degrees
Through every Sign, till on the Ram they light,
Which equals Time, and Day adjusts to Night)
Must next be shown to all that press to learn,
Short are the Rules, but yet of great Concern.
First take the measure of the shortest Day
And longest Night, when with unequal Ray
Through Caper Phoebus drives the narrow way.
Then count the 22 Hours which Day must yield to Shade,
And in three Portions let the Sum be laid;
One of these Parts to the Middle Sign applied
Shows the Increase of Day on either side:
For as the First is by the Midst surpassed
One Half, so that is exceeded by the last.
Thus through Three Signs the Day's Increase is shown,
The following takes what to the Last was grown,
And adds an equal Portion of its own.
For Instance: To the Conquest Night assign
Full Fifteen Hours, and give the Day but Nine:
Three Hours the difference. Now the Goat has Power
To lengthen Day the space of half an Hour,
One Hour Aquarius adds, the Fishes join
As much as Both, and with the rest combine;
Thus three Hours filled, adjusted Time they bring
To Aries; and he equals Day and Night in Spring.
The Sixth part of the Time, or more or less,
Whatever it proves, is the first Sign's Increase;
The Second doubles what the First surpassed,
And gives it to be trebled by the last.
But from the 23 Equinoctial point the Day
Receives increase, but in another way;
For Aries takes as many Hours from Night,
As Pisces seized before in their own Right;
And to complete the Rapine Taurus joins
One Hour, one Half is added by the Twins;
Thus whilst these Signs the Time to Day restore,
Night justly loses, as it gained before.
From Caper thus Decreasing Nights appear,
And Heaven turns up the right side of the Year;
The Day proceeds to lengthen all the way,
Till high in Cancer raised it finds a Stay;
The Solstice then: when Day and Night are found
Equal to Night and Day that drove the Winter round.
Then by the same degrees again the Light
Decreasing, what it took returns to Night.
Thus far advanced in Art my Verse defines
The proper Years, 11. The Years, Months, Days, and Hours of Signs.
Months, Hours, and Days of Signs:
These must be shown; for Signs have Days and Hours,
And Months, and Years when they exert their Powers.
First then, that Sign in which the Sun appears,
Because the Sun measures out the time in Years,
Claims the first Year: On following Signs bestow
The following Years as they in Order go.
And so the Moon, for as she rounds the Skies,
She measures Months, to Signs the Months applies.
Of Days and Hours the Horoscope possessed
Of the first parts, to following. Signs commits the rest.
This Nature orders, all her Months and Years,
And Days, and Hours, she parcels out to Stars;
That as they run their Course they all may find
The different Signs, and vary in their kind.
This Nature orders too; and hence there springs
That various Discord that is seen in Things;
In one continued Stream no Fortune flows,
Joy mixes Grief, and Pleasures urged by Woes:
Inconstancy in every part appears,
Which Wisdom never trusts, but Folly fears.
Thus Years from Years, and as they roll the round
The Months from Months, and Days from Days are found
To differ: no returning Hours restore
That sort of Fortune which they brought before:
Because the Times, as round their Course they run,
Meet different Signs, and are not bound to One;
The Days and Hours their ruling Signs obey,
The Month's the influence which they give convey
And temper all things by their fatal Ray.
Some Author's Write, Some Astrologers Opinion. concerning the Years, Months
and Days of Signs.
(for who can hope to see
Opinions join, or find the World agree?)
That from the Horoscope our Art defines
The Days, the Hours, the Years, and Months of Signs;
From that alone let the Account begin,
And all the rest will orderly fall in:
And whilst the others, as before 'twas shown,
Three Heads of reckoning ask, the Moon, the Sun,
And Horoscope, these still demand but One:
Yet still as great, their difference must appear,
Month disagrees with Month, and Year with Year,
And Hours and Days: For with uneven pace,
Though starting all together, they run the Race,
And never make Returns in equal space:
Twice to the Signs each 24 Hour the Days restore
Twice every Month, brings round the Days, and more:
Once every Year the Months to Signs are born,
And when Twelve Years are run, the Years return.
It Is hard to think, Refuted.
and Nature's Laws reject
One single Time, so differing in effect:
That when one Sign for Years and Months appears,
Bad Fate should clog the Months, Good Crown the Years:
Or that the Sign which through the Months conveys
Bright Fortune, should with Black infest the Days:
Or that the Star, which with afflicting Power,
The Day oppresses, should exalt the Hour.
Vain therefore their attempt, who fondly hope,
The Times to reckon from the Horoscope,
And think because with an unequal Date,
They come to Signs, that these Returns create
Their different, odd varieties of Fate.
Absurd Opinion! which with fruitless pain,
They strive to prop with mighty Names in vain,
It sinks, and falls with its own stupid weight again.
This sung, 12. How many Years belong to each Sign and Station.
and Times to Signs applied, the Muse
Would beg release, and further Task refuse;
But lo the Subject grows: The next must show
What length of Times the several Signs bestow:
This must be known when in your search for Fate
You measure Life, and fix the gloomy Date.
Ten Years and One, but one third part withdrawn,
The 25 Ram extends the wretched Life of Man;
Poorly he gives, as frugal of his Store,
Whilst Taurus adds two Years to these; the Twins two more.
Full sixteen Years Eight Months, from Cancer flow,
But two Years more the Lion's rays bestow.
From Virgo twenty Years, eight Months conveyed,
Enlarge the Birth: The Scales give equal to the Maid:
Scorpio's as much as Leo's Rays dispense,
The Centaur equals Cancer's influence:
Of Years, twice seven, eight Months the Goat conveys;
Though young Aquarius shines with feebler rays,
Four Years he trebles, and doubles six score Days.
To the same space, with which the Ram began,
The Fish placed, next extend the Age of Man.
But farther yet, it is not enough to know
The length of time which single signs bestow;
For you may Err, when in your search for Fate,
You measure Life, and fix the gloomy Date;
Because the Heavenly Stations claim their share,
As Planets intermix their Force declare,
In this Contrivance, and make Life their Care.
To single stations now what Years belong,
(With Planets joined, they claim 26 another Song)
In well wrought Numbers let the Muse impart,
And teach the simplest Elements of Art;
This done, these things prepared and sitly joined,
With greater Ease, she will raise the Work designed,
If when the Moon is in the Hinge at East,
The Birth breaks forward from its native rest;
Full Eighty Years, if you two Years abate,
This Station gives, and long defers its Fate:
But if in Heavens midst point, this large Decree
She shortens, giving fewer Years by three:
With Eighty Courses in the Zodiac Round,
Substracting Four, the Western Hinge is Crowned.
The lowest Hinge on all its Births, derives
Years sixty two, Vid. Fig. 9.
and then concludes their Lives.
The ninth, which makes upon the Right the Trine,
Gives sixty Years, and bates but One of Nine.
The Fifth of the Left, as frugal of its store,
Gives sixty three, and can enlarge no more;
The Eleventh station, that which rises high,
Almost an equal of the Middle Sky,
Yields six score Springs, and lest that Gift should be
Too scanty, lengthens that vast Sum by Three.
The Third which lies at equal space below
The Eastern point, does fifty Years bestow,
Mean is the station, and its Gift is so.
The second Forty Courses of the Sun,
And two bestows, and when that term is done,
The Man goes off, e're half his race be run.
The Twelfth gives twenty three, then hasty Death,
Comes on, and in his Bloom, the Youth resigns his Breath.
The Eighth next over the Western Hinge can bring
But fourteen Years, nor adds another Spring.
The sixth but Twelve bestows, then Death destroys
The Parents Hopes, and crops the growing Boys;
Diseases following, from their Birth create
A feeble Frame, and sit the Prey for Fate.
Now nicely view the Tropic Signs that lie
Opposed in the four Quarters of the Sky; 13. The Tropic Signs

Called Tropic Signs, because when these appear,
The World then Turns the Seasons of the Year:
Thus Spring in Cancer, in Autumnal Scales
The Summer turns, in Caper Autumn sails;
Thence shivering Winter creeps congealed with Frost,
Yet melts again; and in the Ram is lost:
These loose the Seasons, to their full Career,
And make the Course of the Revolving Year;
And these being Hingers of the World, create
New Powers in Stars; and fix new Rules for Fate.
In Heavens high Arch, Cancer.
and on the utmost Line
Of Summers progross, Cancer seats his Sign:
There stretches out the greatest length of Day,
And then declines, and makes it soon decay;
But all the time which, as he bears the Light
He takes from Day, He still conveys to Night.
Then Corn grows yellow on the fruitful Soil,
And lusty Reapers bare their Limbs for toil:
Then Seas grow warm, the Floods forbear to roar,
And Billows languish on the quiet Shore.
Then Mars goes forth, nor is the Scythian Coast
From Roman Arms defended by her Frost:
And whilst their Pools and Marshy Grounds are dry,
Fearing our Force, the conquered Germans fly:
Then Nile o'reflows, and Egypt's fruitful Plain,
Rich Harvests yields, nor needs the aid of Rain.
Thus lies the World, when with exalted Ray,
In The Summer Solstice Phoebus bears the Day
Through Cancer's Sign, and drives the highest Way.
Opposed the Goat in narrowest rounds of Light,
Wheels Winter on, Capricorn
but long extends the Night;
Yet soon Ascending, He contracts the Shade,
To Day returning all the waste he made;
The Fields unwrought, then lie, unplough'd the Seas,
And Mars in Quarters, lies consigned to Ease:
Rocks cleave with Frost; and by the Cold, oppressed,
All Nature's Powers, are stiffned into Rest.
The next in Power are those two Signs that rise
With equal Revolutions of the Skies;
Which times of Day and Night adjust, Aries.
and bring
The Autumn on, or else advance the Spring.
The Sun returning in his Yearly Race,
To Cancer's Sign meets Aries midst the Space,
Seated between the Point, from whence he bends
His upward Course, and that in which he ends.
There placed as Umpire in the midst oth' way,
Contracted Night, he well adjusts to Day.
And as through him the Sun goes on to climb
The Heavenly steep, He makes a change in time;
For Day, that shortened in the Winter Bend,
The Ram first lengthens; and the next extend,
'Till raised in Cancer, to the utmost height
Of Summer's pitch, He wheels the longest Light.
Then Seas lie hushed: Then Earth grows bold to bear,
And trusts young Flowers to the serener Air:
Then Beasts in Fields, and Birds in every Grove,
Press on with Fury to consummate Love.
With joyful Songs the vocal Forests Ring,
And various Leaves adorn the gaudy Spring:
With such brisk Powers are Nature's parts possessed,
When waked, she rouses from her Winter's Rest.
Opposed to Aries, Libra's Stars appear
With the like power to sway the rouling Year, Libra.

She equals Day and Night: But soon the Scale
O'repois'd by Darkness, lets the Night prevail;
And Day, that lengthned in the Summer's height,
Shortens 'till Winter, and is lost in Night.
Then from the burdened Elms, the generous Vine
Descends, and Presses overflow with Wine:
Then Wheat is sown, whilst Autumn's heats remain
To loose the Clods, and mollify the Grain.
These have their Powers, and as these Signs create
A turn in Seasons, so they do in Fate:
From Tropic Signs (for by their name, we guess
Their turning Natures) who can hope for less?
But wide in their mistake, who think to see
These Powers spread equally in each Degree;
Not every Portion of the Tropic Signs
Turns Seasons, What Degrees in the Tropic Signs are to be considered.
and the Planets force confines,
But one Day only, in the blooming Prime
Of Spring, in Autumn One adjusts the Time,
One Day in Aries does to Time restore
Equality, and Libra boasts no more;
One Longest Day in Cancer's Sign is born,
One Night of equal length in Capricorn:
The other Days roll on with different Light,
Now gaining from, now losing time to Night.
Thus One Degree in Tropic Signs creates
A change in Heaven, and turns the Rules of Fates;
No fixed Decree's secure, their boundless sway,
Extends to all, and makes the Stars obey.
But which that is that governs, Fate's Decree,
There Authors differ, nor can Art agree;
For some the Eighth, and some the Tenth assign,
The First Degree -- is only Thine,
Thine, but the Muse with scorn, forbears the Name;
Unworthy mention, and too mean for Fame.
The End of the Third Book.
NOTES.
1. This and the seven following Verses relate to the several particulars of
Medea's story.

2. I use this Interpretation rather than that of Scaliger and others, because
I think Manilius speaks only of that famous Siege of Thebes, when the seven
Generals attackt it; and as the Story says, Capaneus had almost ruined the Town
before he was struck with Thunder.

3. Oedipus Married his own Mother Jocasta, and had Children by her; so that
each Son was Brother to the Father, and Grandchild to the Mother.

4. This respects the Story of Atreus and Thyestes.

5. Xerxes is said to have dug a Channel round Mount Athos, and to have made a
Bridge over the Hellespont.

6. Thus, for instance, in whatever Sign the Lot of Fortune is placed, the next
that belongs to the next Sign, is the Lot of Warfare: Civil Employments must be
given to the third, etc.

7. For the Lot of Fortune being in all Nativities that belong to Day to be
accounted for from the Sun, and in all Nativities that belong to Night from the
Moon; and those two Planets not always possessing the same place in every
Nativity, and the other Lots following the disposition of that of Fortune; it
is very evident that the same Lot is not to be always applied to the same Sign.

8. The Poet never finished this part, or it is now lost.

9. For instance, let the Sun be in the 20th Degree of Aries, the Moon in the
10th Degree of Libra; from the 20th Degree of Aries (counting through the
following Signs Taurus, Gemini, etc) to the 10th Degree of Libra; are 170
Degrees: Let the Horoscope be the 10th Degree of Cancer; from that 10th Degree
of Cancer, count through the following Signs, viz. Leo, Virgo, etc. and you will
find the Number 170 to end in the 10th Degree of Capricorn: Therefore in the
10th Degree of Capricorn place the Lot of Fortune: This I take to be the
meaning of Manilius.

10. Suppose the Sun to be in the 21, 49''''' of Leo, the Moon in the 26,
31''''' of Virgo; the Horoscope in the, 1, 0''''' of Leo; The Moon is distant
from the Sun 325, 18''''', which number being distributed amongst the
Antecedent Signs, viz. Cancer, Gemini, Taurus, etc. ends in the 5, 42''''' of
Virgo, that there is the place of the Lot of Fortune.

11. To explain this Method which the Chaldeans used to find the Horoscope,
Scaliger gives this instance: Let the Sun's place be the 13, 25' of Libra, let
the Birth be at the end of the Seventh Hour of the Day: Now because every Sign
has thirty Degrees, and fifteen Degrees make one Hour, these Seven Hours are
three Signs and an half, or one Hundred and five Degrees: Now reckon those
Degrees through the following Signs, viz. Scorpius, Centaurus, etc. The Number
ends in the 28125''''' of Capricorn, and therefore that is the Horoscope.

12. Sic media extremis, etc. The middle Signs here are Aries and Libra, and
these are said to be opposite to the Extremes, Cancer and Capricorn, because in
them the Days are equal, but in the others unequal to the Nights: This I take
to be the meaning of the Poet, rather than what Scaliger and other Interpreters
pretend.

13. Thus in Cancer the Days are longest; in Capricorn, which is a Sign adverse
to Cancer, the Nights are of the same length, that the Days were of in Cancer:
The like holds in Leo, and Aquarius, and so in the rest.

14. The Italians divided all the time betwixt the Rising and Setting of the
Sun into Twelve Hours, and all the time between the Setting and Rising of the
Sun into Twelve Hours: And therefore, those times being various and unequal,
the Hours must likewise be unequal.

15. According to the Opinion of some Ancient Astronomers, who placed the
Winter Solstice in the Eighth Degree of Capricorn, the Summer Solstice in the
Eighth Degree of Cancer, and the Equinox in the Eighth Degrees of Aries and
Libra: Thus in the End of this Book, Has quidam vires octava in part reponunt.


16. Eudoxus wrote of the Sphere at the 36th Degree, Elevation of the Pole, and
Manilius follows him.

17. A Stadium in Manilius is half of a Degree, and therefore in the whole
Zodiac there are 720 Stadia. In the Zodiac are 360 Degrees, to every Hour we
reckon, 15 Degrees, therefore every Hour is equal to 30 Stadia, and for the
same Reason, each Hour containing 60 Minutes, every Stadium is equal to two
Minutes.

18. The rising and Setting of the Signs according to Manilius.

Rising.
Signs. Stadia. Hours. Minutes. Degrees. Aries. 40 1 20''''' 20 Taurus. 48 1
36' 24 Gem. 56 1 52' 28 Cancer. 64 2 8' 32 Leo. 72 2 24' 26 Virgo. 80 2 40' 40
Libra. 80 2 40' 40 Scorp. 72 2 24 36 Cent. 64 2 8' 32 Capr. 56 1 52' 28 Aquar.
48 1 36' 24 Pisces. 40 1 20' 20 Signs Stadia. Hours. Min. Degrees.

Setting
Signs. Stadia. Hours. Min. Degrees. Aries. 80 2 40''''' 40 Taur. 72 2 24' 36 Gem.
64 2 8' 32 Canc. 56 1 52' 28 Leo. 48 1 36' 24 Virg. 40 1 20 20 Lib. 40 1 20' 20
Scorp. 48 1 36' 24 Cent. 56 1 52' 28 Capr. 64 2 8' 32 Aquar. 72 2 24' 36
Pisces. 80 2 40' 40 Signs. Stadia. Hours. Min. Degrees.

19. Let the Child be born in the Fourth Hour of the Day, add five to four, the
Sum is 9, Multiply 9 by 10, the Product is 90. Let the Sun be in the 10th
Degree of Gemini, add 10 to 90, the Sum is 100, of this 100 give 30 to Gemini,
the Sign in which the Sun is, 30 more to the following Sign Taurus: 30 to the
next Aries, 10 remain, therefore the 10th Degree of Pisces is the Horoscope.

20. Let the Birth be in the Seventh Hour of Night, add to that the Twelve
Hours of the Day, and that Seventh Hour will be the Nineteenth, from the Suns
Rising: Then add, multiply, and work, as in the former Method.

21. Let the longest Day in Cancer be of 16 Hours, the shortest Night of 8:
Divide those 16 Hours into 6 parts, each part contains 2 Hours 40 Minutes:
Therefore allow Leo 2 Hours 40 Min. for his Rising time: Divide likewise the 8
Hours of Night into 6 parts, each part will contain 1 Hour 20. m. and that is
the rising time of Taurus. The Difference between the Rising Times of these two
Signs is 1 Hour 20 Min. Divide this Difference into three equal parts, each
part will contain 26 Min. 40 Sec. Add these 26 Min. and 40 Sec. to the Rising
time of Taurus, and the whole Sum makes up the Rising time of Gemini, viz. 1
Hour, 46 Min. 40 Sec. To this add another third part to make up the Rising time
of Cancer, viz. 2 Hours 13 Min. 20 Sec. And so of the rest, as in the following
Scheme.

Signs Hours Min. Sec. Signs Aries. 0 53 20 Pisces. Taur. 1 20 0 Aqua. Gem. 1
46 40 Capr. Cancer 2 13 20 Cent. Leo. 2 40 0 Scorp. Virg. 3 6 40 Libra.

But it must always be observed, that the Southern or Winter Signs are opposed
to the Northern or Summer Signs. The Rising-time of the Summer is the
Setting-time of the Winter; and the Setting-time of the Summer the Rising-time
of the Winter Signs.

22. The Example which Manilius himself gives, sets this Doctrine in its true
Light. Let the longest Night in Capricorn be of 15 Hours, the Day consequently
must be of 9. Thus the Night exceeds the Day by 3 Hours. Divide these 3 Hours
into 3 Parts, give one Part, that is, 1 Hour to the Middle Sign, viz. Aquarius,
and thence conclude that in Capricorn the Day increases half an Hour, and in
Pisces an Hour and half; Aquarius being the Middle Sign in which the Days
increase one Hour.

23. According to the Doctrine of Manilius (let the Example be the same with
that in the preceding Note) in Aries the Day increases one Hour and half, in
Taurus one Hour, in Gemini half an Hour.

24. There being 24 Hours belonging to each Day, and but 12 Signs, more than 24
Days in each Month, and 12 Months in every Year.

25. A Table of the Years and Months that belong to each Sign.

Signs. Years. Months Signs. Aries. 10 8 Pisces. Taurus. 12 8 Aquar. Gemini. 14
8 Capr. Cancer. 16 8 Sagit. Leo. 18 8 Scorp. Virgo. 20 8 Libra.

26. This was never finished by the Poet, or is now lost.

MANILIUS. The Fourth Book.
After a short Reflection on the vain Cares of Mankind, he brings several
Arguments to prove Fate: 1. Several unaccountable passages in the Roman and
Grecian Histories: 2. Sudden Death, and unexpected Recoveries, contrary to all
the powers of Art and Physic: 3. The difference between the Children of the
same Parents: 4. The fewness of Worthy Men, and the certainty of Death: 5. The
ill successes of Wise and Good Men, and the prosperity of Knaves and Fools* 6.
Monstrous Births: 7. Prophesy: And then endeavors, 8. to take off some
Objections that might be rationally proposed against this Doctrine: Then. 9. He
shows what Tempers and Inclinations the twelve Signs singly considered do
bestow, and to what Arts they incline: 10. Under the Ram, are born all sorts of
workers in Wool, Broakers, Men of unsettled Fortunes, fearful, inconstant, and
covetous of Praise: 11. Under the Bull, Plowmen, Aspiring, Reserved, Strong,
and Amorous: 12. Under the Twins, Musicians, Songsters, Men of merry Tempers,
and Astronomers: 13. Under the Crab, Covetous Fellows and Usurers: 14. Under
the Lion, Hunters, Beast-keepers, Plain, Open-hearted, easily provoked, and
easily appeased: Under the Maid, Philosophers, Orators, Notaries, shamefaced
and indifferently good: 16. Under the Scales, Measurers, Gagers, Accountants,
Lawgivers, Lawyers, and Judges: 17. Under the Scorpion, Hunters, Gladiators,
Men of Warlike and Military Dispositions: 18. Under Sagittarius,
Chariot-Racers, Horse-breakers, Tamers of Wild Beasts, Men of acute
Understandings, and strong and nimble Bodies: 19. Under the Goat, Miners,
Coyners, Goldsmiths, Bakers, Broakers, Inconstant and Lascivious in their
Youth: 20. Under Aquarius, Men skilled in making Aqueducts, and Waterworks,
and Spheres, and Globes, tractable and prodigal: 21. Under Pisces, Mariners,
Pilots, Shipwrights, Rowers, Fishers, Fruitful but Inconstant: 22. He
Discourses of the Tenths of each Sign, and what Sign is Lord of each third part
of every Sign: 23. He encourages his Scholar to go on, tho the Task seems to
grow upon him, and to be very difficult, because it is a Noble Study, and the
Object truly great: 24. He shows what degrees of each Sign are hurtful, what
not: 25. He Teaches, that the Tempers of those that are Born when the Sign
rises, are different from those that are Born at other times: 26. He draws a
Map of the Earth and Seas, and Teaches what Signs govern particular Countries:
27. He shows what Signs are called Eccliptick, and why: 28. He proposes such
Objections as are made to deter Men from this curious search, and answers
them.

WHy should our Time run out in useless years, Short Reflections on the Cares
of Men.

Of anxious Troubles and tormenting Fears?
Why should deluding Hopes disturb our ease,
Vain to pursue, yet eager to possess?
With no Success, and no Advantage crowned,
Why should we still tread on the unfinisht Round?
Grown gray in Cares, pursue the senseless strife,
And seeking how to Live, consume a Life?
The more we have, the meaner is our Store;
The unenjoying craving Wretch is Poor:
But Heaven is kind, with bounteous Hand it grants
A fit supply for Nature's sober wants:
She asks not much, yet Men press blindly on,
And heap up more, to be the more undone:
By Luxury, they Rapine's Force maintain,
What that scrapes up, flows out in Luxury again;
And to be squandered, or to raise debate,
Is the great only use of an Estate.
Vain Man forbear, of Cares, unload thy Mind,
Forget thy Hopes, and give thy Fears to Wind;
For Fate rules all, its stubborn Laws must sway
The lower World, and Man confined obey.
As we are Born we Dye, our Lots are cast,
And our first Hour disposes of our last.
Then as the influence of the Stars ordains,
To Empires Kings are doomed, and Slaves to Chains.
Then Poverty, that common Fate comes down,
(Few Stars are Regal, and design a Crown)
What make a Wit, a Knave, a Saint, or Dunce,
Are hudled then together, and fixed at once.
The Ills that are ordained we must endure,
From not Decreed how fatally secure?
Prayers are too weak to check fixed Destinies,
And Vows too slow to catch the Fate that flies.
Whether with Glory raised, or clogged with Scorn,
The State, that then is settled, must be born.
For did not Fate preside, 1. The first Argument for Fate.
and Fortune lead,
Had parting Flames the good 1 Aenaeas fled?
Had Troy's sunk Fortune been sustained by 2 one?
And only Conquered then, when overthrown?
And did not Stars the rise of States dispose,
Had mighty Rome from such beginnings rose?
Had 3 Shepherds built, or Swains without control
Advanced their 4 Cottage to a Capitol?
Placed on whose heights, our Caesar's now survey
The lower Earth, and see the World obey?
From their 5 burnt Nest, had Conquering Eagles flown,
And the World yielded to a ruined Town?
Had Jove been stormed; or 6 Mutius safe returned
From baffled Flames, or vanquished whilst he burned?
Our Towns and Bridges guard, had 6 Cocles stood,
Or the weak 6 Virgin swam rough Tiber's Flood?
Had one 6 Horatius our sunk hopes restored,
Or Three have fallen beneath a single Sword?
O Glorious Victory! what Arms before,
E're won so much, none ever fought for more;
Rome and her hopes of Empire hung on One,
His over matched Lot was Hers, a Yoke or Throne.
Why should I 8 Cannae's bloody Plains relate,
And Africk's Ensigns threatening at our Gate,
How Thrasymene Drowned Flaminius's Shame,
And after Fabius, wise Retreats o'recame,
The Conquered Carthage shone with Roman flame?
How Hannibal on the Campanian Plains,
Rome's Terror once, then destined to our Chains;
Whilst waiting on his Proud Bithynian Lord,
Stole a base Death, and escaped our Nobler Sword?
But turn and view the 9 Civil Wars of Rome,
There opens wide a various Scene of Doom:
See Marcus ride with Cimbrian Laurels Crowned,
Then in the Dungeon stretched upon the groun'd;
Now Slave, now Consul, Consul, Slave again,
His Curule Chair, succeeded by a Chain;
Now a mean Ruin on the Lybian Sands
Despised he lies, and straight the World Commands;
Like Thunder from low Earth exhaled, he rose
From the Minturnian Pools,
And scattered Vengeance on his haughty Foes.
These wondrous Changes Fate and Stars advance,
O mighty turns, and much too great for Chance!
Who 10 Pompey could (that saw thy Conquering Fleet
Regain the Seas, and Kings beneath thy Feet,
Proud Pontus yield, fierce Tyrants make thy Train,
And crowding Monarchs beg thy leave to Reign,
That saw Victorious Laurels Crown thy Head,
And Worlds in thy repeated Triumphs lead;
And all that Glory which thy Sword had won,
Fixed and supported by as great a 11 Son)
Have thought that Thou, upon a Foreign Sand,
Should steal a Burial from a common Hand;
That shattered Planks, the Sea's dishonest spoil
Should hiz beneath thy Trunk, and be thy Pile?
That Thou, the mighty Thou, should want an Urn,
What Power, but Fate, could work so strange a turn?
Even 12 Caesar sprung from Heaven, and now a Star,
Though midst the dangers of the Civil War,
Secure He stood, and careless of Repose,
Was never surpised by his most watchful Foes;
Yet Crowned with Peace, in all his Pomp and State
He fell a Victim to o're-ruling Fate:
No dark suspicions, but bright hints were brought,
He knew what Cassius spoke, and Brutus thought;
How far advanced, how far they meant to go,
And saw the minute of the fatal Blow:
Yet dark Oblivion did his Memory blot,
He all his warnings, and Himself forgot;
And in the Senate, whilst his Right Hand held
The faithful Bill, which all the Plot revealed;
To prove that Fate will sway, and Stars control,
He fell, and with his Blood defaced the Scroul:
O mighty power of Fate, and proved too well!
The Best, the Wisest, and the Greatest fell.
Why should I mention Kings 13 and Empires falls,
Show Conquering 13 Cyrus on the Sardian Walls?
Or Croesus shrinking at the rising Flame?
Or 13 Priam's Trunk, a thing without a Name?
Unhappy Prince! the Beasts and Vultur's spoil,
His Troy was burnt, but Priam wants a Pile.
The Wreck of 13 Xerxes, who would scourge the Gods,
A Wreck, much greater than the threatened Floods?
Or 13 Tullus's Reign, who by the power of Fate,
Was born a Slave, yet Ruled the Roman State?
Or show 13 Metellus snatch the Vestal Fire,
And as he passed, prophaner Flames retire?
How often do sudden Deaths the Healthy seize, II. Second Argument.

Without the formal warning of Disease?
And yet how often from the Piles retire,
Even 14 fly themselves, and wander through the Fire?
Thus some have from their Graves returned, and known
Two Lives, whilst others, scarce enjoy but One.
A small Disease destroys, whilst greater spare,
Good Methods fail, and Men are lost by Care.
Some temperate Diet, with Diseases fills,
And Poyson's Innocent, when Physic Kills.
Some Children prove a mean degenerate Race, III. Third Argument.

Some show their Father's Mind, as well as Face;
In One, their Virtue, and their Fortune rise
To greater height, and in Another dies.
One 15 mad in Love, to Troy will carry War,
Or swim the Flood, and view the Torch from far,
The Other is determined to the Bar.
A Son his Father, Father kills the Son
On mutual Wounds two headlong Brothers run;
These Combats prove the force of ruling Powers,
For they are too unnatural to be Ours.
That every Age no new Camilli's breath, IV. Fourth Argument.

The 16 Decij dye, or 16 Cato conquer Death,
It Is not but that the Seed can still receive
As noble Stamps, but Fates refuse to give.
To fewer Days they do not cramp the Poor,
Nor bribed by Wealth, enlarged the Rich with more;
There Riches lose their force, the shining Years
Of glorious Tyrants must be turned in Tears;
They dig a Grave for Kings, and fix the Day;
How great must be that Power which Crowns obey!
Successless Virtue sinks whilst Vice prevails, V. Fifth Argument.

And Folly wins the Prize when Prudence fails:
He argues ill that from the Fortune draws
The goodness or the badness of a Cause:
Success or Merit do not always Crown,
Midst good and bad Men they are blindly thrown,
Without Respect, sixth fatally on One.
For some superior Power's impetuous force
Marks out our way, and still directs the Course;
The Years that we must run, the length, the pace,
And all the various turnings of the Race.
Besides, VI. Sixth Argument.
what Monstrous Births, the Nurses fear
And Mother's shame, half Man, half Beast appear?
Such wondrous Creatures never from Seed began,
For what has Beast that is common to a Man?
And what mean Soul would with his Lust comply,
And Sin on purpose for a Prodigy?
No; Stars dispose, they Counterfeit a Rape,
And mix a Monster of amazing shape.
Besides, VII. Seventh Argument.
were not Events by Fates enrol'd,
How can their certain Order be foretold?
How can the Prophets Sing of future Doom,
And in the present read the Age to come?
To this there is one Objection; VIII. An Objection answered.
Fate denies
Rewards to Virtue, and must plead for Vice:
Absurd; for who less hates a Poisonous Weed
Because it is bred from Necessary Seed?
Or who loves Corn the less; who hates the Vine.
Because by Nature raised, and not Design?
Thus Virtuous Minds deserve the greater Love,
Since Heaven consents, and all the Stars approve;
And we should hate those more whom Fates have sent
To commit Crimes and suffer Punishment;
For how, or whence these noxious faults begin
No matter, since each is certainly a Sin.
Nay this Opinion's settled by Debate,
It Is Fate that we should thus dispute of Fate.
This settled, IX. The Influence of the Signs.
I must now attempt to climb
Celestial steps, and run the Round of Time,
The Zodiac travel, go through every Sign,
Their Powers rehearse, and sing how all incline.
First Aries shines, X. Of Aries.
and as he often does lose
His Fleece, and then as frequently renews,
'Twixt sudden Ruin, and a fair Estate
He fixes the variety of Fate;
He gets, then loses, then returns to Gain,
Then Loss steals in, and empties all his pain;
He rears new Lambs, he does increase the Fold,
And makes the Rams to shine in native Gold;
Betters the Wool, and whilst the Subject grows
He forms Men's Minds to use what he bestows;
To Pick, to Card, to Spin, and Weave, to deal
In Cloth with gain; to Buy, Exchange, and sell:
All useful Arts, whose constant Works supply
Men's real Wants, not only Luxury:
This 17 Pallas owns, nor does disdain to claim
Arachne's conquest as her greatest Fame.
These are the manners, these the various Arts
Which Aries Rays, and secret force imparts;
To anxious fears he troubled Minds betrays
And strong Desires to venture all for Praise.
Dull Honest Plowmen to manure the Field
Strong Taurus bears, XI. Of Taurus.
by him the Grounds are tilled:
No gaudy things he breeds, no Prize for worth,
But Blesses Earth, and brings her Labor forth:
He takes the Yoke, nor does the Plough disdain,
And teaches Farmers to manure the Plain:
He Is their Example, when he bears the Sun
In his bright Horns, the noble toyl's begun:
The useful Plowshare he retrieves from Rust,
Nor lies at ease, and wants his strength in Dust.
To him the 18 Curij, and to him we owe
The brave Serrani, he in the Fields did Rods bestow,
And sent a great Dictator from his Plow.
Reserved, aspiring Minds, Limbs slow to move
But strong in Bulk his powerful Rays improve,
And on his 19 Curled Front sits wanton Love.
Soft Gemini to easier Arts incline
For softer Studies fit an Infant Sign. XII. Of Gemini.

They tune rough Words, or they incline to Sing,
To stop the Pipe, or strike the speaking String;
Through Reeds they blow the Natural Sound in Measure,
Gay their delight, and even their Pains are Pleasure;
Wars they avoid, Old Age they chase with Song,
And when late Death o'retakes them they are Young.
Sometimes to Heaven they mount, and trace the Stars,
Then fix in Globes, or turn the Signs in Spheres:
Their Wit reigns over their Nature, and refines
Its Powers; This is the Influence of the Twins.
But glowing Cancer (where the Summer Sun
With fiery Chariots bounds the Torrid Zone, XIII. Of Cancer.

Drives fiercely up, then with a bending Rein
Sinks down, and runs in lower Rounds again.)
As close in's Shell he lies, affords his Aid
To greedy Merchants, and inclines to Trade:
His Births shall sail, through Seas and Dangers tossed
To reap the Riches of a Foreign Coast.
What thrifty Nature has but thinly sown
In Many Countries, they shall bring to One;
Intent on gain never heed the Poors complaint
But thrive on Scarcity, and live on Want:
For Wealth undaunted gather every Wind,
Out-sail good Fame, and leave Repute behind,
And when their greedy Hands have seized the Store
Of this, search other Worlds, and seek for more.
Or else at home prove griping Usurers,
Complaining at the slowness of the Years,
Wish swifter Suns, and set too vast a rate
On Time it self, to raise a quick Estate:
Their Bodies shall be Strong, inured to Pain,
Their Wits Contriving, and intent on gain:
What Inclinations Leo's Rays dispense
Is quickly known, XIV. Of Leo.
it is plain to Common Sense,
He gives his Own; for he the Woods infests
The mighty Terror of the meaner Beasts:
He lives on Rapine, ranges all the Day,
And sullenly at Night groans over his Prey.
Hence he inclines Men's Minds to Hunt, and fills
Our Nobles spacious Halls with grinning spoils;
There Skins and Horns do spread a dismal grace,
And stand as certain Heralds of their Race;
This Beast was mine, and that my Father's Game,
They cry, these are the Annals of their Fame:
That generous Youth which France and Spain did fear
Now prove the Humble Terror of a Deer.
Nay some in 20 Towns pursue this wild delight,
There barbarous grow, and breed up Beasts to fight;
Then bring them out for sight in Theaters,
And feast their Luxury with Brutish Wars;
Cruel in Sport: Their Posts are graced with Spoil,
And they get shameful Honor without Toil:
He makes Men warm, their Passions quickly raised,
Like Boys soon angry, and as soon appeased:
But Plain and Honest all their Thoughts sincere;
Pure as the Sun, and like the Water clear.
But modest Virgo's Rays give polisht parts, XV. Of Virgo.

And fill Men's Breasts with Honesty and Arts;
No tricks for Gain, nor love of Wealth dispense,
But piercing Thoughts, and winning Eloquence;
With words persuasive, and with Rhetoric strong
They rule, and are even Monarchs by their Tongue.
Through Nature's Secrets too, they boldly press,
Though deeply hid, and meet a just success;
In Shorthand skilled, where little Marks comprise,
Whole words, a Sentence in a Letter lies;
And whilst Obedient hands their Aid afford,
Prevent the Tongue, and Fix the falling Word.
But bashful Modesty, casts down their Eyes,
The best of Vices, yet it is still a Vice,
Because it stifles, checks, or nips like Frost
A blooming Virtue, and the Fruit is lost.
Besides, though strange such Influence should come
From Virgo's Rays, she gives a fruitful Womb.
Libra, XVI. Of Libra.
whose Scales, when Autumn turns the Signs,
And ruddy Bacchus treads the juicy Vines;
In equal Balance, poize the Night and Day,
Teach how to measure, and instruct to weigh:
And Rival 21 Palamed, (who Numbers found,
And into Letters framed unpolisht sound;
To Him the Art of Words, and Speech we owe,
Till then Men only Spoak, but knew not how.)
Besides, He Will know the Niceties of Law;
What guard the Good, and what the Guilty awe,
What Vengeance wait on Crimes, with Skill declare,
His private Chamber, still shall be the Bar.
What He determines, that for Right shall stand,
As Justice weighed her Balance in his Hand.
This Ruled at 22 Servius's Birth, who first did give
Our Laws a Being, rather than Revive;
The Tables seemed Old, Reverend Senseless Lines,
Mere waxen Things, and fit to serve Designs,
As Fools mistook, or Crafty Knaves would draw;
Till He infused a Soul, and made them Law.
Bright Scorpio Armed, XVII. Of Scorpio.
with poisonous Tail prepares,
Men's Martial Minds, for Violence and Wars;
His Venom heats, and boyls their Bloods to Rage,
And Rapine spreads over the unlucky Age.
Yet, when the Sun drives there, Men tear the Earth,
And cast their Seed to an increasing Birth,
As if he led mistaken Men to toil,
And sweat for Matter for a future spoil.
Yet it is not Prey they seek, as much as Blood,
For even in Peace they fiercely trace the Wood,
Over Forests range, and every Plain infest,
Now Fight with Man, and now Engage with Beast;
To please the Crowd, they unprovoked engage,
And sell their Lives, to the dishonest Stage;
And when calm Peace does Public Rest bestow,
Yet still to Fight, each seeks himself a Foe.
They spend their leisure Hours in fierce Alarms,
And all their Recreation is in Arms.
The double Centaur different Tempers breeds, XVIII. Of Sagittarius.

They break the Horse, and tame the fiery Steeds;
They love the sounding Whip, the Race, the Rein,
And whirl the Chariot over the dusty Plain:
Nor is their Humor to the Fields confined,
They range the Woods, and tame the Savage Kind;
Young Bears they break, and Tigers heats assuage,
And hear Young Lions roaring without Rage.
Discourse the 23 Elephant, and Teach the Mass
A mimick Action, and a decent Grace;
To Act in Plays, or raise the unweildly load,
To Dance, and be the Darling of the Crowd.
For in the Frame, in double forms expressed,
The Man is uppermost, and rules the Beast;
His Bow full drawn implies, his Rays impart,
Strength to the Limbs, and Vigor to the Heart.
Quick active Motions, full of warmth and heat,
Still pressing on, unknowing to retreat.
But Sacred Vesta guards thy fatal Fire, XIX. Of Capricorn.

And thence it is guessed, what Minds thy Rays inspire,
Contracted Goat; by thee that Art's infused,
Which Fire assists, and where a Flame is used;
By thee the Miners burn the Womb of Earth;
And see the place of Metals fatal Birth:
By thee they melt; by thee they work the Mould,
Refine, and Stamp it into mighty Gold:
By thee, the Silver, Iron, Gold, and Brass,
The Forge dissolves, and forms the easy Mass:
By thee, the Ovens heat, and Baths acquire,
And Happy 24 Chemists blow enriching Fire:
Thy Cold (for thou over Winter Signs do reign,
Pull'st back the Sun, and send'st us Day again)
Makes Brokers Rich, for whilst you spread your Ice,
Their Wares go off, and they enhance the Price:
From thee our Youth unconstant Tempers prove,
And eagerly pursue unlawful Love,
'Cause Goat above; but these the Fish behind
Corrects in Age, and fixes the soft Mind.
Aquarius pouring out his Urn, XX. Of Aquarius.
imparts
An useful Knowledge in resembling Arts,
To find out Springs, and with new Streams supply
The Barren Countries, and refresh the dry;
To raise in Pipes, or to extend in Beams,
And in high Rooms imprison Foreign Streams;
Affront the Sea, for State, not use, restrain
The Waves with Moles, and curb the raging Main;
Or Engines raise, whence Waters mount above,
And mix the lower, with the higher Jove.
A thousand other Arts, which Waters sway,
As Channels lead, or else as Pipes convey,
Depend upon the influence of his Ray.
And to his Births the World obliged shall owe
Spheres, Cycles, Orbs, and turn new Skies below.
Soft, easy Tempers, loving Coin for use,
Not sorbid, but inclined to be profuse;
Not pincht, nor yet too swelling in Estate;
Thus flows the Vrn, and fixes this for Fate.
Last double Pisces, XXI. Of Pisces.
from their shining scale,
Spread watery influence, and incline to Sail;
To trust their Lives to Seas, to plow the Deep,
To make fit Rigging, or to build a Ship.
In short, what e're can for a Fleet be framed,
A thousand Arts, too numerous to be named.
Beside to steer, observe the Stars, and guide
As they direct, and never lose the Tide;
To know the Coasts, the Winds, the Ports, and Shores;
To turn the Helm, or ply the bending Oars;
To sweep smooth Seas with Nets, to drag the Sand,
And draw the leaping Captives to the Land,
Lay cheating Wires, or with unfaithful bait,
The Hook conceal, and get by the deceit:
To fight at Sea, to stain the Waves with blood,
Whilst War lies floating on the unstable flood:
Fruitful their Births, of Pleasure fond, engage
In Love, are quick, but changing with their Age.
Thus rule the Twelve, XXII. The Tenths and the Lords of the third part of each
sign.
these Powers they singly own,
And these would give if they could work alone.
But none rules All its own degrees, they join
Their friendly forces with some other Sign,
As 'twere compound, and equal parts receive
From Other Signs, as they to Others give:
Thus each has Thirty parts, and each resigns
Two Thirds of those degrees to other Signs:
We call these portions (Art new words will frame,)
The Tenths, 25 the Number does impose the Name:
So hid is Truth, so many Vails are spread
Coy Nature's Face, and hide her Gloomy Head,
So many are the little Niceties,
So intricate, and puzling are the Skies,
Not easy to be read by common Eyes.
For one appearance in another lies,
Conceals its Powers, and Acts in disguise;
And that which Lurks, and subtly interferes
Has different Powers from that which then appears.
Not Day, but piercing Thought must clear this Sky,
The Labor of thy Mind, not of thy Eye;
Press bravely on, and pass the Gloomy Cloud,
Enter, and view the inside of the God;
The Path is dark, and lest thy Mind should stray
I Will boldly lead, and show the nearest way;
I Will Sing what League the different Parts combines,
And show how others Rule in other Signs.
For instance, Of Aries.
Aries shakes his shining Fleece,
And governs the First Ten of his Degrees:
But next the Bull, and next the Twins do claim
The second, and third Portions of the Ram:
Thus three times Ten Degrees the Ram divide,
And He, as many others as preside
In his Degrees, so many Fates affords
His proper Powers being tempered by his Lords.
Thus lies the Ram, Of Taurus.
next view the threatening Bull,
His case is different, he has none to Rule:
For in his First Ten Parts the Crab's obeyed,
In The Second Leo, and in the Third the Maid.
Yet he seems stubborn, and maintains his Throne,
And all Their Powers he mixeth with his Own.
The feeble Twins just Libra's Scales possess, Of Gemini.

Then Scorpio, and the rest of their Degrees
Bold Sagittarius subjects to his flame,
With Bow full drawn, as to defend his claim.
An equal share in Empire all maintain,
But keep not the same order in their Reign.
For Cancer's Sign, Of Cancer*
as in the Goat he sways,
Resigns his first third Portion to His Rays:
For when he bears the Sun opposed in site,
His Day is equal to the Others Night:
This is the Reason why these Two combine,
And each has the same Portion in each Sign.
His second part the Vrn with watery Beams
O're-flows, and Pisces rule in the Extremes.
The Lion minds his Partner in the Trine, Of Leo.

And makes the Ram first Ruler in his Sign;
And then the Bull, with whom he makes a Square,
In The Second Reigns; His Sextile Twins declare
Their Third pretense, and Rule the other share.
The Crab is chiefly Honored by the Maid, In Cancer.

The first place his, and there his Sway's obeyed;
The next is Leo's, and the last her own,
She Rules unenvied in her petty Throne.
The Ram's Example Libra takes, In Libra.
and bears
A likeness in this Rule, as in the Years;
For as He in the Spring, Her Scales do weigh
In Autumn equal Night with equal Day:
The first She Rules her self, next Scorpio's placed,
And Sagittarius Lords it over the last:
In Scorpio's first Degrees the Goat presides, In Scorpio.

Next Young Aquarius pours his flowing Tides;
Next Pisces Rules, for they in Waves delight,
The Flood pursue, and claim an easy Right.
The grateful Goat does Cancer's Gift repay, In Capricorn.

His First Third part resigning to his Ray;
In The next the Lion shakes his flaming Manc,
The last feels modest Virgo's gentle Rein.
The Young Aquarius Libra's Scales command, In Aquarius.

Restrain his Youth, and check his turning Hand;
The next Ten parts bright Scorpio's Rays enjoy,
Then Sagittarius Rules the giddy Boy:
Pisces comes last, In Pisces.
and sheds a watery flame,
Its First Degrees resigning to the Ram:
The Bull's the next, his own the last are found,
Content with the last Portion of the Round.
This thing considered well thy Mind prepares
To know the secret guidance of the Stars; The usefulness of this Doctrine of
the Lords.

They interchange their Powers, they mix their Laws,
And all agree to make one Common Cause;
For these Divisions do unite the Sky,
The more they part the closer is the Tie.
But now, lest Error should thy Mind surprise,
Believe not the Appearance of the Skies;
They make a show, they spread a Glaring Light
To lead thee on, but never guide thee right;
Let Active Thought assisting Sense pursue
Goy Truth's retreat, and take an open view:
What ever Things are born, their Minds receive
The fatal Temper which that sign can give
That governs in the Tenths, the Foreign Ray,
Tempers the Mass, and forms the easy Clay.
A Thousand Reasons for this Truth appear
From different Births belonging to One Star;
Of all those Creatures, that at once do see
The Light, scarce Two can perfectly agree;
But different Tempers all the shapes adorn,
As various as the Bodies that are born:
For though one Chiefly Rules, yet others join
And change the proper influence of that Sign:
These Interchanges all our Thoughts distract,
We think on other Signs, whilst others Act.
Thus neither singly will the Ram bestow
A Love to Clothing, nor the Bull to Plough;
To Hunt the Lion, nor the Crab to Trade;
Learning the Twins, nor Eloquence the Maid;
The Scales to weigh, to measure, and to gage,
Nor Poisonous Scorpio arm unhappy Rage;
The Fish to Sail, nor the Youth's Urn inspire
To work in Water, nor the Goat in Fire.
But many join, and these mixed Signs bestow
Mixed Inclinations on the Births below:
A subtle and surprising Task is shown, XXIII. Encouragements to this Study.

Much have I past, yet still you lead me on;
These things seem dark, whilst I the rest explore,
Enjoy my Precepts, and complain no more.
It Is God you search for, by my Aid you try
To climb, and view the inside of the Sky;
Confined by Fate, you search its boundless sway,
And seek to know the Laws you must Obey:
The narrow Bounds of your own Breast you pass,
Enjoy the World, and rove in the vast space:
Painful, but always noble things are hard,
Great is the Task, but equal the Reward:
Nor let the various Maze thy Thoughts repress,
Enter, and you are certain to possess.
Is Gold thy Aim? What mighty Pains attend?
Mountains are levelled, and the Mines descend
Through Earth's deep Center; though she hides her Store
We tear her up, and reach the hidden Oar:
For shining Gems we cut the burning Zone,
Such Dangers are the value of a Stone:
The fearful Farmer makes his Yearly Vow,
And Pain still presses the deceiving Plow:
In War no Danger's shunned, we fight for Spoil,
Even lazy Luxury leads us on to Toil;
For Food^ and Clothes from East to West we run,
And Spendchrists often sweat to be undone.
Are perishing Goods worth so much Pains and Cost,
Hard to be got, and in enjoyment lost?
Then what must Heaven Deserve? 26 That Gold, that buys
The rest, how disproportionate a Price!
It asks a higher value, and to gain
The God, lay out thy self, The Price is Man:
Thus Fate's disposed, XXIV. The Good and Bad Degrees of each Sign.
but yet the Work's not done;
For though the Powers of all the Signs are known,
And how they join, how each rules every part,
The Skill is small, and incomplete the Art:
Observe the numerous parts of the Degrees
What Heat does scorch or what the Cold does freeze,
(Unfruitful both) where too much Moisture flows,
Or Drought does drain, and various Fates dispose:
For different Qualities in Signs control,
There Is naught all-over-equal in the whole.
For view the Earth, the gliding Streams, or Flood,
Faults are on all sides, Bad is mixed with Good.
Thus Barren Seasons midst the Best appear,
And a small Turn blasts all the Blooming Year.
A Port turns Shelf, and the inglorious Sand
Forfeits that Praise which once its Safety gained.
Now Streams through Plains in smooth Meanders play,
Then Roar over Rocks, and force a rugged way.
Such Inequality above appears,
And thus the Sky is varied in the Stars;
As Sign from Sign, so from it self the same
Does disagree, and spread unequal Flame;
And Signs, whose Sovereign influence Births do find
In One Degree, are in the next unkind:
Those things these parts o're-rule, no Joys shall know
Or little Pleasure over-mixt with Woe.
These parts, The difficulty of putting this Doctrine into Verse.
if such can be to Verse confined,
My Muse must Sing, and ease my troubled Mind;
For though it is various, yet the Subject's bound
To words but few, and all of equal sound;
So that it must be mean, it must refuse
The turn of Verse, though fashioned by a Muse.
And that, though labored, Line must bald appear
That brings ungrateful Music to the Ear.
But since I must the Laws of Fate rehearse
The settled Matter must direct my verse;
No Room for Fiction, I must things declare,
Not as they may be feigned, but as they are.
It is enough the God is barely shown,
Rich in himself he shines, and great alone:
Nor should the World be so to Words betrayed
As to be thought ennobled by their Aid:
This spurs me on, and I forget my Ease,
The World must be obliged, and I must please;
I must, if plainly I these parts comprise;
Then learn the noxious portions of the Skies.
The Fourth, The hurtful Degrees in Aries.
and the Sixth Portions of the Ram
Are hurtful parts, and spread unlucky flame;
Nor does the Seventeenth or the next display
A kinder face, or shed a milder Ray:
The Twenty First, Fifth, Seventh spread noxious Beams
The Twelfth, and Fourteenth leaning to Extremes.
The Bull's Ninth portion, In Taurus.
did the Sign depend
On me, should never shine upon a Friend:
Add Three to Ten, or double Ten and Three,
Take Two from Thirty, all these parts agree;
Twice Twelve, and twice Eleven count, and join
The Seventeenth part as noxious in this Sign,
Nor is the Thirtieth better than the Rest.
The Twins First part does hurtful Rays dispense, In Gemini.

Nor does their Childhood prove their Innocence;
They Are froward, pettish, and unused to smile,
Their Third, and Seventh Degrees agree in Ill:
The Fifteenth equals these, and Twenty sees
Close on each side immoderate Degrees:
To Twenty reckon Seven, or Five, or Nine,
And all are hurtful portions of this Sign.
Should Cancer boast a kind and gentle Reign, In Cancer.

The First, and Third, and Sixth would plead in vain;
The Eleventh, Fifteenth, and the Eighth Degrees,
The Twentieth too could hope no more success:
The Twenty Fifth, Seventh, Ninth, severely sway,
The Seventeenth too with a malignant Ray
Rules over the Birth, and stamps the easy Clay.
The flaming Lion in the First we fear, In Leo.

Nor does the Fourth a milder Image bear;
The Twenty Second, the Fifteenth, Tenth presage
With the Eight and Twentieth an unhappy Age.
With hurtful Powers the Twenty Fifth is Cursed,
The Thirtieth too as noxious as the First.
The First, In Virgo.
and the Eleventh of the Maid,
The Sixth, the Fourteenth, Eighteenth parts are bad:
The Twenty First, and Fourth this Sign disgrace,
Nor can the Thirtieth show a better Face.
Next view the Scales, In Libra.
the Seventh, and Fifth degree
Is bad, add Eight to Ten, or Ten to Three:
To Ten twice told add Seven, or Four, or Nine,
All like the Thirtieth hurtful in this Sign.
In The First, In Scorpio.
Third, Sixth, and Tenth black Scorpio 's Claws
And in the Fifteenth make Malignant Laws;
The Twenty Second, Eighth, Fifth, and Ninth betray
His poisonous Rage in an unhappy Ray:
Would Fate allow thee choice, In Sagittarius.
forbear to choose
The Centaur's Fourth Degree, the Eighth refuse;
The Twelfth, the Sixteenth, Twentieth parts portend
A wretched Life, and an untimely End:
The Twenty Fourth, Sixth, Eighth Degrees molest,
Nor is the Thirtieth better than the Rest.
The Thirteenth of the Goats contracted Star, In Capricorn.

Nor Seventh, nor Ninth shall be my earnest Prayer;
Nor that which Twenty does of One deprive,
Or Three, or adding gives it Six or Five.
To Ten add One, In Aquarius.
or Five, or Nine, or Three
And you are sure to find a bad Degree:
Add One, Five, Nine to Twenty, hurtful Streams
Flow from the Vrn, and spread unlucky Beams.
The Fishes close the Signs, In Pisces.
their parts confessed
As noxious, and as guilty as the Rest;
For Three, Five, Seven, or Ten when joined with Seven,
Or One, mark hurtful Portions of the Heaven.
Five multiplied by Five is hardly cleared,
And Seven to Twenty added 's to be feared:
All these are noxious Portions of the Sky,
Too Hot, or Cold, or else too Moist, or Dry.
This known, XXV. How the Signs Act when they rise.
the Work is not completely done,
The Labors still increase as you go on;
The Time makes difference, as they Rise, new force
They gain, and after lose it in their Course.
Thus when the Ram ascends, Aries.
and proudly turns
His bending backward Neck before his Horns
To Mortal Eyes, the wretched Births are Cursed
With Ravenous Tempers, and inflamed with Lust:
All Modesty shall be to Gold betrayed,
Nor Parents Care secure the easy Maid:
These Tempers are his own; as Fancy leads
He roves, and wantons over the flowery Meads:
Forward to push, and as the Grass renews
His wasted Strength, he Courts the willing Ews.
To Travel he inclines through Lands unknown,
He Ploughs new Seas, and makes the World his own:
This he prefigur'd when his Back conveyed
Young Phryxus safe, and lost the falling Maid.
The Bulls bright part that first appears, Taurus.
creates
Vile Pathicks scandals to the other Fates.
The Cause, if it be fit to search for one
When Nature works, may easily be shown;
His Back-part first appears, in that he bears
The narrow Cloudy Train of Female Stars:
And thus the Posture, and the Sex combine
To show the Influence of the rising Sign:
He bends to Plow, and over the Fruitful Plains
The Laboring Ox grows Fat upon his Pains.
But when their Feet the rising Twins do show, Gemini.

And half appear above, half lie below,
The Births are happy, all their Parts refind,
And Arts enrich the Treasures of their Mind;
Ready their Wit, persuasive is their Tongue,
In Music skilled, and excellent in Song:
These are the Powers their rising Rays dispense,
They Wit bestow, and fix that Wit with Sense.
When rouling Cancer rises vaild in Clouds, Cancer.

In The Skies as deeply hid as in the Floods,
The Moon resembling when deprived of Light;
The Births are Blind, and wish in vain for sight:
By Fates a Verse condemned to double Death,
Dead whilst Alive, and Buried whilst they breath:
But when the Lion shows his ravenous Jaws
Prepared for Rapine, Leo.
and unsheaths his Paws,
A Spendthrift's born, who minds himself alone,
He wrongs his Father, and he cheats his Son;
His Race in vain with expectation wait,
For in himself he buries his Estate;
So vast his Gluttony, his Lust so wild
That he devours himself, yet is not filled:
And whilst his Appetite proceeds to crave
He eats his Funeral, and he spends his Grave.
When Virgo rises, Virgo.
(who whilst Right prevailed
Ruled here below, retreating when it failed)
To awful Honors all the Births must rise
Profoundly skilled in Sacred Mysteries:
Good, Pious, Just, Devout, unused to Rage
And great Examples to the looser Age:
But when Autumnal Scales do first appear
Happy the Birth, Libra.
he shall be known from far,
The Glory of the Bench, and of the Bar;
He justest Laws shall make, and Life and Death
Depend upon the Issues of his Breath;
Him Towns shall fear, the Earth observe his Nod,
And after Earth the Heaven enjoy a God.
Thus Act these Signs, Scorpio.
but Scorpio's Tail displays
A double Influence from his Forked Rays;
For when that first appears, tho Peaceful Child
Shall Cities Raise, and be inclined to build;
The World shall see him with his 28 Plow surround
The place designed, and mark the fatal Bound;
Or he shall wast what others Pains did raise,
Where Populous Cities stood, there Beasts shall graze,
Or Harvests grow; He leads to these Extremes,
And Power agreeing waits upon his Beams.
Bold Sagittarius, Sagittarius.
when he first appears,
Heats the gay Birth, and makes him famed for Wars;
In Triumphs great, the Wonder of the Crowd,
By Captives carried, he almost a God
Shall climb the Capitol, bright Fame pursue,
Old Cities raze, or grace the Earth with New:
But ill succeess, (his Forehead's wreathed with Frowns)
Shall wast his Fame, and blast his gathered Crowns.
Thus Conquering Hannibal, by this Sign betrayed
Before his slight perceived his Wreaths to f^de,
He paid for Trebia's and for Cannae's fame,
And recompensed our Losses by his shame.
But when the narrow Goat erects his Tail
He drives to Sea, Capricornus.
and much inclines to Sail,
Ignoble Trade then Ploughs the dangerous Main,
And precious Life is meanly staked for Gain.
The Good, the Pious, and the Just are born
When first Aquarius pours out his Vrn. Aquarius.

But could I rule, Pisces.
could I the Fates design,
The rising Fishes never should govern mine;
They give a Hateful, Prattling, Railing Tongue,
Still full of Venom, always in the wrong;
That blows up Jealousies, and heightens Fears,
By mutterring Poisonous Whispers in Men's Ears.
Faithless the Births, and full of wild desire;
Their Faith is Treachery, and their Love is Fire.
For when the Skies grew weak, when Giants strove,
And snaky Typhon shook the Throne of Jove;
Fair Venus fled, and in a Fish's shape
(This Syria knows) secured her mean escape;
Then did she through the Scaly Kind inspire
New Heats, and with the Ocean mixed her Fire.
No single Births, for when this Sign begins,
Twins shall be Born, or those that shall have Twins.
Now learn what Signs over different Lands control,
But first take this short figure of the whole:
East, The winds called Cardinal.
West, and North, and South, on either side,
These Quarters lie opposed, the World divide:
As many Winds from these four Quarters fly,
And fight and rattle, through the empty Sky:
Rough Boreas from the North, bears Frost and Snows,
And from the East, the gentle Eurus blows.
Wet Auster from the torrid South is thrown,
And pleasing Zephyrus cools the setting Sun.
'Twixt these two other Winds their Seats do claim, The Collateral winds.

Alike in Nature, different but in Name.
Around the Earth the liquid Ocean plays,
The Ball enclosing with a soft Embrace;
But yet on many parts, Earth's bending sides,
Or open Bays receive the flowing Tides.
The Sea admitted from the Western Shores, The Mediterranean Sea and and the
several parts of it.

Does on the Right Hand wash the swarthy Moors;
And Lybia's Sands, where once great Carthage stood,
Then over the Syrtes whirls the rapid Flood;
And thence to Egypt it directly flows,
Where what dry Heaven denies, the Nile bestows.
The Left Hand Sea by Spain and France extends,
And follows Conquering Italy as it bends;
Till into Streights the barking Sylla draws,
And whirls it round Charybdis greedy Jaws;
Loosed from these Streights, the Floods spread wide again,
And freely flow in the Ionian Main:
Then on the left they turn, and winding flow,
Fair Italy surround, and drink the Po.
Then make rough Adria's Gulf; the other side
Illyrium washes with a gentle Tide,
Sees Epire's Cliffs, and Corinth's lofty Towers,
Then winds round plain Morea's open Shores.
Thence Northward into vast recesses tossed
The Sea confines the Learned Achaia's Coast:
Thence North and Eastward the unwilling Flood
Consigned by Streights, and stained with Helle's Blood
To famed Byzantium cuts its winding way,
And joins Propontis to the Euxine Sea;
Behind whose back the Lake Meotis lies
Receives full Tanais, and the Sea supplies.
Hence when the Circling Waves return again
The weary Sailer to the Open Main,
He cuts the Icarian, and the Aegaean Tide
By Asia's Coasts, and wonders at their Pride:
And whilst the left hand Course he still pursues
As many Trophies, as he places views;
A thousand Nations, 29 Taurus mount, that threats
The Floods, the Bay that from the Sea retreats
Parcht Syria's Plains, and the Cilician Seats,
Till he at last to Egypt turns his Oars
And sees the Waves dye on the swarthy Shores.
Thus ruling Nature draws her bounding Lines,
Checks midland Seas, and all their Rage confines.
Yet midst this Sea a thousand Islands rise; The Islands of the Mediter-anean.

Shaped like a Foot the low Sardinia lies
Near Lybia's shores; Trina^rid filled with Fires,
But just cut off from Italy, retires,
And adverse Greece Euboean Cliffs admires.
Jove's Birthplace Crete appears, a goodly Isle,
And Cyprus beaten by the adverse Nile.
A thousand lesser Isles Command these Seas,
Rhodes, Delos, and the equal Cyclades,
Famed Aulis, Tenedos, and by Sardinia's side
Lies Corsica, and breaks the coming Tide;
Near the Streight's Mouth the Baleares Reign,
And strong Ebusus Triumphs over the Main.
Ten thousand smaller Rocks the Waves disperse,
Too little to be named, too mean for Verse.
Nor does the Ocean but one single way
Attempt the Earth, The Caspian Sea.
and force an open Bay,
It tries on every side, but Mountains bound
Insulting Billows, and preserve the Ground;
For 'twixt the Summer East and Northern Pole
Through narrow Channels secret Waters roll,
Till spread at last upon the open Plain
They make the Caspian like the Euxine Main.
Southward encroaching Waters doubly press, The Persian Gulf.

Overflow the Earth, and in a vast recess
One part more East runs on, and breaks a way
Through Persia's Banks, and makes the Persian Bay:
More West the other soft Arabia beats
Where Incense grows, The Arabian Gulf.
and pleasing Odor sweats,
Which sends us Gums soft Luxury to please,
And reconcile the angry Deities:
Strange that the same, when differently applied,
Should calm the Rage of Heaven, and serve our Pride.
This Bay is called the Arabian Gulf, the Name
The Country gives it, and it is great in Fame.
Thus lie the Seas; Africa.
Earth midst this mighty Flood
Contains, first Africa, where proud Carthage good;
Once great in Arms, and whose extended sway
Over Libya stretched, and made the Spains obey:
When Hannibal wrapped Alban Towns in flame,
And eternized the bloody Trebia's Name;
When led by Fate he Marched to overcome,
And poured his swarthy Libya upon Rome:
When gasping Consuls groaned on every Plain,
And Canna's Fields were burd'ned with the slain.
Here Nature angry with Mankind prepares
Strange Monsters, Instruments 30 of future Wars;
Here Snakes, those Cells of Poison, take their Birth,
Those living Crimes and grievance of the Earth;
Fruitful in its own Plagues, the Desert shore
Hears Elephants, and frightful Lions roar;
Serious it seems in all these Monstrous shapes,
But sports in the lewd Limbs of Mimick Apes.
The Country's large, the Barren Plains extend
A mighty space, and then in Egypt end.
Thence Asia spreads, Asia.
a fruitful Soil, the Streams
Roll Golden Sand, the Ocean shines with Gems;
The Trees drop Balsom, and on all the Boughs
Health sits, and makes it Sovereign as it flows.
Thence India lies, a Land more large than thought,
The Parthians often, though not securely fought;
They flying still delude Rome's firmer Powers,
And yet Command a different World from Ours.
These Taurus bounds, whose threatening Mountains rise
To awful Hights, and wound the lower Skies;
A thousand Nations lie by Tanais flood
Which cuts the Scythia's, stained with humane blood;
By Lake Meotis, and the Euxine Tide
Which Nature sets as bounds to Asia's Pride.
Europe remains, Europe.
which first the Beauteous load
Received, and where the Bull confessed the God;
Hence came its Name, in that the grateful Jove
Has Eternized the Glory of his Love:
Here Greece is seen, with Ruined Ancient Troy,
And showed what Fates attend unlawful joy:
A Country Rich in Men of wondrous parts,
The place of Learning, and the Seat of Arts:
Here Athens stands, which makes the best pretense
To Sovereignty in Wit and Eloquence:
For Courage Sparta, and for Deities
Famed Thebes, whose Heroes People half the Skies:
Epirus, Thessaly, whose lasting Praise
One single Pyrrhus, and Achilles raise.
To these Illyrium joins, and Warlike Thrace,
The Seat of Mars, and breeds a stubborn Race.
Thence 31 Germany, a mighty Country runs,
And wonders at the vastness of her Yellow Sons.
Thence South and Westward in a fertile Plain
Lies France, for Tribute famed, for Battles Spain:
But Italy Crowns all, whom Rome has given
Command of Earth, and joins 32 her self to Heaven:
These Bounds the Earth, What Signs govern each Country.
and these the Seas confine,
And God allots to every part a Sign;
No Land is free, no stately Town denied
The kind Protection of a Starry Guide:
For as in Man, the work of Hands Divine,
Each Member lies allotted to a Sign;
And as the Body is the common care
Of all the Signs, each Limb enjoys a share:
(The Ram defends the Head, the Neck the Bull,
The Arms bright Twins are subject to your Rule;
In The Shoulders Leo, and the Crab's obeyed
In The Breast, and in the Guts the modest Maid;
In The Buttocks, Libra, Scorpio warms desires
In The secret parts, and spreads unruly fires:
The Thighs, the Centaur, and the Goat Commands
The Knees, and binds them up with double bands.
The parted Legs, in cold Aquarius meet,
And Pisces gives protection to the Feet.)
So in the greater World, the Members share
Celestial Rulers, and enjoy their Care:
Hence different Men, Why different Countries bear Men of different Shapes and
Colors.
in different Climes we view,
They vary in their shape, or in their Hue;
The Matter's common, and in all the same,
But private Stamps, distinctly mark the Frame.
Vast Yellow Offsprings are the German's Pride,
Whilst Neighboring France is not so deeply died:
But hotter Climates narrower Frames obtain,
And low-built Bodies are the growth of Spain:
Hesperia mixeth sweet with many Grace,
And tempered Mars appears in every Face:
Whilst active Greece produces finer parts,
Their looks betray their Exercise and Arts:
Short Curled up Hair the Sons of Syria grace,
Whilst Ethiopia's Blackness stains the Face,
With Horrid Shapes she does her Sons expose,
Distends their swelling Lips, and flats their Nose:
Less India blackens, less it Crusts the Mass,
And mixeth Colors in the Tawny Face:
But Egypt's slimy Plains affect the sight
With brighter Colors, and approach to White.
Parcht Lybia burns her Sons, the vilest Shapes
She shows, and scarce divides her Men from Apes:
Whilst Mauritania does disgust the Eye,
(Her Name betrays it) with the blackest Dye.
Though each Speech Organs framed alike employs,
How many Languages confound the Voice?
How different Virtues Reign, how different Crimes?
Men's Manners are as various as the Climes.
Like Trees transplanted by the Farmer's Toil;
Vice turns to Virtue, in another Soil.
Though Seed the same, yet different Fruits are born,
Thus Yellow Ceres varies in her Corn.
Nor does the Vine on every Hill produce
Like Grapes, nor Bacchus press an equal Juice.
Rich Cinnamon, not every Country bears,
Nor are all Fields bedewed with Myrrha's Tears.
Nor is this great variety expressed
In Man, and Fruits alone, but it divides the Beast:
Here Lions roar, and there in dreadful Wars
The high-built Elephant his Castle rears;
Looks down on Man below, and strikes the Stars
As many parts, so many Worlds appear,
For every part is subject to a Star;
They spread their Influence, and the Countries pay
A due compliance to the Fatal Ray.
Placed midst the pleasing Vernal Signs, What Countries are governed by Aries.
the Ram
Commands the narrow Straight over which he swam;
When from the Mothers Rage, his Fleece conveyed
The Brothers safe, and dropped the falling Maid;
Content he swam, and with his Burden pleased,
He mourned his Loss, and grieved to be so eased:
The near Propontis too his Beams obeys,
And Syria feels the Influence of his Rays:
The loose Garb'd Persians, know his gentle Rule,
Their Garments bear Relation to his Wool:
With Nile that swells at Fiery Cancers Beams,
And Egypt drowned by its ore-flowing Streams.
Cold Scythia's Rocks; Arabia's wealthy Groves,
And powerful Asia, By Taurus.
Taurus Empire proves,
Rich in their Corn, and wanton in their Loves.
The boisterous Euxine, By Gemini.
bent like Scythian bows.
Beneath the Twins subjection gladly flows,
And they of Ganges infant Streams dispose.
The swarthy Indians Fiery Cancer sways, By Cancer.

His Rule the Blackness of their Hue betrays,
And Ethiopia's heated with his Ray.
The Phrygian Plains the large Bithynian Woods
The 33 Servant of the Mother of the Gods,
The Lion own, By Leo.
the Cappadocian Shore
With fierce Armenia, hear the Lion Roar.
And Macedon, that all the World subdued,
Submits to the Great Monarch of the Wood.
In happy Rhodes the gentle Maids adored, By Virgo.

Rhodes, the retirement of our future 34 Lord:
Blessed Island truly Sacred to the Sun,
E're since in thee the Glorious Coesar Shone,
The World's great Light, whom with expecting Eyes;
Mankind desires, and longs to see him rise.
The Dorick Plains, the rich Ionian Towns,
Arcadia Rival to the waining Moons:
With Warlike Caria high in Ancient Fame
Owe all Subjection to her modest Flame.
What Sign, By Libra.
could you dispose the Signs, should fall
To Latium's share, but that which poizeth all;
To which by Nature, it must needs belong
To value things, and separate Right from Wrong.
In which the Times are weighed, and Day with Night
Are met, the Darkness equal to the Light:
The Scales rule Italy, where Rome Commands,
And spreads its Empire wide to Foreign Lands:
They hang upon her Nod, their Fates are weighed
By her, and Laws are sent to be obeyed:
And as her powerful Favor turns the Poize,
How low some Nation's sink and others rise:
Thus guide the Scales, and then to fix the Doom,
They gave us 35 Caesar, Founder of our Rome.
The following Sign rules Carthage Conquered Towers, By Scorpio.

Subject they lie, to Scorpio's Scaly Powers;
With Lybia's Sand, and Egypt's fruitful Soil,
The slimy 36 Gift of the o're-flowing Nile.
Large Bounds, but yet too narrow to confine
The vast Ambition of this craving Sign;
He claims the Isles of the Italian Main,
And low Sardinia's subject to his Reign.
To Crete the Centaur makes an hateful claim, By Sagittarius.

And still keeps up the Memory of its shame:
It bore a Centaur once, and that confines
The Isle to the same Figure in the Signs:
To him their Skill and Darts, the Cretans owe,
And imitate the sureness of his Bow.
Trinacria follows, Crete's Example draws
Her Sister Isle, and yields it to his Laws;
And Latium's Shores, which narrow Friths disjoyn,
Here baffle Nature, and in him combine,
Nor would be differenced by another Sign.
The West, By Capricornus.
and Northern Parts, rich France and Spain,
Contracted Goat, are subject to thy Reign,
And Germany, since 37 Varus stained thy Shore,
A Seat for Beasts, and fit for Man no more:
This monstrous Sign has variously engrost,
(He Rules at Sea and Land) thy doubtful Coast,
Now Earth appearing, now in Water lost.
But Young Aquarius with his watery Fires, By Aquarius.

From Egypt to the Clydae Isles retires;
The stout Cilicians, and the Neighboring Plain
With Sailing Tire are subject to his Reign.
When Heaven grew weak, By Pisces.
and a successful fight
The Giants raised, and Gods were saved by flight;
From Snaky Typhon's Arms, a Fishe's shape
Saved Venus, and secured her from a Rape:
Euphrates hid her, and from thence his Streams
Owe all Obedience to the Fish's Beams.
Wide Parthia's Plains confined by mighty Rocks,
The Nations round, long bent unto its Yokes
With Tigris Streams, the Red-Sea's shining Shores
Are Subject to the Heavenly Fish's Powers.
Thus Earth's divided, What Influence these Signs have in the seveveral
Countries subject to their Rule.
these the Signs that sway
Its Portions, and the Parts their Beams obey;
These Signs the Tempers of their Empires show,
The Parts above, directing those below,
Their Powers infuse: And thus as Ruling Signs
Are now Opposed, and now agree in Trines,
Or other Site maintain, which Site directs
Their Fatal Influence, various in Effects;
So Towns with Towns, and roaring Seas with Seas,
And Land with Land, or differs or agrees.
And as these Signs direct, so Men should choose
This Town, this Country, or that Seat refuse;
Here Hate expect, there surest Friendship prove,
As Heaven directs, and Stars decree above.
But now attend, XXVII. What Signs are Eccliptick.
for Signs Eccliptick claim
Thy Care, and learn the Reason of the Name:
For some, as wearied in their tedious Race,
Grow restiff, dull, nor keep their usual pace.
Nor is this strange, for through the mighty Frame
There Is nothing that continues still the same:
As Years wheel round, a change must needs ensue,
Things lose their former State, and take a new.
Now tired with Births, the Fields refuse to bear,
Now unmanur'd, prevent the Tiller's care.
Dilated Vapors tear the solid Earth,
Strong the Convulsions at the Fatal Birth;
Vast Mountains sink: And now his large Command*
Neptune extends, and Seas o're-spread the Land,
Contemning Shores: Thus were the Towns o're-flow'd
When Mankind's single Heir Deu^alion stood
On steep Parnassus, to repair the Stock,
The spacious World possessing in one Rock.
And when bold Phaeton, with unequal force
The Chariot filled, and drove the Flaming Horse;
The Earth took Fire, Heaven saw the Stars recoil,
And frighted Nature feared one common Pile.
So much as Years roll round, the mighty Frame
Is changed, yet still returns to be the same:
And so the Stars, whilst they revolve their Course,
Now lose their Power, and now regain their force.
The Reason's plain, Why called Eccliptick.
for when deprived of Light,
The Moon Ecclipst, lies veiled in sudden Night;
Whilst hindering Earth diverts her Brother's Ray,
These Signs Eccliptick feel the same decay;
They feeble grow, they hang their bending Head,
And mourn, and pine, as if the Moon were dead.
Now Signs Eccliptick (see the Name betray
Unusual Languor, and a weak decay,)
Grow weak by Pavis, and those not Neighboring Signs,
But Opposite; for thus our Art defines,
Because the Moon then only feels decay,
When Opposite unto her Brother's Ray.
Nor is this Languor, nor these Times of Grief
Alike to All, foam quickly find relief;
Some Languish long, and e're their Mourning's done,
The Sun goes round, and all the Year is run.
But when their Grief is over, In what Order the Eccliptick succeed one another.
the next in turn
Begin to Languish, and prepare to Mourn;
The next in turn, that are in Order placed
On either side, the Two that Languish't last:
To speak distinctly, 38 those two Signs that view
And leave the Earth before the former two.
Not that the Earth does noxious Powers dispense,
Or Subject Heaven to its dull Influence;
But since the World turns round, the Orb obeys,
And Signs abate the vigor of their Rays,
Not by Earth's Influence, but by their place.
But what avail my Songs, XXVIII. This Artho' difficult, yet may be obtained.
if all refuse
The profer'd Aid of my obliging Muse?
If puny fear forbids our Hopes to rise,
To enter boldly, and enjoy the Skies?
What Nature hides, (for thus Objections teach)
Is deeply hid, too deep for Man to reach.
Vast the Recess! Though stubborn Fate should Reign,
And we know this, yet all the search were vain,
Since none can find the Links that make the Chain.
Fond Mortals! why should we our selves abuse?
Nor use those Powers which God permits to use?
Basely detract from the Celestial mind,
And close our Eyes, endeavoring to be blind?
We see the Skies, then why should we despair
To know the Fatal Office of each Star?
To open Nature, to unvail her Face,
Go in, and tread the Order of the Maze?
Why should we not employ the Gifts bestowed
By Heaven, in knowing the kind Author of the Good?
Our Work grows short, we may surround the Ball,
Make the whole World our own, and live in all:
Through what remains, we now with Ease may pierce,
Take, and enjoy the Captive Universe:
Our Parent Nature we, her parts, descry,
And Heaven-born Souls affect their Father Sky:
For who can doubt that God resides in Man,
That Souls from Heaven descend, and when the Chain
Of Life is broke, return to Heaven again?
As in the Greater World aspiring Flame,
Earth, Water, Air, make the Material Frame;
But through these Members a Commanding Soul
Infused, directs the Motions of the whole;
So it is in Man, the lesser World, the Case
Is Clay, unactive, and an Earthly Mass;
Bloods Circling Streams the Purple Soul convey,
The Ruling Mind uniting to the Clay:
Then who can wonder that the World is known
So well by Man, since he himself is One?
The same Composure in his Form is showed,
And Man's the little Image of the God.
Now other Creatures view, how mean their Birth,
The Rubbish, and the Burdens of the Earth:
Some hang in Air, some float upon the Waves,
Born for our use, and bred to be our Slaves.
All their Enjoyments are confined to Sense,
The easy Works of wary Providence.
But since they Reason want, their Tongues are mute,
How mean, how low a Creature is a Brute?
No Mysteries disclosed, commend their Parts,
Nor are they Subjects capable of Arts;
How hard the Labor, yet how often vain
To bring them foolishly to Ape a Man?
But ruling Man extends his larger sway
Beyond himself, and makes the World obey;
Wild Beasts are tamed, The Fields are forced to bear,
And Recompense the Labors of the Share.
In vain the Sea disjoyns the distant Shores,
His Sails the Winds command, the Floods his Ores.
Alone erect his Form does nobly rise,
Up to the Stars he lifts his Starry Eyes,
And takes a nearer Prospect of the Skies:
He searches Jove, and whilst his Thoughts do trace
His kindred Stars, in them he finds his Race.
No outside Knowledge fills his vast Desires,
The more he rises, he the more aspires.
We think it Reason that in Augury
We should on Birds, and slaughtered Beasts rely;
And can the Fates be less in Stars expressed,
Than in a Bird, or Entrails of a Beast?
When God his Mind in meaner things declares,
Should he neglect the Glory of the Stars?
Besides, the World is eager to be known,
Our search provoking still; for rouling on
It shows us all its parts, displays its Light,
And constantly intrudes upon our Sight:
His Face unvailed, God does so plainly show,
That if we will but look, we needs must know:
He draws our Eyes, nor does our search forbid;
What Powers he hides not, he would not have hid:
Then who can think it impiously bold
To search what we are encouraged to behold?
Nor think thy force too small, too weak thy Mind
Because to Clay unequally confined;
Its Power is wondrous Great; how small a Mass
Of Gold or Gems, exceeds vast Heaps of Brass?
How little is the Apple of the Eye?
And yet at once, he takes in half the Sky:
Nor dreads the disproportion to the Sense,
The Organ small, the Object is immense:
And from the narrow limits of the Heart,
The Active Soul does vigorous Life impart
To all the Limbs, its Sway the Members own,
Wide is its Empire from its petty Throne.
Man know thy Powers, and not observe thy Size,
Thy noble Power in piercing Reason lies,
And Reason conquers all, and rules the Skies.
Nor must you vainly doubt that Man's allowed
To know Heaven's mind, since Man can make a God:
A Star 39 new raised, the Sky enlarged contains,
And Heaven must still increase whilst Caesar Reigns.
The End of the Fourth Book.
NOTES.
1 The Poet did not think of the Palladium as Scaliger imagines, but only of
the Fire at Troy, which parted to let Aeneas go through with his Father, and
his Household Gods.

2 Manilius makes only short Reflections on History, and therefore is
frequently obscure: He says here, that it was impossible one single Aeneas
should have raised the Glory and Reputation of ruined Troy, and made it then
conquer, when it was overthrown, by building Rome which subdued the whole
World; for Rome rose out of the Ruins of Troy; unless some overruling Power
and Fate had ordained it should be so.

3 Romulus and Remus, the Founders of Rome, were but Shepherds.

4 I choose to read Auxissent Culmina rather than vexissent, or duxissent
Fulmina, and render Culmina a Cottage.

5 If Manilius be supposed to keep the Order of Time in his Historical
Reflections, I must own I have not hit his meaning in this place; for no doubt
he had an Eye upon the Wars between the Sabines and Romulus: but then I cannot
imagine what those Words Captus and a Captis Orbis foret mean: I cannot think
with Scaliger and Huetius that he runs back to Troy, which he had left several
Verses before, and therefore apply this passage to the taking and burning of
Rome, and the besieging the Capitol by the Gauls: And it is certain the Poet in
his following Reflections neglects the Order of Time very much.

6 The Stories of Mutius Scaevola, Horatius Cocles, the Virgin Claelia, and the
Combat between the three Horatij on the Roman, and the three Curiatij on the
Alban side, are well known.

8 Short Reflections on the great Accidents in the Second and Third
Carthaginian Wars, together with the Death of Hannibal.

9 He goes on with the Roman History, the unaccountable Fortunes of the Great
Marius.

10 Pompey the Great, was a very notable Example of the variety of Fortune,
being on a sudden raised to the highest, and as soon thrown down to the lowest
Condition in the World.

11 Cum jam etiam posses alium cognoscere Magnum: I hope I have given this
Verse a better Sense, than the other Interpreters have done.

12 Caesar is said to be sprung from Heaven, because he was descended from
Aeneas the Son of Venus: After his Murder an unusual Star appeared, which the
Flatterers of Augustus said was the Soul of his Father Caesar.

13 The Poet closes his Examples with Reflections on the overthrow of Croesus,
the Famous wealthy King of Lydia, who was taken by Cyrus; on the wretched
Condition to which old Priam was reduced; on the unaccountable overthrow of
Xerxes; on the Advancement of Servius Tullus, who was the Son of a Bondwoman,
and yet came to be King of Rome, and on the Conduct of Metellus, who broke into
the Temple of Vesta when it was on Fire, and brought out the Image of the
Goddess.

14 -- Mortes seque ipsae rursus fugiunt, errantque per Ignes.

15 To reconcile the different Interpreters, I have hinted at both Paris, (or
rather Hercules) and Leander.

16 Furius Camillus was the restorer of Rome, after it had been taken and burnt
by the Gauls: Of the Family of the Decij there were Three, who voluntarily
devoted themselves to Death, for the Good and Prosperity of their Country: Cato
Vticensis, who killed himself that he might not survive the Liberty of Rome.

17 Alluding to the Trial of skill between Pallas and Arachne, described by
Ovid, in the Sixth Book of his Metamorphosis.

18 M. Curious Dentatus and Serranus were both fetched from the Plough, to
Command the Roman Armies, fought bravely, and Triumphed.

19 For this the Poets fancied to be the Bull that carried Europa into Crete.

20 Scaliger thinks Manilius means such as keep Beasts for public Shows, and
to fight in the Theaters; and this Interpretation I rather follow than that of
Huetius, who fancies the Poet means by this pompous Description no more than
innocent, honest Butchers.

21 Palamedes is said to be the first Man amongst the Greeks, who invented
Ciphers, and taught Men to cast Account: I have enlarged his Character, and
taken notice of his invention of Letters.

22 Servius Sulpitius, the Great Lawyer, and Acquaintance of Cicero.

23 Of the Docility of Elephants, we meet with numerous Examples: Seneca
mentions one, that played at Ball: Another, that would Dance on a Rope, etc.
The Travelers in the East are full of strange Stories concerning those
Animals; and Lipsius in his Epistles, will furnish any Man with more Stories
than he will readily believe.

24. If Alchymy was more Ancient than Manilius, as Huetius himself grants, I
see no Reason why the Poet might not speak of the Alchymists: The
Interpretation I have given, I am sure, sounds better than that of Huetius.

25 The Tenths: This is a new word, but answers to Decanica in Manilius:
Decanica signifies Ten Degrees, and the Decanus is Lord of Ten Degrees: The
several Lords are these, In Aries Aries Taurus Gemini In Taurus Cancer Leo Virgo


In Gemini Libra Scorpius Sagittar. In Cancer Capricor. Aquarius Pisces


In Leo Aries Taurus Gemini In Virgo Cancer Leo Virgo


In Libra Libra Scorpius Sagittar. In Scorpius Capricor. Aquarius Pisces


In Sagittar. Aries Taurus Gemini In Capricor. Cancer Leo Virgo


In Aquarius Libra Scorpius Sagittar. In Pisces Aries Taurus Pisces





26 Quantum est quo veniat Omne, I have followed the Interpretation of
Scaliger; but do not reject the Opinion of Huetius: Though of less force than
Scaliger's.

27 The Hurtful Degrees.

In Aries 4. 6. 12. 14. 17. 18. 21. 25. 27. In Taurus 9. 13. 17. 22. 24. 26.
28. 30.


In Gemini 1. 3. 7. 15. 19. 21. 25. 27. 29. In Cancer 1. 3. 6. 8. 11. 15. 17.
20. 25. 27. 29.


In Leo 1. 4. 10. 15. 22. 25. 28. 30. In Virgo 1. 6. 11. 14. 18. 21. 24. 30.


In Libra 5. 7. 13. 18. 24. 27. 29. 30. In Scorpio 1. 3. 6. 10. 15. 22. 25. 28.
29.


In Sagittar. 4. 8. 12. 16. 20. 24. 26. 28. 30. In Capric. 7. 9. 13. 17. 19.
25. 26.


In Aquarius 11. 13. 15. 19. 21. 25. 29. In Pisces 3. 5. 17. 11. 17. 25. 27.



28 Alluding to the Custom of the Romans, who, when they designed to build a
City, took a Plow* and made Furrow a where the Walls were to stand.

29 Vossius, In his Observations on Catullus, P. 204. Reads, -- Taurumque
minantem
Fluctibus. --


30 Pyrrhus made use both of Elephants and Snakes, in his Wars against the
Romans.

31 Germany, which comprehends all the Northern tract of Land beyond Thrace.

32 Rome had Temples Dedicated to her, and was looked upon to be a Goddess.

33 The Poets feigned that Cybele, the Mother of the Gods, rode in a Chariot
drawn by two Lions.

34 Tiberius being under the displeasure of Augustus, was sent to the Island
Rhodes, and lived there some time.

35 Vossius out of his Ancient Manuscript Reads, Qua genitus Caesarque meus qui
hanc condidit urbem.

36 I know Donata Regna may bear another Sense, but this will do as well.

37 Whom* in the time of Agustus, the Germans destroyed, and cut off all the
Legions he Commanded.

38 Thus when Aries and Libra are Eccliptick, the two next Eccliptick are
Pisces and Virgo.

39 Alluding to Julius Caesar, Deify'd by Augustus.

MANILIUS. The Fifth Book.
Having explained the general influence of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, and
given a particular account of their interchanges with one another, and how they
incline when they rise; after a short Preface, in which he magnifies his own
Industry, and unwearied diligence in this Subject: He goes on, 1. To show what
Constellations rise with the several Degrees of the Twelve Signs, and then what
Tempers they bestow, and to what Studies they incline: For instance, 2. The
Northern Rudder of the Ship, rises with the fourth Degree of Aries, and those
that are then Born, shall be inclined to Sail, and prove good Pilots: 3. Orion
rises with the same Degree of Aries, and those that are Born under his
Influence, shall be Men of busy, active Tempers, Solicitors, cringing
Parasites and Flatterers: 4. Heniochus or the Driver, rises with the fifteenth
Degree of Aries, and makes Charioteers, Horse-Racers, and Men skilled in all
sorts of Horseman-ship: 5. With the Twentieth Degree of Aries, the Hoedi or the
Kids rise, and those, being wanton Stars, produce nothing that is Virtuous or
Noble: Their Births are wanton, light, and lustful, and never Courageous, but
in pursuit of some shameful lewd Pleasure; some of their Births, are peculiarly
delighted in feeding and keeping Goats: 7. With the Twenty-seventh Degree of
Aries, rise the Hyades: And their Births are always turbulent and Seditious,
prone to Factions, restless Phanaticks, or else, they give their Minds to
Country Affairs, feed Cattle, or turn Waggoners: 7. With the Thirtieth Degree
of Aries, the Goat rises; and those that are Born under that influence, shall
be fearful, jealous, suspicious, and inconstant, or else inclined to Travel: 8.
He says the Pleiades rise with the sixth Degree of Taurus; and the Men that are
then Born, shall be gay, and humorous, witty, but too effeminate and soft,
minding nothing but Dress, Gate, and Love: 9. The Hare rises with the seventh
Degree of Gemini or the Twins; and her Births are active and nimble, fit for
all sports, all feats of activity, and slight of hand: 10. The Asses rise with
the first Degree of Cancer; and those that are Born under their influence,
shall be employed in all sorts of Hunting and Fishing: 11. With the
twenty-seventh Degree of Cancer, Procyon or the little Dog rises, and that
produces such as weave Nets, make Spears, and all other Instruments of
Huntsmen: 12. The Great Dog rises with Leo, and being himself a Constellation
of excessive heat; those that are Born under his influence, shall be full of
Passion, Hate, Jealousy, and ungovernable suspicion, and given to excess in
Wine; their Heat shall lead them on to to dangers, and engage them to hunt wild
Beasts. 13. With the last Degree of Leo, the Bowl appears, and inclines to
plant and dress Vines; the Births shall be somewhat intemperate, inclined to
Merchandise, and to trade in those Commodities, which cannot be brought to
perfection without moisture: 14. With the fifteenth Degree of Virgo, the Crown
of Ariadne rises, and then the Births shall be Florists; they shall delight in
making and perfuming Garlands, be Gay; Amorous, and affect neatness in their
Habit. 15. The Sheaf rises with the tenth Degree of Virgo, and inclines Men to
look after Corn, to build Barns, to Grind and Bake Grain, and make it useful:
16. With the eighth Degree of Libra, the Arrow rises, and then are Born expert
Darters, and good Bow-Men, such as Philoctetes, Teucer, and Alcon. 17. The Goat
or Hoedus, rises with some part of Libra, and produces Tempers quick and
active, fit for Business, and covetous of Employment: somewhat loose, but
honest to their Country, and Enemies to Knaves. 18. The Harp rising with some
part of Libra, breeds Songsters and Musicians; such as affect to Sing in
Company, and are always humming to themselves. 19. The Altar rising with the
eighth Degree of Scorpio, breeds Priests, Servants in Temples, and such as take
care of and consult Oracles. 20. The Southern Centaur rising with the twelfth
Degree of Scorpio, breeds Horsemen, Charioteers, and Farriers. 21. With the
fifth Degree of Sagittarius, Arcturus appears, and breeds Collectors of
Customs, Treasurers for Kings, or Stewards for private Men's Estates. 22. With
the thirtieth Degree of Sagittarius, the Swan rises; and then are Born all
kinds of Fowlers* such as Teach Birds to speak, to sing, or to decoy, etc. all
their Employments shall be about Birds. 23. With some part of Capricon,
Ophieuchus, or the Snake-holder rises, and produces such as are skilled in
during poisoned Persons, and such as cannot be poisoned themselves. 24. With
the last Degrees of Capricorn, the Southern Fish rising, breeds Anglers,
Diverse, Fishers for Pearls, etc. or at least, Traders for Fish and Pearls. 25.
With some part of Capricorn the Harp, (or rather the Strings of it, for of the
Shell Manilius has already spoken) rises, and produces subtle Accusers,
Justices that shall examine nicely, and determine justly; or such as shall
torture, and force the Guilty to Confession. 26. With some Degree of Capricon,
the Dolphin rises, and breeds all sorts of Swimmers, such as are nimble and
active, and perform feats of activity, either in the Water, or on Land. 27.
Cepheus rising with some Degree of Aquarius, breeds Men of Morose Tempers, such
as are designed for Guardians, or Tutors, Tragic Poets, and sometimes
Comedians, Stage Players, Pantomimes, and all sorts of Actors. 28. With, the
twelfth Degree of Aquarius, the Eagle rises, and breeds Men of the most
violent Tempers, headstrong, and bloody, greedy of spoil, and destroying every
thing that opposes them; Underofficers in an Army, and* Armor-bearers to a
General. 29. Cassiopeia rising with the twentieth Degree of Aquarius, breeds
Founders in Metals, Goldsmiths, Jewellers, etc. 30. With the twelfth Degree of
Pisces, Andromeda rises, and breeds Goalers, and all sorts of Exceutioners,
cruel, pitiless and bloody. 31. With the twenty-first Degree of Pisces, the
Horse rises, and breeds strong, vigorous, active Men, excellent Horsemen,
either for the Race or War, Farriers, and Physicians 32. With the thirtieth
Degree of Pisces, the kneeling Constellation, or Hercules appears; and his
Births are Lewd, Treacherous Villains, given to no useful Arts, at best Juglers
and Rope-dancers. 33. With the same Degree of Pisces, the Whale rises, and
produces Fishers, Fishmongers, makers of Salt, etc. 34. The Bears (Manilius
tells us, what he means by their rising) are joined with Leo and Scorpio, and
breed such as are employed in breeding Beasts, and particularly Bears. 35.
There follows a fragment, in which the Poet Treats of the several magnitudes or
sizes of the Stars, that make up the several Constellations.

It is confessed that Manilius shows no great exactness in the Astronomical
part of this Book* but the Astrology is perfect and, may for the most part be
applied to the most correct Astronomy.

HEre at the Signs, The design of the Fifth Book.
those Paths of yearly light,
Weak Minds would stop; nor dare a farther flight:
But through the Planets Orbs would take their Course
At one full stoop from Heaven, and mark their force;
What Mercury designed, what Mars did dare,
Or Luna thought on in her Gloomy care:
What Sol would work, how Saturn looked on Jove,
And Venus managed her Intriegue of Love:
No farther would their feeble Thoughts aspire,
And other Stars had roul'd unheeded Fire.
But since I Am once on wing, and raised on high,
I Will boldly soar, and compass all the Sky;
I Will visit every Star, and strive to know
Their proper Powers, and how they Rule below:
Avoid no labor, and no toil refuse,
Whilst constant Industry can aid my Muse.
Here vast Orion Heaven's great part, The Southern Constellations.
the Streams,
Whose Spacious Windings mix agreeing Beams;
The Hero's Ship which now midst Stars does Sail,
The frightful Centaur, and the gaping Whale,
The Dog, whose Fires over all the World are rould,
The watchful Keeper of the growing Gold;
And Heaven's high Altar graced with Gifts invite
My eager Muse to take a larger flight.
There where the Serpent twines betwixt the Bears, The Northern Constellations.

Where rouls the Driver, and still minds his Cares:
Where slow Boots drives his lingering Teams,
Or Ariadne's Crown spreads Heavenly Beams:
Where Perseus soars with Gorgon's Spoils above,
And weilds his Fauchion to secure his Love:
Where wretched Cepheus and his Wife beside
The fair Andromeda still Curse their Pride;
Or where 1 opposed the scaly Dolphin lies
To the swift Shaft, or where the Eagle flies,
Or Starry Horse still runs, my Muse must move,
And boldly visit every Star above.
These I must Sing, their proper Powers explain,
How when they rise, how when they set they Reign:
And what Degrees they claim from every Sign,
And what extend their force, and what confine:
For when the World was Framed, the Mighty Cause
These Powers bestowed, and did Enact these Laws;
How Signs should singly work, how Stars agree,
And settled all things by a firm Decree.
First Golden Aries Shines, II. What Constellations rise with Aries.
(who whilst he swam
Lost part of's Freight, and gave the Sea a Name:
Whose 2 Skin destroyed himself, whose Golden Spoil
Forced fierce Medea, from her Native Soil;
Then Magic Arts to Cholchis Shores confined
First Sailed abroad, and Poison swelled the Wind:)
And now as Victor over the Conquered Deep
He keeps his Power, The Ship.
and still Commands the Ship:
For when the 3 Northern Rudder rears its Flame,
And in the fourth Degree, first joins the Ram:
Who ever's born, shall be to Sail inclined,
He Will Plow the Ocean, and he will tempt the Wind;
He over the Seas shall Love, or Fame pursue;
And other Months, another 4 Phasis view:
Fixed to the Rudder, he shall boldly Steer,
And pass those Rocks which 5 Tiphys used to fear.
Had no such Births been born Troy's Walls had stood,
No 6 Wind-bound Navy, bought a Gale with Blood;
No 7 Xerxes Persia over the Ocean roul'd,
Dug a new Sea, nor yet confined an old.
No Athens sunk by 8 Syracusian Shores,
Nor Lybia's Seas been choakt with Punick Oars,
Nor had the World in doubt at Actium stood,
Nor 9 Heaven's great Fortune floated on the Flood:
Such Births as these their hopes to Seas resign,
Ships spread their Sails, and distant Nations join,
The World divided, mutual Wants invite
To close again; and Friendly Ships unite.
But when Orion on the left does rise, III. Orion.

Orion 10 the large Portion of the Skies;
At whose appearance Day the Night invades,
And frighted Darkness folds her Gloomy Shades:
One fit for Business, quick of Mind is wrought,
Of Body nimble, and of Active Thought:
As if he were the 11 People, all the Town
He shall inhabit, every House his own:
And one Salute, when 12 Morning peeps, extend
Through every Street, to All a Common Friend.
But when the Ram first shows thrice five Degrees, IV. Heniochus, or the Driver.

The Driver rears his Chariot from the Seas;
And climbs that Steep, whence blustering Boreas brings
His North-East Blasts, and shakes their freezing Wings.
He keeps his old Concern, and thence bestows
Those various Arts which here on Earth he chose.
To drive the 13 Chariot, to direct the Course,
And hang with forward Lashes on the Horse;
Now press directly, now wheel nimbly round,
Outstrip the Wind, nor raise the dusty Ground;
Or cross athwart, and force the rest to yield,
Disperse the Crowd, and clear the gapeing Field:
And though outstript, yet scorn to stoop to Fear,
But, drive on Hope, and leave behind Despair.
Or midst the Race from 14 Horse to Horse to leap,
Sport over their Backs, and fix the dangerous step:
Or singly mounted break the Foaming Jaws,
Throw* well the Dart, and force a just applause.
Hence influenc't at his Birth 15 Salmoneus strove
To vye with Lightning, and to Rival Jove;
His Brazen Bridge, and Chariots fiercely hurled
Must roar like Thunder, and must shake the World.
Vain the attempt: But yet his Pride was high,
And now he thought he had brought down the Sky:
Proudly he rode, but winged Bolts pursue,
And his feigned Thunder's noise provoked the True;
He fell, and by his sad Example showed
'T was Fate for Man, to be esteemed a God.
The famed Bellerophon first viewed the Light
When this appeared, and took his Aerie Flight:
Over Seas and Land he fled, and first began
Through pathless Skies, a way unknown to Man.
But when the Ram twice Ten Degrees does show, V. The Hoedi, or the Kids.

Where on the Right rough Boreas Tempests blow;
The Kids appear: But never hope to find
Severe in Manners, nor correct in Mind
Their Births; from them no Censuring Catos come
To settle Virtue, and adorn their Rome.
No temperate Scipio's, whose obliging Charms
The Spaniards Conquered, and excelled their Arms:
Too great a work for them, their Rays inspire
Soft Love, then heat that Love to fierce Desire:
Still urging on, they boil that Lust to Rage,
And Lust, not Courage, make the Youth engage:
By Death bafe Pleasure is ignobly bought,
And the Misfortune hightned by the Fault:
By them are some to keeping Goats inclined,
The Kids being always mindful of their Kind:
Thence Goatherds rise, whose Pipes in every Vale
Soft Love inspire, and tell the moving Tale.
But when the Ram has doubled Ten Degrees, VI. The Hyades.

And joined seven more, then rise the Hyades;
Whose Births delight in Tumults, hate soft Peace,
Seditions seek, and live averse to Ease:
The Desks the 17 Gracchi, Soldiers crowd the Town
They love to see, and scorn the peaceful Gown.
They seek Contention, and when none appears
They heighten Jealousies, and nourish Fears.
Or meanly bent, they over the fruitful Plain
Their Cattle feed, or drive the lazy Wain:
Such Minds these give, such Tempers these bestow,
Cursed Influence! raised too high, or bent too low.
But when the Ram has trebled Ten Degrees, VII. The Goat.

Shines all above, excluded all from Seas;
The Goat (whose Brutish Dugs did once improve
The mighty Babe, and nursed the growing Jove;
Who gave him strength to Thunder) first appears,
Breeds timorous Births, and fills their Breasts with Fears.
On slight Occasions, they with Doubts are Cursed,
Suspicious, jealous, fearing still the worst.
Or Travelers bent on foreign Lands they breed;
Thus over the Rocks Goats wander as they feed:
Now seek this Plain, and then as fast pursue
What tempts their sight, leave old, and seize the new.
Thus far the Ram's concerned, VIII. What Constellations rise with Taurus.
and next the Bull
Joins other Stars, and varies in its Rule:
For mounting upward in his backward rise
When Six Degrees appear, and grace the Skies,
He shows the Pleiades: The Pleiades.
Whose Rays incline
To Joys of Venus, and the Charms of Wine:
Feasts their delight, where witty biting Drolls
Raise Mirth, and Health swims round in flowing Bowls.
Such are these Stars gay Births; their Face, their Dress
They chiefly mind, and it is their work to please:
Offended with their Sex, their Manly Hair
With Pumice kill, and Curse those Limbs that bear.
Female they seem; now borrowed Curls must raise
Their Heads, and Love must play in every Maze:
Now Gems must bind them up, now loose behind
Their Locks must flow, and wanton in the Wind:
Affected in their Gate, grow Fops by Rule,
And with great study, finish Nature's Fool.
Yet high Ambition, and a Thirst to please
(The Name of Virtue covers the Disease:)
Still fire their Breasts, nor from their Souls remove,
They would not only Love, but would be known to Love.
The Twins succeed, IX. What Constellations rise with the Twins.
and when their Seventh Degree
Swims rising over the Surface of the Sea;
The Hare appears, The Hare.
whose active Rays supply
A nimble force, and hardly Wings deny:
The Whirlbats falling Blow they nimbly shun;
And win the Race, e're they begin to run.
Let Feasts unbend the Clowns, let Labor yield
To Sport and Mirth, and Pastime Crown the Field;
None give so sure, and none avoid the Fall
So well; or catch and turn the flying Ball.
To vigorous stroke their active Arms command,
Or with their Foot supply the place of Hand.
Or when in Sport they shall the 18 Balls divide
From Hand to Hand, and toss on every side;
Now throw the flying Globes, and now retain,
Or play them back upon themselves again:
Now back, now forward, round, and every way
Over all their Limbs the active Balls shall play,
As taught to know their meaning, and obey.
Whilst Crowds admire, and think the constant cares
Of Art effect what is the work of Stars.
Wak't whilst asleep, they tame by active Pleasure
Their growing Troubles, and Sports employ their leisure.
Thus those agree. X. What Constellations rise with Cancer.
And next my Songs comprise
Stars near the Crab, with whom the Asses rise:
Then Births appear, whose Skill infests the Woods,
Lay Snares for Beasts; The Asses.
nor do they spare the Floods:
On all they Prey, they boldly search the Caves;
Nor are the Fish secure in deepest Waves:
Then 19 Meleager rose, whose fatal Brand,
And Life too wasted in his Mother's Hand;
Unhappy Noble Youth! who must atone
Her wretched Brothers Slaughter by thy own!
Half buried whilst alive! Whom Love betrayed
To give the Hero's Honors to the Maid;
To rob thy jealous Uncles of their Fame,
And by their Death secure the Beauty's claim.
Then Atalante rose, who pressed for Fame
Through thickest Woods, and saw and overcame;
Her Dart first reached the Boar, and wan the Prize,
She Conquered with her Arrow, and her Eyes;
The Monster groaned, and Meleager found
As much disquiet, and as deep a Wound.
Some pitch strong Nets, and some the Woods surround
With 20 fear of Death, or slip the faithful Hound:
Some dig the treacherous Pits, some spread the Toyls,
Or hunt with Spears, and Grace their House with Spoils.
Another puts to Sea, infests the Lakes,
Draws monstrous Fish, and starts at what he Takes.
Whilst some through Nets the wandering Waters strein,
Their Game they follow through the pathless Main,
Where no Scent lies, yet seldom Hunt in vain.
As if the Earth were not profusely stored,
They fly to Seas, they search what Floods afford,
And Nereus from his Waves supplies the Glutton's Board: XI. Procyon, or the
little Dog.

But when the Crab has doubled Ten Degrees,
And reared seven more, bright Procyon leaves the Seas:
His Influence mean; But though his feeble Flame
No Hunters breeds, yet it supports the Game:
Inclines to Weave strong Nets, to Train the Hound,
To know the Breed, and to improve the Sound.
To shave the Spear, and follow every Trade,
That Love of Sport, and Hope of Gain persuade.
But when the Lion's gaping Jaws aspire, XII. What Constellations rise with the
Lion.

The Dog appears, and foams unruly Fire.
In Caves scorcht Neptune mourns contracted Floods,
Herbs dye, The great Dog.
and Beauteous Greenness leaves the Woods;
To other Climates Beasts and Birds retire,
And Feverish Nature burns in her own Fire.
So vast the Heat, such Flames increase the Sun,
As if all Heaven's great Fires were joined in one.
Air's turned to Dust, the Earth's low Entrails burn,
And dying Nature fears one common Urn.
When this appears, his rising Beams presage
Ungoverned Fury, and unruly Rage;
A flaming Anger, universal Hate
With Jealousy make up his Births unhappy Fate:
Each little Cause does scorching Thoughts inspire,
Their Soul's inflamed, and Words break out in Fire:
Yet crowd so fast, they justle as they rise,
And part flies out in Sparkles through their Eyes.
Their Tongue's on Foam, and with their Teeth they break
Their Words, and Bark when they design to Speak.
Besides, excess in Wine inflames their Fire,
And Bacchus makes their Fury blaze the higher.
They fear no Rocks, nor Woods, but love to Gore
The furious Lion, and the Foaming Boar;
They dread no Beasts, but with blind Warmth engage,
And to their natural strength infuse their Rage:
Nor is it strange that from his Beams should rise
Such Tempers; for above through yielding Skies
Averse to Peace, he cuts his furious way,
And hunts the Hare, intent upon his Prey.
The Lion mounts, XIII. The Bowl.
and with his last the Bowl
Studded with Stars comes up, and cheers the Pole:
And then who e're are born, their Minds incline
To water Meadows, and to dress the Vine.
To Hills, Lakes; Rivers: To what e're produce
The generous Liquor, and improve the Juice:
Now Bridegroom Elms they shall in order place,
And bring the blushing Brides to their embrace;
Entwine their Boughs: Or when the Stock's displayed
Without support, nor needs a Foreign Aid,
In Branches lead it; and uncurious grown
Trust reeling Bacchus to himself alone.
Or from the Stock, the hopeful Tendrils tear,
Plant them anew, and teach the Twigs to bear.
Use all improving ways that Art has sought,
By long Experience, or wise Nature taught:
When ripe their Bowls the generous Wine shall Crown,
Soften their Cares, and all their Wishes drown;
They largely shall enjoy their Fruits, nor spare
The pleasing Recompenses of their Care:
Happy this State; but Stars still force them on,
And urge their greedy Minds to be undone:
For Corn, and Foreign Stores which moisture yields,
They Will Plow the Ocean, and forsake their Fields
Till tossed by Storms, they midst the Waves resign
Their baffled Hopes: And thus the Bowl inclines.
Next Shines the Maid, XIV. What Constellations rise with Virgo.
and when the Maid ascends
Thrice Five Degrees, the glorious Crown attends.
The Crown, since Theseus first his Faith betrayed,
The Monument of the forsaken Maid: The Crown^

They give Soft Arts, for here the Virgin Shines,
And there the Virgin's Crown, and each combines
Soft Beams agreeing in the same Designs.
Births influenced then shall raise fine Beds of Flowers,
And twine their creeping Jasmine round their Bowers;
The Lillies, Violets in Banks dispose,
The Purple Poppy, and the blushing Rose:
For Pleasure shades their rising Mounts shall yield*
And real Figures paint the gaudy Field:
Or they shall wreath their Flowers, their Sweets entwine,
To Grace their Mistress, or to Crown their Wine*
The Odors fair Arabia's Groves dispense
Sovereign for Health, or grateful to the Sense,
Shall bath these Wreaths; for when the Sweets unite,
The new Adultery heightens the delight.
Besides they will study Neatness, learn to dress,
Affected grow, and think it Art to please:
The present Pleasures Court, and gay desires;
For this the Virgin's Age; and this the Crown requires.
When with her Tenth Degree, XV. The Sheaf.
the Sheaf appears,
Shows her full Corn, and shakes her laden Ears:
The Fields may fear, for those that shall be born
Shall Plough the Ground, and be intent on Corn:
They Will trust their Seed to Clods, whose large produce
Shall yield the Sum, and give increase by Use.
Build Barns for Grain, for Nature those contrives,
And in the Ear it self a Pattern gives;
In that the Corn lies safe, her Laws ordain
A proper different Cell for every Grain:
How blessed the World, had this been only known,
Had Gold lain hid, and Corn been born alone!
Then Men were rich, when they could Want suffice,
And knew no Baits for Lust, and Avarice.
Yet had they still employed their Cares on Corn
Alone, those Arts would have been slowly born,
Which make Grain useful, and for Common good
Grind, Mould, and Bake, and work it up to Food.
Now Southward bend, XVI. What Constellations rise with Libra.
and see in Southern Skies
With Libra's Eighth Degree the Arrow rise:
Their Beams are strong: They curious Arts bestow,
To dart the Javelin, and to draw the Bow;
Or sling the Bullet; from the lofty Clouds
Swift Birds shall drop, nor shall the deepest Floods
Secure their Fish: But both shall surely feel
The fatal force of the unerring Steel:
What powerful Stars but these drew here below
Brave 21 Philoctete's and sure 22 Teucer's Bow?
One Hector's Flames repelled, the angry Fire
Did fear his Shafts, and sullenly retire;
The other bore Troy's Fate, more dreadful far,
He sat Exiled, than all the Greeks in War.
He owned those Stars, 23 who when the Serpent lay
Twined round his Child, and Sucked the Bleeding Prey;
Ventured to shoot: The pious Arrow fled
As sent by Fate, and pierced the Dragon's Head:
To be a Father then was Art, and Love
By Stars unaided, had but vainly strove;
They drew the Bow, restored the flying Breath
To the lost Boy, and waked the Youth from Death.
But when the heedless Goat 24 Exalts his Beard, XVII. The Goat.

Alone, as straggling from the other Herd;
Then Tempers quick, and piercing Minds are wrought,
With Cares unwearied, and of active Thought:
They scorn that Rest, which private Minds enjoy,
But fawn upon the Crowd, and Court Employ;
That Is their delight, and they are enlarged by Fate
To serve the Many, and be Slaves of State.
Whilst they survive, smooth Knaves shall fear to Cheat
In hopes of scapeing, or of grownig Great;
They shall espouse their injured Country's Cause,
And be severe, yet not exceed the Laws;
Imprison Cheats, or else with rigorous Fines
Break their Estates, and curb their lewd Designs.
Happy this Temper, would they still pursue
These useful Pleasures, and affect the True;
But they will from Business, and from Court retire,
(Loose are their Words, and looser their Desire;)
Lewd Love and Wine indulge, and wast their Age
In Mimick Dancing, or affect the Stage.
Next shines the Harp, XVIII. The Harp.
and through the Liquid Skies
The Shell as lightest, first begins to rise;
This when sweet Orpheus struck, to listening Rocks
He Senses gave, and Ears to withered Oaks;
Parched Pluto's 25 Cheeks grew moist, and Death resigned
Her Spoil, and unrelenting Fates grew kind.
These skill in Music, and in Songs impart;
How Sound is varied into Notes by Art
Their Births shall know: Their Mouths shall Pipes inspire
With voice; Their Hands shall strike the speaking Lyre:
At merry Feasts they shall the Guests delight,
Smooth Wine with Songs, and stay the flying Night.
Nay even when Troubles, and when Cares oppress,
Their Mournful Lays, shall give their Sorrows Ease.
Low Murmurs shall employ their warbling Tongue,
And their own Ears shall always hear a Song:
Below fierce Scorpio, XIX. What Constellations rise with Scorpio.
when his Eighth Degree
Appears, the Altar rises from the Sea:
No Lightning armed Jove's Hand, no Thunder roard
Till here as Priest he stood, The Altar.
and first adored;
Then Powers unknown assisted, Clouds did swell
With Fire, and the Devoted Giants fell:
And who should then be born, but those that wait
On Sacred Temples, and converse with Fate?
That Hymn in Holy Quires, know what is to come,
Are almost Gods, and can dispose of Doom?
With Twelve Degrees the Centaur's Form appears, XX. The Centaur.

And gives a Temper from the shape he bears;
For he that then is born, and feels his force,
Shall harness Mules, or he shall drive the Horse;
Or he shall proudly mount the rattling Car,
Or Arm the Steed, and lead him forth to War;
Or he shall study what Disease infests,
And Ease apply to uncomplaining Beasts;
Or he shall keep them sound, his Art be shown
In sure Prevention, nor expect a Groan.
Next Sagittarius mounts with threatening Bow, XXI. What Constellations rise
with Sagittarius.

Whose Fifth Degree does bright Arcturus show:
And he that then is born shall never be Poor,
To him rich Fortune shall entrust her Store;
King's Treasures he shall keep, and Reign alone,
Whilst those sit only higher in the Throne: Arcturus.

Or if a Private House confine his Care,
Blessed he shall live, and see the thriving Heir
In Wealth increast; Or he shall still defend
The People's Right, and be a Common Friend.
But when this Centaur has advanced his Fire
Thrice Ten Degrees, XXII. The Swan.
and shows his Horse entire;
The Swan displays his Wings; And then by Fate
The Birds for an Enployment, and Estate
Are given to every Birth: Nor can the Skies
Make better claim to every Fowl that flies;
And hence to seize their own, they often declare
Against the Sky it self an open War;
They take them flying, or they set their Toyls
On Boughs or Fields, and catch the Feathered Spoils.
Sometimes besiege their Nestswith treacherous Reed,
Or draw the Net, and take them whilst they feed:
Thus Luxury toyls; bold Luxury ventures far
To Foreign Lands, and Travels more than War:
Numidia's Plains, and Cholcos Woods afford
Delicious Tribute to the Glutton's Board.
Or Nature's stubborn Laws their Art shall break,
Enlarge Converse, and teach the Birds to speak.
The 26 Swan still shrouds a God, it is more than Fowl,
The Feathered part confines a noble Soul;
And when cold Death comes on, the God dilates
His Powers, and softly murmurs over his Fates.
Or they on Doves shall all their Cares employ,
To make them Thrive, or teach them to decoy,
Or carry Messages; the Birds convey
Their Masters Orders, nor mistake their way:
They know this Star, and they this Influence own,
Who carry sportive Birds about the Town;
Who with one Sparrow wretched Life maintain;
These are his Powers, and thus inclines the Swan.
When Ophieuchus mounts, XXIII. With Capricorn rises Ophieuchus.
and joins the Goat,
Those that are born shall live an Antidote
To strongest Poison; they may safely take
The frightful Serpent, and the Venomed Snake
Into their Bosom: Whilst the Monster's Cling
About their Bodies kills their fiercest Sting.
When the South Fish does leave the Floods, XXIV. The South Fish.
and rise
To Airy Seats, and swims in Liquid Skies;
Those that are born in every Shore shall lay
Their Lines and Hooks, and catch the hanging Prey;
No Fish in their own Shells shall safely live
By Nature fortified, whilst these can dive,
All shall be dared; and they immerst shall rove
Through Depths, despaired, and lost to those above;
Till with their dancing Prey they mount again;
So small is the reward of all this Pain!
Or Fish for Pearls, for Avarice cheats the Mind
By valuing Things not for their Worth, but Kind.
Vile Shells, which Nature midst the Floods has laid,
Ashamed of the mean work that she has made;
When drawn up hither equal Provinces;
Nor can the Land now bear the Riches of the Seas:
Such are the Tempers, and Success that waits
On these Stars Influence, and compleats their Fates.
Or free from danger they incline to gain
By Merchandise, what others get by Pain.
Before I sung the Harp's Commanding Powers, XXV. The Strings of the Harp.

And taught the Influence of its fatal Hours;
Back to the same my Muse does now retire,
Pleased with the sounding Virtues of the Lyre:
For when its gay Harmonious Strings appear,
Let Sin grow Pale, and Villains learn to fear:
For subtle Judges, whose Demands shall draw
Pale sculking Guilt within the reach of Law,
Shall then be born; or else the Births shall dare
To screw the Rack, and make the Wretch his Sin declare;
Steeled against Pity, and averse to Spare.
All Pains inflict, be Cruel without Hate,
And make stern Justice wield the Sword of Fate:
Or if soft Methods can prevail, the Cause
They gravely shall determine by the Laws:
As Wisdom gave the Sentence, Strife shall cease,
Both sides be pleased, at least consent to Peace.
But when the Dolphin's Fires begin to rise
With Stars like Scales, XXVI. The Dolphin.
and swim in Liquid Skies;
It shall be doubtful which shall most Command
The Inclination for the Sea or Land:
Both shall conspire, and in one Mass combind,
Now this way draw, now that way force the Mind:
For as the Dolphin mounts, now dives again,
Now turns, now leaps, and figures all the Main:
So those that shall be born shall now divide
With wide stretched Arms, and beat the swelling Tide;
Now thrust them downward, and with secret Oars
Their Bodies row, and visit Foreign Shores;
Now tread the Water, with their Feet maintain
Themselves Erect, and wade the deepest Main,
As it were a shallow; like the firmest Field,
The Floods shall bear them, and refuse to yield:
Now on their Backs or Sides securely keep
One constant place, and lie upon the Deep:
No Oar to Boy them up; but Floods forget
Their natural yielding, and sustain the Weight:
Or they shall dive, through boundless Oceans go,
And visit Nereus, and the Nymphs below;
Or take up Shipwracks, Merchants Spoils restore,
And rob the greedy Ocean of its Oar.
To these join those, who from an 27 Engine tossed
Pierce through the Air, and in the Clouds are lost;
Or poize on Timber, where by turns they rise
And sink, and mount each other to the Skies:
Or leap through Fire, and fall on hardest Ground
As on soft Seas, unhurt, and safe from Wound:
Though void of Wings, their Bodies boldly rear,
And imitate their Dolphin in the Air.
Or if they want the skill, yet Nature's part
Performed, they shall be nimble without Art:
Not run, but rather fly, be swiftly born
Over Fields of Wheat, nor bend the standing Corn.
When with Aquarius Cepheus mounts, XXVII. What Constellations rise with
Aquarius. Cepheus.
require
No sportive Tempers from so grave a Fire:
But stiff, morose, severe, affected Fools,
With Looks as starcht, and heavy as their Souls:
Whose Guardian's roughness, or an Uncle's force
Praise, and in Cato's Sentences Discourse:
Designed for Tutors, whom the noble Heir,
Although he keeps them, shall be forced to fear;
Shrink at their Nods, and of their Looks afraid,
Worship the Imperious Idol he has made.
Or Tragic Poets; Those whose Style must slay
In Paper, and be Barbarous in a Play:
Who must kill Heroes to delight the Crowd,
And seek to please with Horror, and with Blood:
Antigone 28 must fall the Tyrant's Spoil,
And Brothers disagree upon their Pile:
Thyestes eat his Babes, the Sun retire,
And jealous Rage the mad Medea Fire;
Her Father, Brother, Sons must Murdered lie,
Whilst Dragons bear her through the Guilty Sky:
Or she must Youth renew; such Themes as these
Shall raise their Thoughts, and make them strive to please.
But then if softer Themes their Fancies move
In Comedy, the heated Youth shall Love;
The Maid be stolen, the witty Slave defeat
The covetous Father, and enjoy the Cheat.
Thus famed 29 Menander in immortal Rhymes
Exposes Humor and instructs the Times;
Nature to him her Parts might safely trust,
His Words expressive, and his Thoughts were just;
And when he copied her, she hardly knew
Her own Original; he wrought so true.
But if unequal to a Poet's Rage
They cannot Write, yet they shall serve the Stage.
Their graceful action and their voice shall raise
The native value of another's Plays;
The School's Simplicity, the Court's Address,
The Soldier's Huff so decently express;
As if they acted not another's part;
And all was simple Nature, and not Art.
In one short view they shall present to sight
Whole Crowds, make Kings engage, and Armies fight:
Before the pleased Spectators Troy shall lie
In ruins, and the wretched Priam dye.
But now the Eagle must my Songs employ, XVIII. (...)he Ea(...)e.

He shines upon the left hand of the Boy,
Whom first from Earth he did to Skies convey,
And now with wide stretched Wings hovers over his Prey.
This Bird, the Armor-bearer of the Skies,
Brings back thrown Thunder, Jove with Arms supplies,
And with the Youth's twelfth part begins to rise.
And then shall spring a violent ravenous Brood,
Eager to rob, and purchase Spoil with Blood:
On Men and Beasts with equal Lust they seize,
Nor make a difference between War and Peace.
Their Friends and Enemies alike they awe,
They every thing to wild contention draw,
Their Will their Ruler, and their Sword their Law.
But if their Violence aright they place,
Their Vice turns Virtue; conquered Spoils shall grace
Their happy Country; when in Arms they dare,
Success shall wait, and Victory crown their War.
But since the Eagle is employed above
Not to throw Thunder, but to wait on Jove,
And bring him Arms, they hope in vain to bear
The highest Office, and Command in War;
They must be meaner, equal to their Star:
Wait on a General, bear his ponderous Shield,
And serve him bravely in the dangerous Field.
When mourning Cassiopeia, XXIX. Cassiopeia.
graced with Stars,
Upon the left hand of the Youth appears,
And joins twice ten Degrees, her Beams impart
In Metals skill, and fill the Births with Art:
The precious Matter they shall nobly mold,
And raise the native value of the Gold;
Hence shine our Temples, and our Roman Jove
Fills here a Heaven as bright as that above;
Happy this Art employed on things Divine,
To frame a Statue, or adorn a Shrine;
But now how low her Head she strives to hide,
Whilst chained to Luxury, and a Slave to pride!
Now precious Metals common Roofs enfold,
Rival the Temples, and we feast in Gold.
But great Augustus does its state maintain,
Shows its old worth, and makes it rise again;
His Temples shine, and now such Works are wrought
As Mithridates lost when Sylla fought;
The Sun's outshone, and Caesar's glorious Gems
Excel the native luster of his Beams:
And hence with joy we view that wondrous Prize,
The Monuments of 30 Pompey's Victories;
Though those did first a Lust for Gems inspire,
Which still burns new, and spreads a growing fire;
The Ornaments of Kings now serve to grace
A shape, and raise the value of a Face;
Now Neck, Feet, Hands are decked, and every Dress
Shines with the Spoils of groaning Provinces;
Yet it is the Ladies Sign, their wants supplied
Advance its worth, they love what decks their Pride:
Lest want of Matter should the Work restrain,
The Art grow idle, and the Sign be vain,
By the same Powers are wretched Men decoyed
To dig for Oar, and work to be employed;
To turn the Globe to search where Metals breed,
And see young Gold first blushing in its Seed;
Harmless it lies, 'till the mistaken worth
Deludes poor Man, and brings the Monster forth.
And lest Temptations too obscure should lie,
Too far removed from every common Eye,
Mixed with the Sands they shine on every Shore,
These he shall gather, and extract the Oar,
Or dive for Jewels, and, intent on Gain,
Pierce through the Floods, and search the deepest Main;
Draw Gold and Silver from the Waves embrace,
And work them singly, and adorn the Mass;
Or in Electrum both ignobly join:
These are the Powers and Tempers of this Sign.
Next shines Andromeda; XXX. What Constellations rise with Pisces.
she leaves the Sea,
And on the Right joins Pisces twelfth Degree.
Bright she appears, and gay with sparkling Fires,
As when young Perseus first felt warm desires.
Unhappy Maid! Andromeda.
exposed to rage Divine,
A faultless Victim for her Mother's Sin:
When Seas let loose o'reflow'd the fruitful Plain,
And Earth now feared its ruin from the Main;
Naught could appease, but to the injured Flood
The Maid resigned, to quench its rage with Blood.
This was her Bridal, in her Robes of State;
But not provided for so sad a Fate,
Glorious she looked, and like the setting Sun,
Greater, tho not so sierce, her Beauty shone.
No joyful Torch its ominous Flames did spread,
No Vows were heard to crown her fruitful Bed;
But Groans and Tears, e're Death pronounced her doom
The Maid was born alive to her own Tomb.
Hence fly my Muse, and on the naked Shore
Leave the poor Maid, and dare to look no more;
'Twill melt thy Song to turn again to view,
The weeping Parents bid their last adieu;
To see her fettered, and exposed to pain,
Designed by Nature for another Chain:
To see her hang on Rocks, and by her side
Grim Death appear, and point to the swollen Tide.
Yet turn, and view how she her Shape retains,
How fair she looks, and glorious in her Chains:
With what becoming fear her flowing Vest
Forsakes her Limbs, and leaves her naked Breast:
What hidden Beauties are exposed to sight,
Like Lightning glare, but must be lost in night.
By her the Halcyons mourned, and round the Coast,
That so much Beauty should in vain be lost,
The Nymphs repined; and Nereis from the Deep
Bewailed her Fate, and did consent to weep:
The gentle Breeze that fanned her golden Locks,
Turned into Sighs, and murmured to the Rocks:
All Nature seemed concerned, despairing Grief
Was general, but too weak to yield relief.
Then Perseus, glorious with the Gorgon's Spoil,
By Love directed to a nobler Toil,
Kind Fortune brought; and at the wondrous sight
He checked his Horse, and stopped his airy flight;
His Hand scarce held his Spoil, Medusa's Eyes
He bore, but now grew stiff at this surprise;
The Chains that held her, and the burth'ned Stone
He happy called, and envied joys unknown.
Amazed a while he hung, her Form surveyed,
Then heard the Story from the weeping Maid;
Straight in his Breast high generous thoughts were bred,
To spoil the Ocean to adorn his Bed:
And should a thousand frightful Gorgons rise;
He would oppose them for so vast a Prize:
Fixed on these Thoughts he leaves the mournful Shore,
Her Parents chears, and bids them weep no more,
For Aid was come: And their Consent desired
Was granted soon, and nobler warmth inspired.
Back he returns: Now teeming Seas did roar,
Waves fled the Monster, and o'reflow'd the Shore;
High raised his Head, he spouts the Floods around,
All Nereus echoes, and the Shores resound:
Wide gapes his Mouth, and as on a vast Rock
Dashed on each Tooth the foaming Billows broke:
His winding Tail over half the Main was spread,
The Ocean groaned, Rocks feared, and Mountains fled:
Unhappy Maid! though such an Aid was near,
What was thy Mind, and how surprised with fear?
How pale thy Look? and how thy Spirit fled
In a deep sigh, and hovered round thy Head?
How bloodless all thy Limbs, when from deep Caves
The Monster rushed, and bore the foaming Waves
And Fate along? and all designed for thee
A Prey how little, for so vast a Sea!
But Perseus nimble Aid descends, and hides
The Gorgon's Fauchion in his scaly Sides;
He twists upon the Wound, then strives to rear
His head, and shoots up forward through the Air:
Perseus retires, and still deludes his Foe,
Hangs in the Sky, and aims a surer Blow:
He presses on, and casts his Jaws around,
Bites at the Air, but bites without a Wound.
Then tosses Seas to Heaven, spouts purple Floods
At his high ^oe, and drowns him in the Clouds.
The Maid beheld this Fight, and, grateful grown,
Feared for his danger, but forgot her own;
Doubtful which way the various Fate inclined,
In Body less suspended than in Mind:
Her doubt not long; for now Success did prove
The great advantage, and the force of Love;
The Monster groaned, and from his Wounds there flowed
A mighty Stream, and stained the Seas with Blood.
Down deep he sinks, but soon he floats again,
And his vast Carcass covers all the Main;
Breathless he lay, yet then his shape did fright;
Tho dead, he was too dreadful for her sight.
Now big with Conquest, from the cleansing Flood
Bright Perseus rose, and more August he stood;
Then to the Rocks with eager haste he flies,
Unbinds the Virgin, and enjoys the Prize.
And thence Andromeda now shines a Star,
The Cause, and the Reward of such a War,
As freed the Ocean, and restored the Main
To Neptune's sway, and fixed him in his Reign.
And he that sees her rising Beams, shall draw
The Sword of Justice, and shall smite by Law;
Dungeons shall be, and Whips and Racks his care,
Steeled against Pity, and averse to spare.
At his stern feet shall wretched Wives complain,
And weeping Mothers tell their grief in vain:
Though late at night to kiss a parting Son,
And draw his flying Soul into his own;
A Father sues, in unrelenting Ears
His Prayers are lost, nor shall he yield to Tears.
Or lean pale Hangmen shall her Beams create,
Those solemn Murderers and Salves to Fate:
Who on the Curses of the pitying Crowd
Ignobly thrive, and live on shedding Blood.
But he that sees her chained to Rocks, shall find
A meaner Fortune, though as fierce a Mind;
A Jailer he shall be, secure for pains
Poor Slaves, and be a 31 partner of their Chains.
With Pisces twenty first Degree to fly
The Horse begins, XXXI. The Horse.
and beats the yielding Sky;
His Births shall Health, and vigorous Strength enjoy,
For Action quick, and nimble for employ.
They in thick rounds shall rein the managed Steed,
Or sweep the Plain, deceiving with their speed:
Or proudly mounted they shall boldly dare
Heroic Acts, and lead the Crowd to War:
Or else be nimble Messengers, and move
With greater swiftness than a flying Dove;
Send both with like Advice, the one shall bring
Returns, whilst the other lags with lazy Wing.
Or they shall study Herbs, and strength impart
To Beasts, and even to Man enlarge their Art.
But now go on; XXXII. Hercules, or the Kneeling Constellation.
with Pisces last Degrees,
The humble Constellation on his Knees
Of The Right appears: And those that then are born
No virtuous Powers, nor useful Arts adorn,
But they are for treachery, mischief, spoil designed,
Guilt's in their looks and Rapine in their mind.
Or if to Arts he shall incline the Breed,
Such, where the Danger does the Skill exceed,
They chiefly follow; it is their only scope
To mount a Precipice, or dance a Rope;
Tread 32. Airy steps, and whilst through Clouds they reel,
Draw up the Crowd, and hang them at their heel.
But on the Left is opened to our view
The Whale, XXXIII. The Whale
who now does through the Skies pursue
With eager haste, as through the injured Flood
The fair Andromeda, and still thirsts for Blood.
And He that then is born shall be inclined
To spoil the Sea, and kill the Scaly Kind,
No Fish shall swim secure whilst Nets can sweep
The troubled Ocean, and confine the Deep:
Those that but now could wanton over the Main
Shall lie fast bound, and wonder at their chain;
Till with a touch He shall the Cords command,
And draw the Dancing Captives to the Land.
Or whilst He shoals expects even midst the Flood
Destroy, and stain the Ocean with their Blood.
Yet then his works not cease, or pains decay,
His various Arts increasing with his prey:
For on the Shore He shall his spoil divide
For different uses. This when lightly dried
Is better Meat; and that when moist is good,
Whilst other parts are hardened into Food.
Could Gluttons see, they would not bear the sight
Of preparations for their Appetite,
Whilst Blood and Guts in a polluted Mass
Lie mixed, and are corrupted into Sauce;
Till all in filthy Gore distills to treat
The fashionable Palate of the Great.
Or if to meaner Arts his Thoughts incline,
Then Salt's his care; he shall the Floods confine
In narrow Pitts, and to the Beams expose,
Till what was liquid now a solid grows,
Then lay the crusted froth with careful hand
In heaps, and cleanse it, and divide the Sand.
And thus the brackish and unwholesom Flood
Proves vital Salt, and Poyson's turned to Food.
The Great and Lesser Bear which still maintain
One constant Round, The rising of the two Bears.
and never touch the Main,
Scarce know a Rise; yet when each front appears,
Take that to be the rising of the Bears.
The First with Leo, and the last is joined
With Scorpio, and prove friendly to their kind.
For those that then are born to Beasts shall bear
Kind tempers, and oblige them by their Care;
Give Law to Lions, with a Panther play,
Teach Tigers peace, and make a Wolf obey;
Maintain Converse, and give them Arts unknown,
And such as Nature never thought her own.
But yet their thoughts to Bears shall most incline,
And there improve the Kindred of their Sign.
Or ride the Elephant, his Bulk command,
And make the Monster tremble at their Wand.
Base the submission, where such strength in vain
Possess't must tamely yield to feeble Man:
The third sized Stars the Pleiad's form do grace, The several magnitudes of
the Stars.

They shine with virgin blushes in their face:
Four in the Dolphin are observed to rise,
And in Deltoton Three of equal size:
The same the Eagle, and the Bear display,
Nor can the Draco boast a greater ray;
Of size the Fourth and Fifth securely take
A measure from the others of the Snake.
But yet the greatest part we spare to note,
Too small to be discerned, or too remote:
These lie obscure, and seldom spread their light,
But when the Moon's withdrawn to lower Night,
When great Orion from the Skies retires,
Plunges in Waves, and quenches his bright Fires;
Or when gay Phoebus does his sway resign
To shades, then They have a short leave to shine,
Then Heaven with little Lights is spangled over,
That not the Sand upon the crooked Shore,
That not the Billows in Tempestuous Floods,
That not the leaves when Autumn shakes the Woods,
Can equal the great Train; they all surmount,
Even Number is too short for the account.
And as in Cities, where in ranks decreed
First 33 Nobels go, and then the Knights succeed,
The next in order may the People claim;
The Rabble next, a Crowd without a Name:
So is the Heaven by different ranks possessed;
Some like the Nobles with more rays are dressed,
Some shine with less, the numerous crowd with least:
Were these endowed with a proportioned heat,
Were they in Power, as they are in number great;
They long ago must have dissolved the Frame,
Nor could the world have born so fierce a Flame.
The End of the fifth Book.
NOTES.
1. -- Celerique Sagittae
Delphinus certans --
We may read, -- Celerique Sagitta Delphinus certans -- and interpret the
words, not as others do, The Dolphin seated opposite to the Arrow: But The
Dolphin of equal swiftness with the Arrow.

2. The Ram having a Golden Fleece, as the Poets fancied, the King of Jolcos
killed him that he might enjoy the Treasure, and Jason being sent to fetch this
Golden Fleece carried away Medea the King's Daughter.

3. The Ship has two Rudders, a Northern, and a Southern Rudder.

4. A River of Jolchos, whither Jason with the Argonauts first Sailed.

5. Typhis, the Pilot to the Argonauts, who in his Voyage steered through the
dangerous moving Rocks called the Symplegadae.

6. The Grecian Navy lay Wind-bound till Iphigenia was Sacrificed, and
appeased the anger of Diana.

7. Vossius, in his Observations on Catullus, Reads -- Invehet undis Persida --
The Expression is bold, and therefore proper for the Poet. That Xerxes dug a
new Channel, and made a Bridge over the Hellespont, are known stories.

8. Manilius mentions several notable defeats at Sea, such was that of the
Athenians near Syracuse, which brought the Athenians very low: such were those
of the Carthaginians by the Romans: And that of Antony by Augustus near Actium.

9. Heavens great Fortune: Because the Conqueror was to be deify'd.

10. Orion is a very large and bright Constellation, and deserves this pompous
Description.

11. Instar erit Populi: This is one of Manilius's bold Expressions, which my
English cannot reach.

12. Alluding to the officious Salutations, which the Clients amongst the
Romans carried early every Morning to their Patrons.

13. Manilius is very accurate in describing the particular Niceties observed
in the Roman racing: Those are not now observed amongst us, and therefore we
must be content with such Expressions as our Language will afford.

14. An Exercise much used amongst the Romans; the Horseman rode one Horse,
and led another, and in the midst of the Race would throw himself on the led
Horse, and so back again as often as he was required; or else would stand upon
the Horses back, and in that posture ride the Course.

15. Salmoneus built a Bridge of Brass, and driving Chariots over it fancied he
Thundered: This he did to procure himself divine Honors, but was killed by a
Thunderbolt for his impious attempt.

16. The Poets fancied Bellerophon rode upon the flying Horse Pegasus.

17. A Family amongst the Romans, famous for their seditious Harangues, which
they made to the People of Rome out of the Desks, or Rostra, standing in the
Market place.

18. Amongst the Romans one Man would take several Balls, and toss them,
sometimes behind, and sometimes before, now on this hand, and now on the other,
so that some of them should be always up in the Air: And this feat of Activity
Manilius Describes.

19. The Story of Meleager runs thus: At his Birth his Mother heard one of the
Destinies say, the Child should live till the stick that then lay in the Fire
was burnt: The Mother snatched the stick out of the Fire, and perserv'd it.
When Meleager was grown a Man, he with a great many others went to hunt a Wild
Bore; at the same time Atalante a Nymph of extraordinary Beauty came into the
Field, and had the good Fortune to wound the Bore first: Meleager fell in Love
with Atalante, and having killed the Bore presented the Head to her: His two
Uncles who were present at the Hunting thought themselves injured, and would
not suffer a Woman to carry off their Spoil. Meleager in defense of Atalante
kills his two Uncles: Meleager's Mother, to revenge the Death of her two
Brothers, puts the stick into the Fire, as that burnt Meleager wasted.

20. Formidine Mortis: Huetius Reads Formidine Pennae: For when they Hunted,
they used to see stakes in the ground, to which they tied Feathers which
frighted the Deer, and made them keep within that compass, or take that way the
Hunters thought most convenient for their sport.

21. Philoctetes was Servant to Hercules, and when Hercules burnt himself, he
left his Bow and Arrows to Philoctetes: Without these Arrows Troy could not be
taken: Now it happened that Philoctetes, either by a contrivance of Ulysses, or
because, being wounded by one of the Poisoned Arrows, he became offensive to
the Grecian Camp, was sent away to Lemnos: But the Siege going on slowly, he
was fetched back again: With his Arrows he killed the chiefest of the Remaining
Commanders, and so Troy was taken.

22. Teucer was Brother to Ajax, and he with his Bow beat back Hector when he
came to burn the Grecian Navy.

23. The following Verses relate to Alcon the Cretan, who shot a Snake that lay
twisted round the Head of his Son, and did not touch the Boy.

24. This Goat or Hoedus Scaliger could not find, but Huetius says, the Single
Hoedus is put by Manilius for those two Haedi that are in the left hand of
Heniochus, or the Driver. Thus Horace. -- Archeri cadentis
Impetus, aut orientis Hoedi,
and Propertius Purus and Orion, purus and Hoedus erit.

25. The Poets fancied Orpheus went down to Hell, charmed Pluto and the
Destinies, and brought back his Wife Eurydice.

26. Alluding to the Fable, which says Jupiter Courted Leda in the shape of a
Swan.

27. Several Feats of Activity amongst the Romans, in which they equaled if
not excelled all the following Ages.

28. The common Subjects upon which Sophocles, Euripides, and other Tragaedians
amongst the Ancients wrote their Plays.

29. A famed Comedian, who flourished in the hundred and fourteenth Olympiad.

30. Pompey having conquered Mithridates, brought to Rome more valuable Jewels
than ever had been seen there: And from that time, as Pliny in the first
Chapter of his 37th. Book complains, the Romans began to value and admire
Jewels.

31. The Romans did not only put Notorious Malefactors in Chains, but likewise
chained them to their Keepers; and this Custom the Poet hints at.

32. Vossius out of his Ancient Manuscript reads, Et Coeli meditatus iter
vestigia perdet,
Et Perna pendens populum suspendet ab ipsa.


33. These were the several Orders in the Roman Commonwealth.

FINIS.
INDEX.
A.
AStronomy, its rise and progress, part 1. p. 3. Axis of the World, part 1. p.
13. Plague of Athens, part 1. p. 34. Aspects, part 1. p. 60. Aspects friendly
and unfriendly, part 1. p. 74. Aries's Influence, part 2. p. 9. et 24.
Aquarius's Influence, part 2. p. 15. et 27. Astronomy to be studied, part 2. p.
39. Aries's Influence when joined with other Constellations, part 2. p. 56.
Aquarius's Influence when joined with other Constellations, part 2. p. 72. The
Fable of Andromeda, part 2. p. 76.
C.
Northern Constellations, part 1. p. 14. Southern Constellations, part 1. p.
17. Figures of the Constellations not real, part 1. p. 20. Northern Polar
Circle, part 1. p. 24. Tropical Circle of Cancer, part 1. p. 24. Equinoctial
Circle, part 1. p. 24. Tropic of Capricorn, part 1. p. 24. Southern Polar
Circle, part 1. p. 25. The Colures, part 1. p. 25. Comets presage, part 1. p.
34. Chaldeans refuted, part 1. p. 106. and 110. Cancer's Influence, part 2. p.
11 et 25. Capricorn's Influence, part 2. p. 14. et 27. Countries governed by
particular Signs, part 2. p. 36. The Influence of Cancer joined with other
Constellations, part 2. p. 61. Capricorn's Influence when joined with other
Constellations, part 2. p. 70.
D
Dodecatemorion, part 1. p. 76. Dodecatemoria of the Planets, part 1. p. 77.
Day Births, part 1. p. 104. Bad and good Degrees of Signs, part 2. p. 21.
E.
Earth the Center of the Universe, part 1. p. 9. Earth round, part 1. p. 10.
Geographical description of the Earth, part 2. p. 28. Eccliptick Signs, part 2.
p. 38.
F.
Friendship, part 1. p. 72. Fortune's Lot, part 1. p. 103. Fate, part 2. p. 4.
G.
Guardians of the Signs, part 1. p. 66. Gemini's Influence, part 2. p. 10. et
25. The Influence of Gemini when joined with other Constellations, part 2. p.
60.
H.
Horizon, part 1. p. 26. Influence of the Heavens, part 1. p. 51. Signs hear
and see, love and hate each other, part 1. p. 67. The Celestial Houses, part 1.
p. 80. Horoscope, part 1. p. 105. Hours various, part 1. p. 106.
L.
Twelve Lots of the twelve Signs, part 1. p. 99. Leo's Influence, part 2. p.
11. et 26. Libra's Influence, part 2. p. 13. et 26. Leo's Influence when joined
with other Constellations, part 2. p. 63. Libra's Influence when joined with
other Constellations, part 2. p. 66.
M.
Meridian part 1. p. 26. Milky way, part 1. p. 27. Various Opinions about the
milky way, part 1. page 29. Meteors, part 1. p. 32. The several Magnitudes of
the Stars, p. 2. p. 82.
N.
Night Births, part 1. p. 104.
P.
Southern Pole like the Northern, part 1. page 19. Providence asserted against
Epicurus, part 1. page 21. Planets, part 1. page 32. Pisces's Influence, part
2. p. 15. and 27. Pisces Influence joined with other Constellations, part 2.
page 76.
Q.
Quadrates, part 1. page 61.
S.
Soul of the World, part 1. p. 12. and 51. The several kinds or sorts of Signs,
part 1. p. 55. Sextiles, part 1. p. 63. Stadia, part 1. p. 108, The several
positions of the Sphere, part 1. p. 110. Scorpio's Influence, part 2. p. 13. et
26. Sagittarius Influence, part 2. p. 14. et 27. Sagittarius Influence when
joined with other Constellations, part 2. p. 69. Scorpio's Influence when
joined with other Constellations, part 2. p. 68.
T.
Trines part 1. p. 60. Taurus's Influence, part 2. p, 10. et 25. Tenths, or
Lords of the Signs, part 2. p. 16. The Influence of Taurus joined with other
Constellations, part 2. p. 60.
V.
Virgo's Influence, part 2. p. 12. et 26. Virgo's Influence when joined with
other Constellations, part 2. p. 65.
W.
Different Opinions about the Beginning of the World, part 1. p. 7. The order
of the World, part 1. p. 8. The bigness of the World, part 1. p. 23. The World
animate, part 1. p. 51. Winds cardinal and collateral, part. 2. p. 28.
Z.
Signs of the Zodiac, part 1. p. 13. Zodiac, part 1. p. 27.
ERRATA.
Part I.
Page 5. lin. 7. read looked. page 12. l. 2. r. feet. p. 15. l. 27. r. stretch.
p. 16. l. 33. r. the Tempests. p. 19. l. 15. r. their starry. p. 24 l. 15. r.
Light. l. 18. r. Summer's Solstice. l. 22. r. sees. p. 46. l. 19. r. Fayus. p.
47. last line r. World. p. 49. l. 6. r. preside. p. 51. l. 22. r. Purle. p. 53.
l. 2. r. draws. p. 59. l. 13. r. Cretan. p. 65. l. 31. r. Times. p. 66. l. 17.
r. to more. p. 70. l. 16. r. then. p. 75. l. 26. r. which, and marks. p. 76. l.
21. r. which. p. 77. l. 10. r. Twelfth. p. 82. l. 32. r. point. p. 83. l. 6. r.
Influence. p. 84. l. 6. read Typhoeus. l. 16. r. it is. p. 86. l. 17. r. the. p.
97. l. 9. r. sells. p. 100. l. 27. r. speeds. p. 104. l. 4. r. unfold. p. 107.
l. 23. r. Carr. p. 109. l. 8. r. do equal. p. 110. l. 26. r. site. p. 114. in
the margin blot out the Trine. l. 24. r. regularly. p. 116. l. 13. r. longest.
p. 119. l. 15. r. she. p. 121. l. 28. r. fails. p. 124. l. 8. r. is.

Part II.
Page 4. lin. 24. read Marius. p. 8. l. 10. r. enlarge. l. 19. r. Successes. p.
10. l. 18. r. wastes. p. 16. l. 28. r. o're-spread. p. 17. l. 2. r. in a
Disguise. p. 26. l. 3. r. averse. p. 31. l. 2. r. stood. p. 32. l. 7. r. which.
p. 33. l. 21. r. manly, l. 28. r. flats. p. 39. l. 7. r. Pairs. p. 55. l. 9. r.
Carr. l. 30. r. Carrs. p. 59. l. 6. r. makes. p. 67. l. 18. r. growing. p. 70.
l. 18. r. kiss. p. 72. l. 33. r. who. p. 83. l. 22. r. nor.


