TO HIS HIGHNESS THE LORD PROTECTOR OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF England, Scotland,
and Ireland.

THE HUMBLE ADDRESSES OF MENASSEH Ben Israel, a Divine, and Doctor of PHYSIC,
in behalf of the Jewish Nation.

TO His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR OF THE Commonwealth of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND,
and IRELAND The Humble Addresses of Menasseh Ben Israel, a Divine and Doctor of
Physic, in behalf of the Jewish Nation.
GIve me leave, at such a juncture of time, to your Highness, in a style and
manner fitting to us Jews and our condition. It is a thing most certain, that
the great God of Israel, Creator of Heaven and Earth, does give and take away
Dominions and Empires, according to his own pleasure; exalting some, and
overthrowing others: who, seeing he has the hearts of Kings in his hand; he
easily moves them whithersoever himself pleases, to put in execution his
Divine Commands. This, my Lord, appears most evidently out of those words of
Daniel, where he, rendering thanks unto God, for revealing unto him that
prodigious Dream of Nebuchadnezar, does say: Thou that removest Kings, and sets
up Kings. And elsewhere, To the end the living might know, that the Highest
has dominion in Man's Kingdom, and gives the same to whom he please. Of the
very same mind are Thalmudists likewise, affirming that a good Government, or
Governor, is a Heavenly Gift, and that there is no Governor, but is first
called by God unto that dignity: and this they prove from that passage of
Exodus: Behold I have called Bazale'l by name, etc. all things being governed
by Divine Providence, God dispensing rewards unto Virtues, and punishment unto
Vices, according to his own good Will. This the Examples of great Monarchs
make good; especially of such, who have afflicted the people of Israel: For
none has ever afflicted them, who has not been by some ominous Exit, most
heavily punished of God Almighty; as is manifest from the Histories of those
Kings, Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezar, Antiochus, Epiphanius, Pompey, and others. And
on the contrary, none ever was a Benefactor to that people, and cherished them
in their Countries, who thereupon has not presently begun very much to
flourish. In so much that the Oracle to Abraham (I will bless them that bless
thee, and curse them that curse thee) seems yet daily to have its
accomplishment. Hence I, one of the least among the Hebrews, since by
experience I have found, that through Gods great bounty toward us, many
considerable and eminent persons both for Piety and Power, are moved with
sincere and inward pity and compassion toward us, and do comfort us
concerning the approaching deliverance of Israel, could not but for my self,
and in the behalf of my Country men, make this my humble address to your
Highness, and beseech you for Gods sake, that ye would, according to that Piety
and Power wherein you are eminent beyond others, vouchsafe to grant, that the
Great and Glorious Name of the Lord our God may be extolled, and solemnly
worshipped and praised by us through all the bounds of this Commonwealth; and
to grant us place in your Country, that we may have our Synagogues, and free
exercise of our Religion. I nothing doubting, but that your Clemency will
easily grant this most equitable Petition of ours. Pagans have of old, out of
reverence to the God of Israel; and the esteem they had to his people granted
most willingly free liberty, even to apostated Jews; as Onias the High Priest,
to build another Temple in their Country, like unto that at Jerusalem: how
much more then may we, that are not Apostate or runagate Jews, hope it from
your Highness and your Christian Council, since you have so great knowledge
of, and adore the same one only God of Israel, together with us. Besides, it
increases our confidence of your bounty toward us, in that so soon as ever the
rumor of that most wished-for liberty, that ye were a thinking to grant us,
was made known unto our Contrymen; I, in the name of my Nation, the Jews,
that live in Holland, did congratulate and entertain their Excellencies, the
Ambassadors of England; who were received in our Synagogue with as great pomp
and applause, Hymns and cheerfulness of mind, as ever any Sovereign Prince
was. For our people did in their own minds presage, that the Kingly Government
being now changed into that of a Commonwealth, the ancient hatred toward
them, would also be changed into good will: that those rigorous Laws (if any
there be yet extant, made under the Kings) against so innocent a people, would
happily be repealed. So that we hope now for better from your gentleness, and
goodness, since, from the beginning of your Government of this Commonwealth,
your Highness has professed much respect, and favor toward us. Wherefore I
humbly entreat your Highness, that you would with a gracious eye have regard
unto us, and our Petition, and grant unto us, as you have done unto others,
free exercise of our Religion, that we may have our Synagogues, and keep our
own public worship, as our brethren do in Italy, Germany, Poland, and many
other places, and we shall pray for the happiness and Peace of this your much
renowned and puissant Commonwealth.

A DECLARATION TO THE Commonwealth of ENGLAND, BY Rabbi Menasseh Ben ISRAEL,
showing the Motives of his coming into England.
HAving some years since often perceived that in this Nation, God has a
People, that is very tender hearted, and well wishing to our sore afflicted
Nation; Yea, I my self having some Experience thereof, in diverse Eminent
persons, excelling both in Piety and Learning: I thought with my self, I should
do no small service to my own Nation, as also to the People and Inhabitants of
this Commonwealth, if by humble addresses to the late Honorable Parliament, I
might obtain a safe. Conduct once to transport my self thither. Which I having
done, and according to my desire, received a most kind and satisfactory
Answer, I now am come. And to the end all Men may know the true Motives and
Intent of this my coming, I shall briefly comprehend and deliver them in these
particulars.

First and Foremost, my Intention is to try, if by Gods good hand over me, I may
obtain here for my Nation the Liberty of a free and public Synagogue, wherein
we may daily call upon the Lord our God, that once he may be pleased to
remember his Mercies and Promises done to our Fore fathers, forgiving our
trespasses, and restoring us once again into our fathers Inheritance; and
besides to sue also for a blessing upon this Nation, and People of England, for
receiving us into their bosoms, and comforting Sion in her distress.

My second Motive is, because the opinion of many Christians and mine do
concur herein, that we both believe that the restoring time of our Nation
into their Native Country, is very near at hand; I believing more
particularly, that this restoration cannot be, before these words of Daniel
Chap. 12. ver. 7. be first accomplished, when he says, And when the dispersion
of the Holy people shall be completed in all places, then shall all these
things be completed: signifying therewith, that before all be fulfilled, the
People of God must be first dispersed into all places and Countries of the
World. Now we know, how our Nation at the present is spread all about, and has
its seat and dwelling in the most flourishing parts of all the Kingdoms, and
Countries of the Worlds, as well in America, as in the other three parts
thereof; except only in this considerable and mighty Island. And therefore
this remains only in my judgment, before the MESSIA come and restore our
Nation, that first we must have our seat here likewise.

My thira Motive is grounded on the profit that I conceive this Commonwealth
is to reap, if it shall vouchsafe to receive us; for thence, I hope, there will
follow a great blessing from God upon them, and a very abundant trading into,
and from all parts of the World, not only without prejudice to the English
Nation, but for their profit, both in Importation, and Exportation of goods.
Yet if any shall doubt hereof, I trust their Charity toward the people of God,
will satisfy them, especially when they shall read the ensuing Treatise.

The fourth Motive of my coming hither, is, my sincere affection to this
Commonwealth, by reason of so many Worthy, Learned, and Pious men in this
Nation, whose loving kindness and Piety I have experience of: hoping to find
the like affection in all the People generally, the more, because I always
have, both by writing and deeds, professed much inclination to this
Commonwealth; and that I persuade my self they will be mindful of that
Command of the Lord our God, who so highly recommends unto all men the love of
strangers; much more to those that profess their good affection to them. For
this I desire all may be confident of, that I am not come to make any
disturbance, or to move any disputes about matters of Religion; but only to
live with my Nation in the fear of the Lord, under the shadow of your
protection, whiles we expect with you the hope of Israel to be revealed.

How Profitable The Nation of the Jews are.
THree things, if it please your Highness, there are that make a strange
Nation wel-beloved amongst the Natives of a land where they dwell; and on the
contrary, three things that make them hateful. viz. Profit, they may receive
from them; Fidelity they hold toward their Princes; and the Noblenes and
purety of their blood. Now when I shall have made good, that all these three
things are found in the Jewish Nation, I shall certainly persuade your
Highness, that with a favorable eye, (Monarchy being changed into a Republicq)
you shall be pleased to receive again the Nation of the Jews, who in time past
lived in that Island: but by, I know not what, false Informations, were cruelly
handled and banished.

Profit is a most powerful motive, and which all the World preferres before
all other things: and therefore we shall handle that point first.

It is a thing confirmed, that merchandicing is, as it were, the proper
profession of the Nation of the Jews. I attribute this in the first place, to
the particular Providence and mercy of God toward his people: for having
banished them from their own Country, yet not from his Protection, he has
given them, as it were, a natural instinct, by which they might not only gain
what was necessary for their need, but that they should also thrive in Riches
and possessions; whereby they should not only become gracious to their Princes
and Lords, but that they should be invited by others to come and dwell in their
Lands.

Moreover, it cannot be denied, but that necessity stirs up a man's ability
and industry; and that it gives him great incitement, by all means to try the
favor of Fortune.

Besides, seeing it is no Wisdom for them to endeavor the gaining of Land
and other immovable goods, and so to imprison their possessions here, where
their persons are subject to so many casualities, banishments and
peregrinations; they are forced to use marchandizing until that time, when
they shall return to their own Country, that then as God has promised by de
Prophet Zachary, There shall be found no more any merchant amongst them in the
House of the Lord.

From that very thing we have said, there rises an infallible Profit,
commodity and gain to all those Princes in whose Lands they dwell above all
other strange Nations whatsoever, as experience by diverse Reasons does confirm.

I. The Jews, having no opportunity to live in their own Country, to till the
Lands or other like employments, give themselves wholly unto merchandising, and
for contriving new Inventions, no Nation almost going beyond them. And so 't is
observed, that wheresoever they go to dwell, there presently the Traficq begins
to flourish. Which may be seen in diverse places, especially in Ligorne, which
having been but a very ignoble and inconsiderable City, is at this time, by the
great concourse of people, one of the most famous places of Trafique of whole
Italy.

Furthermore, the Inventor of the famous Scala de Spalatro (the most firm and
solid Traficq of Venice) was a Jew, who by this his Invention transported the
Negotiation from a great part of the Levant into that City.

Even that very same is seen likewise at this day in Nizza, and in other
infinite places more, both in Europe and Asia.

II. The Nation of the Jews is dispersed throughout the whole world, it being a
chastisement that God has laid upon them for their Idolatries, Deuteronomy. 28.69.
Ezech. 20.23. Nehem. 1.8. Psalm. 107.27. as likewayes by contrary fortunes their
families suffer the same ship wrack.

Now in this dispersion our Forefathers flying from the Spanish Inquisition,
some of them came in Holland, others got into Italy, and others betook
themselves in Asia; and so easily they credit one another; and by that means
they draw the Negotiation wherever they are; wherewith all of them
marchandising and having perfect knowledge of all the kinds of Moneys,
Diamants, Cochinil, Indigo, Wines, oil, and other Commodities, that serve from
place to place; especially holding correspondence with their friends and
kinds-folke, whose language they understand; they do abundantly enrich the
Lands and Countries of strangers, where they live, not only with what is
requisite and necessary for the life of man, but also what may serve for
ornament to his civil condition. Of which Traficq, there arises ordinarily
Five important benefits.

1. The augmentation of the Publiq Tolls and Gabels, at their coming in and
going out of the place. 2. The transporting and bringing in of marchandises
from remote Countries. 3. The affording of Materials in great plenty for all
Mechaniqs; as Wool, Leather and Hides, and such like Merchandise. 4. The
venting and exportation of so many kinds of Manifactures. 5. The Commerce and
reciprocal Negotiation at Sea, which is the ground of Peace between neighbor
Nations, and of great profit to their own fellow-citizens.
III. This reason is the more strengthened, when we see, that not only the
Jewish Nation dwelling in Holland and Italy, traficq with their own stock,
but also with the richesse of many others of their own Nation, friends,
kinds-men and acquaintance, which not withstanding live in Spain, and send
unto them their moneys and goods, which they hold in their hands, and content
themselves with a very small portion of their estate, to the end they may be
secure and free from danger that might happen unto them, in case they should
fall under they yoke of the Inquisition; whence not only their goods, but
oftentimes also their lives are endangered.

IV. The love that men ordinarily bear to their own Country, and the desire
they have to end their lives, where they had their beginning, is the cause, that
most strangers having gotten richesse where they are in a forain land; are
commonly taken in a desire to return to their natif soil, and there peaceably
to enjoy their estate; so that as they were a help to the places where they
lived, and negotiated while they remained there; so when they depart from
thence, they carry all away, and spoil them of their wealth: transporting all
into their own native Country: But with the Jews the case is far different;
for where the Jews are once kindly received, they make a firm resolution never
to depart from thence, seeing they have no proper place of their own: and so
they are always with their goods in the Cities where they live, a perpetual
benefit to all payments. Which reasons do clearly prove, that it being the
property of Citizens in populous and rich countries, to seek their rest and
ease with buying lands and fair possession of which they live: many of them
hating commerce, aspire to Titles and Dignities: that of all strangers, in
whose hands ordinarily Trafique is found, there are none so profitable and
beneficial to the place where they trade and live, as is the Nation of the
Jews. And seeing amongst the people of Europe, the chiefest richesses they
possess, come from Spain, those neighbor Nations, where the Jews shall
find liberty to live according to their own Judicial Laws, they shall most
easily draw that benefit to themselves by means of the industry of our Nation,
and their mutual correspondance.

From hence (if it please your Highness) it results; that the Jewish Nation,
though scattered through the whole World, are not therefore a despisable
people, but as a Plant worthy to be planted in the whole world, received into
populous Cities: who ought to plant them in those places, which are most secure
from danger; being trees of most savory fruit and profit, to be always most
favored with Laws and Privileges; or Prerogatives, secured and defended by
Arms* An Exemple of this we have in our times. His Majesty, the Illustrious
King of Danemarck, invited them with special Privileges into Geluckstadt: the
Duke of Savoy into Nisa of Provence; and the Duke of Modina in Retio, allowing
them such conditions and benefices, the like never were presented unto them by
any other Prince, as appears by the copy of those Privileges, which I have
in my hands. But supposing it would be a matter of too large extention, if I
should make a relation of all the places under whose Princes the Jews live, I
will only speak briefly of the two Tribes Judah and Benjamin: These in India
in Cochin have 4 Synagogues, one part of these Jews being there of a white
color, and three of a tawny; these being most favored by the King. In the
year 1640. dyed Samuel Castoel, Gouvernour of the City, and Agent for the
King, and David Castoel his son succeeded in his place. In Persia there is a
great number of Jews, and they live indifferent freely: there are also amongst
them that are in favor and great respect by the King, and who live there very
bravely. Some years past, there was Elhazar Huza, the Viceroy, and now there is
David Ian, if yet he be living. In the year 1636. the Saltan Amarat took in
Bagdad, and putting all to the sword, he commanded that they should not touch
the Jews, nor their houses, and besides that, he freed them from one half of
the tribut they were wont to pay to the Persian.

But the chiefest place where the Jews live, is the Turkish Empire, where some
of them live in great estate, even in the Court of the Grand Turk at
Constantinople, by reason there is no Viceroy, or Gouvernour, or Bassa, which
has not a Jew to manage his affairs, and to take care for his estate: Hence
it comes, that in short time they grow up to be Lords of great revenus, and
they most frequently bend the minds of Greatones to most weighty affairs in
gouvernment.

The greatest Viceroy of whole Europe is the Bassa of Egypt; this Bassa always
takes to him, by order of the Kingdom, a lew with the title of Zaraf-Bassa
(Thresurer) viz. of all the Revenus of that gouvernment, who receaves purses
full of money, seals them, and then sends them to the King. This man in a short
time grows very rich, for that by his hands as being next to the Bassa, the 24
Gouvernments of that Empire are sold and given, and all other bussinesses
menaged. At present he that possesses this place, is called Sr. Abraham
Alhula. The number of the Jews living in this Kingdom of the Great Turk, is
very great, and amounts to many Millions. In Constantinople alone there are 48
Synagogues, and in Salaminque 36, and more then fourscore thousand souls in
these two Cities alone.

The first King gave them great privileges, which they enjoy until this day:
for besides the liberty, they have everywhere, of trading with open shops, of
bearing any Office and possessing of any goods, both mooveable and immooveable,
he yet granted them power to judge all Civil causes according to their own
Laws amongst themselves. Moreover they are exempted from going to Wars, and
that soldiers should be quartered in their houses, and that Justice should
take no place upon the death of any one that left no heir to his Estate.

In all which they are preferred before the natural Turks themselves. For
which cause they pay in some Cities to the King three Patacons, and in others
two and a half by the pole.

In this estate some of the Jews have grown to great fortunes; as Joseph
Nasino, unto whom Amatus Lusitanus dedicated his fifth and sixth Centuriae, was
by Sultan Solime made Duke of Maccia, Earl of Andro, Seignor of Millo, and the
seven Islands: And Jacob Ben-Iaes by Sultan Amurat, was made Gouvernour of the
Tiberiades: so likewise others were exalted to very great and eminent
Dignities: as was that Selomo Rofe, that was sent for Ambassador at Venice,
where he confirmed the last Peace with Amurat. In Germany, there lives also a
great multitude of Jews, especially at Prague, Vienna and Franckfurt, very much
favored by the most mild and most gracious Emperors, but despised of the
people, being a Nation not very finely garnished by reason of their vile
clothing: yet notwithstanding there is not wanting amongst them persons of
great quality. The Emperor Matthias made Noble both Mardochai Mairel, and
Ferdinando Jacob Bar Seba.

But yet a greater number of Jews are found in the Kingdom of Poland, Prussia
and Lethuania, under which Monarchy they have the Jurisdiction to judge amongst
themselves all causes, both Criminal and Civil; and also great and famous
Academies of their own. The chief Cities where the Nation lives, are Lublin
and Cracow, where there is a Jew, called Isaac Iecells, who built a Synagogue,
which stood him in one hundred thousand Francs, and is worth many tons of gold.
There is in this place such infinite number of Jews, that although the
Cosaques in the late wars have killed of them above one hundred and
fourscore thousand; yet it is sustained that they are yet at this day as
innumerable as those were that came out of Egypt. In that Kingdom the whole
Negotiation is in the hand of the Jews, the rest of the Christians are either
all Noblemen, or Rustiques and kept as slaves.

In Italy they are generally protected by all the Princes: their principal
residence is in the most famous City of Venice; so that in that same City
alone they possess about 1400 Houses; and are used there with much courtoisy
and clemency. Many also live in Padoa and Verona; others in Mantua, and also
many in Rome it self. Finally they are scattered here and there in the chief
places of Italy, and do live there with many special privileges.

In the Gouvernment of the great Duke of Tuscany, they are by that Prince most
graciously and bountifully dealt with, having power from him granted, to have
their Iudicatory by themselves, and to judge in all matters, both Civil and
Criminal; besides many other Privileges, whereof I my self have the Copies in
hand. The rich and illustrious families that flourished in these Countries are
many, viz. The Thoraces, who being three Brethren, shared betwixt them above
700 thousand Crowns. In Ferrara were the Viles, whose stock was above 200
thousand Crowns. The Lord Joseph de Fano, Marquis de Villependi, was a man
much respected of all the Princes in Italy, and was called by them, The
Peacemaker and appeaser of all troubles; because he, by his auctority and
entremise, was used to appease all troubles and strife rising amongst them. Don
Daniel Rodrigues, because of his prudency and other good qualities, was sent in
the year 1589 from the most Excellent Senate of Venice into Dalmatia, to appease
those tumults and scandals given by the Usquoquibs in Clissa: which he most
manly effected, and caused all the women and children, that were kept cloose
prisonners, to be set at liberty, brought also to an happy issue many other
things of great moment, for which he was sent. Alphonso II. the Duke of
Ferrara, sent also for his Ambassador to the Imperial Majesty, one Abraham de
Bondi, to pay and discharge Investiture of the States of Modena and Reggio. The
Prince of Sasol and the Marquis of Scandia likewise, had to their Factors men
of our Nation.

In the King dome of Barbary, there lives also a great number of Jews,
who-ever cruelly and basely used by that Barbarous Nation, except at Marrocco,
the Court and Kings house, where they have their Naguid or Prince that gouverns
them, and is their Judge, and is called at this day, Seignor Moseh Palache: and
before him was in the same Court, that Noble family Ruthes, that had power and
Jurisdiction of all kind of punishment, only life and death excepted.

In the Low Countries also, the Jews are received with great Charity and
Benevolency, and especially in this most renowned City of Amsterdam, where
there are no less then 400 Families; and how great a trading and Negotiation
they draw to that City, experience does sufficiently witness. They have there
no less then three hundred houses of their own, enjoy a good part of the West
and East-Indian Compagnies; and besides have yet to set forth their Traficq
such a stock, that for setting a side, only one duit of every pound flamish
for all kind of commodities that enter, and again as much for all what goes out
of this town, and what besides we pay yearly of the rents we get from the
East-Indian Compagnie to the relief and sustenance of the poor of our
Synagogue, that very money amounts ordinarily every year, unto the sum very
near of 12000 Franks; whereby you may easily conceive what a mighty stock it
is they trade with, and what a profit they needs must bring into this City.

In Hambourg likewise, a most famous City of Holsace in Germany, there lives
also a hundred families, protected by the Magistrate, though molested by the
people. There resides Sr. Duarck Mines d'Acosta, Resident for his Majesty the
King of Portugal: Gabriel Gomes, Agent for his Majesty the King of Danemarck:
David de Lima, a Ieweller, for the same his Majesty; and Emanuel Boccaro
Rosales, created by the Emperor a Nobleman and a Count Palatin.

In all these places the Jews live (in a manner) all of them Merchants, and
that without any prejudice at all to the Natives: For the Natives, and those
especially that are most rich, they build themselves houses and Palaces, buy
Lands and firm goods, aim at Titles and Dignities, and so seek their rest
and contentement that way: But as for the Jews, they aspire at nothing, but to
prefer themselves in their way of merchandise; and so employing their
Capitals, they send forth the benefit of their labor amongst many and sundry
of the Natives, which they, by the traficq of their Negotiation, do enrich.
From whence it is easy to judge of the profit that Princes and Commonwealths do
reap, by giving liberty of Religion to the Jews, and gathering them by some
special privileges into their Countries: as Trees that bring forth such
excellent fruits.

So that if one Prince, ill advised, drives them out of his Land, yet another
invites them to his, and shows them favor: Wherein we may see the prophety of
Jacob fulfilled in the letter: The staff (to support him) shall not depart
from Jacob, until Messiah shall come. And this shall suffice concerning the
Profit of the Jewish Nation.

How Faithful The Nation of the Jews are.
THe Fidelity of Vassals and Subjects, is a thing that Princes much most esteem
off: for there-on, both in Peace and War, depends the preservation of their
estates. And as for this point, in my opinion, they owe much to the Nation of
the Jews, by reason of the faithfulness and loyalty they show to all
Potentates that receive and protect them in their Countries. For setting aside
the Histories of the Ptolomies, Kings of Egypt, who did not trust the Guard of
their persons, nor the keeping of their Forts, nor the most important affairs
of their Kingdom to any other Nation with greater satisfaction then to the
Jews; the Wounds of Antipater showed to Julius Caesar in token of his loyalty,
and the brazen Tables of our Ancestors amongst the Romans, are evident
witnesses enough of their fidelity showed unto them.

In Spain the Jews of Burgos, as the Cronicles do declare, most generously
showed the very same fidelity in the times of Don Henrique; who having killed
his Brother, the King, Don Pedro de Cruel, made himself Lord of all his
Kingdoms, and brought under his obedience all the Grandos and people of Spain:
Only the Jews of Burgos denied to obey him, and fortified themselves within
the City, saying, That God would never have it, that they should deny obedience
to their Natural Lord Don Pedro, or to his rightful successors. A constancy
that the prudent King, Don Henriques, very much esteemed of, saying, that such
Vassals as those were, by Kings and great men, worthy of much account, seeing
they held greater respect to the fidelity they ought to their King, although
conquered and dead, than to the present fortune of the Conqueror: And a while
after, receiving very honorable conditions, they gave themselves over.

In Spain also (as you may see in Mariana) many Jews for the same fidelity
were appointed Gouvernours of the Kingdom, and Tutors of Noble-mens children,
jointly to others of the Nobility upon the death of their Parents.

The Chronicles of the Xarifes, dedicated to King Philip the second, King of
Spain, alleagues for an exemple of great fidelity and virtue, how the rising
of the Xarifes against the Morines, their killing and spoiling them of the
Kingdom, was such a great grief unto Samuel Alvalensi, one of those banished
out of Spain, and much favored by the king of Fez, descended from the house
of the Morines; that joining himself with other Magistrates, and subjects of the
Morines, arming some ships and going himself Captain over all, he came suddenly
with 400 men, and fell by night upon the Army of the Xarifes, that were more
then 3000 men, besieging Copta, and without losing one man, killed of them
above 500, and caused them to raise the siege.

Many the like Exemples may be brought of times past; but for our present, and
modern times there is no Exemple so evident, as in the besieging of Mantua for
the Emperor in the year 1630, where the Jews fought most valiantly, and
rescued it from the Natives. As likewise in the Seignory of Brasil, where the
same thing was done: for one of the same Nation, a Dutchman, having delivered
the Cape unto the Portugals, there was found in our Nation there not only
loyalty, but also such discretion, that had they taken their advise, the
business had not so proceeded.

This may be seen more clearly yet in their being banished out of Castilla, in
the days of Ferdinand and Isabella. Their number at that time was supposed to
have been half a million of men, amongst whom were many of great valor and
courage (as Don Isaac Abarbanel, a Counselor of State, does relate) and yet
amongst so great a number, there was not found any one man, that undertook to
raise a party to free themselves from that most miserable banishment. An
evident sign of the proper and natural resolution of this Nation, and of
their constant obedience to their Princes.

The same affection is confirmed by the inviolable custom of all the Jews
wheresoever they live: for on every Sabbath or festival Day, they everywhere
are used to pray for the safety of all Kings, Princes and Commonwealths, under
whose jurisdiction they live, of what profession-soever: unto which duty they
are bound by the Prophets and the Talmudists; from the Law, as by Jeremy chap.
29. verse. 7. Seek the peace of the City unto which I have made you to wander:
and pray for her unto the Lord, for in her Peace you shall enjoy peace. He
speaks of Babylon, where the Jews at that time were captives. From the Talmud
ord. 4. tract. 4. Abodazara pereq. 1. Pray for the peace of the Kingdom, for
unles there were fear of the Kingdom, men would swallow one the other alive,
etc.

From the continual and never broken Custom of the Jews wheresoever they
are, on the Sabbath Day, or other solemn Feasts; at which time all the Jews
from all places come together to the Synagogue, after the benediction of the
Holy Law, before the Minister of the Synagogue blesses the people of the
Jews; with a loud voice he blesses the Prince of the Country under whom they
live, that all the Jews may hear it, and say, Amen. The words he uses are
these, as in the printed book of the Jews may be seen: He that gives
salvation unto Kings, and dominion unto Lords, he that delivered his servant
David from the sword of the Enemy, he that made a way in the Sea, and a path in
the strange waters, bless and keep, preserve and rescue, exalt and magnify, and
lift up higher and higher, our Lord. [And then he names, the Pope, the
Emperor, King, Duke, or any other Prince under whom the Jews live, and
add's;] The King of kings defend him in his mercy, making him joyful, and free
him from all dangers and distress. The King of kings, for his goodness sake,
raise up and exalt his planetary star, and multiply his days over his
Kingdom. The King of kings for his mercies sake, put into his heart, and into
the heart of his Counselors, and those that attend and administer to him, that
he may show mercy unto us, and unto all the people of Israel. In his days and
in our days, let Judah be safe, and Irae dwell securely, and let the Redeemer
come to Irae; and so may it please God. Amen. These are the very formalities
set down word for word, which the Jews, by the command of God, received from
the Talmud, do use in their prayers for Princes, under whose gouvernment they
reside. And therefore wise Princes are wont to banish from their Courts false
rapports. And most wise R. Simon Ben-Iochai, in his excellent book called Zoar
in Sarasa Pecudi, relates, that it is a Tradition received from Heaven, that
the Kings of the Nations of the world, Princes, Gouvernours, that protect the
Jews in this world, or do them any good, that the same shall enjoy certain
degrees of glory, or eternal reward; as on the other side, they that do to the
Nation of the Jews any harm, that they shall be punished with some particular
eternal punishment. As appears also out of Esa. the last chapter.

Thus you see the Fidelity of the Jews toward their Gouvernours clearly
prooved. Now, that no man may think that their banishment out of Spaigne and
Portugal, proceeded from any suspicion or faults of theirs, I shall clearly
rehearse the reason of so sudden a determination, and what the thoughts of many
Christian Princes have been there-upon. The business was thus: Ferdinand and
Isabella, Gouvernours of Castile, having gained the Kingdom of Granada, of
which they took possession on the 5 of January, they resolved to thrust out
all the Jews that lived in their Kingdoms, and so on the last of March, they
made an Edict in the same City, in which they expressed: That seeing the Jews
in their Countries drew many Christians to turn Jews, and especially some
Noblemen of their Kingdom of Andaluzia, that for this cause they banished
them under most heavy penalties, etc. So that the cause of their banishment was
not any disloyalty at all.

Now what amongst many others in all Christendom, one famous Lawyer in Rome,
and Osorius an excellent and most eloquent Historian have thought, I shall here
relate. In the year 1492 (says the Lawyer) Ferdinand, called the Catholic,
being King of Spain, drove out of his Country all the Jews that were living
there from the time of the Babylonian and Roman Captivity, and were very rich
in houses and goods: and that upon pain, if they went not away within the term
of 6 months, that all their houses and goods should be confiscated unto the
Exchequer, which as we have said, were very great. Whereupon they leaving the
Kingdom of Castile, they went over many of them into Portugal, as being the
nearest place. In the year 1497, there being an Alliance contracted between the
Kings of Castile and Portugal; the Jews at the request of the said King
Ferdinand, were banished out of Portugal; but it being against the will of
Emauel, King of Portugal, to have them banished out of his Country, he resolved
to oblidge them to become Christians, promising never to molest them, neither
in Criminal matters, nor in the loss of their goods; and exempted them from
many burdens and Tributs of the Kingdom. This Emanuel being dead, John III.
succeeded in his place in the Kingdom of Portugal, who being excited by
others, said, That what his Father Emanue had done, concerning the
not-troubling them, was of no value, because they lived not as was convenient,
and that without the authority of the Pope of Rome, his father could not grant
any such thing: for which cause he would that for those that lived amish, there
should be proceeded against, as against the Mores in Castile: And sending to
Rome to disanull the said promises, it was not only not granted to him, but
moreover they reprooved his appearance there, and praised and approoved the
promises made by his Father Emanuel to the Jews, publishing a general pardon
to all that were taken, which were about 1500, and they all were set free.
Which Bull was granted by Clement VII. by the intervention of all the
Consistory of Cardinals. Afterward the said king John sent once again to
desire the former License with so many replications and triplications, that at
length the Pope granted it: But a few days after it was revoked again with a
general Pardon to all that were taken, which were 12000, with such a
determination, that the same License should never be granted, as being against
all right and reason. This troubled Don John the King very much, and withal
the Cardinal his brother, who came in these last days to be King of Portugal
himself. Great Paul III. of the house of Farnesia, succeeding to Clement the
VII. there was a request tendered to the Pope for power to bring in the
Inquisition into this Kingdom: The Pope would not grant it, saying: He could
not, and that it was a thing against reason and Justice, but on the contrary
confirmed the promises made by the King Don Emanuel, his Father; and pardonned
all the delinquents since the time of violence unto that day. Don John seeing
this, sent an Ambassador merely for that business to the Pope, but could
obtain nothing at all: for which cause King John resolved to entreat the
Emperor Charles the V. than passing for Rome, as Conqueror over the Turks,
having wonn Tunis and Goleta, that in this his Triumph he would take occasion
to desire this favor from the Pope, that the King of Portugal might set up the
Inquisition in his Kingdom, it being an old custom that those that triumphed,
should ask something of the Pope that they most desired. The Emperor than
having desired this, the Pope answered him, that he could not do it by reason
of the agreement made, and the promises of the King Don Emanuel; which he had
found by an Apostolical Nuntio in Portugal in the year 1497, at which time the
Jews were forced and compelled to become Christians. The Emperor replied, Let
that sin fall on him, and the Prince his son, the Apostolical seat shall
be free from it. So the Pope granted it; because the Emperor Charles the V.
was brother in law to King Don John of Portugal; and besides they treated at
that time to enter further in affinity, and to marry their children, which
since was effected. After Paul the III. granted this, there was a new Pardon
given in general to all that were taken unto that time, amounting the Number
unto 1800. But the King refusing to obey the Pardon, and to free the
Prisonners, the Pope took it very ill, and sent for this only business for his
Nuntio, one Monsegnor Monte Paliciano, who since was Cardinal of the Church of
Rome. And the King for all this not obeying, the Pope made the Nuntio to six
the Pardon upon the doors of the Cathedral Churches, and the Nuntio caused the
Prisons to be opened, and there were set free about 1800 prisonners. He that
solicited this business at Rome, was one Seignor Duarte de Paz, a Cavallier of
the Order of St. John: whom to search out there were appointed at Rome ten men
disguised; these having found him, gave him fifteen wounds, and left him for
dead: thus wounded, he was carried to the house of Seignor Philip Estrozi: This
being reported to the Pope, Paul the III. he caused him to be carried to the
Castle of S. Angelo, where he gave order to have him nobly cured. That same
Seignor was by the Pope, by all the Cardinals and the whole Court in great
respect. At the same time that this man was hurt, the Emperor Charles the V.
was at Rome with his Army. On the time when he began to treat of this business
with Clement the VII. seeing the Kings importunity, he made a Bull and gave
license to all the Portugals of that Nation of the Jews, that they might go
and live in the Church-Dominions, and whosoever will come in the said
Dominions, that he shall have freedom to live, as at the first, in his Jewish
profession, and that at no time they should be enquired into, but after the
same manner as they were wont to live in Portugal, so they should live there.
The said Bull passed all the Consistory; and being confirmed and received by
the said Portugals, they began some of them to depart to live in Ancona, being
a seaport more commodious then others: which being known by the King and
Cardinal of Portugal, they caused to be proclaimed in all the Kingdom, that
upon pain of death, and loss of all their goods, no man should dare depart
the Kingdom. Clement being dead, in his place succeeded (as we have said) Pope
Paul the III. who confirmed the same Privileges: Afterward in the year 1550.
Paul the III. died, and Julius the III. succeeded, who ratified the
forementioned Privileges given by his Praedecessours, and the whole
Apostolic Seat inviolably. In those times there were many Doctors that wrote
on this matter, amongst whom the chiefest were Alciat, and the Cardinal
Parisius in 2 and 3 part Consiliorum pro Christianis noviter conversis;
showing by reason and law, that considering they were forced and not converted
willingly, that they had not fallen nor do fall under any Censure. These
reasons being considered of by the Princes of Italy, they granted likewise the
same Privileges: viz. Cosmo the Great; Duke of Florence, and Hercules, Duke of
Ferrare, and within few years Emanuel Felibert, Duke of Savoye; and were by
all his successors confirmed. In the year 1492, when they were banished from
Castile, we read in the Chronicles of that Kingdom, that the Lords of that
place did complain that their Cities and Towns were destroyed and
dis-inhabitated; and had they believed any such thing, that they would have
opposed the Kings decree, and would never have given their consent to it. That
was the cause, that Don Emanuel of Portugal, seeing on the one side apparent
dommage, should he let them depart his Kingdom; and on the other side, not
being able to break his promise made to the King of Castile, he caused them to
be compelled to the Faith, upon pain of Death, that they should not depart out
of his Dominions. The Catholiq King was blamed of all Christian Princes, and
especially by the Senate of Venice, (as Marcus Antonius Sabellicus does write)
for having banished a Nation so profitable to the Publicq and Particular good,
without any kind of pretense. And so the Parliament of Paris likewise did
extremely wonder at such a determination. And truly good reason there was to
wonder; for we see since, what the Senate of Venice has done, who never
deliberats or puts into execution any thing, without great judgment: having
the advantage of all Republicqs in their gouvernment and leaving behind them
the Romans, Carthagenians, Athenians, and most learned Lacedaemonians; and that
Parliament of Paris, which in the gouvernment of affairs was always most
prudent. Most of those that were banished passed to the Levant, who were
embraced by the Ottoman-familly, all the succeeding Kings wondering at it, that
the Spanjards, who make profession to be a politiq Nation, should drive out of
their Kingdoms such a people. Moreover Sultan Bajazet, and Sultan Soliman,
received them exceeding well, the coming of the Jews to them being very
acceptable: and so did likewise all their successors, considering of how great
a profit and benefit their residing in their dominions was. And in the year
1555. Paul the IV. being chosen Pope of Rome, who before was called Cardinal de
Chiesi, an intimate to the Cardinal of Portugal, caused the Jews to be held in
Ancona, and other places of the Church, according to the Privileges granted
to them by the Popes, his Predecesseurs in the name of the Apostolical Roman
seat. Licurgus, Solon and Draco, and all Founders of Commonwealths, gave
counsel that strangers ought to be loved and much made of, as in the
Discourses of Se. in 7 de Legibus de Rep. is amply to be seen. And by the
Divine Law (as Moses commands us) we ought not to trouble a stranger, but he
says, Remember you were strangers in the Land of Egypt.

In summa, to the same purpose might be brought many other and more powerful
reasons, but because they are out of our consideration, we pass them over. And
here to declare some particulars, worthy to be known for advise and exemple,
that befell our Nation in those bitter banishments; part whereof Hieronymus
Osorius recites more at large, in the first of his elegant two Books de Rebus
Emanuelis. The first title he gives to those miserable successes, is this,
which he puts for a Postil in the margent of his book, Iudaeorum Liberi per
vim ad Christianismum pertracti: and than rehearses, how that in the year 1496
the King decreed, that all the Jews and Mores, that dwelt in his Kingdom, and
would not become Christians, should depart his Dominions in a short time; which
being past, all that should be found in his Kingdom, should loose their
liberty, and become slaves to the King. The time being now at hand (as Osorius
proceeds) in which the Jews, that would not turn Christians, were to depart
the Kingdom, and all of them as many as they were, had with all their power
provided, and taken a firm resolution to be gone: which the King seeing; and
not able to endure it, thought upon a business (as he says) facto quidem
iniquam and injustam, which to do was realy wicked and unjust, and that was to
command that all the children of the Israelites, that were not above 14 years
old, should be taken out of the power of their own Parents; and when they had
them, they should force them to become Christians; a new thing that could not
be done without a wonderful alteration of their minds: for it was (as Osorius
speaks) a horrid and miserable spectacle, to see the tender Infants wrestled
out of the arms and breasts of their lamenting mothers, to dragge along their
poor fathers that held them fast, and to give them many wounds and blows to
draw them out of their hands; to hear their cries that ascend to heaven, their
groans, lamentations, and complaints everywhere; so that this cruelty was the
cause, that many of those distressed Fathers threw their children into wells,
and others killed themselves with their own hands, that they might not see so
bitter a thing with their eyes. The cruelty of Emanuel ended not here, but
going on with compulsion and revilings, gave cause to his own Chronographer to
make the second title or postil, with these words; Vis and Dolus Iudaeis
illata: That is, The force and deceit used toward the Jews. And so he goes
on, declaring how he had promised in the condition they had made, that he would
assign them three Ports in his Kingdom to embarque at, viz. Lisbon, Setuval,
and Puerto: and nevertheless he forbad them afterward to embarque themselves
in any place but Lisbon: for which cause all the Jews of the Kingdom came to
that City, from whence besides a thousand molestations and extortions, he drove
them (as Vasquo says) as sheep in the stalls, and there forced their afflicted
bodies to counterfeit, that which their souls and thoughts never meant nor
approoved of. Works, of which his own Chronologer says, Fuit hoc quidem neque
ex Lege, neque ex Religione factum. That is, This was done neither according to
Law, nor Religion. Let men of clear mind, and free from passion consider for
Gods sake, if such violences can work any good impression or character in men:
or what Law, either Humain or Divine, National or Modern, can bear, that the
souls of men (which the Most High has created free). be forced to believe
what they believe not, and to love what they hate? This cruelty was reprooved
and censured of many Princes of the world and learned men. And his own
Chronologer reprehends it with a new postil, and speaks freely; Regis in
Iudaeos facinorum reprehensio. That is, A censure of the Kings wickedness
against the Jews. Truly with just reason does Osorius call the works, which
the King did unto us, Iniquities and injustices, deceitful violences, and
wicked attempts: And so goes on, reprooving them with most elegant Reasons.

Further what happened to the Jews under other Princes in other Kingdoms and
Countries, is notorious and enough known to all the world, and therefore not
necessary here to relate. So far concerning their Bannishment.

Now, I will not conceal to say, but that always there have been found some
calumniators, that endeavoring to make the Nation infamous, laid upon them
three most false reports, as if they were dangerous to the Goods, the Lives,
and withal to the very Souls of the Natives. They urge against them their
usuries, the slaying of infants to celebrate their Passe-over, and the inducing
Christians to become Jews. To all which I shall answer briefly.

1. As for usury, such dealing is not the essential property of the Jews, for
though in Germany there be some indeed that practice usury; yet the most part
of them that live in Turkey, Italy, Holland and Hamburg, being come out of
Spaigne, they hold it infamous to use it; and so with a very small profit of 4.
or 5 per Cent, as Christians themselves do, they put their money ordinarily in
Banco: for to lay out their money without any profit, was commanded only
toward their brethren of the same Nation of the Jews; but not to any other
Nation. And however by this Charity is not hurt: for it stands in good reason,
that every one should gain and get some advantage with his money, to sustain
his own life: and when any one to supply his own wants, does take some course
of merchandise, by which he hopes to gain by other men's moneys taken up on
trust, 't is no inhumanity to reckon and take from him use: For as no man is
bound to give his goods to an other; so is he not bound to let it out, but for
his own occasions and profit, and not to leave himself destitute of the profit
he could make of the moneys. Only this must be done with moderation, that the
usury be not biting and exorbitant, which the Christians themselves use,
amongst themselves; as even in the Mounts of Piety at Padua, Vicenza and Verona
is to be seen, where they take 6 par Cent, and elsewere yet much more. This in
no manner can be called Robbery, but is with consent and will of the
Contracter; and the same Sacred Scripture, which allows usury with him that is
not of the same Religion, forbids absolutely the robbing of all men, whatsoever
Religion they be of, In our Law it is a greater sin to rob or defraud a
stranger, than if I did it to one of my own profession: because a Jew is bound
to show his charity to all men: for he has a precept, not to abhor an
Idumean, nor an Egyptian; and that he shall love and protect a stranger that
comes to live in his land. If notwithstanding there be some that do contrary to
this, they do it not as Jews simply, but as wicked Jews, as amongst all
nations there are found generally some Usurers.

2. As for killing of the young children of Christians; it is an infallible
truth what is reported of the Negros of Guinea and Brazil, that if they see any
miserable man that has escaped from the danger of the sea, or has fallen or
suffered any kind of ill-fortune, or Shipwrake, they persecute and vex him so
much the more, saying, God curse thee. And we that live not amongst the
Blacke-moors and wild-men, but amongst the white and civilized people of the
world, yet we find this an ordinary course, that men are very prone to hate and
despise him that has ill fortune; and on the other side, to make much of those
whom fortune does favor. Hereof the Christians themselves have good
experience; for during the times of their suppression and persecution under the
Roman Empire, they were falsely slandred of diverse Emperors and tyrannical
Princes. Nero accused them, that they had set Rome on fire; Others, that they
were Witches and Conjurers; and others again that they slew their children to
celebrate their Ceremonies, as we find in diverse Authors. Even so likewise it
is with the Jewish Nation, that now is dispersed and afflicted, though they
have moneys: There is no slander nor calumny that is not cast upon them, even
the very same ancient scandal that was cast of old upon the innocent
Christians, is now laid upon the Jews. Whereas the whole world may easily
perceive, it is but a mere slander, seeing it is known that at this day, out of
Jerusalem, no sacrifice nor blood is in any use by them, even that blood which
is found in an Egg is forbidden them, how much more man's blood? More-over I
could produce diverse memorable exemples which out in our own times in Araguza
to a Jew: how he was accused of this same wickedness, and not confessing it, how
they imprisoned him betwixt two walls, and being in that distress, how he
cited before God all the Judges to answer there for what they did; and how
within a year after, many of the Judges died, and those that lived, fearing the
like might befall them, and loose their lives, set him free: But I must not be
too prolix; it may suffice to say, that by the Pope himself it was defined in
full Counsel the accusation to be false; and so likewise judged all the
Princes of Italy; as also Alphonso the Wise, King of Spain, and that it was
only a near invention to drink the blood, and to swallow up the goods of the
harmless Jews.

3. As for the third Point, I say, that although Ferdinand and Isabell, giving
color to so indiscreet a determination, said, that they induced the Nobles to
become Jews, yet truly this cannot be said, but by some false informations.
For if so be, amongst those difficulties and impossibilities, it may happen,
that some of the Sect of the Papists, of a better mind, embrace the Jewish
Religion; it cannot therefore be presumed, that they were induced thereunto by
the Jews; seeing the Jews do not entice any man to profess their Law: But if
any man of his own free will come to them, they by their rites and Ceremonies
are obliged to make proof of them, whether they come for any temporal
interest, and to persuade them to look well to themselves what they do: that
the Law unto which they are to submit themselves, is of many precepts; and does
oblige the transgressor to many sore punishments. And so we follow the example
of Nahomi, cited in the Sacred Scripture, who did not persuade Ruth to go along
with her; but said first to her: Orpa thy sister returned to her Nation and
her. Gods; go thou and follow her. But Ruth continuing constant, then at length
she received her.

Besides this, the Jews indeed have reason to take care for their own
preservation; and therefore will not go about by such ways to make themselves
odious to Princes and Commonwealths, under whose Dominions they live.

Now, because I believe, that with a good conscience I have discharged our
Nation of the Jews of those three slanders or calumnies, as elsewhere I have
more at large written about it; I conceive I may from those two qualities, of
Profitablenes and Fidelity conclude, that such a Nation ought to be well
entertained, and also beloved and protected generally of all. The more,
considering they are called in the Sacred Scriptures, the Sons of God; and 't
is said by all the Prophets, that they who shall wrong them, shall be most
severely punished; and that he that touches them, touches the apple of Gods
eye. And at least, it was always the opinion of Augustine, as he made it
appear in his works Libr. de Doctrina Christiana cap. 28. where he says, Quod
omnes homines aeque diligendi sunt. That all men are equally to be beloved.

Now, having prooved the two former Points, I could add a third, viz. of the
Nobility of the Jews: but because that Point is enough known amongst all
Christians, as lately yet it has been most worthily and excellently showed and
described in a certain Book, called, The Glory of the Iehudah and Israel,
dedicated to our Nation by that worthy Christian Minister Mr. Henry Iessey,
(1653. in Dutch) where this matter is set out at large: And by M. Edw. Nicholas
Gentleman, in his Book, called, An Apology for the Honorable Nation of the
Jews, and all the Sons of Israel (1648. in English.) Therefore I will here
forbear, and rest on that saying of our King Solomon, the wisest on earth, Let
another man's mouth praise, thee, and not thine own.

FIN.

