

W. Marshall sculpsit.

(...) not my Anointed,
And do my Prophets no harm.
Psalm: 105. 15. London Printed for Humphrey Mosley 1648.

Il Davide Perseguitato DAVID Persecuted.

Written in Italian BY The Marquess Virgilio Malvezzi. And done into English
By ROBERT ASHLEY. GENT.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the sign of the Princes Arms in St
Paul's Church yard. 1650.

DAVID Persecuted.
THEY that make a question whether it be true or no that God speaks any more
to men, or indeed that men have any more intelligence from God; let them
believe it for a certain that he speaks, but they are too deaf to hear the
language; let them believe it for certain that he writes, but they are too
blind to perceive the Character: He that will understand his voice, he that
will read his letter, let him betake himself to the Holy writ, that is a
Vocabulary, which the Spirit of God has left us to explain his profound
discourses by, that is a key to disclose all those obscure letters that are
directed to us from heaven.

Will you, O Princes, will you, O people, conceive what it is that God speaks
when he sends a pestilence, when he sends a famine, when he sends war,
when he brings estates to destruction, or in hazard to be destroyed? Go run
over these names in the Vocabulary of the Almighty.

But the weak and weary eyes of our mind eschew the light of the truth, they
precipitate themselves into an abyss of miseries, and among the obscurities of
the night grope for the splendor of the sun: Thus we renounce the
prerogatives of the new law.

It is not the way to get forth of the Clouds in which the Israelites walked,
for men, but to change them. Those divine mysteries which they beheld only
clouded up in darkness, are now most transparently observed in a clear sky;
yet the causes of the Revolutions of States, of the increase of one, of the
diminution of another, of the fall of Princes, of Famine, of Pestilence, of
War, were openly displayed to them, and we on the contrary envelop them in
the obscurity of a thousand ambiguities, as if that were not true which the
greatest Divines have told us, that the Chastisements which came upon the
Israelites befell them for our example.

God speaks but once (says Job) and speaks not again: the holy writ is
that book in which he has spoken: there then ought to be searched the causes
of good or bad events, where clearly and for our sakes they are written.

To frame Politic aphorisms, to set down rules for it taken from profane
authors, is in a manner to pretend that man's will is necessary and conducing.

Nay I could find in my heart to say that it is an undeifying of God, and a
deifying of the second causes: He makes them serve his turn, but them he
serves not. He that in discussing upon natural events brings in God only for
a reason, is but a poor Philosopher; and he that brings him not in, in
Inquiries of Politic occurrences, is but a poor Christian; when it is his
pleasure that the fire which at one time scorched should at another cool, Vid.
Da^
he must have recourse to his almighty power in working miracles, but he may
very well without miracles give way, that the same action which at one time
has reared up a Prince, should at another sink him.

Our too leaden wings cannot eagle us up from this base earth, we walk in a
gloomy air, without lifting up our eyes to that most glorious Sun of the
Empireum.

The Politic treatises of the Gentiles which are but earthly, bring us back to
earth, in that they have in them but earthly causes, but the holy instructions
which are sent us from heaven producing heavenly causes, bring us home to
heaven. O most benign Lord, may it please thee to give to drink of thy most
clear and living water, this thirsty wretch who forsakes the stinking and
muddy Cisternes of the Gentiles, rather loathing them than satisfied with them.

If I knew not my self unworthy to be taken out of the darkness of my gross
ignorance, I would most humbly and upon my knees entreat thee for one ray which
like the dawning leading me on to the most clear Noone, might at this present
in some part draw me out of the obscurity of this dim night, that I might
discover those deep and profound mysteries which are concealed from the
feebleness of our understandings.

The Prophet Samuel reproves Saul, because that contrary to Gods commandment,
he had left Agag King of the Amalekites alive, and had not slain all his
cattle.

THe disobedience of Saul gives the last turn to the wheel of his greatness:
It is a fire which consumes crowns, for they are soldred with obedience. He
knows not what belongs to matter of state that loses this toward God: he
teaches others to forgo it toward their superiors, and as much as in him
lies, destroys the compacture of the universe.

Disobedience is the offspring either of the arrogance of the brain, or of the
weakness of the senses; either that men think to do better than they are
commanded, or that they are inclined to do worse; In one of these the frailty
sometimes meets with compassion, in the other the contempt always provokes to
vengeance: This can never be in regard of God, because it is not possible to
be wiser than God, and when it is practiced among men, although it may often
seem to produce good fruit, yet is it always naught, as that which proceeds
from an evil plant. Well ordered Commonwealths have not forborne to punish
it, though prosperous victories ill disciplined bringing with them more damage
than defeatments do.

Saul excuses himself in that the people had preserved the best of the spoil
to sacrifice them to God: Obedience is better than Sacrifice (answers Samuel.)

GOd had already ordained the Sacrifice when he had commanded that all the men,
and all the Cattle of the Amalekites should be slain; so many Priests they
were, that were appointed to kill them, so many sacrifices as to be killed.

There want not this day such Saul's, that sacrifice to God the sacrifices of
disobedience. These golden mountains heaped up with impiety that seems
sometimes to adorn them, defile the altars of God, they only garnish the
ambition of man: He that thinks with these to pacify his divine Majesty,
incenseth it: as much as in him lies, with execrable blasphemy proclaims that
Majesty to be most wicked, and makes him partaker of his misdeeds, as if he
were bound to be appeased with him, so he may but have a share in the
purchases of his villainies.

The Prophet replies, Because thou have rejected the word of the Lord, the Lord
bath rejected thee from being King. Saul says to him, I have sinned, return
with me that I may worship the Lord.

SEe the power of ambition, which has oftentimes more force upon the hearts of
men than the Commandments of God have: He makes as if he repented, because he
fears to lose the Kingdom: He repents not because he cares not for losing
Heaven But (Oh the deceivable judgments of men) because he repents not, he
loses the kingdom of Heaven; when happily had he repented, he had lost
neither the kingdom nor heaven.

He that will learn the best art for preserving of states, let him read the
decalogue, he shall find there in ten lines dictated by the holy Ghost, those
directions that are the most assured for the achieving of heaven, and the least
deceitful for soveraigntie upon earth: Policy is a Sea so inconstant, so
turbulent, that there is no place to be found in it where we have not seen
one Prince or other cast away, it is a piece of Architecture so decayed, that
it always threatens to fall down, that to keep the frame of the world upon
its basis, God, that heaven and earth may not be confounded, permits it still
to be tottering, yet sometimes under those that observe his own precepts.

Samuel offers to depart; Saul takes him by the skirt of his garment and tears
it: Even so shall the kingdom of Israel be rent from thee, adds the
Prophet.

Do not (Oh ye Princes) spoil your subjects; Let the vestments of the
Priests be sacred in your eyes: He that spoileth the subject is not a Prince;
he is a Tyrant: he loses the name if he lose not the estate.

God has many times made garments express his intentions, peradventure
because they are in some sort a part of our selves while they are united to us.
The spirits which continually exhale out of our bodies, are those that cause
this union.

The Coats of beasts are very certain signs of their nature, as the Garments
of men are of their conceit, for as that apparells the one kind, so the other
does the other. Every Country has its difference of Garment because each has
its difference of conceit, which has not a clothing of her own, has not a
Prince of her own: Against such a one peradventure one of the Prophets
exclaimed in threatening terms when he said, Woe be to you which go clad in
strange garments: It may go for a kind of a sure token, that if they have not
a stranger to theri Sovereign, they would have one. A horses coat shows his
constitution, and a man's his inclination.

Saul answers that he has sinned, yet prays the Prophet again to return
with him to the sacrifice, and to honor him before the Elders of the people.

TO leap from Religion to Hypocrisy, to offend and therewith to defend
himself, is not to serve God, but to make God serve his turn, and when one
cannot deceive him, to deceive others by him. The cause of so great an impiety
is that execrable proposition never enough deplored, That it is all one, to be
good, and to seem good. This may be true in regard of men whose knowledge is
but opinion.

No sooner was Saul made acquainted with the will of God, but he seeks how to
hinder it; no sooner leaves he to be religious, but he becomes a Politician;
as if the cunning of state which is not sufficient to defend us against men,
were able to defend us against God.

The certain knowledge that a Prince is to lose his estate, raises up many to
look after it. There is no fearing of him whose fortunes the heavens oppose,
and men are very gladly instruments of Gods anger. If men were among us as
zealous to remunerate the good as they are to chastise the bad, and rewards
were equal to punishments, peradventure the world would be better than it is:
but because punishment many times is accompanied with profit, and Reward with
some loss, men are more inclined to punish than to reward: And it is very
convenient that in this world the Chastisements should be greater than the
Rewards, to make us know that in the other the Rewards shall be greater than
the Chastisements.

Samuel had said that he would not return, yet he returns afterward,
though not to sacrifice with Saul, yet to sacrifice Agag, not as Minister of
Hypocrisy, or of Policy, but of Religion: He causes Agag to be brought
before him, that he might slay him. He considers in him the Image of a Tyrant
waxen fat with the blood and substance of his subjects, and trembling at the
anger of God. The Prophet says unto him; As thy sword has made many women
childlesse, so shall thy mother be made childlesse among women, and so he
kills him.

KNow you why the Lord said, He that strikes with the sword, shall perish
with the sword? To add force to the law of nature, that says, Do not that to
another which thou would not have done to thee: but little would this, if God
had not added; for that which thou do to another shall be done to thee: the
one does instruct, and the other terrify us. If God should not sometimes
punish sins in this world, they would not believe that there is a God; if he
should always punish sins in this world, men would think there were no other
world for them but this.

Samuel departs to Ramah, and there mourns for Saul, because God repents
that he had made him King.

PRinces may well think it is no shame to remove those from their charge, that
carry themselves shamefully therein: yet need they not regard that false rule
of policy, that to change their Ministers before their time is to submit
themselves to their subjects, to accustom them to dislike of their Governors,
and a prejudicial thing to their dominion in permitting them not to have the
election, yet at least the approbation of his Ministers, who may thereby be
more apt to prefer the appetite of the people, before the service of the
Prince. The malignitie of men has mistaken the terms, this is not to give way
to the people, it is but to give them ear. It is no loss of authority, but a
purchase, and it shall never accustom the subjects to complain of such
officers which deserve well, to take away those who deserve ill.

Man who is molded of base matter attributes to himself more oftentimes than
to God; who though he can never repent, yet having chosen a Minister who
turns to evil, does speak and work as if he repented. And man who on many
occasions to repent, either repents not at all, or else proceeds, as if he
had not repented.

The lamentations of Samuel appease not God, and why should his weepings
appease him for Saul, when Saul himself weeps not?

HOw often does the righteous offer sacrifice for the sinner, whiles the sinner
himself is sacrificing to the Devil? whiles the one labors to appease God,
the other provokes him farther. It might seem unto God that the righteous
intercessor were a liar in craving pardon for him that refuses it, if God did
not know that the sinner is like to a mad man, who often has need of one of
understanding to speak to the Physician for him.

God in some sort complains against Samuel, when he says, How long will thou
mourn for Saul? God could not (if one may say so) endure his lamenting, and
not hearken to his suit. These are those waters which in a manner offer
violence to Heaven; The Spirit of God moves upon such waters, and they make a
river of oblivion in Paradise. The tears which are shed, the prayers which are
said, and the supplications which are sent up to God for others, are as
acceptable to God, and more peradventure than if they were made for themselves:
They are esteemed of more merit, at least in regard of the morality of the
action. Why th^^ do some Princes persuade themselves, that they satisfy the
obligatios wherein they are obliged to some one, when they yield him his suit
which he has made for another? Or to say more truly, why do some favorites
believe that there is such an impiety in their Princes? Let them call to mind
that the office of a favorite is the office of an Angel, and ought therefore
to present the suits and supplications of the subjects to their Lord, and to
bring back the gracious grants of the Lord unto the subjects; he that does the
contrary is a Devil, and no Angel.

Fill thy horn with oil (says God to the Prophet) and go to Ishai the
Bethleemite, for amongst his sons I have provided me a King: He answers,
How can I go, for if Saul hear of it, he will kill me.

THus he answers, not because he fears death, but because he is desirous
to do service unto God; he much prizes his life in that case wherein to die is
not to obey: Hence let those that are employed by their Princes learn that the
death of the servant is seldom the service of the Lord. It ought indeed to be
received courageously, but never to be encountered but when it is very useful,
and when the dying is an obeying. A man of worth is a high prized instrument of
the greatness of his Prince, if he cares not to preserve himself for his
own sake, yet he ought to be careful of preservation for his Lord and Masters
sake. Every man that is fitted to die is not fit to do service. It is true
also what I have said even in the common Soldier, (whose life rather than his
brain is dedicated to the Princes service) that he ought also to endeavor to
obey, and not to die. He that runs headlong on death, does not spend his
life to the advantage, but casts it away to the loss of his Lord; his service
is to overcome, and not to die, and indeed they lose that are slain. To expose
needlessly to death that body which can do service to its Prince, but whiles it
lives, is a most pernicious desire of vain glory, contrary to good policy,
against good military discipline, and an affection full of deceit and flattery;
into which even the Generals whose life is most precious, do often precipitate
themselves, as if it were a greater bravery to fight than to command. But that
Army is but in a bad taking (pardon me this digression) whose safety consists
in the arm, not in the brain of the General. To know how to command well in
war, is a part of the imaginative faculty. The imagination to work well
requires a good measure of heat, whose contrary is fear, which how little so
ever it be, the other abates, and how little so ever that abates, the
imagination is disturbed; whence it comes to pass that to be afraid and to
command well cannot stand together: But how many are there that incited more by
Honor than by Courage, do both fight and fear? these may handle the sword
well, but yet not apt for command. The heating of the brain is not in our own
power, as is the managing of the hands: we have no command over that,
howsoever (...) dominion we have over (...) for otherwise (...) not blame (...)
nature necessarily in us. Thence it follows that there is no greater or surer
sign of a brave courage than to command well in a battle; where both
Reputation and life, yea, and many times the State it self comes upon the
stage.

The Lord wills Samuel to take him a calfe out of the flock, and to say that
he is come to do sacrifice.

BEcause God could succor him by ordinary means, he would not have recourse
to extraordinary. If he should always be doing of miracles, men would not
think his Providence so great in creating the second causes; and if he never
used miracles, he should not perhaps be known to be Almighty. Where God
works many miracles, there is commonly great need of them; and where there is
such need, there is but little faith. When he is not known by his Impression,
stamp, or Image, which he has imprinted in the things by him created, then he
finds it requisite to make himself seen in the works of his Omnipotency.

Samuel obeys the Lord, goes and calls Ishai and his sons to the
sacrifice, and looking on Eliab supposes him to be the man whom he should
annoint, because he is the tallest and the goodliest of person.

Had the Prophet been of the opinion of those Philosophers, who have censured
men of great stature to be void of wisdom, he would not at the first sight
so much have respected the tallness of stature. I for my part am not of that
opinion, but do hold it to be most false.

IF those Philosophers believed the neerenesse of the brain to the stomach,
does trouble the operations of the understanding, and if they have also
imagined to themselves, that the vital spirits which ascend from the heart,
may be made animal spirits, for the service and operation of the Brain are
unapt for such effect, unless they be first somewhat cooled (because of the
incompatibilitie of wisdom with heat) wherefore have they not also affirmed
the taller sort of men to be wiser than the little, as having their Brain
farther distant from the perturbations of the stomach, and their spirits not so
hot by reason of their long way, and larger distance from their Original?
Peradventure they are deceived, in that they believe that men are always great
by the forming Power, through the superabundance of matter, not observing that
many times there concurreth with it as a principal Instrument the Quantity of
heat, as it is commonly verified in those whose tallness is accompanied with
slenderness. It has therefore been noted as a true observation, that the tall
men that have little heads, and the little men which have great, have more
Brain than the rest, which comes to pass not as many have thought, because
the little head in the great body, and the great in the little makes a
mediocrity in the ordinary stature of men; which is false if we measure the
mediocritie of the part in respect of the whole of which it is a part: But
because the little head in a great man, is a sign that the extension did
proceed of heat, and by consequence that the littleness of that member comes
through defect of matter in the bony and fleshy parts, which being but small,
produces the thinner and more delicate Organs which do not obstruct, or hinder
the operations of the brain. The little man having a great head, is an
argument that it is full of brain, especially if he be but slender, for it
cannot be ascribed to the thickness of the skull, because that Nature would
rather have employed that matter to have made the man taller or greater. I am
excusable if I seek by reason to overthrow this doctrine, because I am willing
to verify it by the example of mine own stature.

The Lord wills Samuel not to regard the countenance of Eliab, nor the
tallness of his stature, but he had refused him, judging not as men do by the
outward appearance, but beholding the Heart.

Lo here the vanity of Metoposcopie and Physiognomie is pointed at. Beauty or
Comeliness is a most perfect consonancie arising out of the symmetrie and
proportion of the first Qualities: It gets in the eye because it is fair; It
attracts the will because it is good, it moves the understanding because it is
true. The Poets in the vanity of their fables have happily come near unto the
truth calling beauty by the name of the Sun, of the Stars, and of Heaven: It
is certainly a piece of that Harmony which the motions and aspects of the
Heavens, of the Sun, and of the stars do incite, and has such a radiant
light in it self, that (though we know not why) it does if not enforce our
minds, yet certainly incline them strongly. The Providence of God has seldom
informed the fairest body with the fairest mind, that men might not believe,
that from the same Harmony of temperament of the stars, from which proceeds
the Beauty of the one, that of the other did proceed likewise.

Ishai having finally brought forth his sons before Samuel to the number of
seven, he refusing them all, asks whether he has no more: Ishai answering,
there is yet one which is feeding of the sheep, the Prophet causes him to be
sent for, and annointeth him in the midst of his Brethren, being the same whom
the Lord had appointed in the stead of Saul.

GOd having at first chosen for King, the tallest that was in Israel, chooses
the second time the least that was in the house of Ishai: The first shall be
last, and the last shall be first, (says the Lord) who then chose the last to
be the first. There is no difference of time with God, in whose eternity
there is neither first nor second. The eldest may be stoutest, but are not
usually the wisest. That tenderness that commonly enfeebleth the Children of
our old Age, makes the organs of their understanding more tender and delicate.
The cold of him that engenders, gives them the more wisdom, and his organs
the better discourse: whence it comes, that if the last begotten be commonly
the weakest, yet they are often and many times the wisest. He that brings David
from the sheephooke to the scepter, and exalts him from the stable to the
Kingdom, it is he that humbled himself from his Kingdom to the stable: He
that is both a shepherd and a King, makes him a King who was but a
shepherd. There is a kind of Analogy in all sorts of Commands. He that said
that to know well how to order a table, was a sign that he knew also how to
marshall an Army, might as well say, that he that could well keep a flock of
sheep, had the skill how to govern a people well.

God from the fold has taken Kings, from husbandry and hunting Tyrants. The
husbandman will have the earth to produce that which naturally it does not, and
that it should produce he wounds it. The hunts-man by shedding the blood of
poor innocent beasts, grows to be delighted in Cruelty: But the shepherd
conducts his flock to pasture, brings it back to the fold, preserves it from
maladies, and defends it from wolves: his taking their milk, and their wool,
is a disburthening of them, not a wounding. Let Kings learn to take their
Ministers sometimes even of the sheepfold. The best men are not always in the
greatest Palaces: a lowly Cottage oftentimes incloses a high spirit, and a
ragged rock a very clear diamond.

The good spirit departs from Saul, and the evil one enters into him.

GOds refusals are the devils purchases: where the one departs, if the other
enters not, he at least draws very near, either to perturb or to possess.

Let us seek out one that can play well (say the servants of Saul) that the
King may be eased, when he is molested by the evil spirit.

THey believed peradventure that the Melancholic humor being stirred up, they
that are oppressed by it might be eased by melody.

There have been some of opinion that Melancholy is produced of the devil.
The wiser sort if they did not believe that it is of his production, yet judged
that it may easily prove to be of his introduction, and therefore termed it the
Bath of the devil, because it is the Lees, because it is black, because it
has an Analogy with the darkness of sin: The occasion of their belief was
the seeing sometimes how by the fixation thereof men were lifted up or elevated
in an ecstasy: Yea, and sometimes how the sharpness thereof irritating the
brain, and stirring the Images therein, has made some to speak things
whereof before they were not held capable; whence I think it came to pass,
that many oppressed with the greatness of the effects produced by this humor,
have often judged the animal spirits to be infernal spirits.

I deny not, there are found some melancholicke persons possessed with devils,
or that melancholy is an apt bath for the devil; but I affirm it not only of
the gross, thick and dark melancholy, but even of that also which produces
the subtilest and lightest spirits. He has need of active bodily instruments
for his operations in the body. He joins himself therefore gladly with the
subtilest and finest spirits, because they being in some sort of a middle
nature, being corporeal and incorporeall, are a more proportionate receptacle
for a spirit to unite himself to a thing that is merely corporeal. An
ancient Sage believed that our soul which he imagined to be at first clothed
with air, had need of the like organs to join it to the body, whereunto he
thought it not united but assistant; neither are there wanting among the
Divines those that have conceived the Angles to be clothed in like manner.

They tell Saul of David, that he is strong, a valiant man of war, can play
well, is a wise and a comely person, and that God is with him.

HOw should the devil continue his possession, being to be assailed with so
many prerogatives, but that finding in them some rays of the glorious
Archangell Michael, he must needs sly and hide himself in the bottomless
pit of hell?

Saul sends to Ishai for his son that keeps the sheep, whom Ishai does
send unto him with some presents.

MEn ought not to come before Princes without presents, nor to depart from them
without thanksgivings.

Saul makes him his Armourbearer, and writes unto his father that he does not
send him his son again, because he has found favor in his sight.

ANd who is he that is so gracious in the eyes of Saul? It is even he that is
to take his Kingdom from him: It is an extraordinary thing amongst men, that
their loves become their overthrowes: the affections of a corrupt mind, like
those of adiseased body, are always pernicious; nor are they motions of
Nature, but the motions of that which has destroyed Nature, she inclines not
to that which corrupts her, if she be not already corrupted; and if she be
corrupted, she is dead, she is gone.

David sung and played when Saul was vexed with the Devil, and then the Devil
left him, not because of David's music, but his Goodness.

HAd the devil a body, Music might happily be able to chase him out, being
unable to endure the power of Melody: he who is a friend to it, is an enemy
to sin. One that writ hereof, took the delighting in Harmony, to be a
moral sign of Praedestination: Sin discomposeth all the consonancies in
man, making a discord between the inferior and superior parts, which is the
cause of all evil, and finally of the last of all dissonancies, which is Death.

If Health be but a Harmony of the Temperament, and sickness a dissonancie,
why are humors molested? why farther distempered with diverse medicaments, and
not rather reduced to a true temper with consonancies? Music would be the
truest medicine for all Maladies, if we knew the right and true proportion,
and how to apply to each that kind of Consonancie that would correct it: If any
acromatick music has been able to stir up the melancholik humor and to
inrage it, why should not the contrary be effectual to qualify and restrain
it?

If Nature in our maladies did happily feel that due consonancie that were
requisite, she would peradventure rouse up her self as well as the string of
an Instrument; which though it be without life, yet stirs and moves it self,
as soon as it feels a perfect union. She discovers the truth hereof, in
those that are stung or bitten by the Tarantula, when we see that Nature
strives not to deliver her self from that poison, until she be first
stirred wtih that Consonancie, whose proportion does correct her. This is not
proper to that malady alone, but all other I believe would in the like manner
be cured, if the Consonancies of all were as well known: But the ignorance of
men, and the discomposed nature of Sin, makes us run to the Physician, when
we should have recourse to the Musician.

The Philistims come to assault the Israelites, Saul with his Army goes to
encounter them, each of them planteth his Army on the edge of a hill, and
leave the valley between them: There was in the Philistims Army a man called
Goliath.

He was a Giant, and he was a bastard; The Giant has for his Correlative the
rash and foole-hardy: he being greater than men, thinks himself equal with
God, as if where Humanity does end, there must needs Divinity begin, and that
there were not rather an infinite distance between. This is that Generation
that opened the Cataracts of Heaven, which made the sea overflow the Land;
Antiquity could no way describe them so well as to describe their fighting
against God. The greatest individuals of one Species, are for the most part
Lucifers.

He was a Bastard, and Bastards are commonly valorous, because they come of
Parents that were a norous. The Birth and Parentage, which ordinarily makes men
hide their Talents, with the glories of their forepassed Ancestors, which
brings them that are present and living asleep, has no place in these who
being oftentimes poor and despised, yet finding in themselves the spirit of
those that begot them, in a desperate manner, get up to the steepest of the
mount of Glory, always egged on by the bitter touches of their spotted
beginning; the continual reproach and perpetual spur of generous spirits.
But if on the contrary their minds be dejected with their miseries into a
dead sleep, and will not be excited and awakened with the sharp stings of
Honor, they are not worthy to be reckoned amongst men; whence it arises that
Bastards most commonly light upon the extremes either of valor or of baseness.

This Goliath desieth the Israelites to a single combat, he requires that the
fortune of the whole war may he restrained to the fortune of one petty
duel.

TO hazard their whole fortune, without hazarding at the same time all their
forces, has been taken to be no well advised course: which yet peradventure
might do well enough, if men could be content to lose all their fortune,
before they had lost all their forces. The present victories then might
facilitate the future. But such Conditions if ever they be promised, are very
seldom observed. Such single Combats are but Preludiums to set battles, and
the happy success therein is rather a sign that men may conquer, than that
they have done it. The Constellation of that party whose Champion has been
Victor, is then taken to be stronger, when it shall appear that he is
governed by that which appertains to the King, and not by his own peculiar.

There was none amongst the Israelites, but was afraid of this man. The King
promises to give him his daughter in Marriage, that shall overcome him.

REwards make valor appear, which lay hid before: they produce it, they do
not create it. It is great prudence in men to moderate their promises when they
are in great dangers: To make too large ones, is a token of fearfulness, and
oftentimes does not prevent the danger, but changes it: To deliver from great
dangers, yields great reputation; Rewards increase strength and reputation, and
strength endangers the State: From hence it comes that Promises are not kept,
not because they are made with purpose not to keep them, but because men are
changed with their change of fortune, and he that should perform, is no
longer the same that promised.

David, who was returned home, comes now into the Army, to bring certain
presents to the Officers, under whom his Brethren did serve: He enquires
concerning the business in hand: He asks what shall be the reward. His elder
brother rebukes him of pride and overweening.

THis man discernes not Pride from Fortitude, because he looked on his brother
with an envious eye, not with an eye of love. There are many virtues which have
their operations common with vice, being distinguished only by the Intent:
which because it cannot be seen, is judged of by others, and men's judgments
are not always without passion, it seldom happens that they judge without
error. He would not have any adventure on that which he dares not adventure
on: Those defects that are common, seem rather the defects of mankind, than of
any particular persons: he lays the blame on us, that by being free from such
defects himself, acquites nature of them too.

David is brought before Saul, who seeing him so young, tells him that he is
not able to fight with the Giant, who was experienced in war from his youth.

PRinces ought not to put any upon a great enterprise, who has not first been
brought up and tried in things of the like nature. Danger has not the same
look with it when we are near it, as when we are at a distance; when it is
far off from us, our understanding represents only the Honor and the Profit;
but when we approach face to face, we see nothing oftentimes, but the horror
of Death.

It is true that Courage is a real thing in a man, yet nevertheless he
knows not that he has it, till experience has made him know that he has
had it. There are many that prove better upon trial than they thought they
should have done; and many come short of the opinion they had of themselves.
Wise men are very fearful of danger, because they have considered well of it:
but when they come to try it, and are no longer to consider of it, they stand
no longer in fear of it. On the contrary, they which are of little judgment,
imagining all things alike, when they find it otherwise than they imagined,
they grow also many times to be other manner of men, than before they held
themselves for.

David to encounter this doubt of Saul, declares how he had smitten Bears,
and how he had slain Lions.

TO recount our own doughty Acts is oftentimes vanity, here it is of
necessity: he did not rehearse it to show that he had overgone great
dangers, but to undergo greater; not to be commended, but to be commanded.

Saul resolves to let David go to fight; He puts on him his own Armor,
which David being not able to manage, puts it off.

EVen as little men cannot fight well with great Armor, so neither can the
lesser Princes with those greater. He that has not fitted himself with armor
of his own, is not to fight in another. Patroclus came not to his Death till
he put on that of Achilles. This is the common Doctrine of the Politicians,
yet I take it sometimes to fail in regard that there are often found men of
that worth, that like Ostriges, they convert others Arms into their own
substance. This may come to pass, when one receiving an Army without a Head,
makes himself to be obeyed, and managing them by his valor, brings himself
into great estimation; If Generals that were no Princes, have sometimes drawn
by such means the Armies to be at their Devotion, and have gotten Kingdoms by
such Armies as were not their own, why should not a valorous Prince be able to
do it by the Arms of his Friends?

David goes with his staff and his sling, with five smooth stones against the
Giant.

He had no need of other Armor, he was armed with his confidence in God. He
which has this Armor, can never perish: If we happen to be deceived, it is
because we deceive our selves, having our confidence in those things in which
we ought not, or not having so much as we ought; to bring forth a true act of
Confidence, is a very difficult thing: There is requisite a great assistance of
God to make one truly and only rely on the help of God. If such acts were
more frequent amongst us, we should not happily account so many Events to be
miracles. They that teach us how notwithstanding our Confidence in God, we
ought to do as much as we can, or otherwise in stead of trusting in God we
should presume upon him, their meaning may happily be, that it were but a rash
presumption to persuade our selves that we have produced any true act of
Confidence; but not if we firmly believe that God for his part would assuredly
help us, when we for our part should produce such an Act.

The Giant derides David, curses and disdaines him, but he putting a stone in
his sling, throws it at him, hitteth him in the forehead, makes him fall
grovelling on his face to the ground, and running upon him cutteth off his head
with his sword.

IT has been an ordinary thing in single combats, between a giant-like man
and one of a meaner stature, that the little man has had always the better:
The Philosophers would attribute the cause to the Courage which is counted to
be greater in the lesser heart; a small fire will heat a little room, when a
larger will scarce be warmed with a great one. I have no assurance in this
opinion, but would rather adventure (if I should not be thought too bold) to
affirm that Courage consists not in the Heart, as is commonly held both by
the ignorant vulgar, and many of the learned: Who knows that it is not rather
produced by the same imaginative faculty out of which fear also proceeds?
how many that in their health were exceeding faint hearted, in raging fits have
become rash and desperate, which was occasioned only by the heat of the Brain?
for if it proceeded from that of the Heart, they that are distempered with
fevers should be always the most courageous: and what is it that makes
hopeless men so resolute? Is it their Heart forsooth grown less or more
heated than it was before? or their understanding rather which suggesteth unto
them that there is no other way to escape death but by encountering it? To what
purpose do men speak to cowards to animate them? Reasons may indeed work
upon the Brain, but are not able to heat the Heart: Who knows not, that the
not knowing of the danger makes men adventurous? Whence it comes that the
wisest are not always the most courageous. Hardiness (and herein I refer my
self to the better learned) is a certain kind of madness, consisting happily
in a hot distemper of the Brain, which permits no consideration or
discourse of the danger of Death. He that in fighting thinks he shall be
slain, cannot fight courageously. And albeit the Philosophers define the
valiant man to be such a one as knowing the perils goes to encounter them,
because it is just and honest. I believe it ought to be understood before he
enters into those dangers, because after he is once engaged, if he knew them
he would faint. A wise man was of the mind, that fencers were more fearful
than others, because they knew the danger more than others: It is not therefore
the Heart, but the Brain, and if it come from the Heart, it must be in regard
that the same is the original of all the operations of the Mind. The Divines
going a surer way, would resolve this problem by saying, that it has been
the pleasure of God by humility to overthrow Pride, and by the least things to
abase the greatest: If it were not so not only in men, but also in States and
Empires, there would be no tides and ebbes in the world, but he that was once
the greatest should always so continue, seeing he could not be overcome by a
lesser.

The Politicians would allege Disdain to be the cause: he that despises his
enemy, does not strive with all his might, but employing some part only, and
that with no great heed, is often overcome by one who being weaker than he,
opposes him with the utmost of his strength and cunning: One of the greatest
errors that I have observed in great Potentates, has been to see how
applying their forces on an enterprise, they have rather taken measure of the
enemy than themselves, opposing against him only so much of their strength, as
they conjectured to be answerable to the present affairs; and whereas with a
greater power they might have been sure of victory, with an equal one they
have either lost it, or at least prolonged the wars with more expense of men
and money. It is very difficult to measure the proportion of things by their
Beginnings. Childrens garments must be allowed to be somewhat larger than
themselves, lest they growing greater, the garments become too little. It is
enough for a meaner man if at the beginning he be enabled to resist a
greater, that so he may but get him reputation, and by the means thereof he
can procure himself adherents and protectors.

The Giant was no sooner slain, but the Army of the Philistims being
discomfited, betakes it self to flight; and the Israelites pursue and slay
them.

THat Army whose trust is in the straightness of some passage, in the height
of any situation, in the strength of their Trenches, in the valor of a man, or
in any one special thing of good defense, is easily overcome by him who shall
be assuredly persuaded, that if he can but overthrow such a part, or slay such
a man, or pass through the difficulties of such a hill, or such
fortifications, he shall find no other resistance, and therefore shall he set
forward very stoutly and courageously: Because men having once lost that by
which they were confident they should overcome, being dejected, think there is
nothing left that can defend them against the valor of their enemies. But that
Army which relies upon it entire self equally throughout is in a manner
invincible; It may peradventure be routed, utterly discomfited it cannot:
Every one will fight to the Death, because every one trusting in himself, will
not distrust of the victory, until he has lost his life.

The slaughter being ended, David returns with the Giants head. Saul enquires
of Abner who he is: Abner not knowing him, goes to meet him, and brings him
unto Saul: He asks him whose son he is: he answers, he is the Son of
Ishai.

SEe how fading or how displeasing the memory of benefits is in Princes; either
Saul did not remember David, or else he was not willing to remember him: He
that but a little before had found so much favor in his sight, has now lost
it both in his sight and memory: The memory of a benefit lasts well, if it
lasts as long as the benefit, and the respect that is begotten thereby often
dies before its Father. If Reasons may be rendered for the affection of a
Prince toward a Courtier, be they drawn of Profit or out of Pleasure, or
whether accompanied with Honesty, yet is it a thing but of small continuance:
If it follow Reason, it forms a habit of which comes satietie, and if it be
not grounded on Reason, the ground of such affection fails. It is a vanity to
think our selves able to yield a reason of the affectionate favors of
Princes: Those are great, and slowly will they end, for which there can no
reason be given how they came to begin. There are stars which incline them
thereunto by their influences, neither are those loves always happy, for
neither are the aspects of these always favorable: In this manner happily that
great scholar meant it, though he was not so understood, when he seemed to
doubt, whether any reason could be given of the Inclinations of Princes, or
whether they depended on the Course of their Nativitie. And whereas in all
other occurrents he had showed himself a friend unto reason, he never spoke
of this Argument or matter, but made a present recourse unto Destiny, which
having once coupled and conjoined with the course of the Nativity, there is no
doubt but he meant it by the operation of the stars. Politicians may cease to
teach the ways to obtain the favor of Princes; men must be borne to it, not
taught it. A man may by his valor and wisdom make himself well esteemed,
but yet not beloved.

When he had made an end of speaking, the soul of Jonathan was knit with the
soul of David, in a knot of Amity.

Wonderful things are Friendship and Love, whence they proceed (with all
respect, and far from all presumption be it spoken) men have not yet well
declared for all their Philosophy. Some have thought them to be the daughters
of Abundance, and of Want; but this were a taxing of Love and Amity with
imperfection, and to deny the prime and chief love which we call the holy
spirit: for in the three divine Persons there can be no defect. The rest of
the Philosophers, have deduced the original from the similitude of the parties
loving, some from the Heaven, some from the stars, some from the temper, some
from the Manners, and some finally from the features, yet peradventure they
have all mistaken: for if love came from the resemblance, a man should rather
love the male than the female; and whereas Love is but seldom reciprocal, it
should be always answered with like affection; seeing one thing cannot be said
to be like another, but that the other must also be like to it. I believe that
there are some Constellations conducing to Friendship, and others to Love,
which produce in their subject, a kind of lovely Character which comes not of
the Temper, but rather of some (I know not what) celestial impressions which
the Heavens and stars with their operations have left imprinted in that
tender body, and that he is most beloved that has most thereof, and that he
who has less cannot be the object of Love, but only of good will or respect.
The reason whereof is because Beauty is the object of Love: Yet not Beauty
which is like unto ours, but that which is greater, otherwise there would not
(no not in Patria) be any love toward God: And if sometimes here we love our
equal, it is either because then we see none more worthy, or because we do
not reflect thereon. But only that excellence which is in God is the adequate
object of Love, because that only which is in God is the adequated object of
our will: and if we could see him as he is, he should infallibly make us
love with him. But because we are here as but in Via, he is not so represented
to us: we turn our eyes to admire that celestial Beauty where we find it
best imprinted among us, and is often termed Gratia divisata, which consists
neither in the symmetrie of the Humors, nor the Proportion of the Lineaments,
albeit it oftentimes accords and agrees well with them both when it is not
hindered by any defect in the matter, and so sometimes, but not always the
fairest be the best beloved. Hence we may learn the reason of the little
correspondence, and the much mutability in Love: It is not always
counterchanged, for if the greater Beauty be beloved, that which is beloved
will not love that which loves it. It is changed as often as there is
represented to us greater beauty than which we love. Yet it is not sufficient
that it be represented unto us, if we do not reflect upon with a desire, and
therefore many leave not their first love, because they permit not any new
object of love to enter into their mind.

Saul suffers not David to return home, but sets him over his Army: he
is very gracious in the eyes of the people, and particularly of the servants of
the King.

THe subject that is grown great, diminishes the glory of his Master: (...)
shall a Prince take then (...) but of slender worth? If he take not worthy men
to (...), how will he govern his Kingdom? If he take such, how will he be a
King? He is not King over others that has in his Palace a greater man than
himself. If his stare be unsettled, he loses his state; if the state be safe,
his reputation: With great reason men might complain of Nature, if they were
not for the most part commanded by the better. He that holds the Scepter, is
not the King, he is but the servant of his Minister who obeys him. Crowns
come by Inheritance, it is true; but not the faculties of ruling: If fortune give
those to whom she pleases, Nature disposes the other to him that deserves.
That Proposition of the Philosophers is most true, that some are bound to
Command and others to obey: This is confirmed by him that divided the signs of
the Zodiac into commanding and obeying signs. This truth is not overthrown
by seeing him to hold a Scepter that was borne fitter for the mattock; though
he play the King, he is not a King.

David comes to Jerusalem, with the Head of the Giant, the women meet him,
rejoicing, and ascribe more to him in their singing than to Saul, who is
displeased thereat.

SHort and unhappie are the favors of the People; short, for like the floating
of the sea it is tossed with every wind; a Sea that in the same haven wherein
one time it has secured ships, another sinkes them. Unhappie are they, because
it is as a violent star, whose radiall beams may be good, but not lucky; it
never raises any but to make their down-falls the greater: unhappie love
because it has for a Correlative the Princes hatred: The Prince is not Lord of
that people that loves another better than him: If he be Master of their
bodies and means, the other is Master over their Hearts and minds: But good
God! how shall a man behave himself? must a man's valor needs become his
infelicitie? A wise man may indeed not desire applause, but he cannot hinder
it, except he leave those qualities for which he is applauded, or depart from
them that applaud him. Ought he then to forgo the Talents which God has
bestowed on him? or employ them only among wild beasts in the horrid
wildernesses, or in solitary places? The eminent virtue of men, if it be not
the cause of their Death, is so of their Banishment: At the first they are
sought to out of necessity, and then again they are expelled under color of
necessity. The Tree that was esteemed for its shadow, to shelter us from the
heat of the summer, is afterward cut down to defend us from the cold of the
winter. The same man whom Princes embraced in the heat of their necessity, is
he whom they cut down in the cold of their jelousie.

Saul since that never looked aright on David.

NAture teaches when we look on our enemy to give a violent Metum to our
aspect, whether by staring fiercely, or looking askew upon him, to strike him
with our very spirits, and with the greatest quantity and worst quality that
may be. He that thinks them not to issue out of the eyes, and that they proceed
not to touch the object, when it is near them, is deceived, and he that
believes it, will not deny that they have their operation on that subject. If
the only diversity of the aspect make the self same radiation of the star,
to be sometimes gracious, and sometimes deadly, why should not the eyes, being
the stars of this little world, have power to diversifie their effects,
according to the diversity of their aspects.

It was not long ere the Devil assaulted Saul again; and when David played
and sung, to deliver him from the oppression of the spirits, he with a spear
in his hand would have slain him, but David avoided the blow and departed.

THat Tyrant is put to a shrewd pinch, that is grown jelous of a subject of
worth and reputation: If he kill him, he fears the rising of the people: If
he suffer him, he doubts his raising of them. Now he accounts himself happy
if in his oppressing him, he could make the faults of his will to be laid upon
the ignorance of his understanding, and with the imputation of a madman smother
that of an ungrateful. A most wicked piece of Policy, to make our greatest
defects the best instruments of our Government: There has been one that made
use of drunkenness, to secure himself of the most valorous man of his Army;
and Saul does the like by his vexation with spirits to make David away: Such
colorable carriages do move the ignorant rout to compassion, rather than to
rebellion, whiles they give place to Princes to bewail the death of those,
whom themselves have slain, and to make them believe that their tears of joy
are tears of lamentation.

Saul perceived that God was with David, when he could not slay him with the
casting of his spear, from which his valor could not defend him because he
did not expect it, neither his wisdom because he did not foresee it.

He that will know when God is with his enemy (and this is a moral and not a
natural knowledge) let him not consider the conquests made by his valor, and
by that which we call Prudence, but the helps he receives from natural
inanimate things, as Clouds, winds, fires, snow, ice, rain and tempests; for
they, as it is written, fulfill the will of God. What avails our valor if
God be not with us? and what is our Prudence if God do not govern it? It is
nothing (I speak of politic Prudence,) for it is a good connection of present,
things with the future and those that are past: but of that which is past, and
which is present, we know but little, and of what is to come we know nothing:
For my part (in regard of future things) I esteem that as we give unto God an
unproper attribute of that which he has not, so we suppose also a virtue in
man which is not in him. God has not properly any prescience, because there is
nothing future in respect of him, neither is there any Prudence in man, because
he knows not what is to come. That which is in God is more properly to be
termed knowledge, because it is intuitive, and the other in man may be called
Chance, because it works on a subject which may be or not be.

Then Saul began to be afraid of David.

THat the Prince should be afraid of his subject, and the subject stand in
fear of his Prince, has been accounted a Harmony to hold the State happily
together. This opinion howsoever it may seem a witty conceit, while such fear
keeps in the mean, and grows not excessive, notwithstanding is most false:
It is true that hot and dry may be corrected by degrees, even as heavy and
light may be their Counterpoises, because the degrees of the one are known,
and the weight also of the other; but the affections of the mind can hardly be
cou^terpoised, because they have no firmness nor measure. Fear has too
sharp a prick for those that produce it, and is too troublesome a passion to
them that own it; the one with the qualities that make them to be feared, are
spurred on forward after the Government: The other cannot willingly hold
themselves, in, because fear is a motion that is not natural but violent.
There is no man that desires not to free himself of it: The greater part
attempt it, and in attempting it the State is troubled. If the Prince be he
that fears, he turns to be a Tyrant; and if any subject make himself
feared, it will breed a Conspiracy; if the whole Communalty, a Rebellion. The
subject ought to fear the Justice of his Prince, and the Prince that of God;
if a subject make himself feared, he is no longer a subject, or intends not to
be so; if the Prince be afraid, he is no longer Prince, or not like long to
be. To think to make a Prince good by Art, may chance prove but fopperie;
they are rather borne to it than brought to it: The goodness of a Prince
consists in I know not what in expressible mystery, that cannot be known,
nor can be taught: It wants nothing of the last Individuation which gives it
the being, and that same being and no other. This conceit of mine resolves the
Problem that demands how it comes to pass, that many who in the managing of
great affairs, were held to be capable of the highest dignity and Dominion,
having after attained to it, been found to be unfit for it.

Saul made David a Colonel over a thousand Soldiers, and said after that he
would give him his daughter Merob to be his wife, supposing that to obtain
her, he would so far adventure against the Philistims, that he would be
slain.

SAul would that David should be slain, but God permitted not that he should
be past the shame of being wicked, till it could no more hurt David, that Saul
was past it. This error of advancing men that are rising, and not to know
afterward how to take them down, has often happened even to those that justly
and without any offense of God ought to have done it. A star though but a
Comet, because it is a light that is newly up, draws all men's eyes to it,
even theirs whose damage it threatens. A man of worth can no sooner begin to
appear, but Princes begin to embrace him, thinking to raise themselves by his
Friendship, when indeed he raises himself by theirs, not heeding that in
stead of growing they decrease. It is a difficult thing for one to advance
himself, if he be not protected or impugned by a great one: Many times when
one has begun to advance another by protecting him, he raises him higher by
crossing of him, not because it is likely he would then second him, but because
he knows not how to extinguish him. Men are ashamed, yea, and sometimes
afraid to show themselves open enemies of one that is thought to be their
friend who has deserved well of them, and is accounted valorous. They seek
then by subtle sleights to overthrow him, and therewith advance him the more.
They are not resolved to use force until their subtilities fail them, and
when there is no security in using of force. Neither yet do I commend it if
they then go about to second them, for the things that are forward in growing
should never be seconded. Catiline by being opposed was overthrown, and though
in Caesar it had not the like effect, it happened so, because he was first
seconded, and afterward opposed: Yet was it better once to resist than always
to second him, because where the victory was doubtful, the loss had been
certain. I am firmly persuaded that if Catiline had prevailed to be Emperor,
and Caesar had been slain, the writers would have blamed the impugning of
Catiline, and commended the opposing of Caesar; because there are many
Politicians that make use of examples not to confirm their reasons, but to
frame them. The errors of men consist in watering the Plant that grows,
placing it in their own garden, delighting in the Beauty of it, and not
knowing that it is a kind of Wolfes-bane, until they strain at it and pull it
up, and then it kills them. If the great ones knew what hurt they receive by
showing themselves enemies to a little one, they would not permit any sparks
to fly forth, if they were not such sparks as forthwith give fire to the
gunne, whose bullet should destroy them.

Saul marries his daughter Merob to Adriel, whom he had promised to David, and
causes it to be told unto him, that he intends to give him his other
daughter Michol that loved him: David answers, that he is not worthy to be
the Kings son in law, because he is poor and of as meant pedigrees.

MArriages are of power to further thing, formerly began, whether tending to
enmity or to amity. Saul sees not how in deceiving David he deceives
himself; and thinking to lay an impediment in his way to the Kingdom, he
opens him the way thereunto. Some one has made use of such means with better
success, but with more cunning. He was a private person, and not yet a
Prince, when he married his Sister to his equal, not unto his inferior, to
lull him asleep without advancing him; and because he to whom he married her
was not so wise as David, he hoped by such a marriage to have help to
strengthen his side, and to find a just occasion to oppress his Kinsman. But
Saul had no need of David's help to attain to that Kingdom which he possessed
already: He was without comparison greater than he, and might rather fear to
increase the reputation of David, than to bring his prudent watchfulness
asleep, which was not like to give him any just occasion to oppress him. It is
no safe advice to advance men to the end to abuse them: The advancement is
always successful, but there is difficulty often found in abasing them.
This is written for one of the neatest pieces of policy, but I set it down
amongst the most confused.

Saul sends word to David, that he does not disdain his poverty, and that
he demands no other Dowry than a hundred fore-skins of the Philistims.

HEre comes now on the Stage one of the Engines which were hidden under the
Honor of Marriage; to bring David in danger to be slain by the Philistims. If
Nature had not often accompanied the most certain perils with the most
conspicuous glories, it were a commendable course to expose them to such
dangers whose reputation terrifies us; but because near the greatest downefals
are the highest hills, it is not safe to let men clime up the tops of those
mountains, where they may as well raise up as ruin themselves. Occasion is it
which makes men wise, or which brings them to be known. He that at first
sight could see into men of ability by a hidden token, should under pretense of
Honor make them spend their days in delicacie and idleness, and not suffer
men to have a sight of that light, which until it be stricken out does never
appear. The seeds of Plants that are kept in vessels of Gold, or of Pearl, or
of precious stone, are honored thereby, but being as buried and become barren,
they bring forth no buds unless they be first cast into the Soil of the
earth. Without motion there is no Augmentation. Resting is imperfection in
things that may increase: In God only it is perfection, because in him there is
no Augmentation. It is not in our power to make our selves great. The utmost
limit of our Actions is in the hand of men, or of Fortune. How many that have
been very able in Potentia, have come to their grave without having any
opportunity to perform an Act worthy their sufficiency?

Saul speaks to Jonathan, and to all his servants, that they should kill
David: Jonathan advertiseth David, and puts Saul in mind how much he is
obliged to him, and what injustice it were to slay him.

BUt of what effect be such Remonstrances of Obligations? The chief
Obligation which a Tyrant pretends to have, is the conservation of his
Dominion, and his greatest Justice is to put to death the best. To oblige were
a thing very desiderable if it were only to oblige, and not to bind himself
for a farther obliging. That Obligation which seemed complete to him that
produced it, comes to be accepted but as a beginning by him for whom it was
wrought. He that will bind another by benefits, must join them one to
another: The report of the one must not cease before he has added another.
The linkes that are not chained one to another do not make up a Chain. The
resemblance has a great force to move and receive in the Imagination even the
Phantasmes that were dead.

Time is a destroyer of all things; where it destroys not the greatness of
men's Actions, it will destroy the marvelling at it: for it frames them into a
habit, and that being once attained, makes the operations come on without
difficulty, and without any reflecting. That which is passed already does
cancel the obligation of private men; and with Tyrants that also which is to
come, whether they be grateful or ungrateful, they are always afraid, that
they will oblige them either by their own rewards, or through discontent of
not being rewarded, will make insurrection.

The words of Jonathan seemed to have appeased Saul, who gives order that
David return to Court.

THe Truth which passes through our understanding does not use to fly away so
fast, but that our will takes hold and embraces it, unless the malice of our
senses defile it. It is not so hard to withdraw a wicked man from his evil
purposes, as it is difficult afterward to keep him in a good mind, thereto is
requisite in a manner a perpetual assistance, for as soon as you leave him
he returns to that from which you withdrew him.

David returns to the Court as informer times.

THey must not all be put to death of whose valor we stand in fear, that
thereby we may be secured. To use a like proceeding is inconvenient, when the
persons are of a different disposition. The benefits that serve to aid and
provoke the wickedly minded against their Prince, are but as Chains, whereby
generous minds are drawn to their devotions. So that to oblige them is to
bind them: But the ruin of the good proceeds from the multitude of the Evil:
which are not only evil, but do counterfeit as if they were good; so that
because it is a difficult thing to discern Truth and Falsehood, men will rather
deceive themselves in hindering a thousand that ought to be cherished, than in
cherishing one alone that ought to be hindered; and because it is easier to be
ungrateful than to maintain their gratitude, though they believe not always
that it is necessary to put deserving men to death, yet they feign sometimes
that they believe it, that they may cover the baseness of their minds with the
forcible jelousies of their Soveraigntie.

The evil spirit returning again to molest Saul, when David played, Saul
attempteth again to smite him to the wall with a spear, but he turns aside
and escapes.

WHen the subject once finds his Prince to be afraid of him, he stands
always in fear of the Prince; such jelousies have no other fire to consume
them but impossibility; for he that stands in fear, believes that whatsoever
may happen unto him, will. The first peril we incur in any thing may be
ascribed to fortune, the second if it be the same is commonly attributed to
our indiscretion. But the goodness of David makes him to be excusable in
regard his exceeding good conscience made him so adventurous: David trusts
Saul, because Saul might safely have trusted David. As we naturally imagine
other men to look like our selves, so we suppose them of our own conditions.
That which shall happen to a man, is not always the same that should. The
consequences of the future are fallible, because the Antecedents presupposed by
us are false. He that knew well the customs and manners of all men as they
are, and upon occasion should make use of them in conjecturing what is to come,
should not need to have recourse to the vanity of Astrologers.

Saul causes David's house to be compassed with Soldiers that should kill him,
yet gives them not order to enter into the house, peradventure because in those
times it was reputed too great a wickedness to kill one in his bed. Having
given over himself a prey to wickedness, he had not happily as yet lost all
respect unto goodness.

THat men are not altogether wicked, nor yet perfectly good, is not
peradventure because they know not how to be so, but because they cannot
possibly be so: It consists rather in the strength of nature than of will:
For if Nature have left no power to our feebleness to reach to the height of
goodness, why shall we believe that she has left any to our corruption to
come to the extremity of evil? He that blamed a Tyrant in that behalf, and
thereupon did pretend that their ruin was for the most preordained, declared
his belief to be, that the mischiefs which are destructions were
conservations: He discovered his not knowing, that the evil which is not a
being, cannot subsist without the supporting of that good which is a being; and
finally he made it manifest, that he had not read the Master of those
Doctrines, with which he had honored his writings, because his saying was,
that the Tyrant, when he goes not in the way of goodness, must not suffer it
to be quite out of his sight, and that if he will not be good throughout, yet
that he must at least have a Moity of goodness.

Michol tells David what peril he is in; she lets him down through a window,
and lays an Image in his place in the Bed.

GOd makes use of the Acts of human wittiness, as Instruments of his
Providence; those footsteps that fly it, are the self same that lead to it:
Saul makes David his son in Law, to bring him to his end; and because he is
his son in Law, he escapes it: That sentence, That the Destinies lead those
that follow them, and draw those that are unwilling, is an unadvised saying.
They that wrote it were deceived either in denying the Providence of God, or in
the manner of expressing it: He disposes all things sweetly: He conducteth
them that go with a good will, and those that are unwilling to go, are
conducted (if I may so say) by themselves.

Saul sends some again to take David, they bring word that he is sick in
his bed: Finally, he loses all respect of bed, and will have him slain how
ever; but instead of David they find an Image: Saul reproves his daughter
Michol, who excuses her self by her Husbands threats.

MEn in their desires invest themselves so far in their own interest, that
they make themselves believe that every one that knows them should cooperate
with them: but if they also invested themselves in the interest of others, and
did not consider every one in reference to themselves, but rather each one in
reference to himself, and whereas they think but of theirs alone, they formed
as many interests as there are men, they would not find themselves so often
deceived. Saul considers Michol as his daughter, and by consequence in
reference to himself; if he had considered her as David's wife, then he had
considered her in reference to her self, and had not found it strange that she
should save her husband out of her fathers hands: When women depart from their
friends houses, they oftentimes leave nothing behind them but Love.

Saul sends some after David, they find him in the Company of the Prophets
prophesying with them; he sends others after him, and they find him in like
manner: In the end full of anger and fury, he goes himself, and he also
remains with them, and prophesies in like manner.

THere are some so superstitious, that they account all things miraculous,
because they are ignorant of their second causes: some again are so
headstrong, as to deny all miracles because they know not the first cause; and
in conclusion there want not those that are so sacrilegious, that they will
rather acknowledge the Devil to be the doer of such miraculous effects than
God, because they themselves are more of the Devil than God. I know not
whether Saul might be reckoned among these, or whether knowing the miracle, he
suffered himself nevertheless to be transported by his anger and fury to
contend with the Almighty. All sinners in regard of themselves do undeifie
him, yet there are found very few that do desire to undeifie him, yet are
there not wanting some, who in their choler would willingly they could reduce
him to nothing, that has brought them out of nothing. He that is in choler, I
would say has even lost his understanding, yea, I would think him stark mad,
save that there remains only so much reason in him, as suffices to make his
works worthy of chastisement: Choler (and perhaps I am not deceived) is a
short fever; which if it were in the humors as it is in the spirits, would
prove to be a frenzy, whereunto it is so near of kin, that if by the little
while it continues it were not known from the other, there would scarce be any
such piercing eye that could discern betwixt them: That little reason that
remains in the choleric man makes him to differ from the mad man; yet makes
him worse than he, because it makes him not only to err, but to sin.

David flies, and going to meet Jonathan, he asks him what evil he has
committed that should procure Saul to persecute him.

He knew not peradventure that an eminent Virtue is no less persecuted than
an exorbitant Vice. I am of opinion that even Tyrants themselves do like well,
that their Ministers be men of valor and worth, but they would measure them as
they do cloth, by their arm, allowing them as much as will fit the person
they represent, and no more: Good Ministers are sometimes better than the best,
because the best are sometimes as dangerous as the worst are dishonorable. It
is a happiness in Princes how good soever they be, to be served by good
subjects equal to their affairs, for if they be of abilities above their
employments, they neglect them, if beneath them, their employments ruin them.
It is a fortunate thing therefore to happen on such as are fit for the purpose;
seeing we have no Instrument by which the degrees of worth may be measured,
neither any one that knows justly how much every office requires.

Jonathan answers David that he should not need to fear, because his father
would not resolve on any enterprise without communicating the same to him, and
that he would advertize him thereof: But David does not believe that Saul would
acquaint him with his purpose.

TO what end should a Tyrant communicate his Machinations? they are so
shameful, that he cannot expect commendations: He is so distrustful, that
he will not seek any counsel, and so far from trusting others, that he
scarcely trusts himself. One must needs believe this Truth, when we see
that distrusting the better part of himself, which is Reason, his trust is
wholly in his sense: when he communicates his thoughts, he does not impart them
to have conference about them, but to command, not to be counseled concerning
them, but to have them put in execution. He has no regard of sons, or
brethren, or wife, or friend. The interest of State is all in all with him, and
besides it he makes no account of any thing. A Tyrant is ordinarily so close
by nature, and so enured by Art to conceal his intent, that when he would
willingly be understood, he cannot sometimes make them understand them. For
not only men know not what he thinks, but many times they understand not what
he says.

They agree that David should hide himself, and Jonathan should observe what
the King says when on the first day of the month he should note David's
absence from the table, and that by a sign between them he should make
known his fathers intent. Then they depart as under renewing their oaths and
covenants of friendship.

THe first day of the month being come, Saul seeing that David appeared not,
flattering his desire he would not believe that David absented himself for
fear, but rather for some uncleanness: when he sees him not appear on the
second day, he asks Jonathan what is become of David, who answers that he
is gone to celebrate the solemnity; then Saul reproachfully reproves his son
for preferring his friendship with David before matter of State, by reason that
while David lived he could not be established in the Kingdom.

To chastise an offense committed is proper to the Law: that which would be
committed is reserved to God; that which may be committed is peculiar to a
Tyrant: when it is not justice, but a point of State that seeks the life of a
subject, there is scarce any remedy: if David had offended, he might have
hoped for pardon, and happily have obtained it: But where there i^ no offense
there can be no recourse to clemency, nor expectation of it. Those merits that
would have countervailed his faults, do condemn his innocencies. A great
occasion it mu^^ he to put an innocent to death, and because it is great, it
is insuperable. When justice has had her course in condemning, she leaves
Clemency her place to absolve; but where it is injustice to condemn, the
putting to death proceeds of self interest. It is good for him that dies, if
he dye innocent; but in regard of the world it is better being guilty when he
is condemned. He that has done an offense, and demands pardon, speaks not a
word but to the Princes praise, he confesses his fault, declares the virtue
of Justice in the Prince, and in demanding his pardon he shows that he does
also believe the virtue of clemency to be in him. But all the words of the
innocent sound to the blame of the Prince; he shows him to be unjust, he
declares him to be a Tyrant, he seeks not to pacify him; he incenses him,
and cannot hope for mercy because he cannot ask it: if he pray the Prince to
spare him his life, he must needs discover the cause that moves him to take it
away, and because he discovers it, he is made worthy of Death.

Jonathan demands of Saul, for what offense he does persecute David: but the
King in a rage casts a spear at him, and he flies.

THere is nothing more offensive to a Prince than to require him to declare
what he desires to conceal. The word (why) or (when) imports an Interrogation,
ought never to be found in their mouths that treat with Princes: The
interrogating has I know not what superiority, because it obliges one to
answer, and Princes are not to be obliged, but rather to be obeyed.

Jonathan rises from the Table in a great anger, he goes the next morning
where David was, and gives the sign according to their agreement. David comes
out of the place where he was hid: Jonathan informs him of his success, and
reiterating the oaths of their Confederacy, and the tokens of their Amity,
not without tender tears they depart asunder.

WHat thing is Friendship? It is a union as one may say of two souls in one
body, which in a sort do inform it, if not truly yet vertually; and if a
soul be so much grieved when it is to depart out of an earthly body which it
informed; why should it not also be grievous to depart from another soul
which she loved? Such a departure should be but as a death, were it not that
the distance of place does not break off the union of those things that do
not possess any place. But as in the parting of friends the souls are not so
much afflicted, the bodies are grieved in forgoing the fomentation of those
spirits that were a consolation to them. It is not credible that Nature having
permitted us spirits to offend us with, has not also granted that the spirits
of a friend should be comfortable unto us. Otherwise the spirits of Hatred and
of Love should be the selfsame.

David flies and comes to Nob to Achimelech the Priest, who marvelling to
see him alone, demands the occasion thereof. David answers that he goes about
the Kings service, who has so commanded.

He says truth, that he goes about the Kings service, for in flying he does
the King good service by bereaving him of occasion to do a great outrage. His
flight is not to escape chastisement for his offenses, but to avoid the
mischievous requ^tall of his benefits.

O the lamentable condition of men of high desert, they have two most potent
enemies, Envy and Fear, the one very hardly to be overcome, the other
impossible, nay rather the victory over the first makes the other the greater.
Envy like a mountain, it the waters of valor increase, is sometimes
overwhelmed: but fear like a ship, the more they increase, the higher does it
rise. What must they do then, that are so beset with impossibilities? Let them
courageously make head against the obstacles of their good fortune, if where it
is; and where not, let them give place to the evil. It is necessary sometimes
even in a storm to strive against the wind, if we see the haven near at
hand, but if it be far off, it is better to strike sail and run adrift than
to make shipwreck. The most worthy when they are not the greatest, become the
most unfortunate: Valor can never clearly be discerned but only in a Prince:
There, because it is profitable to the subjects, they reverence and fear it
not, and because it is an honor to them, they commend and envy it not. It is
so fair a thing, that if those two monsters Fear and Envy, did not deforme
it, men would even adore it, but happily God permits them to deforme it, lest
it should be adored, because it is adored over much when it is not so deformed.
If it be true that it is agreeable to nature, that the best should command, it
cannot be contrary to Nature, that the better should be feared by him that
does command. If the eminency of virtue could be laid aside, perhaps there
would not some be wanting, that to lead a quiet life would willingly reduce
themselves to that mediocritie that might keep them from contempt, and defend
them from envy: But as that eminency is fair, and not easy to be acquired,
so it is sometimes hurtful, because it cannot be laid aside.

David receives the sword of the Giant Goliath from the Priest, and eats of the
Shewbread, because he found no other sword for his defense, nor any other
bread for his sustenance.

NEcessity enforces him, she sometimes makes that lawful which at all times
is not so: It is a shield, which being ill used, works the ruin of the world.
All misdeeds, how heinous soever, do withdraw themselves out of the danger of
the Law, and in stead of being condemned to be borne withal, are invested with
the cloak of necessity: there is no absolute necessity in man, because he is a
free agent; if he suffer no outward violence, he has none within him; those
which we call necessities, and which we pretend that they free from the Law,
are made to be such by the Law. They are necessary consequences by supposition,
having a conditional antecedent for their foundation: But the suppositions
that are not authorized by the Law, have no consistence; for otherwise, all the
actions of men should be lawful, seeing all might be necessary by supposing a
conditional antecedent before them, out of which a necessary consequence
should arise by supposition. Therefore it is not true that necessity has no
Law, but it is very true that the necessity which has no Law is only that
which is an enemy to the Law.

David flies to King Achish, but seeing himself and his virtues known, being
much afraid of his envy, he faineth himself to be mad, and changes his
countenance before him.

HE that is borne into this great Theater of the world, ought to know how to
suit himself into sundry habits, that he may be enabled in this Comedy to
represent many persons. When a man sees himself persecuted by envy, he must
like the shelfish fructified by the dew of Heaven, cast away his pearl rather
than be a prey to those that have him in chase. David puts on a form of
madness, and by it brings Achish to put off his envy. The countenance of the
former is transformed before the eyes of the latter, not that the effigies of
the one is altered, but the intellect of the other: If it had pleased the Lord
by his mercy and benignity to root up envy out of the world, how many David's
would change their countenances in the presence of Achish? But they that hate
valor and virtue, let them (I beseech them) tell me what thing it is they
think they hate, they hate even themselves. Virtue cannot be odious; if it
be good, it is fair also; if it be fair, it is the object of love, and not
of hatred. The envious is an ignorant Painter, or a malicious one; who in
drawing the virtue of others deformes it; either he takes the perfections from
it, or adds imperfections to it, and blames in another that which himself
has added of his own to it, or what he has taken from it. Yet this were not
much, if he did not also expose that picture to public view, that they who
cannot see the original, might hate it.

Take away David out of my presence, says Achish; Have I any need of madmen?

THis King is one of those that when the time comes shall call themselves
fools, for having believed wisemen to be fools: I know not which error to be
the greater, either to think wise men to be fools, or to account fools to
be wise men: of this ignorance as out of a root arise all precipitated
courses. The most dangerous person that is represented, and the greatest fool
that can be found, is he that takes upon him to be wise.

David departs thence, and saves himself in the cave of Adullam, where his
brethren and all his fathers house come unto him.

AS a foraigne war is the only remedy to unite the disordinate minds in
Common wealths, so are enmities and persecutions to make an atonement in
families. This is a true rule when the discords are not bloody, and when
proceeding no farther than to some high terms, they are not grown to hatred.

Those brethren that in a sort would have hindered the fortune of David, are
they which now are willing to help him in his misery. Base minds applaud our
felicities, and abandon us in our disasters; but they that are only corrupted
by envy, retaining yet a kind of generosity, when their envy rather springs
from desire of honor, than malignity, they run readily to assist their allies
in their dangers: and if they go not to applaud them in their glory, it is not
for that they desire not to see them great, but because they themselves would
gladly be great.

The malecontented also gathered together to David, and made him their
Captain.

IT is impossible but there should be some such kind of people in a State. If
the Prince be good, then the evil are malecontent; if he be evil, the good
are: and some that are not displeased with the Princes government, are so with
their own, by which being ruinated and wasted, when they have no hope in quiet
courses, they affect nothing but turbulencies. The state ought to beware of 2.
most potent enemies, Hope and Despair, for these two extremes are they that
molest it, the greatest and the least of quality; the one supposing that their
good fortune calls them to a better estate: the other by their evil one are
stirred to avoid the worst: for this cause I suppose was that City preferred by
a professed politic Writer which is inhabited by the middle sort of men.

The Prophet Gad advises David to depart, and to go into the land of Judah,
and Saul hearing that David was seen there, complains greatly amongst his
servants, that David being not able to give them vineyards nor houses, nor make
them Commanders, nor otherwise reward them, should find followers and he be
abandoned.

PRinces do err when they think their Rebels should not be followed in hope
of reward. I speak not of David who was a King and no Rebel, one that was
raised up, and not risen against his Prince; one that was flying from him, and
not contending against him. The rewards expected of treachery are far greater
than those that are yielded to fidelity. And what do not they promise, which
promise that which is none of their own? what do they not give before they
be well advised that it is their own? Disordinate minds are not content with
ordinate rewards: their troublesome heads account quietness their enemy, and
even those of a quiet disposition do sometimes surfeit of rest, because the
natural desire of change makes felicity it self to be tedious.

The Subjects serving their Prince, if they will be rewarded, oftentimes are
driven to show some excessive merit, because there are few that think
themselves bound to those whose service is bound to them: but he that follows
a rebel, has already merited of him in that he follows him. That false
proposition, that to work where one is obliged diminishes his merit, is both
pernicious to Princes, and prejudicial to Subjects. The obligation rather
increases the merit, seeing reward is due to the Subject, not only for that
which he presently performs, but for his future actions which he has
obliged himself unto. The stranger that does somewhat for the Princes service,
gives him only some fruit of his own tree, whereas the Subject has given him
the tree it self with all the fruit.

Doeg the Idumean answers Saul, that he saw David when he came to
Achimelech the Priest, who gave him besides victuals, the sword of Goliath; the
King sends to call him, and questions him thereabout. He who the truth being
known, expected reward rather than punishment, does not excuse himself as not
guilty, but speaks with that confidence which rather proceeds of innocence
than temerity, saying, And who is among all thy Servants more faithful than
David the Kings son in law, and readier to do all thy Commandments? neither
is this the first time that I have prayed the Lord for him. Far be the name
of a rebel from me. I thought I had done service to thee, in doing service to
thy chief Favorite.

THe subjects of the Tyrant that has an inward Favorite, are intang^ed in
streights inextricable. Let them look for ruin at all hands, if they hate him
when he is exalted, or if they love him when he falls; yet what error do
they commit in loving him, but that their Lord does the same? He cannot find
fault with others, unless he first condemn himself; and he deserves the
greater chastisement, because he ought to have greater advertisement, in
considering who he is whom he exalts above others. It is not the part of
subjects to examine the actions of their Sovereign: It is their glory to
second them; and yet it is not sufficient to obey the commands of a Tyrant, if
we diue not also into his secret thoughts. He that seeks to search into
them, makes himself (as it were) guilty of death; he that does not, easily
becomes liable. He embraces sometimes such a one as he could be content were
made away by his subjects, he dissembleth for his proper interest, yet permits
not others to do so for theirs. If his thoughts were always bent toward the
prosperity of his people, he were a wicked subject that did not bend himself
wholly to his service.

Saul commands Achimelech and all the Priests of Nob, to be slain.

I Who have found elsewhere that the same proceeding which provoked Saul, had
pacified a Tyrant, should wonder at the diversity of the effect, had it not
been produced by the innocence of David, who left Achimelech no place to
defend himself without condemning the King, not only of an oversight as it
was in the other, but even of ingratitude, perfidiousnesse, and cruelty.

Saul says, kill Achimelech and all the Priests, but no man stirs; he bids
Doeg kill them, and he presently obeys.

THe voice that commands in general, proceeds not with so much sharpness,
as that which is directed to some particular. The dividing of it into so many
ears, makes so many divisions, that it becomes diminished in every of them.
The rewards as also the punishments which are in common, come but slowly, but
the private are as soon obtained, as they are deserved: He that would chastise
general errors, or would reward the merits of all, as those of some
particulars are; on the one side he would destroy the world, and the empty
treasuries on the other: And therefore as in the great errors of a multitude,
the proportio decupla is observed, so likewise in such great benefits, the like
decimation is used, if not some greater proportion. Whence it comes that
particulars are more easily wrought on to do well, and with greater difficulty
to do evil the multitude, because their fear and hope of chastisement and
reward is greater.

Saul goes afterward to Nob, where he kills small and great, as well of the
one sex as of the other, as well men as beasts.

IF that City had been culpable, and David a rebel, Saul perhaps had taken no
ill course, that being the first and only place. That Prince is sometimes the
most pious, which upon occasion is most severe: his cruelty is deep, but not
large, because if it be intensive, it is not extensive. It is true that where
many Cities have rebelled, the using of greater in the first that is taken,
does not dishearten the rest, but makes them desperate and obstinate in their
defense to their last breath. It is such an antidote as is not to be ministered
to all that are diseased.

Abiathar a son of Achimelech escapes out of Nob, and comes to David, who
afflicts him greatly, saying that he is the cause of the death of so many
persons.

THis is an intolerable passion, because three most potent affections are the
procurers of this grief, and enforce the revenge: The character of friendship
melting the heart, the prick of honor which enkindles it, and finally the
interest which excites it. To defend our friends is so profitable for the
maintaining and increasing of Monarchies, that they which have been held to
be most prudent have endeavored it, even in places far remote from them, not
to receive aid or service, but only to help and succor them: he that
knows not how to make use of this rule, knows not how to rule. The greatest
Rulers and Potentates of the world have made themselves great by this Art; yea
this color is so pleasing, that it dazleth the eyes of the people, and makes
them often applaud such a one, as under the color of defending his friends,
brings himself into the estates of others: but if he find great resistance
there, seeing himself unable to offend those whom he would have opposed, he
oppresses them whom he should have defended.

Word is brought unto David that the Philistims had invaded Keilah, and spoiled
it: He asks counsel of the Lord, whether he shall go against them; who
answers him, that he shall go, overcome, and defeat them.

HE that will learn the way into matter of State, let him but observe David,
let him not enterprise with fraud, but with valor: Let him not defile his
hands with civil blood, but with that of the stranger; nor offend those whom
he would have to be his subjects, but defend them. It is true indeed that
most men grow great by fraud; not because it is more safe than valor, but
because it is more easy; whence it comes that there are many fraudulent, but
few that are valorous: notwithstanding the greater part even of those that by
fraud have made themselves Masters, in seizing on the Country in which they
were borne, have first manifested their valor either in enlarging or defending
it. To defend the subjects of others, is to touch the finest string of State
and Dominion; if the Lord grieve at it, he seems ungrateful; if he suffer it
and say nothing, he is in little safety. The Subjects are not to be defended by
any, but their own Prince: It is his proper office. He that arrogates it to
himself, if he be not already, he will be in the Princes room. The wisest
Commonweals have not been ignorant how much this point imports, declaring
that they knew it for a matter of much consequence, and of maine importance,
when they would not permit the Subjects themselves to be the defenders of
themselves.

Saul understanding that David is in Keilah, prepares to go and besiege him;
which he foreseeing, causes Abiathar to enquire of the Lord whether Saul will
come or no, who answers he will. Then whether they of Keilah will deliver him
into the hands of the King, and he answers they will.

THe destruction of Nob had made the men of Keilah so ungrateful, as that they
would have delivered him into the hands of his enemy, who had but at that
instant delivered them out of the hands of their enemies. Gratitude works
exceeding great effects in generous minds, and the greater when it has
brought forth: It is then surely prevailing over private interest, yet must it
of force give place unto fear, to which all the passions give way, I mean in
State affairs, because none of them can be used when we think our selves to
be thereby endangered, without which they cannot be exercised: It has been
disputed whether the Prince or the people are more ungrateful. I am of opinion
that there is ingratitude everywhere to be found, if our being grateful cannot
be without loss of our lives; yet rather in the people than in the Prince,
because it is easier to find one man than many, to sacrifice his life to his
reputation. But if the question be of augmenting or diminishing the State, I
hold Princes to be the more ungrateful, because their interest is very great;
and that of the people howsoever it be in their entire body as great, is but
small notwithstanding in every particular: whence it comes that men more easily
part with a little, though in many it be much, than one man alone with much,
which in many would be but little.

David departs into the desert of Ziph, to hide himself in the wood. Saul
hears of it, and follows him in vain: But Jonathan goes to him, comforts
him, and says, he is assured that he shall reign over Israel.

SEe here the force of friendship, which makes Jonathan rejoice that David is
to take the kingdom from him. Albeit that friendship seems to be without
interest, yet is it not altogether without interest. The affection that we
bear to our selves, is the rule of all our affections. They who have supposed
that a friend loves another more than himself, have happily been deceived, for
if sometimes a man loses his life, his goods and estate for his friend, it is
not in regard that he wishes more good to another, than to himself, but
because he acknowledges no other goods but virtues, which he gains, when
gloriously for his friend he forgot those of fortune. But they that love
riches, their estate and their life above virtue, when they saw some forgo
their goods (which they so much esteemed) for their friend, were easily induced
to think that they loved not themselves so much as their friend.

I was never of opinion that it was any imperfection, to love himself above
others, but have rather esteemed it an imperfection not to love himself more
than others. He that erreth not in this, shall never offend; because he that
sins, destroying God as much as he can, destroys himself, or as much as
he may: seeing that all his good is depending on the goodness of God.

The Ziphines give notice to Saul that David had hid himself in their woods,
and they conduct him where he is: David finds himself out of hope, seeing
himself encompassed round about. But Saul is advertised by a messenger, that
the army of the Philistims was entered into the land.

SInners many times have no recourse unto God, but in their utmost extremity,
and many times God delayeth the deliverance of the faithful to prove them, and
then he hears them: but those other are seldom delivered out of their
dangers, but they return eftsoons to their misdoings. He suffers them to
return thither whence their fear had withdrawn them, which departs as soon
as he has delivered them. To reserve himself from aiding his friends till
they be in extremity, is a thing well befitting in God, who can help
whenever he will, and then wills when it is best; but in men that have no
power according to their will, it is perilous. When it moves not to distance,
yet it diminishes the obligation, and most commonly produces ingratitude.
There is a kind of proceeding put in ure (yet not always with good success)
by Potentates when they have received some disgust for the satisfying of two
affections, their anger and their interest; to suffer those that have given
them distaste, to be mortified, but not to be opposed. This course is rather
to be practiced with enemies, and may prove well when the enmity proceeds not
of emulation, if at least that act do not lift him up to a higher sphere. It
is a difficult thing for a corrivall not to be always an enemy, when such
emulation has one degenerated into hatred: and when he cease to be an enemy,
he will cease also to be a corrivall, either having passed into a further
degree, or being so overpassed himself. Though Saul were more enraged against
David, yet he leaves pursuing him to go against the Philistims, with whom he
has more interest. Physicians do sometimes not only not assuage a grief,
but suffer it also to grow; whiles they cure, a putrid fever happens. He is
very unwise, that for the healing of a part is careless of the whole, which
when it dies, the part dies with it.

David being retired into the holds of Engaddi, Saul returns to pursue him
even in rockie places, having vanquished the Philistims, and entering into a
Cave for his necessary business, he happened into the same, in which David and
his men were hid; where they persuade David to kill him, but he is contented
only to cut off a lap of his garment.

TO kill the chief Commander of an army, if he be gracious with it, when he
that kills him has not another army, is the revenge of a private person to
discharge his passion of hatred, but not of a Prince that desires dominion.
The army is thereby incensed, makes presently another chief, thinks to
revenge the loss of their Prince, hates the murderer, and is more ready to
die against him, than serve under him. David, who was in the way to the
Kingdom by man^uetude and fortitude, accompanied with the fear of God, and by
consequence a reverence toward his King, and humility withal, could forgo
those virtues, and take to him revenge with irreverence and cruelty, without
loss of reputation. He that is come forward with one virtue, ought rather to
die than to change it: there are some who having gotten reputation by one
manner of proceeding, cannot alter it, because it is natural to them; others
will not, because they have prospered with it* and those ought never to change,
whose demeanor has ever been virtuous. That power which is rising, because
it rises commonly by the means of reputation, must beware of losing it, and
prefer it even before life, for therewith all its good is lost. Politicians
have esteemed this rule to be so true, that they have made it an universal
one, and will have a Prince rather to hazard his estate and life, than to lose
by means of Peace, Truce, or tribute his reputation. I subscribe not to their
opinion, yet do I agree, that if the greatness of a Prince consist in his
reputation, he ought rather to die than to lose it; but if it be founded on
store of money and people which are his subjects, let him yield to the time,
make peace and truce ever, though it be with disadvantage of reputation; let
him become tributary, though it be to an inferior nation, and leave not any
thing undone how mean soever, (so it be not against Gods Law) rather than to
adventure his estate; for any thing is better than to put that in jeopardy. If
that be not lost, it is never out of season to recover whatsoever is lost: Its
prudence in Princes and no infamy; they ought not to abhor any thing that may
augment or maintain their dominion. Private men write such weak rules,
because they measure them by their own compass: Every degree of men has his
proper and peculiar kind of reputation differing each from other, so far
forth that many things accounted infamous in one degree, are well reputed in
another. A Prince that has a great estate never loses his reputation, if he
lose not his estate, for his estate is his reputation. The world is in a
confusion in such sort, that men of one degree leaping into that of others by
confounding the diverse degrees, have confounded all the world. The Merchant
will take upon him the Gentleman, and the Gentleman the part of the Prince; the
religious, that of the soldier; and where the reputation of the one consists
in suffering and forgiving of injuries, he leapes into that of the other,
whiles he seeks to require and revenge. I am to be excused if I am long in
this matter, which is the cause of great errors in the world; for if every one
would follow his own profession, it would soon be known that reputation
consists in knowing well how to perform his own profession.

David being on one side of a mountain, seeing Saul on the other, calls unto
him and shows him his garment, assuring him of his good will, complains
that he is persecuted, but blames the Kings Ministers, and not the King
himself. Saul hearing that malice is imputed to his servants, does not excuse
himself by them, but lays the fault on himself.

IT is an ordinary thing of male-contented men to complain, though not of the
Prince himself, yet of his Ministers. That when David does here out of
modesty, is done often by others out of subtilty. To rise against the
government, makes the name of a rebellion the less odious, deceives the
people, yea, many times, the Princes themselves for a while, who sometimes
discern not at the first the ambition that comes masked under
coffeehouse. Princes ought therefore to have their Ministers about them of
singular goodness, and of tried prudence, that upon the first rumor they may
be well assured of the falsehood of such complaints, and break the heads of
such horrible Serpents at their first appearing. The reverence that the people
bear toward the Prince is so great, that it would be a difficult thing to
stir them up against him, but by first beguiling them; and though it be all
one to rise against the government, and to rebel against the Prince, (because
either the Prince is he that governs, or he that governes is the Princes
Minister) yet it appears not at first with so foul a face. It is true indeed
that an insurrection of the people is occasioned by a bad Minister, in which
case the Prince does always amiss to chastise him. In the people there is not
always one desire covered under another, but if the great ones arise against
the government, it is not because they are not well governed, but because they
would be governors themselves; to satisfy their demands were to consent to
lose the Sovereignty, seeing such will not be satisfied, till they obtain it.

Samuel dies, he is buried with honor, and is by the people most tenderly
bewailed.

I Know not whether mourning for the dead proceeds of piety, or of mere
interest: It may favor peradventure of piety to bewail when he dies, but
not after he is dead: who would not have compassion of his friend, while he
sees him, or imagines tormented with the grievous agonies of death. Men are
certainly in very great pain, for they are in the pain due to a very great
fault: And who would not after rejoice to see him departed victorious over
humane frailty, and to triumph over death it self, without having left any
other spoil in that conflict than his body, and that for a very short time?

To lament the dead (if one may say) is then most impious, when it seems most
pious: and then ought most to be done, when it seems not due at all. The
death of the righteous, at which we ought to rejoice, makes us to mourn; and
that of the wicked, which we ought most to lament, does rejoice us. It is no
friendly but an envious part to be grieved at the death of that friend, whose
life may make us believe that he injoyes his deserved glory. But it is a part
of piety to be sorry at their death, whose wickedness does make us doubt that
they are cast headlong into hell. The world is so full of snares that the good
should not desire to be in it, because there they may be corrupted; and so
great is the mercy of the Lord our God, that the wicked should desire to be
therein, that they may be amended. But if we are grieved in regard of our own
interest, is it not more available that our friends pray to God for us, than to
men? He that thinks he has lost his friend when he dies, if he believe the
immortality of the soul, and does not think him damned, must then believe
that the Characters of his virtues are lost with God. O how true it is that all
our errors do spring and grow from our muddy senses! They acknowledge no
interest but earthy, no happiness but worldly; and albeit man is elevated by
his better part unto a more excellent knowledge, yet he cannot desire it as he
ought, because he cannot know it as it is.

David went unto the wilderness of Rachan, and understanding that there dwelt
near thereabout a man exceeding rich in flocks and other possessions, whose
name was Nabal; he sent unto him on the day of sheep-shearing, to demand some
relief of provision and victuals: But Nabal not only denies him, but with
ill words provoking him, declaring his avarice, to be accompanied with malice.

IT is an ordinary thing in denying of benefits to accompany the denial with
injuries; I know not whether it be to cloak their avarice with hate, or
because such men loving their goods as dearly as their lives, when one dema^ds
to have any of them, are incensed with anger, as if he sought so much of their
blood; or else that it comes to pass, because men in denying what is demanded,
think they have made him their enemy that demanded it, and framing him such in
their imaginations, speak of him not as one that is become such, but as of one
that is so already. Peradventure also Nabal denies with arrogance to accomplish
David's desire, doubting his guiltiness might seem to be some sign that he
stood in fear of violence, and to show that he does not fear it, himself in
terms begins to use it.

David is incensed by the answer of Nabal, and sets forward to destroy him and
all his house. But Abigail, Nabals wife, being a prudent and a beautiful
woman, hearing of David's request, and her husbands denial, goes with many
beasts laden with victuals to meet David, and begins with excuse of her
husbands ignorance, and foolishness. She entreats him to accept of the
present she brought, and pardon her husband: And so David is appeased.

WOmen are of so great force in persuading, that it has been held all one to
hearken to them, and to grant their requests. He that forbade them to be
brought up in learning, had an eye perhaps not only to their difficulty of
understanding, but also to their facility in persuading. He that was judged by
the Lord God to be the wisest, made use of such an instrument; and that tyrant
who was written among the most circumspect, was afraid of this force. Women
have always delight joined with their words, and where delight is, there is
also persuasion. If the understanding does not agree to it, the will consents:
so that when that which they say cannot be believed, yet they which have said
it must not be displeased. Their tears are their Enthymems, their beauty is
their sword: where they do not procure love, there they move compassion; yea,
and sometimes they persuade the better, because they have no skill in
persuading: There is no cunning suspected where there is no science, yet there
is more thereof in their countenance than in all Rhetoric. It is lawful to
forgo all fierceness in favor of a sex that is so amorous: The weakness of
it makes us not ashamed to lay down all our wrath to it, yea, rather makes him
ashamed that does not lay it down,

David does bless God and Abigail, for having by her prudence diverted him
from revenging himself of Nabal.

IT is a great good hap to be taken off from a necessity of revenging
himself. He that can divert it and does not, deserves great blame; he that
hinders it, great commendation; and he meriteth more that desires to be so
diverted. But there are many now a days desirous of such necessities, which if
they be but small, they seek to augment them, and feign some when they find
none. They account it a glory to revenge, and the name of revengefull,
glorious. This is a proper art for those who having no talents by which they
make themselves known to be men, will make themselves known to be beasts;
they know not how to make themselves honored, therefore they will make
themselves feared, as if reputation and fear were all one. The vulgar rout
breed such kind of people by applauding them, but such applauses turn to
their ruins, seeing the quarrels which begin among the greater sort are for
the most part quenched with the blood of the meaner. Cities will never be rid
of these blood-thirsty companions, till they cease from commending their bloody
proceedings, neither will the way to such false praise ever be stopped up,
till the way to the true, shall be laid open; which then only will be
effected, when Princes and States give place and occasion to their Subjects to
make known their true valor, and reward them according to their due
deservings.

Abigail returns to Nabal, and because she finds him drunken, she forbeares
till the morning to speak unto him, and then tells him what had passed; which
when he had heard, his heart was dead within him as a stone, and within few
days he dies.

WHy should Nabals heart become dead, seeing his offense was pardoned? or
rather why should not his heart be dead, seeing he had offended? David does
not cast him down, it is only his own conscience. He that offends his
neighbor unjustly offends his own reason, and although his neighbor has
pardoned him, she never pardons him: the revenge taken of him, is the
rememberance of his offenses. Nabal cannot believe that revenge to be
abolished, whose characters being blotted out the memory of men, are written in
heaven; for then are they written there, when they are struck out here. He
does not perfectly pardon, who does not pray God to pardon, which if he do, he
does not thereby diminish the offenses, but in some sort increases them. If
the Judges, whom the Holy Ghost calls gods, did resemble God in punishing of
sins, as they desire to be like God in superiority above others, there would
not be so much offending, and there would be more pardoning. A man has no
sooner forgiven an offense, but the Judge also pardons it; yea, sometimes also
the Judge has absolved before the party has pardoned. That savage fierceness
of never pardoning an enemy would soon be abolished, if their pardoning did
augment the offenses in the judiciary seats of men, as it does in a sort before
the Tribunal or high Justice of God. But when the offended pardons, the
offenses are written above, though here being remitted they are cancelled.

David takes Abigail being a woman of singular beauty and prudence to wife,
and Saul gives his daughter, who was first the wife of David, unto Phalti.

WHo desires to marry to Beauty, may hap to meet with a Devil: for the
Devil also has some beauty. But he that desires to be joined with Prudence,
if he marry not an Angel, yet he is surely married to an angelical virtue.
Prudence is a fire which converts all Antimony into medicine, makes her
pleasing that is deformed, makes her tolerated that is poor, and her quietly
enjoyed that is fair: for it is a Bezar that corrects the venom of beauty; It
makes it majesticall, and not lascivious, and being majestical it is the
daughter of the radiant beams of Jupiter, not of Venus; rather enforcing
reverence, than enflaming desire. He that sees her, conceits her a thing
impossible to obtain, and the will never fixes upon impossibilities; if it be
not fixed it reflects on the object, if it do not reflect, it loves not for
the often reflections are the producers of love.

The Ziphims go to Saul, and advertise him that David is in their deserts, and
he goes to seek him with 3000. chosen soldiers.

SEe how the pride of Saul is not mitigated with the humility of David, perhaps
because the pride was joined with interest, and the humility with reputation.
The proud man becomes meek, not when his enemy has humbled himself, but when
he himself has humbled him. That humility that is begotten by fear, does
ever mitigate the pride that is not brutish: he that believed otherwise might
happily have been deceived, by confounding the one with interest, and the other
with greatness of mind. The proud man will have his enemy bow unto him; but
if then when he boweth down, his deeds lift him up, he does not mitigate, but
rather exasperate him, because instead of magnifying him, he does afflict and
confound him. All the wise, yea, and wily men do humble themselves to him that
persecutes them; when their humility increases their reputation, which it
always does, when separated from dobilitie. The greatest pride that may be
found, goes clad in the habit of humility* and oftentimes is not discerned by
others, but him only against whom it is employed: and because by the rest it
is not discovered, they cannot oppose against it without being blamed.

David being informed of Saul's arrival, and having gotten some knowledge of
his strength, calls unto him Achimelech and Abishai; asks them who will go
with me into the army of Saul, and Abishai answers, I will go.

WHen Princes confer a degree of honor on a subject, they will make choice
themselves; but in a matter of danger, they use to leave him to his own
choice: and whereas the subject thinks to make his merit the greater, by how
much it is the more voluntary; the Prince on the contrary sometimes holds
himself less obliged to him whom he has least obliged. I blame not this
proceeding, so it be not of purpose to avoid to be beholding, but to be
assured of the sufficiency and love of the subject. To expose him to danger and
to love him, do not very well agree. To make one to offer himself in a
voluntary manner, is not sufficient argument of such affection, if without much
entreatie his offer be accepted.

David and Abishai go to the camp of Saul, where they find the Guard, the
King himself, and all his soldiers asleep.

THe Lord God ordinarily in the effects of the world suffers his hand to be
seen of them only that are very sharp sighted, because he works by natural
instruments; yet sometimes also he will be seen even of those that are blind,
because he works by the supernatural a^me of his Omnipotency. When there are
operations perceived to be contrary to the ordinary course, that the watchful
are found sleeping, that the prudent are overseene, that the valiant are faint
hearted; there they that are well sighted may discern the hidden finger of
God, who when he intends the ruin of some house or kingdom, or any other
place, takes from it those that might save it; or otherwise alters them in such
sort, that they oppose not his designs: sometimes also taking away the mark
of natural things, he sends an Angel to burn Cities, to destroy Armies, and
raises up Captains, that with the light of a torch or a lamp make Cities
fall down; and then there is no eye so blind, but sees therein the Almighty
hand of God.

Abishai would have slain Saul, David would not permit him, but takes away his
spear and his pot of water.

WHo will wonder at David, that having been as a Lion when he slew the Giant
Goliath, he now shows himself a lamb in suffering Saul to live, if he were a
figure of that God, who to the sinner was a Lamb, and a Lion to the Devil. He
that aims at a dignity, in showing himself faint-hearted in obtaining it,
will not prove courageous when he has obtained it. David did not forbear to
slay Saul for any reason of State, but abstained from it for the reverence and
fear of God. Where has that man been found, that knew this piece of policy
at any time? It is too finely wrought to be disdiscerned by the eyes of those
that are blinded with the passions of desire to rule or revenge, until having
obtained the dominion or the revenge they desired, their eyes happily are
cleared; then they begin to consider that which they should have considered
before, they are afraid of the example which themselves have begotten; whence
it came to pass that many have revenged the death of those Princes, of which
themselves have been the procurers. They are terrified in their seat of State,
they hate their Scepter, as if it threatened violent death to him that treads on
it or hold it: They stand in fear of the stars that rule over that kingdom,
as if the vanity of those were true, as it is most false; who have believed
that the violent constellations of kingdoms, with a very little help of the
Kings Horoscope had the power to kill them.

David calls out to Abner, and reprooves him for not having kept the King
duly.

I Know not whether this were good policy to provoke the General of the army,
but I know that Abner after the death of Saul, was he that made all the war
against David.

He complains again to Saul of his being persecuted, saying, if God has
stirred thee up against me, let him be appeased with sacrifice; if men have
done it, accursed be they of God.

HE speaks not of appeasing men, he knows that malignity may be extinguished,
but never appealed, and that no other sacrifice does extinguish it, but the
suffering of himself to be extinct. He that practices malignity is base, he
that gives ear to it is weak, it is not the part of a prudent or a wary man.
It is a sword that is sharp on every side, one cannot strike with it, but is
wounded himself: he is irksome to those that hear him, among whom while he
seeks to endamage another, he loses his own reputation, but yet he is
hearkened to; and why they hearken to him, and how this is wrought I know not,
neither will I teach nor learn it: For I hold the profession so infamous, that
if I did contemplate the means of the practice thereof, I should accuse my
self to be guilty in the tribunal of detraction. To teach others how to be
malicious, is a great malignity, and would be a great madness in me: I should
sharpen that sword that has wounded me so often, and should make my self
master of a profession which I never practiced but passively.

Saul confesses again that he has sinned, and prays David to return, who
answers; Let one come to fetch the Kings spear; but speaks not of his
returning.

THe great favorites of Princes if they once fall, they fall headlong, they are
gone, they cannot up again. The cause that shall separate them from their Lord
must needs be great, there is no returning. The ordinary middle sized
Courtiers, may sometimes fall and sometimes rise. The Angel fell, and so did
man, but the man returned into grace, and not the Angel; because the nature of
man was not so great a favorit, as was that of the angel. If a prince be but
simply angry with his favorite* so that his anger does not end in discharging
and turning him away, it is a sign of love. We are very angry with them, whom
we love entirely. It is a security of being a favorite, because the anger which
may be vented when it is not kept in by fear, is entertained by love, and is
finally a confirmation of the inward affection; being (as one may say) a
certain venting of matters, which being kept in the Princes breast would ruin
the Courtier, and uttered with choler, they call back the love to his
beginning, which according to the property of all humane things receives
satiety and corruption in time.

David says in his heart, I shall one day fall into the hands of Saul: It is
better for me to go into the land of the Philistims.

HE that has need of fortune for his preservation, let him be well assured
that she is not always helpful, let him withdraw himself out of danger:
because he had her on his side, let him look to have her against him* and
conclude that the longer she has lasted, the sooner his end will come. This is
a precept which one shall rather find written than observed; perhaps because
the nature of men which is in their disasters to complain of fortune, in their
good success to boast of their own worth does not permit them to be afraid
of being aba^doned of those helps, which they know not how or whence they
obtained: so that the vows which are hanged up in the Temple of Fortune, are
more to pacify her, than to be thankful to her. He therefore that of
necessity to maintain himself in state, is driven either to the help of
Fortune, or his best skill and cunning; let him live always in fear, for in
the end the instability of the one, and the deceitfulnes of the other, will let
him fall into the hands of Saul. That Monarchy or Common weal is not stable
which is not founded on forces, laws, and ordinances of their own. That
clock which has no Gnomon, and which receives its motion either from springs
or counterpoises cannot long endure without erring.

David with his men go to Achish, the King of Seth, which when Saul
understood, he left off pursuing him.

IT seems lawful to fly among the pagans when there is no other way to save
himself, so that he live not like a Pagan; and he is not always to be
blamed, that has recourse to their help for the recovery or defense of his
own estate. It has been sometimes also permitted to help them against other
pagans, so the help we yield them be in favor of reason and right. But it
shall be always recorded for a great fault to succor, to encourage, to move
or to counsel the idolaters to an invasion of the states of true believers,
for that were not to go against men, but against God, to lessen his kingdom,
and to enlarge the confines of the Devil.

David says unto Achish, I am not worthy to dwell in the head City with thee.
Appoint me, I beseech thee some other place: then Achish assigned him Ziklag.

DAvid withdrawes himself from the Court of King Achish; not because Courts
are to be forsaken, but he retires himself, because his different religion
and great valor, would have made him suspected and feared. I am not of their
mind that blame and condemn the Court, it is the true Paragon of virtuous men:
there is no place where vice is sooner discovered, and virtue more rewarded. It
is a light by which men's hearts are seen and discerned, yea, it is a most
clear test to distinguish natural gold from that of Alchimie. He that has
great talents let him hasten thither, for there they are gloriously spent and
employed. Let him not regard the complaints of those whose talents, how great
soever they have been, have not adv^nced them. It may perhaps be found, if
they were examined, that they were not printed with the stamp of prudence, and
so of no value, because he that had them could not utter them, or because he
would have them go for more than they were worth. He that excels in any art or
science, if he have not withal some eminent place in Court, he complains
that virtues are not regarded. Princes for the most part both esteem and
reward all men according to the greatness of their quality, not of their
ambition: and ^f any one complain, it is thought he has more of that than of
the other. A great part of the errors in the world arises hence, not because
every one does not give place to his better, but because every one does not
know his better; and indeed, it is a difficult thing to know him, because he
goes not always clad in the same cloth. Men deceive themselves in equivocating
from a greatness, with an addition to an absolute greatness; believing
oftentimes, because they are esteemed the best in some one thing, that
therefore they should be the best esteemed. He only in regard he is the
greatest in his profession, shall be in great repute above others, whose
profession shall be in estimation above others.

David with his men goes forth of the City to spoil and destroy certain
idolatrous countries, and returning to Achish, makes him believe that he has
been to endamage the Isra^lites; and the King thereupon is persuaded that he
might assure himself of David, believed that he had so far provoked the
Israelites, that he could no more be reconciled.

MAny Princes when they were grown jealous of the fidelity of a subject, have
used the like means to be secured of him, and the chiefest among rebels do
commonly ground their hopes in putting those that follow them in despair. Yet
all such rampires are very weak, and easily overthrown, as soon as assaulted
with the engine of reason and state. It facilitateth pardons, makes offenses to
be forgotten, and overcomes all desires, because the desire of dominion, is
the first begotten and eldest of all the affections. The Princes that are wary
and circumspect, do think themselves only assured of that faith which is
either enforced, or interessed.

The Philistimes prepare a great army to go against Saul. Achish inviteth
David to go with him, and he accepts of his invitation.

I Would not that this place should serve for any example to any Christian
Princes, to accompany any Infidels in oppressing the faithful: He had no
thought of bringing the Philistims into the Land of Israel, but he was brought
into the posession of that kingdom by Achish, unto which God had elected him.
The Philistims went not to fight against the kingdom, but against the King; as
was clearly seen, when after the overthrow given to Saul, they returned to
their own houses, leaving Mephibosheth to rule and reign in Israel.

The Philistimes pitch their tents in Shunem, and Saul with his army in Gilboa,
Saul had all the Magicians and South-sayers that had spirits in their belly to
be slain: perhaps they had given out that the kingdom should come into the
hands of David. But he staid not long from seeking out the relics of those
whom he had so persecuted: for being afraid when he had seen the host of the
Philistims, he asked counsel thereupon of the Lord, and when he could have no
answer, makes recourse to the Devil.

IT was said by a Politician, that Diviners are a sort of men deceiving those
that have hope in them, unfaithful to those that command; which should always
be prohibited, and ever retained in his City. But how should they be
forbidden, and yet retained? only because that they that did so prohibit them,
were the same that also retained them There were two sorts of professors in
time past running the same fortune among Princes. The cunning poysoners, and
the fortune tellers: they kept still the one sort that they might poison others,
and sometimes did banish them that they might not be poisoned by them
themselves. To the other, they ran to know the nativities of great persons: the
Princes belike thinking by violence to enforce the senses, if at any time they
should raise up a subject to reign; yet they drove them away again, lest
others in the Princes nativity should seek out the time of his death, or
should seek the rather to procure it, supposing heaven and the stars to be
favorable to it.

Saul therefore disguised with two in his company, goes to a woman having a
familiar spirit; she refuses and excuses her art, for fear of the king; but
Saul swearing that no harm should come unto her, she by her skill raises up
Samuel, as Saul had requested; who (were it either an illusion or a vision)
clear it is, that being questioned by Saul, tells him what was to come.

TO seek to know things to come by means of the devil, is a great error: to
seek it by the stars, is sure a greater arrogance; by this men pretend a
science, by the other a revelation. The one we may yet know by the permissive
will of God, but the other passes our understanding; and he that thinks by
this means to know what is to come, pretends also to be God, for God only
knows the future without any revelatio^: But perhaps there is no other
difference betwixt these professions, (setting aside the odiousness of the
name) saving that in the one, men run voluntarily to the devil; in the other,
ignorantly. Who knows that those Astrologicall figures, are not as the circles
of Negromacers, and that those same signs, and those stars have not a
proportion correspondent with their characters, by means of which, they bring
the devil sometimes to foretell what is to come, but ever to deceive them? And
if perchance the devil is he that does by such arts reveal it, why do they
seek unto him? If to get evil, it is a mere madness; if to get some good, it
is to much simplicity to believe that the devil will be a minister of any
good.

Samuel says unto Saul, that he, and his sons, and a part of the people shall
die in battle, because he fulfilled not the will of God in the victory against
the Amalekites.

THe Prince is often the occasion of the sins of the people and the people of
those of the Prince; the one in permitting, the other in applauding them.
Sometimes also God chasteneth the people for the Princes sins, not because it
has demerited with them, but because it has so deserved. It is true indeed
that when his Divine Majesty sends the sith of chastisement, it cuts down the
good as well as the bad; because that which he sends into the world, is not
the same which does sever the wheat from the darnell.

Saul faints at the hearing of such bitter news, and afterward by the
entreaty of the woman, with the persuasion of his servants, having eaten
somewhat, returns to his army.

HEre are seen two contrary effects in one self subject, faintness, and
fortitude; Saul seems to faint, when his heart failed at the hearing of his
death foretold: Again, he seems valiant when he returns to his Army, in
which he knows that the next day he shall die. But happily fears may be like
unto loves: as the security of enjoying a thing that is desired, does diminish
the desire, so the assurance of falling into a thing that we feared,
diminishes the fear of it. Saul's blood within him made some sudden motion at
that unexpected blow; but he afterward reflecting on it with his
understanding, and imagining death as already present, he discharged his
fear, but has nothing to do with any other time, but with the future.

The armies gather together, that of the Philistimes in Aphek, the other of the
Israelites in Israel; but the Princes of the Philistimes seeing David with
Achish, advised him to send him away, because he could no way better than with
their heads regaine the favor of his king.

INterest is of such force with men in their operations, that it is accounted
weakness to trust him, whose interest may move him to betray us. Sincere and
plain dealing has nothing to do in this case in matters of policy: whosoever
presupposes it in any, is sometimes deceived* and because he is sometimes
deceivd, he does never presuppose it. It cannot be believed without making some
error in policy, or without some error already made. He that makes use of it
after long experience does not err, yet erred then when he made experience of
it.

Achish although David had not been with him above six months, says that he
had been with him some years, to make it believed that if he had been evil,
he should have known him.

IT is not altogether impossible to refrain nature a long time, but it is so
in the utmost confines of possibility. There is requisite thereunto a
perpetual assistance of judgment; nature is always ready to move according
to her inclination, if she be not always withheld: and if through
headlesnesse or weariness she be left unto her self, she falls like a stone
to her own center. Here hence comes that little truth which is found in
Astrologicall predictions, or rather which we make them have; because our
inclination is a mover that continually works in us, and does not always
find a continual resistance. That which is violent is said to be of little
continuance, not only for the necessity in him that uses the violence to be
always working; but also bebecause he is therewith so wearied, that either
weariness or satiety makes him to cease.

David seems to be grieved that Achish will not take him with him, not
knowing that he has given him any occasion to the contrary: Achish answers
that in his eyes he is an Angel of God, but the Princes of the army are not
pleased in him.

Lo here a means how one may lose his inward familiarity with a Prince, and
get not his favor. The conspiracy of great ones where they bear great sway,
undoubtedly either does ruin the favorite, or trouble the state, whenever
he that is greatest with the Prince, is not the greatest among them. In such a
case men would not be ashamed to bow unto him, to whom though he were not the
favorite, he ought to bow: and there would be opened unto them a clear way
without any dirty flattery, or thorny danger, to run a happy course between
obsequiousness, and odious liberty; but this seldom or never happens: whether
by the cunning of Princes, or by nature, I know not. This Art teaches them
that the greatest in the state may not be called into inward favor without
danger of dominion, from which he is but one pace distant. Nature teaches to
lift up the lowly, and to beat down the mighty: and this nature is dictated of
God, who raises the poor from the dunghill to place him among Princes, even
with the Princes of his people: It is signified by the stars, whose radiation
is the^ thought to be great, powerful, and glorious; which lifting men from
low estate, does seat them with Princes. It is finally manifested in the earth,
whiles it favorably cherishes and raises up those plants that are not wrapped
in gold, that is resplendent, but buried in the baseness of the soil that is
unclean. What instruction may then be give^ to favorites for eschewing the
hatred of great ones? The wittiest politician seems to commend such a subject,
as contenting himself to be the greatest of the great ones in authority about
the Princes, cared not to exceed the meaner ones in dignity: I take this to be
want of knowledge, how to make ones best benefit of the fortunes that befall
one, or rather an abusing of them: and that it is no way sufficient to
extirpate envy, which is rooted in favor, and not in honor. How many have
been seen to lose their favors with the Prince, retaining still their
dignity; and of objects of envy to become the objects of compassion. He that
thinks riches and honors are envied, is deceived: It is the command, the
applause, and obsequiousness, that they bring with them: if these were
separated from the King, it were no desirable thing to be a King. A very small
reverence, and a very little place, is sufficient to satisfy what our bodies
require: but the whole world is not enough to quench the thirst of the mind;
which stands also with reason, because the body may easily find his object in
a bodily world. But the mind which is a spirit, never finds it where there is
no spirit. It deceives it self sometimes in running with the body after some
bodily thing, as toward a proper object; but no sooner is the same obtained,
but the error is discovered. Those pleasing tastes which some altogether
sensual do account but as smoke, which are the obsequiousnes, the
reverences, the applauses, these are the greatest food to the mind, because
these are the least corporeal.

There are a thousand other precepts written for favorites, both to defend
them from the hatred of the great, and from every other occasion that might
work their overthrow. Some also I could add which are not mentioned by
others, but because they are all vain and frivolous, I will not fill up the
page with such vanities and weaknesses: I will say one only thing, being the
truest and securest course to maintain himself in the Princes favor, which
may well be performed, and may well be spoken of; yet can it not be learnd nor
taught, which is, to preserve always the love of the Prince, and the manner
how to preserve it. It is true, that the favorite never falls without some
cause, but the same causes have not always the same effects: for sometimes they
are surmounted by an affection greater than their own; if this stands firm
and sure, there can be no danger; if this shrinkes, then the ruin is at hand:
not because he falls without cause, but because it is impossible not to give
some cause, and then the lesser have more force than at another time the
greater would. A constellation which would scarce have caused a simple ter^ian
in youth (by consent of those that write these vanities in Astrology) is
sufficient to kill one in his decrepit age. He that would not have his love
decline, let him hold both his eyes always fixed upon the Prince, never depart
from him, never seek any other but him; for as soon as he turns his eyes to
himself or others, he is undone. His greatness, his affections, his
pleasures, and delights, must be in his Prince. Neither let him think that by
this means he may miss of preferments, but rather that he shall be sure of
them, and peradventure with less envy. He that possesses things that are
subject to envy, and takes no delight in them, is rather to be pitied, than
envied. But who is he that will do so, saving the man that is full of
affection, and most tenderly enamoured of his Lord. It is a thing that cannot
be reduccd into Art, though it be easily known. Affectation differs much
from affection, which if he has not, let him not imitate; for such imitations
are odious in the school of love: they that will maintain themselves in the
Princes favor with Art, their Art fails them, and they then fail with their
Art.

David departs from the army, and returns with his men to Ziklag, whereby they
find that the Amalekites have burnt the City, and carried away all the
inhabitants prisoners, with David's wives also; and the people therewith
enraged, would have stoned him.

IT is no marvel that this multitude would have stoned innocent David: men
being angry, seek some subject on which they may discharge their passion; yet
if they find not those that offend them, they suppose whomsoever they meet to
be the same; yea, and sometimes when there appears before them no other, on
which they may revenge themselves, they beat the pavement with their feet, and
the walls with their fists. And this is no such folly as many do imagine, but
an instinct of nature; which feeling the heart suffocated by so great a
quantity of fiery spirits, seeks to ease her self by diverting some part of
them in the exercising of some action.

The passions of the people are too distemperate going always to extremes,
which is not proper to the people, as they are a people, but as they are a
multitude; in which every one has his particular passion, and participateth
also with that of the others, and with that participation increases his own.
I have sometimes doubted, (but I say it is not a thing undoubted) that in this
increasing the contracting at least of the spirits has some part: considering
that a multitude of people gathered together, finds nothing to stay it from
going whither it may go without separating, and whither they would not go
with less danger if they were separated: from whence may be taken an
instruction for them that will fortify themselves in a place that they have
regard to accommodate in such manner, that the fortification it self may be
able to withstand the incursion of a multitude; or otherwise, not think their
strength sufficient to maintain it with neither fire nor shot.

David asks counsel of the Lord thereupon what shall be done, and suddenly
turns to follow the steps of the Amalekites.

THis is the best way to withdraw himself out of danger, to divert an angry
multitude to the true object of their anger, that thereby they may forsake the
false.

They finally find out the Amalekites, fight with them, and overcome them;
recovering the prey with the prisoners: and the spoil which they had taken,
David will have divided with those that kept the baggage, and were not at the
fight.

THe Captain of a male-contented company, had need be both valorous, and
circumspect: That heat that stirs up a multitude, whether for love to their
leader, or anger against their Prince, grows soon cold, and then gives place
to a comparison, to which succeeds repentance; the consequence whereof, is
either the killing of their Captain, or the abandoning of him: Neither is it
sufficient for the eschewing of such a danger, to have once gotten a great
reputation: time consumes it, and how great soever it be, reduces it to
nothing. It is necessary to link it into a chain, not suffering the report of
a great action to cease, without renewing it with another as great or greater.
David because his flying from Saul might take from him the reputation he had
gotten in subduing the Giant, no sooner begins to fly, but he fights and
overcomes the Philistimes, that had sacked ^eilah; and because that flight is
an argument of fear, and that fear brings a loss of reputation, he makes it
known that he could twice have killed the King, to give his flight the title
of reverence, and to take away the imputation of fear. Afterward being
returned to Ziklag, that the malecontented might not have leisure to make any
reflections on him to his harm; and desirous to maintain his reputation, he
oftentimes with honor and profit to himself assaulteth the infidels; and
finally vanquisheth the Amalekites, and recovereth that reputation, the
diminution whereof, had brought him into the peril of being stoned.

The Philistimes fight with the Israelites, and have broken the body of their
army, and slain three of the Kings sons; the strength of the whole charged
Saul, when he turning to his Armor-bearer, prays him to kill him, that he
might not be a derision to the uncircumcised; which when he refused, Saul sets
his own sword against his breast, and falling on it, kills himself.

I Know not how the description of death to be the utmost of all terrible
things, should be understood: If in this life the utmost of all delectable
things be not to be had, why should the utmost of the terrible? One of the
contraries cannot be admitted, but the other must also be granted. Now to
live, not being the utmost of delectable things, teaches that to dye is not
the utmost of the terrible. The not finding in this our world any object that
is the last of delectable and of terrible things (if we will not suppose the
powers without an object) makes us believe that it is in the other world, and
in that other world is God seen and not seen. But he that described death the
last of all terrible things, meant it of things in this world; which would be
true, if spoken of the last in number, and not in weight: for otherwise, if it
be such in it self, it must then be always such unto all: And yet we read of
many men that have embraced it, to eschew some other thing, which we must
needs believe was more terrible to them. He that wonders at a resolution so
extravagant as makes a man kill himself, may marvel at nature also, which
being sometimes terrified at death does prevent it.

The Armor-bearer of Saul, seeing what his Lord had done, draws out likewise
his sword, and kills himself. Some Writers are of opinion that this was Doeg
the Edomite, Saul's favorite; who lest he should be punished by his
successor, killed himself.

THe favorites of a Prince that has a successor, if they die not before Saul,
yet they die often with Saul. I know not how to steer them from this rock:
there has been one, that seeing no other remedy, made at the sovereignty it
self, and was just there destroyed. There has been also that turned his
back to the West, and sat his eyes toward the East, and toward those rays
that would have been deadly to him, had not that Sun been then under the line
of the Horizon. As the sons of Princes cannot endure any companion in
domination, no more will Princes in their love. He that thinks there is no
envy betwixt the father and the son, is deceived. The honors done to the
son, if they increase that of the father, do rejoice him; but if they
diminish his, they make him sorrowful; which because it falls out but seldom,
men suppose there is no such thing. When the favorite has hope that by course
of nature he shall survive the Prince, it is a hard matter for him not to have
an eye to the future; toward which if he cast a look, he loses that which is
present: but he deserves no favor, that desires or thinks to outlive his
Lord. The greatest felicity that may befall the former, (it being not lawful
for any violently to charge upon death) would be to end his life just when the
latter dies. It is hard to die before him, because it is no easy thing to
leave one that is his Patron, and his Love. He that blames Princes for having
favorites, would have them inhumane and vile: What thing is a man that has no
love? or wherein may a Prince show gracious unto others, or see himself his
own greatness, but in advancing of others? and how or why should he advance
them, if he does not love them? Would they have him always masked? would they
not allow him any, to whom he may unstrip himself, and discover the secrets of
his heart? He that will give to Princes (that which surely they ought to have)
leave to descend sometimes from their throne of Majesty, and to confer their
inward cogitations with any one, he must allow a favorite* If the Prince lay
aside his Majesty, withal he would grow contemptible; if his secrets should
be imparted unto many, they could not be secrets; but if he be familiar but
to one, open but to one, he is then the favorite. It is wished by them that
are not beloved above the rest, that the Prince would love all alike: but why
should he love all alike, since he is not beloved himself of all alike? A well
devoted subject ought to be grieved that any one loves his Lord more than he,
and not that his Lord loves another more than himself. This would be a desire
to tyrannize over the affections of Princes, which men ought to reverence. He
that could make his love more fervent, than that of the favorite, might
peradventure make himself the greater favorite: but commonly men strive to
unhorse him by malice, and not by virtue, because it is more easy to envy,
than to love. Give me leave also further to affirm (if without offense I may)
that it cannot be any blame to have a favorite, unless men will say that
Christ our Lord was to be blamed, whose favorite was Saint John.

One passing by chance near unto Saul, who longed to die, and asked him whence
he was; and the other answering that he was an Amalekite: Saul prays him to
kill him, which he excuses.

O The unspeakable providence of God! he peradventure permitted not Saul to
kill himself, he consented that his sin should kill him. One of the
Amalekites, whom against the will of God he had saved alive, God will have to
put him to death. That sinner spoke for all sinners, and spoke divinely, that
said, My sin is always against me. We have no enemies, but we make some: nor
is Saul alone slain by his sin, for there be but few men that are not also
killed by theirs. And it is very particular, that one particular should kill
them; seeing it was the same that brought death into all the world: O how
pleasant, and how profitable are the precepts of God! He is a Physician (under
favor be it spoken) not only for the soul, but for the body also. He has
left us better rules in a few leaves to preserve our health, than are contained
in the great volumes of the books of the Gentiles.

King Saul dies after he had reigned many years, and with the King, dies a
great part of the people, which had demanded a King.

Favors are not therefore demanded of God that he may do them, but because he
will do them; he does them by means of our prayers: they are obtained with
the Optative, not with the Imperative mood. He that will command them,
deserves then only to be heard when it is to his harm; to have been heard to
teach him that is God, neither to be taught, nor to be commanded. Wherefore
then it was that Saul did lose his life, and wherefore the Kingdom of Israel
went out of his Progeny, is easily resolved by them, who omitting the manifold
other causes, have recourse to that alone, which is the first, and chief, and
prime cause: from whose well, all the rest proceed. But why God wills the
destruction of Kings and Kingdoms, would be easy also to show, were it not
the will of God, is not always effective, but sometimes also permissive: He
wills that such as forsake him, lose their kingdoms; and that they that follow
him, obtain them. Moreover, how and when it comes to pass that he permits
sometimes those that follow him to be abased, and those that abandon him to be
exalted, I do not know, and others peradventure know as little. Those Princes
then that are not in Gods favor, let them always fear, how prosperous soever
they are: Being not able to allege any cause of their happiness, they must
needs be afraid; if they be great, they know not why they are so: and it is to
be doubted that such greatness cannot long endure; whereof no cause can be
given for which it began. He who happening to come into the house of a fortunate
man, did suddenly depart thence, certainly he meant it not of them that God
makes happy and successful, but of those whom God permits so to be. The
ruin of Saul came peradventure of his own great prosperity, his being from a
base estate exalted to a kingdom, confirmed and settled therein with happy
success, in stead of making him the more devout, made him more confident, yea,
more rash and unadvised. Let us not make it lawful to serve him the less, who
has prospered us to the end; we should serve him the more, as if the gifts or
graces which God vouchsafes us were but for our pleasure, and not for his
glory. A great sort of men offend their God in their prosperity, and pray unto
him in their adversity; yet is he still the same God, when he delivers us
out of misery and distress, and when he overturneth our fortunate courses and
proceedings. It may seem peradventure, that to deliver out of disasters does
more manifest the Divinity, than to abase prosperous fortunes; whence it is
that men are more confident in his mercies, than fearful of his vengeance.
There is no man how wicked soever, but does some good thing whereunto he
afterward ascribes the cause of his good success, and equivocating between
the reward, and the grace given him, has no fear of losing what he pretends
to have deserved. On the contrary, there is no man so good, but he commits
some evil whereunto for the most part he attributes the cause of his
misfortune, and equivocating between Gods chastising and his exercising of
him, sends up sometimes his supplications to God, when he should rather have
sent thanksgivings; as if the world which is the place of meriting and
demeriting, were the place also of rewarding and punishing.

To conclude, let us pray his divine Majesty, that he will be always pleased
to end the persecutions of the David's, with the death of the Saul's: And all to
the glory and honor of his great Name; in which I end this Book, as I desire
also to end my life.

FINIS.

