THE POURTRACT OF THE POLITIC Christian-Favourite.

Originally drawn from some of the actions of the Lord DUKE of St. LUCAR.

Written to the Catholic Majesty of PHILIP the Great, and the Fourth of that
name.

A Piece worthy to be read by all Gentlemen, who desire to know the secrets of
State, and mysteries of Government.

By Marquess Virgilio Malvezzi.

To this Translation is annexed; the chief State Maxims, Political and
Historical observations, in a brief and sententious way, upon the same story of
Count Olivares, Duke of St. Lucar.

LONDON, Printed for M. Meighen, and G. Bedell, and are to be sold at their
shop, at the Middle Temple gate. 1647.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
A Little Gold is of more value then much Lead, and there is more excellency in
a small Diamond, then in the greatest rocks or quarries of freestone,, there
is a quantity of virtue, as well as of bigness; and it is the quality, not the
quantity that for the most part sets price and esteem upon things. This book
though small in bulk, yet is great in worth, and contains more wealth in a
little room, then thou shall find in more capacious buildings. I am confident
had Alexander lighted upon this piece, he would have given it entertainment
wit^ Homers Iliads, in Darius hi^^ rich Cabinet, here are briefly an^
sententiously set down many excellent and rare State Maxime^ and Political
observations upon some prime actions of the greates^ Favorite, to the greatest
Princ^ of Christendom, the Author (...) the Marquess Virgilio Malvez Zi, a
man so noble and eminent (...) very way, that he needs not my pennicell to
delineat him; I recommend this piece to thee, as (...) jem of great value, and
desir^ thee to drink it down with no less^ cheerfulness and delight, ther^
Cleopatra did her rich jewel* when she entertained Mark Antonie; and so I bid
thee heartily farewell.

An Introduction to the Reader.
I Never (Reader writ a book, with greater have, nor with greater danger; for
the Enemies of that subject whereof I write, will call me enemy, the Corrivals
flatterer, the friends weak, and he perhaps himself, will deem me rash; one
will believe I have said more then is said, another will undertake to know I
have said less; some will make me say, that which I would not say, and to
conclude, it will be much lamented, that I have taken such a freedom and
liberty of speech, I do humbly entreat the Lord Duke to excuse me, his friends
to bear with me, his competitours to know, that I write not in flattery, and
his enemies to believe, that I write not in hatred.

I confess it an undertaking of no great discretion, to write the actions of
any man, without knowing whether he will repute it, a hate, or a kindness; and
I shall peradventure be discredited with thee my reader incredulous, that I can
set down rules of policy, and cannot put them in practice; for that I could
say, the Byt-maker cannot byt a horse; but I mean not to make that servile,
which is Architectonicall, nor write my self a master, wherein I am but a
Scholar.

I could say, that if a little house, and a great City, be not the same, that
then likewise, the policies of Princes will not be the same with that of
particulars; but there I expect no glory.

I seek for no excuse, all my actions are without policies, for I my self am
without interests; professing my self only, to be most affectionate to my
friends, and most devoted to my Lords, and this is a known truth to such as
know me.

Nothing did more suspend my pen from writing this book, nor more retard my
provocations to print it, then the being most assured, (the perverseness of
the times make me speak it) that the world which is full of interests and
flattery, will judge me too, to be full of interests and flattery; but now I
return to your excellency (great Favorite) and here do publicly protest,
that I have writ for truths sake first of all, for so, nay more then so, do
your great actions merit; then, after that ingratitude, for so much and much
more, I am indebted to the noble offers, which so exceeding lovingly, you did
make be made me, in times that were to me calamitous. And if I have not
lighted upon any thing, that suites with your liking; I do humbly again
entreat you to excuse me; but if you do happily, value my will to merit a
reward; any reward whatsoever, that is not either your favor or your praise,
should by me, be reputed for an insufferable injury, and I should be compelled
by necessity, to call your Excellency by the name of ungrateful. My family
has never known, how to deserve rewards in Spain, with any other pen then
with the Sword; nor with any other ink then with blood; and I am still likewise
ready, both with the one and the other, if not to deserve, yet at least to
serve.

I am not of so poor a condition, as that I am forced to write for a reward,
nor am I of so arrogant a disposition, as that I write to give instructions;
but I am least of all so far from vain, as not to write for praise, which
peradventure is my due, if not because I merit it, yet in regard I seek it;
for though this affecting of praise be not to be commended, yet is it out of
question to be tolerated, because it is borne with us; because it seldom times
dies before us, and it many times makes us live longer then we do live.

I entreat thee Reader, and I humbly entreat thee, (that if ever my writings
have been of any merit with thee, either by unloading thee of idleness, or by
withholding thee from drowsinesse) to be willing to favor me with a belief,
that in all my past and present books, I never have meant, nor do ever mean,
to blame any living man, either particular Favorite, or private; the hearty
devotion which I bear my Lords, nor the tender affection which I bear to my
friends, never as yet has, nor never shall have power, to make me forget that
reverence, wherewith I am obliged unto Princes, or that respect whereof I am a
debtor to all men. As for my writings they are not figurativelie, but literally
to be interpreted, nor have they any breath but what they breath; I write not
after the Egyptian manner, nor have I said, but what I say; And since I am not
willing to say, that which I have not said, be pleased not to make me say,
what I say not. I seriously protest, that if any, for what cause soever, be
moved to write against me; my purpose is to afford him no answer; for if he
write against what I have faid, either that I have said will defend it self,
or else it will not merit a defense; and then if he write against what I have
not said, it nothing belong unto me to defend it.

For a Conclusion, be advertised Reader; that the book is not yet finished; nor
indeed can I desire to finish it, if I do not desire to outlive him, who is
worthy to outlive time, and to hold out with all eternity; the All that I
write, is not the All that the Duke has done, nor all that he will do, but
it is only a little that I came to hear of, of the infinite of that which
he has performed; it shall be sufficient for me, that if my hand may not
have a quil of Mercuries vving, that so I might fly this lofty pitch, that it
may have but one of his fingers to point out all the way; and who can tell
whether this my book, but only with the lifting up of the hand, may not
beat time to a consort of sweet singing Swans, which fly in a more noble
air, amidst his fortunate Sky? but let the heavens forbid, it should beat
time, unto the harsh and importunate discords, of such, who baselie trouble,
the Crystal streams of Wisdom and verity.

State Maxims, and Political ohservations on the actions of Count Olivares.
ANgels are the figures of God, Favorites are the figures of Angels.

The glory of things past, is like the King of Bees without a sting and the
vanity thereof.

The relation of things past, is like the painting of a picture, and some odds
there is, in relating things past, and present.

Historians subject to diverse censures.

What is represented to the eye is more forcible, then what is read in papers.

In marriages worth is to be as well regarded as wealth.

A man's Country is not where, but under which he is borne.

Man is a tree inversed; whose hold is in Heaven, not in the ground.

Trees bred on stormy hills prove stronger, then those which are planted in
fruitful warm valleys.

The Lawgivers were Politicians, and the Law political, but now professors of
the Law are become Empericks, and the Law it self made mechanical.

The Stars have always the same influence, but they seem not still to be the
same.

Cyrus was first a King of boys, then of men.

Why the first borne have the greatest fortunes, and the younger the greatest
virtues.

Riches preceding virtue hinder it, but if they follow, they help it.

To be always amongst books, is to die amongst the living, and live amongst
the dead.

Nothing of old honorable but valor.

Glory consists both in knowing and in doing.

When study is not delightsome, it is a passion, not a labor.

They that will serve Princes, must spend their youth first in their studies,
before they become Courtiers.

Man a moveable world; when he goes not forward, he returns back, and can no
more stand still, then running water, which if stopped, will rather ascend
against its nature, then stand still.

The aspects of the firmament are not without some opposition, nor the greatest
fortunes without some molestation.

To be made governors of remote places is an honorable and ordinary exile of
unfortunate worthy men.

Distance thawes the actions of remote governors, that they seldom arrive to
the Princes ears; except by the Favorites means.

The Suns splendour is so great, that the thickest Clouds, cannot totally
intercept it; such are the beams of worth which cannot be hid.

A little heat is soon extinguished by cold, but a great heat increases by
antiperistasis or opposition; so it is with eminent worth.

Agesilaus would not have his riding upon a stick amongst his boys be told to
them who were not parents, least they should think him too fond a father;
neither will Favorites have their love to the Prince known to their enemies,
for fear of misconstruction.

Lovers do not only love, when they are beloveed, but also when they are
hated; which love is in the heart, not in the head,

Love is radicated in the soul, but diffused into the body, as the Suns
light is extended where his Globe is not.

He that cannot moderate the base affections of riches, cannot temper the
urgent provocation of domination.

A spotless Favorite admits of no companion, but he makes him his enemy; for
though in ability in managing great affairs require it, yet ambition will not
brook it.

A Favorite that desires a companion seems to accuse the Prince of tyranny;
as requiring help against his barbarousnesse.

If Tiberius cannot wait upon the Princes body, he will wait upon his carcass.

Habit is not like nature, but is another nature; not a copy, but the
original.

The habit which is necessarily produced by actions, does not necessarily
produce actions.

Love which is in habit, by a little disturbance receives no detriment.

A rest in Music, if short, its delightful, if long, it dislikes; so long
expectation wearies the desire, and weakens love.

The long absence of a Favorite from his Prince, may retain the reputation of
profitable, but loses the opinion of necessary.

He that would have it believed that nothing can be done without him, must not
give time that it may be done.

It is wisdom sometimes to make show of refusing the favor presented.

Discourse requires settled spirits, but love unsettles and troubles them.

Agrippina^ wise act in calling home Seneca from exile.

Its ill when for the man's sake virtues are banished, but worse when for his
virtues sake, the man is exiled.

The people punish worth, when they fear it, a popular Government then fears,
but a tyrannical hates it, and an Aristocracie both envies, hates, and fears
it.

Favorites cannot be tyrants over others, if they be not first so, over their
Princes.

The differences that are between a great Counselor, and a great Favorite.

The favor of Princes comes partly ^y destiny of our birth, partly by our
^wne prudence.

When a Favorite does every thing, and nothing done without him, hatred ^s
begot.

When the inferior heavens do not move with the first mover, they move by it.

The primum mobile may cause contrary motions in the inferior orbs, as well
as the souls of man, and of other creatures in their bodies.

A true Favorite in the interest of the King, and in right of justice, knows
no friends, and has no parents.

The Prince like the Sun is the equivocall and universal father of his
subjects.

A man has blood for the foundation of his paternity, a Prince has love.

He that loves not the Prince more then others, makes himself no son, but a
servant, and the Prince no father, but a Lord.

In correcting of errors, many times errors are committed, either because
they are believed as necessary, or because profitable.

When Princes suffer men of worth to live retiredly, its a sign, that either
they know not, or else hate their worth.

He that will not serve his Prince and yet knows how to serve, is more faulty
then he that serves him ill, not knowing how to serve.

Retiring is the reward of such as have wrought; he that retires and has done
nothing, will have his reward before his merit.

Retiring is a recompense to them that have done enough, but a punishment to
the idle.

A man may rest, and yet not be at quiet, yet for the most part he is most
unquiet, when he is most at rest.

He that sells justice, sells his Prince.

Gold blunts the edge of the sword and weighs down the balance of justice.

The hunger of Gold is not natural, but sickly, therefore is never satisfied.

Example is more powerful then the Law; because the law works by violence;
example by love, that produces fear, this affection.

He that loves another better then his Prince, makes that man a Prince, if not
of others, yet of himself.

The Favorite that would reform the Kings Palace, must first reform his
own house.

The Favorite, that raises his own family, makes this the center, and the
Kings house the circumference, which ought to be contrary.

A wall that has a good foundation needs no buttrasse, nor has a Favorite
who is founded on worth need of his kindred to support him.

The Favorites of a Favorite serve him as little for a support, as the tree
does the Elephant, against which he leanes.

The end of tyrannical Laws, is to ensnare, punish, and impoverish.

Princes honor those rich men most that have most, the people them only, that
employ most; for they extol bounty and magnificence, because of the benefit
they have by it.

A Tyrant has more reason to fear the money that is spent, then that which is
hoarded.

Favorites ought not to estrange Princes from all manner of business.

Riches are not the pay of worth, but the wages of labor, honor is the reward
of worth.

If honors or titles grow common, they have no rewards of worth, nor are they,
when they are sold.

Needy Princes give more honor to the wealthy, then the worthy.

States increase sometimes with money, but never without valor.

When a league thrives its broken by jealousy, when it thrives not, by fear.

Many Arts and Sciences have the same objects, but the same manner of
considering them.

Leagues are not always hurtful, and fearful, but always envied, and hated.

To despise riches is a great virtue, but to distribute them is a greater; for
moral virtue consists not in being poor, but in making ones self poor.

He that will not be rich is unprofitable, he that flings it away is vain, but
he that spends it commendably, is liberal and magnanimous.

He that cancels wealth out of a wise man's heart, cancels liberality, one of
the moral virtues, and to fly the means that make virtue, is to fly virtue.

The spirits fly to the heart in fear, to the face in shame.

Time lost in prosecuting of business is more precious, then the money that is
consumed in feasting, apparel, and sumptuousness.

The life of a good man is long, because it is a journey from earth to heaven;
but of a wicked man short, because he missing this way, goes quickly to hell.

No time should abridge the reward of him that served for love, because though
he cease to serve, he cease not to love.

Astrology false in all parts, but chiefly in marriages, which are made, not
according to inclinations, but for some ends; hence are the change of tempers
in Families.

Men are eternized partly by generation of children, partly by the soul.

It is the quality, not the quantity of subjects, that make Common wealths
great.

He that intends the greatness of his Family, is one that loves his own
respects, and satisfies not the obligation of a perfect Favorite.

A Monarchy is but a Chaos, albeit there be many operative Officers in (...)
till there come one only architect, by whose direction it is ordered and
disposed.

As unity is the life of man, so it is of bodies politic.

The scarsity of gold is the cause of its esteem, and it is scarce, because it
is not produced without a great victory; nor obtained without great resistance.

Quiet Favorites are the birth of the favorable beams of Jupiter and Venus;
but those who delight in wars, as Crows flocking to dead bodies, are begot of
Mars and Saturn.

Warlike and troublesome Favorites increase the water, but diminish the
channel, because they increase the mud, but such Phaetons are oftentimes
thunder struck.

There is a true prudence that has a real good for its end, there is an other
which seem.

The brains of a witty man are like the waving Sea, still unquiet.

A prudent man falls not from favor, if the Prince fall not into tyranny, and
he does not tumble, but go down.

Witty men fly up suddenly like balls of earth, then fall down and break.

Soldiers are not enriched by their pay, but by their plunderings, inrodes,
and victories.

A Favorite that increases the Princes means, increases also the estates of
the people, for a rich Prince is not taking but giving, therefore a holding
Prince is more desiderable, then a bountiful.

The reason of State, and Religion are so conjoined in Christian Kings, that
they are not to be disjoined.

Lucifers intention was not to exalt himself above God, but to withdraw his
subjection from, that so of one, he might make two Gods.

There are two reasons of State, one of God, the other of the Devil; that is
to come near to God, and to become great, this is to go from God, and to make
himself great.

Such as are inflexible in receiving, are so in giving, the same severity that
they use against themselves, makes them uncharitable toward others.

A Favorite is to esteem the service done to his Prince, as done to himself.

He that receives every thing is too covetous, he that takes nothing is too
severe, he that gives always is too prodigal, and he that never gives is too
miserable.

A magnanimous Favorite, will help by liberality, when he cannot by justice;
and if he cannot intercede to the King for them, he will give like a King to
them.

Man is a reasonable creature, but when he lays aside his justice, he deprives
himself of reason.

Justice has a Sword in one hand to punish, and a balance in the other hand
to weigh men's merits.

To pardon such whose natures are enemies to nature, may be magnanimity, but
not to punish them is injustice.

The man offended may pardon the offense, but the Judge must punish the
offender; who is therefore called God, because he does not punish as man, but
as God.

The Judge in punishing the malefactor, does not render evil for evil, but
good for evil, and justice for unjustice.

Not plants but beasts are savage because of their sense, but man is most
savage, when his reason is ill directed by the sense.

All States yea Tyrannies are governed by an Aristocracie; to wit, by
Magistrates or Officers.

If a Favorite does nothing, he becomes nothing, if he do every thing, he
savours of a Tyrant.

Every science to be well learned, and every office to be well discharged,
requires a particular quality of the brain.

He that is employed in business of State, ought not to be superior to it,
for so he will despise it; nor inferior, for so he will come short of it, but
there must be a suitable equality of the affairs they are employed in, to their
capacities.

He that is more afraid to sin in the presence of the Prince, then of God; he
does as it were doubt of that which is certain, and is as it were certain of
that which he doubts.

All our errors proceed from our ignorance of God, for though we know that he
is, yet we know not what he is, because we see him not as he is.

Princes can have no better masters and instructors, then the lives and actions
of their progenitors, in whose stories they should be well versed.

If men are desirous to know the learning of the Ancients, they should likewise
desire to imitate their actions.

Though men be not changed in their Species, yet they are changed in their
actions, which follow the Individualls, and the change of diet, has altered
the temperature, and this in part changed the manners.

The Heavens and Stars are not changed in their substance, and motions, but
in their aspects, which is the cause of the diversity of sublunary effects.

Its no wonder that there is not one man like another upon earth, seeing there
is not one constellation like another in heaven.

As in Astrology, the observation that is nearest, is least false* so in
policy, is that example, which is most modern.

All ancient Medicines, and precepts for diet, are not now to be used; nor are
all ancient Laws now convenient.

As in Sculpture men are not now shaped with the same habits they wore of old;
so modern States are not now to be ruled, after the manner of the old Romans.

The World is like an Instrument of many strings, alter one, and all are out of
tune.

As Empericks are to be condemned in Physic, so are Exemplaries to be
abandoned in policy, for we are not to make use either of ancient or modern
examples.

Many examples are required to make a rule; many of them are dangerous, as
being not from prudence, but from fortune, which is not to be presupposed in
business, but to be desired.

Meats which stay only in the stomach, do not nourish the body, so history
which remain only in the memory, does not inform the judgment.

Politicians are not to operate according to the judgment that they have
raised upon the reading of these examples.

Princes are not by subjects to be satyrized against, but to be praised if
past, followed if present, and to be wished for, if future.

If Satyrs be false they move laughter, if true, they excite choler, they then
that punish them, approve of them.

To be blamed with a lie comforts, for it intimates a not being able to be
blamed with a truth.

Princes that find themselves galled with truth, fall into fury, because they
perceive that known, which they did not believe to be known.

Liberty of speech, and writing against a Prince, causes him to loose his
respect, which once lost, produces rebellion.

It is better timorously to avoid dangers, then confidently to encounter them.

If beauty moves to love, it incites to compassion, which is formed either from
the quality of the person, or of the business; this is produced from fear,
that from love.

Fear is of things future, love of things present; therefore though fear be
more active, yet the person present moves more compassion, for that which is,
has much more vigor then that that may be.

Woman was made not against the intention of nature, but for generation; from
the assaults of whose beauty we are better preserved by distance, then by
resistance.

To blame competitors is either a sign of great good, or of weakness, and
when it proceeds not from zeal, it proceeds from envy.

Though an Artist at first, make some excellent Artificer his object; yet
afterward he reflects more upon the greatness of the art, then of the Artist.

To stand firm in a good opinion is constancy; in a bad, is obstinacy.

He that is chief of the counselors, is not always found to be chief in
counsels.

The object of the understanding is truth, if it be quieted with that which may
be, and may not be, it is deceived.

Monarchies are supported by two base Pillars, that is, by Executioners and
Sergeants, as the sweetest gardens are by the basest excrements of beasts.

The office of executioner, which was performed by Samuel and Eliah, is now for
want of zeal to Gods glory, left to the meanest people, as also that Princes
might not seem terrible to the people, and so be more feared then loved.

The most capital offense in conspiracy, is to conceal the conspirators, for
he that knows a rebellion, and holds his peace, shows more fear then love.

Tyrants by their wickedness, have made the revealing of conspiracies an
infamy, and the plotting of them a glory.

The Prince as a Physician ought to use his subjects that are sick of infamy,
roughly, not to kill but to cure them.

Not only ought fortune to be pictured on a wheel, but also every thing else
in this world.

Cities that rebel against their Princes, though they overcome, yet fall into
many inconveniences, as the overthrow of their Country, the destruction of
the people, the consumption of their Exchequers, etc.

The love of interest which is a Clyant, does easily overcome all other loves,
which are but children.

The space of an hundred years, is the breadth of the channel of the river of
forgetfulness.

Rebellions are unfruitful, vain, not without great danger, and extreme great
loss.

The Romans dealth courteously with the Graecians in beating down the walls of
their Cities; for so they made them the more virtuous, and less rash.

Men's good complexion is oftentimes their death, because being confident of it,
they fall into disorders that kill them.

Wars sprout out again, when Conquerours know not how, or will not know, or are
not able to make an end of their victories.

Wars many times would not be, if the greatness amongst equals did not bring
forth envy, and if there were not jealousies amongst inferiors.

The covetuosnesse of Princes to get large Dominions, is grounded upon the
desire they have, to keep what they have got.

Augustus by not dilating, but bounding the Confines of his Empire, both
fortified the same, took away envy and fear, and made it known that his
desire of domination was not infinite.

Breach of Faith has caused jealousy, and jealousy envy.

Historical observations
The Lord Jasper Guzmans pedigree.
COunt Olivares was borne i^ Rome, and for twelve years went up and down with
his Father.

Having entered into Spain he disposed himself to the study of the Laws.

Made Rector of the University of Salamanca.

His elder Brother died.

His Father also died about the same time.

He went to the Court after he had got learning.

He refused to go liege Ambassador to Rome.

He was twice like to be murdered.

He was nominated for a Gentleman of the Bedchamber, to Philip the fourth.

In the entry of the Kings service he found many difficulties.

He was accused by the King.

The King tries his patience.

He left the Court a while when Philip the third with the Prince went to
Portugal.

His Speech to the Prince, when the King was like to die.

The first Counsel be gave the King, was to call home from exile many worthy
men.

He bestowed upon his Uncle the charge of State business, reserving to
himself the care of the Kings person, and charge of his house.

He left the Duke of Ossuna his kinsman in the hands of justice, and Don
Roderigo.

He placed none of his kindred in the Kings service, but such as were worthy.

He bestowed the Lievetenantship of Castile upon an excellent man.

He put away his servant for recommending a business to one of his Officers.

He quickened the Law against Riots in Spain.

He procured the King to join three men of excellent abilities with him, as
assistants.

He persuaded the King to forbear taxing the people, and to remember well
deserving men with offices, honors, and titles.

His advise to the King, when the Prince of Wales went into Spain.

Pope Urbans Letter to Count Olivares.

The Prince of Wales return to England discontented, and the effects thereof.

By Guzmans care the Spaniards had good success in Brasil and else where.

He refuses the Kings donative, and to transport a ship with merchandise to
China.

He accepts of the stipends belonging to his Offices.

He provides a remedy against the delay in the promotions of Counsels.

He intercedes to the King for old officers, to be dismissed and rewarded.

He had but one only Daughter.

The Kings answer to him, about the marriage of his Daughter.

He marries his Daughter to the Marquess of Torall, she was brought to bed of
a dead child, and dyed her self.

His care of the King in his sickness.

He spent 16. hours every day in the Kings service, reserving only eight for
himself.

He advances the Cardinal of Tresco to be President of Castile against the
opinion of his friends.

He counsels the King to cry down the brasse-money of Spain to half the worth.

He prudently manages the business of the Kings Revenues.

He caused some rivers to be made navigable, and some veins of gold to be
found in Spain,

He counseled the King to assist the French with a Fleet against Rochell.

He reserved the rewards of war bestowed upon him, to help deserving men in
their necessities.

He was very easy to pardon injuries against himself, as he showed in
pardoning the man that would have pistolled him.

When offices and dignities were to be distributed, he came seldom to the
counsel.

He caused a little window to be made in all places of Counsels, to make
Counselors the more wary.

He entreated the King to read the stories of his predecessors, and told him
that one of them did ill in depending too much upon his Favorite.

He punished Libellers and Satyrists against the King, but not against himself.

He gave no audience to women, and assures maids and widows that few lines
under their hand should prevail more with him, then the sight of their persons.

He was no obstinate maintainer of his ^wne opinions.

His Speech to Don Francisco of Con^reras.

His carriage toward the Duke of Ascot, who was sent by the Infanta, in the
^roubles of Flanders into Spain.

He convinced the Duke of Ascot by showing him the Infanta's Letter.

He humbly desires the King to excuse the error of the Duke of Ascot.

THE POVRTRAIT OF THE Politic Christian Favorite. Originally, Drawn from some
of the actions of the Lord Duke of St. Lucar.
Written to the Catholic Majesty of PHILIP the Great, and the 4th of that
name.
I Write unto your Majesty, rather of your Majesty, I write of your Favorite;
it is said that Moses spoke with God in the Mount, and yet there are that
believe, that he spoke with an Angel: sometimes Angels are the figures of God
with us, Favorites, the figures of Angels with Princes; Princes, of God with
men: that magnanimous Hero, whose stupendous victories did not violently take
away, did give; when he saw the prostrate prisoner Queen at the foot of his
chariot, did value himself able to make Alexanders an error in it self,
glorious; which his greatness mounted already to so sublime a degree, did
manifest.

If amongst Authors of an admired Classis, there has been any one found that
reputed a Prince praiseworthy, because he had a minister worthy of praise, how
much more is your Majesty's due, who has a servant of great condition, one
that you have elected and made? What glorious action shall I recount, wherein
thy great Favorite, may not acknowledge you the actour: either because you
have concurred with your assistance, or because you have given an influence
with your grace, or have dictated, nay animated it, by your wisdom and
greatness. In this subject (great Potentate) I will figure out your image, not
the true one, but the likest; God did not disdain to see himself shaped under
the semblance of a man, and worshipped, not because man can be his Image, but
because he made him after his Image.

Laborious it is, but it is profitable to Register the egregious performances
of men in being: They wound and they heal, and where they heal they also
wound: Their resounding does awaken, reprove, stir up, and leaves no place
for sloathfulnesse, to pass the time idly away, in the laments of the time. If
one man of vallue be borne, the fame of that one, produces a thousand, for if
she being fruitful should not bring forth, the world would be now one only
man's, because he being sterill, would not have produced so much as one.

The glory of those that are past, like the King of Bees, has Majesty, and
greatness, but has no sting: It wounds not, it inanimats not, disanimats, if
it be examined, because it has no soul, it makes humane condition lamentable,
that glory dispicable, which being neither enjoyed by the soul, nor perceived
by the carcass, does first remain vain with the body, and then without it
vainest of all. It is an accident will accost a substance, and where the
substance dies, if it be, it works not.

The Actions of Predecessors that they may be praised, require no more, then
to be flourishingly related; it is with them as with pictures, for it is
sufficient, if they be but master-like painted, no consideration is had,
whether the Actions be true, or the Pictures be like; in as much as the Acts
of the Ancients are not known, nor the Originalls of the draughts are not
seen; but he that writes the deeds, or draws the picture of one that is alive,
let him look for censure, and that from the weakest, since papers have no
souls, and clothes no tongues.

Men are sometimes without eyes; nay, though they have them, they see not
color, because they have them not without color. Every one judges of every
one that writes, according to his own affection; one shows himself a
flatterer, and another malicious. I do profess (it is true) to be infinitely
obliged to this exalted Hero, but it shall never be discovered, that I rather
sordidly defile, then faithfully satisfy that obligation, which as it is
derived from the virtue of magnanimity, will not be pai'd with the viciousness
of flattery. I should not much lament to incur that blemish from such as are
his Emulours, so I might be quit from it in his conceit: For I hold it far
more facile, to make the Duke blush, then to make them look pale, in the
relating of his great Acts, I will expect more liberty from envy then from
modesty, because there is more virtue in him, then there is defect in others.

Your Majesty then is humbly entreated, to bear with the weakness of my
writings, too unequal for successes. I grant it to be more easy to speak
then to do, when that which is spoken is to be done; but it is peradventure
easier to do then to speak, when a man is to tell what has been done: The
Drammaticke that is represented in Scenes, is more forcible then the Epick,
that is read in Papers, yet is that personated part much inferior in spirit,
to that which is seen, for if it have a soul, yet it has not that soul.

Let that comendation nevertheless be granted to these writtings, which is
customarily given by him that loves, to the face that is pictured: For if penns
be not inferior to pencills, and words to colors, it will be acceptable to
your Majesty, to behold exposed to veiw those Actions drawn, howsoever not to
the life, which your Majesty has thought worthy of your generous affections.
I know right well that this Pourtrait should not have been adventured upon, but
by an Appelles, and by an Appelles, who drawing from all the favorites, of all
Kings and great Princes, all the beauties that did adorn them, being in him
united, he should present him to the sight of Your Majesty.

The Lord Jasper Guzman, third Earl of Olivarez; was the son of Henry
Guzman, who was the Ambassador for his sacred Majesty in Rome, and of the
Lady Mary Pimentelli, a Lady of most worthy vallue.

If the Imaginative faculty, be of force to imprint an impression in tender and
plain conceits; and that it has any part in the representing of shapes to the
Formative power, what conceit may we presume it to form, or what shape to
represent in that Imagination, which approved of no other discourse then of
that of the King, nor conceited the forming of other conceits then of his
service? I do not exclude the service of God, because that holy Kings, intent
unto Gods honor, cannot be well served, if God be not first served.

If men would seek when they do seek for wives, to join themselves to worth
as well as wealth; their rich estates would oftentimes be more hereditary, as
being more secure from men's treachery, and less submitted to the insultings of
fortune, which although it sometimes does hinder the working, it takes not from
them the being.

He was not borne in Rome, and for twelve years space went up and down with
his Father, who was surrounded with troublesome negotiations; sometimes in
Sicely, sometimes in Naples, in both which Provinces he sat in the throne of
Viceroy.

That is not a man's Country where he was borne; but that under which he was
borne. Man was esteemed by men of old a Tree reversed, because as the Country
of a Tree is the soil wherein its roots are placed, so the Country of a man is
that Heaven to which he is exposed: To stay in ones native Country, to
vindicate himself amongst his own, is to become a true Tree, and a reversed
man; such as these are for the most part are like to those plants, which being
planted in the fatness of a fertile soil, do grow bulky oftentimes, but
unfruitful: The Oaks, that are set and grow on the barren mountains, brought
up among storms, winds, tempests, they fear not the impetuous furies, of the
blustering Northern gusts; but if they grow fat in the calmness of
delightful plains, and luxuriantly increase, they are but feeble, and endure
no stronger gales, then warm refreshing breaths of Zephyrus, or else they are
made leaflesse or blown down.

He being returned into Spain, and having journied far in virtues, disposed
himself to the study of the Laws; not to defend causes, by cases of Titus and
Sempronius, but o^ defend States with the prudence of the Laws Expoundors.

The Law is a Book of Politics, yet few Lawyers now are Politicians: They were
that made it, but they are not that learn it; because they only learn that
which is done, and not to what end it has been done: Very few of those that
know the Laws understand them; He that seeks Authority without Reason, is
reasonlesse. To deprive the Law of reason, is to take the soul from men and
from themselves; this comes thus to pass, because that which is Political, is
in many become Mechanical: And whereas Law was at first, the legitimate
Daughter of Judgment; it is now made the adopted Daughter of Memory, and
Legists of Rationalls are become Empericks.

This man was created Rectour of the University of Salamanca.

He that could have Lyncaeus his eyes, would sometime know with little
children in the cradle, that the Stars do prattle, and show themselves by the
matter, with the souls, if not hindered by it, for surely they are not helped;
then are the nfluences more secure though then they be more impotent, and it
may be that God would, that they have less force in that age, that is to
predominate over their power.

The influences of the stars are always the same, but they seem not so,
because the men that receive them, are not always the same; the Actions of the
Active search for a good disposition of the patient, that their issue may be
prosperous. That star which would make Cyrus great, because it found him
among Children made him King of Children: And certainly it was the self same
star, which afterward finding him amidst the Armies, made him the King of
the Persians. That Aspect which made the Earl in Salamanca the first Rector of
the University, is the self same Constellation, that finding him in the Court
of the greatest Monarch, did make him one of the Princes of the Universe.

In this time died the Lord Ierosme his elder Brother; so that he who was the
second birth was now become the first.

The first borne because it is given by fortune to be the first. The gifts of
fortune are oftentimes likewise given them by men: This custom peradventure is
not in use to reward them, but to succor them; they that are begotten last do
sometimes become the valiantest; the seeing them to be borne more unfortunate,
is an argument to us of their valor. Who knows whether men either by a motive
of the soul, or by some other instigation have not known this truth, and have
repaired thither with presents of gold, where the reparations of virtue were
wanting.

It is a greater good fortune to live a while a second and then become a first,
then to be borne first; When riches precede virtue they oftentimes hinder it,
and when they follow it, they help it; he that is borne first, believes he
has room to preserve the splendour of his Progenitors with the splendour of
his gold, as if riches were the leaven of ignorance; whence it is, that those
goods which in times past were the rewards of industry, are oftentimes now
become the servants of sluggishnesse; But such as are borne in the second
place, to quit themselves of the outrages of fortune, cast themselves into the
Arms of toil, so that where they cannot equal in wealth, they exceed in
virtue, and make it evident that it is a fortune to many to be borne
unfortunate.

At this time likewise his Father died, whereupon, he was compelled to make a
journey from Contemplation to Action.

Study is an idleness, and if it be a business, it is a business of
idleness, it would be an unlawful appetite, if it were not an act of the
understanding, it weakens minds, and wearies bodies, but it is a sweet kind of
loss because it is insensible; to be always among Books, is a dying amongst
the living, and a living among the dead, or indeed it is rather a dying to all,
and peradventure not a living to ones self; The Commonwealths of old time, did
repute it most pernicious to p^ace a reputation, upon any other endeavors,
then upon employments of valor; for they did know, that to withdraw the
understanding from the effeminatenesse of Sciences, it was most necessary, that
as they were without fruit, so to make them without glory. All worldly men
aspire unto glory, if they be not foolish, and now that glory consists as well
in knowing as in doing, and all men are ^apter to contemplation then to action;
most ^men run that course to which they are most inclinable, and it may be
all men would run it, if nature which has made youth unable for operation,
did not make it likewise discrepant from study. He that to avoid the title of
stupid, entitles it laborious; either I deceive my self, on he deceives
himself, or else he will deceive. Study is a delight, and when it is not a
delight, it is no labor, but is a passion, that does trouble, but not molest,
because it is but little in the matter, and does not dissolve the continuation.

He went to the Court, and thither went he Learned, he went not thither
ignorant.

The Court is not a Grammar School, it gives not the first Aliments, nor does
it teach the first Elements: the food of it is not milk, it seldom produces,
it refines; to study, and to serve well are incompatible, but yet to serve well
it is necessary to have studied.

Princes are oftentimes in a great dearth of wise men, because they make them
not, and many would make themselves so, if study would render them as
meritorious, as service, but in regard, that as soon as they begin to serve
they merit; and not as soon as they begin to study; Men for the most part
dedicate that youth to the Prince, which they should have disposed to
Learnings; whereupon it comes to pass, that their merit is at the last
numbered by years, and not weighed by actions, and they are sometimes in the
number of years, outvied by some piece of Arras, that was there before them.

There was offered him an Embassage to Rome, with an assurance, that he should
afterward obtain the honor of Grandee, a title merited by his Father, but
denied him by death; but the Earl knowing that to be a Leiger Ambassador was
but an enclosure, would not accept of it, not being able to obtain that
greatness, that should have advanced him.

It is not the property of man to stand still, he is under a world, he is
always moveable, and he himself is a moveable world; when he goes not
forward, be returns backward, if not to where he was, yet to where his desire
was. He is a traveller and journies on to felicity, he seeks it and finds it
not, nor can he be quiet till he has found it, nor can he find it, till he be
dead; motion is so natural to man, that if he cannot advance, because he
cannot stand still he returns; not that felicities are tedioas to him, but
because he has not found them; and being unable to proceed in their search, he
fears he has out-gone them. The waters which naturally descends, if it meet
with a resistance, because it cannot stay, ascends, and hopes that motion will
convey it, to its end, for rather then to embrace a stillness that is out of
its nature, it moves against its nature.

Although the Earl gave not an occasion of offense to any, he ran
notwithstanding the danger of death; one time by four Murderers that waited,
way-led him, at the going into his house; another time, by three of the same
disposition, that did follow his Coach, when he was in it, all alone; yet was
he always fortunately delivered, he not being aware of the peril.

Those men are thinly served that enjoy an immaculate fortune, because those
Stars are very rare, that have an unmix't Ray. The greatest, and most benign
Aspects of the Firmament, are not without their petty violence, whereupon it
falls out that such as are most fortunate, have not an unperplexed felicity.
Fortune cannot be sincere, in a world, that has not an Element which is pure,
nor a thing that is not mixed; Though I know not what of molestation, which is
never wanting to the greatest fortunes, is borne of I know not what of
Malignity, that is always found in the greatest Stars.

Occasion was offered to settle a Court for Phillip the fourth the great, in
regard of a marriage with France, and then was the Earl nominated for a
Gentleman of his Chamber.

He that in those times had the mannageing of the Monarchy (with all respect be
it spoken) either did not care to eternize the favor he had, or did not know
the vallue of the Earl, in closing of him to the Prince; to surround him with
contraries was idle, the worth that is accompanied with Prudence, can by no
contrary be extinguished but by death. It would have been better to have sent
him far off from the Court, placing him in some Government, which is an
honorable, and ordinary exile of unfortunate worthy men; no inkling of their
Actions, although very great, does ever come to the Prince; for distance thawes
them, and if they do arrive to his ear, they are brought by the Favorites
means, and so do seem rather his that brought them, then his that performed
them.

Worth is a Ray that cannot be hid, if it be not extinguished, nay rather it is
a Sun, which always shines where it is; Though some black clouds oppose it,
it gives light, for such oppositions have not so much obscurity, as that has
splendour; either the breath of the Prince does disperse them, or his Ray
consumes them, that it may clearly appear; but when the Sun is far off,
when it is out of our Hemisphere, it shines not, or if it shine a little, that
Ray is not known for his, which strikes not in a strait line, but reflects.

The Earl being entered into the service of the Prince, did find himself among
a world of contraries, that did stir up his Lord against him.

The life of man is a warfare, so that he which fights not, or stands not
ready to fight, either lives not or lives ill. Contraries that surround us, if
they be not stifled, they increase, and they are not stifled, if they be not
met with in the cradle. The heat that is little to maintain it self, stands in
need of the like to maintain it, but great heat does increase most, when the
contrary does most struggle with it. That power of Antiperistasis, which is
granted to the Elements, is not to be denied to men.

Amongst other disgraces the Prince did one day tell the Earl, that he was
reputed a greevance; and he did humbly beseech him, that when he could destroy
him, he would not do it, in the presence of his enemies.

Agesilaus, being taken by an Ambassador, riding upon a stick in the midst of
his boys, entreated him not to tell it to any that had no Children, left of a
tender, he should be reputed a weak Father.

The Earl is mortified by the Prince, and entreats him not to tell it to any
he does not love, for they would have believed, that affectionate patience
stupid, and that loving soul servile.

He does noc labor to know the occasion, nor does he persuade his Master with
reason, because it is not the brain that loves but the heart; his Arguments
are affection, his affection love; nor is the disgust likewise of not being
beloved, without the thirst of the lovers: If we take pleasure to be beloved,
when we are most beloved, we take most pleasure; nay when we are hated, if we
love, we love most. It may be too that the present is not beloved, or that at
the least there is hope in the future: And that not being beloved which makes
him hope, makes him likewise merit: He that loves, has the gain of love for
his end, and love for his means; so that, he then that has loved most
deserves most to be beloved.

When I speak of love, I speak of a virtuous not a venereall love: But yet to
speak truth, they are but a little unlike; for both of them have their
radication in the soul: If the lascivious be transmitted into the body, it is
by accident; and like the Sun, which defuseth its light where his Globe is
not, otherwise violences would pacify lovers.

The Earl did know that the words of the Prince were dictated, not said, and
that howso're the voice did fell him, the eye did raise him; so that he did
not remain without consolation, nor did the Prince leave him without love. The
Favorites of that time were then aware they had erred, they did seek to amend
their amiss, by endeavoring to bring in the Earl, into the service of the
King; but he would not leave the rising Sun, for the setting.

It is a great good fortune to find a Prince disingaged; to take away a place
from one that has used it with virtue is hard, with wisdom is blame worthy,
and is generally reputed malicious, but he that comes into a vacancie, does
easily get in: No machination could bat^^ down this wall; they make the Prince
try his patience, and he by suffering augments his merits: They tempt him with
honors, and he by refusing justifies his affection. Finally, when they
perceive, that they are not able to trample upon the ruins of this great man,
they endeavor to surmount his heights, and to top them they lay hold upon the
ladder of his affection, but all in vain, for that wall was built too high, to
serve for a Basis.

The Earl did remain in this instability, until there fell a division
amongst the Favorites of those times.

There is a Politician that affirms, that power and concord can hardly be
found in the same place; and he says it in a time, when he pretends to have
found it. He did not observe peradventure, that such as did appear most
powerful were not so, except it were they that were nearest allied, and the
nearest of blood of the veins, not of the Arteries. The self same Author, did
likewise another time in the process of his writings, light upon two, that
were equally, powerful and concordant; and this did not proceed from the
morality of that one, because he that could not moderate the base affections of
riches, it is not to be believed, that he could temper the urgent provocations
of domination, and it was less occasioned by the diversity of their
professions, the one being wholly intent to policy, and the other to war. If
a Favorite will not exercise War in his own person, he may make it be
exercised, and has room enough to divide charges, without dividing his own
Favor. I bear within reason, the being Favorites of a Tyrant, for when
peradventure he did not love them, he did reverence them; there can be no
discourse, that can set down a secure manner of carrying ones self with such
men, who although they have, do not use it, but to become worse then other
men. These did fear falling, now one, and now another trembled, that he that
stood fast, upheld his staggering companion, and hardly did the one fall, that
he drew not the other to the precipice: A spotless Favorite admits of no
companion, but he makes him his enemy; he that desires one, seems to desire
aid against he barbarousnesse of the Prince, and seems to accuse him for a
Tyrant. It is true that the inability of a man, in the mannaging of great
undertakings, would require company, but ambition will not brook^ it, he has
recourse to the dependencies^ Fear indeed admits it, because he has not the
grace of the Prince, may be releeved in the burdens, but not in the dangers.

Phillip the third went into Portugal, and the Prince with him, the Earl took
this occasion to attend the affairs of his own family, but long he stayed
not, for he necessarily was to return to the Court.

Tyberius did judge it so dangerous an hazard to be far away from the Prince,
that he conceived it well done, when he could not wait upon the body to
wait upon the carcass; he would have them be near then likewise when the
Prince was not: But the Earl feared no distance of place; The love that the
Prince bare him was become nature. They that say, habit is like nature are
deceive'd, it is not a Copy, it is an Original, it is called another nature,
not because it is not nature, but because it was not, it is borne with us, if
not with us, in us: The Art that is believed to imitate nature, does imitate
it, and after likewise does often times produce it, and often times surpass
it. That love which is in Habits, receives no Detriment by a little distance,
but it rather excites it to operation; because that habit which is necessarily
produced by actions does not necessarily produce actions. The subject whose
abilities are of great importance to his Prince, cannot be absent for a small
time, but it redounds to his great profit. A rest that is interposed in the
composition of Music, if it be alone, does increase the delight, but if it
has company destroys it; the ear is in expectation of the following harmony,
and when it comes quickly, embraces it, but if it stay long, it dislikes it;
the expectation that is short, inflames the desire, and desire, love; but that
which is long does weary the desire, and makes love be laid down, and he that
once lays down his love, takes it not up again; love is a kind of slavery,
that is sweet, when it is not known, and it is not known when it is not free:
It is good to make the loss of a presence to appear, but it is not good to be
so long absent, as that it be provided for; For in such a case, though a man
may retain the reputation of profitable, yet may he loose the opinion of
necessary: He that would have it believed, that nothing can be done without
him, must not give time, that it may be done.

Phillip the third, being sick to death; the precedent day to the day of his
death; the Earl in this sort spoke to the Prince.

With bended knee I beg of Your Highness, to grant me the liberty to go to
Sivill, and for so much time at the least, to leave the Court, until Your
Highness enter into possession, both of Your Kingdom and Officers, which at
this time govern.

To whom the Prince answered. My Fathers sickness is at height enough, and if
it please God to punish me with his death, I cannot trust any, more then you,
in the new and troublesome Government; because I am confident of your affection
and abilities. The King dyed, the Prince succeeded in the Kingdom, and the
Earl held the possession of his favor.

There was a Prince and peradventure the wisest of any, who coming to the
succession of the Empire, made a show of not desiring it, and the Earl who
without peradventure is the wisest of Favorites that ever was borne, does make
a show to refuse the favor that was presented him; the one had a purpose to
sift the mind of the Senate, the other to find out the heart of his King.

This was the greatest testimony of temper and moderation, that it was possible
for the Earl to manifest; not in that he had the heart to refuse a Kingly
favor, but because he had the brain to discourse it.

How is it possible, that any man, that is not this man, seeing himself arrived
to one of the greatest fortunes of the world, could be able to struggle
himself, out of the hands of joy, to cast himself into the paws of discourse.
Discourse requires, quiet, ordered, and restreined spirits, whereas joy, like
the wind breaths in the center of a man, and sends forth spirits to the
circumference, dilating, troubling, and confounding them.

The first of the counsels that the Earl^ gave his Majesty, was to call out
of Exile many of his subjects, of approved worth, of which was Doctor Pietro of
Toledo, Marquess of Villa-Franca, and one of the Council of State.

To repeal from banishment, such as are men of worth, is an act of so worthy
fame, that Agrippina the wise, being scarce entered into the power of ruling,
did think she did abolish a multitude of faults, by her calling home Seneca
out of banishment.

If worthy men demerit, the qualities merit: It is ill, when for the man's sake
virtues are banished; but it is worse, when for his virtues sake the man is
exiled. In punishing there is something of pardoning to be considered for
worth; for justice should be injustice, should her balances equal a pound of
gold to a pound of dirt, for having equal weight. The people have worth in
great esteem, and it is true too, that they have punished it, but it was only
when they feared it. In Monarchy, where they do not fear it, they applaud it;
and when they see a man of worth is punished, they grieve as if his worth, and
not his errors suffered. In jealous Commonwealths, and unsecured
Principalities, he deserves great punishment when he does ill, who did deserve
a great reward when he did well, because they cannot run a greater hazard, then
when the best becomes worst. A Tyrannous government, hates and fears worthy
men: A popular arrives not to so much corruption as to hate them, it only
fears them, but neither the one, nor the other does enjoy them; in as much, as
envy neither ascends, nor descends. It is only an Aristocracy, that envies,
fears, and hates them: And sometimes when they do not fear them, they make
as if they did: It would defend it self with the ^^ckler of weakness, from the
blemish of ^^alice. Worth is in the most happy Estate, under firm, and
confirmed Principalities: If, where the Princes are not Tyrants, there should
not oftentimes be Favorites; they do not fear the loss of their
governments, but Favorites fear the loss of their favor; They cannot be
Tyrants over others, if they be not first so over their Princes. Whereupon it
comes to pass, that Princes oftentimes, of an upright intention, have without
tyranizing, tyranized, because they were tyranized upon.

He divided the Kingdom in two parts, bestowing upon Don Baltazar of Zuniga
his Uncle, the charge of the Consultations, and business of State, and
reserved to himself, the charge of the house, and the care of the Kings person.

The He, that is greatest in Council, is not therefore the greatest in favor.
Favor is not the Daughter of the Interest of State, but of the affection of
the mind; the one makes a man respected, the other makes him beloved: To arrive
to the one instructions may be laid down, but none can come to the other, that
is not borne to it; this confused distinction Tacitus did see, but he did not
understand it, or I understand not him. He makes a question whether the favor
of a Prince come by destiny of birth, or indeed by the Counsels of our
Prudence; I say it comes from both: The one has all the part in that favor
which makes us be loved, the other has a great part in that which makes us
dear. When a Favorite does every thing it brings forth hatred, when nothing
is done without him, it brings forth the same effect; Though that hatred be
removed; the one is impossible, the other is necessary: The first mover, moves
only it self, and all the other Heavens do follow it; when they do not follow
it, nor move with it, they move by it. I undoubtedly hold that thereis not any
motion in Heaven, howsoever contrary to the primum mobile, that does not depend
upon that first motion, and that if that should stand still, all the rest would
be at a stay; nor let any man tell me, that the ^rimum mobile, cannot occasion
a contrary motion, in as much as we see, that man with all other creatures, by
that power, which they have from the first mover, do oftentimes move, against
the first mover. Who has be^eved, that the motion from the West, to ^he East,
is the proper motion of the Sun? and that therefore Ioshuah spoke not
pro^enly, (if I understand) but has spoken im^operly.

Where the interest of his King is in debate, and the right of justice, he has
no parents, nor he knows no friends, because the King is his chiefest Parent,
and his greatest friend; and therefore although he were able by that way of his
power, to have succored Don Pietro of Giron, Duke of Ossuna, his Kinsman, yet
did he leave him in the hands of justice, where he died in prison. And although
he could have set at liberty Don Roderigo of Calderon yet he did it not, but
did only manifest his friendship, to his posterity.

The Prince like the Sun, is the Father of all his subjects, if not
univocall, equivocall, if not as a particular man, as an universal; but he
cannot be a Father if his subjects be not sons, and love him not more then a
Father. The paternity of a man has blood for the foundation, the paternity of
a Prince, love; this is to be greatest when it is most necessary, and it is
most necessary where it constitutes, where it follows, and does not always
follow. He that loves not the Prince, more then he loves others, because he
renounceth his sonship, he desires that paternity be denied unto him, and that
the King of a Father do become a Lord, that he of (...) son may become a
servant. He that could constitute a Principality like this, wherein the
subjects should be more zealous for their Princes good then their own; it
would be needless for him to prohibit a proprium. Mine and thine, which form
the particular, destroy the public, if the particular be not turned into the
public. A wise man knew that necessaty well, and therefore in his
Commonwealth, he took away all kindred of blood, and knowledge of goods; he
did not then offend in knowing the error, but in the correcting it, he took
all the occasions of virtue away, putting man into the hands of necessity, and
whereas he ought to have had recourse for a remedy, to establish the civil
Laws; he hasted to destroy the natural, and would rather desire a not
desiderable, then seek for that which he thought impossible. In the correcting
of great errors, there are always as it were great ones committed, yea, and
sometimes greater, but they do not oftentimes seem so, because they are
believed necessary, and sometimes they are not, because they are profitable;
extreme mischeifes; call for extreme remedies, yet extremes are never good,
but in comparison of worse.

He did not place his kindred, but such as were worthy in the service of the
King; nay rather he took away the Lievtenancy of Castile, from a good subject,
who for the names sake of his marriage, would have been to him most faithful,
and gave it to an excellent man, that had no kind of relation to him; and one
who did undergo a kind of reluctation to accept it, being unwilling to
relinquish that sweetness of repose, to which he had retired himself.

It is a thing blame worthy in Princes, to suffer worth to be retired, for it
is a sign, that either they do not know it, or that they hate it. If they
send them not into exile, yet there they leave them, and to leave them there,
and to send them thither, is all one. When cattle come home to their hovells
before night, it is a sign of a tempest. Men do it, not that they may do
ill, (for virtue is a beam of divinity that does no ill) but because they are
deprived of that good, that hinders the doing of ill: It is not only to be
blamed in Princes, that they suffer worthy men to be retired, but it is
likewise a fault in the men that they are willing to be so. He that serves not
his Prince, and knows how to serve him, is worthy of a severer punishment,
then he that serves him ill, not knowing how to serve. A negative occasion
concurres as well to loss as a positive, when it is obliged to hinder it; nay
the obligation has a power to make the negative become positive: Retiring is
only granted as a reward to such as have wrought: He that retires himself and
has done nothing, will have his reward, before his merit; but he is mightily
deceived, in as much as this, which is reputed a plentiful recompense to men
that have done enough; is certainly an excessive punishment to such as have
been idle. The quiet which follows motion is the Rest of the moveable, that
which preceeds motion is the weariness of the mover. He that is always in
motion is without a body, he that is never in motion is without a soul. There
is a strife in man between the soul and the body, the body is of its own
nature immovable, and would not stir; the soul which is the beginning of
motion, would move the body, that it might persuade it to motion, it does
promise it felicity, it is sometimes persuaded and consents, but after that the
soul with the body is conducted, to whither it is able to be conducted,
without lighting upon felicity; hopeless now to find it in motion, is likewise
peradventure persuaded by the body, to find it in rest, and so deceived,
suffers it self to be brought to rest, whether it voluntary goes either
desperate or undeceived. It is a great deceit to believe to be able to be quiet
and live; it is not true that rest is a reward, but it is always a most
insupportable pain to him that has labored most, the world affords not
quiet, he makes a journey to folly, that goes about to seek it, and he is come
to his journeyes end, that believes he has found it. A man may indeed rest,
and yet not be at quiet, nay for the most part, he is most unquiet when he is
most at rest.

The Lord Duke found the service of the King, puddled by his servants, and not
being able to resist what was past, he made good orders to provide for what was
to come, among the which the example of his own clear proceeding was not the
least, which was confessed and admired by all, yea by such as could not abide him.

Gold does blunt the edge of the sword, and weighs down the balance of
justice; He that sells justice, sells his Prince, when he can find a Chapman.
The gold that holds not out at the test, was false and did deceive; the man
that holds not out against gold, does cozen.

Some Princes have given money enough to their servants, that they should not
sell themselves, nor sell them; but that hunger which is not natural, but
sickly, admits not of satiety: That hunger is not in the man, it is in the
gold, so that who so increases that body, increases its hunger; there is no
cure for it, but to make them loose the love of it, and that cannot be made to
be lost, if the Favorite be not the first that loses it: The power of
example is greater then that of the Law, because it has no power; the Law
works with violence, example operates with love; the one raises desire and
produces affection; the other without raising the desire, produces fear; if
the Favorite be not to be sold, then is he above all price, but the most part
of them that bagg up money, heap it up to buy the Favorite.

The Lord Duke has not a Favorite, nor knows he what friendship is, or
Parentage, when the business of the King is in agitation: His servants have no
power with him, they intrude not into business, they falter not; There may be
a Simon like him that Lucian speaks of, that may have served a long time, as a
helper to Audiences, but did never advance so far, as that Simon did, to
raise a family of the Symoniades, but rather when he came to know, that one of
his servants had recommended a business to one of his Officers, he put away
the recommender, and took away the love recommended from him that had it.

That Prince which loves his subject, gives him Principality, that subject that
returns love to his Lord, gives it him again; but the subject, that loves
another, takes it from him, is rebellious, making him, whom he loves, Prince,
if not of others, yet of himself, and is ungrateful, though profitable, though
faithful, though he love him.

These are the obligations of a subject, but it is the obligation of a
Favorite, that is more beloved then others, to be careful that he love more
then others, and more then he loves any other.

It would be an easy matter for Favorites to reform the Palace of a King,
if it were not a hard thing to order his own house; for the first is not
reformed, if this be not first put in order. All the lines of a Favorite, yea
those that reach from his own house, are to have, but one only center, and
that is, the Palace of the Prince; He that raises to greatness, to Offices,
to Honors, his servants, kindred, or friends, does make his own house the
Center, and the Kings house the Circumference. It is a rule among Favorites,
to advance servants, kindred and friends, that they may have many supports to
uphold them; but it may be, that that is no good rule, and without all question
it is no good sign, that favor has no good foundation, that is not fixed upon
its own worth; a wall that has a firm bottom, has no need of a Buttresse,
if ruin do not threat it, and then assistants of that necessity, do rather
thrust down, then uphold favor, in as much as, they never lean to it, but
they crow'd it. The Hunter should vainly toil himself, to overthrow the
Elephant, if he would not lean against something; but he does lean to
uphold himself, and often falls, because he leaned: Even so the Favorites of a
Favorite, serve him as little for a support; but indeed it is he, that is of
use to them for an upholder, and they do sometime bear so much upon him, that
they lay him along. The Favorite is vigilant not to offend the Prince, because
he has none near to defend him; but his Favorites are bold, feareles of
loosing the favor they have not; and hope to be protected by the favor they
have; whereupon it comes to pass, that the Prince oftentimes molested, is
compelled to punish them, and then finding his Favorite in the crow'd, in the
overthrow of them he is destroyed.

The Lord Duke, having made a discovery, that Riot, was the ruin of Spain;
he gave life to the Law by practice, but he most of all quickened it by the
example of the King, and of the Court, a course in admirable reputation, in the
times of Vespasian, and so celebrated by Authors of venerable Authority.

The practical law was shown to Tyberius, but he would none of it; wherein,
if he did not dissemble, he showed great weakness, to conceal great wisdom;
he made it believed that he conceived it odious, and it was in a Prince
peradventure that was reputed a Tyrant; who knows whether indeed he did not
think it hurtful, and that he did serve his turn with the defects of
impossible, to hide those of his will.

The laws of Tyrants, are suspected snares to punish, not advertisements for
correction. The ends of Tyrants are to impoverish, and they are accustomed to
propound occasions, for consuming of Patrimonies, then to give instructions,
for the procuring of wealth. It may be Tacitus rellished not my reason, because
he thought it not a good one, and to speak truth it is not a good one. Store of
money can procure particular friends, by the mediation of gifts: The purses of
Favorites cannot raise Armies, but that which is spent can purchase a general
applause. The common people love to ^ee magnificence, for they know by nature,
that the virtue of magnanimity, consists in glorious actions; though they
wink, they are not blind, though they see not the Sun as it is, yet they see
where it is. Princes do more often deceive themselves in applauding riches,
then the people do; For Princes do sometimes honor them most, that have
most, the people them only that employ most; they hate covet ousnesse, and
extol bounty, because they hope to have some benefit by that which is spent,
but dream not of getting that which is hoarded: The people that are the dreggs
of the Commons, are not so ignorant as many would make them; they always have
an eye upon virtue, and though they be not so foreseeing as Princes, and less
understanding then the Nobility, yet have they less fears of the one, and
less envy of the other; they draw not their swords upon virtue* nor do they
pollute it with malice; always when it is great they know it, and always when
they know it, they extol it, and reverence it: And therefore a Tyrant has
more reason to fear money that is spent, then many baggs that are locked up,
because it is an easier possibillity for Citizens to depose a Prince by
applause, then by Armies.

Don Baltazar of Zuniga died, and because the Lord Duke would not take upon him
the whole weight of business, he procured the King to appoint as assistance,
three men of excellent abilities, who were Don Agostina Missia, the Marquess
of Monticlare, and Don Ferdinando of Giron, who were to propound all
businesses, to the end that his Majesty might be able to elect what he
pleased, when he heard them nominated, and so proceed to practice; to which he
did persuade him with a disinteressed ingenuity (that which became his afforded
favor) full of Learning, eloquence and love, representing to his Majesty the
duty of the best of Kings.

This and many such like discourses, which for their exquisite politenesse
would enable my Relation, and make the infinite worth of the Duke more famous,
are not by me recounted in this present work, because that I having written it
(I call God to witness) without his consent, I reputed it not convenient to
publish them to view, without authority from him that performed them, but it
does me good nevertheless to believe that he will one day be pleased that some
more eminent pen then mine, shall divulge them to the world, not to defraud him
of the glory, of being the first to inform Favorites, how to serve their
Prince, and Princes how to govern their people.

He that shall write as the Duke did, will discover a knowledge of the great
good inclination in his Master, and declare himself to be a faithful Favorite.

To with hold Princes from business, may be a laudable effect, but always of
a blameworthy occasion; if prudence produce it, it is an ill sign for the
Prince, if sagaeity, it it is worse for the Favorite, because it always
intimates the one wicked, the other unable.

There have been some that have deemed it, an irrevocable maxim for Favorites
to estrange Princes from all manner of business, but it may be that they
peradventure have thought it ought to be so, because they have found it done
so; they would have one draught serve to one species in a world, wherein nature
has not made any thing original that is not different; to give excellent
precepts to one that never was excellent, and has too too much strayed from
the right, is a sure destroying of him He is not at the first capable of more
then of an indifferent good; he must be first healed and then perfected; there
is no doubt, but that a Favorite who fears not his Prince as he ought, does
utterly ruin himself, if he suffer his manner of proceeding to be corrected,
or if he let his Prince come into action. The good old man of Chio, said, that
when a Physician met with a contagious distemper, he was not on the sudden to
reduce it to what it should be, but to what it was at the first, because to
that then it ought to come. Nature which does help to expel a worse distemper
then its own, does resist to bring in a better. It might peradventure be
credible, that that Master would have inferred this, who did desire a Tyrant
indifferently good, not that he should stay there, but because he imagined,
that he could not at the first be reduced to a superlative, without his ruin.

The examples of this most wise Favorite, would be of no use to the vigilant.
Sound men's food is most dangerous for the sick.

Necessity of state importuning Taxes, and the Duke knowing how much it grieved
the people, to see their contributions given away; he writ a Discourse to his
Majesty, wherein he discovered the great error, that Princes ran into that
proceeding, and that there was not wanting to his Majesty, Habits, Orders,
Honors, Offices, Degrees, and Greatness, to satisfy the merits of the
Worthy, without either distasting the subject, or impoverishing the Exchequer:
This counsel was the occasion, that the King began to remunerate his deserving
subjects, or the deservings of his subjects, with honors and dignities.

Riches are not the pay of worth, they are the wages of labor; he that buys
it vilifies himself, he that sells it, is vile already: The operation of worth
produces its reward, for it produces honors, and he that has it, can
pretend nothing more, then some marks that he has it: Of this condition are
Greatness, Titles, Orders, Habits, and of this nature were the City Crowns,
the Collars, and the Triumphs of the Ancients. Such rewards if they grow
common, give no honors, nay rather they loose that they have, when they are
bestowed on such as have it not. There was a time when rewarding did not empty
the Kings Coffers, and it was a time fertile in worthy men; they were most
rewarded, who were least rewarded. Honor was then a very great price, and the
price of virtue only; But when that which was a price, began to be at a price,
it lost value, and made men loose their courages, so that honor and worth
became both mercenary, and men lusted rather after the wealths, that bought
them, then after the qualities that got them. The original of so much error
and confusion, was derived from such Princes, that were needy and poor, and
thereupon gave more honor to the wealthy, then the worthy; but these would not
have had need of riches, if they had not made them necessary, with taking away
the reputatiou^ of worth. The Spartans were a while without gold, and the first
Romans if they had it, did not adore it: States have many times increased with
money, but never without valor. It may be it did not concern Kings to keep it
in credit, such are not the most valarous but the richest, they have given
reputation, to what they always have, to assure them of that, which sometimes
they have not.

The Prince of Wales went into Spain, to get the Infanta Maria to wife, and
for some other respects of the Palatine his Brother in law. When the Lord Duke
stood firm upon this resolution, that when the King of England should in his
Kingdom, grant all that in favor of the Catholic Religion, without which
there was no probability of a match; that then the Catholic Nation should
accord to all that, that the convenience of State required, nor would he ^ver
depart from this Catholic vow, although he well enough understood, (that if
the King of England, would not consent to this proposition, as he did
manifestly declare he would not) the issue, that he insisted upon with a potent
King to the enemies of the house of Austria, and that he did foresee Wars,
which would more load the Favorite, then any man else; because they take from
him the commodity of enjoying the degree that he does possess, and oppress
him with turmoyles, cares, and necessities, that attend them.

This Counsel was the counsel of the Duke, and the counsel and the Duke are
worthy of the highest praise, has no need of my pen. I do here lie down,
with all reverence and humility, at the feet of Pope Urban, our Lord, and as I
have been confident to be able securely to go on in the way of commendations
of the Duke, enlightened by his great splendor, which in many things cannot
err, and in those he can, he will not. So likewise have I been willing to
participate the Ray of it to others, to strengthen their sight that see, and to
illuminate them that see not, and confound them that will not see. Then did his
holiness write a Letter to the Lord Duke, the contents whereof translated into
Italian, sounds, as you here may hear.

To the beloved Son and Noble Lord, the Earl of OLIVAREZ.
Urban the Pope 8.
NOBLE Lord and beloved Son, health and Apostolical benediction: The Common
report of the Monarchy of Spain, drives such an applause to the Counsels of
your Nobility, that, that serves for Authority to your person, which is its
felicity; in as much as fame the messenger of truth, conceales not the praises
of the Lord Duke Olivarez, but by publishing your virtues fills all Europe, and
comforts the Church of Rome.

We truly who long before this have had notice of your Nobleness, are hardly
to express with what comfort of heart, we have now heard by our beloved
Son, Father Zachary, a Capuchin, how much more you esteem a good report then
riches, believing that an affection for the propagation of the Faith, is the
fortification of the power of Spain, and the greatest honor of the Catholic
King. And he affirms that the Counsels of your zeal are such, that they
assure the patronage of Heaven to your family, and perpetual felicity to the
Kingdoms of Spain; in as much as it is published, that you have given such
instructions of Christian piety in the business of the marriage with England,
that foreign Princes may learn from you, with what great virtues the
Chatholike Religion adornes her sons withal, in whom the glory of the Name
of God, has a greater sway, then the increase of any humane power. These
praises thus confirmed by the testimony of so good a Priest, did give so much
consolation to the cares of our dignity, that We have been pleased to notify
it by our Apostolic Letters. Proceed on worthy Lord, take such pains, that
the inseparable Nations of the Spanish Empire may know, the public welfare,
the Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, and the Authority of the Nobleness upon which
We bestow Our Apostolical Benediction.

From St Peter's in Rome, under the Seal of the Piscator, the 27th. of Ap. in
the year of our Pontificate the first, and of the Lord, 1624. Johan. Champele.


The Prince of Wales being but ill satisfied and returned into England, joined
himself with other of the Emulours, and enemies of the King, in the League of
Avignion, the Articles whereof were, that the Hollanders should set upon
Brasile, that the Army of France, with the assistance of the Duke of Savoy,
should fall upon the State of Genoa, and that the King of England, should go
with a Fleet for a design upon Cales; that the King of Denmark with Protestant
Associats, should infest the Empire, that the Venetians should furnish the Duke
of Savoy with money, and the Grizons with money and munition, to make an inrode
upon the Valteline; that a peace should be procured between the Turks, and the
Persian, that the Turk might enter by the way of Hungary, and Bethlem Gabor by
Transylvania; that the Hollanders should send Cannons and Cannoniers; to the
Moors of Affricke, that they might beseige Mamora and Larachy. All these
storms were dispersed, first by the breath of God, then by the prudence of the
Catholic King, and by the counsel and providence of the Lord Duke; there was
a Fleet supplied in Brasile, which recovered the Sconce, whereof the Hollanders
were Masters, in the Bay of All Saints; two Armies relieved Genoa and the
Valteline, the one set at large that which was at the last gasp, the other did
maintain in the Valteline the Catholic Religion.

The Englishmen were expected with so furnished a preparation, that after they
of Cales had killed some five thousand of them, the rest returned home, weary
and afflicted. The Hollanders did loose Breda. The King of Denmark was beaten
in a battle, and betook himself to his trenches. The Affricans were repulsed
from Mamora, and Carachy, with a great loss. After which successes, there was
a peace made, whereby the Church obtained great authority, the Catholic King
great applause, and the Lord Duke no small reputation.

When Leagues thrive, Jealousy breaks them, when they do not thrive, fear
breaks them, but they seldom overcome, if they do it not in an instant; they
have large forces, but not long, in regard that they are for the most part
composed of ordinary powers, and Wars do quickly consume their treasures; but
it is not so with Monarchs.

A League is a body of a facile corruption, it often resolves into the first
matter, and that abandoned, it remains but an empty power.

Many Sciences, and Arts, have one and the same object, but never considered
after one and the same manner, and howsoever they accord to move toward it; yet
they agree not in the operation. The Tailor goes to the same body that the
Philosopher does, but when he has clothed it, he leaves it, because it is not
ever to be clothed. The Physician goes likewise to the same body, and when he
has healed it, he goes his way, because it is not always to be cured: The
Philosopher always stands fast there, because it is always moveable. So in
Leagues, all have power for the object, but by a diverse manner, some because
they receive hurt by it, some because they fear it, some because they envy
it: The first being quit from hurt, they go away because it is not always
hurtful; the second secured from fear, they go away, because it is not
always fearful; so that at the last, there remains none but the last, which
do always envy it, because it is always to be envied.

The King would have given the Lord Duke a great Donative, and would likewise
have authorized him to have transported from new Spain into China, a ship
laden with merchandise; an advantage, which would have been of great commodity
to him, but of an answerable damage to the inhabitants of Spain: The Duke did
accept of neither, because he would not transgress his established rule.

I conceive this so necessary an action, and so concerning his reputation, that
I should not commend it, if the ignorance of many, that have not so known it,
did not proclaim it admirable; The act is so profitatable, that he who is not
persuaded to it by prudence, is to suffer himself to be brought to it by
prevision. To accept of what accepted, incurres blame, and what refused, merits
glory, is a testimony either of baseness or foolishness. Worldly men that are
not of this Alloy, walk to the Temple of glory, but the passage is so steep,
that they have need of a Wagon: Some have recourse the Chariot of worth, and
some to the Cart of riches; whereupon it comes to pass, that as they are to be
borne withal, who seek them, to make themselves glorious, so are they to be
reprehended, who hunt after them, to make themselves be blamed.

The Lord Duke forbeares not to take the stipends belonging to his Offices,
which he personally performs, not applauding, that dryness of the conceits
of those morrall men, that blame riches.

Virtue (I speak now of moral virtue) does not consist in being poor, but in
making ones self poor. He does not adore but despises money that spends it; he
that would not be rich, is an un profitable poor man, and a cruel fool. He
that casts riches into the sea, is a poor vain man, and an envious fool; He
that possesses wealth, and spends it commendably, is a rich, magnanimous, and
a wise liberal man. I confess that the despising of riches is a great virtue,
but it is a greater in him, who having them distributes them, then in him, who
having them, throws them away, or not having them avoides them: These men do
not despise them, but they either fear them or envy them; in the one, appears
the greatness of a gallant mind, in the other baseness and vanity. He that
cancells riches out of a wise man's heart, does cancel out of the Catalogue of
virtues, part of magnanimity, and all liberallity; to fly the means that make
virtue, is to fly virtue. That moral Philosopher, that did so much blame
riches, had so much as made him blameworthy; and whereas at other times, he
was wont to contradict his sayings with his sayings, in this particular he did
it with his doings; and gave us to understand, that he did despise them,
because he had them not; and that then they are only to be despised, when they
may be feared.

The Lord Duke, perceiving a delay in the promotions of Counsels in the
Tribunalls for a long time, occasioned about disputes of precedence, he did
cull one out of every bench, forming thereby a Council, by whom there might be
a provision made against all the difficulties that did arise; which proceeding
of his brought an incredible commodity to the affairs of the King.

The Generals did take out some one soldier, out of every Company in the
Armies, to make a squadron, calling it by the name of the squadron volant, as
active, upon and in all occasions.

Nature (if I be not deceived) has given spirits to all the parts of man, that
they may work; but then taking out some one from every one, makes a Globe,
which must speedily relieve in business, and interpose themselves likewise in
the offices of the other parts.

These are the spirits that run to the heart in fear, that fly into the
face in shame, that help the vital, and succor the animal spirits, and that
they are taken out from the several parts will clearly appear, when we shall
observe, that in the vehement operations of the spirits, in one place, the
other spirits do remain feeble and weakened.

He that is dexterous in business, merits great praise, and he lengthens our
life, that shortens it. Man finds a kind of lust in it; the luxury of it are
the ceremonies, the strifes of precedencies, and many other like accidents;
which to his discommodity surround it. It would be more needsull to make a law
against the dispatch of business, then against sumptuousness, feasting and
apparel; For the time that is lost, is more precious then the money that is
consumed. It grieves a man that his life is short, and yet he does his
business, as if it were of many ages: He complains of idleness, and makes
his business so. Life is consumed in idlensse, and it is overplus of life,
they call it short, and it is long, for that which advances, is more then that
which operates. Man has a rule to mourn by nature, so soon as he is borne, he
should give thanks, and as soon as he is borne he mournes,; being arrived to
the use of reason, he bewailes his life as calamitous, come to years forgetting
that he called it miserable, he is sorry it is so short: It is indeed too long,
for it is a way that reaches from the Earth to Heaven; he that desired to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, desired it should be shorter. They are to
suppose it short, that by missing their way, go the right way to hell.

He is a great intercessour to the King for good Officers; if any of them come
to old age, and so cannot serve, he procures them rewards as if they did serve,
as he did to Don Francisco of Contreras, President of Castile, and many others.

Such servants as serve for respects, deserve to be rewarded with their
respects, and that their reward may end, when that service is ended, because
the profit of the one, does terminate with the work of the other: But no time
should abridge the reward of a servant that serves for love, for though to
serve, he cease not to love. There is no remuneration more fertile, nor of
less bulk, then that which is bestowed upon the decrepidnesse of a servant: It
fills the Court with servants, and empties no Exchequers; few arrive to it, few
hold out to it, and all aspire to it, because, as fear makes us doubt, that
all that may come to pass which is not impossible, so desire makes us hope.

The Lord Duke had one only Daughter, and because he had no more, he conceived
it necessary to marry her into his stock, and or this purpose he propounded to
the King, four Subjects, that his Majesty might make choice of one of them;
the prudent answer of the King, worthy of the eminences of his understanding
was, whatsoever shall be convenient for you, shall be acceptable to me: Be it
your care to choose, and it shall be mine to enrich him as your Son in Law.

Astrology is in all parts falls, but false est of all in matters of marriages,
because men are not married, nor do they marry according to their
inclinations, but for some ends, and that is the cause of the change of tempers
in families, because some by-respect has its share in marriages. It is true,
they are voluntary, otherwise they were of no value, but that will, was not
that which was made with us, but that which we did make. Inclinations that
belong unto manners, are not always to be followed, for the temper is surely
exquisite, and if it be not good, they are not good; but inclinations to
generation, may be prosecuted with more security, because, the constitution
ordinarily desires, either the like that conserves it, or the contrary that
corrects it,

The Lord Duke would not have restrained his Election (nay certainly he ought
not to have done it) to his own Family, if he had not found such a man in it,
as he could not peradventure have found the like, in the whole Kingdom, and it
was the Marquess of Torall.

If it were lawful for me to Print some few leaves, concerning the precepts,
which the Duke gave to the Marquess his son in Law, when he did elect him, I
am confident, and it is a truth, that the great subjects of Princes would
learn more by those advertisements how to regulate and govern themselves,
then by all the Books, that I have written. His Daughter was married to this
Marquess, with a general joy of all; but that cheerfulness was soon turned
into sadness, for when she had brought forth a dead daughter, she was a dead
Mother.

Philosophers do make a generation a natural instinct; for say they, in regard
that man cannot eternize himself in the individual, he seeks to eternize
himself in the species by children, but they are deceived, for that is not
perpetuated, is so perpetuated, but it may be, man does rather desire them for
his consolation and love. Nature to eternal us, has not been willing that we
should seek for childeen, from any where else, then from the soul that she
has made eternal; or if they be desired to be loved; then are they not
desiderable by the Duke, who has so great a King to love, and so eminent an
understanding to eternize him.

The Duke remained hopeless of succession in his blood, being without sons.

The desire of generation, which for the benefit of the world is to be only of
the good, if it were not likewise among the bad, Cities would not be so great,
and perdaventure would be better. I could be amazed that the Heathen
Lawmakers, who had no regard to Relgion, would be careless in this point, if
there were not an impossibillity of resisting, such an inconvenience, without
running into greater; It is a weakness to believe that they forbear it, for
the increase of the number of Cities; Since it is the quality and not the
quantity of subjects, that makes Commonwealths to be great. The condition of
the world is lamentable, for nature as if she were covetous, or envious, makes
those plants most fruitful, which are most unprofitable, and is rather a
Mother in law, then a Mother; to such as are necessary, we should have reason
to complain us of her, had not she had it first, to complain her of us. For
sin, that did infest the generation of man, did likewise infest the
generation of the Earth.

The death of his Daughter, made the Duke abandon all intention of advancing
his Family, if he ever had had such a purpose, and wholly betook himself to the
service of God and the King.

The Lord Duke (with pardon let me speak it) did not arrive to the true Idea
of a Favorite, when his Daughter died. He that has Children loves them,
thinks how to make them great; and he that intends the greatness of his
Family, is one that love his own respects, and does not satisfy, the
obligation of a perfect Favorite. The love, that is the due of a Prince,
consists altogether of good affections; it is alone splendour, and infinite
lights do form it; to it has recourse the affections of tenderness, which is
toward children, and the reverence due to a Father, the cordiallnesse,
wherewith we love a friend, the naturallnesse wherewith we love our selves; and
he that has another Friend, another Son, another Father, and who indeed is
not himself transformed into his Lord, is not worthy to have his heart. That
the Duke was such an one, was well discovered, in the sickness that the King
had, upon the first of August, in the year 1627. for he did all that was
possible for a servant to do that his Lord might live, and so far as was
permitted to a Christian, to dye if he dyed. And when he was advised by his
friends at that time, to have some regard to the maintenance of his own health,
he thrust them from him, with a furious choler.

If the King dye not, his privacy cannot dye, and indeed he cannot desire it
life, if he live not; if he could have been deprived of that affection
wherewith he was bound to his Prince, whom he loved so much, and loved him so
much, either he was not a true Private, or would not have been: For a Favorite
is called a Private, because he is to be Private to his will, to all his
affections, to all his passions, and transformed only into the service of God
and of his Lord. They that sit musing upon what may happen, love not their
Prince, but themselves, either they have not the service of their Lord for
their end, or they think of beyond the end, when they think of something
after the end. I do believe, that if the King had dyed, the Duke had dyed with
him, and if not dyed in the world, yet to the world.

The Duke perceiving, that God would form in him a servant, without affection,
only destinated to the service of his King, did embrace it with all his soul,
and all his body, digesting in his brain the Chaos of the whole Monarchy,
wherein he spent sixteen hours of the day, reserving to himself, but only
eight, for his sleep, his nourishment and his own business.

The body of man consists of many parts, the body of a Monarchy, of many
affairs; both which are diverse; I was about to say contrary, but in the whole
man, and the whole monarchy, there is one and the same consent and conspiracy:
A thousand Artificers concur to the building of an house. A house as I may
say does consist of Wood, of Iron, of thorns, of lyme, of Sand, but it is not
enough, that all the materials be together that build it, to make it a house,
nay that every piece by it self, were in its due order, yet would this
gathering together be nothing more then a confusion; but here is required an
Architect, who uniting them in his understanding, does concoct, and regenerate
them, who raising the form from the parts, may produce that from the mixture,
that it may not be stone alone, nor lyme alone, or only Wood or only Iron,
nor all these things together, but an house, which does consist in a certain
harmony, that is the soul of these things, that have no soul, even so (as I
take it) is the Chaos of a Monarchy, in the forming and upholding whereof,
there is a concurrence of infinite Officers, and howsoever each of them might
operate well enough, in his peculiar office, yet would it for all that be but a
confusion, if there were not, one only Architect, by whose direction should be
ordered and disposed; All the particulars, which otherwise would loose the
proper form, and only have part of the All.

Man consists of soul and body, but the soul and the body do not make a man,
but it is necessary, that there be an Union, which though it seem nothing, is
a real Entitye: It seems as it were a prejudice to a Monarchy, which intimates
one, that the first influences of it are received in more; as it, that it did
produce, that more before the one, whereas it should produce, first the One,
because from that One, and from him which are more, the more is produced.

Who so will know, the sincerity and goodness of the Duke, let him consider
how he did advance the Cardinal of Tresco to be President of Castile, although
his friends persuaded the contrary, conceiving that he would run into some
danger, by the Election, the Cardinal being the Creature of the Duke of Lerma,
and of the Marquess of the Seven Churches, the one being fallen from being a
Favorite, and the other put to death, in the time of the Duke; his
well-willers did insist upon it, that there being no want of persons for so
principal a place, it was lawful for him to have respect to his own fafety,
when he might do it, without damage to the Kings service.

The gross matter that makes the bow of policy, does not bend sometimes, and
the thin does sometimes break; the way of the one is broader, but is longer,
it seems more secure, because if it precipitate, it does it leisurely, if it
arrive, it arrives likewise slowly; the other is shorter but it is slippery,
and sometimes precipitates speedily, and so likewise, comes sometimes to the
end, this cannot be learned in books, it requires many circumstances, and who
so wants one of them, wants a foot, if he slip, he falls: He that will perform
it, must necessarily know, how to produce it of himself, because it requires a
great power of the understanding, and a great strength of knowledge, of how
much, is to be done, and when it is to be done. There is a rule in policy, that
men cannot be brought into (howsoever otherwise very able) if they be not
dependants; it is a gross kind of policy, which avoids present danger; but not
blame, and that puts the future into a peradventure, if it happen, that a
business shipwreck, which has been taken out of the hand of some able man, to
give it to a dependant, although fortune have all the share in it, yet is it
given to Election, and the loss of credit and sometimes of favor is the
consequent.

There is another rule, which able men may come to, though they be not
dependants, or friends, and this is a subtle policy, which assures against
dangers, and produces praise, but it requires a great eye to see it, and a
greater to manage it.

When he is not our friend, that is friend to another, that is not our friend,
his not loving us is not to be hated, for where he loves not, he loves not
because he loves; his not being a friend is accessory in him, he follows the
nature of the Principal; So soon as the one cease to be, the other gives over
loving, but where there is enmity, and enmity proceeds from a bad nature, it
ought not to be benefitted with loss, and it may be given over without shame,
because the malignity which would put the benefit in danger does secure from
blame, it is very odious to all, it brings not forth worth but destroys it, it
would be likewise avoided of all, if it were not that many seek rather to
beat down then to build.

Spain which did enrich other Provinces with gold and silver, was grown so
meanly poor, by the disorderly value of brass money, that trading was now in
part given over among the Provincials, and wholly left of by strangers; which
was occasioned, not by the moneys coined by the King, but by a mass of false
money brought in by Enemies; when the Duke resolutely (though resisted with
great obstinacy, by the most part of the Officers) did council the King, to
cry it down, to half the worth, which put in practice to the benefit of the
people made them hasten to erect a statue, to the providence of their most
loving Sovereign, not without honorable mention of the Lord Duke.

The profit of the Prince in such an error, holds no proportion with the loss
of the subject, it hinders traffic with strangers, and difficults it among his
home merchants, where the profit is great, there will not be wanting some, that
will adventure to falsify coin, whence it is, that afterward in the
computation of the money he does find, the loss greater then that which he
has made; there was a Commonwealth, that lived a long time with leather
money, but their laws did admit of no strangers, so that here they destroyed
no traffic; they did tolerate no excess, and by these two they did hinder
falsification of money. A State that could have no necessity of trading with
strangers, and a Prince that could find means to assure himself from coyners,
either in regard of some special material, or that he could find an
indiscoverable, or inimitable form from others, he might be able without
detriment to his subjects, either to that matter, or that form, or likewise to
some other matter, that is far more vile then gold, give the value of gold; but
because stamps are easily imitated, it is necessary to have recourse to such a
material as is not easily found, and that which is every where dispersed, not
to hinder commerce, and to be secured from counterfeiters.

It is by accident, that gold is of such value, rare it is, because it is rare;
Crystal is likewise beautiful, clear and transparent; if Gold be like the
Sun, Crystal is like the Sky, the brittlenesse of it does not villify the
worth, nor take away the beauty, but rather increases the respect; the Pearl
which is more brittle then gold, and for its original, is not more noble,
being the daughter of the Moon and Water is more precious then gold; but if
that Gold be like the Sun, and that the Sun be the principal Agent here below,
and that the Agent endeavors always to make that, which it makes like it
self, why does it make the metal so seldom? why does it not produce more
gold then lead? It may be the Sun is not so powerful an Agent as man thinks
it is, it is hindered by the obscure matter in which it works, it is resisted by
the gravenesse, and coldness of the earth, against which it works; for if one
of these Agents were always superior to the other, the Heaven^ would either
have become by this time wholly Earth, or the Earth wholly Heaven, or if they
should be always, and in every place of equal strength, there would be no
generation. It is therefore no wonder if gold be so scarce in the world,
because it is not produced without a great victory, and that is not obtained
without great resistance, because the Earth takes great care, that the
Characters of her enemy may not be produced out of her bosom.

Phillip the fourth found his revenues at ^awne, and yet though he had greater
wars, and greater expenses then his father, and his grandfather; the clear
proceeding and order of the Duke, has in such sort managed the business of
his demeanes, that the Majesty of this great King, has been able to oppress
the Enemies of God, defend his Estates and reputation without greater impawning.

I cannot in this place dissemble the knowing of what they say, that are ill
affected, whilst they accuse the prudence of the most wise Catholic King,
and the Counsels of his Favorite, because some Forts are lost in Flanders,
because they have had so many wars with Italy and Germany, as if wisdom could
overcome Envy, and the occasion of jealousy be separated from greatness.

If Phillip the second, to hinder France only from being heretical, may, as it
were affirm that he lost Flanders: Why is Phillip the fourth to be blamed, if
he did leave the Armies in Flanders weak, to defend the Religion, and likewise
the estates of the Princes of his blood, and that there are not rather some
glorious Encomions published in his commendation, that may call him the
disinteressed Defender of the Faith, the Sanctuary of the unjustly persecu^ted,
Tutor of of the Commonwealths, and Princes, the always magnanimous, and eve^
glorious Oppressor of Heretics? How much treasure has he spent, how many
Ar^mies consumed in the service of God and o^ men? How many Forts has he
taken and most liberally restored them all again from whom they were most
unlawfull^ compelled, or from whom he himself ha^ justly taken them? What war
has he en^terpriz'd that has not been, either to defend Religion from such as
wounded it, o^ to relieve justice when it was oppressed, or t^ maintain his
credit against such, as despise^ him.

But that, which is lost in Flanders, is not lost by the Kings fault, or the
Favorites, i^ as much as there wanted no provision of men* or money: But it was
lost, by other sufficiently known accidents: And in this is the Government, of
the most glorious Phillip the fourth, more worthy of praise, then that of his
Grandfather; whereas the one, has made War in other Provinces, without
calling his Armies out of Flanders, and the other could not succor, the
Catholic Faith ^n France, without abandoning Flanders.

As little likewise is the Duke to be blamed, for the Wars that have in these
times ^eld the Austrian Monarchy in a tottering condition, but rather such, as
having been se^itious have moved them. It is not very ^ikely that a Favorite
of a quiet brain, the ^irth of the favorable beams of Jupiter and Venus,
does meditate the topsy-turvy, ^urning of the world. If he be as wise as a
love, he brings an olive branch, and not a de^^ance of War: For he cannot
order it, without leaving his privacy, and he can hardly ^ake that be ordered
without loosing it. Victories make a too much rumor to be con^ealed, they are
in the view of all the world; ^o hinder them is ^ith the danger of the Prince,
to let them run on, is peradventure with the danger of the Favorite; he is
an ^ble man, who in the time of War, loses not is privacy, or makes not the
Kingdom be ^^st.

I say not, but that Favorites may be found desirous of Wars; who like Crows
^re always flocking to dead bodies, but those ^re ordinarily, the troublesome
parts of the Rays of Mars and Saturn, they wriggle themselves into favor, by
pernicious, but specious Counsels, whence it is, that they afterward send
forth those sooty humors, tha^ they have within them, and they do puddl^ the
waters, that they may not be a prey t^ such as fish for the truth. Woe to the
worl^ when such a Favorite is borne (and let u^ thank God, that we are none of
them in ou^ times) for he confounds it, lays it along* overturnes it, ruins
it, and is ruined troublesome. Whithersoeuer they go, it seems tha^ they
increase the waters, but diminish the Channel, because they increase the mud;
no^ go they much thither, for they go not thither. These Phaetons when they
come to touch that fire of Heaven, are for the most part thunder struck by
Jove. It is very considerable, that howsoever, Prudence, be that, which is
necessary to the maintenance of privacy, yet is not always the true practiced,
but for the most part the false. There is a Prudence that has real good for
its end, another that which seems so; the one is pure, the other puddle, both
cry men up, and both greatly exult; the one with the greater security, because
it is much more benign, the other with much more mirror, because it has more
eagerness. The brains of a witty man is as a waving sea, always unquiet, it
neither has rest, nor gives rest, it destroies, or will build, or will
maintain: The foundations of its height, are the ruins of others; it procures
a fear in the Prince to make it self necessary; it will make him a Tyrant, and
sometimes makes it self so; it is an Art which imitates Prudence, like the
Artist that imitates Nature; it takes no pleasure if it do not deceive, and is
most pleased when it deceives most, leaving to be, when it leaves to cozen; it
stands upon the very brink of a precipice, and because it cannot always
deceive, there is one time when it headlong falls. The brain of the Prudent
man is placide and and loving, breathing nothing but sweetness, nothing but
quiet, it builds up what others ruin; and if it sometimes does destroy, it
destroys not to raise its own house, but to uphold it: It makes the King
good, by showing him what is profitable; it makes him love, to make him be
beloved. A prudent man falls not from favor, if the Prince falls not into
tyranny; and if some casual accident does thrust him from the Mountain of
Grace, he goes but down, he tumbles not. Greatness of the Prudent, are
influences from benevolent Stars; and because they are increased by little and
little, like high Towers, they are continued high, upon their own foundations.
Witty men go high, but they grow not high, they are like balls of earth, which
violently compelled, by some compulsion, do swiftly pass through all
buildings, and when they are at the highest heights, they fall, and fall not
but they break. If Tacitus had ascribed the fall from privacy, as well to
sagacity, as he did to satiety, I would have borne with his other part of
speech, where he shows it rarely sempiternall, because it is rare for men to
have prudence, and such men are most rare, which placed on high, maintain it;
and he that did attribute so much to the power of domination and enchantment of
obsequiousness, might well think all constancy frail, all prudence fleeting.

He has made some Rivers in Spain to be made Navigable; he made some veins
of gold to be found, not for covetousness of gain, but to be able to diminish
the griveances of the subject, without being wanting to the business of the
Monarchy.

Gold is profitable to conserve and necessary to increase States. Some
Politicians have made it inferior to reputation, when indeed reputation has
no other price, but the reward which gold gives it; they are deceived in this,
because, they sometimes see men forsake a rich Prince, to go serve a Prince of
reputation, this experience has been true, but it came not so to pass,
because reputation enticeth more then gold, but because the worth of one in
reputation, gives more hope of gold, then the Exchequer of a rich man gives
gold; those Soldiers are ill apaid, that are always paid; and they are well
pleased that are ill paid: the ordinary price of their lives hardly keeps them
alive; Sackings, Inroades, Rapines, Victories, are the advantages that enrich
the Soldiers, and they expect them most frequent, from such as they know most
reputed.

The Favorite that increases the Revenues of his master does likewise
increase the Estates of the people, one of whose great felicities is, to have
the Prince rich, for when he takes not away, he gives, and when he gives he
takes away, a holding Prince is more desiderable then a bountiful; Donatives
enrich but few, but they empty the store, that must be restored by the
impoverishnesse of all.

The most Christian King of France had besieged Rochell, and suspecting that it
would have been relieved by the King of England, he did, by the means of the
Marquess Ramboulle, his Ambassador Extraordinary, demand a Navy from Phillip
the fourth, whereto the Council of the Duke advising, it was consented him;
and was an Act of great honor, by delivering France from so long an
oppression, with so much commodity to the Catholic Faith.

It was thought that the Duke erred in reason of state, in preferring the
service of God, to that of the King, but he cannot err in the service of the
Catholic King, that erres not in the service of God; if any impious man has
in his Instructions, separated the reason of State from that of God, yet are
they so conjoined in the concernings of this King, that no distinction of any
understanding can disjoyn them. God who has manifested unto us his Election of
this Family, for the defense of his Religion, has not left a place, that it
may be taken away by the quickness of spirit; so that if some Officer, of
small or no Religion, should by chance spring up, he could do no hurt but to
himself with his wicked intention, finding himself thrust on, by a nimblenesse
of spirit to those actions, which clothed with the zeal of God, would be
laudable parts of prudence; but in the examination of reason of State, I
conclude it to be necessarily that of the Devil, when it is separated from
that of the Lord. I believe that Lucifer had no intention to raise himself to
such a height, as to be above God, for then he would not have had an intention
to dissolve the Unity, but to betterit, which he by the natural gift only of
science, did know to be impossible: He then had a thought to exalt himself, by
withdrawing himself aside, and so going from one, to make the number of two,
upon which afterward as upon a Center, he did design his Circumference diverse
from that of God, nor could he go from the one, but that he must be bad,
because all that is good is One. God drawing a line from his Circumference, did
to make the number of three, create man: the Devil likewise thrust out a line
from his circumference, to make the number of four, and did seduce him. God
who would not leave man in the hands of the Devil, came to redeem him, and
made the number of five, and although he did not take away from him the
excitement that seduceth him toward the number of two, yet he gave him the
grace that reduced him toward the One, whereupon man remained free (not being
able to design a Circumference upon himself, because there is no other
Circumference to be given, then of the One, and of the Two, nothing else being
found but good or evil to determine it; Operating well upon the Center of the
one, and operating ill upon the Center of the Two. As there are two
Circumferences, so are there two reasons of State; the one of God the other of
the Devil, that of God, is to come near to God, to be great; that of the
Devil is to go far from God to make himself great, what discourse then of a
religious understanding shall ever deter us from the spoiling the nest of the
Heretics, if we be able to do it? He that can do it, and does it not, does
sin, and does enlarge (as much as in him lies) the Circumference of the Devil.
He that can do it, and does it, does enlarge (by what is in his power,) the
circumference of God. Have sins power to defend States, and merrits power to
destroy them? Oh King! oh Grandee! oh Catholic! what thing think you, can
defend your Kingdoms, not your treasures, not the Armies, it is God defends
them, because you have defended him, because you do defend him; and that you
may defend him.

Don Emanuell of Merveses, General of the Fleet of Lisbone, wanting sufficient
means to maintain him at Court, and to defend him from some oppositions,
advertised about the discharge of his trust, was resolved to be gone, and leave
a Deputy; which the Duke perceiving by him, when he went to get leave of him
did not consent that he should depart with damage to his reputation, and yet
being unwilling to hinder the course of justice, did offer himself to his
assistance, as he did in effect to his purse, so did this magnanimous
Favorite, reserve the rewards that were bestowed upon him to help deserving
men upon their occasions.

It is a more blessed thing to give then to receive, and peradventure the
reason is, because he that has the commodity of giving; is more happy, then he
that has the necessity of receiving, most happy then is he that gives and not
receives. He that receives and gives, is not the man that gives, but he that
gave it him; such as are inflexible in receiving, are so likewise in giving:
the selfsame severity that they use against themselves, makes them little
charitable toward others: the Lord Duke was able to have relieved an Officer
of so great merit, with that, which was his, of whom he had well deserved, but
he desired to do it with his own, because he was a well deserver of the King. A
Favorite is to esteem the service done to his Prince, as done to him, and to
repute himself obliged to whom the King is, if he gives to him that has
served well, he merits for those works, that he has not done, but rewarded; he
should prize his goods more then his life, more then his understanding, more
then himself, that would wast himself, and not his Estate in the Kings
service; the part of giving is as hard as part of receiving; he that receives
every thing is too covetous, he that takes nothing is too severe; he that gives
always, is too prodigal, and he that never gives is too miserable.

The Rhetorician that thought it a difficult thing, to persuade a Judge to give
what was his own, and to be no hard matter to win him to give what was
another man's, would have been upon a false ground with the Duke; Oh the gallant
and true magnanimity of a Favorite, who helps by liberality where he cannot
by justice; and will rather be a looser himself, that he may win who is to
loose, then that justice should lose, who is always to overcome; the Subjects
that have worth in them, may contend with certainty of reward, when they serve
a Monarch, whose Favorite is such an one, that if he do not intercede to the
King for them, he gives like a King to them; who will believe that a man will
not be liberal of another man's purse, when he is frank of his own when he is
to be so; I was about to say, when he needs not be so, I will say when he
cannot be.

Never was there a Favorite so courteous in Audiences, so loving to Council,
to assist, to comfort, and to hearken, I would set down multitudes of glorious
examples, but because they are many, I will let them all alone, because I would
carry away the garland for brevity.

There is nothing more desired or more dear to the people then audience, and
there is no Officer, that can give it more, or ought to give it more, then he
that is most just. Some there are, the which I know not whether through zeal
of justice, or ruggedness of nature, do hear with little patience, and answer
with little love, such as they will not listen unto; whereas indeed they should
have been harkned unto patienly, and sweetly comforted; it is necessary to show
love to all, being merry with them that have what they would have;
compassionating others that want of their riches; to the end that the gainers
may ascribe the obligation of their gaining to their favors, and the loosers
may lay it only on necessity: They are no competent givers of audience, that do
not do that which is just, for when they are assailed by the powerful reasons
of such as are concerned, they are compelled to dismiss them with an, I will
have it so: Whereupon afterward the offended subjects call them, and by good
reason call them, the Willers of wrong, because they will, in as much as
because they would, they wronged them.

But the Lord Duke, who does hold in his hand the balances of Astraea, as well
in matters of favor as of justice, does easily pacify such as he accepts
against, making them to know that they are either overcome by merit, or by law.

I know not what to say of the Prince, I might happily say that of him, that I
say of the Favorite, that he has not only an uprightness in the
administration of justice, but that he has no less in the granting of
courtesies. Man is of himself a reasonable creature, but when he deprives
himself of justice, he lays aside his reason, and is but only a creature. The
friends of the Favorite are to be such as merit, and such to be most his
friends, that merit most; the friendship that is grounded without reason, may
be said not to be without unlawful appetite, and because it is not without
passion, it is not without reason; man has not so much liberty to have as he
thinks he has. If we should not love God above all things, we should sin,
and if we love such as merit little, we may err; it is a great matter
certainly, that charges are unjustly given, to such sometimes that are to
administer justice. I will not call this a liberty to do favors, but a
licenciousnesse and an abuse, which makes a great confusion in the world; the
greatest honor does of justice belong to him which is of greatest worth, as
the greatest punishment is his due by justice that is the greatest offendour,
and questionless if there could be found balances which should weigh merits,
as there are some to weigh transgressions, I should wonder why justice should
be painted only with the sword in her right hand, and not likewise with
Cities, Kingdoms, and Monarchies, that she may as it were weigh them, not to
the end, to reward merits, but to the end to punish offenses.

If all Kingdoms could have such a Favorite as this, which would as
diligently weigh deserts, as failings, and that he would take away that false
liberty of granting favors, which does so much harm, and procures so much
hatred to the Prince, how would they be without confusion, without laments, and
always full of worthy men and happy; but it may be this is not in use, because
Princes would not be known to be necessitated, either to be of more value then
others, or to hold the Principallity unjustly, or else to lay it down.

The Lord Duke is so easy to pardon injuries, and so much an enemy to revenge
himself, that many have thought it reason of state to be his Enemies; there
was a principal man, who upon no occasion of his, nor for any just reason, had
a pistol prepared to kill him, and having confessed this with many other faults
deserving death, the Lord Duke did make his punishment to be changed into a
long imprisonment, from thence he got means to get free, yet left he not the
wickedness of his heart, but being discovered he was forced to have him out of
Spain to get into another Kingdom, where he was imprisoned.

The Lord Duke having notice of it, he dispatched a post, to the Officers of
the King to let him remain there, for if he were remanded into Spain, he could
not be able to save him from death.

I do relate this, but (by the Dukes leave) I do not commend it; for he that
hates without occasion, hates without reason, he hates by nature, nay rather
against nature; he takes not away such a man's hatred, that takes not away his
life, to pardon such whose natures are Enemies to nature, may be magnanimity,
but not to punish them is injustice, it is the will of God, that man pardon man
here in this world, but not so as he does in heaven, if the offended pardon the
offense, his purpose is, that the Judge should punish it; whereas if God pardon
it in heaven, he cannot punish it; because he himself is the Judge and the
party offended, but in the world, although man may pardon, yet will he that the
Judge punishes, because He for his part is not the selfsame He, that
punishes in the world, that is offended in Heaven, and to the end that the
same man in the behalf of man, may not be less, that is offended then he that
punishes, he calls the Judge ^y the name of God, to the end peradventure to
make us know, that he does not punish as man, but as God.

To return evil for good is a notable error, yet that is not it, which
ruins the world; for it is very seldom done, it is too great injustice, it is
odious, it is ingratitude, it is blamed of all, because the example of it, is
prejudicial to all, it is reason of State, to hinder it, and to hate it. They
that expect benefits (and all expect them) would loose the hope of receiving
any, if by frequent ingratitudes the minds of such as do favors, should be
abused.

To render evil for evil, which seems ^ less error, is oftentimes praised,
is always as it were borne withal, and is that which has brought in revenge,
and revenge is that which ruins the world.

The Judge cannot render Evil for Evil, when he cuts of a limb. or takes
away life; he does justice for injustice, he does good for ill; Man sins in
doing, either because he does it, when he ought not, or because he does it not
as he ought, or that he does more then he ought; Plants are not untamed, a
savage; they are the beasts that are so, and they are so because they have a
sensitive soul, men are more savage, because because besides the sensitive,
they have a reasonable soul; Wild Beaits destroy, led on by their senses, but
men do it guided indeed by their senses, and likewise by reason ill directed by
the sense; amongst such things as are under the Circle of the Moon, they
always become the worst, that were the most perfect.

In the distribution of offices and dignities, the Lord Duke, came seldom to
the Council, and oftentimes jumped with the people; in knowing who was to be
elected, when he is to be elected; And this course does not he only, but the
King likewise strictly observes in Ecclesiastical offices, laying that burden
upon the shoulders of his Confessors to choose such as are propounded by the
Council, though there be every month such a quantity of them provided, that
it amounts to a hundred thousand crowns revennue.

All states, yea Tyrannies, are governed by an Aristocracy, for if the
Magistrates do it not, the Officers do, and they for Mass are a
Commonwealth. The Favorite is the Dictatour, if he do nothing, he becomes
nothing, if he do every thing, he savours of a Tyrant. What matter is it, or of
what consequence, for him to choose Offices for all; it serves well enough that
such as choose, have chosen, for then is he assured, that such shall be
elected, as he himself would have chosen: He is quitted from the hatred of such
as are left out, and loses not the obligation of those that are elected, for
they are sufficiently obliged to him, in that they were not hindered by him;
and that which is best of all, he is safe from the danger, of not having well
elected. It is very hard to know the ability of persons, thereby to rest
confident in election. Experience deceives us, and reason cannot teach it.
Every Science to be well learned, and every office to be well discharged
requires a particular quality of the brain, and so as one man's being eminent
in a Science, is rather a certain sign of weakness, then of ability in
others; so the managing of one employment with prudence, does not conclude the
same fidelity in others, that are not the same. Nature when she makes one only
thing, she makes it for one only end; she is not (as the Philosopher said) like
the Delphick Smith, whose knife did cut, and saw, and bore. Either a witty
Tyrant knew this, or a subtle Politician made him say it, when he left it
written; That, many who are sent into commands appear diverse, from what was
hoped, or feared; some of them are ^^eightned by the greatness of employment,
and others disgraced; which does not only proceed by a glancing quality of the
brain, but likewise sometimes through the inequality of the business. A man
of great abilities thrust upon an inferior business, despises it, regards it
not, is careless of it; and that man brought to great affairs, makes it
appear, he was less then the least, because he was greater. Others of a small
Alloy, being employed in poor affairs, and therein wholly intent, come out
with much applause, but advanced to greater, they do fall to ruin, and
manifest that the felicity which they had in the small matters, was not the
greatness of their parts, but the suitable equality to their capacities: That
Tyrant did desire this part in his Officers, and that Politician knew it for
excellent when he did command a subject, not for his being superior, but
because he was equal to business.

The Lord Duke, to the end that the Counselors should always be wary and
dilligent in the well performing of their duties, made a little window, to be
made in all the places of Counsels, where though the King, could not sometimes
be present, yet that they might always doubt he might be there.

A Prince has a similitude to God, though infinitely inferior, and yet man
makes him as it were superior, whilst he is careful not to transgress,
because it may be the Prince may be there, but takes no care at all, though the
Lord is there, as if he did doubt of that which is certain, and were certain of
that which he doubts. He that durst not offend in the presence of Cato, did
audaciously offend in the presence of God. I give not this as a sign of an
annihilated faith, but an assuaged faith; it is a point that should be taught
children, before they know sin, to the end they should not sin, because they
should know they did it in the sight of God; it may be the having sinned
without shame, would not take away the shame of sin. It is a great matter to
consider that the quantity of offenses, encreaset^ the confidence of offending,
whereas (...) should increase the fear, because it increases the offenses.
But all our Errors proceed from our ignorance: Man cannot see God alive; man
knows that God is, what he is, but he knows not that, which he is, because in
this world he does not see him, as he is. I do not therefore wonder that the
Prophet called his sins, by the name of ignorances.

He did entreat his King, upon his knees, that he would increase his Talent,
not only by his experience, which by his continual practice in business he
had gained, but by his reading of the stories of his predecessors; the King
followed his counsel, and one day as he was reading, he fell into a large
commendation of one King in especial, to whom the Duke replied, that he would
have been much more worthy of praise, had he not suffered himself to be so
much governed by his Favorite.

It was given as an excellent counsel to Nero, to the end he might suppress
Seneca, to show him who was his Master, that his predecessors were most
powerful Doctors to instruct him; the Lord Duke likewise, to the end that
none should give the counsel against him, did blame that King to his Majesty,
because he suffered himself to be led by his Favorite, as by a Master, making
it appear to him, that his Forefathers are fit to instruct him, and therefore
intreates him to read the story of his Family.

Nicholas Machiavell, he would have men have recourse to Ancient rather then
Modern Writers; he said, that if we make use of the learnings of the Ancient,
for Physic, if of their Laws for judgment, if of their Statutes for
imitation, why should we not serve our turns likewise with them by imitation
of their Actions, which is not a thing impossible to be done, in as much, as
neither the Heavens, the Elements, nor men, have changed their motion, order or
manners.

I for my part (and I desire pardon) am of a contrary opinion, yet do not I say
that men are changed, I rather say they are not changed in Specie, or the
Individualls, yet are the actions changed which are not of the Species, but of
the Individualls; the quality and quantity of meats, being now in our times
altered and changed, have made them excusable, who have written Aphorisms that
once were true, but now are false; and this alteration has had great power in
the change of the Temperature, which being changed, has in part changed the
manners.

I do not say, that the heavens are not the same, and that their motions are
varied; The motions are not the givers of influence, but the Stars, nor the
Stars neither without an Aspect; The selfsame Heavens then, the self same
Stars, the self-same motions do still remain; but not the self-same Aspects,
nor never shall, and then if the self-same Aspects shall never be, no more (in
as much as belongs to them) shall the same effects be. Inferior things has a
connection with the superior: He that would consider, that there is not one
Constellation like another in the Heavens, would not mervaile, that there is
not one man like another on the Earth, and that one action is not like another;
but as in Astrology that observation that is nearest, is least false, so in
policy is that example, that is most modern.

If Physicians go not from the reasons of the Ancients, yet do they in a
great part, go from their Medicines; The thin and spare dyets, that are
appointed and taught by Hippocrates, which are to give nothing, except the
disease be resolved on, when the judgment is made on the fourth day, if all
those times they help, all other times they hurt; some barley corns weight,
that did serve them of old for a competent food, would sterve us now. The
Hellebores which then did work a purging Medicines, would now extinguish
Patients, new diseases are now sprung up, new Medicines are now invented, and
the old corrected and changed.

The Laws of times past, do serve these times, but they are such as judge
between Titus and Sempronius, but not those that have respect to the
countenance of States: Nay rather a great part belonging to manners are
changed; Our Religion has established a Canonical Law diverse from the Civil
Law: Laws of marriage are varied, those of divorce are taken away; nor is
there any thing now spoken, of bond or freeman.

The Agrarian and the Julian Law, besides a multitude of others, are muffled up
in oblivion, nor there is the least City that is built, that has not built
peculiar Statutes.

In Sculpture we imitate the Ancients to make a man, which is always the same,
but not to make this man which is always diverse, and as the Sculpture should
be ridiculous that being desirous to make a strong man, should shape him out by
the Statue of Alexander, so likewise that politician should be foolish, that
would endeavor to teach the maintenance of our modern Commonwealths, with
the rules and manners of the Romans.

He that believes that after he has read a laudable example of our
Predecessors, that he is able by and by, to put it in practice, is deceived;
he should have need first to change all the world: The world consists of order
and harmony, and it is an Instrument of many strings, alter any one, of them
never so little, and all are a great deal out of tune.

Machiavell was likewise deceived in believing, that the help of history did
consist in the making use of example; and from this error, as from the Root,
come all his failings in policy; As Empericks are to be condemned in Physic,
so are Exemplaries to be abandoned in policy.

We ought not, not only, not to make use of the Examples of the Ancients, but
likewise not of the modern; for they require too great circumstances to come to
be themselves, and will ask a great many to make a rule; Many of them are very
dangerous, in as much as they are not always the sons of prudence, but many
times of fortune, and fortune is not to be presupposed in business, but to be
desired. I blame not by this the reading of history, for I commend it, and
resemble it to meats, because as meats, except they do more then stay in the
stomach only, they do not nourish the body' so if history stay only in the
memory, it does not form the judgment, they are changed, digested, and
animated: If all men had eminency of understanding, they would have no need to
read histories, to become Physicians, or trouble themselves to study Statues (I
now insist against Machiavels argument) to be Sculptoures: but because in few,
and a few times this eminency is to be found, Politicians dispose themselves to
read Histories, and Sculptours to imitate statues; and as Statues are of no use
to Sculptours, but for good, delineation, it being no commendation to copy the
very same, but to make some varied with the manner deduced from them: So
Histories are little helpful to Politicians, but only for the settling of a
good judgment. For they are not to operate according to the examples, but
according to the judgment that they have raised upon the reading of the
examples.

Machiavell is to be borne withal, if he be an Emprick in policy, because he
is likewise an Emperick in physic, whilst he does say, that it is an
experience made by the Ancients, whereupon the Physicians of now a days, do
ground their judgments; whereas he should have said, that it is a Science of
wholsomenesse, unwholsomensse and Neuters.

I fall to my Center, and commend the Duke, that commended the reading of
Histories to the King, on purpose that from them he might frame his judgment,
and that he should consider those of his Forefathers, that he might serve his
turn with example, and with less danger.

If Libells and Satyrs be only against him, he never punishes, because he
despises them; but if they be against the King, or any other Officer, he makes
the Delinquent smart for it.

A man that was a great Artist, said, that a subject ought not to satyrize
against one that commands, but is to praise him that is past, to follow him
that is present, and is to desire good Princes, but to reverence them
whatsoever they are.

Tyberius began the law of high treason, for his beginnings were very good; he
did not follow it, because they became bad.

It was not Art, it was Nature; and rigor was not increased in that, till
goodness was diminished in him, himself he altered, and it he altered, and
because he ingraved it in the tree of malice, as that increased, it increased.
They that punish Satyrs approve of them, if they be false, they move to
laughter; if they be true, they excite to choler.

To be blamed with a lie does comfort, for it intimates, a not being able to be
blamed with a truth. That which is, is not neglected to be said, when that
which is not is said; but those Princes, that find themselves galled by truth,
fall into fury, because they perceive that known, which they did not believe to
be known, and it may be they did not know it themselves, being flattered by
others, sometimes likewise flatterers of themselves, and since that they cannot
hinder understanding, but that they understand them, they will restrain pens
that they may not write, tongues that they may not speak, that if it be not
lost in the memory of those that are, yet that nothing may come into the
knowledge of those that shall be, and truly Princes would have a power in them
to form forgetfulness, if it were in their power, as it is in ours to stop
pens, and stay tongues.

I do not consent to the coneeit of the Commons that Libels are good
instructions of Princes, I hate them as unprofitable, I blame them as
pernicious, I speak not to have them approved of, but I say, that they are not
always to be punished, without any meaning, but that they should be sometimes
corrected, Liberty of speech and writing against a Prince without danger, makes
him loose his respect, and respect once lost produces rebellion, to what few
the advices and counsels of such, as not managing the business of state are
never informd, upon what pin they turn? A Prince in my opinion should err in
his affairs if he take not the opinion of many; I was about to say of all, if
it could be had without the communicating of his interests to all. He that
blames him and knows not his secrets, must remember, that so the God of
Heaven, might sometimes be blamed by the rashness of men; if he that did know
his secrets had not stopped his tongue, with the bridle of ignorance.

The Lord Duke gives no audience to women, because he will not that married
women shame their husbands, as if that they were the more able; and as for
widdowoes and maids, he has assured them, that a Letter under their hand,
shall have more power to prevail, then the sight of their persons. He says
that the Seremonies which are to be considered about women, take up too much
time, and that humane weakness persuades him timorously to avoid dangers,
rather then too confidently to encounter them.

Beauty if it does move to love, it incites to compassion, and the Judge that
has compassion, is in passion, and not right: He falls from himself, and
always declines that is compassionate, or loves; and for the most part he
that takes pity, loves. Compassion is sometimes formed from the quality of
the business, sometimes from the quality of the person; the one is produced
from fear, the other from love, the one has the future for object which is
feared, the other the present, which is loved; and albeit fear is more active,
yet does the person move more compassion then the case, because that which is;
does move with more vigor, then that, that may be.

They that believe that woman was not made against the intention of nature,
that she is not an Error or a Monster, must confess she is made for
generation, and if she be made for this end, as indeed she is, it is necessary
that she be endued with parts that move unto the end; for hence it comes to
pass, that so soon as she is represented unto us, if there be not first a
habit formed, or that at the very instant, there be not some great resistance
made, man does by nature hasten to contemplate her, for the end to which she
was made by nature. Distance is a better Fort then Habit, and more secure then
resistance. Man may always resist, but he does not always resist; and
extraordinary occasions which are rare, produce not those habits, which things
that haunt us acquire, nay, rather the forms does not admit them, because this
is an inseparable natural, from a pep^aved nature, a man may overcome it, but
not separate it.

It was told the Duke, that a great Officer of the greatest Potentate, found
fault with him; I cannot believe it, I will not believe it, replied the Duke;
for it is not to be surmised of a man of so great worth. Though the Duke had
reason to blame him, and to conceit but meanly of him, principally, if he
compared him to himself, who is an Officer of so worthy fame, and worthy of so
high renown.

To blame Competitours, is either a sign of great good, or of great weakness;
for the most part, when it does not proceed from zeal, it pro^eeds from envy,
and envy in regard of its essence, is called inferiority. He that knows
himself superior to others, praises his Corrivalls, to make them great to
engreate^ himself, for their deserving much, makes him merit more.

He is not great, that is not so over inferiors; but he is great, that is
greater then the greatest: The worst comparison does diminish blame, but does
not form a praise, the best encraseth it. The Tyrant that did never desire
other thing then to make his subject vile and base, was ashamed when he knew
them base, because he knew that it made him base. Such as will learn an Art or
a Science, the first object that they set before them, is not immediately that
of the Art, or that of the Science; but an Artist, or a Scientiate, and that
not the greatest neither, but the nearest. (Our desires are short sighted, they
see but a little way off, and doubtless it is a great matter, that the very
same man, that has a mind so swollen, as not to be content with the greatest
things in the world, can yet have it so little, as to believe he is to be
content with small things: The one proceeds pradventure from the business of
the matter, the other from the eminency of the form.) And afterward when the
Artist or Scientiate has arrived to the first object, he thrusts himself
forward to another, never ceasing to have some one man for his object, till he
has passed all men; then is it in his nature, never to look back upon such as
he has out gone, and as one that is altogether intent, not to arrive to an
eminency among Professors, but of the profession; He reflects no more upon the
quality of the Artificers, but only considers the greatness of the Art,
whence it comes to pass, that when he speaks not of others, and when he
considers not others, he manifests to have exceeded them, and if by chance some
speak to him of any Artificer, he praises him, because he chose the Art that
he did choose; he blames him not, because he considers him, not as an object not
arrived unto, but as a companion to that object, to which he himself is not
arrived,

The Duke is not an obstinate defendour of his opinions, but if he does meet
with a better, which rarely falls out, he embraces it.

Some stand firm and settled in their opinions, because it is good, and then it
is constancy, and some because they know not a better, and then it is
weakness, some because they will not know another, and then it is obstinacy.
It seems to be a very secure course for the Favorite, to be turned to the
opinion that seems to him the best, for if it happen well, it is so where he
accepts it, if it was not his, he shall avoid inexplicable dangers, that has a
purpose to make himself the head of a party, if after he has spoken his
opinion he does not stand obstinately to maintain it. All opinions that seem
best are not so, because a man does not always negotiate with the best,
irresolution is reputed weakness, and perhaps it is the nobleness of the
understanding: the object of it is that which cannot be false, if it be quieted
with that which may be, and may not be, it is deceived; the man that is the
chief of the Counselors, is not for all that, found to be chiefest in
Counsels, he that has got a strong Fort, is not to adventure it upon the
uncertainty of one issve; for the danger, and the gain are not equal in him;
he ought always to propound business by way of doubt, without hearing a case
beyond distinction, or knot to be untied, or evasion to be propounded, to that
end that an opinion may not be held, that may not be framed by Arguments, and
defended by the solutions which he has propounded in his understanding, and in
this case if they fall out well, he shall have the honor of it, because they
were taken for the reasons that he had adopted, if they prove ill, he shall not
be ashamed, for he shall meet with those difficulties, which he foresaw, and if
by chance he has ometimes a desire to apply them, more to one resolution then
to another, he must provide to make some confident of his, the president of the
business.

True it is, that a subject of great worth, that is not known, and moves not in
a large Spheere, after having exquisitely pondered the reasons, may for once be
the leader of an opinion, because it is doubtful whether the loss or the gain
may be greater to him. It is necessary for a man to make himself famous in the
opinion of him, to whom he should appear so, and to adventure himself to him
that will make him famous.

The first day that Do^ Francisco of Contreras entered into his office, the Duke
spoke to him after this manner:

Many are the years that I have lived in Court, and in those years I have seen
many Lords and Knights consume their Estates, been sent to prison and be
banished, for having had brawles with representers of justice, as Notaries,
Provost Marshals, Sergeants and such like; and yet I never saw any of those
hanged; though it be impossible that such kind of people, which are of
inferior condition should always have reason for what they do; and therefore
it is to be believed, that these being such as hale men to prison, and such as
form processes, do find means to unburthen themselves, to burden others.

Your Excellency then, shall do a great service to his Majesty, and a great
good to the Commonwealth, if you will ridd the Court of this abuse; yet do I
not mean that offenders of any condition should escape unpunished, (for that
would diminish the respect that is due to justice) but that you should cause
such Officers that abuse their Authority to be hanged. This advertisement that
manifested the upright intention of the Duke, did likewise notably comfort all
the Nobility.

Monarchies, which are the great Colosses of the world, are kept up by two of
the basest pillars that can be, that is by Executioners and Sergeants; but what
of that? Has not likewise every garden that is full of sweetest herbs, rich
in choicest flowers, fruitful in every plant, the basest excrements of brute
beasts for its foundation?

If Monarchies were not degenerated into Tyrannies, if zeal for God would
always administer justice, then would there be Samuels found, that would put
Agags to death; Eliahs that would rip up the bellies of the false Prophets; But
that zeal is lost, and instead of it we find, that subjects of great blood are
ashamed to be Officers for such employments? So that it was necessary to have
recourse, to the vilest of the vile people; and because the base fellows which
undertake that charge, if they find it not vile, do make it so: Princes were as
it were compelled, yea, the very wisest of them, to defend and uphold such kind
of instruments: For should they likewise have had them in a base esteem, that
weakness of the foundation would have drawn with it the ruin of Dominion into
consequence; but it may be too, that it is a cunning in Princes, to put these
charges into the hands of people of a vile condition, for such offices have in
them something of terrible; so that if they should have joined reputation to
such terriblenesse, I am not certain whether instead of making the subjects
only stand in fear, they would not likewise have terrified Princes, whereas
now they cannot offend with that reputation which the Prince gives them,
because he defends them; they think it an error to punish them, by whom they
punish, they believe, that the Domination which relieth upon them in general,
relyeth upon every Individual, as if that the neck of a rascal were the neck
of the Monarchy; but it is a too too ordinary a course, to make justice become
impudent, that they may keep their government untouched.

The Duke of Ascot of Flanders went into Spain, sent thither by the she, that
is beyond all praise, the Infanta Elizabeth, who as she did assure the
Catholic King of the integrity of that Duke, in the insurrection propounded
by Count Henry, and some other Rebels, so likewise she writ to him, that by him
he might be able to discover all the persons of the Confederacy, and all the
designs that they had; Now in regard that the effects of it were begun to be
felt in Flanders, the King questioned the Duke of As^ot about it, whose answer
was, that he knew no more of any thing, then what he had revealed to the most
renowned Infanta; such a Negation in so dangerous a business, looked, as if it
deserved an imprisonment, but the Lord Duke, who knew, that it did not proceed
from any ill mind in the Duke of Ascot, but from a certai^ niceness of laying
them open which had trusted him, taking upon himself, the assurance of his not
flying away, did entreat his Majesty to question him once again.

Many there are, that believe that they are not bound to discover what they
know; so that they do not, what they ought not, but they do that, they should
not, when they tell not, that they know.

It is the most capital offense in conspiracy to conceal the conspiracy, for
if they be known they are hindered, he that does not run himself into a
rebellion, yet knows of it, and holds his peace shows more fear then love.

I confidently believe, that the character of nobility of mind in the Duke of
Ascot, which made him loyal to his Prince, was the very same thing that made
him faithful to his friends; but what faith is to be observed with such an
one, as keeps not his faith? with one that would make him unfaithful, (I was
about to say, that had made him when he tempted him? what kind of friend call
you him, that persuades his friend unto treason? he is doubtless an enemy,
that touches a man's reputation, and i^rites him to infamy, this is not a
conceit, but a truth that I write, and yet are men oftentimes deceived with it,
running to what is false, under the appearance of what is good: Tyrants have
been the occasion of that great error, who by means of their wickedness, have
made the revealing of conspiracies an infamy, the plotting of them a glory. It
may too, that Princes have co-operated in the work, by suffering them to come
abroad imbroydered with Encomions, therein publishing that Conspiracies are
good, if Princes be bad; how much better had it been, to have made it utterly
detestable, then to leave it in the breast of the passions of men, to judge
first of the Prince, and then of the conspiracies; our religion has in part
provided for it, such as have impugned the Authority of the Pope, being
unwilling to have it in his hands to declare who are friends, either have a
desire to be, or would have a power to be, or else are already Tyrants, they
know not certainly what the reason of State is, which (though Religion move
them not, that ought to move them) should not only have a power to make them
believe this infallible truth, but that they should likewise makeit be believed
by the Subjects. to the end, that whereas there are now so many Tribunals of
Subjects that judge of the Prince, and so answerable to that judgment,
legitimate, or illegitimate conspiracy, it might be brought to one only just
Tribunal, which is the Tribunal, of the Vicar of God.

The King examined the Duke of Ascot twice more, rather like a Brother then a
Sovereign; and he still holding himself to his first tale, the Lord Duke was
desirous to talk with him himself once again, in the presence of the Duke of
Atra, and the President of Castile, to whom the Duke of Ascot answering, that
he had told what he knew, and what the Infanta would have testified for a
truth, had she been now alive; the Duke that he might convince him, showed him
the letter of the Infanta, at which he was astonished, not being able to
recover himself, the King hereupon was enforced to commit him into hold, with
all the commodities that were possible; when the Duke of Ascot reflecting upon
the Letter of the Infanta, and knowing the bounds of necessity, writ a letter
to the Duke, as to the man whom he had always known well affected toward him,
wherein he did unfold as much as was desired to be known: the Duke carried it
to the King without opening it, and then upon his knees did humbly beseech him
to excuse the error of the Duke of Ascot, as a thing that proceeded from a
false opinion, and not from any ill will, and in the mean time he took the
leave, to make his sword be restored him, that it might appear he was not
restrained for his own fault, and he gave order that there should be an Edict
of pardon published in Flanders for all such, as had not made themselves guilty
by discovering themselves.

The Scruples of honor, whereby Subjects do sometimes distaste Princes, are
rather worthy of compassion then chastisement, what ill will be feared from an
honorable man? the subject can do no harm to his Prince if he be not
infamous, then ought the Prince as a Physician to use the sick party roughly,
not to kill him, but to heal him; when a man does any thing for the honor of
zeal only, he works not by his own will, less against his will, but out of
his will, for that that persuades him, is not in him, but without him. To set
upon which necessity, is not to do violence, but to remove it: Honor should be
one of the most substantial foundations, that should uphold nature, if it were
as well regulated by good Laws, as it is worm-eaten with wicked opinions; but
it cannot be ordered by good Laws, if the opinion of swaggering be not first
taken away, and this cannot be abolished, because it is a too necessary quality
in Subjects, if Princes will either defend or enlarge their territories, the
advantages that men get by stoutnesse, and the disadvantages that they receive
by cowardlinesse, makes this be despised and that applauded; so that many have
valued swaggerers, for men of greatest spirits, as if they had greater souls.

The Lord Duke was likewise to be praised for the happy progress in Germany.
He was the man that counseled the King to send, and did make the provision,
that the Cardinal Infanta might go thither, a Prince of great Spirit and
magnanimous, of a generous mind and undaunted heart, whose beams were scarcely
discovered Oriental, but that they consumed the vapors, dispersed the clouds,
and cleared the sky, It is questionless a great matter, but now adays not
new, nay rather most usual, that three Princes, and they young ones, as the
King of Hungaria, the Cardinal Infanta, and Duke Charles of Lorraine, have
terrified and suppressed, the wisdom experience and fortune, of Captains of
great reputation, bred up in the ways and knowledge of wars.

All that are, and have been in the world, have ordinarily periods, which are
the Beginnings, Increase, Stay, Declination, and End. He that painted Fortune
upon a wheel, if that wheel were not Heaven, if that Fortune were not the
Stars, he was in an horrible error to picture only one thing in this world
upon a wheel, where every thing has its several wheel. It is true that
Fortune oftentimes grows grey-headed with a man; but that which did at one
time raise him, is not that which dejected him, because it may turn. One has
a fortune, does increase, another that throws down, and declines. I never
wonder that foraigne Princes to move Cities under Dominion to rebellion, but I
am amazed to think, that Cities will be moved to it; for if they overcome they
cannot do it, but they must first behold, their Countries destroyed, their
countrymen spoiled, and their Exchequours consumed; so that when they have
wone, they have lost; they do not take away Authority, they do but change it;
and the very same hatred they had toward their old Governors, they will place
upon the new. It is not against the man, it is against Dominion, which never
dies, for the Princes be mortal, Principalities are immortal. They too much
flatter themselves with hopes of melioration in mutation; if they trust in
friendship, they are vain. The love of interest, which is a Giant, does easily
overcome all other loves, which are but Children.

It may be peradventure believed, that there will be less desire of dominion
in a new Lord, who is not a new Lord, but by too much covetous desire of rule,
nay rather it is to be feared as most undoubted, that he will stop up the way
by which he entered in himself, that other may not be brought by it. I will not
particularize the mischiefs that their losses would bring forth, they see them
that produce them, yet produce they not so many as their victories would; they
are too too quickly fallen under the gentleness of so courteous Princes.

If our Lord God would have been pleased to show in a glass, to the Princes,
and Cities, that have moved commotions in Germany, upon future condition, that,
which such an Insurrection would have brought forth, this so horrible a
Tragedy, had not now been to be seen; but he forbear not doubtless to present
it to such eyes, as were willing to see it. What understanding could be so
blockish as not to know it, did it but discourse it; What memory so slippery,
that could not as it were lively represent the future success, which it had
observed in the forepassed Wars that which has been, is that which shall be,
particularly when that which was, is that which is.

The space of an hundred years, is the breadth of the Channel, that the River
of forgetfulness has, those men are now dead, who did know Rebellions to be
unfruitful, vain, not without great danger, and extreme great los^e; there
is now no Relics to be disovered of burnt down Towns, Trees burnt to ashes;
Lands become barren; Cities laid defart, destroyed and demollished; the loss
is not believed, or if it be not valued, because it is known reparable, and is
seen to be repair^^.

How ought it to be desiderable by many, to have no walls about their Cities.
The Romans certainly were not more courteous to the Grecians in any one thing,
then in beating down their walls; and that Lawmakers, that would not have the
Citizens repair them, had not only an opinion peradventure to make them more
Virtuous, but had a conceit likewise to make them less rash. The good
complexion of men is oftentimes their death, because they being confident of
it, fall into disorders that kill them.

Power that is great in name, and not great in Authority, or at the least
greater in forces, should not adventure (without security) to be beaten down by
them, whose losses it may increase; because sometimes Princes are not moved to
great purchases, either because they think them not necessary to be gotten, and
so content themselves, or because they fear to loose, and so endanger not
themselves, but if by chance some violence spur them on to take Arms, they
begin to believe, that for to maintain their^reputation of not being afraid, it
is necessary to take them up, and then they lay them not down, till they have
enlarged their Dominions, or increased their Authority, but it is very true,
that wars come again to sprout out, because Conquerours either know not how, or
will not know, or indeed are not able to make an end of their victories;
sometimes being full of glory they are Satiate, sometimes afflicted by the
charges, affrighted by the many slaughters, and desirous of quiet, they enjoy
the present, recommending the future into the hands of Time and Fortune, and
the valor of their successors; he deserves sufficiently in this world that
can put danger a great way from him, because great ones may be deferred, but not
taken away; so many wars would not doubtless be, if a means could be found,
that greatness amongst equals, should not bring forth Envy, and that they
could take away jealousy from Inferiors.

I certainly hold that Princes (I speak of such as are past, after that they
were come the Monarchs) had a regard only to the preservation of their states,
and I believe likewise that they were oftentimes informed, they could not be
able to keep them, without the taking in of some places, that might threaten a
disturbance; and then, as soon as that was gained, they would begin to find out
another that might be prejudicial to the last that was got, and so indeed go
infinitely on, from whence peradventure it comes, that by this insensible
deceit, they have made it be believed, that the desire to keep what they have,
has been a covetuousnesse to get large Dominions.

That Emperor always Augustus, that in his time saw the world in a calm; to
keep it in that tranquillity which might have been disturbed by envy and fear,
more then by any other thing whatsoever, had a purpose not to dilate, but to
restrain, and likewise peradventure to fortify the Confines of the Empire,
thereby to be able the better to keep, and more quietly to enjoy it, by his
making it known that the desire of domination was not infinite, being
terminated in a Prince that had bounded the Imperial Confines: He that was the
first that made faith violable, was the He that did ruin the world, for had
not men been deceived by breach of faith, there would never have been
jealousy, and without jealousy envy would have been of small account, because
it would have been alone.

FINIS.

