THE Generous Choice. A COMEDY. As it is Acted at the New Theater IN Little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields. BY His MAJESTY's SERVANTS.

W^i^^^n by Mr. MANNING.

Lectori credere mallem.

Hor. LONDON, Printed for R. Wellington at the Dolphin and Crown, the Westend
of St. Paul's Churchyard: And A. Bettesworth, at the Red Li^n on
London Bridge, 1700.

Newly Published, The History of the Reign of Lewis XIII. King of France and
Navarre; containing the most Remarkable Occurrences in France and Europe during
the Minority of that Prince. By Mr. Michel le Vassor. Price (...).

A Collection of Novels, in 2 Vol. viz. The Secret History of the E. of Essex
and Q. Elizabeth. The Happy Slave, in Three Parts. And The Double Cuckold. To
which is added, The Ar^ of ^easing in Conversation. By Cardinal Richlieu. Vol.
II. contains, The Her^^ne Musqueteer, in 4 Parts. Incognita, or love and Duty
Reconciled. By Mr. Congreve. The Pilgrim, in 2 parts. Price 10 s. Each Volume
may be had singly.

The Tragical History of Richard the Third, as it is Acted at the Theater
Royal: Written by Mr. Cibber. Price 1 s. is this Day published; where Gentlemen
may have all sorts of Plays and Novels.

TO Christopher Codrington, Esquire
SIR,
I Must own the first and chiefest Advantage I proposed to my self in this
Play, was, To gain the only Opportunity, perhaps I shall ever have, of
acknowledging to the World how very much I am bound to be Yours, not only out
of Gratitude but Inclination.

From hence it might be expected, according to the Course of Dedications, that
I should forget both You and my self in tiring you with your own Praises. No,
Sir, I consider to whom I write; nor need you blush at what I am going to say,
though I know you are more afraid of your Friends on such an Occasion as this,
than your Enemies on any other.

Were it possible for me to think of but attempting your Character, I should
esteem my self very Happy, if I could reach so far as the Out-lines of the
Original. To proceed any further, were to draw upon my self a harder Task than
ever any Painter yet had. 'Twere todwell upon Lights altogether without even
the Mixture of a Shade.

But if I had Strength to support the Undertaking, I should beg leave to
mention your Affability of Temper, your Perfection in Learning, a Delicacy in
your Thoughts, a noble Vivacity in your Expressions, a matchless Fire in your
Fancy, and a great Exactness of Judgment: To change the Scene your Personal
Bravery in the Camp, your Gallantry at Court, your Zeal to serve your Friends,
your Humanity to all the World, and your easy Dispatch in Business.

Thus consummate in Merit, no wonder your Great Master's Favor should shine
upon you with such Distinction as to send so Gallant a Son to succeed so
Renowned a Father in his Commands and Governments Abroad.

Permit me, Sir, on this occasion to wish you a Prosperous Voyage, and all the
Happiness that ever Man enjoyed

I cannot end better than with such a Wish; nor can it be sent to you with
greater Fervency by any one, than

SIR, Your much Obliged, Humble Servant, F. M.

PROLOGUE.
AS Orange-Plants that by the Gard'ner's Care
TO rive by degrees, and spread abroad in Air,
Expand their Branches, and extend their Roots,
As through their Veins prolifick moisture shoots:
No^ growing fertile gratefully produce
Blossoms and Fruit for their Preserver's Use.
So the young Writer of the following Scenes,
To his good Friends, on whose Support he leans,
Presents his very Blossom of a Play,
Which if you will have the Patience but to stay,
May ripen the generous Fruit one Day.
His humble Muse a tender Plant is found,
Which the first Year with Buds alone is crowned.
But if mild Seasons nurse its spreading Root,
Succeeding years may bring forth grateful Fruit.
Would to kind Heaven That Harvest were in view,
For at our Lung's Expense We daily show,
There never was such a Dearth of Wit as now.
Yet were it so that Plenty at this time
With her full Horn enriched our peaceful Clime,
Now to produce our Stores would be a Crime.
For our Wise Stage-Reclaimers would resent
The Offense and bid us mortify in Lent.
Thus might we hope there is Color to excuse
This Author's first Attempt, and dawning Muse.
Sooth then his Pain and make his Sentence easy,
Methinks in Lent some Charity should seize you;
If you Judge nicely, he despairs to Please you.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Miss Porter.
OUR Author thinks Himself Arraigned to Day,
You are his Jury, and his Crime the Play.
Me He retains a Counsel in his Case,
What Fee He gave me I leave You to guess.
I come to plead before you vent your Spite,
And by your Verdict Fine Him the Third Night.
First then as Criminals are wont, He chooses
Out of his Jury such, and such refuses.
The Critic He excepts, nor is it fit,
One should be thought for t'other's Faults, a Wit.
Those Ladies next, that shrowed in Masks their Graces,
And dare show any thing, except their Faces.
This Plot He to their Judgments will not Submit,
For They Are contriving how Their own may hit,
The Singe han't half so many as the Pit.
And least their Favors should at last entrap him,
He Would rather have the Vizzards Hiss, than Clap Him.
For want of Mercy Wits are banished hence,
And most of Those who Write, for want of Sense.
To close the Rear, He challenges by Crowds
Brushed Beavers, Natural Bobs, and Velvet Hoods,
And all behind the Scenes, and all above the Alluding to the Upper Gallery
above the Ceiling.
Clouds.
To the Few left He lays This Maxim down,
That each should make the Poet's Case his own.
Whoever Themselves of Ruin are afraid,
All Those should Him their Fellow-suff'rer Aid:
Soldiers Disbanded should their Pity show,
And India-Merchants, either Old or New.
You City-Dames, that from your Husbands fly
With borrowed Looks to Please the Play'rs Eye,
And grace with Patch and Paint the Gallery.
When blush on blush, and Charms Inch thick you lay,
If He your Arts should Damn as you his Play,
Would it not grieve you? Yet the same the Case is,
How many here are Authors of their Faces!
To the sweet Beaux We make our next Complaint,
Both you that Ugly are, and you that Paint.
How, Sirs, shall we for what He feels prepare you?
Let Us see -- What is it would next to Fighting scare you?
Suppose you should in some Lampoon appear,
Psha, What is that? You Have been too often there.
Were you confined by Surgeon or by Jayler,
Or, what is worse Deserted by your Tailor?
No: It Is the greatest Penance we can find,
To leave you Combed and Powdered to the Wind,
As you fear This, be to the Poet kind.
We hope at last we may good Luck divine
From those Bright Stars that in the Boxes Shine.
Such Beauteous Eyes should smiling Favors grant;
Nor Pity be the only Charm they Want.
You never should Blame, to whom all Praise is Due,
Think but of Him as all Mankind of You.
Come, you must all, it is his first Fault forgive Him;
Or if not that, for poor Three Days Reprieve Him.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Don Sebastian, A Gentleman of Valencia. Don Philip, His Friend, newly come to
Valencia. Don Frederick, Just arrived at Valencia from their Travels. Don
Bernardo, Just arrived at Valencia from their Travels. 1 Anthony, Don Philip's
Man. 2 Anthony, Don Frederick's Man.
WOMEN.
Donna Cornelia, Sister to Don Bernardo, contracted to Don Philip, just come to
Valencia in Disguise in pursuit of him. Donna Olivia, Sister to Don Frederick,
enjoyed by Don Philip newly arrived at Valencia too in Disguise in Search of
Philip. Eleonora, A Woman of Intrigue. Dorila, Her Maid.
Constable, Watchmen, Footmen, Ruffians, etc.

SCENE, The City of Valencia in Spain.

ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Don Bernardo, and Don Frederick. Fred. WEll, Bernardo, thou will never
leave thy old courses, I see, till Age or Distempers have made thee Impotent.
The good old Count at home might, indeed, expect more Sobriety from the Tour
thou have made abroad. But alas! poor Gentleman, he will be as much deceived in
thy Manners, as thou art in following the wickedness of the Flesh.


Ber. Prithee, Frederick, no more of this Gravity: I am not so keen a sportsman
as you make me. Indeed, if a very handsome Woman bolts out upon me unawares, I
may, perhaps, course her now and then for a breathing: But I don't love beating
the bushes for game.


Fred. Well, I see, thou art incorrigible, therefore I have done. Methinks,
Bernardo, the Air grows cool: Sure the night must be far advanced.


Ber. No matter; even let us ramble for once, we shall find some Adventure or
other that is diverting I warrant thee.


Fred. What, you are again at your old Trade: No, no, I Will home, I assure you.
I have no mind to be mistaken for another in the dark, and so have my Throat
cut, or, if I escape that way, to be seized upon by the Watch for a
Night-walker, that has some ill design on foot.


Ber. You Will excuse me then, for not going with you, since I have some Commands
to obey to night, of one that expects a readier Compliance than any Grandee of
Spain: It Is one Don Cupid, Seignor, if you have heard of him.


Fred. Don Lucifer, you mean.


Ber. Call him what you will. But, Frederick, to be plain with you, the
business is this; you must know, Sir, I have had a private Intrigue upon my
hands with a very lovely Woman almost ever since we arrived at Valencia, and
this very hour am I to meet her, by Assignation in the mean time you are
brawling with our old Host at home, it is the better Engagement of the two.


Fred. It Is less dangerous, that is certain; besides, you say your Intrigue is
private.


Ber. It is so, indeed: But I Will tell you what I Will do for you, if I succeed in
my Amor to night, and taste of this Circe's Cup, I Will undertake you shall be
made the next Swine, Frederick.


Fred. A pox of your Swine's Jest: Farewell.


Exit Fred. Ber. Ha, ha, ha! good night Don Frederick. When I had told him of
my Amor, I had no other way to be rid of him, for whatsoever he pretends, I
know he is stanch, though a sly Gamester.

Now for the Coast of Love, on wings I Am born
To reach that Axis, on which all things turn.

Exit. SCENE II. Donna Eleonora's Longings.
Enter Eleonora and her Maid. Eleon. Come, Dorila, let us take a walk before
the door, this cool Evening.


Dor. I Will wait upon you, Madam.


Eleon. I wonder Don Sebastian is not come yet: Sure somewhat of importance
keeps him away, for he does not use to be so tardy.


Dor. He is a Man, Madam, and may forget that he has been kindly used by a fair
Lady.


Eleon. I would not willingly believe any such Ingratitude of him, because I
have long entertained an opinion of his faithfulness; and though the expectation
he has given me of being his Wife after the death of his Mother (if the
solemnest Oaths and Protestations avail any thing) makes me a little uneasy
under a disappointment: yet he has so much Goodness in his Nature, and such
Charms about his Person, that I cannot soon give way to interpret any thing
amiss of him.


Dor. And so had Don Philip, when you were first acquainted with him at Madrid.
He had such another Art of Charming too, that he soon gained a passage into
your yielding heart, and when he had made the Conquest, left and despised you.


Eleon. And now he shall pay for his Villainy; for know, Dorila, that he no
sooner left me to night, but I sent some Ruffians after him to dispatch him,
lest he should hinder my design upon Sabastian, as well as to punish him for
his Ingratitude. I wonder he could have the Impudence to inquire me out here,
after the Contempt he used me with at Madrid. How do I long to hear the Fact is
committed!


Dor. For my part I cannot pity him.


Eleon. Pity him, no; but I Will be revenged on him, Wench. He goes to Hell this
night: There let him scorn a poor deluded Maid, that sacrificed her Honor to
oblige him; trusted to all his flattering promises, and saw her self forsaken,
blasted, ruined. O Woman! Woman! How eager have thou always been to know what
brings ruin as soon as known! Could thou but spare thy Curiosity, and give no
Ear to the alluring Tongues of Men, how might thou live in Triumph, and see
proud Man beneath thee!


Dor. But, Madam, you would soon have the World dispeopled at this rate.


Eleon. Were it a drowning a second time, 'twere no matter. It Is a vile World
that is not worth keeping above Water. What is there to be found in it, but
specious promises and certain falsehood. Two such Contagions, like North-East
Winds in the Spring, are enough to blast Mankind, as those do the Fruits of the
Earth.


Dor. Alas, poor World, what a condition art thou in!


Eleon. Never in a worse: But however, my meaning at first was, that I would
have our Sex hold out, till they could obtain Men by Lawful means; but even
then, how much discontent does often follow!


Dor. Why there is the business: You would deprive poor Women of their pleasure
every way. Come, come, Madam, Venus has been more indulgent to you, than you
imagine, for, though one Lover has forsaken you, yet, thanks to fortune, you have
found a Friend here that may hereafter be your Husband. Or, if you mistrust him
there is the handsome stranger Don Bernardo, who has made some Addresses of Love
to you.


Eleon. 'Dslife, Dorila, he was to be here to night, this very hour, by
appointment, when I did not think of Sebastian's coming. As I live I had quite
forgot it. Dorila, come, let us go and contrive some way to avoid meeting both.


Dor. Why, this it is, not to Communicate your Affairs to me. I hope by this
time you see how necessary a Confidente is in your Affairs; you may have undone
your self now, for ought I know.


Eleon. Come, for Venus sake, let us go. Hark! some body's coming

Don Bernardo Enters. Ha! Bernardo, as I live. Dorila, make haste in, and after
a little while call me, and I Will pretend it is my Aunt that calls, and so get
away; for I would not be observed to shun him neither.


Ber. [running to them.] By your leave, Ladies, I hope to find an Acquaintance
here. Nay, never strive to conceal your self, Madam. Could the fair Eleonora
think to be so disguised, that a Lover should not be able to distinguish her?

Dor. slips. in.
Eleon. I might have expected some assistance from the darkness of the night,
if I had not been inclined to disclose my self to you.


Ber. Were the night much darker than it is, and you had kept back the goodness
you show me, yet those Eyes would have dispersed the darkness, and left me
certain of my happiness.


Eleon. You are skilled in Complements, I see; but let me entreat you to speak
lower, for my Aunt is yet awake, and is apt to hear the least noise.


Ber. Let us walk further off then, that it may not be in her power either to
hear us, or see us.


Eleon. O no, not for the World: If I should not be within call, she would
certainly rise, and suspect I was away upon some bad account. 'Twould ruin me,
Sir, for she is very passionate, and would surely make another Will, and give
away Forty Thousand Crowns from me.


Ber. Ha! Forty Thousand Crowns: Can it be true?

Aside. But, Madam, when will you grant some pity to a Man that so infinitely
adores you? Were we not by Appointment to meet to night?


Eleon. Are we not met, Sir?


Ber. But not as I could wish: I would convince you of my unspeakable Affection.


Eleon. O, Sir, then you and I must meet no more. Is it possible you should
entertain any such unlawful hopes?


Ber. 'Sdeath, she would hook me into Marriage!

Aside.
Eleonora, within. Eleon. Pray let me go: My Aunt calls within, and I shall be
undone for staying.


Eleonora again. Ber. A pox of this Aunt for me.

Aside. Madam, give me leave to assure you, that I have no ill design: All that
I intended was to give you most undeniable proofs of my Love. I entreat you to
believe my sincerity.


Eleon. You talked just now at such a mad rate, that 'twill be some difficulty
to retrieve the good opinion I had of you.

Eleonora. O I shall be ruined, if I stay longer.


Ber. When shall I have an opportunity to bring you to a better understanding?


Eleon. O never, never. You sha'n't catch me here again to morrow night, I
warrant you.

Runs in.
Ber. A Pox of all Aunts, I say: You sha'n't catch me here again to morrow
night I warrant you. A good direction however for to morrow; but what have I to
do with to morrow? I may be less inclined for a Woman then, and less at
leisure. A Curse on this Accident! Well, I Will take the other walk, and if the
Stars decree me no Adventure to night, I Will even home, and take Counsel of my
Pillow about this last Affair.


Exit. Enter Don Sebastian muffled in his Cloak. Seb. Let me see; this must be
the House. Well, this Love has a strange power: It Is so diffused through the
Composition of Man, that all his other Faculties are like so many useless
Wheels, till that spring be put in motion. What is there agreeable in Life,
without Love? That Poet had a true taste of the World, who said, Let me die, ye
Powers, when I am no longer able to relish the Blessings of Love. But I amuse
my self too long.

(Knocks.)
Dorila in the Balcony. Dor. Who is it that knocks at this late hour?


Seb. It Is I; good Dorila, make no noise, but let me in.


Dor. I fly, Seignor, to obey you.

Retires.
Seb. I Am glad they are so cautions whom to admit, though it may be nothing but
disguise to cheat me, for Women have their Arts, I know.

Dorila opens the door.
Dor. O Seignor, we have expected you so long, that we began to despair of
seeing you to night.


Seb. I hope I am not come too soon. Where Is my Eleonora?


Dor. In her Chamber, impatient for your arrival, to be sure.


Seb. Did you not tell her I was at the door?


Dor. I thought 'twould be more agreeable for you to surprise her with your
coming.


Seb. You have obliged me. Come, let us go in.

They go in.
SCENE Changes. The street.
Enter Don Bernardo. Ber. A Plague upon that Sreech-owl that called in my
Eleonora from me: For besides my ill fortune in losing her, she has presaged me
no luck all this night, I am afraid. Well, if I must go home without any
Adventure to boast of, or to justify my absence to Don Frederick, I must even
be content to bear with his dull Encomiums on Regularity and Example; though he,
like the rest of the Men of Zeal for severity of Manners, is better pleased
with the formality of advising, than the difficulty of the practice.


A Song without, at some distance. Custom, alas! does partial prove,
Nor gives us even measure:
To Maids it is a Pain to Love,
But it is to Men a pleasure.
They freely can their Thoughts explain,
Whilst ours must burn within:
We have got Eyes and Tongues in vain,
And Truth from us is sin.
Men to new Joys and Conquests fly,
And yet no hazard run:
Poor we are left, if we deny,
Or if we yield, undone.
Then equal Laws let Custom find,
Nor either Sex oppress:
More freedom give to Womankind,
Or give to Mankind less.
Ber. By your leave, whoever you are, I mean to interrupt your Singing, though I
like it well. This may prove some lucky check to my rising inclination to go
home. I Will follow the voice, whatever may ensue.


Ex. SCENE changes to Don Frederick's Lodgings.
Enter Don Frederick and his Man Anthony. Fred. From Alcantara, did he say?


2 Ant. I tell you, Sir, from Alcantara, and when he knew that, I had the
Honor to be your Valet de Chamber.


Fred. You are pleasant, Sir.


2 Ant. Why, Sir, I hope it is not an Employment above me, for the Heralds have
distinguished us in France.


Fred. So they will a Fiddler, if he has money to purchase a Coat of Arms.


2 Ant. I hope, Sir, you don't speak of that Profession by way of Contempt.


Fred. What does it deserve else?


2 Ant. I am sorry for your Judgment, for we were always esteemed in our
Country.


Fred. O, I find you were your self an Instrument Scraper there once: But no
more of this. What request did this stranger make to you?


2 Ant. That I should let you know, upon your coming home, that he was very
earnest to speak with you alone.


Fred. So privately: Who can it be? Come, lead me to him; I long to know who
it is.


Exeunt. A Bedchamber. Donna Cornelia in Man's Clothes, sitting by a Table in
a thoughtful posture. Corn. What a Capricious Deity is Love, and how repugnant
often to Nature it self! So true are those Lines of the Divine English Poet.

In Love the Victors from the Vanquished fly,
They fly that wound, and they pursue that die.

Enter 2 Anthony. 2 Ant. Seignor, my Master, Don Frederick, if you are disposed
to receive his visit, would wait on you.


Corn. With all my heart; I shall esteem his Company as a favor.

Exit 2 Ant. Now must I unfold my self to him, and if he has that Generosity
the World gives him, he will both secure me from my Brother's indignation, and
assist me toward the success of my design.


Enter Don Frederick. Fred. Sir, I was made believe upon my coming home, that
you had some Commands for me. I should be glad to have it in my power to obey a
Stranger, especially one whose Aspect can even so soon prevail on my
Inclinations.


Corn. Sir, your Language and Behavour speak you Generous: I did indeed make it
my request to your Servant, who had informed me of yours and Don Bernardo's
Loding here, to give you private notice that a Stranger was earnest to speak
with you. Be not surprised, Sir, but oblige me so far as to sit down, and hear
my Story.

They sit.
Fred. Sir, I am ready to give all attention.


Corn. I presume, Sir, by the Description you may have had of me, and the Garb
you see me in, you take me for one of your own Sex.

he starts. Be not amazed, Sir, for I am but a Woman, a most unhappy Woman, no
other than the Sister of your Friend Don Bernardo.


Fred. You astonish me, Donna Gornelia!


Corn. The same: Pray how long is it since you and my Brother arrived here from
Italy?


Fred. We have been in Spain about four days, and only wait for the passing of
to morrow's Festival, before we go for Alcantara. It Is the great Feast of St.
Jago, at whose Church to morrow is to be seen all the Magnificence of this
Place.


Corn. It Is possible then you may have seen Don Philip de Monasco, in this Town.


Fred. I have only heard of him, Madam, I never had the honor to know him.


Corn. Alas, Sir, it is he that is the cause of this disguise, this Journey to
Valencia, and of all the misfortunes that have yet befaln me. Not to detain
you, you must know that Don Philip making use of the Acquaintance of our
Friends, came frequently to our House, and was always entertained with that
welcome that was due to the Son of a Man of Quality, and a particular Friend. I
must confess, that from the first moment I saw him, I had a more than ordinary
Joy to think we were under the same Roof, and an unusual heaviness when he went
away. How soon does Love find entrance into a weak Woman's heart! I fancied
whenever he appeared before me, that there was not a Man in Spain of such
Beauty, Grace, and Proportion; but when he spoke, sure Music hung upon his
Tongue, and all he said I thought Oraculous.


Fred. Nay, now you are far gone indeed.


Corn. You Will excuse my weakness, Sir. After many discourses we had together
full of Complaisance and Gallantry, He at last made some advances of Love. You
may imagine I was not displeased to find a mutual concern. This humor he
continued for many days, and at last after a Thousand Solicitations attended
with Oaths and Promises of Marriage: I was Fool enough to yield.


Fred. Heavens! Can it be?


Corn. To an agreement to meet him such a day.


Fred. Your discretion may be yet safe. But pray, Madam, why did you not give
your Father notice of your mutual Inclinations, that he might have procured Don
Philip for your Husband?


Corn. Because I knew he had given his word to another Gentleman, and had
commanded me to prepare to accept him for my Husband, though I told him I could
never love him.


Fred. Well, Madam, when the day came?


Corn. I met him at the appointed place, but had the prudence to resolve
beforehand not to yield till he should actually have Married me. He used many
importunities to persuade me, but, I thank Heaven, I had so much reason left,
as to consider, that he who refused to send for a Priest, when I gave him an
opportunity, by being absent from my Father's House, would scarce agree to do
it when he had once enjoyed me.


Fred. 'Twas wisely reasoned, Madam; so you broke off.


Corn. We did from what he proposed, but not from a Contract we had made before.


Fred. Ha! Contracted?


Corn. A Solemn Contract had passed between us.


Fred. I am sorry for it. Pray, what has induced you to come hither in disguise?


Corn. Two days after our Adventure, I was informed that Don Philip was
privately gone to this Place, in order to take Shipping for Naples, and had
carried with him a beautiful young Lady, whom he had newly married, or designed
to marry. This News put me into such a fit of melancholy, that I could not
conceal it from the Family, which was very earnest to know the Cause, but in
vain. After a day or two I took a resolution to disguise my self, and to come
directly to Valencia to find out this ungrateful Philip, who is my Husband
before Heaven, though another has the happiness to live with him. If I can find
them, I Will either pull her by force out of his Arms, and let the World know the
claim I have to him, or if he refuses to own me for his Wife, he shall
experience the Revenge of a Neglected Woman.


Fred. Madam, if I might advise you, things being not yet gone so far as to
necessitate your pursuit of him at this rate, you should even despise him in
your turn, and make choice of another that should be more worthy of your Love.


Corn. Alas, Sir, if we could Love whom we would, your Counsel might be chosen:
But Love, you know, has Fate in it, and therefore cannot be withstood.


Fred. You may be Wedded to a false opinion of Love; there is no such Astrology
in the matter.


Corn. However, it is impossible I can ever forget Don Philip.


Fred. Few things are impossible, Madam, they only appear so to us for want of
putting them in practice: However, let us refer this business, if you please,
till the morning; you must needs want rest after the fatigue of a Journey. To
morrow you may Command me as far as I have any Power.


Corn. But, Sir, I must entreat one Favor of you, which is, that you give my
Brother no Intelligence of my being here, for I fear his Anger as much as the
neglect of Philip.


Fred. Madam, I shall be careful to obey your Commands. Good rest to the fair
Cornelia.


Exit. Corn. Alas! I can have no rest: This ungrateful Man will keep me for
ever waking. To go to Bed is only to toss from side to side, to be tormented
with Sighs, and inflamed with Jealousy.

O Love, in Notion so transporting Fair,
Once Felt, what Wreks and Tortures do Thou bear
Between the Flames of Hope and Coldness of Despair.

She End of the First Act.
ACT the Second.
SCENE the First: The street.
Enter Don Bernardo, with Donna Olivia in Man's Clothes. Ber. THe relation you
have made me, Madam, of this ungrateful Philip, as it makes me look upon you
with the tenderest Compassion, so it gives me reason to detest the Author of
your misfortune. You say he promised you Marriage first with all the marks of
sincerity.


Ol. He wished a thousand times that Heaven might pour down Vengeance on his
head, if he proved false.


Ber. What a Villain is he then for leaving you thus!


Ol. He is so, and yet I love this Villain. O! Bernardo, do but frame to your
self the softest delights that ever any Loved Woman has yet raised in your
Soul: Fancy how transported you should be with the full possession of her
Charms: Think what a pain 'twould be to live deprived of such a happiness; and
then conclude what I have lost in Philip.


Ber. Amazement! Can there be so much felicity in our Sex? I thought all we had
on Earth was to be found in yours.


Ol. I find you think me vain, Sir, in giving such a Character of a Man, with
whom I have had some understanding: But it is my infirmity, pray pass it by.


Ber. Pardon me, Madam, I am well pleased than any of our Sex can be so very
acceptable. I Will recant the name of Villain I called him too, if 'twould oblige
you.


Ol. His leaving me looks unkind enough, indeed, but could I meet him here, I
should not doubt the recovery of his heart, I know it was nothing but a
youthful sally to make me sensible of the want of his dear Company, that I
might receive him at his return with more than usual Ardour.


Ber. How ready the fond thing is to excuse this treacherous Fellow!


Aside. Ol. But whatever be the cause, I must entreat you, since the Accident
of my voice brought you to discover my passion, that you would give me your
assistance, as soon as it is day, to find out this Rambler, if he be in
Valencia; if not, O misfortune! Whither shall I go to seek him?


Ber. You may command my faithfulest service.


Ol. Another Request I have to make to you, which is, that you conceal my being
here from Don Frederick's knowledge for the present.


Ber. I shall obey you. You Will give me leave to wait on you to your Lodging,
and, as soon as it is day, I shall not fail to send to know your Commands.


Ol. You maintain the Character the World is full of.


Exeunt. Don Philip and his Man. Phil. Sure I must be near Don Sebastian's:
Anthony, don't you know the Street?


1 Ant. If 'twere not quite so dark, possibly I might, Sir.


Phil. As far as I remember, we should pass by this Church.


1 Ant. Ay, Sir, you were always for passing by the Church, I Will say that for
you; but if you live at this rate, the Church will not pass You by very long.


Phil. Why how now, Sir, you are Witty to night: What, you have been punning
in Donna Eleonora's Kitchen, servile Rogue!


1 Ant. Faith, Sir, it is a mistake, with your pardon; for there was Mrs. Pert,
her Maid, who has so unreasonable a Tongue, that set it once a going, it is a
very Laram for an hour together, so that no body can be heard but she. Will you
give me leave, Sir, to tell you something she said?


Phil. Barring all Smut, and so forth, which thou can no more forbear
interlarding in thy discourse, than an Old Maid when she is past hopes of
Matrimony.


1 Ant. Smut, Sir, I scorn your Words; I Will have you to know we Frenchmen have
more good Breeding.


Phil. Nay, your Nation has the Character for good Manners.


1 Ant. Ay, and for good Courage, good Politics, and good Subjects, Begar.


Phil. How do you make your Courage out, pray, my Understanding Valet?


1 Ant. Why, we always get the better of our Enemies by our Numbers, and so our
Courage is not disputed. Then as for Politics, don't you know a Nation, Sir,
that has had cunning enough to get a Peace concluded, when 'twas Six to four
that it had been undone in another Campaign.


Phil. I Am afraid that condition regarded more than one Nation. Well, and how
are you good Subjects?


1 Ant. In troth, I think we are very good, easy Subjects, to suffer all to be
restored in one Day that we had been getting for half an Age.


Phil. Admirable Pasquil! Well, but thou have rambled all this while from thy
Theme: Thou art a true Frenchman in thy Tongue at least, which is ever running
a swift Course without any Goal before it. I thought I was to have had a decent
Account of your late Conversation.


1 Ant. Sir, I beg your Pardon, with all my heart: Why, Sir, what do you think
this wicked Jade told me?


Phil. Come, out with it.


1 Ant. Why, Sir, as sure as you're alive, this Water-wagtail told me, that the
whole business of this wicked Town was Love.


Phil. Say thou so, my little Anthony?


1 Ant. Nay, I knew 'twould please you, for you are such a Hawk at the Sex,
that the very name of an Intrigue, though you were to cross the Sea for it, would
be a Lure to you. But, pray, Sir, let me entreat you to set me a better
Example, that we may both leave this pernicious way; for, to tell you the
truth, I have so great a respect for you, that I can no more forbear following
all your steps like a true Serving man, than an old Sharper can those of a
young Heir.


Phil. Leave off your Canting, Sir, for thou love. Woman's flesh as
naturally as Spaniards love Constancy, or Englishmen Change.


1 Ant. But, Sir, how can you so soon forget the Beautiful Cornelia? I dare
swear she is pining and languishing for her Contracted Husband.


Phil. Let her languish on: A foolish Wench, she might have had what she
languish'd for, but Virtue, forsooth, flew in her face, and made her resolve to
starve her Love. Now for a Woman, commend me to Olivia, that no sooner loved
but nourished her desire, leaving the dull fantastic notion of Fame and
Honor, for the lively substantial Enjoyment of Man and Happiness.


1 Ant. And yet you could forsake her too.


Phil. Yes, because she began to trouble me, like the other, with my promise of
Marriage: They would have had me worn a very strait Shoe that galls and
pinches one even to Lameness. To marry is to open Pandora's Box, which is no
sooner done, but all kinds of miseries flutter about your Ears.


1 Ant. And have you no qualms of Conscience for these things?


Phil. Not I, fool; Pleasure is my Employment, and my Conscience is subservient
to it.


Ruffians peep in. 1 Ruf. It must be he by what we have heard: Courage,
Friends, prepare.


2 Ruf. I Will have his head at the first stroke, an ungrateful Villain.


Four or five enter and come forward. 1 Ant. I hear a noise, Sir: Let us jog on
and find the House, if it be possible.


Phil. Stay. Who Is there? What Is your business?


1 Ruf. We come to send a Villain to the Devil.


1 Ant. I am Thunderstruck, I Am Dead; did not I tell you, Sir, that the
injuries you have done to those Gentlewomen would come home to you, and now you
have involved me too?

softly.
Phil. Anthony, stand up close to me, do you hear, or, by the Mass, I Will give you
into their hands, whoever they are.

Aside to him.
Ant. (trembling.) I will stand close, Sir. A pox confound them for me.


Phil. Well, who is this Villain you talk of? If you expect to find him here,
you are deceived.


1 Ruf. We know you are a Villain, as sure as you are Don Philip, therefore
fall on, Friends.


Phil. Nay, then it is time to defend our selves: Anthony, keep close to me, or
do you hear, I shall thrust you before me to be first slain.


Ant. Poor Anthony! how hard it is that other Men's sins should fall upon thy
head!

They draw.
Phil. Will you hear me? I am not the Man you take me for: I am a stranger here.


2 Ruf. No, no; fall on, fall on.


1 Ruf. Courage, Lads, remember the Reward: It Is to kill a Villain, so it is no
murder.


2 Ruf. If he were an honest Man 'twere all one to me. What, every Man must
live in his way.


Ant. O bloody-minded Rogues! I wish I do not swoon before the fight begins.

Trembling.
Phil. Since no entreaties will prevail, come on: I shall send some of you,
blood hounds, to Hell, before you murder me, I shall.

They fight, Don Bernardo by the clashing of Swords is brought that way, and
joins with Philip.
Ber. Take Courage, Sir; you have one by your side that would stand by you,
were the number of your Adversaries double.


Phil. Whoever you are, you are very generous.


Ant. Nay, then I Will even steal away, and save my self.

sneaks off. They fight still, at last the noise of the Watch makes the
Ruffians retire.
1 Ruf. The Watch! The Watch! Let us shift for our selves!

They scower off several ways,
Phil. Sir, I am extremely in your debt for your timely assistance and should
be glad to know of whom I have received so important a service.


Ber. I have done no more, Sir, than the duty of a Gentleman obliged me to; you
were overpowered by Numbers, and Humanity forced me to take your part. My name
is of little moment to you, since I am a stranger in this Place.


Phil. You are my preserver, however: Let me entreat you then to be seen to
morrow. The Watch, I find, is alarmed, and will be every where; Their rudeness
is to be avoided.


Ber. You may Command me any where in the morning.


Phil. Let it be then near the great Church, at Ten.


Ber. You Will please to give me Your name.


Phil. You must excuse me, Sir, for some private reasons, but if you will please
to wear this Sword, whose Hilt is of a remarkable Frame, and of no ordinary
Value, I shall have the pleasure of knowing you again at the time and place.


Ber. The satisfaction you promise me, makes me willing to exchange Swords,
which I should otherwise be ashamed to do, since mine is of no value.

They change Swords. Watch without, cry, This way, this way. Good night, Sir.


Phil. Fortune ever attend you. Anthony: Where the Devil is he? Sure he is not
dropped in the Fray: I never missed him till now; but let him be where he will I
must avoid this Watch.


Exit. Enter three of four Watchmen. 1 Watch. Here this way they went. Let Us
after them.


2 Watch. Follow, follow!

All follow.
Re-enter Don Bernardo. Ber. I can go no way but these damned Constables, and
their guard of Watchmen are upon the hunt. How to escape them, I don't well
know.

A noise without, This way, this way. The dogs are upon full scent, and I shall
be finely mumbled if I stay here. Ha! a door open; nay, then there needs no
pausing for a resolution what to do.

Goes in, and shuts the door fast.
Enter Constable and Watchmen, with 1st. Anthony. 1 Wat. Here Is one of the
Rogues.


2 Watch. Come, bring him before our Prince of Darkness here, to be examined.


1 Ant. Prince of Darkness, hum! then am I in Hell it seems.

aside.
Constable. (in his Chair.) Come, Sir, in the first place, Who are you, that has
had the Impudence to disturb the King's Peace, and the Quiet of our Government?


1 Ant. Truly, Sir, the King's Peace, and your Government put together, have
made me forget my self in the Wonder.


Constable. Sir, I Will have you to know, I am the King's Image, and Viceroy of his
Nocturnal hours in Valencia.


1 Ant. Nay, Sir, I beg your pardon now you have explained your self, and to
give you no further trouble, my name is honest Anthony.


1 Watch. Honest Anthony! here is a Rogue now, when, as I am an Assistant to his
Majesty's Image here, I found him crammed in a Cellar Window.


Con. Nay, it is very suspicions, let me tell you, Friends; for if he had not
been upon some Wicked Design he would never have hid himself.


All. Plain, plain: Some House-breaker.


2 Watch. I warrant he is a Cendary in his heart, and came to set fire to the
City.


Con. Like enough, truly, for though we have a Peace do you see, we ought to be
upon our guard; else what our Enemies could not bring to pass by the Sword,
they may try to do by Fire.


1 Ant. Pauvre Antoine!


1 Watch. Do You hear, Mr. Constable, what Gibberish the Rogue speaks: I warrant
that is Treason, if we knew what 'twas. I say, let him be hanged without any
more a-doe.


2 Watch. What, do you talk of hanging only: I humbly move, Mr. Constable, that
he may be first hanged and then drowned.


Con. Nay, hold a little, my hearts of Steel: The Law takes notice of Life and
Death, do you see. Let us proceed regular, do you mind. If upon further
Examination, that is -- we find him a Vagabond -- That is to say -- a Fellow,
that -- you know my meaning.


1 Watch. Ay, ay: One that cannot answer for himself.


Con. Ay, that is it, Tom, the very thing I would have said: But as I was
saying, if he can give no 'count of himself, that is -- We'll put him in the
Stocks till morning, do you mind, and then carry him before a Magistrate. This is
a Constable's duty.


2 Watch. Ay, ay, it is so, Mr. Constable: I had forgot my self.


Con. Well, Friend, since the Question of Who are you is answered, the next is
always, What are you?


1 Watch. Ay, Sir, what are you? ha!


1 Ant. Why truly, Sir, I am a stranger here, I must own. But --


Con. He has Condemned himself: A mischievous Rogue, I warrant him. What say
you, Gentlemen, shall we proceed to Sentence?


All. Ay, ay, to Sentence, to Sentence.


1 Watch. And then to Execution with him.


1 Ant. Nay, good Gentlemen, do but hear me: I am not --


2 Watch. Stop his mouth for him; he is Convicted.


1 Watch. Ay, ay; it is not the custom for a Criminal to speak after Conviction.
Be silent, you had best, and harken to your Sentence.


Con. Well then, since we have, upon a full Hearing and a clear Evidence, found
him to be a Rogue, the next thing is, to proceed to Sentence, which I pronounce
thus. You are, Sir, to sit in the Stocks till morning, and then you must
expect to go to Prison, and from thence to be hanged at least, if not impaled
alive.


1 Ant. O malheureux que Je suis!


1 Watch. Come, away with him; away with him.


All. Away! Away!


Exeunt. Scene changes to Dan Frederick 's Lodgings. Enter Don Frederick alone,
with a Candle. Fred. What, in the name of wonder, ail'st thou, Frederick, that
thou can not go to sleep? Is it not the time when Men forget their daily
cares, and lay themselves to rest? All are at Peace within these Walls, but
Thou. As I passed by Cornelia's Room, methought I could have craved admittance
there, but that I recollected she was tired with her Journey, and 'twould be
barbarous to wake her. Ha! wake her! What pretense have I to wake her? Wake
whom, Cornelia, for what? Have a care, Frederick, this Woman runs in thy head
so much, that there is no reason either in thy actions, or thy talk. Why then I
am in Love, it seems: Speed you, Sir. In Love! with whom? Why, Cornelia. There
it is again: With one, that has left a kind Father, to run a gadding after an
Ungrateful Lover. O well placed Affection!

If I must feel your power, cruel Cupid,
Why have you made me fix my thoughts on one
From whom I can expect no kind return?
But the blind Boy delights in Tyranny.
Well, since I cannot sleep, I Will even walk out, and try if I can meet Don
Bernardo.

Goes to the door, and calls Anthony. How fast the Rascal is! Stretched upon
the Floor he sleeps as hea^^^ly as if he had taken Opium. Thou have no cares to
keep thee waking, much happier than thy Master. Why Anthony?

He answers without, Sir, Sir. Make no noise, but come hither.


Enter 2 Anthony, yawning, and rubbing his Eyes. 2 Ant. What would your Worship
have, Sir? you waked me out of the most extraordinary Dream.

yawning.
Fred. What was your Dream, you sleepy sot? here, take the Candle.


2 Ant. Why, Sir, methought the World was turned Topsie-turvy; Integrity was
come in fashion at Court, and Modesty the road to Preferment there. Great
Ministers no longer wracked Attendance, and advanced Men of Worth, without
putting them to the blush to ask. Lawyers forbore taking Fees on both sides,
and Physicians after their Patients were dead. The Clergy were in esteem for
not going from their Text, and Tradesmen were grown Conscientions. Right and
Wrong were no more the Subjects of Dispute, and Men of Sense valued Things more
than Words. Envy and Ostentation were no longer known among Wits and Critics,
nor Controversies among Divines.


Fred. Why, this was a Golden Age.


2 Ant. Ay, Sir, would it were more than a Dream. But to pursue it, methought
all Women were grown Virtuous; Balls and Masquerades were quite laid aside;
Vails and Vizards were out of doors, they were not suffered even at the
Playhouses; City Ladies no longer affected to outshine Quality, nor Court
Lords joynd issue with the City. In a Word, Sir, Honesty, Discretion and good
Breeding went hand in hand together.


Fred. But how will you Interpret this Dream?


2 Ant. Nay, Sir, if once you come to that, I know what 'twill come to --


Fred. What?


2 Ant. Even nothing, Sir; for the rule of interpreting dreams is by their
contraries.


Fred. Therefore you're out, for if you pursue that rule, you have the very
World we live in. But no more; I have a mind to walk out to try if I can meet
Don Bernardo. Make no answer, but follow me.


Exeunt. SCENE the Street.
Enter Don Philip, with two of Don Sebastian 's Servants, with Lanthorns Phil.
Hold, let me see; It must be hereabouts that I was set upon by Ruffians, and
relieved by a strange Gentleman, when I missed my Man Anthony. Pray let us look
about for him: It Is possible he may have fain in the Encounter; if he did, he
shall have a decent Funeral for the Service he has done me. Yet I would not
lose the Rogue neither, if I could help it, because he used to divert me often
with his Country raillery.

The Servants are looking about all this time. You say Don Sebastian is not at
home to night.


1 Ser. No, Seignor, begs you would excuse him till morning.


Phil. With all my heart.

Enter Don Frederick, and his Man. Ha! who are these that come this way? One of
your Lights, that I may view them.


Fred. Good Evening, Seignor.


Phil. Seignor, the like to you.

Fred. passes by, and his Man comes after. Ha! is not that Anthony?


1 Ser. As I live, Anthony risen from the dead.


2 Ant. Yes, Sirs, my name is Anthony, but I was never dead yet, I thank
Heaven: If you will not believe me, my Master, who is gone before, will
confirm, that I have been alive at least these two years.


Phil. How, Slave! have you forsaken me then, and, not only so soon found
another Master, but do you banter me too?


Fred. turns back. Ha! what mean you, Friends? Forsaken whom? Whom has he
banter'd? Pray give him leave to do his duty in following me.


Phil. Hey day! Pray do you give your opinions of him?

To Don Seb 's Servants. Is not this Anthony, that came with me to your
Master's House; and has been with me ever since, till within this half hour?

Both view him.
1 Ser. Why, what a Rogue are you, Anthony, to deny your self to your Master?


2 Ser. It Is either Anthony, or the Devil in his shape, that is certain.


Phil. Now, Sir, are you convinced yet?


Fred. Of your mistake, I am sure you are all bewitched to talk thus. I tell
you, he has lived with me these two years in Italy, and we are newly arrived
here from thence.


Phil. Nay, Sir, since you are so positive, and he is such a Rascal to deny me,
I have done: You shall keep your Man, and much good may he do you; only spare
me one word, which is this, it is very certain, that one and the self-same
Person, could not have lived with me in Spain, and with you in Italy, at the
same time; though one of our Modern Virtuosi has boldly undertaken to prove the
possibility of such a thing. But, Sir, it is as certain, that this very
individual Fellow that you have taken into your Service, has been my Man every
day for these six months, or it must be the Devil in his Person.


Fred. Sir, we are all subject to be deceived; it is likely your Man might bear
some resemblance to him; that you are mistaken in him, I Will wager my Estate;
for, I repeat it to you again, he has lived with me these two years.


2 Ant. Truly, Sir, I should be sorry to offend you, or any Genleman, but, upon
my honest Word, Sir, I never saw your Face before.


Phil. Be damned, Sir. Come, let us go: I Am weary of this illusion.


1 Ser. Ay, Sir, pray let us go, for fear it should be the Devil in good
earnest.


Phil. Speed you, Sir, with your new servant.


Exeunt Don Philip and Don Sebastian 's Men. Fred. What a Whimsical Adventure
have I met with? I wonder what time of the Moon it is? Sure these Men have lost
their Wits, they could never have been so mistaken else. Well, the morning may
discover more of this. I Will take the other walk, and see what I can meet with
next.


Exeunt. The End of the Second Act.
ACT the Third.
SCENE the First.
Eleonora 's Lodgings. Enter Don Bernardo, and Dorila. Ber. I Believe I
surprised you, but I had no other way to escape the rude Watch, neither did I
know whose door it was I so seasonably found open, though at an unseasonable hour.


Dor. My Lady was horribly frightened, when I told her first of it, but when she
was a little recovered, she called me to her Bedside, and whispering, least her
Aunt, whom she lay with, should hear her, charged me to beg your Excuse for her
not seeing you; and that you might be convinced, 'twas nothing but the fear of
her Aunt, if she should attempt to rise, that hindered it: She commanded me to
present you with this Ring, as a Testimony of her Favor.


Ber. Nay then, Mrs. Dorila, you must oblige me so far as to accept of this.

Gives her Money. Pray tell your Lady, I Will ever wear it for her sake, and to
morrow I hope to acknowledge to her in Person, this generous Favor. In the
mean time, pray do you make my Excuse to her for this Accident, and the
disturbance I have unhappily caused her. Good morrow, Mrs. Dorila.


Dor. I shall obey your Commands, Seignor.

Exit Ber. I am glad he is gone, for if Don Sebastian and he should have met
here, there would have been fine Work. Now does this Amorist believe he has
received a signal favor from his Mistress, when in truth she knows nothing of
the matter. The Ring's but a Trifle, and was given her formerly by Don Philip,
and she gave it me: However, as soon as her Lover Sebastian goes, I must
acquaint her with it to prepare her against the next time she sees Bernardo.
Well, let the Men say what they will, our Wits are quickest, that is certain.


Exit. SCENE the Street.
Don Philip 's man Anthony in the Stocks. 1 Ant. Poor Anthony! This Punishment
is certainly a Judgment upon thee for serving so debauched a Master. Well, Don
Philip, you have been met with too: If you are slain by those Ruffians I left
you engaged with, why then my Cowardice has got the advantage of your Courage.
If you have escaped them, I hope the danger will be a warming for you to reform
your Life. O my Legs, my Legs! Now am I just for all the World as if I were
Married. Ha! who comes here?


Don Bernardo passing that way. Ber. It Is yet too early to go home for one of
my wakeful Constitution. I Will even saunter about, and if nothing happens worthy
my humble attention here below, I Will erect my face, and please my self with the
observation of the growing day: Nor is it an unprofitable Amusement to view the
separation of Light and Darkness, to see day and night struggle for Empire. For
by this reflection may one learn the nature of humane passions, that at first
make wild contention with our Reason, which rising by degrees like the Lights
force, disperses all their gloom, and brings forth Day to the Understanding.


1 Ant. This must be some Philosopher, or Star-gazer.


Ber. Ha! One so near me. Who are you, speak?


1 Ant. No Dancing Master -- for I want Legs.


Ber. Sure it is Anthony's voice.

Approaches him. Why, how now, Anthony, how came you here, and in this humility?


1 Ant. Sir, if you will vouchsafe to let me know how you came so well acquainted
with me, I Will soon answer you.


Ber. What, is your Preferment so great, that you have forgot me? I could
hardly have expected to have found the Quality of a Great Man in the Stocks.


1 Ant. You are a very pleasant Gentleman. But, Sir, it is an unseasonable time
for mirth; and take this from me, I never saw you in my Life before.


Ber. Sure he is distracted. Pray, who are you, Friend?


1 Ant. I am a Native of that Country that you scorn, though it has made you
tremble. I have the honor to be a Subject of the Grand Monarque, who, in time
of War, knew how to turn a Skirmish into a great Fight; the reduction of a
Village into that of an invincible Castle, and the loss of a Battle into an
absolute Victory, and sung Te Deum for them all.

All this in a big voice.
Ber. A very Politic Person! And where do you live, my notable Statesman?


1 Ant. In the Stocks.


Ber. Good. But where, before you were thus exalted?


1 Ant. I served a Spaniard.


Ber. All this agrees mighty well. Pray, what is his name?


1 Ant. Person. Il u'en a point.


Ber. Now his fit returns; poor fellow.


1 Ant. Was it not enough I told you that I served a Spaniard. By all my wrongs
'twas too much; 'twas adding to the disgrace I am under. Those of our Country
should Command, not Serve; at least not serve a thing so stupid as a Spaniard:
One that prefers a lazy Luxury before an active Frugality, and would not lose a
formal Ceremony, or part with an Inch of his Grandeur to save his Country from
Ruin.


Ber. This is notorious Truth, tho it come from the mouth of a Madman. Farewell,
Anthony. I Will send you relief in the morning.


Exit. 1 Ant. You Will do more than I expect then.

Who should this Man be? I never saw him in my Life before, and yet he will
needs be acquainted with me. Well, if he should send to release me, according
to his promise, I shall be obliged to him, that is certain. So I were out of
this noose, I should not care if I were to be converted into a Spaniard, or an
Englishman, tho they are as much extremes as Fire and Water: For as one by his
Violence always shoots beyond the Mark, so the other by his Laziness ever falls
short of his Distance.


Scene shuts him in. Enter Don Bernardo. Ber. Ha! I don't like these Fellows.
still as I go on, they follow me. I turned down this Street on purpose to avoid
them, and yet they are here. I Will make what have I can homewards, or try to
lose them by the way.


Eenter three Ruffians. 1 R. It must be Don Philip by the glittering of his
Sword-hilt. I took particular notice of that before.


2. R. So did I. Sure it must be set with Diamonds.


1. R. So much the better still, Boys, it is lucky we have found him again.
Come, we may dispatch him yet.


2. R. Away, away. We lose time.


Exeunt after him. Re-enter Don Bernardo. Ber. Nay, if you follow me still, I
may well suspect your design. So, I am met with for my Curiosity. But hold,
sure I am come round again to Eleonora's. By my surprise I am. I Will strive to
get in here before they come up to me. St. Eleonora, Dorila, Hem.


Eleonora in her Nightgown at the Window. El. softly, Who calls Eleonora at
this early hour?


Ber. It Is I, Bernardo. For Heavens sake, dear Creature, let me in this moment,
for I am pursued by Ruffians. Use no delay or objection, for if you do I am a
Dead Man.


El. Pho, this is one of the Artifices of you young Fellows, to seduce a tender
Maid. You must excuse me, Seignor. Besides, if I had an inclination, my Aunt is
yet stirring, and it concerns my Honor, and Well-being with her not to admit
you.


Ber. Come you are designed to preserve me, for let me go which way I will to
night, still I meet with your House. 'Twill be now the second time my shelter
this night from imminent Danger.


El. Indeed, Sir! you talk strangely. My doors are never opened at late hours
to any one.


Ber. 'Sdeath, Madam, what do you mean? the Ring, the Ring.


El. What of a Ring? I don't know your sign, Sir, It Is plain you are mistaken
in the House, therefore Adieu.

She retires.
Ber. Mistaken in the House, that is impossible. Neither can I be in that
deluding Voice. Is it not cruel to trifle with me thus at such a time? Alas!
she is gone indeed. Discourteous Eleonora! Well, if they do assault me, I must
even defend my self as well as I can.


1. Ruf. There he is like a Rat caught in a Trap. He can retire no further.


2. Ruf. But hold, hold. Let us be sure it is he before we send him to Lucifer's
Dominions. I would not kill a wrong man neither.


1. Ruf. What do you talk of a wrong man? don't you see how his Sword glitters?
it must be he by that.


2. Ruf. Ay, but if I thought he were not the right-man I would not be
concerned.


1. Ruf. Why it is he, what a pox do you ail? I Will swear it upon any Mass Book in
Spain. What do you flinch now? you have forgot the Reward sure.


2. Ruf. The reward, let me see. Mass, and so I had. A hundred Crowns, Mass,
it is enough to slay an Emperor. Come, he dies.


1. Ruf. Come on then, let us move toward him.


2. Ruf. Ay, ay, it must be he: It Is the very Sword he had before.


They come up to him. Ber. What Is your design, Friends, in following me thus?


1. Ruf. Nay, you are mistaken, we are none of your friends, and for our
design, that you may guess at by your own Villanys.


Ber. Villanys? you amaze me. I am a Stranger here, and have done wrong to none.


2. Ruf. We'll soon try if we are mistaken. Know we are resolute, and will
trifle no longer.


Ber. Nay, if you are so bent to murder me, I Will sell my Life as dear as I can.


They fight. The noise of Swords brings Don Frederick that way.

Fred. Ha! three against one, Cowardly Villains! it is Bernardo, as I live.

He joins with Bernardo. Courage, my Friend.


Ber. You were never more welcome.


2. Ant. Peeps in.) Nay, if you are there abouts, I Will wait here for the Issue
of the Engagement.

The Ruffians are beat back.
Ber Dogs, Villains.


1 Ant. Comes in and pursues. Blood-sucking Sons of Whores.


The 2. Ruffian falls, the other two run away. Fred. So, here is one of them
rewarded.


2. Ruf. O spare my Life, and I Will confess all.


Ber. Ha! not dead: then we may learn this Mystery.


2. Ruf. O Seignor, is not your name Don Philip de Monasco?


Ber. No, you are deceived.


2. Ruf. Truly, Sir, I was in some doubt of it before, but my Companions said
they knew you by the glittering of your Sword.


Ber. Ha! Don Philip, by the glittering of my Sword! but suppose it had been
Philip, how were you induced to commit violence upon him.


2. Ruf. We were hired to it by one Donna Eleonora that lives hard by.


Ber. My barbarous Mistress, as I live!

Well, what was it for, come, out with all, or the Watch shall have you.


Ruf. She only told us he had wronged her so heinously, that it was not to be
forgiven, and we were to have a hundred Crowns for our Reward.


Ber. Well, you may go. But, do you hear, if you are wise, This mercy that I
show to you, will be a means to make you change your Life.


Ruf. Seignor, you have so work't upon me with your generosity, that I here
make a solemn protestation to become another Man.


Ber. 'Twill be the better for you.

Exit Ruffian bowing: Come to my Arms, my much loved Frederick. You have
preserved me. who is that with you, Anthony?


2. Ant. What, my service was taken no notice of. I am sure you had not been
alive but for me. My Arm aches plaguely with hacking and hewing your enemies.


Fred. Yes, you make vast havoc always, when you are half a mile from the
Battle.


2. Ant. I have ever your good word. O my Arm!


Ber. Don't your Legs ache too, Anthony?


2. Ant. Nay my Legs are mauled too, that is the truth on it, by thrusting in
among you.


Ber. But I mean by the Fetters I found you in but now.


2. Ant. Fetters, Sir!


Ber. How the Devil came he in the Stocks to night, Frederick?


Fred. In the Stocks, you amaze me.


2. Ant. I in the Stocks! sure the Danger you have been in has distracted you,
Sir.


Ber. Sure you are both in a Conspiracy to banter me.


Fred. Can you be serious, Bernardo? prithee no more of this.


Ber. Nay, by St. Jago I saw him there, fixed to the Stocks like any Vagabond
within this half hour.


Fred. Mere Banter. We are but newly come from the Lodging to seek you.


Ber. Why then I have seen the Devil to night, that is all. 'Twas one so like
him in Voice, Person, and Raillery after his way, that I am amazed to hear you
thus deny 'twas He.


Fred. Sure the Devil does walk to night, for since I came out I have met with
much such another accident, which you shall hear anon. But prithee what else
has thy curiosity discovered?


Ber. This night has been lavish of her Adventures, I Will assure you, For
besides this Mystery of Anthony, I have rescued a man from Villains, who, I
have reason to believe was Don Philip de Monasco, and he has appointed to meet
me this morning near the Great Church. Some other things I have met with too,
but they are secrets.


Fred. Well, Sir, I have a secret for your secret. This night has indeed been
lavish of her Adventures.


Ber. Keep it close, Don Frederick.


Fred. That you may depend on.

Nothing can Wrest it from me, but the obligation of being trusted with yours
first.


Ber. O Devil, are you thereabouts? but this insinuation will never prevail to
extort a secret, that I am enjoined to keep particularly from thee.


Fred. Ha! that I must own, whetts my curiosity. Prithee, Don Bernardo, come,
you shall have a secret for your secret. In good faith, I have one in my
keeping.


Ber. That you are impatient to get rid of, I thank you, Sir. no, no, hold
there. I can be trusted with a secret even among the Women. I have not the
vanity of most young Fellows of the Town, who think the Pleasure of Telling the
principal part of their Happiness with Ladys.


Fred. Then it is with a Lady, it seems.


Ber. Nay that does not directly follow: But, faith, to be ingenuous with you,
there is a Lady in the Case.


Fred. Then there are two Ladys in the case, Boy. And One of such a matchless
form, so Graceful, so surprising Fair, so infinitely Charming, that as she can
have no equal upon Earth, so she is above all Human Description.


Ber. Ha! Where is this Goddess to be seen? will thou not tell me, Frederick?
shall not your dear friend have a sight of her?


Fred. Oh, I knew I should be even with you. A Sight of her! You must excuse
me, Sir. Goddesses are invisible to Mortal Eyes.


Ber. Well, I see when once a Man has indulged the Humor of bantering, it is as
hard for him to leave it, as it is for a Poet to cease Writing, when he has once
begun.


Fred. Or as it is for you to avoid wishing to go to Bed to every Description of
a fine Woman that you hear.


Ber. Well, you have surpised me. But prithee, put me in Mind, as we Walk, and
I Will disclose something to you that was a Secret, but is no longer worthy to be
so.


Fred. I knew he could not hold.

Come on then, let us Walk.


Ber. First give me leave, Frederick, for my Satisfaction, to order your Man
Anthony to place himself near those Lodgings, to bring me Word if any Man comes
out, when it grows Lighter.


Fred. Heyday, what is to do now!


Ber. You shall know as we Walk.


Fred. This is some Jealousy about a Wench, I Will lay my Life.


Ber. She Is a handsome one at least then, and you know Venus is predominant
over me.


Fred. Yes, yes. It Is a Superstition much in fashion with young Fellows. You
will be wiser, Don Bernardo.


Ber. You shall know presently that I have begun at least already, by throwing
off this Woman, near whose Lodgings your Man is to watch. And the Wise say,
That a Good Beginning is half a Cure. But come, let us walk homewards. Anthony,
be sure you place your self somewhere about that Door, that you may discover
who comes out this Morning, and bring an exact account home to us.


2. Ant. I shall do my best, Sir, to satisfy you.


Ber. Now, let us walk.


Fred. Come on, my trusty Adventurer.


Exeunt. ACT. IV.
Scene I. The Street near Eleonora 's.
Don Frederick 's Man. 2. Ant. WAS there ever such a Cormorant at Whoring as
this Don Bernardo? no Place, no Time, nor no Woman almost can be free from his
Persecutions. A Pox of these Night-doings, and what else can be the end of
them! Hark, the Door opens.


Don Sebastian muffled in his Cloak comes out. Eleonora in her Nightgown. El.
Well, and must Nelly part with her dear Don then?


Seb. It Is for your Service I go so soon, my Dear.


2. Ant. For your own rather.


El. You might have stayed with me all day, my Love, for once.


2. Ant. How unreasonable a Creature is Woman!


El. And though I have been nicely careful of my Reputation, yet for your Company
I could venture all things.


2 Ant. A very civil Person!


Seb. Thou know, my Eleonora, there is no Ingratitude on my side. Thou
know the Promises I have made thee, and may rely on the Performance of
them. Nor should I now want Entreaties to stay with thee, but that I have a
Guest at home, whose Goodness, though a Friend, I must not trespass on too far.
Besides, to leave him any l^nger would not only seem like forgetfulness, but
ill manners.


El. I hope the Ruffians too have remembered him before this time.

aside.
Seb. Madam, good morrow. We may be seen, if I stay longer.


El. Well, if you must go, Don Sebastian.

In a soft Voice.
2 Ant. Don Sebastian, good!


El. You are unkind not to understand me.


Seb. What do thou mean, Child?


El. Psha, you cannot tell a Woman's meaning, I warrant you.


2 Ant. What can she drive at?


Seb. You keep me in the Dark, my Dear.


El. I swear I could chide you, you are so dull.

Kisses him.
Seb. My Angel, thou shall have twenty of them presently.

Kisses her.
2 Ant. A Pox on them, how they make my Chops Water!


El. Nay now you take my Breath away.


Seb. Good morrow to my Joy.

Is going.
El. Adieu.

But stay, I had forgot one thing.

When will you come and see poor Nelly again?

In a soft tone.
Seb. You Will send me your Commands.


El. Well, adieu.

Rans in.
Don. Sebastian goes cross the Stage muffled, and meets Anthony passing.


Seb. There goes Anthony Don Philip's Man, but I must not discover my self to
him.


Exit. 2 Ant. Don Sebastian, your Servant. Now will I go home and disclose what
I have seen to Don Bernardo. Let me see, their names are Eleonora and
Sebastian, and the Scene between them at parting will make Bernardo cursedly
jealous, I know. Well, he shall have it all, that is certain; who knows but it
may cure him of his frenzy? Especially when it is improved with some of my
heightning Colors. Et bien, allez Monsieur Antoine.


Exit Anthony. SCENE Eleonora's Lodgings.
Enter Eleonora and Dorila. Dor. Will Not you go and lie down, Madam? you must
needs want rest, for 'twas morning when Don Sebastian came.


El. No, no. I have other things to mind, before I can take any true rest.
We Will Sleep hereafter, Dorila, when we have brought our Designs about.


Dor. How stand affairs with him? does he hold kind?


El. In all appearance he does. The same indearments passed between us as
usual, and when he parted, he gave me more assurances of his Resolution to
marry me. But still to be in expectation only is not to be so easy as I could
wish: I hope Bernardo got off safe, for if the Men I hired to dispatch Philip
should have mistaken him in the Dark for the other, there is a part of my Design
confounded.


Dor. Or grant he be come off, your denying to admit him at such a dangerous
time may provoke him to think no more of you.


El. 'Twas very unlucky that he should call again before you had acquainted me
with the business of the Ring. But since such an Accident has happened, I
confess I don't disapprove of the Stratagem you devised to get him away. Well,
Dorila, you shall be no Loser by the Ring.


Dor. I thank you, Madam. We never want invention at a Shift, you know. But how
will you do to excuse your self to him?


El. I Will go and write to him this minute, and endeavor that way to make him
forget the usage of last Night, and if I can but insinuate my self into his
forgiveness, and find him so much a Lover as I think him, who knows what it may
end in?


Dor. Articles of Matrimony perchance, if you hold the Fort out well.


El. I warrant thee, girl. It Is not all the Artillery of his Arguments, that
can persuade me to another surrender without honorable Terms. I was always
averse to this way of Living, and am now resov'd to take up with the first
likely Husband I can get, with Schastian, or Bernarde, or any Body else, I am
indifferent who it is, so it is a Husband. But come, I Will go and Write.


Exeunt. SCENE Don Frederick's Lodgings. A Bedchamber.
Frederick, and Cornelia in Man's Clothes. Fred. I had not presumed to disturb
you, Madam, but that I heard you were stirring. This Philip, whom you ought to
forger, will not let you Sleep, I find.


Corn. You rally me, Sir, perhaps justly enough. But alas! when it is our Fate,
we can no more help. Loving, than we can Dying.


Fred. Ay, but when a Man abuses Love, and counterfeits a Passion to delude a
Woman, methinks the force of Reason should make her despise him after the
Discovery of the Cheat.


Corn. You argue very well, Sir, and according to reason: But don't you know
that Love and Reason are inconsistent?

But, Sir, is there any News of him in Valencia? your obliging promise makes me
hope you have made some enquiry after him.


Fred. Madam, I have: and can inform you that I hope to find him in this Town.


Corn. Where, Where? O tell me quickly, that I may fly to see him.


Fred. Amazement! That so ungrateful a Wretch should be loved by so beautiful a
Creature, whom he has abused beyond all patience!

Aside.
Corn. Don Frederick, my Friend, for I dare call you so. Where is this Rambler
to be found?


Fred. Madam, you honor me very much, but I had rather be thought to deserve
another Name.


Corn. What other Name? are not you called Don Frederick? Or is Friend too
little for you? I thought it comprehended the utmost Esteem.


Fred. Esteem alone's a trifle, Madam, to that which I would merit. It Is your
Love, fair Excellence, that I aspire to raise. You have so wounded me with your
resistless Beauty, that nothing but the Possession of those Charms that made
the mischief, can effect the Cure.


Corn. Sir, I took you to be more generous than to triumph over a distressed
Maid.


Fred. By all that is sacred I am sincere. Don Philip may abuse you, but not
Frederick. I have a Heart unpracticed in Deceit: A Heart that never was
tortured with the pangs of Love, till now.


Corn. I do confess I thought you very honest.


Fred. I thank my Stars I can boast of it. O do not refuse so passionate, and
yet so true a Lover.


Corn. I do entreat you, Sir, forbear. You know I am engaged to one I love.


Fred. But to one you ought to loath. A Man that has scorned and abused you.


Corn. And yet I love him, Frederick.


Fred. The more's the Pity. What can you propose by following such a
treacherous Fellow?


Corn. To reclaim him, or to be revenged.


Fred. The first you will find impracticable. It Is like besieging a very strong
Town with a small Force. You will but expose your self to Contempt and Ruin.


Corn. Why then I Will be revenged.


Fred. That you may by indulging my Suit. Come, let it not be said that the
heavenly Cornelia was inexorable. Give me but Hopes, and you set me in the way
to Paradise.


Corn. Revenge is so sweet, that upon Condition you let me see Philip, and he
denies to own me for his Wife, I could almost be persuaded to believe you.


Fred. I accept the Condition with as much Transport of Bliss, as e're
Condemned Criminal received his pardon. Now will I go and search my Doom. Life
or Death depends on a few hours. But, Madam, I must entreat you to consent that
I may acquaint your Brother with your Circumstance, that we may be the Stronger
for the Execution of our Design.


Corn. I resign my self to your Conduct.


Fred. I Will wait on you again, when I have prepared Don Bernardo.


Exit. SCENE Changes to another Room.
Enter Don Bernardo. Ber. (Looking upon a Ring.) If I can trust my Eyes, the
more I look the more I am amazed. This very Ring, or my Sight is not my own, I
gave my Sister Cornelia, when I departed last from Alcamara. That it should be
found in Valencia gives me Wonder, but that it should be sent me from Donna
Eleonora pats me into Confusion. Well, things have been strangely carried to
night in Valencia.


Enter Servant. Ser. Seignor, a Young Gentleman without desires to be admitted.


Ber. Admit him. This Ring will not out of my Head. When I consider the Accident
by which I obtained it, and the succeeding one, wherein the same Eleonora that
sent it, seemed to know nothing of the matter, I must own I cannot but fancy
it is all a Dream.


Enter Donna Olivia in Man's Clothes. Ol. Am I not bold, Sir, to venture within
the Roof where an angry Brother might be found, that would kill me if he knew
me.


Ber. You are both safe and welcome here.

Runs to the Door and shuts it fast. I have fastened the Door, lest Don
Frederick should chance to fall in.


Ol. Well, Sir, have you heard any thing of Don Philip, since I saw you?


Ber. O, I find I am obliged to your Impatience to hear of Him for this Visit.


Ol. Good Sir, Torture me not with Supence: If you have not, I am come to claim
your Promise to assist me in searching after him.


Ber. Sure there is Enchantment in Love, that it can make People thus eager to
pursue their Ruin!


Ol. Alas! your Reflections are now out of Season. I beseech you answer me to
the purpose.


Ber. I am deceived, or I saved his Life last Night, when he was encountered by
Ruffians.


Ol. A thousand Blessings attend you for it. But are you sure 'twas he.


Ber. By several Circumstances I am almost assured. But this Morning at Ten I
am to meet the Man I rescued. He would not give me his Name, but desired me to
exchange Swords with him, that he might know me again by that. Here Is that I
had of him.


Ol. (Viewing it.) O, it is he. It Is Don Philip. It Is the very Sword I have seen
him wear. I know it from a thousand.


Ber. Well, since it is so, if you please, we'll go together to the Great
Church, where I have appointed to meet him.


Ol. With all my Heart. O lucky Discovery!


Ber. But one thing will be necessary first. It Is fit Don Frederick should be
acquainted with your affairs.


Ol. Be it as you please. I trust to you.


Ber. In the mean time pray use my Apartment. You Will see no Body to disturb you.


Exit Bernardo. Olivia alone. Ol. Thanks, Fortune, that this Dear, false Man is
found.
Oh, how I long to chide him for his Absence!
Sure when he sees me thus disguised, thus bold
In my pursuit of him, he will recant
His Sex's Levity, and fix his Soul
On me, on virtuous Love, and mutual Vows.

2 Anthony comes in, and would go through to another Room. Ha! either my Eyes
deceive me, or there is his Servant Anthony. Hold, Friend, be not in such have.
Where Is thy Master?

2 Ant. Seignor, I want to find him.

Cornelia comes in behind from another Room.
Ol. What, did you expect to find him in this House.


2 Ant. It Is most likely to find him at home, for He Is no Gadder ab^^ad. I Will
assure you.


Ol. What, does Don Philip then lie in this House?


2 ^nt. No, Sir, who said he did?


Ol. Why, did not thou this moment?


2 Ant. Not I, by St. Jago.


Ol. Prithee leave off thy old fooling.


2 Ant. It seems you know me then.


Ol. Alas! but too well.


2 Ant. Truly, Sir, I have not the good Fortune to remember you.


Ol. That may very well be. But prithee tell me, how long has Don Philip lodg*d
here?


2 Ant. Why, Sir, he does not lodge here; nor ever did, that I know of; and
more than that, Sir, I know no such Person. Now, Sir* I must beg your leave to
go through to that Apartment, to see if my Master be there, that I may
discharge my Errand.

Ant. goes in.
Ol. What*s the meaning of this?


Corn. You seem, Sir, to have been moved to some Surprise about that Fellow.
Pray, Who do you take him for?


Ol. Have I not Reason, Sir, if I Am alive it is he.


Corn. Pray, who?


Ol. Why Don Philip de Monas^o's Man.


Corn. Do you know that Don Philip, Sir?


Ol. I have some Cause, Sir.


Corn. Then you know a Villain.


Ol. You shock me, Sir; for he is my Friend, and I must not hear him wronged.


Corn. How long has he been your Friend?


Ol. A great while. He is my Bosom-Friend.


Corn. Those Bosom-Friends prove often our worst Foes.


Ol. But I have tried him.


Corn. He may deeeive you still. If you were a Woman, he would certainly.


Ol. Ha! Sure he does not know me.

[aside.] Why do you think so?


Corn. Because he is a Man.


Ol. Your Satyr's too extensive. We are not all false.


Corn. I fear all.


Ol. You have accused your self.


Corn. No, I accused the Men.


Ol. Are not you one?


Corn. Yes, yes, Sir; but I meant such Men as Don Philip. Alas! I had like to
have discovered my self.

aside. Sir, I beg you would excuse me. I am a little thoughtful, and know not
what I say. If you lodge here, I shall be glad of your Acquaintance.


Ol. I do but visit here, Sir. But if you have any Justice to demand of Philip,
I Will let him know it.


Corn. The World shall know it soon. This Morning I expect my self to see him.


Ol. Pray how long has he he been in Valencia?


Corn. That I know not; but that he is here, I have had some Information. Good
morrow, Sir.

Goes in.
Ol. Who can this be? He seems to have some Resentment against Don Philip,
therefore it must be my Care to prevent its bursting out into a Flame. I Will
enquire about him.

Strange Power of Love, that makes us court even Pain,
To fly true Passion, and pursue Disdain.
Scene shuts her in.
Another Room.
Enter Don Frederick with a Letter. Fred. For Don Bernardio. It Is a Woman's
Hand by the over-spelling.


Enter Don Bernardo. Sure no Jesuit ever confessed more Women, than thou have
brought to the Altar of Venus. See here

Gives him the Letter. Ber. opens and reads it. Oh it is from Eleonora. She
would excuse her Behavior to me last-Night. But I despise her now as much as
e're I loved her. I hope her Barbarity will make me forget the whole Sex.


Fred. A wholesome Resolution, if you could keep it. I suppose I may read the
Letter.


Ber. Yes, and visit the Lady if you please.


Fred. Nay then you are indifferent indeed.

Reads. I Am sorry my Circumstances with my Aunt obliged me to use you as I did
last Night, but my Well-being so depends upon her Opinion of me, that I am
sometimes forced to do things against my inclination. I hope this will find you
safe, and enjoying the same good Humor, that has so often engaged my Thoughts
in your behalf. Assure your self I am impatient to hear of your Welfare, and
should not be displeased to see you come in the Afternoon, not so much to give
me a Relation of the Affair of the Ring, as to convince me that you are well,
and inclined to forgive the seeming fault of

Eleonora.



Fred. A Jilt! with what a face she carrys it on! Well, you will Visit her in the
Afternoon, I suppose.


Ber. No, Frederick, but you shall in my Room, if you think good. For my part,
her usage last night has so provoked me, that I have not so much as
Indifference left for her. Besides, this fawning trick of a Letter persuades me
that she is a Jilt.


Fred. I am glad you are of my mind. That she is so, I Will venture the reversion
of my Father's Estate. What, don't I know their subtle, coy, dissembling, fond,
alluring, false Designs? Proteus himself had fewer Shapes, than one of these
jilting Whores. They are like Aristotle's first matter, capable of any Form.


Ber. Let her be what she will, I Will send her an answer, but it shall be an
honester Letter: For I Will tell her in plain Terms it is my Inclination to forget
her.


2 Anthony comes in. But hold, here is Anthony returned, whom we left upon the
Watch.

Fred. Well, Sir, what has your Curiosity discovered?


2 Ant. No miracle, Seignor, for I have seen a Fornicator come out of a Whore's
Lodgings.


Fred. Have a care whom you asperse, Sir.


2 Ant. I hope I may trust my sight; but if that alone will not do, I have another
sense to back it. I heard as well as saw.


Fred. Well, what was it you heard?


2 Ant. I heard one Eleonora take her leave of one Sebastian.


Ber. Sebastian! Are you sure 'twas such a Name?


2 Ant. I think I am not deaf. And when he was going, she came out with him,
and there was such Ceremony at parting, such Unwillingness to let him go, so
many soft things, such Kissing and such Dying on her side, and such a cold
Civility and Backwardness to understand her on his, that for my part --


Ber. You wondered he could leave the Banquet so soon, and wished your self in
his Place.


2 Ant. What, when the Soup was palled, and had lost its Gusto. No, I thank you.


Ber. Why could not you have had prtience till it had been cooked up again?


2 Ant. It Is somewhat a la Francoise indeed. But truly I have more Nicety. It Is
not a mon gout.


Fred. Enough, enough; leave us.

[ Exit Ant.] What, think you now, my Amorist?


Ber. That Women are no more to be believed than Courtiers. They differ only in
this, Women deceive us by Nature, Courtiers by Art.


Fred. Nay, this imposition does not want Art, I Will assure you.


Ber. Ay, but I mean Women*s Inclinations to deceive us are born with them Are
they not continually forging Plots to make some Traffic or other of us? Sure
they are our evil Genius's, for there is scarce a false Path in Life that we
are not led into by their foolish Conduct. And yet we follow on, as if they
were the Leading-strings of Fate, and we were doomed in this World to the
punishment of being miguised by the weaker Sex.


Fred. Nay, now you are unreasonably severe, but it is too much an Extremity to
last long. This is only the hot Fit of the Ague.


Ber. But you know the Cold one succeeds it, and that is still a greater Mark
of Contempt.


Fred. It Is granted. But for my part, I cannot commend Extremes in any thing.
And yet I am grown since last Night, will thou believe it, my Friend? A most
passionate Lover.


Ber. Prithee know thy self a little better.


Fred. All other knowledge but that of the unparalleled Cornelia, is like the
Comparison of the Stars with the Sun.


Ber. You amaze me, what Cornelia. do you mean!


Fred. Don Bernardo, prepare your self for something that will furprize you.


Ber. Speak out. I am ready.


Fred. Should you not wonder to find your Sister in this Place?


Ber. Very much, Sir. Pray, what mean you?


Fred. Disguised too in Man's Clothes, I saw her.


Ber. Are you distracted, Frederick?


Fred. No, Don Bernardo, unless it be with Joy. I have hopes, my Friend if Don
Philip prove but false.


Ber. Don Philip too! What is all this?


Fred. I knew you would be surpised. But pray compose your self, and I Will
disclose a Secret, which it is convenient you should know.


Ber. Speak it aloud, if it concern my Honor.


Fred. It does indeed. And to let you know it in a Word, Don Philip, whom you
so lately rescued, once made pretensions to your Sister, but they were such as
Virtue could not hear, and yet she loved him.


Ber. That is, she had a Mind to be undone, but a little of her Sex's Pride
saved her.


Fred. You shall hear. He soon perceived her seeming Weakness, and laid his
Batteries against that part, but bravely she repulsed him. In short they both
engaged again, till having made Trial of each others Force, they drew off and
parred. Some Articles, it seems, had been agreed to on both sides, but he
refusing to perform his part your Sister grew incensed, and in disguise pursued
him to this Place.


Ber. You would imply they were contracted, and after he refused to marry her,
but sought only to abuse her.


Fred. You have it. Yet she loves him.


Ber. Base Villain! but you shall do her Justice, you shall, or by Heaven I Will
root out your perfidious Tongue. Now Ring, your Mystery is out. An unlick'd
Brute, to throw away a Lady's Favor, which any one else would have esteemed
invaluable.

Aside. But hold. Don Frederick, you gave me Caution to be prep ar'd to hear
what has indeed astonished me.


Fred. I believe so.


Ber. Now do you guard your self against a worse Event


Fred. Ha! speak out.


Ber. Are you prepared against surprise?


Fred. Speak. I defy surprise.


Ber. Why then the same perfidious Dog has whor'd thy Sister, and forsaken her.


Fred. Have a care, I charge thee. My Sister, and a Whore by the same Don
Philip. Sure you want sleep, Bernardo.


Ber. I wonder not at your Amazement, but so it is.


Fred. It Is a rank Falsehood. Bernardo, you have suggested this to abuse me. Now
by the untainted Honor of our House, Olivia must be honest.

Lays hold of his Sword.
Ber. The Contradiction was unmannerly. But Thou art Angry, and I consider
Rashness is the Birth of Anger, or by the King of Spain I would not bear it.


Fred. I do confess my Fault, and ask your Pardon. But, prithee tell me, What
do thou mean about Olivia?


Ber. That I have met with her to Night in Valencia, and have heard her Story,
which acquainted me with his villainous Desertion after he had obtained her.


Fred. If this be so, by all that is Great and Powerful, this Day's his Last, if
he refuse to Wed her.


Ber. Nay there I am for you. But hold, let me see! How shall I do Justice then
for Cornelia?


Fred. It Is true; Cornelia must be righted, though Olivia suffer.


Ber. Not so neither. Let Justice have its Course. It seems, you know her Story.


Fred. I do, which you shall have anon.


Ber. Which done, we'll refer all to Philip at the time of Appointment this
Morning; and if he refuse to marry Her whom it shall appear he has most
wronged, he must have speedy Punishment.


Fred. Agreed; and though I love your Sister most passionately, if she appears
most wronged, I Will force him to receive her for his Wife, or Die in the Attempt.


Ber. It Is generously resolved. Though for your sake I wish it on Olivia's side,
that we may be more than Friends, Brothers.


Fred. If Providence so orders it, I shall be supreamly blessed on Earth. Such
a Wife and such a Brother would set me above a Throne.


Ber. We must leave all to Fate. But come, I Will go write to this barbarous
Eleonora, and then for our meeting with Don Philip at the Church.


Fred. With all my Heart.

Now, Love, if for a God thou would be known,
And art determined to support thy Throne:
Display thy Power, and vindicate thy Fame,
Reward true Love, Revenge thy injured Name.

Exeunt. ACT V.
Scene I. The Street.
Enter Don Sebastian and Don Philip with a Servant. Phil. ARe you sure you saw
him so early, and alone?


Seb. 'Twas he, or my Eyes deceived me much. But I am amazed to hear how you
lost him; sure he is distracted.


Phil. Hang him, to deny me to my Face, and to follow another Master without
any cause of Disgust -- I know not what to think.


Seb. It Is a Riddle indeed beyond my Ability to solve.


Phil. And beneath your Care. It Is but a Fool lost.


Seb. I wonder who 'twas came to your assistance last Night.


Phil. 'Twas then too dark to distinguish him, but I promised to meet him at
Ten this Morning near the Great Church. Let me see.

[Looks upon his Watch.] It Is within half an hour on it.


Seb. I believe it may.

Dorila crosses the Stage in have, and drops a Letter. Ha! What Is that she has
dropped?

[Runs and takes it up.] Methought 'twas Dorila, that went into her Mistress's.
For Donna Eleonora. Unsealed too, then 'twill be no ill Manners to open it.

[Opens it.] Now who art thou from? Bernardo. It Is from a Man it seems. Let me
see.

Walks about and Reads to himself.
Phil. Nay, nay, you will let me share in the Accident, I hope.


Seb. I beg you would excuse me. It happens to be a Secret wherein I am more
than ordinarily concerned.


Phil. Then I am no longer curious.

Walks from him. Sebastian Reads as to himself in a low Voice. WHat
Satisfaction soever you could take in not sheltering me last Night from almost
inevitable Destruction: Yet know, Cruel. Woman, that I have escaped, nay doubly
escaped both from the Villains you your self employed for Murder, and from the
Sanres of a Designing and perfidrous Jili. Neither am I ignorant who it was
that hindered my admittance; and to give you a just Correction for your
Treachery, I shall find a Way to let Don Sebastian know how false you are to
him. Alas! Your invitations have now lost their Force. I despise you and your
Letters. Your trifling Present too, which is not worth returning. And to finish
your mortification, know, that the Inclinations I had for you are turned into
Revenge,

Bernardo.



Seb. Now I have a very fair occasion to get rid of an old Mistress, that I
have long suspected to play me false. This Letter is convincing* The Obligation
I was under of my promise to marry her, joined with the Charms I still found in
her, kept me to my usual Complaisance, and Heaven knows how far two such
powerful Advocates as Honor and Beauty might have prevailed but for this
fortunate Accident. Marry her! Forbid it all ye Powers. Now by St. Jago, I Would
sooner Wed Infection. Hateful Eleonora! I Will go to her this Moment, and declare
my Resolution

[ All this in a low Voice to avoid being heard by Philip.] My dear Friend, I
beg your Excuse. I have found somewhat of much Import to me, that requires my
immediate absence for a few Moments. I Will meet you near the Church forthwith;
do you wait upon Don Philip.


Exit Seb. Phil. Some Amor of his at bottom, I Will lay my Life. This Love is as
infectious as the Plague, and diffuses it self as hastily, but is not quite so
mortal, Heaven be praised. Whatever Darts and Flames some People find in it, I
thank my Stars I am yet Heart-whole Languishing and Dying for a Woman's Toy is
such a Jest with all my Heatt. Sir, pray sing the Song I so much admire.

SONG.
1.
BEauty is not what I pray,
I ask no shining Graces;
Celia has another way,
Without the Tricks of Faces.
So our Humors still agree,
Kind Heaven, it is enough for me.
2.
Mere Fruition is a Joy
But of a Moment's lasting:
Fruit, that does so quickly Cloy,
It surfeits but with Tasting.
No true Bliss in Love we find,
Unless two Bodies share one Mind.
Here Is something for your Trouble. Now toward the Church.


Exeunt. Eleonora's Lodgings. Don Sebastian and Dorila. Seb. Dorila, where is
your Mistress?


Dor. She Is in her Chamber, Seignor.


Seb. Let her know I am here.


Dor. I shall, Sir, and she will be o'erjoy'd to see you here again so soon.

I don't like this sudden return though. I wish it does not presage some
extraordinary event.


Exit. Seb. Her Joy will be soon abated, when she sees me depart again so soon,
at least upon such an Occasion. Now must I resolve to be Flint, or she with her
damned, alluring, female Wiles will melt me to forgiveness. But -- I have
thought on a Way to countermine her.


Enter Eleonora and Dorila. El. O my Dear Sebastian.

Running to embrace him. This is unexpectedly kind to return so soon. Believe
me, I am so full of Joy, I want Words to express it.


Seb. Avaunt, thou fawning Strumpet. Thou Spirit of Delusion. See here this
Letter. Have I not fostered thee in my Bosom most tenderly, and Thou, like an
ungrateful Viper, have set thy Teeth against thy Preserver?


El. You are soon offended, Seignor, at nothing. It Is true, I did receive this
Letter. But pray, Sir, how am I to blame if Men will be so impertinent as to
write to me. Besides, you see he confesses that I used him ill.


Seb. Yes, you have your Arts to show your seeming Frowns sometimes, to provoke
Men to study how to reconcile you. This is your Sex's Method to draw us on to
our Ruin. Go, you are perfidious, and remember 'twas your own inconstancy not
mine, that caused our Separation.


El. Shall it then be said that Don Sebastian did but seem to be a Man of
Honor, and good Nature, not easily possessed with Fancies, slow of Belief, a
Lover of his Friend, soon provoked, but soon returning to himself? you see,
this is the trick of a malicious Fellow to ruin me. For that is the
Consequence, when my Sebastian thinks me false.

Crying.
Seb. So. This I expected.

Madam, You need not be so much concerned. The World is wide enough, and Fools
are plenty.

Is going.
El. What, will you go without hearing me? The vilest Criminal is allowed his
Defense. I am not guilty, do but hear me.


Seb. No, that is playing at hazard. Why should I attempt to throw again, when I
have nicked you already? Farewell.


El. and Dorila hold him.] Do but hear us, let us both entreat you.


Seb. You are both as false as Hell.

Struggling gets away. So. Farewell. I*ll never fee you more.


Exit. Seb. El (walks about in a passionate manner) Devil, you are the cause of
all this. Now may I go and hang my self.


Dor. I am as much concerned, Madam, as it is possible. You cannot believe I
dropped the Letter on purpose.


El. How do I know but you did! I believe you and Bernardo are in a Conspiracy
to undo me.


Dor. You reward me liberally for all my Services. I thought I had given you
sufficient Proofs of my Fidelity.


El. How could thou drop that Letter so unhappily? Or what had you to do to
meddle with it?


Dor. I thought I had taken more than ordinary Care of it; for I put it into my
Bosom when I went to make Enquiry after the Ruffians, and how I dropped it by the
way, or where, I cannot imagine.


El. A greater Misfortune sure could not have happened to me: For now my
Expectations are all crossed, my springing Hopes are blasted in the Bud, and
naught remains but withered Disappointment, and a fruitless Wast of Despair.


Dor. Have Patience, Madam, they have but served you like Men, which may be a
Warning to you hereafter not to trust any of the Sex.


El. Trusted! No; they shall be despised by me for ever. Certainly there is not
in the Creation so vile a Monster as Man, and yet we Women are such Fools to
liken him to an Angel.


Der. That Is before we know him. As soon as Curiosity has brought us acquainted
with him, we see the Devil lurking under that Angel's Form.


El. O that I could recover my stolen Honor, and those Golden days of innocence
which I enjoyed, but knew not how to prize, before I listened to false Man.
Curse upon the Sex, they are all dissembling Villains, Curse on my Ears for
harkening to their Arguments, and doubly cursed be my Credulity for trusting
them beyond the bounds of Virtue.

Walks about in a Rage.
Dor. Restrain your passion, Madam.


El. Yes, I will, you shall see I will.

Trust them no more, forget them, there lies your happiness. Ha! But how forget
them to be happy. I have it. I thank you, friendly Powers, that have so soon
spread forth your Providence. I Will turn Nun, and spend the remainder of my Days
in penitence for my past Offenses.


Dor. Are you in your Wits? good Venus, how you talk?


El. Somewhat disagreeably to your Taste, it seems. But, know, I am determined,
and most fortunately this very Day is the great Festival of St. Jago, a proper
Day to enter into my year of Probation.


Dor. Why then you are another Magdalen. But truly if I might advise you, you
are now in the Flower of your Age, and may propose to spend many a happy Year
in the enjoyment of the World: Why should you seek Death, when Life is yet so
well worth preserving?


El. Thou art deceived in Life. What is it but a Succession of Troubles? A mere
Quotidian Ague, which by the constant supply of Hopes and Fears, knows little
intermission as long as Nature lasts.


Dor. Use your Pleasure, Madam. I thank my Stars, I am not yet weary of the
World.


El. However, let us retire together, that I may take my last leave of you,
when I am prepared for my Heavenly Journey.


Dor. I Will wait on you, Madam, to the Threshold of Death, but you must excuse
me from going over it.


El. I wish your happiness, but cannot compel it.


Exeunt. SCENE the Street, near the great Church.
Enter Constable and Watch, with 1 Anthony; Don Philip meets them. 1 Wat: Come,
this way with him. This way leads to Don Sebastian's


Con, Hold, Friends, don't be so very hasty, do you see. Pray, let us consider a
little, dy'e mind me, what we shall say to the Magistrate.


2 Wat. Why, that is very true, Neighbor. We ought to lay our story well, do you
see me?


Phil. My Man Anthony, as I live! How the Devil came he among that fry of
Leaches? But it is what he deserves: Yet I Will ask them, to amuse my self, till
Don Sebastian's return.


Con. Enough, enough; come away with him.


Phil. Hold, Gentlemen. Pray, whither are you conducting that Fellow?


Con. But that you promise for a Person of Note, we should not have time to
answer any Man's questions: We are carrying him to Don Sebastian's to be
committed for a House-breaker.


1 Ant. O Sir, I Am glad I have found you again. I have been baited, Sir, no
Tiger was ever so baited, as I have been by these Spanish Dogs.


Enter Don Sebastian. Phil. You are come in good time, Seignior, to do a piece
of justice


Seb. What Is the matter, Mr. Constable?


Con. Matter, Seignior? An please your Worship, we have brought a Stranger
here, that we found hid to Night in a Cellar Window, just ready to set the City
a Fire about our Ears, I warrant him.


Seb. Is not this your Man, Don Philip?


Phil. If I have Eyes it is he, pray examine him.


Seb. How now, Anthony? How come you under the guard of the Constable and the
Watch?


1 Am. Your Worship knows as well as I. One thing I know, which is, that I have
been abused most disgracefully.


Phil. It Is no more than you deserve, ungrateful Villain! Did you not forsake
me last Night when I was assaulted in the Street, and did I not meet you
afterward following another Master? And more than that, when I claimed you for
my Servant, did you not utterly disown that you knew me, or had ever seen me
before.


1 Ant. Sure, this is but a Dream, Sir: For this Lifeguard of mine here, (Pox
choke them) can answer to my disgrace, that I have sat in the Stocks all Night.


Con. That he has indeed, I Will witness it, for he was put in by my order.


Phil. Hey-day! Sure I Dream still, or I Will be sworn I met him Early to Day.


1 Wat. He was safe locked down from one a Clock till within this half hour,
I Will pass my Word.


Seb. Nay now I can disprove you; for if I have Eyes, I saw him pass by me very
early to Day.


Con. An'please your Worship, what the Watchman said must needs be true, for he
stood near him all the time till he was released


Seb. Then will I be Sacrificed: Go, you are all a pack of Rascals, Release
him, I Will answer for him.


Exeunt Con. and Wat. hastily. Enter Don Bernardo and Don Frederick with
Cornelia and Olivia in Men's Clothes. Ber. There Is Don Sebastian, and he with
him should be Don Philip.


Fred. Bernardo, 'twere fit they withdraw a while, till we have prepared him
for the Interview.


Ber. By all means. Ladies, will you oblige us by retiring a step or two, till
we have had some conference with those Gentlemen?


Corn. Another Woman disguised?


Both. We will.


Exeunt Ladies. Bern. and Fred. walk by them and view them. Phil, Sir, by that
Sword you wear, I should be much your Debtor, sure you releiv'd me last Night,
when I was assaulted by Villains.


Ber. I did indeed attempt a Gentleman's relief last Night, who exchanged
Swords with me, and it is very likely you are he.


Phil. The same. And believe, Sir, that as I am bound to you for my
preservation, so shall I be always ready to serve you with my Life.


Ber. Serve your self first, Don Philip, and be honest.


Phil. Ha! what means this odd, familiar Counsel?


Ber. Have you not abused Cornelia, my Sister? Now if thou art a Man, speak
truth.


Fred. Olivia's wronged too, Philip, think of that, and know her Brother's here
to do her justice.


Phil. You have somewhat surpised me, Gentlemen, with your accusations.


Fred. Do you deny the facts?


Phil. What if I do?


Fred. Then we must try the cause this way, Draw,


Phil. You may be sure of that.

all Draw.
Seb. Hold, Gentlemen, Don Philip is my Friend, and I must take his part.


Ber. With all my Heart. We are two and two.


Fred. Come on thou Poison to our Families


Seb. Nay then at you, Sir.


They tilt Phil. disarms Fred. and Bern. Sebastian. Phil. Now, Sir, I hope
You're satisfied.

Giving Fred. his Sword.
Ber. But not I, Sir, I have the same advantage over your Friend, and you have
vvrong'd my Sister.


Phil. Take Your satisfaction too, whilst my Sword holds, it shall deny none
that ask it.

They tilt. Bern. is disarmed.
Ber. Your fortune is Superior, whatever your Justice be.


Phil. You owe me both your Lives. And now what I have to beg of you is, that
you would stifle your Resentments: And if you will favor me with your company's
to Don Sebastian's, I here give you my Honor to do you Justice too, as far as
in me lies before we part.


Fred. Nay now you are truly brave.

as they are going
Enter 2 Anthony. Phil. Ha! What art thou, that in the very shape of Anthony,
come hither to perplex us!


2 Ant Staring] Why I think my Name is Anthony, by the singular favor of
chance both Frenchman and Spaniard, that is to say, a mixture of all the
Contrarieties in Nature.


The company staring first at one, then at the other. Seb. His very Voice,
Person, and Raillery.


Fred. The Seal and the Print are not more perfectly alike.


2 Ant. Staring at the other It Is something mavelous, I must own: if this
should prove my own Apparition now, which they say People often see a little
before their Death, how many Sins have thou to answer for, pauvre Antoine! What
art thou that here usurp'st my Name and Shape?


1 Ant. Trembling O Gentlemen. shield me, shield me from this Fiend, -- it is
certainly -- the Devil, he could never be so like me else.


Ber. This is surprising. From hence came the mistakes of last Night, Don
Frederick.


Phil. And ours, Don Sebastian.


2 Ant. If 'twere not for one cursed Objection, that is not to be got over
without a Miracle, I could-soon resolve this Riddle.


Fred. Try what you can do.


2. Ant. It Is impossible Seignior, for the Man I should take him for was
drowned many Years ago.


Fred. Examine him however.


2 Ant. Pray, Monsieur Antoine, are you a native of Caen in Normandy?


1 Ant. Yes, -- indeed, Seignior Devil.


2 Ant. The Devil you are. Was not Monsieur your Father called Pierre le
Menetrier, that is to be understood, Peter the Fiddler?


1 Ant. He was indeed Sir.


2 Ant. Ha! Sure I Dream.

[In a surprize] What will this come to? Did not you follow his Trade after his
Death?


1 Ant. I commenced Joueur de Violon that Year the great Turn in England
happened in 88.


2 Ant. Impossible! Thou art some Magician, and art resolved to deceive me into
madness. -- One thing more. We^^ not you pressed abord Monsieur Tourville with
a Twin-Brother, that was so perfectly your likeness, that you were the
Amazement of all that saw you?


1 Ant. I was, and should have taken you for him but that he was blown up in
one of those Twenty Ships that were Burnt by the English, after the Sea Fight
between the French and the English Fleets.


2 Ant. Then art thou my Brother, Anthony? How I was preserved and where, after
my misfortune you shall know another time.


1. Ant. My Brother restored from the Dead! This is such excess of joy to me.
Come to my Arms, I will embrace thee, as I would a Woman.


Ber. So let them embrace. Now the Mystery is over, and you have your Mares
again.


Seb. Though they are Brothers, so exact a likeness was surely never seen.


Fred. It Is very strange. But come, let us walk. Don Bernardo; we forget our
Friends hard by.


Ber. With Don Philip's and this Gentleman's leave well' call for them, and
take them with us.


Phil. With all our Hearts.


Seb. With all our Hearts.


Seb. Your Friends too are welcome, Gentlemen, to such poor entertainment as my
House can afford.


Fred. You are very obliging.


Exeunt. SCENE Shifts.
Olivia and Cornelia, Ol. I scorn to deny my self upon such an occasion. I own
I am a Woman, and Married to Don Philip before Heaven, though he has left me: Yet
will I pursue him, till I have either found the faithless wanderer, or spent my
Days in the vain Search.


Corn. You will, you say. Alas! I pity thee, for Thy search will be vain
indeed. Know, fond Woman, that he is mine by legal contract, not to be revoked
but by mutal consent: So much he is mine, that I Will not spare him a look to
throw away upon thee.


Ol. Impotent Avarice! I pity thee, undone as thou art, as well as deserted;
for he is mine by yet a stronger tie than any contract


Corn. It Is false: He never was, nor shall be. If thou do offer any farther
claim, thy Life's in danger.


Ol. I Laugh at thy rage, unthinking Creature, and to let you see how much I
value Philip, I here renounce the weakness of my Sex, and dare you to the
combat for his Love.


Corn. Now by great Hymen's Torch, 'twas nobly offered, and though a Rival spoke
it, I applaud it.

Both draw Come on. Now for Don Philip.


Oli. She who survives is happy.

Fight awkerdly.
Don. Philip, Frederick, Sebastian, and Bernardo come in, followed by the
Anthony's Fred. Ha! at Wars? What new adventure's this? We left you but now
unaccquainted with each other, as we thought.

parts them.
Ol. And are returned too soon. You have hindered the effect of a noble
contention. Don Philip there! Then am I satisfied, for sure he will do me justice.

Runs to him.
Corn. Ha! Do I see my Love again? But hold, fond Heart, keep up thy usual
Pride, least the false wretch insult and scorn thy weakness.


Phil. Sir, I am yet a stranger to you: How can I do you justice?


Ol. It Is but acknowledging Olivia for your Wife.


Phil. [In amazement] Olivia her self. This is beyond my hopes. I will
acknowledge thee, thou Miracle of Love.


Corn. Villain, hold. See Cornelia too, disguised as she is. See your
contracted Wife.


Phil. Ha!


Corn. What, does he demur upon it?

Draws. Die then, ungrateful wretch.


Ol. [Draws] Stop thy mad Hand, or sheath thy Blade within this Breast, so it
may save Don Philip.

Corn. is held
Phil. [to Ol.] My dear Olivia, I Blush to see this kindness from thee.

[to Corn.] Madam, you might have been less outrageous. I must own I have been
to blame, but am now resolved --


Corn. To marry Olivia, I suppose.


Phil. I was a going to say Madam --


Corn. That thou art perjured. Enough, thou have my consent to be so. Be thy
Perjury thy Punishment: For my part I freely discharge thee.


Phil. I am obliged to your Passion then, for it has made you consent to clear
me of such an imputation. You have revoked your contract, and so do I before
these witnesses. Donna Olivia, here is my Hand, take it, and my Heart along
with it, I doubt not but this Action will restore me to my true happiness.
Gentlemen, I hope you own my justice.


Ber. I cannot deny your obligation here to be superior.


Oli. This fortunate Event transports me beyond expression.


Fred. May I presume, Madam, to remind you of your late conditions?


Corn. Are you not a Man, Sir?


Fred. I hope so, Madam.


Corn. How then are you to be trusted? The only one I ever yet confided in has
deceived me. But [sighing] you have my promise, even dispose of me as you will


Fred. Madam, you have made me entirely happy. You have not only blessed me
with your self, but made a worthy Friend my Brother.


Ber. But hold, one thing more. Cornelia, do you know this Ring?


Corn. Yes, sure. 'Twas your gift, which I could have parted with to no one,
but Don Philip.


Phil. I know it too and Blush. But how came you by it?


Ber. Think where you disposed of it, then ask no more.


Phil. I was mad when I parted with it, but I find where you have been.


Ber. I fell in my accident, as you shall know another time. In the mean while
we are all satisfied. Joy to you all. I could almost wish my self in the same
condition, but not with Eleonora, Don Fredrick.


Fred. You once wished it with her, Don Bernardo.


Seb. Eleonora, and Bernardo! This must be he who writ that Letter.

Sir, I believe we are both delivered from the same perfidious Woman. Did not
you write lately to one Eleonora?


Ber. I dare confess it. She used me ill, and I let her know it. Possibly your
understanding with her brought you to know it.


Seb. That she has been of my acquaintance, I don't disown: But 'twas pure
accident made me see the Letter. It served to confirm me in what I before
suspected, and I have since broke of all correspondence with her.


Ber. I am glad on it, for she is a very Jilt. But what had Don Philip done to
her, that she should hire Ruffians to Murder him?


Phil. Was it she then that set those Villains on to Murder me, when I was so
seasonably releiv'd by you?


Ber. So I afterward discovered by one of the same Ruffians, whom I had
wounded and seized, after they had attacked me by mistake of the Sword you gave
me at parting, and it seems Eleonora had hired them for a hundred Crowns to
Murder you.


Phil. What a She-Devil is this! I knew her formerly at Madrid, a Woman of a
light Character, who would fain have persuaded me to marry her. When she could
not prevail, she removed from thence hither as I had been informed. Wherefore
when I came to this Town, I recollected what I had heard, and enquiring her
out, I last Night made a visit to her, and it seems by the story, when I went
from her, she sent Villains after me to dispatch me.


Seb. What, did she entertain You too?


Phil. O, she was my old acquaintance, and I suppose would have been revenged
on me for the slight I had put upon her.


Seb. What a rare Wife I should have had! Fortune thou deserve all things
from me.


Fred. Well she is going to be revenged upon you all. For I was told but now,
that she is resolved to leave the seducing World, and end her Days in a Nunnery.


Ber. That would be strange.


Phil. But the best Action of her Life.


Seb. Ay, ay, to a Nunnery let her go. In the mean time let Us think a little
of this World, and since you are all agreed, let the Ladies retire, and shift
themselves into their own habits, and we will see you joined together, before
Noon is past.


Fred. With all my Soul. Come, my Cornelia, have to make me happy.


Corn. Be it as you please.


Phil. Though Marriage is accounted by some a kind of servitude, yet I hope, my
Olivia, we shall have no repenting before the Year is out at least.


Ol. I shall make it my endeavor to give no cause on my side.


Phil. Come on then, let us hasten to the Trial: One pleasure at least I am
before hand sure of, and that is in the thought of making satisfaction for the
wrong I have done.

For whatsoever delight Bad Men can find
In doing wrong, it is the unblemished mind,
That makes our Lives most sweet, our Pleasures most refined.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is newly Published the History of Lewis XII. King of France and Navarre,
containing the most remarkable Occurrences in France and Europe, during the
Minority of that Prince. By Monsieur Michelle Vasser, Price 5 s.

A Collection of Novels, in two Volumes, viz. The secret History of the Earl of
Essex and Queen Elizabeth. The Happy Slave, and the Double Cuckold. To which is
added the Art of Pleasing in Conversation. By Cardinal Richlieu. Vol. II. The
Heroine Musqueteer. In Four parts: Or, Love and Duty Reconciled. By Mr.
Congreve. The Pilgrim in two parts. Price of the two Volumes 10 s. Each Volumes
may be had singly.

There is in the Press the Elements of History, from the Creation of the World
to the Monarchy of Constantine the Great; being an Abridgment of Howel's
History of the World. Done by himself Containing the affairs of the Empires, in
a new order and method: With a description of the Kingdoms and Republics
Contempory with them: And a brief account of their Magistrates and Political
Governments: Written Originally in Latin. By William Howel, L L. D. for the use
of the Universities, and now Translated into English. Price 5 s.

Where Gentlemen and Ladies may be furnished with all sorts of Novels and Plays.

This Day is Published the last New Tragedy called, Richard the Third. Written
by Mr. Cibber.

FINIS.

