CHRIST'S TEMPTATION AND TRANSFIGURATION, PRACTICALLY EXPLAINED AND IMPROVED In
several SERMONS.

By the late Reverend THO. MANTON, D. D.

LONDON, Printed in the YEAR, 1685.

TO THE READER.
THE following Discourses on Those important Subjects of the Temptation and
Transfiguration of our Blessed Savior, together with the Sermons on the First
Chapter, of the Epistle to the Colossians, from the 14th. to the 21th. verse,
Having been carefully Perused, and Transcribed from the Reverend Authors own
Manuscripts; are now at the earnest request of diverse persons that were the
happy Auditors thereof, offered to public view: had the Author lived to
publish these himself, they had come forth into the World more exact; but yet
as they are now left, I doubt not but they will be very acceptable to all that
have discerning Minds, for the peculiar Excellency contained in them.

Thus much was thought necessary to be said by way of Preface. The Work
sufficiently commending it self, especially coming from such an Author as
Doctor Manton.

THE TEMPTATION OF CHRIST.
SERMON. I.
MATTHEW. 4. 1. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness to be
Tempted of the Devil.
THis Scripture gives us the History of Christ's Temptation, which I shall go
over by degrees.

In the Words Observe. 1. The Parties Tempted, and Tempting. The Person Tempted
was the Lord Jesus Christ. The Person Tempting was the Devil. 2. The Occasion
inducing this Combat, Jesus was led up of the Spirit. 3. The Time, Then. 4.
The Place, the Wilderness.


From the whole observe.

Doctrine, The Lord Jesus Christ was pleased to submit himself to an
extraordinary Combat with the Tempter, for our good.
1. I shall explain the nature and circumstances of this extraordinary Combat.
2. The Reasons, why Christ submitted to it. 3. The good of this to us.
I. The circumstances of this extraordinary Combat. And here.

1. The Persons Combating, Jesus and the Devil, the Seed of the Woman, and the
Seed of the Serpent. It was designed long before, Genesis 3. 15. I will put enmity
between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed: it shall bruise
thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel, and now it is accomplished. Here is
the Prince of peace against the Prince of darkness; Michael and the Dragon; the
Captain of our Salvation, and our grand Enemy. The Devil is the great Architect
of wickedness, as Christ is the Prince of Life and Righteousness. These are the
Combatants; the one ruined the creation of God, and the other restored and
repaired it.

2. The Manner of the combat. It was not merely a phantasm, that Christ was
thus assaulted and used: No, he was tempted in reality, not in conceit and
imagination only. It seems to be in the Spirit, though it was real. As Paul
was taken up into the third Heaven, whether in the body or out of the body we
cannot easily judge, but real it was. I shall more accurately discuss this
question afterward in its more proper place.

3. What Moved him? Or how was he brought to enter into the lists with Satan?
He was led by the Spirit, meaning thereby the impulsion and excitation of the
Holy Spirit, the Spirit of God. For it is said Luke 4. 1. Jesus being full of
the Holy Ghost, returned from Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the
Wilderness. He did not voluntarily put himself upon Temptation, but by Gods
appointment went up from Jordan further into the Desert.

We Learn hence.

1. That temptations come not by chance, not out of the Earth, nor merely from
the Devil; but God orders them for his own Glory and our Good. Satan was fain
to beg leave to tempt Job, Job 1. 12. And the Lord said unto Satan, behold, all
that he has is in thy power, only upon himself put not forth thine hand.
There is a concession with a limitation, till God exposes us to trials, the
devil cannot trouble us, nor touch us. So Luke 22. 31. Simon, Simon, Satan has
desired to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat. Nay he could not enter into
the Herd of Swine without a patent, and new pass from Christ, Matthew. 8. 31. So
the devils besought him, saying. If thou cast us out suffer us to go away into
the Herd of Swine. This cruel spirit is held in the chains of an irresistible
Providence, that he cannot molest any creature of God without his permission.
Which is a great satisfaction to the faithful: all things which concern our
trial are determined and ordered by God. If we be free, let us bless God for
it, and pray that he would not lead us into temptation: if tempted when we are
in Satan's hands remember Satan is in Gods hand.

2. Having given up our selves to God, we are no longer to be at our own
dispose and direction; but must submit our selves to be led, guided and ordered
by God in all things. So it was with Christ, he was led by the spirit
continually: if he retire into the desert, he is led by the Spirit, Luke 4. 1.
If he come back again into Galilee, ver. 4. Jesus returned in the power of the
Spirit into Galilee. The Holy Ghost leads him into the conflict, and when it
was ended, leads him back again. Now there is a perfect likeness between a
Christian and Christ: he is led by the spirit off and on, so we must be guided
by the same Spirit in all our actions, Romans 8. 14. For as many as are led by
the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.

3. That we must observe our warrant and calling in all we resolve upon. To put
our selves upon hazards we are not called unto, is to go out of our bounds to
meet a temptation, or to ride into the devils quarters. Christ did not go of
his own accord into the desert, but by divine impulsion, and so he came from
thence. We may in our place and calling venture our selves on the protection of
Gods Providence upon obvious temptations, God will maintain and support us in
them; that is to trust God, but to go out of our calling is to tempt God.

4. Compare the words used in Matthew and Mark, chap. 1. 12. And immediately
the Spirit drives him into the Wilderness. That shows that it was a forcible
motion, or a strong impulse, such as he could not easily resist or refuse, so
here is freedom, he was led; there is Force and efficacious impression, he was
driven, with a voluntary condescension thereunto. There may be liberty of man's
Will, yet the victorious efficacy of Grace united together: a man may be taught
and drawn; as Christ here was led, and driven by the Spirit into the Wilderness.

3. The Time.

1. Presently after his Baptism. Now the Baptism of Christ agrees with ours
as to the general nature of it. Baptism is our initiation into the service of
God, or our solemn consecration of our selves to him; and it does not only
imply work, but fight, Romans 6. 13. Neither yield ye your members as instruments
(...), of unrighteousness unto sin: but yield your selves unto God, as those
that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness
unto God. And Romans 13. 12. Let us cast off the works of darkness, and let us
put on the armor of light. Christ's Baptism had the same general nature with
ours, not the same special nature: the general nature is an engagement to God,
the special use of Baptism is to be a seal of the New Covenant, or to be to us
the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of sins. Now this Christ was not
capable of, he had no sin to be repented of or remitted; but his Baptism was an
engagement to the same military work, to which we are engaged. He came into the
World for that end and purpose, to War against sin and satan; he engages as
the General, we as the common Soldiers. He as the General 1 John 3. 8. For
this purpose the son of God was manifested (...), that he might destroy the
works of the Devil. His Baptism was the taking of the Field as General; we
undertake to fight under him in our rank and place.

2. At this Baptismal engagement the Father had given him a testimony by a
voice from Heaven, this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, and the
Holy Ghost had descended upon him in the form of a Dove, Mark 3. 16, 17. Now
presently after this he is set upon by the Tempter. Thus many times the
Children of God after solemn assurances of his love are exposed to great
temptations. Of this you may see an instance in Abraham, Genesis 22. 1. And it
came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, that is after he
had assured Abraham, that he was his shield, and his exceeding great reward,
and given him so many renewed testimonies of his favor. So Paul after his
rapture, lest he should be exalted above measure through the abundance of
revelations, there was given to him a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet him, 2 Cor. 12. 7. So Heb. 10. 32. But call to remembrance the
former days, in which after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of
afflictions, i. e. after ye were fully convinced of the Christian Faith, and
furnished with those virtues and graces that belong to it. Gods conduct is
gentle and proportioned to our strength, as Jacob drove as the little ones were
able to bear it. He never suffers his Castles to be besieged till they are
victualled.

3. Immediately before he entered upon his Prophetical Office. Experience of
temptation fits for the Ministry, as Christ's temptations prepared him to set a
foot the Kingdom of God, for the recovery of poor Souls out of their bondage
into the liberty of the children of God, verse 17. From that time Jesus began
to preach, and to say, Repent for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand. Our state
of innocence was our Health, the grace of the Redeemer our Medicine, Christ our
Physician: for the Devil had poisoned our humane Nature. Therefore when he sets
afoot his healing cure, it was fit and congruous, that he should experimentally
feel the power of the tempter, and in what manner he does assault and endanger
souls, Christ also would show us, that Ministers should not only be men of
Science but of Experience.

4. The Place or Field, where this combat was fought, The Wilderness; where
were none but Wild Beasts, Mark 1. 13. And he was there in the Wilderness forty
days tempted of Satan, and was with the wild beasts, and the Angels ministered
unto him. Great question there is in what Wilderness Christ was; their opinion
is most probable who think it was the great Wilderness, called The Desert of
Arabia, in which the Israelites wandered forty years, and in which Elijah fasted
forty days and forty nights. In this solitary place Satan tried his utmost
power against our Savior.

This teaches us.

1. That Christ alone grapled with Satan, having no fellow worker with him,
that we may know the strength of our Redeemer, who is able himself to overcome
the tempter without any assistance, and to save to the uttermost all that come
unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25.

2. That the Devil often abuses our solitude. It is good sometimes to be
alone; but then we need to be stocked with Holy Thoughts, or employed in Holy
exercises, that we may be able to say as Christ, John 16. 32. I am not alone
because the Father is with me. Howsoever a state of retirement from humane
converse, if it be not necessary exposes us to temptations: But if we are cast
upon it, we must expect God's presence and help.

3. That no place is privileged from temptations, unless we leave our hearts
behind us. David walking on the tarrass or house top was ensnared by
Bathsheba's beauty, 2 Samuel 11. 2, 3, 4. Lot that was chaste in Sodom, yet
committed incest in the mountain, where there were none but his own Family,
Genesis 19. 30, 31, etc. When we are locked in our closets we cannot shut out
Satan.

II. The Reasons why Christ submitted to it.

1. With respect to Adam, that the parallel between the first and second Adam
might be more exact. They are often compared in Scriptures as Romans 5. latter
end, and 1 Cor. 15. and we read Romans 5. 14. that the first Adam was (...), the
figure of him that was to come, and as in other respects, so in this; in the
same way we were destroyed by the first Adam, in the same way were we restored
by the second. Christ recovereth and wins that which Adam lost: Our
happiness was lost by the first Adam, being overcome by the tempter, so it must
be recovered by the second Adam, the tempter being overcome by him. He that did
conquer must first be conquered, that sinners might be rescued from the
captivity, wherein he held them captive. The first Adam being assaulted quickly
after his entrance into Paradise was overcome: and therefore must the second
Adam overcome him as soon as he entered upon his office, and that in a conflict
hand to hand, in that nature that was foiled. The Devil must loose his
Prisoners in the same way that he caught them. Christ must do what Adam could
not do. The victory is gotten by a public person in our nature, before it can
be gotten by each individual in his own person, for so it was lost. Adam lost
the day before he had any offspring, so Christ wins it in his own person
before he does solemnly begin to Preach the Gospel, and call Disciples: and
therefore here was the great overthrow of the Adversary.

2. In regard of Satan who by his conquest got a twofold power over man by
tempting; he got an interest in his heart to lead him captive at his will and
pleasure, 2 Timothy 2. 26. and he was made Gods executioner, he got a power to
punish him, Heb. 2. 14. That through death he might destroy him, that had the
power of death, that is the Devil. Therefore the son of God, who interposed on
our behalf, and undertook the rescue of sinners, did assume the nature of man,
that he might conquer Satan in the nature that was conquered, and also offer
himself as a sacrifice in the same nature for the demonstration of the justice
of God. First Christ must overcome by Obedience, tried to the uttermost by
temptations; and then he must also overcome by suffering: by overcoming
temptations he does overcome Satan as a tempter; and by death he overcame his
as a tormentor, or as the Prince of death, who had the power of executing Gods
sentence. So that you see before he overcame him by merit, he overcame him by
example; and was an instance of a tempted man, before he was an instance of a
persecuted man, or one that came to make satisfaction to Gods Justice.

3. With respect to the Saints, who are in their passage to Heaven to be
exposed to great difficulties and trials. Now that they might have comfort and
hope in their Redeemer, and come to him boldly as one touched with a feeling of
their infirmities, he himself submitted to be tempted. This reason is recorded
by the Apostle in two places, Heb. 2. 18. For in that he himself has suffered,
being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted; able to succor,
that is, fit, powerful, inclined, effectually moved to succor them. None so
merciful as those who have been once miserable; and they who have not only
known misery but felt it, do more readily relieve and succor others. God
bids Israel to pity strangers, Exodus 22. 21. Thou shall neither vex a
stranger, nor oppress him, for ye were strangers in the Land of Egypt. They
knew what it was to be exposed to the envy and hatred of the neighbors in the
Land where they sojourned, Exodus 23. 9. For ye know the heart of a stranger,
seeing ye were strangers in the Land of Egypt. We read that when King Richard
the first had been on the Sea near Sicily like to be drowned, he recalled that
ancient and barbarous custom, whereby the goods of shipwrackt men were
escheated to the Crown, making provision that those goods should be preserved
for the right owners. Christ being tossed in the tempest of temptations, knows
what belongs to the trouble thereof. The other place is, Heb. 4. 15. We have
not an high priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities,
but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Christ has
experienced how strong the Assailant is, how feeble our nature is, how hard a
matter it is to withstand when we are so sorely assaulted. His own experience
of sufferings and temptations in himself does intender his heart, and make him
fit for sympathy with us, and begets a tender compassion toward the miseries
and frailties of his members.

4. With respect to Christ himself, that he might be an exact pattern of
Obedience to God. The obedience is little worth, which is carried on in an even
tenor, when we have no temptation to the contrary, but is cast off as soon as
we are tempted to disobey, James 1. 12. Blessed is the man that endures
temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of Life, which the
Lord has promised to them that love him. And Heb. 11. 17. By Faith Abraham
when he was tried offered up Isaac, and he that had received the promises,
offered up his only begotten Son. Now Christ was to be more eminent than all
the holy ones of God, and therefore that he might give an evidence of his
Piety, Constancy, and Trust in God, it was thought fit some trial should be
made of him, that he might by example teach us, what reason we have to hold to
God against the strongest temptations.

III. The good of this to us. It teaches us diverse things, four I shall
instance in.

1. To show us who is our grand enemy, the Devil, who sought the misery and
destruction of mankind, as Christ did our Salvation. And therefore he is called
(...), The Enemy, Matthew. 13. 39. The Enemy that sowed them is the Devil. And he
is called also (...), the wicked one, Matthew. 13. 19. as the first and deepest
in evil. And because this malicious cruel spirit ruined mankind at first, he is
called a liar and murderer from the beginning, John 8. 44. A Liar because of
his deceit; a murderer to show us what he has done and would do. It was he
that set upon Christ, and does upon us, as at first to destroy our health, so
still to keep us from our medicine and recovery out of the lapsed estate by the
Gospel of Christ.

2. That all men none excepted, are subject to temptations. If any might plead
for exemption, our Lord Jesus, the eternal Son of God might, but he was
assaulted and tempted; and if the Devil tempted our Savior, he will be much
more bold with us. The godly are yet in the way not at the end of the Journey;
in the Field, not with the Crown on their heads; and it is Gods will, that the
enemy should have leave to assault them. None go to Heaven without a trial, all
these things are accomplished in your brethren that are in the flesh, 1 Pet. 5.
9. To look for an exempt privilege, or immunity from temptation, is to list
our selves as Christ's Soldiers, and never expect Battle or Conflict.

3. It shows us the manner of Conflict, both of Satan's Fight, and our
Saviors Defense.

1. Of Satan's Fight it is some advantage not to be ignorant of his enterprises,
2 Cor. 2. 11. Lest Satan should get an advantage of us, for we are not ignorant
of his devices. Then we may the better stand upon our guard. He assaulted
Christ by the same kind of temptations by which usually he assaults us. The
kinds of temptations are reckoned up, 1 Ioh. 2. 16. The lusts of the flesh, the
lust of the eye, and the pride of life. And Iam. 3. 15. This wisdom descends
not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish. With these temptations he
assaulted our first Parents, Genesis 3. 8. When the woman saw that the Tree was
good for fruit, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired
to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat. And with the same
temptations he assaulted Christ, tempting him to turn stones into bread, to
satisfy the longings of the flesh; to fall down and worship him, as to the
sight of a bewitching object to his eyes; to fly in the Air in pride, and to
get Glory among men. Here are our snares, which we must carefully avoid.

2. The manner of Christ's Defense, and so it instructs us how to overcome and
carry our selves in temptations. And here are two things whereby we overcome.

1. By Scripture, the Word of God is the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. and 1
John 2. 14. The Word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked
one. It is good to have the Word of God abide in our memories, but chiefly in
our hearts by a sound belief and fervent love to the truth.

2. Partly by Resolution, 1 Pet. 4. 1. Arm your selves with the same mind, viz.
that was in Christ. When Satan grew bold and troublesome Christ rejects him
with indignation. Now the conscience of our duty should thus prevail with us to
be resolute therein; the double minded are as it were torn in pieces between
God and the Devil, James 1. 8. A double minded man is unstable in all his ways.
Therefore being in Gods way, we should resolve to be deaf to all temptations.

4. The hopes of Success. God would set Christ before us as a pattern of Trust
and Confidence, that when we address our selves to serve God, we might not fear
the temptations of Satan. We have an example of overcoming the Devil in our
glorious Head and Chief. If he pleaded John 16. 33. In the World ye shall have
tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the World; the same holds
good here, for the Enemies of our Salvation are combined. He overcame the Devil
in our natures, that we might not be discouraged: we fight against the same
Adversaries, in the same cause, and he will give power to us his weak members
being full of compassion, which certainly is a great comfort to us.

USE.
Of Instruction to us.

1. To reckon upon temptations. As Soon as we mind our Baptismal Covenant we
must expect that Satan will be our professed Foe, seeking to terrify or allure
us from the banner of our Captain Jesus Christ. Many after Baptism fly to
Satan's Camp. There are a sort of men in the visible Church, who though they do
not deny their Baptism, as those did 2 Pet. 2. 9. Who have forgotten that they
were purged from their old sins, yet they carry themselves as if they were in
league with the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, rather then with the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost: with might and main they oppose Christ's Kingdom both
abroad and at home in their own hearts, and are wholly governed by worldly
things, the lusts of the Flesh, and the lusts of the Eye, and the pride of
Life. Now these are the Devils Agents, and the more dangerous, because they use
Christ's name against his Offices, and the form of his Religion to destroy the
power thereof; as the Dragon in the Reve lations pushed with the horns of the
Lamb. Others are not venomously and malignantly set against Christ, and his
interest in the World, or in their own Hearts, but tamely yield to the lusts of
the Flesh, and go like an Ox to the slaughter, and a Fool to the correction of
the Stocks, Prove. 7. 22. We cannot say that Satan's work lies about these.
Satan needs not besiege the soul by temptations, that is his already by
peaceable possession, when a strong man armed keeps his palace, his goods are
in peace, Luke 11. 21. There is no storm when wind and tide goes together. But
then there is a third sort of men, that begin to be serious, and to mind their
recovery by Christ, they have many good motions and convictions of the danger
of sin, excellency of Christ, necessity of Holiness, they have many purposes to
leave sin, and enter upon an holy course of Life, but the wicked one comes,
and catches away that which was sown in his heart, Mat. 13. 19. He begins
betimes to oppose the work, before we are confirmed and settled in a course of
Godliness, as he did set upon Christ presently upon his Baptism. Baptism in us
implies avowed dying unto sin, and living unto God, now God permits
temptation and to try our Resolution. There is a fourth sort of such as have
made some progress in Religion, even to a degree of eminency: these are not
altogether free; for if the Devil had confidence to assault the declared Son of
God, will he be afraid of a mere mortal man? No, these he assaulteth many times
very sorely. Pirates venture on the greatest booty: these he seeks to draw
off from Christ, as Pharaoh sought to bring back the Israelites after their
escape; or to foil them by some scandalous fall, to do Religion a mischief, 2 Samuel 12. 14. By this deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the
Lord to blaspheme, or at least to vex them and torment them, to make the
service of God tedious and uncomfortable to them, Luke 22. 31. Simon, Simon,
Behold Satan has desired to have you, that he might sift you as wheat, to toss
and vex you, as wheat in a sieve. So that no sort of Christians can promise
themselves exemption; and God permits it, because to whom much is given, of
them the more is required.

2. The manner and way of his fight is by the World, per blanda and aspera, by
the good or evil things of the World. There is armor of Righteousness on the
right hand, and on the left, 2 Cor. 6. 7. as there are right hand and left hand
temptations. Both ways he lies in ambush in the creature. Sometimes he tempts
us by the good things of the World, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. And Satan stood up against
Israel and provoked David to number Israel, so glorying in his might, and
puissance, and victory over neighbor Kings. So meaner people he tempts to
abuse their Wealth to Pride and Luxury; therefore we are pressed to be sober, 1
Pet. 5. 8. Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the Devil, as a
roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour. The Devil makes an
advantage of our prosperity to divert us from God and Heaven, and to render us
unapt for the strictness of our Holy calling. Sometimes he tempts us by the
evil things of this World, Job 1. 11. Put forth thine hand now, and touch all
that he has, and he will curse thee to thy face. Satan's aim in bringing the
Saints into trouble, is to draw them to fretting, murmuring, despondency, and
distrust of Providence, yea to open defection from God, or blasphemy against
him. And therefore it is said, 1 Pet. 5. 9: Knowing that the same afflictions,
etc. because temptations are conveyed to us by our afflictions or troubles in
the flesh.

3. His end is to dissuade us from good, and persuade us to evil. To dissuade
us from good by representing the impossibility, trouble, and small necessity of
it. If men begin to apply themselves to a strict course, such as they have
sworn to in Baptism, either it is so hard as not to be born, as John 6. 60.
This is a hard saying, who can bear it? Whereas Mark 19. 29. Every one that
has forsaken houses, or brethren, etc. for my names sake, shall receive an
hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting Life. Or the troubles which
accompany a strict profession are many. The World will note us, John 12. 42.
Nevertheless among the chief Rulers also many believed on him, but because of
the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the
Synagogue. Whereas we must not be ashamed of Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 12. If we suffer
we shall also reign with him: if we deny him, he also will deny us. Or that we
need not be so strict and nice, whereas all we can do is little enough, Mar.
25. 9. Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you. In general the greatest
mischiefs done us by sin are not regarded, but the least inconvenience, that
attends our duty, is urged and aggravated. He persuades us to evil by
profit, pleasure, necessity; we cannot live without it in the World. He hides
the hook, and shows the bait only; he concealeth the Hell, the horror, the
eternal pains that follow sin, and only tells you how beneficial, profitable
and delightful the sin will be to you. Prove. 9. 17, 18. Stolen waters are sweet,
and bread eaten in secret is pleasant. But he knows not that the dead are
there, and that her guests are in the depths of Hell.

4. While we are striving against temptations, let us remember our General. We
do but follow the Captain of our Salvation, who has vanquished the Enemy, and
will give us the victory if we keep striving, The God of peace shall bruise
satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16. 2. Not his feet, but ours we shall be
Conquerors. Our Enemy is vigilant and strong, it is enough for us, that our
Redeemer is merciful and faithful in succouring the tempted, and able to master
the tempter, and defeat all his methods. Christ has conquered him both as a
Lamb and as a Lion, Rev. 5. 5. 8. the notion of a Lamb intimates his
sacrifice, the notion of a Lion his victory; in the Lamb is merit in the Lion
strength; by the one he makes satisfaction to God, by the other he rescueth
sinners out of the paw of the roaring Lion, and maintains his interest in
their hearts. Therefore let us not be discouraged, but closely adhere to him.

SERMON. II.
MATTHEW. 4. 2, 3, 4. And when he had fasted forty days, and forty nights, he was
afterward an hungered. And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be
the son of God, command that these stones be made bread. And he answered and
said, It is written, Man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God.
IN these words there are three Branches: First, The Occasion. Secondly, The
Temptation it self. Thirdly, Christ's Answer.


First, The Occasion of the first temptation; in the second verse, When he had
fasted forty days, and forty nights, he was afterward an hungered. Where take
notice, I. Of his Fasting. II. Of his Hunger.


And something I shall speak of them Conjunctly; something Distinctly and Apart.

1. Conjunctly. In every part of our Lords Humiliation, there is an Emission of
some beams of his Godhead; that whenever he is seen to be true Man, he might be
known to be true God also. Is Christ hungry? There was a Fast of forty days
continuance preceding, to show how as God he could sustain his Humane Nature.
The verity of his humane nature is seen, because he submitted to all our
sinless Infirmities. The power of his divine Nature was manifested, because it
enabled him to continue forty days and nights without eating or drinking any
thing; the utmost that an ordinary man can fast being but nine days usually.
Thus his Divinity and Humanity are expressed in most, or all of his Actions;
Ioh. 1. 14. The word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his
glory, as the glory of the only begotten son of God. There was a Vail of
Flesh, yet the glory of his divine Nature was seen, and might be seen, by all
that had an Eye and Heart to see it. He lay in the Manger at Bethlehem, but a
Star appeared to conduct the Wise Men to him; and Angels proclaimed his Birth
to the shepherds, Luke 2. 13, 14. He grew up from a Child, at the ordinary rate
of other Children; but when he was but 12 years old, he disputed with the
Doctors, Luke 2. 42. He submitted to Baptism, but then owned by a Voice from
Heaven to be Gods Beloved Son. He was deceived in the Figtree, when an hungered;
which shows the infirmity of humane Ignorance; but suddenly blasted, this
manifested the glory of a divine Power; Matthew. 21. 19. Here, tempted by Satan;
but Ministered unto, and Attended upon, by a multitude of glorious Angels;
Matthew. 4. 11. Finally Crucified through weakness, but living by the power of
God, 2 Cor. 13. 4. He hung dying on the Cross; but then the Rocks were rent,
the Graves opened, and the Sun darkened. All along you may have these
Intermixtures: he needed to humble himself to purchase our mercies; but
withal, to give a discovery of a divine Glory to assure our Faith. Therefore,
when there were any Evidences of humane frailty, least the world should be
offended, and stumble thereat, he was pleased at the same time to give some
notable demonstration of the divine Power. As on the other side, when holy Men
are honored by God, something falls out to humble them, 2 Cor. 12. 7.

2. Distinctly and Apart. Where observe,

1. That he fasted forty days, and forty nights; so did Moses when he received
the Law, Exodus 34. 28. And at the restoring of the Law Elias did the like, 1
King. 19. 8. Now what these two great Prophets had done, Christ the great
Prophet and Doctor of the Christian Church, did also. For the number of forty
days, Curiosity may make it self work enough; but it is dangerous to make
conclusions where no certainty appears. However this is not amiss, that forty
days were the usual time allotted for Repentance: As to the Ninevites, Jonah
3. 4. so the Prophet Ezekiel was to bear the sins of the People for forty days:
And the Flood was forty days in coming on the old world, Genesis 7. 17. This was
the time given for their Repentance, and therefore for their Humiliation; yet
the forty days Fast in Lent is ill grounded on this Example, for this Fast of
Christ cannot be imitated by us, more than other his Miracles.

2. At the end of the forty days he was an hungered, sorely assaulted with
faintness and hunger, as any other man at any time is for want of meat. Gods
Providence permitted it, that he might be more capable of Satan's temptations;
for Satan fits his temptations to men's present case and condition. When Christ
was hungry, he tempts him to provide bread, in such a way as the Tempter does
prescribe. He works upon what he finds: When men are full, he tempts them
to be proud, and forget God; when they are destitute, to distrust God: If he
sees men covetous, he fits them with a wedge of Gold, as he did Achan: If
discontented, and plotting the destruction of another, he finds out
occasions. When Judas had a mind to sell his Master, he presently sends him a
Chapman. Thus he does work upon our Dispositions, or our Condition; most upon
our Dispositions, but here only upon Christ's Condition. He observes which way
the Tree leans, and then thrusts it forward.

Secondly, The Temptation it self; Verse the third. Where two things are
observable. 1. The Intimation of his Address. And when the tempter came to him.
2. The Proposal of the Temptation: If thou be the son of God, etc.


1. For the Address to the Temptation: And when the tempter came to him. There
two things must be explained: 1. In what manner the Tempter came to Christ. 2.
How he is said to come then to him.


1. How he came to him. Whether the Temptations of Christ are to be understood
by way of Vision, or Historically; as things visibly acted and done. This
latter I incline unto; and I handle here, because it is said (...), The Tempter
came to him. Christ imports some local motion, and accession of the Tempter
to Christ, under a visible and external form and shape. As afterward when the
Lord bids him be gone, then the devil leaves him, ver. 11. A retiring of
Satan out of his Presence, not the ceasing of a Vision only. Yea all along, He
takes him, and sets him on a pinnacle of the temple. And takes him to an high
mountain. All which show some external appearance of Satan, and not a word that
intimates a Vision. Neither can it be conceived how any Act of Adoration could
be demanded by Satan of Christ [fall down and worship me] unless the object to
be worshipped were set before him in some visible shape. The coming of the
Angels to Christ when the Devil left him, ver. II. all understand Historically,
and of some External coming; why is not the coming and going of the Devil thus
to be understood also? And if all had been done in Vision, and not by Converse,
how could Christ be an hungered, or the devil take that occasion to tempt him?
How could answers and replics be tossed to and fro, and Scriptures alleged? So
that from the whole view of the frame of the Text, here was some external
congress between Christ and the devil. If you think it below Christ, you forget
the wonderful Condescension of the Son of God; it is no more unworthy of him
than Crucifixion, Passion and Burial was: It Is true in the writing of the
Prophets, many things historically related were only done in Vision; but not
in the Gospels, which are an History of the Life and Death of Christ; where
things are plainly set down as they were done. To men the grievousness of
Christ's Tempations would be much lessened, if we should think it only a piece
of Fantasy and imaginary, rather than real. And if his Temptations be
lessened, so will his Victory, so will our Comfort. In short, such as was
Christ's Journey into the Wilderness, such was his Fast, such his Temptation;
all real: For all are delivered to us in the same style and thread of
discourse. Yea farther, if these things had been only in Vision and Ecstasy,
there would have been no danger to Christ in the second temptation, when he was
tempted to throw himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple. Surely then he
was truly tempted, and not in vision only: yea it seems not so credible and
agreeable to the dignity and holiness of Christ, that Satan should tempt by
internal false suggestions, and the immission of Species into his fancy or
understanding: That Christ should seem to be here and there, when all the while
he was in the desert: For either Christ took notice of these false Images in
his Fancy, or not; if not, there is no temptation; if so, there will be an
Error in the Mind of Christ, that he should think himself to be on the Pinnacle
of the Temple, or top of an high Mountain, when he was in the Desert. It Is hard
to think these suggestions could be made, without some error or sin; but an
External suggestion, makes the sin to be in the Tempter only, not in the
person Tempted: Our First Parents lost not their innocence by the external
suggestion, but internal admission of it, dwelling upon it in their Minds. To a
man void of sin, the tempter has no way of tempting, but externally.

2. How is this access to Christ said to be after his Fasting, when in Luke 4.
2. it is said, Being forty days tempted of the Devil, and in those days he did
eat nothing; and when they were ended, he afterward hungered?

I Answer 1. Some conceive that the devil tempted Christ all the forty days,
but then he tempted him invisibly, as he does other men, striving to inject
sinful suggestions; but he could find nothing in him to work upon, Ioh. 14. 30.
But at forty days end he takes another course, and appears visibly in the
shape of an Angel of Light. He says he came to him most solemnly and
industriously to tempt him. This opinion is probable.

2. It may be answered, Lukes speech must be understood, Being forty days in
the wilderness, and in those days he did eat nothing, and was tempted; that is,
those days being ended. There is by a Prolepsis, some little Inversion of the
order. But because of Mark 1. 13. where it is said, He was in the wilderness
forty days tempted of satan, and was with the wild Beasts, take the former
Answer.

2. The proposal of the Temptation: If thou be the son of God, command that
these stones be made bread. Certainly every temptation of the devil tends to
sin: Now where is the sin of this? If Christ had turned stones into bread, and
declared himself by this Miracle to be the Son of God; there seems to be no
such evil in this. Like Miracles he did upon other occasions; as turning Water
into Wine at a Marriage Feast, multiplying the loaves in the distribution for
feeding the Multitude. Here was no curiosity, the Fact seemed to be necessary
to supply his hunger. Here is no superfluity urged, into Bread, not dainties,
or occasions of wantonness, but Bread for his necessary sustenance? I Answer,
Notwithstanding all this fair appearance, yet this first assault which is
propounded by Satan, was very sore and grievous.

1. Because manifold sins are employed in it, and there are many temptations
combined in this one Assault.

1. In that Christ, who was led by the Spirit into the Wilderness to Fast, and
so to be tempted, must now break his Fast and work a Miracle at Satan's
direction: The contest between God, and the devil, is, who shall be Sovereign;
therefore it was not meet that Christ should follow the devils advice, and do
any thing at his command and suggestion.

2. That Christ should doubt of that Voice that he heard from Heaven at his
Baptism, Thou art my beloved son; and the devil comes, If thou be the son of
God. That it should anew be put to trial by some extraordinary work, whether it
were true or no, or he should believe it, yea or no. No temptation so sore, no
dart so poisonable, as that which tends to the questioning of the grounds of
Faith; as this did the Love of God, so lately spoken of him. Therefore this is
one of the sharpest Arrows that could come out of Satan's Bow.

3. It tended to weaken his confidence, in the care and love of Gods Fatherly
Providence: Being now afflicted with hunger in a desert place, where no supply
of food could be had, Satan would draw him to suspect and doubt of his Fathers
Providence; as if it were incompatible to be the Son of God, and to be left
destitute of means to supply his hunger, and therefore must take some
extraordinary course of his own to furnish himself.

4. It tended to put him upon an action of Vainglory, by working a Miracle
before the devil, to show his Power. As all needless actions are but a vain
ostentation.

2. Because it was in it self a puzling and perplexing proposal, not without
inconveniences on both sides, which soever of the extremes our Lord should
choose; whether he did, or did not what the tempter suggested. If he did, he
might seem to doubt of the Truth of the Oracle, by which he was declared to be
the Son of God, or to distrust Gods Providence, or to give way to a vain
ostentation of his own Power: If he did not, he seemed to be wanting, in not
providing necessary food for his sustentation, when it was in his own power so
to do; and it seemed to be unreasonable to hide that, which it concerned all to
know, to wit, that he was the Son of God. And it seems grievous to hear
others suspicious concerning our selves, when it is in our power easily to refute
them, such provocations can hardly be born by the most modest spirits. This
temptation was again put upon Christ on the Cross, Math. 27. 40. If thou be the
son of God, come down from the Cross. But all is to be done at Gods direction,
and as it becomes our obedience to him, and respect to his Glory. Satan and
his Instruments will be satisfied with no proofs of principles of Faith, but
such as he and they will prescribe, and which cannot be given without
intrenching upon our obedience to God, and those counsels which he has wisely
laid for his own Glory. And if Gods children be surprised with such a
disposition, it argues so far the influence of Satan upon them: Namely, when
they will not believe but upon their own terms; as Thomas, Ioh. 20. 25. Except
I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of
the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe. If we will not
accept of the graces of Faith as offered by God, but will interpose conditions
of our own prescribing, we make a snare to our selves. God may in condescension
to a weak Believer, grant what was his fault to seek, as he does afterward to
Thomas, Ver. 27. but there is no reason he should grant it to the devil, he
being a malicious and incorrigible spirit, coming temptingly to ask it.

3. This temptation was cunning and plausible, it seemed only to tend to
Christ's good, his refection when hungry, and his Honor and Glory, that this
might be a full demonstration of his being the Son of God. There is an open
solicitation to evil, and a covert; explicit, and implicit; direct, and
indirect. This last here. 'Twas not an open, direct, explicit solicitation to
sin; but covert, implicit and indirect; which sort of temptations are more
dangerous. There was no need of declaring Christ's power, by turning stones into
bread before the devil, and at his instance and suit: It was neither necessary,
nor profitable; not necessary for Christ's Honor and Glory, it being
sufficiently evidenced before by that voice from Heaven, or might be evident to
him without new proof: Nor was it necessary for Christ's refection, because he
might be sustained by the same divine power, by which hitherto he had been
supported for forty days. Nor was it profitable, none being present but the
devil, who asked not this proof for satisfaction but cavil; and that he might
boast and gain advantage, if Christ had done any thing at his instance and
direction: And in this peculiar dispensation, all was to be done, by the
direction of the holy, and not the impure Spirit. I come now to the third
Branch.

Thirdly, Christ's Answer: Ver. 4. And he answered and said, It is written, Man
lives not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of God. Christ's Answer is not made to that part of the proposal, If thou be the
son of God; but to the urgent necessity of his refection. The former was clear
and evident, the force of the temptation lay not there; but the latter, which
Satan sought to make most Advantage of, is clearly refuted: Christ's Answer is
taken out of Deuteronomy. 8. 3. And this Answer is not given for the Tempters sake,
but ours; that we may know how to answer in like Cases, and repel such kind of
temptations. In the place quoted, Moses speaks of Manna, and shows how God
gave his people Manna from Heaven, to teach them, that though bread be the
ordinary means of sustaining man, yet God can feed him by other means, which he
is pleased to make use of to that purpose. His bare word, or nothing; all
comes from his divine power and virtue, whatever he is pleased to give for the
sustentation of Man, ordinary or extraordinary. The tempter had said, that
either he must die for hunger, or turn stones into bread: Christ shows that
there is a middle between both these extremes. There are other ways which the
Wisdom of God has found out, or has appointed by his Word, or decreed to such
an end, and makes use of, in the course of his Providence. And the instance is
fitly chosen, for he that provided forty years for an huge multitude in the
desert, he will not be wanting to his own Son, who had now fasted but forty
days. In the words there is

1. A Concession or Grant, that ordinarily man lives by bread, and therefore
must labor for it, and use it when it may be had.

2. There is a restriction of the Grant, that it is not by bread only; But by
every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. The business is to explain,
how a man can live by the Word of God, or what is meant by it.

1. Some take Word, for the word of Precept; and expound it thus, if you be
faithful to your Duty, God will provide for you. For in every command of God,
general or particular, there is a promise expressed or employed of all things
necessary, Deuteronomy. 28. 5. Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store. And Matthew.
6. 33. Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you. Now we may lean upon this word of God, keep our
selves from indirect means, and in a fair way of Providence refer the issue to
God.

2. Some take the Word, for the word of Promise, which indeed is the livelihood
of the Saints; Psalm. 119. 111. Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for
ever, they are the rejoicing of my heart. Gods people in a time of want, can
make a Feast to themselves out of the Promises, and when seemingly starved in
the Creature, fetch not only Peace and Grace and Righteousness; but Food and
Raiment out of the Covenant.

3. Rather I think it is taken for his Providential word, or commanded
Blessing: For as, God made all things by his Word, so he upholdeth all things
by the word of his Power, Heb. 1. 3. His powerful word does all in the World,
Psalm. 147. 15. He sends forth his commandment on the earth, his word runs
very swiftly, he gives snow like wool. And then in the 18. ver. He sends out
his word and melts them. As the word of Creation made all things, so the word
of Providence sustaineth all things. This word is spoken of, Psalm. 107. 20. He
sent his word, and his word healed them, and delivered them from all their
destructions. It Is dictum factum with God, if he speak but the word it is all
done, Math. 8. 8. Speak but the word and thy servant shall be whole. So Luke 4.
36. What a word is this? For with authority and power he commands the unclean
spirits, and they come out. So of Joseph it is said Psalm. 105. 19. until the
time that his word came, the word of the Lord tried him. That is his power and
influence on the hearts of the parties concerned for his deliverance. Well then
the power of sustaining Life, is not in bread but in the Word of God, not in
the means, but in Gods commanded blessing; which may be conveyed to us by
means, or without means as God pleases: There is a powerful commanding word
which God uses for Health, Strength, Sustentation, or any effect wherein the
good of his people is concerned. He is the great Commander of the World. If he
say to any thing go, and it goes: come, and it comes.

Thus you have the History of the first temptation. Now for the Observations.

1. Observe, That God may leave his children and servants to great streights;
for Christ himself was sorely an hungered: so God suffers his people to hunger
in the Wilderness before he gave them Manna. Therefore it is said Psalm. 102. 23.
He weakneth the strength of the people in the way. He has sundry trials
wherewith to exercise our Faith, and sometimes by sharp necessities: Paul and
his companions had continued fourteen days and had taken nothing, Acts 27. 33.
Many times Gods children are thus tried, Trading is dead and there are many
mouths to be fed, and little supply comes in; yet this is to be born, none of
us more poor then Christ, or more destitute then was Christ.

Secondly, That the Devil makes an advantage of our necessities, when Christ
was an hungered, then the tempter came to him: so unto us. Three sorts of
temptations he then uses to us, the same he did to Christ, 1. Either he
tempts us to unlawful means to satisfy our hunger, so he did to Christ, who
was to be governed by the Spirit, to work a miracle to provide for his bodily
wants at Satan's direction: so us, Poverty has a train of sinful temptations,
Prove. 30. 9. Least I be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in vain.
Necessities are urging, but we must not go to the Devil for a direction how to
supply our selves, least he draw us to put our hand to our neighbors goods, or
to defraud our Brother, or betray the peace of our Conscience or to do some
unworthy thing, that we may live the more comfortably. You cannot plead
necessity, it is to relieve your charge, to maintain Life, God is able to
maintain it in his own way. No necessity can make any sin warrantable; it is
necessary thou should not sin, it is not necessary thou should borrow more
then thou can pay, or use any fraudulent means to get thy sustenance. If
others be unmerciful, thou must not be unrighteous.

2. To question our Adoption, as he did the filiation of Christ, If thou be the
Son of God. It Is no wonder to find Satan calling in question, the Adoption and
Regeneration of Gods Children, for he calls in question the Filiation and
Sonship of the Son of God, though so plainly attested but a little before, Heb.
12. 5. Ye have forgotten the exhortation, which speaks unto you as Children,
my Son, etc. Certainly what ever moves us to question our interest in Gods
fatherly love, bare afflictions should not; for to be without afflictions is a
sign of Bastards. God has no illegitimate Children, but God has degenerate
Children who are left to a larger Discipline.

3. To draw us to a diffidence and distrust of Gods Providence: this he sought
to breed in Christ, or at least to do something that might seem to countenance
it, if he should upon his motion work a miracle. Certainly it is Satan's usual
temptation to work in us a disesteem of Gods goodness and care, and to make us
pore altogether upon our wants. A sense of our wants may be a means to humble
us, to quicken us to prayer, but it should not be a temptation to beget in us
unthankfulness, or murmuring against Gods Providence, or any disquietness or
unsettledness in our minds. And though they may be very pinching, yet we should
still remember that God is good to them that are of a clean Heart, Psalm. 73. 1.
God has in himself al-sufficiency, who knows both what we want, and what is
fittest for us, and is engaged by his general Providence as a faithful Creator,
1 Pet. 4. 19. Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the
keeping of their souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator; but
more especially as related to us as a Father, Matthew. 6. 32. Your heavenly
Father know that you have need of all these things. And by his faithful
Promise, Heb. 13. 5. He has said I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.
And he will give us every good thing while we fear him, Psalm. 34. 9, 10. O fear
the Lord ye his Saints: For there is no want to them that fear him. The young
Lions do lack and suffer hunger: But they that seek the Lord, shall not want
any good thing. And walk uprightly, Psalm 84. 11. For the Lord God is a Sun and
a shield, the Lord will give Grace and Glory: No good thing will he withhold
from them that walk uprightly. And seek it of him by prayer, Matthew. 7. 11. Ask,
and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened
unto you.

But you will say, you Preach only to the poor and destitute. I Answer, I speak
as my subject leads me: It will put the point generally Satan makes an
advantage of our condition. Christ had power to do what was suggested; every
condition has its snares, a full condition most of all, Psalm. 69. 22. Let
their table be a snare, their welfare for a trap. He hides his snares, and
gins to catch our souls; in all the comforts men enjoy they are apt to grow
proud, to forget God, to become mercyless to others who want what they enjoy;
to live in vain pleasures, and to forget Eternity: to live in sinful security,
in the neglect of Christian duties, to be enslaved to sensual satisfactions, to
be flat, and cold in Prayer. This glut and fullness of worldly comforts, is much
more dangerous then our hunger.

Thirdly observe, In Tempting, Satan pretends to help the tempted party to a
better condition, as here he seems careful to have bread provided for Christ
at his need, yea pretends respect to his glory, and to have him manifest
himself to be the Son of God, by such a miracle as he prescribes. This seeming
tenderness, counselling Christ to support his life and health, was the snare
laid for him. Thus he dealt with our first Parents, he seeks to weaken the
reputation of Gods love and kindness to man, and to breed in the Woman's mind a
good opinion of himself. That his suggestions might make the greater impression
upon her, he manageth all his discourse with her, that all the advice which he
seems to give her, proceeded of his love, and good affection toward her and
her husband; pretending a more then ordinary desire and care of man's good, Genesis
3. 5. as if he could direct him how to become a match for God himself. So still
he deals with us; for alas, otherwise in vain is the snare laid in the sight
of any Bird, Prove. 1. 17. He covers the snare laid for man's destruction with
a fair pretense of Love, to advance man to a greater happiness, and so
pretends the good of those whom he means wholly to destroy. He enticeth the
covetous with dishonest gain, which at length proves a real loss: The sensual
with vain pleasures, which at length prove the greatest pain to body and soul:
The ambitious with honors, which really tend to their disgrace. Always trust
God, but disbelieve the Devil, who promoteth man's destruction under a pretense
of his good and happiness. How can Satan and his instruments, put us upon any
thing that is really good for us?

Fourthly, That Satan's first temptations are more plausible, he does not at
first dash come with fall down and worship me; but only pretends a respect to
Christ's refection, and a demonstration of his Sonship. Few or none are so
desperate at first, as to leap into Hell at the first dash, therefore the Devil
begins with the least temptations. First men begin with less evils, play
about the brink of Hell: a man at first takes a likeing to company, afterward
he does a little enlarge himself, into some haunts and merry meetings with his
companions, then enters into a confederacy in evil, till he has brought utter
ruin upon himself, and what was honest Friendship at first, proves wicked
company and sure destruction at last. At first a man plays for recreation,
then ventureth a shilling or two, afterward by the witchery of Gaming, off
goes all sense of thrift, honesty, and credit. At first a man dispenses with
himself in some duty, then his dispensation grows into a settled toleration,
and God is cast out of his closet, and his Heart grows dead, dry, and
sapless: there is no stop in sin, it is of a multiplying nature, and we go on
from one degree to another; and a little lust sets open the door for a greater,
as the lesser sticks set the greater on fire.

Fifthly, There is no way to defeat Satan's temptations, but by a sound belief
of Gods all sufficiency, and the nothingness of the Creature.

1. A sound belief of, and a dependence on Gods all sufficiency, Genesis 17. 1. I
am the Almighty God, walk before me and be thou perfect. We need not warp, nor
run to our shifts, he is enough to help to defend or reward us; he can help us
without means, though there be no supply in the view of sense, or full heaps in
our own keeping, God knows when we know not, 2 Pet. 2. 9. The Lord knows
how to deliver the Godly out of Temptations, etc. or by contrary means, curing
the eyes with spittle and clay. He can make a little means go far. As he
blessed the pulse to the captive Children, Dan. 1. 15. And made the Widows
barrel of Meal, and cruise of Oil to hold out, 1 Kings 17. 14. And his filling
and feeding five Thousand with a few Barley loaves, and a few Fishes, Matthew. 14.
21. On the other side he can make abundance unprofitable, Luke 12. 15. A man's
life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses. No
means can avail unless God gives his blessing; therefore we should not
distrust his Providence, nor attempt any thing without Gods warrant, lest we
offend him, and provoke him to withdraw his blessing.

2. The Nothingness of the Creature: Not by bread alone. It Is nothing by way of
comparison with God, nothing by way of exclusion of God, nothing in opposition
to God. It should be nothing in our esteem, so far as it would be something
separate from God, or in co-ordination with God, Isa. 40. 17. All nations
before him are as nothing, less than nothing and vanity, Job 6. 21. Now ye are
nothing: All Friends cannot help, our foes cannot hurt us, not the greatest of
either kind, Isa. 34. 12. All her Princes shall be nothing. In regard of the
effects which the World promise to its deluded lovers, all is as nothing: not
only that it can do nothing to our needy souls, to relieve us from the burden
of sin; nothing toward the quiet, and true peace of our wounded Consciences;
nothing to our acceptance with God, nothing for strength against corruptions
and temptations; nothing at the hour of death; but it can do nothing for us
during Life, nothing to relieve and satisfy us in the World without God.
Therefore God is still to be owned and trusted.

SERMON. III.
MATTHEW. 4. 5, 6. Then the Devil takes him into the Holy City, and sets him
on a pinnacle of the Temple.

And says unto him, if thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down, for it is
written he shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands
they shall bear thee up, least at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.


IN this second Temptation I shall give you. 1. The History of it. 2.
Observations upon it. 1. The History of it. There, 1. What Satan did. 2. What
he said. 3. The soarness of the temptation.


1. What he did, Then the devil takes him up into the Holy City, and sets
him on a pinnacle of the Temple. There 1. Take notice of the ground which the
devil chose for the conflict: he takes him up into the Holy City, and sets
him on the pinnacle of the Temple. By the Holy City is meant Ierusilem, for
this name is given to it in other Scriptures, Isa. 58. 2. They call themselves
of the Holy City. And Isa. 52. 1. O Jerusalem, the Holy City. And in many other
places it was so called because it was the seat of Gods Worship, and the place
where God manifested his gracious presence with his people. If you ask why now,
it was called the Holy City, since it was a City of Blood, the seat of all
wickedness, in which the Law of God was depraved their Religion corrupted,
their Religion polluted? I Answer, yet there was the Temple of the Lord. Some
Relics of good and Holy men, some grace yet continued, and the only place that
owned the true God, though with much corruption. The more especial place which
the Devil chose for the conflict was (...), the Pinnacle of the Temple, or the
wing of the Temple: meaning the border round about the fist covering of the
Temple, to hinder any one from falling off easily, which might be adorned with
pinnacles and spires from whence one might easily fall. 2. How the devil got
him there? Whether Christ was carried through the Air, or went on his feet
following him of his own accord? the last seems to be countenanced by Luke;
that he led him to the pinnacle of the Temple, Luke 4. 9. (...), yet the former
is preferred by most ancient and modern interpreters, and not without reason.
For Christ voluntarily to follow the Devil, and to go up to the top of the
Temple, and stand on one of the pinnacles thereof, it seems improbable, and
would take up more time then could be spent on this temptation. He that would
not obey the Devil persuading him to cast himself down, that he might not tempt
God; would not voluntarily have gone up with him, for that would have been the
beginning of a temptation to yield so far. Most probably then Satan was
permitted to carry him in the Air, without doing him any hurt to Jerusalem, and
one of the pinnacles of the Temple and battlements thereof. But how Christ was
carried in the Air visibly or invisibly the Scripture shows not: it affirms
the thing, but sets not down the manner; we must believe what it asserteth,
reverence what it concealeth: here was a real Translation, a Transportation
from place to place; not imaginary, for then Christ had been in no danger: And
again not violent but voluntary, a carrying not a haling, a leading not a
forcing, as the wrestler is drawn on to the combat. As he suffered himself to
be drawn to death by Satan's instruments, so by the Devil to be translated from
place to place. The Officers of the High Priest had power to carry him from the
Garden to Annas; from Annas, to Caiaphas; from Caiaphas, to Pilate; from
Pilate, to Herod; from Herod; to Pilate again: And then from Gabbatha, to
Golgotha; which could not have been, unless this power had been given them from
above, as Christ himself tells Pilate, Ioh. 19. 11. So God for his greater
glory, and our instruction permitted this transportation: therefore this
translation is not to be imputed to the weakness of Christ, but his patience,
submitting thus far that he might experience all the machinations of Satan: and
the transporting is not to be ascribed to the tempters strength, but his
boldness. Christ did not obey him, but submitted to the Divine dispensation,
and would fight with him not only in the Desert, but in the Holy City: and no
wonder if Christ suffered Satan to carry him, who suffered his instruments to
Crucify him.

Secondly, What he said to him, verse 6. Where take notice. 1. Of the
temptation it self, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down. 2. The
Reason alleged to back it, For it is written he shall give his Angels charge
concerning thee, etc.

1. The temptation it self: If thou be the Son of God cast thy self down, mark
what was the mote in the Devils eye, that Christ was declared to be the Son of
God, the Messiah and Savior of the World: He would have him to put it to this
proof in the sight of all Jerusalem, wherein if he failed, and had dyed of the
fall, the Jews would think him an Impostour; if he had escaped, he had
submitted to the Devils methods, and so had run into the former sins mentioned
before in the first temptation, his doing something at the Devils direction;
his disbelief of the divine Oracle, unless manifested by such proof as Satan
required; and besides a tempting of divine Providence, the ordinary way was
down stairs. He would have him leap, and throw himself over the battlements,
'twould be too long to go down stairs, he will teach him a nearer way, to cast
himself down and fear no hurt, for if he were the Son of God he might securely
do so. But chiefly Christ was not to begin his ministry by miracles, but
Doctrine; not from a demonstration of his Power, but Wisdom. The Gospel was to
be first Preached, then sealed and confirmed by miracles: and Christ's miracles
were not to be ludicrous but profitable, not fitted for pomp, but use; to
instruct and help men, rather then strike them with wonder. Now this would
discredit the Gosple if Christ should fly in the Air; besides we must not fly
to extraordinary means, where ordinary are present.

Only before I go off observe, That Satan did not offer to cast him down, that
God does not suffer him to do, because he sought to bring Christ to sin. If
Satan had cast him down Christ had not sinned.

Secondly, The Reason by which he backeth the temptation, it is taken from
Scripture, For it is written he shall give his Angels charge concerning thee.
The Scripture is in the 91 Psalm. 11. 12. where the words run thus, he shall
give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall
bear thee up in their hands, least thou dash thy foot against a stone. Where

I. Observe, The Devils cunning in citing Scripture. The Apostle tells us
that Satan is sometimes transformed into an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. And
we read that once he took the habit, and guise of a Prophet, 1 Samuel 28. 18. and
indeed he deceives more by the voice of Samuel than by the voice of the
Dragon. We read of (...), The depths of Satan, Rev. 2. 24. Here he comes like
a divine, with a Bible in his hand, and turns to the place, here the Enemy of
God comes with the Word of God, and disguiseth the worst of actions with the
best of words, opposes God to God, and turns his truth to countenance a lie.
Being refuted by Scripture, he will bring Scripture too, and pretends to
reverence that which he chiefly hates. Christians you have not to do with a
foolish devil, who will appear in his own colors and ugly shape, but with a
devout devil, who for his own turn, can pretend to be Godly.

II. That he cites such a Scripture, which exceedingly conduces to commend
the happyness of the godly; for God will not only be the Keeper and Guardian of
them that fear him, but has also appointed the Ministry of Angels; and the
Argument of the tempter seems to be taken from the less to the greater: for
if it be true of every one that trusts in God, and dwells in the shadow of
the Almighty, that God will have such a care of him, much more will he have a
care of his beloved son, in whom he is well pleased. Therefore you that are
declared to be so from Heaven, and having such an occasion to show your self to
be the son of God, with so much honor and profit; Why should you scruple to
cast your self down?

But wherein was the devil faulty in citing the Scripture? some say in leaving
out those words in all thy ways. This was Bernards gloss: in viis, non in
praecipitiis: will keep you in your ways, or duties, not in your headlong
actions, these were none of his ways to throw himself down from the
battlements of the Temple. This is not to be altogether rejected because it
reaches the sense, yet this omission was not the devils fault in citing this
Scripture, for all thy ways signifies no more but in all thy actions and
businesses, and that is sufficiently employed in the words cited by Satan. But
the devils error was in application. He applies the Word of God, not to
instruct but deceive, rather to breed a contempt, disdain, and hatred of
Scriptures, then a reverend esteem of them, to make the Word of God seem
uncertain; or if a reverence of them, to turn this reverence into an occasion
of deceit: more particularly to tempt God to a needless proof of his power. We
are not to cast our selves into danger, that Providence may fetch us off. God
will protect us in the evils we suffer, not in the evils we commit: not in
dangers we seek, but such as befall us besides our intention.

Thirdly, The soreness of this temptation, which appears in several things.

1. The change of place, for a new temptation, he makes choice of a new place;
he could do no good on him in the wilderness, therefore he takes him, and
carries him into the Holy City: here was a public place where Christ might
discover himself with profit, and the edification of many if he would but
submit to the devils methods. In the Temple the Messiah was as in his own
House, where 'twas fit the Messiah should exhibit himself to his people: There
was an old Prophecy, Mal. 3. 1. The Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come
into his Temple, even the messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in. And he
was to send forth his rod out of Sion, even the Law of his Kingdom, Psalm. 110.
2. If he would yield to this advice, and vain glorious ostentation of his
power, before that numerous multitude, which continually resorted to the Holy
things performed in the Temple, how soon should he be manifested to be the Son
of God, or the power of the great God. The Devil does not persuade him to cast
himself from a Rock or top of a Tree in the Desert, that had been temerity and
rashness; but from a pinnacle of the Temple, an Holy place, and a place of much
resort. But the Son of God was not to be discovered to the world by the Devils
methods. That had been such a piece of ostentation and vain glory, as did not
become the Son of God, who came to teach the World humility. But however the
temptation is grievous, in so good a design, in such an Holy place, there could
no ill happen to the Son of God, nor a better occasion be offered of showing
himself to many, so to confirm the Jews in the Truth of the Oracle they had of
late heard from Heaven.

2. The change of temptations: since he will trust, the devil will put him upon
trusting; he shall trust as much as he will. There he tempted him to the use of
unlawful means to preserve his life, here to the neglect of things lawful.
There that God would fail him if he were still obedient to the spirit, and did
not take another course then divine Providence had as yet offered to him; here,
that God would not forsake him, though he threw himself into danger. There,
that he would fail though he had promised; here, that he would help though he
had not promised. That Faith which sustained him in his hunger, would preserve
him in this precipice, if he expected his preservation from God, why not now?
He had hitherto tempted him to diffidence, now to prefidence, or an
over-confident presumption, that God would needlessly show his power. It is
usual with the tempter to tempt man on both sides; sometimes to weaken his
Faith, at other times to neglect his duty. He was cast out of Heaven himself,
and he is all for casting down.

3. The temptation was the more strong, being veiled under a pretense of
Scripture, and so Christ's weapons seem to be beaten back upon himself. The
devil tempted him to nothing but what he might be confident to do upon the
promise of God. Now it is grievous to Gods Children, when the rule of their
lives, and the Charter of their hopes is abused to countenance a temptation.

Secondly, The Observations.

1. Observe, That the first temptation being rejected by Christ, Satan makes a
new assault. Though he get the foil he will set on us again; like a troublesome
fly that is often beaten off, yet will return to the same place. Thus the devil
when he could do no good upon his first Patent against Jobs Goods and Children,
comes and sueth for a new Commission, that he might touch his flesh and bones,
Job 2. 4, 5. Skin for skin, ye all that a man has will he give for his Life.
But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will
curse thee to thy face. Satan is uncessant in his attempts against the Saints,
and is ready to assault afresh upon every occasion. Now this comes to pass by
Satan's unwearied malice, who is a sworn enemy to our peace and welfare, he
still seeks to devour us, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Also from Gods Providence who
permits this, that we may not be careless and secure after temptation,
though we have gotten the victory. For our Life is a continual warfare, Job 7.
1. Is there not an appointed time for man upon earth? The same word signifies
also a warfare. Man's Life is a perpetual toil, and a condition of manifold
temptations and hazards, such as a Soldier is exposed to; therefore we must
perpetuperpetually watch. We get not an absolute victory till death. Now this
should the more prevail with us, because many of Gods Peoplehave failed after
some eminent service performed for God. Josiah after he had prepared the
Temple, fell into that rash attempt against Pharaoh Necho which cost him his
Life, 2 Chro. 35. 20. After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple,
Necho king of Egypt came up to fight against Carchemish by Euphrates, and
Josiah went out against him. And Peter, after he had made a glorious
Confession, gives his Master carnal counsel, Mat. 16. 18. Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock will I build my church, etc. and yet Ver. 23. Get thee behind
me, Satan. Many after they have been much lifted up in consolation, do readily
miscarry; first he made a glorious confession, a sign of great Faith; then
carnal wisdom vents its self in some counsel concerning the ease of the flesh.
Oh what need have we to stand upon our guard, till God tread Satan under our
feet! As one of the Roman Generals, whether conquering or conquered, semper
instaurat pugnam; so does Satan.

2. Observe, God may give Satan some power over the body of one whom he loves
dearly. For Satan is permitted to transport Christ's body from the wilderness to
the Holy City, and to set it on a Pinnacle of the Temple. As it is very
consistent with Gods Love to his People to suffer them to be tempted in their
souls by the fiery darts of Satan; so he may permit Satan to afflict their
bodies, either by himself, or by Witches, who are his Instruments. Thus he
permitted Satan to afflict Job, chap. 2. 6, 7. And the Lord said unto Satan,
Behold, he is in thy hand, but save his life. So went satan forth from the
presence of the Lord, and smote Job with sore boils, from the sole of his foot
unto his crown. The devil may have a threefold power over the bodies of men.

1. By Transportations, or carrying them from one place to another, which
usually is not found, but in those that give up themselves to his Diabolical
Enchantments. Or,

2. In Possessions, which were frequent and rife in Christ's time. My daughter
is sorely vexed with a devil, Mat. 15. 22. Or,

3. In Diseases, which is more common. Thus he afflicted Jobs body with Ulcers;
and what we read, Psalm. 41. 8. An evil disease cleaves fast unto him. It is
(...) a thing of Belial, as if it a were a pestilential disease from the devil.
So some understand that, Psalm. 91. 3. Surely he shall deliver thee from the
snare of the fowler, and from the noisome Pestilence. As if those sudden darts
of Venom by which we are stricken in the Plague, came from Satan. Certainly
evil Angels may have a great hand in our diseases, Psalm. 78. 49. He cast upon
them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation and trouble, by
sending evil angels among them. But I press it not much. Only

1. A word of Patience, that we would submit to God, though our trials be never
so sharp. We must yield to that measure of Humiliation, which it shall please
God to prescribe. If he should give leave to Satan to inflame our blood, and
trouble the humors of our body, we must not repine; the Son of God permitted
his sacred body to be transported by the devil in the Air.

2. A word of Comfort. Whatever power God permits Satan to have over our
bodies, or bodily interests, yet it is limited, he cannot hurt or molest any
further than God pleases. He had power to set Christ on a Pinnacle of the
Temple, but not to cast him down. He had a power to touch Job's skin, but a
charge not to endanger his Life, Job 2. 6. Behold, he is in thine hand, but
save his life. God sets bounds and limits to the malice of Satan, that he is
not able to compass all his designs. Job was to be exercised, but God would not
have him dye in a cloud, his life was to be secured till better times.

3. A word of Caution. Let not the Devil make an advantage of those troubles,
which he brings upon our Bodies, or the interests of the bodily Life, yet let
him not thereby draw you to sin. Here the devil may set Christ upon a
precipice, but he can do him no further hurt; he may persuade us to cast down
our selves, but he cannot cast us down, unless we cast down our selves, Nemo
laeditur nisi a seipso. His main spite is at your souls, to involve you in
sin. God may give him, and his Instruments a power over your bodily lives; but
he does not give him a power over the Graces of the Saints. The devil aims at
the destruction of souls; he can let men enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, that he may deprive you of delight in God, and celestial pleasures; he
can be content that you shall have Dignities and Honors, if they prove a snare
to you. If the devil seek to bring you to Poverty, Trouble and Nakedness, it is
to draw you from God. He cares not for the Body, but as it may be an occasion
to ruin the Soul.

3. Observe, If Satan lead us up, it is to throw us down. He takes up Christ
to the Pinnacle of the Temple, and says unto him, Cast thy self down. He
brings up many by little and little to some high place, that by their
aspiring they may at length break their necks. Thus he did Haman, and so he
does many others, whose climbing makes way for their greater fall. The devil
himself was an aspirer, and fell from Heaven like Lightning, Luke 10. 18. I
beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven: And tho in show he may seem to
befriend many that hearken to his Temptations, yet in the end he cries, down
with them, down with them even to the ground. Gods manner is quite contrary,
when he means to exalt a man, he will first humble him, and make him low,
Matthew. 23. 12. Whosoever shall exalt himself, shall be abased; and he that
shall humble himself, shall be exalted. But the devils way is to lift them up
to the Clouds, that he may bring them down to the lowest Pit of Destruction.
Adam in conceit must be like God, that indeed he may be like the beasts that
perish. Psalm. 49. 20. Man that is in honor, and understands not, is like the
beasts that perish.

4. Observe, If thou be the son of God, cast thy self down. The temptation is
quite contrary to what it was before: Then it was to preserve life by unlawful
means, now to endanger life by the neglect of means lawful; there to distrust
Gods care of our preservation, when he has set us about any task and work;
here to presume on his care without warrant. The devil tempts us sometimes to
pamper the flesh, sometimes to neglect it in such a way as is destructive to
our service. Thus the devil hurrieth us from one extreme to another, as the
possessed man fell oft-times into the fire, and often into the water, Matthew. 17.
15. Those that are guided by Satan reel from one extremity to another; either
men slight sin, and make light of it, or sinners are apt to sorrow above
measure, as the incestuous Corinthian, 2 Cor. 2. 17. Lest perhaps such an one
should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow. And the Apostle shows there,
that these were the enterprises of Satan. Some men are careless of Gods
interest in the World, or else heated into the activity of a bitter Zeal. Some
are of a scrupulous Spirit, that they make Conscience of all things; and the
devil hurrieth them into a large Atheistical Spirit, that they make conscience
of nothing: How often have we known a fond scrupulosity to end in a profane
Licentiousness, when they have been wearyed out of that kind of frame of
Spirit? Some are dead and heartless, like Gallio care for none of these things;
fight Christ, fight Antichrist, it is all one to them; and usually they are such
as formerly have been heated with a blind, and bold madness: As Peter at first
refused to have his feet washed by Christ, and then would have head, hands,
feet and all washed, Ioh. 13. 8, 9. being out in both. What sad work is there
made in the Church of God by Solifidians and Nullifidians: heretofore 'twas all
Faith and Free Grace misapplied and misunderstood; and now it is all Morality
and Virtue, while Christ is neglected, and the mystery of the Gospel little set
by or valued. It is ever the devils policy to work upon the humor of people:
If they will reform the Church, it shall be to a degree of separation, and
condemning all Churches and Christians that are not of their mode; if they be
for uniting, Christ's unquestionable interests must be trodden under foot, and
all care of Truth and Reformation must be laid aside. If he can destroy
Religion and Godliness no otherway, he will be religious and godly himself; but
it is either as to private Christians to set them upon overdoing, that he may
make them weary of the service of Christ; or as to the public, by crying up
some unnecessary things, which Christ never commanded. If men be troubled with
sin, and see a necessity of the Gospel, and prize the comforts of it, the
Gospel must be overgospelled, or else it will not serve their turns; and that
over-gospel must be carried to such a length, as to destroy the very Gospel,
and Free Grace it self. The devil first tempted the World to despise the poor
Fishermen, that preached the Gospel; but the World being convinced by the power
of the Holy Ghost, and gained to the Faith, then he sought by Riches and
Grandeur to debase the Gospel; so that he has got as much or more by the
worldly glory he puts upon Christ's Messengers, as by Persecution. Then when
that is discovered, the devil will turn Reformer; and what Reformation is that?
the very necessary support and maintenance of Ministers must be taken away.
All over-doing in Gods work is undoing. If Christ will trust, the devil will
persuade him to trust, even to the degree of tempting God.

5. Observe, That the Devil himself may pretend Scripture to put a varnish upon
his evil designs. For here he seeks to foil Christ with his own weapons.
Which serves to prevent a double extreme.

1. One is, not to be frighted with the mere noise and sound of Scriptures,
which men bring to countenance their errors. See whether they be not wrested
and misapplyed; for the devil may quote Scripture, but he perverts the meaning
of it. And usually it is so by his Instruments; as that Pope, who would prove a
double power to be in himself, Temporal and Spiritual, by that Scripture, Ecce
duo gladii! Behold, here are two Swords! Luke 22. 38. It is easy to rehearse
the words of Scripture, and therefore not the bare words, but the meaning must
be regarded.

2. The other extreme is this, Let none vilify the Scriptures, because pleaded
by Satan; for so he might as well vilify Human Reason, which is pleaded for
all the Errors in the World; or Law, because it is urged sometimes to justify
a bad Cause. For it is not Scripture, that is not a Nose of Wax, as Papists
say. It is a great proof of the Authority and honor of Scriptures, that Satan
and his greatest Instruments do place their greatest hopes of prevailing by
perverting and misapplying of it.

6. Observe, That God has given his Angels a special charge about his people,
to keep them from harm. Here I shall show, 1. That it is so. 2. Why it is so.


First, That it is so, is evident by the Scripture, which every where shows us,
that Angels are the first Instruments of his Providence, which he makes use of
in guarding his faithful servants, Heb. 1. 14. The Apostle says, Are they not
all (...), ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to them, that shall be
the heirs of salvation? Their work and employment is to attend us at Gods
direction; not to be worshipped, and served by us by any devotion. They are
ministering spirits, not ours, but Christ's; he that serves, has a Master whom
he serves, and by whom he is sent forth: their work and employment is to
attend us indeed, but at the command and direction of their own Master: they
are not at our beck to go and come at our pleasure, neither do they go and come
at their inclination; but at the Commission of God: Their work is appointed by
him, they serve us as their Masters Children, at his Command and Will; and whom
do they serve? the heirs of salvation. They are described, Titus 3. 7. That
being justified by grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of
eternal Life. They are not Ministers of conversion and sanctification; to this
Ministry Christ has called Men, not Angels; but in preserving the converted
the Angels have an hand. Therefore it is notable, they are sometimes called
Gods Angels, Psalm. 103. 21. Bless the Lord, all ye his hosts, ye ministers of
his that do his pleasure. sometimes their Angels; Matthew. 18. 10. Take heed,
that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto you, that in
heaven their angels do always behold the face of my father, which is in heaven.

But whether every one has an Angel-Guardian, is a curious Question. Sometimes
one Angel serves many Persons, Psalm. 34. 7. The angel of the Lord encampeth
round about them that fear him, and delivers them. And sometimes many Angels
are about one person; 2 King. 6. 17. And behold, the mountain was full of
horses and chariots round about Elisha. And here in the Text quoted by satan,
He shall give his angels charge concerning thee. There is not mention made of
one, but many Angels, and the Angels in general are said to be ministering
spirits. When soldiers are said to watch for a City, it is not meant that
every Citizen has a Soldier to watch for him.

The only place, which seems to countenance that Opinion, is Acts 12. 15.
Then said they, it is his Angel. But if Peter had a peculiar Angel to guard
him, and look after him then, when he was in great trouble, and detained in
prison; it does not follow that every person, and every where should have an
Angel-Guardian. Besides an assertion in Scripture must be distinguished from
men introduced speaking in Scripture; it shows indeed, that it was the
Opinion of the Jews at that time, which these holy men had imbibed and drunk
in. Or it may be the word Angel is only taken for a Messenger sent from Peter;
why should an Angel stand knocking at the door, who could easily make his
entrance? And is it credible that the Guardian Angels do take their shape and
habit, whose Angels they are? It is enough for us to believe that all the
Angels are our Guardians, who are sent to keep us, and preserve us, as it
pleases God.

But what is their Ministry and Custody? It is not cura animarum, care and
charge of Souls, that Christ takes upon himself, and performs it by his
Spirit; but ministerium externi auxilii, to afford us outward help and relief:
It is custodia corporis, they guard the bodily life chiefly. Thus we find them
often employed. An Angel brought Elijah his food under the Juniper Tree, 1
King. 19. 5. An Angel stirred the waters at the Pool of Siloam, Ioh. 5. 4. An
Angel was the guide of the way to Abraham's servant, Genesis 24. 7. He will send
his angel before thee, and thou shall take a wife unto my son from thence.
Angels defend us against Enemies, Psalm. 34. 7. The angel of the Lord encampeth
round about them that fear him, and delivers them. 2 King. 19. 35. The Angel
of the Lord went out, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred
fourscore and five thousand. An Angel opened the Prison doors to the Apostles,
Acts 5. 19. and 12. 7.

But were not all these services extraordinary and Miraculous, which we may not
now expect?

Answ. The visible Ministry was extraordinary, proper to those times; but the
invisible is perpetual and ordinary, as Abraham's servant did not see the Angel
in the journey. The devil works in and about wicked men invisibly, so do the
good Angels.

Secondly, Reasons, Why it is so.

1. To manifest the great Love and Care, which God has over his people;
therefore he gives those blessed Spirits, which behold his face, charge
concerning his people on Earth; as if a Nobleman were charged to look to a
Beggar, by the Prince of both.

2. We understand the operation of finite Agents, better than infinite. God is
so far out of the reach of our commerce, that we cannot understand the
particularity of his Providence.

3. To counterwork the devil; evil Angels are ready to hurt us, and therefore
good Angels are ready to preserve us. Well might the devil be so well versed in
this place, he has often felt the effects of it, he knew it by experience,
being so often encountered by the good Angels in his endeavors against the
people of God.

4. To begin our acquaintance, which in Heaven shall be perfected, Heb. 12. 22.
Ye are come to an innumerable company of Angels.

USES.
1. To show the happy state of Gods people. No Heirs of a Crown have such
Guards as they have. Christ dwells in their hearts as in a Throne, Ephesians. 3.
17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. The Holy Spirit guardeth
them against all cares and fears, Phil. 4. 7. And the peace of God which
passes all understanding shall keep your hearts and minds through Jesus
Christ. And the good Angels are as a Wall and Camp about them, Psalm. 34. 7. The
Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them. Mat. 18. 10. Despise not one of these little ones, for verily I say unto
you, that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my father, which
is in heaven. If the Angels make an account of them, surely men should not
despise them: Yea rather, God esteems so much of the meanest of these little
ones, that the good Angels, who daily enjoy Gods glorious presence, are
ministering spirits appointed to attend them. If the Lord and his Holy Angels
set such a price on the meanest Christians, we should be loath to despise and
offend them.

2. It should breed some confidence and comfort in Christians in their sore
straits and difficulties, when all visible help seems to be cut off. This
invisible Ministry of the Angels is matter of Faith, 2 Kings 6. 16, 17. And he
answered, Fear not; for they that be with us, are more than they that be with
them. And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee, open the young man's eyes,
that he may see. And the Lord opened the young man's eyes, and he saw; and
behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about
Elisha. These were no other, but the Angels of God, which were as an host to
defend them. Open the eye of Faith, you may see God, and his holy Angels to
secure you.

3. Take we heed how we carry our selves, because of this Honorable presence.
In Congregations there should be no indecency, because of the Angels, 1 Cor.
II. IC. In all our ways let us take heed that we do not step out of Gods way.
Do nothing that is unseemly and dishonest, they are spies upon us. And it is
profitable for us, that they may give an account of us to God with joy, and not
with grief.

SERMON. IV.
MATTHEW. 4. 7. Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt
the Lord thy God.
HEre is Christ's Answer to the second Temptation; where two things are
Observable. First, That Christ Answered. Secondly, What he Answered.


First, That Christ Answered. Christ answered, the more to convince and
confound this old Deceiver, that he might not think that he was ignorant of his
sleights, or that he fainted in the conflict; as also to instruct us, what to
do in the renewed Assaults of the Devil, to keep up our resistance still, not
letting go our sure hold, which are the Scriptures.

Secondly, What he Answered; It is written, etc. But would it not have been
more satisfactory to have said, It is sufficiently manifest to me, that I am
the Son of God, and cared for by him, and that it is not for the children of
God to run upon Precipices?

I Answer. It is not for Humane Wisdom to interpose and prescribe to Christ,
who was the Wisdom and Power of God. His Answer is most satisfactory for two
Reasons; 1. It strikes at the Throat of the Cause. 2. It does with advantage
give us other instructions.


1. Christ cutteth the throat of the Temptation, by quoting a passage of
Scripture out of Deuteronomy. 6. 16. Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God, as ye
tempted him in Massah. If we must not tempt God, then it does not become Christ
to tempt his Fathers Providence for a new proof of his Filiation and care over
him. Therefore the devils temptation was neither good nor profitable, to put
either his Sonship, or the care of Gods Providence to this Trial: as if he had
said, I shall not require any more signs to prove my Filiation, nor express any
doubt of his Power and Goodness toward me, as the Israelites did, Exodus 17. 7.
And he called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah, because of the chiding
of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the Lord, saying, Is the
Lord among us or not? To which story, this prohibition of tempting God,
alludeth.

2. He does with advantage give us other Instructions; As

1. That we must not esteem the less of Scripture, though Satan and his
Instruments abuse it; and that nothing is more profitable to dissolve doubts
and objections raised from Scripture, than to compare one Scripture with
another. For scripture is not opposite to scripture; there is a fair Agreement
and Harmony between the truths therein compared; and one place does not cross
another, but clear and explain another. One place says, he has a great care
of his People, and uses the Ministry of Angels for that end and purpose; but
another place says, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God; they must not seek
out dangers, and forfeit their protection by unreasonable Presumption.

2. It teaches us, that what the Scripture speaks to all, is to be esteemed
as spoken to every singular Person, for they are included in their
Universality. In Deuteronomy it is, ye shall not tempt the Lord your God; but
Christ accommodateth it to his own purpose, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God. He that is not to be tempted by a multitude, is not to be tempted by any
one. So Psalm. 27. 8. When thou said, Seek ye my face, my heart said unto
thee, Thy face, Lord, will I seek. Gods words invite all, but David makes
Application to himself.

3. Christ subjects himself to the Moral Law, and did apply the Precepts
thereof to himself, no less than to us; and so is a Pattern of Obedience to us,
that we ought to direct and order all our Actions according to the Law and Word
of God.

Doctrine. Tempting of God may be an usual, but yet it is a great and heinous
sin. In speaking to this Point, I shall show.
I. What this Tempting of God is. II. The Heinousness of the Sin.
I. What is this Tempting of God. And here let me speak 1. To the Object. 2. To
the Act.


First, The Object; The Lord thy God. To us Christians there is but one only
true God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Now sometimes we are said to tempt God,
and sometimes Christ, and sometimes the Spirit of God.

1. In Scripture we are said to tempt God, as Psalm. 95. 9. When your fathers
tempted me, proved me, and saw my works. We tempt God either explicitly, or
implicitly.

1. Explicitly, by plain and direct words, which tend to Gods dishonor; or a
doubting of his Prescience, Power and Providence, if they have not all things
given them according to their fancies and humors. As Psalm. 78. 18, 19. They
tempted God in their hearts, by asking meat for their lusts. Yea they spoke
against God, and said, Can God provide a table in the wilderness? So Exodus 17.
7. Is the Lord in the midst of us, or no? They doubted whether Gods Presence
were among them, when they had continually such pregnant proofs of it. The
words may either bear this sense; Who knows that God is present? Or, Now see
whether God be present, or takes any care of us, yea or no.

2. Implicitly, or by Interpretation, which is a more secret way of tempting
God; when the Act speaks it, whatever be the intention of the Doer. As those
who were about to lay the burden of the Rites of Moses's Law, on the new
converts of the Gentiles, Acts 15. 10. Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a
yoke upon the necks of the disciples, which neither our fathers, nor we were
able to bear? That is, why do you not acquiesce in the Will of God, apparently
manifested, as if ye did go about to try, whether God did require any thing of
his servants, besides Faith in Christ? His Will was clearly evident in the
case, by what happened to Cornelius: Or as if ye would try, whether God will
take it well, that ye should impose upon his Disciples a yoke that he approves
not.

2. We are said to tempt Christ; and he may be considered, either as in the
days of his Flesh; or in his state of glory, and with respect to his invisible
presence.

1. In the days of his Flesh, he was frequently tempted by the Scribes and
Pharisees, who would not be satisfied in his Mission, notwithstanding all the
signs and wonders, that he had wrought among them; or else sought to accuse,
and disgrace him, and prejudice the people against him; so Matthew. 16. 1. The
Pharisees with the Sadducees came, and tempting him, desired him, that he would
show them a sign from heaven. So Matthew. 22. 18. Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites?
When the Pharisees and the Herodians came to question him about paying Tribute.
So Luke 10. 25. A certain Lawyer stood up, and tempted him, etc.

2. In his state of Glory, and with respect to his invisible presence. So the
Israelites in the Wilderness tempted him before his coming in the flesh; and
Christians may now tempt him, after his Ascension into Heaven. Both are in one
place, 1 Cor. 10. 9. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted,
and were destroyed of serpents. What was their tempting of Christ in the
Wilderness? If he be considered as God, he had a subsistence before he was
incarnate of the Virgin; and in this sense, as they tempted God, so they may be
said also to tempt Christ; for all the affliction, shame and disgrace, done to
that people, are called the Reproach of Christ; Heb. 11. 26, 27. Choosing
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season. Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches, than the
treasures of Egypt. So their murmuring might be called a tempting of Christ.
Christ was the perpetual Head of the Church, who in his own Person did lead the
people, and was present in the midst of them under the notion of the Angel of
the Covenant: The Eternal Son of God guided them in the Wilderness, Exodus 23.
20, 21, 22, 23. Behold, I will send an angel before thee, to keep thee in the
way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared. Beware of him, and
obey his voice, provoke him not: for he will not pardon your transgressions:
for my name is in him. But if thou shall indeed obey his voice, and do all that
I speak, then I will be an enemy to thy enemies, and an adversary unto thine
adversaries. For mine angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the
land of the Amorites, etc. This Angel can be no other than Christ, whose office
it is to keep us in the way, and to bring us into the place which Christ has
prepared for us; he it is that must be obeyed by the people of God, and pardon
their transgressions; in him is Gods Name, for he will not communicate it to
any other, that is not of the same substance with himself: God is in him, and
he in the Father, and his name is Jehovah our Righteousness. So Exodus 33. 14.
My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest. My presence, that
is, my Angel, spoken of before, called the angel of his presence. Isa. 63. 9.
In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved
them. This Angel is called Jehovah, Exodus 13. 21. And the Lord went before
them, by day in a pillar of a cloud, etc. This Angel of Gods presence was no
other than Jesus Christ, the conductor of them in the Wilderness, who
safe-guarded them, and secured them all the way from Egypt to Canaan. And we
Christians may also tempt Christ, for the Apostle warns us against it: We
tempt Christ now he is ascended into Heaven, when we disobey his Laws,
question his Authority, doubt of his Promises, after sufficient means of
conviction, that he is the Messiah, the Son of God; grow weary of his Religion,
lothing spiritual Manna, and begin to be glutted with the Gospel, and are
discouraged in the way to our heavenly Canaan, whither we are traveling.

3. The Holy Ghost is said also to be tempted, Acts 5. 9. How is it that ye
have agreed together to tempt the spirit of the Lord? Namely by their
Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, putting it to the trial, whether he could
discover them in their sin, yea or no; they had endeavored, as much as in them
lay, to deceive the Spirit, by keeping back part of the price; that is, by that
practice they would put it to the trial, whether the Holy Ghost yea or no could
find out that cheat and fallacy. It is not barely to deceive the Apostle, who
was full of the Holy Ghost, and had a discerning spirit, though to them they
brought their lie; no, says the Apostle, ye have not lied unto men, but unto
God, Ver. 4. and therefore they are said to tempt the Holy Ghost, whether he
could find them out or no: though they had so many experiences of his care and
respect to the Church, and all affairs belonging thereunto, and so the injury
was done, not to the Apostles, but to the Holy Ghost himself.

Secondly, The Act. What is this Tempting of God? Temptation is the proving and
making Trial of a Thing or Person, what he is, and what he will do. Thus we
tempt God, when we put it to the Trial, whether God will be as good as his
Word, and doubt of the cominatory and promissory part thereof; or whether he
will be such an one as he is taken to be. Now this is lawful or unlawful,
according as the Trial is made humbly and dutifully; or else proudly and
sinfully, whether God will do such a thing as we have prescribed him: And
again, as the trial is made necessarily or unnecessarily; sinfully we are said
to tempt God, when we make an unnecessary experiment of his Truth, Goodness,
and Power and Care of us, having had sufficient assurance of these things
before.

1. There is a tempting or proving of God in a way of Duty. So we are bidden,
Malachi 3. 10. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be
meat in mine house, and prove me now therewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I
will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that
there shall not be room enough to receive it. God there submits to a trial
upon experience; though we are to believe him upon his bare word, yet he will
have us to wait for the good things promised; and in this sense it is said, The
word of the Lord is a tried word, he is a buckler to all them, that trust in
him, Psalm. 18. 30. All those, that build any hope upon it, and wait to see what
the Lord will do, will find, that God will stand to his Word. This is a
constant duty to observe Gods Truth and Faithfulness. To suspend our belief
till the event is distrust; but to wait, observing what God will do, as to the
event, is an unquestionable Duty.

2. There is an allowed trying of God in some cases, I cannot say it is a Duty,
because it is only warrantable by Gods special indulgence and dispensation; and
I cannot say it is a sin, because of Gods gracious condescension to his People,
Judges 6. 39. And Gideon said unto God, Let not thine anger be hot against me,
and I will speak but this once; Let me prove, I pray thee, but this once with
the fleece, let it be now dry only upon the fleece, and upon all the ground let
there be dew. The request was not of distrust and malice, but of infirmity and
from a weak Faith; not out of Infidelity to tempt God, but out of Humility,
being sensible of his own weakness, he desired this help, for the further
confirmation of his Faith concerning his calling to this work, as an Instrument
authorized, and the issue and success of it; and also to assure others who
followed him. To this head I refer Thomas his proof and trial, Ioh. 20. 25.
Except I see in his hand the print of the nails, and put my finger into the
print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe. Here
was weakness in Thomas, to suspend his Faith upon such a condition, but an
Apostle was to be (...), an Eyewitness of those things which were done,
especially of his Resurrection; and therefore Christ meekly condescended to his
request, ver. 27. Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and reach
hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not faithless but
believing. I put it among infirmities, he allows him his trial of sense, but
with some rebuke. To this head may be referred that of Hezekiah, who when he
was sick of a mortal disease, and the Lord had extraordinarily promised him on
his mourning, that he should be recovered again, he asks a sign for the
confirmation of his Faith, and God grants it him, 2 Kings 20. 8, 9. And the
instance of Ahaz, who when the Prophet bid him ask a sign, he said, Isa. 7. 12.
I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord. He believed nothing of what the
Prophet had spoke, and was resolved to go on in his way, but he pretended a
reverend and religious respect to God. This kind of tempting God is tolerable,
being an act of condescension in God to the weakness of his People.

3. There is a sinful Tempting of God, and this is done two ways.

1. Generally, every Transgression in a general sense is a tempting of God,
Number. 14. 22. They have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened
to my voice. Every eminent and notable provocation of theirs is called a
tempting of God. Hereby they make trial of Gods Justice, whether he will
execute vengeance upon them or no. Thus we tempt Christ, when we fall into any
voluntary and known sin, we put it to the trial, what he will or can do, we
enter into the Lists with God, provoke him to the Combat, 1 Cor. 10. 22. Do we
provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he? We try, whether God
will be so severe as his threatening speaks him to be, as if we would make some
experiment of his Anger, Justice and Power. This kind of tempting of God is
compounded of Infidelity and Presumption. There is Infidelity in it, when we
dare sin against the clear light and checks of Conscience, and venture upon his
Threatenings: You cannot drive a dull Ass into the fire that is kindled before
him, Prove. 1. 17. Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.
And there is presumption in it, therefore these voluntary Acts of Rebellion are
called presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19. 13. Keep back thy servant also from
presumptuous sins. Gross and scandalous sinners are described to be such as
tempt God, Mal. 3. 15. And now we call the proud happy, yea they that work
wickedness are set up; yea they that tempt God are even delivered. And Ananias
and Saphira are said to tempt the Holy Ghost, Acts 5. 9. By open voluntary sins
men dare God to his face; by secret sins we put it to the trial, whether God be
an all-seeing God, and will discover this Hypocrisy: both conclude they shall
do well enough, though they break his Laws, and run wilfully upon evil
practices, forbidden by his Law.

2. More Particularly, we tempt God two ways, in a way of Distrust or
Presumption. Both these arise from unbelief, though they seem to be contrary
extremes; for though Presumption may seem to arise from an
over-much-confidence, yet if it be narrowly searched into, we shall find that
men presume upon unwarrantable courses, because they do not believe that God
will do what is meet to be done in his own time, or in his own way. As for
instance, had the Israelites believed that God in his own time, and in his own
way, would have destroyed the Canaanites, they would not have presumed against
an express charge to have gone against them, without the Ark, and without
Moses, as they did Numb. 14. 40. to the end. They presumed to go up unto the
Hill-top, and then they were discomfited. But Presumption in some being most
visible, in others distrust, therefore we make two kinds of them.

(1.) In a way of Distrust. And that is done several ways, but all agree in
this; not content with what God has done already to settle our Faith, we
prescribe means of our own, and indent with him upon terms of our own making.
So the Israelites, Exodus 17. 7. And he called the name of the place Massah, and
Meribah, because of the chiding of the children of Israel, and because they
tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord among us, or not? They had sufficient
signs of Gods Presence, the pillar of a Cloud and Fire, that went before them
by day and by night, but they would have signs of their own. So the Jews are
said to tempt Christ, because they sought a sign from heaven, Matthew. 16. 1. The
Pharisees also, with the Sadducees came, and tempting desired him, that he
would show them a sign from heaven. He had given sufficient evidence of his
Mission and Divine Power, in casting out devils, and healing the sick and
diseased; but they would have, a sign from heaven, some sign of their own
prescribing. The Devil is ready to put such thoughts into our Minds. If God be
with us, let him show it by doing this or that; and we are apt to require
stronger proofs of Gods power and presence with us, than he allows. This is a
frequent sin now a days, and men are many ways guilty of it.

(1.) Some will not believe the Gospel, except they see a Miracle, or hear an
Oracle. Christ represents their thoughts, Luke 16. 30. Nay, Father Abraham,
if one went to them from the dead, then they would repent. They would have
other ways of assurance than God allows, and are not content with his Word
and Works, by which he reveals himself to us, but will at their own pleasure
make trial of his Will and Power, and then believe. These tempt God, and
therefore no wonder, if God will not do for them that which they require.

(2.) Some will not believe Gods Providence, but make question of his Power and
Goodness, and care over us, and our welfare, when he has given us sufficient
proof thereof. When he has taken care to convince our infidelity, by supplying
our wants, and has done abundantly enough already for evidencing his Power,
Justice and Truth, and readiness to help us; we will not believe unless he give
us new, and extraordinary proof of each, such as we prescribe to him, Psalm. 95.
9, 10. When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works. Forty years
long was I grieved with this generation; and said, It is a people, that do err
in their hearts, and they have not known my ways. They saw his works, were fed
with Miracles, and clothed with Miracles, yet they must have new proof still.
Two ways of Tempting him as to his providence the Scripture mentions.

1 One was their setting God a task of satisfying their conceits and carnal
Affections, Psalm. 78. 18. And they tempted God in their hearts, by asking meat
for their lusts. Of this sin they are guilty that must be maintained at such a
rate, must have such provision for them and theirs, or else they cannot believe
his Truth and Care of them. As the Israelites, God must give them festival diet
in the Wilderness, or else they will no longer believe his power, and serve him.

2 The other way of tempting God with respect to his Providence, was by
confining him to their own Time, Manner and Means of working, Psalm. 78. 41. Yea
they turned back, and tempted God, and limited the holy One of Israel. To limit
the Holy One is to confine him within a Circle of their own making, and if he
does not help them by their Means, and at their Time, as those in the Text,
they will not tarry Gods leisure, they think there is no depending on him for
any succor. Thus they set bounds to his Wisdom and Power, as if he could do no
more, than they conceive to be probable. Thus also we prescribe Means and Time
to God, take upon us to set rules to him, how he should govern the World. And
one usual way of tempting God now is, when we will not go fair and softly in
the path and pace of Gods appointing, but are offended at the tediousness
thereof, and make haste, and take more compendious ways of our own, Isa. 28.
16. He that believes will not make have; but he that believes not is
precipitant, must have Gods Mercy, Power and Goodness manifested to them in
their own way and time.

(3.) Some will not be satisfied as to their spiritual Estate without some
sensible proof, or such kind of Assurance, as God usually vouchsafes not to
his people. As suppose they must be fed with spiritual dainties, and overflow
with sensible consolation in every holy duty, or else they are filled with
disquieting thoughts about their acceptance with God. We must have matters of
Faith put under the view and feeling of sense, or else we will not take comfort
in them. But we mustnot limit God to give proofs of his Love, nor prescribe
such signs, as are not promised by him, but study our case in the Word. For God
will not always treat us by sensible experience. Thomas is allowed to touch
Christ, but Mary is not allowed to touch him, Ioh. 20. 17. compared with verse
27.

2. In a way of Presumption; so we tempt God, when without any warrant we
presume of Gods Power and Providence. As here the devil tempted Christ to cast
himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple, to try if he would take the charge
of him in the Fall; whereupon Christ replyeth, Thou shall not tempt the Lord
thy God. Now this is done several ways.

1 When we presume upon Gods help, forsaking the ordinary way and means. Christ
would not throw himself down, when he could go down by the stairs or steps of
the Temple. Down stairs and over the battlements is not all one. Christ that
could walk upon the Sea in the distress of his Disciples, in ordinary cases
takes a Ship. Whosoever will not use the ordinary means, that God has
appointed, but in ordinary cases expects extraordinary supplies tempts God.
God is able to bring water out of the Rock, when there is nothing but Rock and
Stone; but when we may hope to find spring water, we must dig for it. God can
rain Manna out of heaven; but when the Soil will bear Corn, we must Till it.
When Elisha was in a little Village, not able to defend him from the Syrians,
he had Chariots and Horsemen of Fire to defend him, 2 King. 6. 17. but when he
was in Samaria, a strong walled town, and the King of Israel sent to fetch his
head, he said to those that were with him, shut the door, ver. 32. Christ in
the Wilderness miraculously fed many; but near the City he sent his disciples
to buy bread, Ioh. 4. 8. When the Church of God had need of able helps at
first, Gifts were miraculously conferred; but afterward every man to his
study, 1 Timothy 4. 15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them,
that thy profiting may appear to all. In short, Gods Omnipotency is for that
time discharged, when we have ordinary means to help our selves. To disdain
ordinary means, and expect extraordinary, is as if a man should put off his
clothes, and then expect God should keep him from cold.

2 When we expect the End without the Means. If Hezekiah had refused the bunch
of Figs, or Paul's companions to tarry in the Ship, they had tempted God. When
we desire any blessing, we must not refuse, or neglect any good means for
attaining of it. In spiritual things this is very usual; men hope to have the
End without the Means. In temporal things we will soon confess there must be
means used, for if any would not work, neither should he eat, 2 These. 3. 10. In
warfare no victory is to be hoped for without fighting; only in spiritual
matters we think to do well enough, though we never put to our endeavors, to
cry for knowledge, and to dig for it; this is a tempting of God, Prove. 2. 3, 4,
5. If thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding;
if thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her, as for hid treasures.
Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.
We dream of Heaven, when there is no Mortification, no exercising our selves
unto Godliness. A great many say as Balaam did, Let me die the death of the
righteous, and let my last end be like his, Numb. 23. 10. but they care not for
living the life of the Righteous. If they can but charm themselves into a
secure presumption of Salvation, they never give diligence to make their
Calling and Election sure. This comes from hardness of Heart, not strength of
Faith. Many defer their Conversion to the last, and then think that in the
twinkling of an eye they shall in a trice be in Heaven, with Elias in a
Whirlwind. It was a Prayer of Sir Thomas More, Domine, Deus, fac me in iis
consequendis operam collocare, pro quibus obtinendis te orare soleo. Lord! make
me to bestow pains in getting those things, for the obtaining of which I use to
pray to thee. Otherwise we tempt God.

3 When without Call we rush into any danger, or throw our selves into it, with
an expectation God will fetch us off again. As if Christ, when no body went
about to thrust him down, should wilfully have cast himself down. Whether the
danger be certain, or inevitable, or very probable, we must not throw our
selves on it; but when God calls us, then we may expect his help according to
his promise, as to go into places or houses infected. In spiritual cases it is
often done, men that by often experience have found such and such things to be
occasions to them of sinning, yet presume to do the same again. These tempt
God, ride into the Devils quarters, go into dangerous Places and Companies,
where they are like to be corrupted; as Peter went into the High Priests Hall,
and those that go to live in Popish Families. We pray, that we be not led into
temptations, but when we lead our selves, what shall become of us? as we do,
when we cast our selves upon Temptations, and dangerous occasions of sin.

4 When we undertake things, for which we are not fitted and prepared either
habitually or actually: As to speak largely without Meditation; when an
unlearned man undertakes the handling a weighty Controversy, and a good cause
wants shoulders, we tempt God. When we undertake things above bodily
strength, all will condemn us; so to undertake things, that we have no ability
to perform, is unlawful. The sons of Sceva would take upon them to Exorcise the
Devil, and the man in whom the evil spirit was, leapt on them, and overcame
them, and prevailed against them, so that they fied out of that house naked and
wounded, Act. 19. 16.

5 Another sort of tempting God is, when we come to him with an Idol in our
hearts, that is, when people are resolved of a thing, they will go, and ask
counsel of God. In all matters we resolve on, we are to take Gods leave, and
counsel and blessing; but they first resolve, and then ask Gods Counsel. And
therefore God says, Ezekiel. 14. 4. Every man of the house of Israel, that
sets up his Idols in his heart, and puts the stumbling block of his
iniquity before his face, and comes to the Prophet, I the Lord will answer him
that comes according to the multitude of his Idols. Balaam had a mind to the
wages of unrighteousness, but yet he durst not go without God, and till God had
permitted him, he would be asking again and again, Numb. 22. 12. compared with
the 20 and 22 Verses. God answered him in wrath according to the Idol of his
Heart. Thus you see men tempt God, when either out of diffidence or presumption
they seek an experience of his Wisdom, Power, Justice, Truth, Goodness against
his Word and Command, and the order he has established; as the Israelites,
when means failed, murmured and prescribed Time, Means and Manner of
deliverance, as if they would subject God to their Lusts.

II. The Heinousness of the Sin.

1. Because it is a great Arrogance, when we seek thus to subject the Lord to
our Direction, Will, and Carnal Affections. Prescribing to God argues too
great an Ascribing to our selves. Certainly the Lord cannot endure that his
People, who ought wholly to depend upon him, submit to him, and be ruled by
him, should prescribe as they please, how and when he should help them; and
that his Power and Goodness should lacquey upon, and be at the beck of our idle
and wanton humors. The direction of the affairs of the world is one of the
Flowers of Gods Crown. Now to dislike of his Holy Government is a presumptuous
Arrogance in the creature; we will take upon us to model our mercies, and
choose our means, and will not tarry the time that he has appointed for our
relief, but will anticipate it, and shorten it according to our own Fancies.
God is Sovereign, we are as clay in his hands, he is our Potter, and must
prescribe the shape in which we must be formed, and the use we must be put to,
Ier. 18. 6. O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as the potter, says the
Lord? Behold, as the clay is in the potters hand, so are ye in mine hand, O
house of Israel. He has full right to dispose of the Creature, as he pleases,
and according to the counsel of his own Will, to which we are to be subject
without murmuring or repining. We cannot say to him, what make thou? or why
do thou this? Isa. 45. 9. Woe unto him that striveth with his maker, let the
potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth: shall the clay say to him,
that fashioneth it, what make thou? or thy work, he has no hands. Tempting
before the Event is the same almost with murmuring after the Event.

2. It is great Unbelief, or a calling into Question Gods Power, Mercy, and
Goodness to us. We should entirely depend upon God for Salvation, and whatsover
is necessary to salvation, and that he will supply our wants, and bring us out
of every straight, in a way most conducing to our own welfare, and his Honor.
But now we are not satisfied with the assurance God has given us in those
Laws of Commerce, which are established between him and us; we must have
extraordinary proofs, or else we question all. Tempting God seems rather to
be opposed to the Fear and Reverence, that we should have of him; yet
primarily, and in it self it is rather opposite to our Trust. And though we
take it for a sin which argues too much Trust, or an unwarrantable boldness in
expecting unusual ways of help from God; yet generally it belongs to
unbelief and diffidence, and arises from it. For therefore we put him to
proof, tempt, or make trial of God, because we distrust his help, and are not
satisfied with his Goodness and Power, till we have other Testimonies thereof,
than are ordinarily dispensed. Therefore this Reason is given of their tempting
God, because they believed not God, and trusted not in his Salvation, Psalm. 78.
22. They must have their own Salvation, their own way of supply or deliverance,
or else they cannot trust God, if he does not help them at their time, and by
their means.

3. It looseneth the bonds of all Obedience, because we set up new Laws of
Commerce between God and us. For when we suspect Gods Fidelity to us, unless he
do such things as we fancy, we suspect our Fidelity to him. Therefore
disobedience is made the fruit of tempting God, Psalm. 78. 56. Yea, they tempted
and provoked the most high God, and kept not his testimonies. They that tempt
God, cast away Gods Rule, and Gods terms of Obedience, and make others to
themselves. The Question is, whether God shall direct us, or we him? We say,
unless God will do thus and thus, we will no longer believe his power and serve
him.

4. It is great ingratitude, or a lessening Gods benefits and works already
done for us, Psalm. 78. 20. Behold he smote the rock, that the waters gushed
out, and the streams overflowed; can he give bread also? can he provide flesh
for his people? As if what he had done formerly were nothing. Now God cannot
endure to have his benefits lessened, or his former works forgotten and
despised.

5. It is wantonness rather than want puts us upon Tempting of God. There is a
Humor in men; we are very desirous to try Conclusions, condemning things
common, and are fond about strange Novelties. It was told the Israelites as
plain as could be, that they should not reserve Manna till the morning, and
they need not to have reserved it, they had fresh every day; yet they would
needs keep it for experiments sake, to try whether it would stink or no, Exodus
16. 20. And though they were forbidden to gather it on the Sabbath day, having
on the evening before enough for two days, and it was told them they should
find none on the Sabbath day, yet they must try. Where need is, there a man may
commit himself to the Providence of God, and rely upon him; and where means
fail us, God can help us by Prerogative, that we may say with Abraham, when we
have no help present, In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen, Genesis 22. 14.
and with Moses, when the Red Sea was before them, and the Enemy was behind
them, Fear ye not, stand still, and ye shall see the salvation of the Lord,
which he will show to you to day, Exodus 14. 13. when Elias was in distress, the
Angel brought him meat, 1 King. 19. 5, 6. when Hagar and Ishmael was in the
Wilderness, and the bottle spent, then God comforted her from Heaven, Genesis 21.
17. when the three Children were in the fiery furnace, then God sent an Angel
to be their Deliverer, Dan. 3. 28. But now in Wantonness to desire
extraordinary proofs of Gods care over us, when he has in ordinary ways
provided for us, is to tempt the Lord, Psalm. 106. 14. They lusted exceedingly
in the desert, and tempted God in the wilderness, when they had so many
convictions of Gods Power and Providence over them, which should in reason have
charmed them into a full and cheerful resignation and dependence upon him, they
remembering the Fleshpots in Egypt, must have their luxuriant Appetites
gratified; and because they had not that Festival plenty, which could not be
expected in the Wilderness, they reproached Moses for having brought them out
of Egypt, to dye in the Wilderness; and now God must show them a Miracle, not
for the supply of their wants, but to pamper and feed their lusts, Psalm. 78.
18, 19. And they tempted God in their heart, by asking meat for their lust. Yea
they spoke against God, they said, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? A
Table must be prepared, he must give them Festival diet in the Wilderness.

6. It argues Impatiency, Psalm. 106. 13, 14. They soon forgot his works, they
waited not for his counsel. But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and
tempted God in the desert. The word signifies, they made haste, took it ill,
they were not presently brought into that plenty, that was promised; Numb. 20.
5. Wherefore have ye made us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us in unto this
evil place: it is no place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of
pomegranates, neither is there any water to drink, which was the plenty that
was promised in the land of Canaan. Thus they made have, were impatient of
staying Gods time of giving them this inheritance, and because they had it not
presently, they wished themselves back again in Egypt. Tempting is because we
cannot attend the performance of Gods promise in his own time. They went out
passionately in the pursuit of their plenty, which they looked for, and as soon
as they discovered any difficulty, conclude they were betrayed, not waiting
with patience Gods time, when he should accomplish his promises made to them.

7. The greatness of the sin is seen by the punishments of it. One is
mentioned, 1 Cor. 10. 9. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also
tempted, and were destroyed of serpents. They were bitten of Serpents, because
they tempted God, and murmured because of the length of the way, that they
could not get presently into Canaan. And the Apostle tells us, that all the
things, which happened to Israel of old, happened to them (...), as patterns of
Providence. A people might easily read their own doom, and destiny, if they
would blow off the dust from the Ancient Providence of God, and observe what
proofs and characters of his Justice, Wisdom and Truth are engraven there. The
desert of sin is still the same, and the exactness of Divine Justice is still
the same; and therefore what has been is a pledge and document of what may be,
if we fall into like Crimes. God is impartially and immutably just, he is but
one, Gal. 3. 20. God is one always Consonant unto himself, and does like unto
himself; his Power is the same, so is his Justice. Even the historical part of
the Word is a kind of Prophecy, not only a Register and Chronicle of what is
past, but a kind of Calendar and Prognostication of what is to come. As other
Histories in Scripture are left upon record for our Learning, so especially the
History of Israel's passage through the Wilderness unto Canaan.

USE.
Let us not tempt God in any of the kinds mentioned.

1. Not by requiring new grounds of Faith, when God has given sufficient
already; not by cherishing Scepticisme and Irresolution in point of Religion,
till new Nuncios come from Heaven, with a power to work Miracles, and to be
endowed with extraordinary Gifts, as the seekers do. Many waver in Religion,
would fain see an Apparition, and have some extraordinary satisfaction, which
God would not give them upon every trifling occasion. The Pharisees must have a
fign from Heaven: The Papists would have the Protestant Teachers show their
Commission by Miracles: The Jews would believe if Christ came down from the
Cross. To suspend our Faith, till God give us our own terms, is to tempt God;
and to disposses you of this conceit, consider

1. Signs and Wonders done in one Age and Time for the confirmation of the true
Religion, should suffice all Ages and Times afterward; and it is a tempting God
to ask more signs and wonders, for the confirmation of that Truth, which is
sufficiently confirmed already, if there be a good and safe Tradition of these
things to us. The giving of the Law was attended with thunderings and
lightnings, and the sound of a terrible Trumpet, Exodus 19. by which means the
Law was Authorized, and owned as proceeding from God: Now it was not needful
this should be repeated in every Age, as long as a certain Report and Records
of it might convey it to their Ears. In the setting up a new Law, signs and
wonders are necessary, to declare it to be of God; but when the Church is in
the possession of it, these cease. So in the Christian Church, when the Gospel
was first set on foot, it was then confirmed with signs and wonders, but now
they are unnecessary. See the Law and Gospel compared, Heb. 2. 2, 3, 4. For if
the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of reward. How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord,
and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him, God also bearing them
witness, both with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles, and gifts of
the holy Ghost, according to his own will.

2. If you had lived in the Age of signs and wonders, there were hard hearts
then, unbelievers then, and blasphemers then, and tempters of God then, Psalm.
78. 22, 23, 24. Because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his
salvation: Though he had commanded the clouds from above, and opened the doors
of heaven: And had rained manna upon them to eat, and had given them of the
corn of heaven, etc. to Ver. 32. For all this they sinned still, and believed
not for his wondrous works. Extraordinary works will not work upon them, upon
whom ordinary works will not prevail.

Object. But for them that have to do with the conversion of Indians, and
remote parts of the World, is it a tempting of God to ask the gift of Miracles?

Answ. I cannot say so. God may be humbly sought unto about direction in the
Gifts of Tongues, and Healing, being so necessary for the Instruments employed,
as well as the conviction of the Nations. I dare not determine any thing in the
case, but I am satisfied with Acostus his Reasons, why Miracles are not
afforded by God now, as well as in the primitive times. Then simple and
unlearned men were sent to preach Christianity among the Nations, where many
were armed and instructed against it with all kind of Learning and Philosophy:
But now learned men are sent to the ignorant, and are superior to them in
Reason, and in Civility and Authority; and besides present them a Religion far
more credible than their own, that they cannot easily withstand the light of it.

2. Do not run into any wilful and known sin, as if you would try, how far the
Patience of God will go; nor abuse his fatherly goodness, by going on still in
your Trespasses. When a man will try the patience of God without any regard of
his Threatenings, or the instances of his Wrath, which are before his eyes, he
puts it to the proof, whether God will punish him, yea or no. Remember you are
no match for him, Isa. 45. 9. Woe unto him, that striveth with his maker; let
the potsherds strive with the potsherds of the earth; As Abner said to Asahel,
2 Samuel 2. 21, 22. Turn thee aside to thy right hand, or to thy left, and lay
thee hold on one of the young men, and take thee his Armor. But Asahel would
not turn aside from following of him. And Abner said again to Asahel, Turn thee
aside from following me, wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? So if you
will needs be tempting and trying Conclusions, and making Experiments, let men
meddle with their Match, those who are equal to themselves, not challenging one
infinitely above them; let frail man cope with man, but let him take heed of
meddling with God, Ezekiel. 22. 14. Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be
strong in the days that I shall deal with thee? Many foolish people say, as
those in the Prophet, It is an evil, and I must bear it; endure it as well as I
can. What, endure the loss of Heaven! endure the Wrath of the Almighty God! If
Rachel could not endure the loss of her Children, nor Jacob the supposed loss
of Joseph, but says he, I will go down into the grave unto my son, mourning,
Genesis 37. 35. If Achitophel could not endure the rejectment of his counsel, and
Haman could not endure to be slighted by Mordecai, and many cannot endure the
loss of a beloved Child; how will thou endure the loss of eternal Happiness!
The Disciples wept bitterly when Paul said, ye shall see my face no more, Acts
20. 38. What will ye do then, when God shall say, ye shall see my face no more?
Ah Wretch! how can thou endure the Wrath of God! Thou can not endure to be
scorched a few days with feavorish Flames, thou can not endure the acute
pains of Stone and Gout, when God armeth the humors of thine own body against
thee, thou can not endure the scorching of a little Gunpowder casually blown
up, thou can not endure the pains of a broken Arm or Leg; and can you endure
the Wrath of God, when God himself shall sall upon you with all his might?

3. When we are destitute and sorely distressed, let us wait upon God with
patience according to the tenor of his Promises, and tarry his leisure,
without prescribing Time and Means. God knows the fittest season, and
delights oftentimes to show our impatience, and try our Faith. Matthew. 15. 28.
O woman, great is thy faith. And that his help may not be ascribed to chance,
or our industry; and that we may the more prize blessings, consider you cannot
be more distressed than Christ was, who seemed abandoned to Satan's power,
distressed with sore hunger through his long fasting. The Devil was permitted
to have power over his body, to carry him to one of the Pinacles of the Temple;
and yet he discovered an invincible confidence and trust in God, that he would
not step the least step out of Gods way for his preservation in so eminent a
danger.

Now that you may not tempt God.

1. Let your heart be deeply possessed with apprehensions of the Goodness,
Wisdom and Power of God. The Scripture tells us for his Goodness, Psalm. 119.
68. Thou art good, and do good: and again, Psalm. 145. 9. The Lord is good to
all. For his Wisdom, Isa. 28. 29. He is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in
working. His purposes are often hidden from us, but he does all things well;
God can do more for us than seems probable at the present. And therefore let
us not tempt him by confining him to our Time, Means and Manner. He may love
us, and yet delay our help, Ioh. 11. 5, 6. Jesus loved Lazarus, and yet ver. 6.
When he heard that he was sick, he abode two days still in the same place
where he was. Then for his Power and Sovereign Dominion, there is not a better
argument for confidence, than the Preface and Conclusion of the Lords Prayer.
Whatsoever state you are reduced to, God is still to be trusted, who is Our
Father, which is in Heaven, and whose is the kingdom, power and glory, 2 Timothy
1. 12. I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep
that which I have committed unto him, against that day. Whatsoever our straits
be, he is a God still to be trusted.

2. Be firmly persuaded of Gods Care and Providence over his people, and so
cares for you in particular. This is assured to us by Promises, and by
Experiences. By Promises, 1 Pet. 5. 7. Casting all your care upon him, for he
cares for you. Phil. 4. 6, 7. Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by
prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto
God. And the peace of God, which passes all understanding shall keep your
hearts and minds through Jesus Christ. By Experiences, Matthew. 16. 8, 9. O ye of
little faith, why reason ye among your selves, because ye have brought no
bread? Do ye not yet understand, neither remember the five loaves of the five
thousand, and how many baskets ye took up? Christ was angry with his Disciples,
that they should be troubled about bread, since they had lately such experience
of his power, to provide bread at pleasure. Use the means God puts into your
hands, and refer the success to him. You need not be anxious about any thing in
this World.

3. Let all this produce in you an holy obstinacy of Trust and obedience, or an
invincible confidence in God, and close adherence to him, whatever your
dangers, straits and extremities be; and this will guard your heart against all
Tempting of God:

1. A resolute Trust and Dependence, Job 13. 15. Though he slay me, yet will I
trust in him. This is the Soul that is prepared to be true to God, and
contentedly to bear whatever he sends.

2. A constant adherence to our duty. Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, Psalm.
37. 34. Do not go one step out of God's way for all the good in the World. The
greatest extremities are to be born rather than the least sin yielded to, Dan.
3. 17, 18. Our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O king. But if not, be it
known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the
golden Image, which thou have set up. Please God, and God will be always with
you, when you seem to be left destitute, Ioh. 8. 29. And he that sent me, is
with me; the father has not left me alone, for I do always those things that
please him.

SERMON. V.
MATTHEW. 4. 8, 9. Again, the Devil takes him into an exceeding high Mountain,
and shows him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them.

And says unto him, all these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down,
and worship me.


THis is the third Temptation. In handling it I shall use the former method,
give you the History of the Temptation, and Observations thereupon.

In the History. 1. The Introduction, verse 8. 2. The temptation it self, with
the grievousness of it, ver. 9. 3. Christ's Reply, ver. 10.


First, In the Introduction we have. 1. The Place, the Devil takes him unto;
an exceeding high Mountain. 2. The Fact, he shows him all the Kingdoms of the
World, and the Glory of them.


1. The Place chosen for the conflict, an exceeding high Mountain. For the
Mountain the Scripture would not name it, and we need not anxiously inquire
after it, whether any near Jericho as some say, or as others, some Mountain
nigh Jerusalem: and possibly the highest above the rest was chosen by the
tempter. The Pinnacle of the Temple was not proper, because Jerusalem was
surrounded with higher Mountains on all sides, Ps. 125. 2. As the Mountains are
round about Jerusalem, etc. He chose an high Mountain, because of the fairer
prospect, where the Horizon might be as spacious as was possible, and the sight
not hindered by any interposing object. God took Moses into Mount Pisgah, and
showed him the Land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 34. 1. The Devil who affects to do in
evil, as God does in what is good, takes Christ into a Mountain. He leads us
high, and promises us high things, that suiteth with his disposition; but it
ends in a downfall that suiteth with his condition. The close is still cast
thy self down, or else as here, fall down and worship me. The Devils taking him
up thither is to be explained the same way, with his taking him up to the
pinnacle of the Temple.

2. The Fact, and shows him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of
them. But how could the devil from one Mountain show him all the Kingdoms of
the World, when there is none so high, as that we can see the latitude of one
Kingdom, much less thorough all, partly thorough the unequal swellings of the
Earth, and partly through the weakness of the eye, which cannot reach so far?
The sight could go no further than the Horizon, and the other Hemisphere is not
to be seen at all, that part which we see is much less then that part which we
see not. Therefore how could he show him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the
Glory thereof? Answer, These words must not be taken rigorously; but that he
showed them. (1.) In Compendio. (2.) In Speculo. (3.) In Colloquio.

1. In Compendio, It may be understood of so many Kingdoms as could fall under
the sight of a man looking round about him from some eminent place; as God is
said to show Moses all the Land of Canaan, when he did actually see only a part
thereof. From that high Mountain, the devil gave him a view of all that was to
be seen from thence; many Castles, Towns, and fruitful Fields might be seen as
a sample of the rest. It is a Synechdochical Hyperbole, he that shows a part
of a thing, and the chiefest part, may be said to show the thing it self.

2. In Speculo, besides what he might reach by his sight; by way of
representation and external visible species, he represented to Christ all the
rest of the Kingdoms of the World, and the pomp and glory thereof as in a Map.
For Satan can object to the eyes of men the species and images of diverse
things, and there is no absurdity to think, that this way he showed his utmost
art and cunning to represent the World to Christ in as splendid and inviting a
manner as he could. If you ask therefore, why he carried him to an high
Mountain, he might have done this in a Valley, or any other place as well? I
answer, it is true if the discovery had been only by representation, or if the
devil could have deluded Christ's fancy or imagination, so as to impress these
species upon it so far, as that he should seem to see what he did not see, a
Valley would have served turn as well as a Mountain: but this was done without
it, and with it, showing the glory of the World as in a Map and Picture, and
therefore a convenient place is chosen.

3. In Colloquio, by discourse. The temptation might be helped on by the Devils
pointing at the several quarters of the World, with words relating the glory
thereof; what splendour and glory the Kings and Nations had which adored him,
all which Christ should have if he would fall down and worship him. Now all
this while Satan is but making way for his purpose, thinking Christ would be
ravished with this glorious sight; possibly it was not a mere dumb show, but
the tempting objects were amply set forth by Satan's speech.

Secondly, The temptation it self, where we may consider the Nature, and the
grievousness of it.

1. The Nature of the temptation, where observe two things. 1. An offer or a
Promise, all these things will I give thee. 2. A Postulation or demand, if thou will fall down and worship me.


1. An Offer or Promise, all these things will I give thee. This is a vain
boast of the tempter, who ascribes to himself that which was proper to God,
and promises to Christ those things, which were all his before. God had said,
Psalm 2. 8. Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy possession; this the devil, who
affects to be like God arrogateth unto himself, as if he would make him the
universal King of the World. In Luke it is chap. 4. 6. All this power will I
give thee, and the glory of them; for that is delivered unto me, and to
whomsoever I will, I give it. But you must not always look for truth in the
devils speeches: He is not Lord of the World to dispose of it at his own
pleasure. And yet it is not to be supposed he would come with a downright
untruth to the Son of God, if there were no pretense or varnish for it.
Therefore we must distinguish between the devils lie and the color thereof.

1. Certain it is, that God does govern all the affairs of this World, and does
put bounds and limits to Satan's power, beyond which he cannot pass, and does
often hinder his endeavors, and turn them to the quite contrary end and
purpose; and if he does not hinder them, yet he directs them for good to his
people. Therefore that power that Satan has is not given but permitted; not
absolute but limited. It is a lie, that Satan can give these things at
pleasure, see these Scriptures, Ps. 24. 1. The Earth is the Lords, and the
fullness thereof; the World and they that dwell therein, Dan. 2. 21. He changes
the times and the seasons, he removes Kings, and sets up Kings, and verse
37. The God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, Power, and Strength and Glory.
All the alterations that are in the Earth are of the Lord; he pulls down, and
raises up, as seems good unto him. Therefore this power of disposing
Kingdoms belongs unto God.

2. That the Son of God is the right Heir of the World, Heb. 1. 2. Whom he has
appointed Heir of all things. To whom the Nations are given, Psalm. 2. 8. Ask of
me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the Earth for thy possession, Matthew. 28. 18. All power is given unto
me in Heaven and in Earth. And therefore it was impudence in him to arrogate
this power, and to promise these things to the Lord, which were his before.

3. Though this was a lie, yet here is the color of the lie. God permits
that men sometimes by indirect means to become great in Honor and Dignity in
this World; all which are done by the instinct of Satan, and his help: And evil
men often succeed in their attempts, and from hence Satan is called the Prince
of this World, John 12. 31. Now shall the Prince of this World be cast out,
John 14. 30. The Prince of this World comes, and has nothing in me, John 16.
11. Of Judgment because the Prince of this World is judged. Yea Paul goes
higher, and calls him the God of this World, 2 Cor. 4. 4. In whom the God of
this World has blinded the minds of them, which believe not: but this is by
usurpation not just right. And the devils are called Ephesians. 6. 12. The rulers of
the darkness of this World, as the wicked consent to his Empire and evil
suggestions. But all this implies but a limited and restrained Kingdom; and
the devils impudence and falsehood lies in this, that he interprets Gods
permission for a commission, his connivance for a conveyance. Indeed there are
two lies in the devils offer; one assertory, as if the power and glory of the
World were at his disposal; the other promissory, as if he would invest Christ
in the full and peaceable possession thereof, whereas indeed he went about to
divest and dispossess the Son of God of his right, or to tempt him to do a
thing contrary to his Kingdom; for he knew the abasement of Christ was the way
to his glory, the cause of man's happiness, and the ruin of the Kingdom of the
devil, therefore he seeks to prevent this by these magnificent promises.

2. The Postulation or demand, if thou will fall down and worship me. Here the
devil appears in his own likeness. Before it was if thou be the Son of God,
now it is, fall down and worship me. Before he appeared as a Friend to advise
him in his hunger; then as a Divine to instruct him how to discover himself as
the Messiah; now as a plain usurper of Gods Worship. And he demands but one act
of prostration such as was given to the Kings of the East, and the Jews in that
manner did Worship God. Therefore this was the vilest and most blasphemous
suggestion which Satan could devise, that the Son of God should stoop to Gods
Rebel. Here we see the devil not only importunate but impudent.

2. The grievousness of the temptation, that will appear in these
considerations.

1. Because it was represented in a matter grateful and pleasing. It was
unnecessary to turn stones into bread, dangerous to throw himself down from a
pinnacle of the Temple; but it might seem sweet and grateful to behold the
Kingdoms of the World, and the glory thereof; for surely the glory of the World
is a bewitching object, and would much move a carnal heart: and therefore he
produces this tempting object, and sets it before Christ himself. Mark he
showed him the glory only, not the burdens, the labors, the cares, those
storms of jealousy and envy, which those encounter with who are at top. This
way did he now choose, wherewith to assault Christ. Had he really represented
the World, with all the vexations attending it, the temptation had not been so
great: but he shows the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory thereof; the
bait, not the hook; he talks highly of small things, commends what is
pleasing, but hides the bitter of these luscious sweets; he offers Christ
the glory of the Kingdoms of the World, but dissembleth the cares, the
troubles, the dangers. Alas we see the best side of those that live in Courts,
their gorgious apparel, their costly entertainments, their power and greatness;
but their fears of being depressed by superiors, jusled by equals, undermined
by inferiors, are hidden from us.

Therefore the temptation was dexteroufly managed by the devil, in that he
showed him the Kingdoms of the World and the glory thereof. Temptations of the
right hand are more dangerous than those of the left hand.

2. He shows the bait, before he offers the temptation, that the World
might speak for him, before he spoke for himself; and prepared the mind of
Christ by this bewitching object before he comes, either with his offer or
demand: and then afterward before he makes his demand, he premiseth his
offer, all these things will I give thee, the offer is made before the spiteful
condition is mentioned. Observe the different methods of Christ and Satan:
Satan makes show of glory first, but Christ of the Cross: Satan offers the
benefit before he seems to require the service, as here he does first offer,
and then ask; but fallaciously, for indeed he requires a present Act, but only
promises a future compensation, I will give thee all these things. Christ's
tells us the worst at first, Matthew. 16. 24. If any man will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me. The issue shows
the fraud of the tempter, and the misery of those poor deluded souls, who
hearken to him. On the contrary, the sincerity of our Lord, and the happyness
of those that obey him will soon appear. The devil will have all paid before
he part with any thing, no Worship, no Glory. But I am carried too far, my
purpose was only to show his dexterity and cunning, how he sets a color upon
sin, before he mentions it, by glorious promises, and the manifold pleasure and
profit which comes by it.

3. He does not seek to move him by naked Words, but by the sight of the thing
it self. Objects move the senses, senses draw away the mind; nor are they the
Porters of the soul, so much as the corrupters, Ps. 119. 37. Turn away mine
eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way. If we let loose our
senses without a guard, we soon contract a deadness of Heart. There is nothing
so soon led away as the eye, it is the broaker between the Heart and the
object; the eye gazeth and the heart lusts; this is the window by which Satan
has crept in, and all manner of taint has been conveyed into the soul. In the
first sin, Eve was corrupted this way, Genesis 3. 6. And when the woman saw that
the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, etc. She took
of the fruit thereof, and did eat. Gazing on the fruit with delight, her heart
was ensnared. We read of Potiphars Wife she cast her eyes on Joseph, Genesis 39.
7. Achan Josh. 7. 21. When I saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment,
and two hundred shekels of silver and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight,
then I coveted them and took them. First he saw, then he coveted, then he took
them, then he hid them, then Israel falls and he is attached by lot; so it is
said of Sechem and Dinah, Genesis 34. 2. He saw her, and took her, and lay with
her, and defiled her. So of Sampson, Judges 16. 1. He went to Gaza, and saw
there an Harlot, and went in unto her. David was ensnared by his eyes, 2 Samuel
11. 2. From the roof he saw a woman washing her self, and the woman was very
beautiful to look upon. Naboths Vineyard was ever in Ahabs eye, as being near
his Palace, therefore he is troubled, and falls sick for it, 1 King. 21. 1, 2.
Now because so many have been betrayed by their senses, the devil takes this
way to tempt Christ, as knowing this is the next way to the heart.

4. He takes him into an high Mountain, that he might look far and near, and
see the more Provinces, Cities, and Kingdoms, to move him the more. The devil
was sensible that small things were not to be offered to Christ, and therefore
dresseth out the temptation in as glorious a manner as he can. The chapman of
souls is grown thrifty of late, he does not offer all the Kingdoms of the
Earth, and the glory thereof, he knows that we will accept of less with
thanks. The devil buyeth many at a very easy price, he needs not carry them
so high as the Mountain, they are contented with a little gain that is got by a
fraudulent bargain in the shop: if we stand in our window, or at our doors, we
meet with temptations enough to carry us away. He needs not come with
Kingdoms, or with the glory of all the World, thirty pence the price of a slave
is enough to make Judas betray his master, Matt. 26. 15. and the Prophet
tells us of some that will transgress for handfulls of Barley and pieces of
Bread, Ezekiel. 13. 19. and those pretended Prophets too, making God the Author
and maintainer of their lies and deceits: and again of those that respect
persons, whether Magistrates or Ministers, Prove. 28. 21. To have respect of
persons is not good, for for a piece of bread will that man transgress: and
another Prophet tells us of those, that sell the poor for a pair of shoes,
Amos 2. 6. and 8. 6. Those will take any price. And the Apostle says of Esau,
Heb. 12. 16. For one morsel of meat he sold his birthright. So that the devil
may abate a great deal of what he offered Christ: he need not say to such, you
shall have all these things, nay hold you! you shall have this petty gain, that
slight pleasure and carnal satisfaction. It is a wonder to consider what small
things make up a temptation to many yea to most. The World is so corrupt, that
they will violate Conscience with a small hire. We are not tempted with great
things, less will serve the turn. But the devil knew that small matters were no
temptation to Christ, therefore he carries him to the Mountain, that he might
see the glory of all the earth, to make the temptation the more strong.

5. He shows him the Kingdoms of the World, (...), Luke 4. 5. In a moment of
time, that circumstance is not to be passed over. When many objects and
glorious come together of a sudden, they do the more surprise us. Therefore the
more to affect Christ with the splendour of these things, and on a sudden to
prevail upon him, which otherwise he was not likely to do, he did not represent
the glory of these Kingdoms of the World to Christ, that he might see them one
after another, but all together, that there might be less time for
consideration, that so his mind might be the more blinded by the appearing
splendour of the tempting object, and his heart the more captivated thereby.
Diverse things seen in one view do more surprise us, than if viewed by a
leisurely contemplation: alas! We are sometimes overborn by the violence of a
temptation, sometimes overtaken by the suddenness of it, Gal. 6. 1. Brethren,
if one be overtaken in a fault, (...), inconsiderately and suddenly surprised
by a sin. We do many things preposterously and in haste, which we repent of by
leisure. Thus the devil thought to surprise Christ, but he was aware of him.

6. In other temptations, the tempter does only ask a thing to be done, but
here he does ask and promise things glorious, profitable and pleasing to carnal
sense, and such as seem every way desirable. The offers of gain and glory are
promised to the temptation.

7. He craveth but one thing, a very small thing, and this under the hope of
the greatest advantage. One act of external adoration, easy to be performed,
if Christ would but kneel to him, not as supreme God, an inferior adoration
would have contented him; yield but a little, do but fall down and worship, it
shall be enough. As the Heathens of old said to the Christians, Do but touch
the Censer. The commendation of Gods servants was, that they had not bowed the
knee to Baal, Romans 11. 4. The devil knows, if he can get us to a little, he
shall get us to more; and the least reverence is too much to such an impure
Spirit.

Secondly, The Observations.

I. Observe from that, Again the Devil takes him; That we must expect not only
to be tempted, but to be often tempted. Satan has both his wiles and darts,
Ephesians. 6. 11, 16. He sometimes assaulteth us with the one, sometimes with the
other. Therefore,

1. Be not secure, but watch, and stand upon your defense. It is a careless
Soul, that can sleep in so great a danger. There is yet a malicious tempting
Devil alive, who would sift you as wheat, Luke 22. 31. and somewhat within you,
which would betray you to him if you be not wary; and you may meet with such
snares, as you have not yet met withal.

2. Be not overmuch troubled and dejected, if you be assaulted afresh. You must
make your way to heaven almost every step by conflict and conquest. Remember
your baptismal vow, the obligation of which cease not, till your life be
ended, and then you shall be out of Gunshot and Harmes-way. Therefore still
follow the Captain of your Salvation, wherever he leads you. The more Trials,
the more Glory.

3. Avoid rash Judgment and Censure, if the same happen to others. Pirates do
not use to set upon an empty Vessel. The best are most assaulted. God
permits it for their Trial, and Satan has the greatest spite at them.

II. Observe, That the more grievous temptations follow the lighter ones, and
the last assaults and trials are usually the greatest. This is so, if you
respect either the dexterity and cunning of the Tempter, represented before, or
the foulness of the Temptation, viz. to Idolatry. The best of Gods Children may
be tempted to the most execrable sins. Thus usually does Satan reserve his
worst assaults for the last, and his last temptation is commonly the sorest.
Dying Beasts bite shrewdly: so Satan rages most, when he has but a short
time. Therefore since our warfare is not over, let us prepare for the worst
brunt, and the last efforts of Satan. If God will crown us fighting, we have no
cause to complain. Many of Gods servants, whom he could not draw to
Worldliness, Sensuality, or Vainglory in their Lifetime, he will seek to
inject blasphemous thoughts into their Minds at last. But though it be
grievous, be not dismayed, your Conquest is sure and near.

III. Observe, The World and Worldly things are the bait and snare, which the
Tempter offers to Christ and his followers. As here when he would make his
last onset upon Christ, he sets before him the Kingdoms of the world, and the
glory of them, as the matter of the Temptation.

1. There are three Enemies of our Salvation, the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh, they are reckoned up together, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. Wherein in time past ye
walked according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the
power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience.
Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past, in the lusts of our
flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind. The Devil is the
deceiver and grand Architect of all wickedness; the Flesh is the Principle that
he works upon, or that rebelling faculty within us, that would be pleased
before God; the World is the bait, by which the devil would deceive us, and
steal away our hearts from God, for it suiteth with our fleshly appetites and
desires. More distinctly, that Satan is an enemy appears from his name, that
signifies an Adversary, and in many places of Scripture he is so called, as
Matthew. 13. 25. While men slept, the enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat,
compared with the 39th. verse, The enemy that sowed them is the Devil; he is
the great Enemy to God and Man, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Your adversary the Devil like a
roaring Lion walks about, etc. The Flesh is an Enemy, yea our greatest Enemy,
for it warreth against the soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Abstain from fleshly lusts,
which war against the soul. If you indulge the Flesh, you are willing to lose
your Souls. Yea it warreth against the Spirit, or better part, as contrary to
it, Gal. 5. 17. For the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh: Other things could do us no harm without our own flesh: We
are tempted to Sin by Satan, encouraged to sin by the Example and Custom of the
World, but inclined to Sin by our own Flesh. The World is an Enemy of our
Salvation, as well as the Devil and the Flesh, all the other Enemies get
strength by it; by the bait of worldly things the devil pleases the flesh; we
are in continual danger of being everlastingly undone by it. Whosoever is a
Lover of the World is presumed to be a professed Enemy of God, Iam. 4. 4. Know
ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God; whosoever will be a
friend of the world is the enemy of God. 1 Ioh. 2. 15. If any man love the
world, the love of the father is not in him. It is an Enemy, because it keeps
us from God, who is our chief good, and the enjoyment of him among his blessed
ones, which is our last end. There is a neglect of God, and heavenly things,
where the world prevails.

2. The devil makes use of the world to a double end.

1. To divert us from God and Heavenly things, that our Time, and Care, and
Thoughts may be wholly taken up about things here below, Luke 12. 19. Soul,
thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and
be merry. Phil. 3. 19, 20. They mind earthly things. But our conversation is in
heaven. These are perfectly opposite. Some are of the world, and speak of the
world, and wholly mind the world, and are governed by the spirit of this world;
seldom look higher, or very coldly and slightly. Thus that which should be
thought of in the first place, is scarce thought of at all. But remember, he
does but offer you worldly things to deprive you of heavenly.

2. To draw us to some open sin for the worlds sake, as here he tempted Christ
to Idolatry, and Demas to defection from the Faith, 2 Timothy 4. 10. Demas has
forsaken us, having loved this present world. Others to some carnal,
fraudulent, oppressive course, whereby they are spotted by the World. The whore
of Babylon propounds her Abominations in a golden cup, Rev. 17. 4. and the
great motive here is, All this will I give thee. Though the Devil comes not in
Person to us with his offers, he does by his Instruments, as Balak when he sent
to Balaam to curse the Israelites, he promised him great rewards, Numb. 22. 17.
I will promote thee unto very great honor, and I will do whatsoever thou
say unto me, Come therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people. So when he
does entice you by the motions of your own hearts to any thing that is
unlawful, to falsehood, deceit, or unjust gain, or to get and keep wealth by any
base or unjust means, or doing something, that is base, and unworthy of your
Religion.

3. I Observe, that Temptations from the world may prevail with us. Satan
makes use of a twofold Artifice. The one is to greaten the worldly Object, the
other is to make us large promises of success, happiness, and contentment in
our evil enterprises.

1. He uses this slight here, he does in the most enticing manner lay the
world before Christ as a splendid object, to greaten it in Christ's Thoughts and
apprehensions. Therefore when we begin to magnify the Riches, Pomp and
pleasures of the World, the devil is at our Elbow, and we are running into the
snare. And therefore if we begin to say, happy is the people that is in such a
case, it is time to correct our selves and say, yea happy is the people whose
God is the Lord, Psalm. 144. 15. Take heed the devil does not gain this
advantage over you, to make you follow the world with the greatest earnestness,
and spiritual and heavenly things in a slight and overly manner. Esteem,
desires, resolutions of worldly Greatness, though not upon base conditions,
begin the Temptation. You think it is a fine thing to live in Pomp, and at
ease, to swim in pleasures, and begin to resolve to make it your business. The
devil has you upon the hip, it is a hour of Temptation.

2. His next course is to make large offers and promises by his instruments, or
your own thoughts, that though you neglect God and Heaven, and do engage in
some sinful course, you shall do well in the world, and enjoy full
satisfaction. There is a double evil in Satan's Offers and Promises.

1. They are false, and fallacious. All these things will I give thee. Satan
makes fair offers of what he cannot perform: He promises many things, but
does only promise them: he offers the Kingdoms of the world to Christ, but
cannot make good his word; he shows them to Christ, but cannot give them. And
this is the devils wont, to be liberal in promises, to fill the minds of those
that hearken to him with vain hopes, as if he could transfer the Riches and
Honors of the world to whom he pleases, whereas they are shamefully
disappointed, and find their ruin in the very things, in which they sought
their Exaltation, and their projects are crossed, for the earth is the Lords,
and the fullness thereof, 1 Cor. 11. 26.

2. All the devils offers, and promises have a spightful condition annexed. He
pretends to give, but yet sells at the dearest rates. It is but a barter
and exchange; a flat bargain, but no gift. He must have our souls, God is
dishonored, his Laws broken, his Spirit grieved. The devil staineth his grant
with unjust covenants, and exacteth more than the thing is worth.

Two ways then must we defeat the Temptation.

1. Not believing his Promises, that I must be beholding to sin to make me
happy. Those that by unlawful means get up to honor and wealth, seem to have
accepted the devils offer, they think he is Lord of the world, and all the
Kingdoms and the Glory thereof. Do not look upon wealth as the devils gift, as
a thing to be gotten by fraud, flattery, corruption, bribery: alas! it is put
into bags with holes, Haggai 1. 6. It is called the deceitfulness of riches,
Matthew. 13. 22. They promise that contentment and happiness, which they cannot
give. There is sure dependence on the Lord's, but none on Satan's promises.
Young men that are to begin the world, take up this resolution, take what God
sends, but resolve never to take wealth out of Satan's hands; what God sends
in the fair way of his Providence by his blessing on your lawful endeavors,
Prove. 10. 4. The hand of the diligent makes rich. And Ver. 22. The blessing of
the Lord it makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it. When you deal
righteously, and do not barely heap up treasure to your selves, but seek to
grow rich toward God, to subordinate all to heaven, and a better pursuit:
otherwise God can find a moth and a thief for your Estates.

2. The other way is, to consider, what a sad bargain you make by gratifying
the devil, and harkening to his Counsel. Matthew. 16. 26. What is a man profited,
if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man
give in exchange for his soul? A man never gets any thing with Satan, but he
shall lose that which is more precious: he never makes a proffer to our
advantage, but to our loss and hurt. Follow the world as hard as you can, lie,
cosen, cheat, and you shall be rich; put the case it is so, but I must lose my
soul, not in a natural, but legal sense; Job 27. 8. What is the hope of the
hypocrite though he has gained, when God takes away his soul? He has far
better things from us, then we have from him; a Birthright for a mess of
Pottage, the hopes of Heaven for an opulent condition here below. The Bird buys
the Fowlers bait at a dear rate, when his life must go for it. Thy soul must be
lost, which all the Gold and Silver in the world cannot redeem and recover.

4. I observe again, that Christ by his refusal has taught us to tread the
world under our feet, and all the glory of it should be an uneffectual and cold
motive to a sanctified soul. If we have the same Spirit that was in Christ, it
will be so. All the Kingdoms of the World and the Glory of them was far too
little to make up a Temptation to him. A mortified heart will contemn all this
in comparison of our duty to God, and the comfort of a good Conscience, and the
Hopes of Glory. Surely they have not the Spirit of Christ, who are taken with
small things, with a Babylonish Garment, or some petty Temptation.

USES.
The Use is to teach us how to counterwork Satan.

1. Since he works upon the fleshly mind, we are to be mortified and grow
dead to the world. We profess Faith in a Crucified Lord, we must be like him,
Crucified as he was Crucified; then shall we glory in the Cross of Christ, when
we feel the virtue of it, and are planted into the likeness of it, Gal. 6. 14.
God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. Grow more dead to
the Riches, Honor, Pomp, Pleasure, the Favor, Fear, Love, Wrath, Praise and
Dispraise of Men, that we may readily deny these things, so far as opposite to
the Kingdom of Christ, or our duty to God, or as they lessen our Affections to
him. We die as our esteem of those things does decay; till the man's temper be
altered there is no hope to prevail by Argument: only they that are made
partakers of a divine Nature do escape the corruption that is in the world
through Lust.

2. Since he works by Representation and Promise, you must be prepared
against both.

1. As he works by Representation, or the fair show and splendid Appearance
of worldly things, you must check it.

(1.) By considering the little subsistence and reality that is in this fair
appearance, 1 Cor. 7. 31. The fashion of this world passes away, (...) It is
but a draft, an empty Pageantry; so it is called, Psalm. 39. 6. Avain show; an
Image, shadow, or dream, that vanishes in a trice. So Prove. 23. 5. Will thou
set thine eyes upon that which is not? It was not awhile ago, and within a
little while it will not be again, at least to us it will not be, we must
shortly bid good night to all the World, 1 Pet. 1. 24. All flesh is grass, and
the glory thereof as the flower of the grass. David says Psalm. 119. 86. I have
seen an end of all perfection. It is good often to intermingle these serious
thoughts of the frailty of all sublunary enjoyments, to keep us modest in what
we have, or desire to have, that we may not be blinded with the delusions of
the Flesh, and enchanted with an admiration of worldly Felicity.

(2.) As the devil seeks to open the eye of sense, so must we open the eye of
Faith, 2 Cor. 4. 18. We look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are eternal. Things unseen must be every day
greatened in our Eyes, that all our pursuit after things seen may be
subordinated to our desires of, and labor after things unseen. There we must
see the greatest Reality, or else we have not the true Christian Faith, Heb.
11. 1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things
not seen. It is such an evidence of the worth and reality of the unseen Glory,
as draws off the heart from things seen, which are so pleasing to the flesh;
Faith sets it before the eye of the soul in the Promises of the Gospel, Heb. 6.
18. Who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us. Heb. 12.
2. Who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, etc.

2. As he deals with us by Promise. Every thing we hope to get by sin is a
kind of promise or offer of the devil to us: As suppose by unconscionable
dealing in our Calling. Here consider two things, 1. The falsity of the Devils
Promises. 2. The truth and stability of Gods Promises.


1. The falsity of Satan's Promises. Either he gives not what he promised, as
he promised our first Parents to be as Gods, Genesis 3. 5. Ye shall be as Gods.
And what ensued, Psalm. 49. 12. Man that is in honor and understands not is
like the beasts that perish, degraded to the Beasts, as the brutish and bestial
nature prevailed in him when he fell from God. Or else, if we have them, we
were better be without them; we have them with a Curse, with the loss of better
things, Ier. 17. 13. Oh Lord! all that forsake thee shall be ashamed, and they
that depart from me shall be written in the earth. They are condemned to this
felicity, we have them with stings of Conscience, Matthew. 27. 4, 5. I have
sinned, in that I have betrayed innocent blood, and he cast down the pieces of
silver in the Temple, and went and hanged himself; which are most quick and
sensible when we come to dye, Ier. 17. 11. He that gets riches, and not by
right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a
fool. Now rise up in Indignation against the Temptation, shall I fell my
birthright? Lose my fatness to rule over the trees? As the olive Tree in
Iotham's Parable, Judges 9. 9.

2. The Sufficiency and Stability of Gods Promises.

(1.) Sufficiency: Genesis 17. 1. I am the almighty God, walk before me and be
thou perfect. 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness is profitable for all things, having the
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come: of heaven and of
Earth, Mat. 6. 33. Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof, and all these things shall be added to you. It may be you have less
than those that indulge themselves in all manner of shifts and wiles, but you
shall have enough, not to be left wholly destitute, Heb. 13. 5. He has said, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. And you shall have it with
contentment, Prove. 15. 6. In the house of the righteous is much treasure, but
in the revenues of the wicked is trouble. And better is a little with
righteousness then great revennes with sin, Prove. 16. 8. And you have it so as
not to lose other things.

(2.) Stability, 2 Cor. 1. 20. All the promises of God in him are yea, and in
him Amen. And Heb. 6. 18. That by two immutable things, in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation, etc. Psalm. 119.
111. Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever; they are the
rejoicing of my heart.

4. Observe [Fall down] The Pride of the Devil: he sins from the beginning,
1 Ioh. 3. 8. The sin of Pride was fatal to him at first, and the cause of those
Chains of darkness in which now he is held: yet still he sins the same sin,
he requires Adoration, and would be admitted into a Partnership of Divine
Worship. He obtained it from Pagans and Idolaters, not from Christ. The Angel
deprecates and detests it, Rev. 19. 10. And I fell at his feet, to worship him,
and he said unto me, see thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, and of
thy brethren, that have the testimony of Jesus; worship thou God. So Rev. 22.
9. I fell down to worship before the face of the angel, that showed me these
things, and he said to me, see thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, and
of thy brethren the prophets, and of them that keep the sayings of this book;
worship God. Paul when the Priests at Lycaonia were about to sacrifice to him,
Acts 14. 14, 15. When the Apostles heard of it, they rent their clothes, and
run in among the people, crying out, and saying, Sirs, why do you these things?
we also are men of like passions with you, and preach unto you, that ye should
turn from these vanities unto the living God. But the evil Angels they are apt
to invade the right of God.

SERMON. VI.
MATTHEW. 4. 10. Then says Jesus unto him, Get thee hence Satan, for it is
written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
THirdly, Christ's Answer and Reply, which is double.

I. By way of Rebuke, Defiance, and bitter Reprehension. Get thee hence Satan.

II. By way of Confutation. For it is written, etc.

1. The Rebuke shows Christ's Indignation against Idolatry, Get thee hence
Satan. This was not to be endured. Twice Christ uses this form of Speech,
(...), to Satan tempting him to Idolatry here, and when his servant dissuaded
him from suffering, Mat. 16. 23. Get thee behind me satan, for thou art an
offense to me, for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that
be of men. This suggestion entrenched or touched upon the Glory of God, the
other upon his love to Mankind, and Christ could endure neither; Satan is
commanded out of his Presence with Indignation. The same zeal we see in his
servants, in Moses in case of Idolatry, Exodus 32. 19. He brake the Tables: So
in case of contradiction to the Faith of Christ, Paul takes up Elimas, Acts
13. 10. O full of subtilty and all mischief! thou child of the devil! thou
enemy of all righteousness! will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of
the Lord? Open Blasphemy must be abhorred, and needs not only a Confutation
but a Rebuke. Besides, it was an impudent demand of Satan to require Adoration
from him, to whom Adoration is due from every Creature; to ask him to bow down
before him, to whom every knee must bow: and therefore a bold temptation must
have a peremptory Answer. There is no mincing in such cases. It is no way
contrary to that Lenity that was in Christ; and it teaches us in such open
cases of Blasphemy and downright sin, not to parley with the Devil but to defy
him.

2. By way of Confutation, for it is written thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve. Where observe,

1. Christ answers to the main point, not to by matters. He does not dispute
the devils title, nor debate the reality of his promises; to do this would
tacitly imply a likeing of the temptation. No but he disproveth the evil of the
suggestion from this unclean and proud spirit: A better answer could not be
given unto the tempter. So that herein we see the Wisdom of Christ; which
teaches us to pass by impertinent matters, and to speak expressly to the cause
in hand in all our debates with Satan and his instruments.

2. He cites Scripture, and thereby teaches, that the Word of God laid up in
the heart and used pertinently, will ward off the blows of every temptation.
This weapon Christ used all along with success, and therefore it is well
called, the Sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. It is a sword and so a weapon both
offensive and defensive, Heb. 4. 12. The Word of God is quick and powerful,
sharper then any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul
and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts,
and intents of the heart. And a sword of the spirit, because the spirit is the
Author of it, 2 Pet. 1. 21. Holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost, he formed and fashioned this weapon for us; and because its
efficacy depends on the spirit, who timously brings it to our remembrance,
and does enliven the word and makes it effectual. Therefore it teaches us to
be much acquainted with the Lords written Word. The timely calling to mind of a
word in Scripture is better than all other Arguments, a word forbidding or
threatening such an evil, Psalm. 119. 11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I
might not sin against thee: pressing the practice of such a duty, when we are
slow of heart, Psalm. 119. 50. Thy word has quickened me: or a word speaking
encouragement to the soul exercised with such a Cross, Heb. 12. 5. Ye have
forgotten the exhortation, which speaks unto you as unto Children, my son!
despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of
him, Psalm. 119. 92. Unless thy Law had been my delight, I should then have
perished in mine affliction, still it breaks the strength of the temptation
whatsoever it be.

3. The words are cited out of the book of Deuteronomy. Indeed out of that book
all Christ's answers are taken, which shows us the excellency of that book. It
was of great esteem among the Jews, and it should be so among all Christians,
and it will be so of all that read it attentively. The Church could not have
wanted it.

4. The places out of which it is cited are two, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear
the Lord thy God, and serve him, and swear by his name. And again Deuteronomy. 10. 20.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and to him shall thou cleave.
Christ according to the Septuagint, thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him
only shall thou serve. (...) only which is emphatical, seems to be added to
the Text, but it is necessarily employed in the words of Moses; for his Scope
was to bind the people to the fear and worship of one God. None was so wicked
and profane as to deny that God was to be feared and worshipped; but many
might think that either the Creatures, or the gods of the Gentiles might be
taken into fellowship of this Reverence and Adoration, him is only him, (...),
is exclusive, if (...), were left out. See the place, Deuteronomy. 6. 13, 14. Thou
shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall swear by his name, ye
shall not go after other gods, of the gods of the people, which are round about
you. And in other places it is expressed, as 1 Samuel 7. 3. If you prepare your
hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only. The devil excepts not against this
Interpretation, as being fully convinced and silenced by it. And it is a known
story, that this was the cause, why the Pagans would not admit the God of the
Jews, as revealed in the Old Testament, or Christ as revealed in the New to be
an object of Adoration, because he would be worshipped alone, all other Deities
excluded. The gods of the Heathens were good-fellowgods, would admit
partnership, as common Whores are less jealous then the married Wife: though
their Lovers went to never so many besides themselves, yet to them it was all
one, whenever they returned to them and brought their Gifts and Offerings.

5. In this place quoted by our Savior there is employed a distinction of
inward and outward Worship. Fear is for inward Worship, serve is for outward
Worship, and the Profession of the same. Fear in Moses is expounded Worship by
Christ; so Mat. 15. 9. compared with Isa. 29. 13. In vain do they Worship me,
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, but in the Prophet it is their
fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men. He that worshippeth, fears
and reverenceth what he worshippeth; or else all his worship is but a
complement and empty formality. So that the Fear of God is that reverence and
estimation that we have of God, the serving of God is the necessary effect and
fruit of it; for service is an open Testimony of our reverence and worship. In
this place you have worship and service, both which are due to God only. But
that you may perceive the force of our Saviors Argument, and also of this
precept, I shall a little dilate on the word service, what the Scripture
intends thereby. Satan says, bow down and worship me: Christ says, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Under service,
Prayer and Thanksgiving is comprehended, Isa. 44. 17. And the residue thereof
he makes a God, even his graven Image, and he falls down unto it, and
worshippeth it, and prays unto it, and says, deliver me, for thou art my
God. This is one of the external acts, whereby the Idolater shows the esteem
of his heart, so Ier. 2. 27. saying to a stock, thou art my Father; and to a
stone, thou have brought me forth. So under serving sacrifice is comprehended,
2 Kings 17. 35. Ye shall not fear other gods nor bow your selves to them, nor
serve them, nor sacrifice to them. Again burning of Incense, Ier. 18. 15. My
people have forgotten me, they have burnt Incense to vanity. Preaching for
them, Ier. 2. 8. The Pastors also have transgressed against me, and the
Prophets prophesied by Baal. Asking counsel of them, Hos. 4. 12. My people ask
counsel at their stocks, and their staff declares unto them, for the spirit of
whoredoms has caused them to err and they have gone a whoring from under their
God. So building Temples, Altars, or other Monuments unto them, Hos. 8. 14.
Israel has forgotten his maker, and builds Temples, and 12. 11. Their Altars
are as heaps in the furrows of the Fields. Erecting of Ministeries, or doing
any ministerial work for their honor, Amos 5. 26. Ye have born the Tabernacle
of your Moloch and Chiun your Images, the star of your God, which ye made to
your selves. As God appointed the Levites to bear the Tabernacle, for Communion
in the service of them, 1 Cor. 10. 18. Are not they that eat of the sacrifices
partakers of the Altar? ver. 21. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the
cup of devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the Table of
devils. So 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17. what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols?
In short, for it is endless to reckon up all which the Scripture comprehends
under service, and gestures of reverence; Exodus 20. 5. Thou shall not bow down
thy self to them, nor serve them: Bowing the knee; 1 Kings 19. 18. I have left
me seven thousand in Israel, which have not bowed the knee to Baal. Kissing
them, Hos. 13. 18. They kiss the Calves. Lifting up the eyes, Ezekiel. 2. 15. He
has not lift up his eyes to the Idols of the house of Israel. Stretching out
the hand, Psalm. 44. 20. If we have stretched our hands to a strange God. So
that you see all gestures of Reverence are forbidden as terminated to Idols.
Thus strict and jealous is God in his Law, that we might not bow down and
worship the Devil, or any thing that is set up by him.

Doctrine, That Religious service, and Religious Worship is due to God only;
and not to be given to Saint, or Angel or any Creature.
Thus Christ defeateth the devils temptation, and thus should we be under the
awe of Gods Authority, that we may not yield to the like temptation, when the
greatest advantages imaginable are offered to us. Here I shall show I. What is
Worship and the Kinds of it. II. I shall prove that Worship is due to God. III.
Not only Worship but service. IV. That both are due to God alone.


1. What is Worship? In the general, it implies these three things, an act of
the Judgment, apprehending an excellency in the object worshipped; an Act of
the Will, or a readiness to yield it, sutably to the degree of excellency which
we apprehend in it; and an external Act of the body, whereby it is expressed.
This is the general nature of worship, common to all the sorts of it.

2. The Kinds of it. Now Worship is of two kinds; Civil and Religious.
Religious worship is a special duty due to God, and commanded in the first
Table. Civil Honor and Worship is commanded in the second Table. They are
expressed by Godliness and Righteousness, 1 Timothy 6. 11. and Godliness and
Honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2.

1. For Religious worship. There is a twofold Religious worship; one when we
are right for the object, and do only worship the true God; this is required in
the first Commandment. The other when we are right for the means, when we
worship the true God by such means as he has appointed, not by an Image, Idol
or outward representation. Opposite to this there is an evil Idolatrous sinful
worship, when that which is due to the Creator is given to any Creature: which
is primary or secondary. Primary when the Image or Idol is accounted God, or
worshipped as such; as the sottish Heathens do. Or secondary, when the Images
themselves are not worshipped, as having any Godhead properly in themselves,
but as they relate to represent, or are made use of in the Worship of him who
is accounted God; we shall find this done by the wiser Heathens, worshipping
their Images, not as Gods themselves, but as intending to worship their gods in
these and by these: so also among some who would be called Christians. Thus the
representing the true God by Images is condemned, Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16, 17. Take ye
good heed unto your selves, for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that
the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire, lest ye corrupt
your selves, and make you a graven Image, the similitude of any figure, the
likeness of male or female. Again sinful Worship is twofold, more gross of
Idols, representing false gods, called worshipping of devils; or more subtle,
when worship is given to Saints or Holy men, Acts 10. 25, 26. As Peter was
coming in Cornelius met him, and fell down at his feet, and worshipped him.
But Peter took him up, saying, stand up, I my self also am a man, Acts 14. 14,
15. Paul and Barnabas when they heard this, rent their clothes, and ran in
among the people, crying out and saying, Sirs! why do you these things we also
are men of like Passions with you, etc. Or to Angels Rev. 22. 8. When John fell
at the Angels feet to worship him, he said, see thou do it not, for I am thy
fellow servant, and of thy brethren the Prophets.

2. Civil Worship is when we give men and Angels due Reverence, and

1. With respect to their stations and relations, whatever their qualifications
be, as to Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, great Men; We are to Reverence and
Honor them according to their degree and quality; according to the fifth
Commandment, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. and to esteem
them very highly in Love for their works sake. Or,

2. A reverential worshipping or esteeming them for their qualifications of
Wisdom and Holiness, Acts 2. 47. Good men had favor with all the people. Such
respect living Saints get, such Angels may have, when they appear, Genesis 18. 2.
Abraham bowed himself toward the ground, and Genesis 19. 1. Lot rose up to meet
them, and bowed himself with his face toward the ground.

Now whether the worship be Civil or Religious, may be gathered by the
circumstances thereof; as if the Act, End or other circumstances be Religious,
the action or worship it self must be so also. It is one thing to bow the knee
in salutation, another thing to bow in Prayer before an Image.

II. That worship is due to God. These two notions live and dye together; that
God is, and that he ought to be worshipped. It appears by our Saviors
reasoning, John 4. 24. God is a spirit and they that worship him must worship
him in spirit, and in Truth. He gives directions about the manner of worship,
but supposes it, that he will be worshipped. When God had proclaimed his name
and manifested himself to Moses, Exodus 34. 8. Moses made have, and bowed
himself and worshipped. It is the crime charged upon the Gentiles, that when
they knew God, they glorified him not as God, Romans 1. 21. They knew a divine
power, but did not give him a worship at lest competent to his nature. God
pleads his right, Mal. 1. 6. If I be a Father where is mine honor? If I be a
master where is my fear? And God who is the common Parent, and absolute Master
of all must have both a Worship and Honor, in which Reverence and Fear is
mixed with Love and Joy. So that if God be worship is certainly due to him.
They that have no worship, are as if they had no God. The Psalmist proves
Atheism by that, Psalm. 14. 1. The fool has said in his heart there is no God,
and ver. 4. They call not upon God. The acknowledgement of a King does imply
subjection to his Laws; so does the acknowledgment of his God imply a necessity
of worshipping him.

III. That both Worship and Service is due to God, him shall thou worship, and
him shall thou serve. The worship of God is both Internal and External: The
Internal consists in that Love and Reverence, which we owe to him; the
External in those offices and duties, by which our honor and respect to God is
signified and expressed. Both are necessary, both believing with the heart, and
confession with the Mouth; Romans 10. 9, 10. If thou shall confess with thy mouth
the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart that God raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved. For with the heart man believes unto Righteousness,
and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. The soul and life of our
Worship and Godliness lies in our Faith, Love, Reverence, and Delight in God
above all other things: the visible expression of it is in Invocation,
Thanksgiving, Prayers and Sacraments, and other Acts of outward Worship. Now it
is not enough, that we own God with the Heart, but we must own him with the
Body also: In the Heart, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling,
Psalm. 2. 11. Such as will become the Greatness and Goodness of God; with
outward and bodily worship you must now own him, in all those prescribed duties
in which these Affections are acted. The spirit must be in it, and the body
also. There are two extremes, some confine all their respect to God to bodily
worship, and external Forms, Mat. 16. 8. This people draws nigh unto me with
their mouth, and honors me with their lips; but their hearts are far from
me. They use the external Rites of worship; but their Affections are no way
suited to the God whom they Worship. It is the Heart must be the principal and
chief Agent in the business, without which it is but the carcass of a duty
without the life and the soul. The other Extreme is, that we are not called to
an external bodily worship under the Gospel; why did he then appoint the
Ordinances of Preaching, Prayer, Singing of Psalms, Baptism, and the Lords
Supper? God that made the whole man, body and soul, must be worshipped of the
whole man. Therefore besides the inward Affections, there must be external
Actions, whereby we express our Respect and Reverence to God.

IV. That both these, Religious Worship and Service are due to God alone. I
prove it by these Arguments.

1. Those things which are due to God as God, are due to him alone, and no
Creature without Sacrilege can claim any part and fellowship in that Worship
and Adoration, neither can it be given to any Creature without Idolatry: but
now Religious worship and service is due to God as God, he is thy Lord, and
worship thou him, Psalm. 45. 11. Our worship and service is due to him, not
only for his supereminent Excellency; but because of our Creation,
Preservation and Redemption. Therefore we must worship and serve him, and him
only; Isa. 42. 8. I am the Lord, that is my name, and my glory will I not give
to another, nor my praise to graven Images. God challenges it as Jehovah, the
great self-being, from whom we have received Life and Breath, and all things.
This Glory God will not suffer to be given to another. And therefore the
Apostle shows the wretched estate of the Galatians, Chap. 4. 8. When ye knew
not God, ye did service to them, that by nature are no Gods; that is, they
worshipped for Gods those things, which really were no Gods. There is no kind
of Religious worship or service, under any name whatsoever, to be given to any
Creature, but to God only; for what is due to the Creator as Creator, cannot be
given to the Creature.

2. The nature of Religious worship is such, that it cannot be terminated on
any Object, but God; for it is a profession of our Dependence and Subjection.
Now whatever invisible Power this worship is tendered unto, must be Omniscient,
Omnipresent, Omnipotent. Omniscient who knows the Thoughts, Cogitations,
secret purposes of our heart, which God alone does, 1 King. 8. 39. Give unto
every one according to his ways, whose heart thou know; for thou, even thou
only know the hearts of all the children of Men. It is Gods Prerogative to
know the inward motions and thoughts of the heart, whether they be sincere or
no in their professions of dependence and subjection. So Omnipresent, that he
may be ready at hand to help us and relieve us, Ier. 23. 23, 24. Am I a God at
hand, and not a God afar of? can any hide himself in secret places, that I
shall not see him? says the Lord, do not I fill heaven and earth? says the
Lord. The Palace of Heaven does not so confine him and enclose him, but that he
is present every where by his essential presence, and powerful and efficacious
Providence. Besides Omnipotent, Psalm. 57. 2. I will cry unto God most high,
unto God who performs all things for me. Alas! what a cold formality were
prayer, if we should speak to those that know us not, and who are not near to
help us, or have no sufficiency of power to help us? Therefore these
professions of dependence and subjection must be made to God alone.

3. To give Religious Worship to the Creatures, it is without command, without
promise, and without Examples, and therefore without any Faith in the
Worshipper, or acceptance of God. Where is there any command or direction, or
approved example of this in Scripture? God will accept only what he commanded;
and without a promise it will be unprofitable to us; and it is a superstitious
Innovation of our own, to devise any Religious Worship, for which there is no
example at all, whereby it may be recommended to us. Certainly no Action can be
commended to us as Godly, which is not prescribed of God, by whose Word and
Institution every Action is sanctified, which otherwise would be common; and no
Action can be profitable to us, which God has not promised to accept, or has
accepted from his people. But giving Religious worship to a Creature is of this
Nature.

4. It is against the express command of God, the Threatening of Scripture, and
the Examples recorded in the Word. Against express command of God, both the
first, and second Commandments, the one respecting the Object, the other the
Means. That we must not serve other Gods, nor go after them, nor bow down unto
them. It is against the Threatenings of the Word in all those places, where God
is said to be a Jealous God. God is said to put on jealousy as a cloak, Isa.
59. 17. That is the upper and outmost Garment. He will be known, and plainly
profess himself to be so. So Exodus 34. 14. The Lord, whose name is jealous, is
a jealous God. Things are distinguished from the same kind by their Names, as
from different kinds by their Natures. Now from the (...), God will be
distinguished by his Jealousy, that he will not endure any partners in his
Worship. It is against Examples, Rev. 19. 10. and 22. 8. When I had heard, and
seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the Angel, which showed me
these things. And he said unto me, see thou do it not, etc. the Argument is, I
am thy fellow servants, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep
the sayings of this book worship God.

USE.
1. To condemn those, who do not make conscience of the Worship of God. There
are an irreligious sort of Men, that never call upon him, in public, or in
private; in the Family, or in the Closet; but wholly forget the God that made
them, at whose expense they are maintained and kept. Wherefore had you
reasonable Souls, but to praise, honor and glorify your Creator? Surely if
God be your God, that is, your Creator and Preserver, the duty will presently
fall upon you, thou shall worship the Lord thy God. If you believe there is a
God, why do not you call upon him? the neglect of his worship argues doubting
thoughts of his Being. For if there be such a supreme Lord, to whom one day you
must give an account, how dare you live without him in the World? all the
Creatures glorify him passively, but you have a heart and a tongue to glorify
him actually. Man is the mouth of the Creation, to return to God the praise of
all that Wisdom, Goodness and Power, which is seen in the things that are made.
Now you should make one among the worshippers of God. An Heathen could say, si
essem luscinia, etc. Are you a Christian, and have such advantages to know more
of God? And will you be dumb and tongue-tyed in his praises?

2, To condemn the Idolatry of the Papists, Synesius said, that the Devil is,
(...), that he rejoices in Idols. Here we see, what was the upshot of his
Temptations, even to bring men to worship and bow down before something that is
not God. Herein he was gratified by the Heathen Nations, and no less by the
Papists; witness their worshipping of Images, their Invocation of the Virgin
Mary, and other Saints, the adoring before the Bread in the Eucharist, etc. I
know they have many Evasions, but yet the stain of Idolatry sticks so close
to them, that all the water in the Sea will not wash them clean from it. This
Text clearly stareth them in the face, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve. Not Saints, not Angels, not Images, etc. They say
Moses only said, and Christ repeateth it from him, Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, but not only, so that the last clause is restrictive, not the first;
but some worship may be given to the creature. Civil we grant but not
Religious, and Worship is the most important word. They distinguish of (...)
and (...); the devil demanded of Christ only (...), fall down and worship me,
not as the supreme Author of all Gods Gifts, but as subordinate; all these
things are delivered unto me; but then Christ's words were not apposite to
refute the Tempters Impudency. Besides, for the distinction of (...) and (...),
the words are promiscuously used; so their distinction of Absolute and Relative
Worship, besides that they are groundless, they are unknown to the Vulgar, who
promiscuously give Worship to God, Saints, Images, Relicts. Some of the Learned
of them have confessed this abuse and bewailed it; Espencaeus a Sorbonist, Are
they well and godly brought up, who being children of an hundred year old, that
is, ancient Christians, do no less attribute to the Saints, and trust in them,
than to God himself, and that God himself is harder to be pleased and entreated
than they? So George Cassander; This false pernicious Opinion is too well known
to have prevailed among the Vulgar, while wicked men, persevering in their
naughtiness, are persuaded, that only by the Intercession of the Saints, whom
they have chosen to be their Patrons, and worship with cold and profane
Ceremonies, they have pardon and Grace prepared them with God; which pernicious
Opinion, as much as was possible, has been confirmed by them by lying
Miracles: and other men, not so evil, have chosen certain Saints to be their
Patrons and Helpers, have put more confidence in their Merits and Intercession,
than in the Merits of Christ, and have substituted into his place the Saints
and Virgin Mother. Ludovicus Vives; There are many Christians, which worship
Saints both Men and Women, no otherwise than they worship God; and I cannot see
any difference between the opinion they had of their Saints and that the
Gentiles had of their Gods. Thus far he, and yet Rome will not be purged.

3. Use is to exhort us to worship and serve the Lord our God, and him only.

1. Let us worship him. Worship has its rise and foundation in the heart of
the worshipper, and especially Religious worship, which is given to the
All-knowing God. Therefore there must we begin, we must have high thoughts, and
an high esteem of God. Worship in the Heart is most seen in two things, Love
and Trust. Love, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. We worship God, when we
give him such a Love as is superlative and transcendental, far above the love
that we give to any other thing; that so our respect to other things may give
way to our respect to God. The other Affection whereby we express our esteem of
God is Trust; This is another Foundation of worship, Psalm. 62. 8. Trust in the
Lord at all times, pour out your hearts before him. Well then, inward Worship
lies in these two things, delightful Adhaesion to God, and an entire
dependence upon him. Without this Worship of God we cannot keep up our service
to him. Not without delight, witness these Scriptures, Job 27. 10. Will he
delight himself in the almighty? will he always call upon God? Isa. 43. 22.
But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou have been weary of me, O
Israel! They that love God and delight in him, cannot be long out of his
Company, they will seek all occasions to meet with God; as Jonathan and David,
whose souls were knit to each other. So for dependence and Trust, it keeps up
service, for they that will not trust God, cannot be long true to him; Heb. 3.
12. Take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God. They that distrust Gods Promises, will not long
hold out in Gods way; for dependence begets observance: when we look for all
from him, we will often come to him, and take all out of his hands, and be
careful how we offend him and displease him. What makes the Christian to be so
sedulous and diligent in duties of worship? so awful and observant of God? his
All comes from God, both in life natural, and spiritual. In life natural,
Psalm. 145. 15, 16, 17, 18. The eyes of all things wait on thee, and thou give
them their food in due season. Thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire
of every living thing, etc. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him,
to all that call upon him in truth. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear
him, he will hear their cry, and will save them. The Lord preserves all them
that love him. Implying, That because their eyes are to him the Author of all
their blessings, therefore they call upon him and cry to him.

2. Serve him. That implies external Reverence and Worship. Now we are said to
serve him, either with respect unto the duties which are more directly to be
performed unto God, or with respect to our whole Conversation.

(1.) With respect unto the duties which are more directly to be performed unto
God; such as the Word, Prayer, Praise, Thanksgiving, Sacraments. Surely these
must be attended upon, because they are Acts of love to God, and Trust in God;
and these holy Duties are the ways of God, wherein he has promised to meet
with his people, and has appointed us to expect his Grace, and therefore they
must not be neglected by us. Therefore serve him in these things, for Mar. 4.
24. With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you. It is a rule of
commerce between us and God.

(2.) In your whole Conversation, Luke 1. 74, 75. That we might serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life. A Christians conversation is a continual Act of Worship; he ever behaveth
himself as before God, doing all things, whether they be directed to God or
Men, out of love to God, and fear of God, and so turns second Table duties
into first Table duties. Pure religion, and undefiled before God and the Father
is this, to visit the fatherless and the widows in their affliction, and to
keep himself unspotted from the world, Iam. 1. 27. Ephesians. 5. 21. 22. Submitting
your selves one to another in the fear of God. And next verse, Wives submit
your selves, unto your own husbands as unto the Lord. So Alms are a Sacrifice,
Heb. 13. 16. But to do good, and to communicate forget not; for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased.

3. Worship and serve God so, as it may look like Worship and service performed
to God, and due to God only, because of his Nature and Attributes. His Nature,
John 4. 24. God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
spirit and in truth. When Hearts wander, and Affections do not answer
Expressions, is this like worship and service done to an All seeing Spirit. His
Attributes; Greatness, Goodness, Holiness.

(1.) His Greatness and glorious Majesty, Heb. 12. 28. Let us serve him
acceptably, with Reverence and godly Fear. Then is there a stamp of Gods
Majesty on the duty.

(2.) His Goodness and Fatherly Love, Psalm. 100. 2. Serve the Lord with
gladness, and come before his presence with singing.

(3.) His Holiness, 2 Timothy 1. 3. I thank God whom I serve from my forefathers,
with pure conscience. 2 Timothy 2. 22. With them that call on the Lord out of a
pure heart.

SERMON. VII.
MATTHEW. 4. 11. Then the Devil leaves him, and behold angels came, and
ministered unto him.
IN these words you have the Issue, and close of Christ's Temptations. The
Issue is double.

I. In respect of the Adversary. II. In respect of Christ himself.
I. In respect of the Adversary; then the devil leaves him. II. In respect of
Christ himself, Behold, angels came and ministered unto him.
I shall consider in both, the History and the Observations.

First, The History of it, as it properly belongs to Christ: And there,

1. Of the first Branch, the Recess of Satan, then the devil leaves him.

1. It was necessary to be known, that Christ had power to chase away the devil
at his pleasure; that as he was an instance of Temptations, so he might be to
us a pattern of Victory and Conquest. If Satan had continued Tempting, this
would have been obscured, which would have been an infringement of Comfort to
us. The devil being overcome by Christ, he may be also overcome by us
Christians, 1 Ioh. 5. 18. He that is begotten of God keeps himself, and the
wicked one touches him not. That is, he uses all care and diligence to keep
himself pure, that the devil draw him not into the sin unto death, and those
deliberate, scandalous sins which lead to it. Christ having overcome Satan in
our name and nature, shows us the way, how to fight against him and overcome
him.

2. Christ had a work to do in the Valley, and therefore was not always to be
detained by Temptations in the Wilderness. The Spirit that led him thither to
be tempted, led him back again into Galilee to preach the Gospel, Luke 4. 14.
Jesus returned in the power of the spirit into Galilee. All things are timed
and ordered by God, and he limiteth Satan how far and how long he shall tempt.

3. In Luke it is said, chap. 4. 13. He departed from him (...) for a season.
He never tempted him again in this solemn way, hand to hand; but either abusing
the simplicity of his own Disciple, Mat. 16. 22, 23. Then Peter took him, and
began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee Lord, this shall not be unto
thee. But he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me Satan! thou art an
offense unto me: Or else by his Instruments, laying plots to take away his
life; as often, but especially in his passion, Luke 22. 53. This is your hour,
and the power of darkness. So Ioh. 14. 30. The prince of this world comes and
has nothing in me. Satan shall join with the Jews to destroy me, but they
shall find nothing to lay to my charge; nor indeed have they power to do me any
hurt, but that in Obedience to my Fathers Will I mean voluntarily to lay down
my life for sinners. So he had a permitted power over him, and was the prime
instrumental cause of his sufferings; set aside his voluntary condescension to
be a Ransom for sinners, satan had not any power over him, or challenge against
him. Well then, though he lost his Victory, he retained his Malice.

2. The second Branch, the access of the good Angels; and behold the Angels
came and ministered to him. There observe three things.

1. The Note of Attention, Behold! the Holy Ghost would excite our Minds, and
have us mark this, the Angels are always at hand to serve Christ, but now they
come to him in some singular manner; some notable appearance there was of them,
probably in a visible form and shape; and so they presented themselves before
the Lord to minister to him, as the devil set himself before him to molest and
vex him. As Christ's humiliation and humane nature was to be manifested by the
devils coming to him, and tempting Assaults; so the honor of his divine
Nature by the Ministry of Angels, lest his temptations should seem to derogate
from his Glory. When we read the story of his Temptations, how he was tempted
in all parts like us, we might seem to take scandal, as if he were a mere man;
therefore his Humiliation is counter-ballanced with the special honor done to
him; he was tempted as man, but as God ministered unto by Angels.

2. Why they came not before the devil was departed? I answer,

(1.) Partly to show that Christ had no help but his own when he grapled with
Satan. When the temptations were ended, then the good Angels came, least the
Victory should seem to be gotten by their help and assistance. They were
admitted to the Triumph, but they were not admitted to the Fight: they were not
spectators only in the conflict (for the Battle was certainly fought before
God and Angels) but partners in the Triumph: they went away to give place to
the Combat, but they come visibly to congratulate the Conqueror, after the
battle fought, and the Victory gotten. Our Lord would alone foil the devil, and
when that was done, the Angels came and ministered unto him.

(2.) Partly to show us, that the going of the one is the coming of the other.
When the devil is gone, the Angels come. Certainly it is true on the contrary,
1 Samuel 16. 14. The spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit
from the Lord troubled him: and it is true in this sense, if we entertain the
Temptation, we banish the good Angels from us: there is no place for the good
Angels, till the Tempter be repulsed.

3. Why now? and to what end was this Ministry?

1. To put Honor on the Redeemer, who is the Head and Lord of the Angels, Ephesians.
1. 20, 21. He has set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far
above all principalities and powers, etc. and gave him to be the head over all
things to the church. So 1 Pet. 3. 22. Who is gone into heaven, and is on the
right hand of God, angels and authorities, and powers being made subject to
him. Christ not only as God, but as Mediator has all of them subject to him,
Heb. 1. 6. and unto the son he says, Let all the angels of God worship him.
They as subjects and servants are bound to obey him. Therefore on all occasions
they attend on Christ; at his Birth, Luke 2. 13, 14. A multitude of the
heavenly host praised God, saying, Glory be to God on high, on earth peace,
good will toward men. Now in his Temptations, the Angels came and ministered
unto him. At his Passion, Luke 22. 43. There appeared to him an angel from
heaven, strengthening him: At his Resurrection, an angel rolled away the stone
from the grave, and attested the truth of it, Matthew. 28. 2. At his Ascension,
the Angels declared the manner of his going to Heaven, and return to Judgment:
Acts 1. 10, 11. So now they come to attend Christ, as Subjects on their Prince,
to tender their service and homage to him, and receive his Commands.

2. For his Consolation, Inward and Outward.

(1.) Inward, as Messengers sent from God; and so their coming was a token of
Gods special Love and Favor to him, and care over him. The Devil had mentioned
in one of his temptations, he shall give his angels charge over thee; this is a
truth, and in due time to be verified; not at Satan's Instance, but when God
pleased. Therefore it was a comfort to Christ to have solemn Messengers sent
from Heaven to applaud his Triumph.

(2.) Outward, they were sent to serve him, either to convey him back from the
mountain, where Satan had set him; or to bring him food, as they did to Elijah,
1 King. 19. 5, 6. And as he lay and slept under a juniper tree, behold then, an
angel touched him, and said unto him, arise, and eat. And he looked, and behold
there was a cake baken on the coals, and a cruse of water at his head, and he
did eat and drink, and laid him down again. (...), the word here used, is often
taken in that sense in the New Testament; Matthew. 8. 15. She arose and ministered
unto them, that is, served them at meat. So Matthew. 25. 44. When saw we thee an
hungered, etc. and did not minister unto thee. The name of Deacons is derived
hence, as they served tables or provided meat for the poor, Acts 6. 2. So Luke
10. 40. My sister has left me, (...), to serve alone, meaning, to prepare
provisions for the family: so Luke 17. 8. Gird thy self and serve me, that is,
at the Table: Again, Luke 22. 27. Whether is greater, he that sits at meat, or
he that serves? or ministers: So Ioh. 12. 2. They made a supper, and Martha
served, but Lazarus was one of those that sat at the table with him. Thus the
Angels ministered unto Christ. This sort of Ministry agrees with what was said
of his Hunger, which was the occasion of Satan's Temptations.

Secondly, The Observations. As Christ is a Pattern of all those Providence,
which are dispensed to the people of God.

Doct. I. That the days of Gods peoples Conflicts and Trials will not always
last.
There are alternative changes and vicissitudes in their condition upon Earth;
sometimes they are vexed with the coming of the Tempter, and then encouraged
and cheared by the presence of Angels: after storms come days of Joy and
Gladness; the devil departs, and the angels came and ministered to him. So
Psalm. 34. 19. Many are the afflictions of the Righteous, but the Lord
delivers him out of them all. Here is their present conflict, and their final
conquest. Look on a Christian on his dark side, and there are Afflictions, and
Afflictions many for number and kind; look on his luminous part, and there is
the Lord to take care of him, to deliver him, and the deliverance is complete,
the Lord delivers him out of them all. God will put an end to their conflict
sooner or later, sometimes visibly in this Life, or if he does not deliver them
till death, or from death, he will deliver them by death; then he delivers
them from all sin and misery at once, for death is theirs. The Reasons are
these,

1. God considers what will become Himself, his Pity, and Fidelity.

1. His own Pity and Mercy, James 5. 11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job,
and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender
mercy. God will give an happy end to our Conflicts and Trials, as he did to
Job, that he may be known to be a God pitiful and merciful: Job is set up as a
public visible Instance, and Monument of Gods tender Mercy. We must not
measure our Afflictions by the smart, but the end of them; what the merciful
God will do at length: the beginning is from Satan, but the end from the Lord.
If we look to the beginning, we draw an ill picture of God in our Minds, as if
he were harsh, severe, and cruel to his Creatures, yea, to his best servants;
but in the end we find him very tender of his people, and that sense has made
lies of God. At the very time when we think God has forgotten us, he is ready
to hear and to remove the trouble, Psalm. 31. 22. I said in my have, I am cut
off, nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplications. The Son of God
was hungry, transported and carried to and fro by the Devil, from the pinnacle
of the Temple to an high Mountain, tempted by a blasphemous suggestion to fall
down and worship the impure spirit; but at length the devil leaves him, and
the angels came and ministered to him.

2. His Fidelity, which will not permit him to suffer you to be tempted above
measure. We do not stand to the devils courtesy, to tempt us as long as he
list, but are in the hands of the Faithful God, 1 Cor. 10. 13. There has no
temptation taken you, but what is common to man: but God is faithful, who will
not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that you may be able to bear it, what a
heap of consolations are there in that one place, as (1.) That temptations are
but ordinary and to be looked for: there is no (...), but it is (...), incident
to humane nature; it has nothing extraordinary in it. If the Son of God in
humane Nature was not exempted, why should we expect a privilege apart to our
selves, not common to others? (2.) That God's conduct is gentle, he inflicteth
nothing, and permits nothing to be inflicted upon you beyond measure, and
above strength; but as Jacob drove as the little ones were able to bear, so God
proportioneth Trials to our strength. Before you have final deliverance, you
shall have present support. (3.) That he will together with the temptation give
(...), a passage out, a way to escape. And all this is assured to us by his
faithfulness; the conflict shall be tolerable, when it is at the highest, and
the end comfortable. God does bridle the malice and hatred of Satan, and his
instruments; he has taken an obligation upon himself to do so, that he may
omit no part of his care toward us. A good man will not overburthen his Beast.

2. The Lord considers also our frailty, both with respect to natural and
spiritual strength.

1. Natural strength. The Psalmist tells us, that he will not always chide
and keep his anger for ever, Psalm 103. 9. Why? One Reason is, that he knows
our frame, and remembers we are dust, verse 14. He may express his just
displeasure, and correct us for our sins for a while; but he takes off his
punishing hand again, because he knows we are soon apt to faint and fail,
being but a little enlivened dust, of a weak constitution, not able to endure
long troubles and vexations. Job pleads chap. 6. 12. Is my strength the
strength of stones? or is my flesh of brass? We have not strength to subsist
under perpetual troubles, but are soon broken and subdued by them.

2. With respect to spiritual strength, the best are subject to great
infirmities, which often betray us to sin, if our vexations be great and long,
Psalm. 125. 3. The rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous,
lest the righteous put forth their hands to iniquity. The oppressions of wicked
men shall not be so lasting and durable, as that the temptations should be of
too great force; this might shake the constancy of the best. He knows nothing
in Divinity, that knows not that God works congruously, and attempereth his
Providence to our strength, and so will not only give an increase of internal
Grace, but lessen and abate the outward temptation; that his external
Government conduces to the preservation of the Saints, as well as his
internal, by supporting their spirits with more liberal aides of Grace.
Therefore God will cause the temptation to cease, when it is overprossing. But
all must be left to his Wisdom and holy methods.

3. With respect to the Devil and his instruments, to whose malice he sets
bounds, who otherwise would know no measure.

(1.) For the devil see Rev. 2. 10. Fear none of those things which thou shall
suffer, behold! the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that you may be
tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days. Mark how they are comforted
against the persecution coming upon them; partly because the cause was clearly
Gods, for all this trouble was by the instigation of the devil, making use of
his instruments, Ephesians. 2. 2. he is called the Prince of the power of the Air,
the spirit that works in the Children, of disobedience; partly because the
persecution raised would not be universal, some of you, not all; and those not
persecuted unto the death, but only cast into prison; partly from the end,
that they should be tried, it was not penal or castigatory but probatory. The
devil would destroy you, but God would suffer you only to be tried, so that
they should come forth like the three Children out of the furnace, without
singing of their garments; or like Daniel out of the Lions Den, without a
scratch or maim; or as Christ here, the devil got not one jot of ground upon
him; partly from the duration, ten days, that is in Prophetical account ten
years, reckoning each day for a year, Numb. 14. 34. It was not long the saddest
afflictions will have an end. All which shows how God bridleth and moderateth
the rage of Satan, and his evil influence.

(2.) For his instruments God says Zech. 1. 15. I am very sorely displeased
with the Heathen that were at ease; for I was but a little displeased, and they
helped forward the affliction. The instruments of Gods chastisements lay on
without mercy, and being of cruel minds, and destructive intentions, which are
heightened in them by Satan, are severe executioners of Gods wrath; and if God
did not restrain them by the invisible chains of his Providence, we should
never see good day more. Well then you see the reasons why the Children of God,
though they have many troubles and conflicts, yet they are not everlasting
troubles.

Use of Instruction to the People of God. It teaches them three Lessons,
Comfort, Patience, Obedience.

1. Comfort and encouragement to them that are under a gloomy day, this will
not always last; he may try you for a while and you may be under great
conflicts, and wants, and difficulties, as he tried the Woman of Canaan with
discouraging answers, but at last, Woman! great is thy Faith, be it unto thee
even as thou will, Matthew. 15. 28. He tried his Disciples, when he meant to feed
the multitude, John 6. 5, 6. Whence shall we buy bread, that all these may eat?
This he said to prove them, for he himself knew what he would do. A poor
Believer is tried Children increase, Trading grows dead in hard times, how
shall so many mouths be filled? He promises Abraham a numerous posterity, but
for a great while he goes childless. He promises David a Kingdom yet for a
while he is fain to shift for his Life, and skulk up and down in the
Wilderness. He intended to turn water into Wine, but first all the store must
be spent. He means to revive the hearts of his contrite ones, but for a while
they lie under great doubts and fears, Moses his hand must be made leprous
before it wrought miracles. Jesus loved Lazarus and meant to recover him, but
he must be dead first. But I must not run too far! There will be tedious
conflicts and trials, but yet there is hope of deliverance; God is willing and
God is able. He is willing, because he is sufficiently inclined to it by the
grace and favor that he bears his people, Psalm. 149. 4. The Lord takes
pleasure in his people, he will beautify the meek with salvation. The Lord
loves their persons, and he loves their Prosperity and Happiness, Psalm. 35.
27. He has pleasure in the prosperity of his Servants. He is able either as to
wisdom or power. Wisdom, 2 Pet. 2. 7. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly
out of temptation. Many times we know not which way, but God knows, he is
never at a loss. Then for his Power, power has a twofold notion, of Authority,
and Might. He has Authority enough, the sovereign Dominion of God is a great
prop to our Faith, all things in the World are at his disposal to use them for
his own Glory, Psalm. 44. 4. Command deliverances for Jacob; Angels, Devils,
Men, the Hearts of the greatest men are all at his command. He has might and
strength, Dan. 3. 17. Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us, and what
then can let?

2. Patience, we must be contented with the Son of God to tarry his leisure,
and undergo our course of trial; as Christ patiently continued till enough was
done to instruct the Church, Isaiah 28. 16. He that believes will not make
have. The people of God miscarry in their have, Psalm. 31. 22. I said in my
have, I am cut off, but thou heardest the voice of my supplication, Psalm 116.
11. I said in my have all men are liars, even Samuel and all the Prophets who
had assured him of the Kingdom. It will come in the best time when it comes in
God's time; neither too soon, nor too late; it will come sooner then your
Enemies would have it, sooner than second causes seem to promise, sooner than
you deserve, soon enough to discover the Glory of God to you, Psalm. 40. 1. I
waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry. God
will not fail a waiting soul, his delay is no denial, nor a sign of want of
love to you, John 11. 5. Jesus loved Lazarus, and yet verse 6. When he had
heard that he was sick, he abode two days still in the same place where he
was. It may come sooner than you expect, Psalm. 94. 18. When I said my foot
slippeth thy mercy, O Lord, held me up. David was apt to think all was gone,
help would never come more to him, and in that very season God delivered him.

3. Obedience, the Son of God submitted to the Holy Spirit, while the impure
Spirit tempted him. If you would look for a ceasing of the conflict, do as he
did, carry it humbly, fruitfully, faithfully to God.

1. Humble carriage will become you under your conflicts, 1 Pet. 5. 6. Humble
your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in
due time. The stubborness of the Child makes his correction double to what it
otherwise would be. The more submissive you are, the more the cross has its
effect, whether you will or no, you must passively submit to God.

2. Carry it fruitfully, otherwise you obstruct the kindness of the Lord. He
proves us, that we may be fruitful, John 15. 2. Every branch in me that
bears not fruit, he takes away; and every branch that bears fruit he
purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit. The Rod has done its work,
when it makes us more holy; then the comfortable days come, Heb. 12. 11. Now
no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous; nevertheless
afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them, which are
exercised thereby. Righteousness brings peace along with it, inward and
outward. This makes amends for the trouble. Then God begins to take it off.

3. Carry it faithfully to God, still opposing sin and satan; for the more you
give way to satan, the more you are troubled with him, and your misery is
increased not lessened. But if you repel his temptations, he is discouraged,
Ephesians. 4. 27. Neither give place to the Devil. The devil watches for a door to
enter, and takes possession of your hearts, that he may exercise his former
Tyranny. If he gains any ground he makes fearful havoc in the soul, and
weakneth not only our comfort but our Grace. Therefore imitate Christ's
resolution and resistance here. But this will deserve a point by it self.
Therefore

II. Doctrine, When the Devil is thoroughly and resolutely resisted he
departs.
As here, when the adversary was put to the foil he went his way. Therefore
this is often pressed upon us in Scripture, James 4. 7. Resist the devil and he
will flee from you. If you resist his suggestions to malice, envy, and strife,
he is discouraged. So 1 Pet. 5. 9. Whom resist steadfast in the Faith. We must
not fly nor yield to him in the least, but stoutly and peremptorily resist him
in all his temptations. If you stand your ground satan falls. In this
spiritual conflict satan has only weapons offensive, cunning wiles, and fiery
darts, none defensive; a believer has weapons both offensive and defensive,
sword and shield, etc. therefore our safety lies in resisting.

About which is to be considered, 1. What kind of Resistance this must be. 2.
Arguments to persuade and enforce it. 3. What Graces enable us in this
Resistance.


1. For the kind of Resistance.

1. It must not be faint and cold. Some kind of Resistance may be made by
general and common Graces; the light of nature will rise up in defyance of many
sins, especially at first before men have sinned away natural light, or else
the Resistance at least is in some cold way. But it must be earnest and
vehement as against the enemy of God, and our Souls. Paul's Resistance in his
conflicts was with serious dislikes, and deep groans, Romans 7. 19. The good that
I would I do not, but the evil which I would not, that I do, and verse 24. Oh
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! In
apparent cases a detestation, and vehement indignation is enough, get thee
behind me Satan! In other cases there need strong Arguments and Considerations,
that the temptation may not stick, when the tempter is gone; as the smutch
remains of a candle stuck against a stone wall. When Eve speaks faintly and
coldly, the devil renews the assault with the more violence, Genesis 3. 3. Ye
shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye dye. As to the
restraint she speaks warmly, and with some impatiency of resentment, not eat,
nor touch: in the Commination too coldly, lest ye dye, when God had said, ye
shall surely dye. A faint denial is a kind of grant: therefore slight Satan's
assaults with indignation. Though the dog barketh the Traveller passes on.
Satan cannot endure contempt. At other times argue for God stoutly; thy Soul
and eternal concernments are in danger. No worldly concernment ought to go so
near to us as that which concerns our eternal good, and the Salvation of our
souls. What would the devil have from thee but thy soul, and its precious
enjoyments, Peace of Conscience, Hope of Everlasting Life? What does he bid?
worldly vanities. As the Merchant puts up his wares with indignation, when
the chapman bids an unworthy price.

2. It must be a through resistance of all sin, take the little Foxes, dash
Babylons brats against the stones. Lesser sticks set the great ones on fire.
The devil cannot hope to prevail for great things presently: at first it is,
has God said? and then, ye shall not surely dye. The approaches of Satan to
the Soul are gradual, he asks a little, it is no great matter. Consider the
evil of a temptation is better kept out than gotten out. Many think to stop
after they have yielded a little; but when the stone at the top of an Hill
begins to role downward, it is hard to stay it, and you cannot say, how far you
shall go. I Will yield but once says a deceived heart; i will yield but a little,
and never yield again. The devil will carry thee further and further, till he
has not left any tenderness in thy Conscience. Some that thought to venture
but a shilling, by the witchery of Gaming have played away all: so some have
sinned away all principles of Conscience.

3. It must not be for a while but continued; not only to stand out against the
first assault, but a long siege. What Satan cannot gain by Argument, he seeks
to gain by importunity; but resist him steadfast in the Faith: as his instrument
spoke to Joseph, day by day, Genesis 39. 10. Our thoughts by time are more
reconciled to evil. Now we must keep up our zeal to the last. To yield at last
is to lose the Glory of the conflict. Therefore rate away the importunate
futor, as Christ does.

II. Arguments to persuade it.

1. Because he cannot overcome you without your own consent. The wicked are
taken captive by him at his will and pleasure, 2 Timothy 2. 26. because they yield
themselves to his temptations, like the young man, Prove. 7. 22. He goes after
her straightway, as an Ox goes to the slaughter, and as a fool to the
correction of the stocks. There is a Consent or at least there is not a
powerful Dissent. Satan's power lies not in a constraining efficacy, but
persuasive allurement.

2. The sweetness of victory will recompense the trouble of Resistance, it is
much more pleasing to deny a temptation, than to yield to it; the pleasure of
sin is shortlived, but the pleasure of self-denial is Eternal.

3. Grace the more it is tried and exercised, the more it is evidenced to be
right and sincere, Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. Knowing that tribulation works patience,
and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed,
because the Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, which
is given to us. It is a comfortable thing to know that we are of the Truth, and
to be able to assure our hearts before God.

4. Grace is strengthened when it has stood out against a Trial. As a Tree
shaken with fierce Winds is more fruitful, its Roots being loosned. Satan is a
loser and you a gainer by temptations, wherein you have approved your fidelity
to God: as a man holds a stick the faster when another seeks to wrest it
out of his hands.

5. The more we resist Satan the greater will our reward be 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness. The danger of the
battle will increase the joy of the victory; as the dangers of the way make
home the sweeter. There will a time come, when he that is now a Soldier will
be a Conqueror, Romans 16. 20. The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your
feet shortly.

6. Where Satan gets possession, after he seems to be cast out, he returns
with the more violence and tyrannizeth the more, Matthew. 12. 45. Then goes he
and takes with himself, seven other spirits more wicked then himself, and they
enter in, and dwell there; and the last state of that man is worse than the
first.

7. The Lords Grace is promised to him that resists. God keeps us from the
evil one, but it is by our watchfulness and resistance; his power makes it
effectual. We are to strive against sin and keep our selves, and God keeps us
by making our keeping effectual.

III. What are the Graces, that enable us in this Resistance? I Answer, the
three fundamental Graces, Faith, Hope, and Love, so the spiritual Armor is
represented, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. But let us who are of the day be sober, putting on
the breast plate of Faith and Love, and for an helmet the hope of Salvation.

1. A strong Faith, 1 Pet. 5. 9. Whom resist, steadfast in the Faith. This is in
the general a sound belief of Eternity, or a deep sense of the World to come.
When we believe the Gospel with an assent so strong, as constantly to adhere to
the duties prescribed, and to venture all upon the hopes offered therein.

2. A fervent love arising out of the sense of our obligations to God, that we
do with all readiness of mind set our selves to do his will, levelling and
directing our actions to his glory. Love is strong as death, and many waters
cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it, Cant. 8. 6, 7. This love
will neither be bribed, nor frightened from Christ.

3. A lively Hope, that does so long and wait for glory to come, that present
things do not greatly move us; either delights, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Whom having not
seen ye love, in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing ye rejoice with
joy unspeakable and full of glory; or the terrors of sense, Romans 8. 18. For I
reckon that the sufferings of this life are not worthy to be compared with the
Glory that shall be revealed in us.

III. Doctrine, That those that come out of eminent conflicts are usually
delivered by God in a glorious manner.
Christ was a pattern of this, The devil leaves him, and behold! Angels came
and ministered unto him. When God delivered his people after a long captivity,
he delivered them with glory, and some kind of triumph, when he turned the
Egyptian Captivity, they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver and jewels
of gold and raiment. And the Lord gave the people favor in the sight of the
Egyptians, so that they lent unto them such things as they required; and they
spoiled the Egyptians, Exodus, 12. 35, 36. So in the Babylonian Captivity, Cyrus
charge his subjects in the place where the Jews remain, to furnish them with
all things necessary for their journey, Ezekiel. 1. 4. And whosoever remains in
any place, where he sojourneth, let the men of his place help him with silver,
and with gold, and with goods, and with beasts, besides the free-will-offering
for the house of God, that is in Jerusalem. So in a private instance, Job 42.
10, 11. And the Lord turned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for his
Friends: also the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before. Then came there
unto him all his brethren, and all his sisters, and all they that had been of
his acquaintance before, and did eat bread with him in his house, and they
bemoaned him, and comforted him over all the evil that the Lord had brought
upon him; every man also gave him a piece of money, and every one an ear-ring of
gold. It is said the Lord turned the captivity of Job, because he had been
delivered to Satan's power, till the Lord set him at Liberty again, and then all
his Friends had compassion on him, even those that had despised him before
releived him. So Isaiah 61. 7. For your shame you shall have double, and for
confusion they shall rejoice in their portion; therefore in their Land they
shall possess the double, Everlasting joy shall be unto them. They should have
large and eminent Honor, double honor for their shame, such a reparation
would God make them for all the troubles and damages they had sustained. So in
an ordinary Providence God raises up comforters to his servants, after all the
injuries done them by satan's instruments. And so also in spirituals the grief
and trouble that comes by Temptation is recompensed with more abundant
consolation after the conquest and victory; and God delights to put special
marks of favor upon his people, that have been faithful in an hour of Trial.
Now God does this,

1. To show the World the advantage of Godliness, and close adhering to him in
an hour of temptation, Psalm 119. 56. This I had because I kept thy precepts.
And Psalm 58. 11. So that a man shall say, verily there is a reward for the
righteous, verily he is a God that judges in the Earth.

2. To check our diffidence and murmurings under trouble. Within a while and
Gods Children will see, they have no cause to quarrel with God, or repent that
they were in trouble. For sometimes God gives not only a comfortable but a
glorious issue. There is nothing lost by waiting on Providence, though we abide
the blows of Satan for a while, yet abide them; God is it may be preparing the
greater mercy for you, Isaiah 25. 9. And it shall be said in that day, lo! this
is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is the Lord, we
have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation. Afflictions
are sharp in their season, but the end is glorious.

USE.
Do not always reckon upon temporal felicity, refer that to God, but do as
Jesus who in his sharp trials, Heb. 12, 2, 3. For the joy that was set before
him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand
of the Throne of God. There is a sure Crown of Life, James 1. 12. Blessed is
the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive the
Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him. That is
enough to content a Christian, the eternal reward is sure. In this World he
shall receive with persecution an hundred fold, but in the World to come
Eternal Life, Mark 10. 29, 30. There is no man that has left house or brethren
or sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my sake
and the Gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold now in this time, Houses,
and Brethren and Sisters, and Mothers, and Children, and Lands with
Persecutions, and in the World to come Eternal Life.

IV. Doctrine, That God makes use of the Ministry of Angels in supporting and
comforting his afflicted servants.
He did so to Christ, he does so to the people of Christ. Partly for the
defense and comfort of the Godly, Ps. 34. 7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth
round about them that fear him, and delivers them, Heb. 1. 14. Are they not
all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to them, who shall be the heirs
of Salvation. Their Ministry is now invisible but yet certain. And partly also
for the terror of their Enemies. When David had said, The Lord has chosen the
hill of Sion to dwell in, Psalm 68. 16. he adds verse 17. The Chariots of God
are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels, implying, that no Kingdom in the
World has such defense, and such potent and numerous Armies as the Church
has, and the Kingdom of Christ; God has fixed his residence there, and the
Angels serve him, and attend upon him, and he will be no less terrible to his
foes in Sion, that oppose the Gospel, than he showed himself in Sinai, when he
gave the Law. Where the King is there his attendants are; so where Christ is
the Courtiers of Heaven take up their station. Now Christ is with his Church to
the end of the World; therefore these thousands of Angels are there ready to be
employed by him. Now we may be sure of this Ministry.

1. They delight in the Preaching of the Gospel, and the explication of the
mysteries of Godliness, 1 Pet. 1. 12. Which things the Angels desire to look
into, Ephesians. 3. 10. To the end that now unto the principalities and powers in
heavenly places, might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God.

2. They delight in the Holy Conversation of the Godly; as they are offended
with all impurity, filthyness, and ungodliness. If good men be offended at the
sins of the wicked, as Lots righteous soul was vexed from day to day with their
ungodly deeds, 2 Pet. 2. 8. much more are these holy spirits, especially when
all things are irregularly carried in the worship of God, 1 Cor. 11. 10. For
this cause ought the woman to have power on her head, because of the Angels, 1 Timothy 5. 21. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect
Angels, that thou observe these things, without preferring one before another,
doing nothing by partiality.

3. They fight against the devil and defend the godly in their extreme dangers.
When the devil comes into the Church of God, like a Wolf into the flock, they
oppose and resist him. Therefore there is said to be War in Heaven, that is in
the Church between Michael and his Angels, and the devil and his Angels, Rev.
12. 7. And there was war in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against the
dragon, and the dragon fought and his Angels. In the highest heaven there is no
War. In short the Angels and Believers, make one Church, under one Head,
Christ; and at length shall both live together in the same place.

Why does God make use of the Ministry of Angels? and how far?

1. To manifest unto them the greatness, and glory of his work in the
recovering Mankind, that their delight in the Love and Wisdom of God may be
increased. All holy Creatures delight in any manifestation of God, the Angels
more especially, 1 Pet. 1. 12. Which things the angels desire to look into. And
Ephesians. 3. 11. To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in
heavenly places may be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God. Though
they themselves be not the parties interested, the spectators not the guests;
yet they are delighted in the glory of God, and are kindly affectionated to the
salvation of lost men; and that they may have a nearer view of this mystery God
gratifieth them by sending them often to attend upon the dispensation of the
Gospel, and to assist in it so far, as is meet for Creatures. They are present
in our Assemblies; see 1 Cor. 11. 10. 1 Timothy 5. 21. they see who is negligent
in his office, who hinders the preaching of the Gospel; they observe what is
the success of it, and when it obtains its effect; Luke 15. 7. There shall be
joy in heaven over one sinner that repeteth. They are hereby more excited to
praise and glorify God, and are careful to vouchsafe their attendance about
the meanest that believe in him, Psalm. 91. 11, 12. He shall give his angels
charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in
their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.

2. To maintain a society and communion between all the parts of the family of
God. When God gathered together the things in Heaven and in Earth, he brought
all into subjection and dependence upon one common head, Jesus Christ; Ephesians. 1.
10. That in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather together
in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth,
even in him. Men by Adoption, Angels by Transition are taken into the family of
Christ. Now there is some intercourse between the several parts thereof; our
goodness extends not to them, but is confined to the Saints on earth, in whom
should be our delight, yet their help may be useful to us, they being such
excellent and glorious Creatures; But we are forbidden to invoke them, or trust
in them. God does employ them in the Affairs of his people. Their help is not
the fruit of our trust in them, but their obedience to God; and it is seen in
frustrating the endeavors of Satan and his Instruments, and other services
wherein Christ employeth them. God showed this to Jacob in the Vision of the
Ladder, which stood upon Earth, and the top reached to heaven, a figure of the
Providence of God, especially in and about the Gospel, Ioh. 1. 51. Hereafter
you shall see the heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending
upon the son of man. To carry on the work of the Gospel, and to promote the
glory and interest of Christ's Kingdom in the World. Thus far in the general we
may be confident of.

3. To preserve his people from many dangers and casualties, which fall not
within the foresight of man, God imployeth the watchers, as they are called in
the book of Daniel, chap. 4. 13, 17. for he is tender of his people, and does
all things by proper means. Now the Angels having a larger foresight than we,
they are appointed to be Guardians. This they do according to Gods pleasure,
preventing many dangers, which we could by no means foresee. They observe the
devil in all his walks, and God uses them to prevent his sudden surprizals of
his people, as Instances are many.

4. Because they are witnesses of the Obedience and Fidelity of Christ's
disciples, and so far as God permits, they cannot but assist them in their
conflicts. Thus Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 9. We are made a spectacle unto the world, and
to angels and to men. Now the Angels, that are witnesses to their combats and
sufferings, cannot but make report to God, Mat. 18. 10. Take heed that ye
despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto you, that in heaven their
angels do always behold the face of my father, which is in heaven. The Angels
which are appointed by God to be their Guardians have their continual recourses
and returns to Gods glorious presence. Now being so high in Gods favor, and
having continual access to make their requests and complaints known to him,
they will not be silent in the behalf of their fellow servants, that either the
trial may be lessened, or grace sufficient may be given to them.

5. They do not only keep off hurt, but there are many blessings and benefits,
that we are partakers of by their ministry. As the Angel of the Lord delivered
Peter out of Prison, Acts 12. 7. And behold the angel of the Lord came upon
him, and a light shined in the prison; and he smote Peter on the side, and
raised him up, saying, Arise up quickly; and his chains fell off from his
hands, etc. but he does not give thanks to the Angel, but to God, ver. 11. Now
I know of a surety that the Lord has sent his angel, and has delivered me,
etc. He directs it to God, not to the creature. The Angels do us many
favors, all the thanks we do them is, that we do not offend them by our sins
against God, other gratitude, they expect not.

6. Their last office is at Death and Judgment. In death to convey our souls to
Christ, Luke 16. 22. And it came to pass, that the beggar dyed, and was carried
by the angels into Abraham's bosom, that so we may enjoy our rest in heaven. In
the last day they will gather the bodies of Christ's Redeemed ones from all
parts of the World, after they have been resolved into dust, and mingled with
the dust of other men, that every Saint may have his own body again, wherein he
has obeyed and glorified God. Matthew. 24. 31. And he shall send his angels with
a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the
four winds, from one end of heaven to the other. That is, from all parts and
quarters of the World, that their Souls may return to their old beloved
habitations, and then both in body and in soul they may be for ever with the
Lord.

USE.
Now this is a great comfort to the Church and People of God, when the Powers
and Principalities on earth are employed against them, to consider, what Powers
and Principalities attend upon Christ. We serve such a Master, as has
authority over the holy Angels, to employ them at his pleasure, and in their
darkest condition his people feel the benefit of it. As the Angel of the Lord
appeared to Paul in a dreadful storm, Acts 27. 23, 24. There stood by me this
night the angel of the Lord, whose I am, and whom I serve; saying, Fear not
Paul, etc. So to Christ in his Agonies, Luke 22. 43. There appeared an angel to
him from heaven strengthening him. So against Satan, the good Angels are ready
to comfort us, as the evil Angels are ready to trouble and tempt us. Let us
then look to God, at whose direction they are sent to help and comfort us.

Doct. V. If God takes away ordinary helps from us, he can supply us by means
Extraordinary.
As he did Christ's hunger by the Ministry of Angels. Therefore till Gods power
be wasted, there is no room for despair. We must not limit the Holy One of
Israel to our ways and means, as they did, Psalm. 78. 41. They turned back, and
tempted God, and limited the Holy One of Israel.

THE TRANSFIGURATION OF CHRIST.
SERMON I.
Matthew 17. 1. And after six days Jesus takes Peter, James and John his
brother, and brings them into an high mountain apart. With Luke 9. 28. It
came to pass about an eight days after these sayings, he took Peter and John,
and James, and went up into a mountain to pray.
I Mean to handle the Transfiguration of Christ which was, 1. A solemn
Confirmation of his Person and Office. 2. A pledge of that glorious estate
which is reserved for us in Heaven.


1. It was a confirmation of his Person and Office, as appears Matthew. 17. 5.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. So Peter who was
one present urges it, 2 Pet. 3. 16, 17, 18. We have not followed cunningly
devised Fables when we made known unto you, the power and coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of His Majesty. For he received from God
the Father Honor and Glory, when there came such a voice to him from the
excellent Glory, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. And this
voice which came from Heaven we heard when we were with him in the Holy Mount;
and John also John 1. 14. We beheld his glory, as the glory of the only
begotten of the Father, they were Eye and Earwitnesses, and therefore could
affirm the certainty of this Doctrine.

2. It is a pledge of our glorious estate, for Christ's Body was adorned with
heavenly Glory, and he had spoken chap. 16. 27. of his coming in the glory of
the Father, and now he gives his Disciples a pledge and earnest of it.

In this Introduction four things are observable. 1. The Time after six days.
2. The Persons whom he takes with him, Peter, James and John. 3. The Place he
brings them to, into an high Mountain apart. 4. The Preparative action, he
went up into a Mountain to pray.


First, The Time, The Evangelist Luke says about an eight days, Matthew and
Mark after six days. The Reconciliation is easy. Matthew and Mark spoke of the
space of Time between the day of Prediction, and the day of Transfiguration
exclusively, Luke includes them both. The Jews called that flux of time
between one Sabbath and another eight days, including not only the
intervening week, but both the Sabbaths; according to their custom Luke
speaks, Matthew of the time between.

Secondly, The Persons chosen to attend him in this Action, Peter, James and
John.

1. Why, Three? 2. Why, Those three?
1. Why Three? so great an Action as this was needed valuable Testimony, for
the Law says in the mouth of two or three Witnesses, every thing shall be
established, Deuteronomy. 17. 6. Now Christ would go to the utmost of the Law, and
would have not two only but three Witnesses, as the Apostle speaks of three
Witnesses in Heaven, and three on Earth, 1 John 5. 7, 8. so here are three and
three, three from Heaven, God the Father, Moses and Elias, and three from Earth
Peter, James and John.

2. Why those Three? Many give diverse reasons, Peter had led the way to the
rest in that notable confession of Christ, Matthew. 16. 16. and is conceived to
have some primacy for the orderly beginning of Actions in the College of the
Apostles, James was the first Apostle who shed his blood for Christ, Acts 12.
2. and John was the most long lived of them all, and so could the longer give
testimony of those things which he heard and saw, till the Church was well
gathered and settled. Others give other Reasons, but to leave conjectures, it is
certain that these had many singular favors afforded them above the rest of
the twelve, as appears partly in this that Christ changed their names calling
Peter Cephas, or a stone; and the other two Boanerges, sons of Thunder; which
was a token that Christ loved these more then the rest. Yea among these John
was his bosom Favorite, and therefore called often the Disciple whom Jesus
loved. Partly because he was in the whole course of his life more intimate with
these, then with the rest of the Disciples. You shall see when he raised Iairus
his daughter from death to Life, Luke 8. 51. he suffered no body to go in but
Peter, James and John, and the Father and Mother of the Maiden, so these very
Persons were those who in Mount Olivet were conscious to his Agonies, Matthew.
26. 27. he took with him Peter and the two Sons of Zebedee, and began to be
sorrowful and very heavy: Now these who were to be conscious to his Agonies,
are first in Mount Tabor beholders of his great Majesty and Glory, for their
better encouragement and preparation for his and their own sufferings.

Thirdly, The Place; he brings them into an high Mountain apart. This
Mountain is supposed to be Tabor though not named by the Evangelists, a fit
place both for height and secrecy, both which were necessary to the double
Action that was to be performed there, either his Transfiguration or Prayer.

1. To his Transfiguration height and secrecy were necessary. (1.) Height, this
work required not only a Mountain, but an high Mountain, for his
Transfiguration was a middle state between the infirmity of his Flesh, and the
Glory that he now possesses. So the top of a very high Mountain was chosen, it
is as a middle place between Heaven the Habitation of God, and Earth the
Habitation of Men. Besides since Moses and Elias were to appear in this Action,
and that with Bodies above the state of those natural Bodies, which we have
here below; it was more agreeable this should be done in a Mountain then in the
lower parts of the Earth, yea moreover they were so nearer to Heaven, to which
they went back again.

(2.) Secrecy was necessary to his Transfiguration, for Christ was about a
business which he would not have presently to come abroad, and therefore it was
to be confined to the knowledge of a few, who were to be called up from the
rest into an high Mountain, verse 9. Jesus charged them that they should tell
the vision to no man till the Son of man was risen from the dead, and what was
done before many will hardly be concealed. The due time for the general and
public manifestation of the divine Glory was not yet come, therefore he would
not have it unseasonably divulged. And hereby he teaches us modesty, Christ
was Crucified in the City before all, but Transfigured in the Mountain only
before a few.

2. The other action of Prayer does very well agree with height and secrecy.

1. For Height, Though God hears us every where wheresoever we lift up pure
hands without wrath and doubting, yet a Mountain is not altogether disagreeable
to this duty; it is good to be as near Heaven as we can, I am sure it is good
to get up the Heart there. We have a freer prospect of Heaven from a Mountain
and may look up to those blessed Regions, where our God is; therefore Christ
often chose a Mountain to pray in not only now but at other times, Matthew. 14.
23. Certainly when we pray we should turn our backs upon all earthly things,
and have our Hearts and Minds carried up to him to whom our prayers are
directed, and that place where he dwells.

2. Secrecy is necessary for this Duty, partly to avoid ostentation, Matthew. 6.
6. When thou prayest enter into thy Closet, and shut thy doors. Public prayer
must be performed before others, but not private for fear of Hypocrisy, so
also to increase fervency secret Prayers are usually most ardent. Ille dolet
vere qui sine test dolet. My soul shall weep sore in secret places, Ier. 13.
17. And Peter went out and wept bitterly, Matthew. 26. 75. And Jacob wrastled
with God alone, Genesis 32. 24. Frequency of objects draws away the Mind,
obstructeth our Affections, abates the vehemence of our zeal, fills us with
carnal thoughts, therefore Christ retireth himself and his three Disciples,
that being separated from all Distractions they might attend the Prayer, and
the vision without interruption.

Fourthly, The Preparative Action, In Luke it is, he went into a Mountain to
Pray. Christ had two ends, he told his Disciples the one, but concealeth the
other. He spoke only of Prayer the more to hide the thing from the rest of the
Apostles, which would soon be evident enough to those whom he took along with
him. Now this tells us that every weighty business should be begun with
Prayer, when we go about the performance of weighty and serious Duties, we
should withdraw ourselves from all occasions which may hinder us and distract
us therein, as our Lord being to give himself to Prayer goes apart into a
Mountain.

In this Introduction I shall only take notice of two things, 1. The choice of
his Company. 2. His preparative Action, he Prayed, and whilst he prayed he was
Transfigured.


I. Of the choice of his Company. He took Peter, James and John. That Christ
does not use all his servants alike familiarly in every thing. Partly because
he had his liberty, for in matters of free favor it is not tance of Persons to
pass by some and admit others, no not in the most necessary spiritual
dispensations, Matthew. 11. 27. All things are delivered to me of my Father, and
no man knows the Son but the Father, and he to whomsoever the Father will
reveal him. The plea of the Lord of the Vineyard will ever hold firm and valid,
Mat. 20. 15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with my own. But this is
a thing of another nature, the dispensing of his arbitrary respects, acceptance
of Persons in Judgment is a violation of Justice, but not in matters of free
favor. Partly because he would consecrate and hallow spiritual Friendship, and
commend it to us by his own example, and therefore though he loved all his
Disciples, yet he choose out some for intimacy and special converse, these were
(...), the flower of the Apostles, either because of their sutableness, he had
a special inclination to them, or for their sincerity and eminency in Grace, he
delighted in them more then in the rest, sicut se habet simpliciter ad
simpliciter, ita magis, ad magis; if I love all that are godly, I love those
most who are most godly. Now as Christ consecrated holy Friendship in his own
Person, so was it exemplified in his Disciples, for I find a great Friendship
between two of these mentioned in the Text, John and Peter you find them mostly
together, John 20. 2, 3, 4. Mary Magdalen runs and comes to Peter and to
the other Disciple whom Jesus loved. Peter went forth and the other Disciple,
and came to the Sepulcher, so Acts 3. 1. Now Peter and John went up together
into the Temple, at the hour of Prayer, John 21. 7. The Disciple whom Jesus
loved said unto Peter, It is the Lord, and John 21. 21, 22. Peter seeing the
Disciple which Jesus loved, said Lord, and what shall this man do? as willing
to know the future state of his Friend, so Acts 8. 14. Peter and John go to
Samaria to confirm the Disciples, See John 18. 15. And Simon Peter followed
Jesus, and so did another Disciple, and that other Disciple was known unto the
High Priest, meaning himself, so that in these and other places you still find
Peter and John together as very near and fast Friends, they always keep
together, possibly for spiritual assistance; for Peter was of an hot temper,
John the Disciple of Love: Peter hasty and of a Military valor, John all for
lenity and peace. Well then though we ought to seek peace with all men as much
as is possible, Romans 12. 18. and there should be special concord and Communion
with all Christians, (...), rises higher then (...), 2 Pet. 1. 7. Yet
Friendship and inward conversation should only be with a few, such as may be
helps to us in godliness, and may promote our mutual good Temporal and
Spiritual. So did Christ who had twelve Disciples single out three of them for
greatest intimacy, and so did Peter, who though he had eleven Colleagues, and
held concord with all, yet his intimate Friendship was with John the Disciple
whom Jesus loved. It is good to hold Friendship with those who are beloved of
God, and one who by his love and lenity might cool his heats, and abate his
hasty fervours which were so natural to him.

Now having so fair an occasion I shall treat of spiritual Friendship, for an
heavenly faithful Friend is one of the greatest treasures upon Earth. A Friend
is valuable in secular matters much more a spiritual Friend, Prove. 27. 17. As
Iron sharpneth Iron, so does the countenance of a man his Friend, that is, when
he is dull his Friend sets an edge upon him.

1. Friendship is necessary for every one that would live in the World, because
man is (...), a sociable Creature. Man was not made to live alone, but in
Company with others; for mutual Society and Friendship, and they that fly all
Company and live to and by themselves are counted inhumane, Eccles. 4. 9, 10,
11, 12. Two are better then one; for if they fall, the one will lift up his
fellow: but woe to him that is alone when he falls; for he has not another to
lift him up. Again, if two lie together, they have heat: but how can one be
warm if he lie alone? And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him?
Thus far Solomon. The Egyptians in their Hieroglyphics expressed the
unprofitableness of a solitary man by a single Millstone, which alone grindeth
no Meal, but with its fellow is very serviceable for that purpose. The Lord
appointed mankind to live in Society, that they might be mutually helpful to
one another. Surely God never made them to live in Deserts, the wild Beasts
love to go alone, but the tame in Flocks and Herds. The Lord does give variety
of gifts to the sons of men; to all some, but to none all, that one might stand
in need of another, and make use of one another; and the subordination of one
gift to another is the great means of upholding the World. Man is weak and
insufficient to himself, and wanting the help of others needs Society, and is
inclined to it by the bent of his Nature.

2. Though Man affects Society, yet in our Company we must use choice, and
the good must converse with the good for these Reasons.

1. Partly because like does best sort with like, Friendship is founded in
sutableness, and maintained by it, eadem velle and nolle, to will and nill the
same things breeds an harmony of minds; the Godly will have special love to
the godly, and they that Fear God will be Companions of them that fear him,
Psalm 119. 63. they must needs be more dear and precious to them then others,
as a wicked man easily smells out a fit Companion for him, Psalm 50. 18. When
thou saw a Thief, then thou consentedst with him, and have been partaker
with Adulterers; like will to like, every man shows his temper in his
Company. The Fowls of Heaven flock together according to their several kinds,
ye shall not see Doves flocking with the Ravens, nor diverse kinds intermixed.
Men that delight in Excess of Drink choose Company suitable to their brutish
humor. Those that delight in Gaming choose such as make no Conscience of their
time, or have no care of their Souls. That which every one is taken withal he
loves to do with his Friends, therefore they that love God delight in those
that love him, those that are most apt to stir them up to the Remembrance of
Everlasting things, and the Preparation necessary, so they are of singular use
to us.

2. If they be not like to us, Intimacy and Converse will make us like to them:
Every Man is wrought upon by his Company; we imitate those whom we love, and
with whom we frequently converse; Prove. 13. 20. He that walks with wise men
shall be wise, but a Companion of fools shall be destroyed. As a man that
walks in the Sun is tanned insensibly, so if we are not aware, we adopt their
Manners and Customs, and get a Tincture from them, especially in Evil; for we
are more susceptible of Evil then of Good. As the sound get a Sickness from the
diseased, sooner than the sick get Health from the sound. Or in the Types of
the Law; that which was clean, by touching the unclean became unclean; but the
unclean were not purified by touching the clean, Prove. 22. 24, 25. Make no
friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou shall not go, left
thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul. A Man would think that of
all sins Wrath and Anger should not be propagated by Converse, the Motions and
Furies of it being so uncomely and undecent to any beholder; yet secretly a
liking of the Person breeds a liking of the Sin, and a man is habituated into
such a frame of Spirit as they have, whom he has chosen for his Companions.
Now this should be regarded by us, because we are sooner made Evil by Evil
Company, than Good by Good Company; therefore how careful should we be to
converse with such as may go before us as Examples of Godliness, and provoke us
by their Strictness, Heavenly-mindedness, Mortification and Self-denial, to
more Love to God, Zeal for his Glory, and Care of our own Salvation. Especially
does this concern the young, who by the weakness of their Judgment, or the
vehemence of their Affections and want of Experience may easily be drawn into a
Snare.

3. Because our Love to God should put us upon loving his People, and making
them our Intimates; for Religion influenceth all things, our Relations, common
Employments, Friendship and Converse, 1 Ioh. 5. 1. Every one that loves him
that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him. The New Nature inclines
to both, there is an inward Propension and Inclination, needing no outward
Provocation and Allurements, 1 These. 4. 9. As touching brotherly love ye need
not that I write unto you, for you your selves are taught of God to love one
another. Gods Teaching is by effectual Impression or Inclining the Heart. It is
a smart Question that of the Prophet, 2 Chro. 19. 2. Should thou hate the
Godly, and love those that hate the Lord? Surely a Gracious Heart cannot take
them into his Bosom, he loves all with a Love of Good will as seeking their
Good, but not with a Love of Complacency as delighting in them. Our Neighbor
must be loved as our selves, our natural or carnal Neighbor as our natural
self, with a love of Benevolence; and our spiritual Neighbor as our spiritual
self, with a love of Complacency. We have hated our sinful Neighbor as we hate
our selves, much more as to love of Benevolence, we must neither hate our
selves, our Neighbor, nor our Enemy. But it is Complacency we are speaking of,
and so the wicked is an Abomination to the Righteous, Prove. 29. 26. The Hatred
of Displicency is opposite to the Love of Complacency, as the Hatred of Enmity
to the Love of Benevolence, we cannot enter into a Confederacy and intimate
Kindness with them.

4. Because that Love which is built upon Holiness is the most durable and
lasting. There is a confederacy in Evil, as between Drunkards with Drunkards,
and Robbers with Robbers, Prove. 1. 14. Cast in thy lot amongst us, let us all
have one common purse. Or when men conspire against the Truth and Interest of
Christ in the World, as Gebal and Amon and Amalek leagued themselves against
Gods People; divided in Interests, but united in Hatred; as the Pharisees and
Herodians agreed together to Tempt Christ; and Herod and Pilate, though otherwise
no very good Friends, agreed to mock him; this is unitas contra unitatem, as
Austin, or consortium factionis, a bond of Iniquity. Now this Friendship is
soon dissolved, for these men though they agree in Evil yet have contrary Lusts
and Interests; and besides, Partners in Evil are usually Objects reviving
Guilt; their very Presence upbraids the Consciences of one another with the
Remembrance of their past sins, and sin though it be sweet in the commiting yet
it is hateful and bitter in the Remembrance of it. Again there is a Civil
Friendship, built on natural Pleasure and Profit. Certainly men are at liberty
to choose their Company, as their Interests and course of Employments leads
them. This may be a Society for Trade or Civil Respect, it cannot be a true and
proper Friendship, for Riches which are so frail and slippery can never make a
firm tie and bond of Hearts and Minds, Prove. 14. 20. The poor is hated even of
his own neighbor, but the rich has many friends. Prove. 19. 6. Many will
entreat the favor of a prince, and every man is a friend to him that gives
gifts. All the brethren of the poor do hate him, etc. And as it is a fluid, so
it is a base and sordid Friendship that is built upon Riches, for that
concerns the Estate rather than the Soul. Well then, Religious Friendship
which is built upon Virtue and Grace, and is called the Unity of the Spirit,
Ephesians. 4. 3. is the most firm bond of all. Sinful Societies are soon dissolved
and the Profane though they seem to hold together yet upon every cross Word
may fall out and break; and Civil Friendship, which is only built upon
Pleasures and Profit stands upon a brittle foundation. Certainly the Good and
the Holy are not so changeable as the Bad and the Carnal. Besides, that
Friendship which is built upon Honesty and Godliness, is Amicitia per se, the
other is Amicitia per accidens, it comes from constitution of Soul and
likeness of Spirits, and the good we seek may be possessed without Envy; the
Friends do not streighten and entrench upon one another. Again there is a
virtuous Friendship, which consists in an Harmony of Minds or an agreement in
some common Studies; this is more Noble, and more like true Friendship than
Society for Trade and Temporal Interests, but yet this Friendship is not so
durable, for at last it must be broken off by Death, but the Godly are
Everlasting Companions. Besides, Self-love and Envy is more apt to invade other
Friendships; but the Godly, if they be true to the Laws of Spiritual
Friendship, they seek the good of one another as much as their own, and rejoice
in the Graces of one another as much as in their own.

3. Though we owe this Religious Friendship to all that fear God, yet some few
may be chosen for our Intimacy and spiritual Solace. We owe it in some respects
to all that fear God and must dispense the General Acts of Friendship to them,
Acts 4. 32. The multitude of them that believed, were of one heart and of one
soul; and Christian Love is called (...), the bond of perfectness, Col. 3. 14.
because it is the band by which Holy and Christian Societies called Churches
are bound together and preserved; otherwise, like a Besom unbound they fall all
to pieces; but yet this does not hinder but that some may be chosen for our
intimacy. Christ that denied himself so many of the commodities of Humane Life
would not live without special Friends, and would enjoy this virtuous Solace,
and in David and Jonathan we have an Instance of it, 1 Samuel 18. 1. And the soul
of Jonathan was knit to the Soul of David. Certainly too many cannot perform
the acts of intimate Friendship to us, nor we to them; the Love being like a
River dispersed into several Channels, must needs be shallower and weaker;
therefore our choice Friends must be but few, inter binos and bonos, was the
old Rule, though it need not be so straightly confined.

4. In the choice of these few Friends we must use Caution 1. Such as are near
to us, with whom we have frequent and familiar Converse, and perform a mutual
interchange of all Offices of Love, Prove. 18. 24. A man that has friends must
show himself friendly, and there is a friend which sticks closer then a
brother. Consanguinity and Affinity is not so near a tie as this Friendship. 2.
Not only near, but those who are holy, prudent and good, Prove. 13. 20. He that
walks with the wise shall be wise, but a companion of fools shall be
destroyed. 3. Such as are most likely to be Faithful, Job 6. 15, 16. My
brethren have dealt deceitfully with me as a brook, and as the stream of brooks
they pass away. Pools in Winter when less need of Water, but dried up in Summer
when Water in those parched Countries was a great Commodity. So many seem to be
great Friends, heighten our expectation; but in our Necessities and Streights
leave us destitute, ye see me cast down and are afraid, says Job, as if I
should be a burden to you. Dearest Friends may disappoint us, their Affection
wants an inward Principle; it is a Winter Brook, and not a Spring; therefore
since the Heart of man is so deceitful, and not only deceitful, but though
sincere for the present, very changeable, and this is so important an Interest
of Humane Life, and the Vexation of a disappointment in a Bosom Friend is so
grievous, and involveth us in many inconveniences, Natural and Spiritual; for
Solomon tells us Prove. 25. 19. Confidence in an unfaithful Friend in time of
trouble, is like a broken tooth and a foot out of joint. When we think to eat
with the broken Tooth, or to walk with the foot out of joint we are put to
grievous pain and torment; therefore we should go to God, and pray him to
direct us in the choice of intimate Friends. David sadly regrets a
disappointment in a Friend, Psalm. 55. 12, 13, 14, 15. For it was not an enemy
that reproached me, then I could have born it, nor was it he that hated me that
did magnify himself against me, then I would have hid my self from him. But it
was thou, a man, mine equal, my guide and mine acquaintance, etc. A deceitful
Friend may become the greatest Foe, and we resent their Ingratitude more than
the Injuries of others, when they abuse their Trust, and the Familiarity they
had with us. The worst that a professed Enemy can do, is not so grievous as the
Treachery of a professed Friend; this is more piercing, less to be avoided,
therefore whom we have used most familiarly and freely, loved as our Soul and
Life, from such we expect the same firm and hearty Friendship. Therefore it
concerns us to seek to God that we may have a Godly Wise Man, with whom we
may be free in all Cases of Mind or Conscience, and to whom we may freely open
our selves, and be strengthened in the Service of God; it is a great part of our
Contentment and Happiness therefore, that we may not be deceived in our choice.
Let us go to God who knows Hearts, and God has a great hand in this, Psalm.
88. 8. Thou have put away my acquaintance from me, thou have made me an
abomination to them. By the Providence of God they left him as a man whose
condition they were afraid to look upon; and again, ver. 9. Lover and friend
have thou put far from me, they stand aloof from me as an execrable thing. He
owneth Providence in it.

5. When Friends be thus chosen, there must be a faithful discharge of the
Duties of Friendship, both in Counsels and Reproofs; for the Godly use this
Friendship chiefly for spiritual ends.

(1.) In Counsel; for Solomon tells us, Prove. 22. 9. As Ointment and perfume
rejoice the heart, so does the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty Counsel. As
sweet perfumes are a reviving, so to be supported in good resolutions or
directed and guided in our way to heaven by a faithful Friend is very chearing
and comfortable; and we read, 1 Samuel 23. 16, 17. That Jonathan went to David
and strengthened his hand in God. Whereas on the contrary a carnal Friend is
the greatest Bane that may be, who does strengthen us in evil, an Instance
whereof we have in Ionadab the son of Shimeah, 2 Samuel 13. 3, 4. and Amnon had a
friend whose name was Ionadab, and Ionadab was a subtle man; and he gave him
Counsel how he should surprise his Sister to defile her and satisfy his
Incestuous Lust. Such a Friend is really and truly our greatest Foe, he was a
Friend to his Vice, but a Foe to his Person and Soul, whereas a true Friend
whose Friendship is grounded on Godliness will be a Foe to our sins, by
wholesome Admonition and Rebukes, and a Friend to our Souls Salvation.

(2.) Reproofs; That is also a part of Friendship, Prove. 27. 6. Faithful are
the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful. A faithful
Friends Wounds are a more sincere Testimony than an Enemies Kisses and so
afterward they will be interpreted, Prove. 28. 23. He that rebukes a man
afterward shall find more favor than he that flattereth with his Tongue. For
this we must trust God, though for the present we displease our Friends. So
Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart by suffering sin upon
him. It is kindness to his soul to reprove him. In the General, Holy Friendship
must be improved to the use of edifying, Romans 1. 11, 12. I long to see you to
impart some spiritual gift unto you, that I may be comforted together with you
by the mutual faith of you and me.

6. After the best care is used you must remember that our Friends are but an
outward help, which God can continue or withdraw at his Pleasure; and that our
chief Help, Comfort and Counsel comes of God. So it was with Christ, Ioh. 16.
32. Behold the hour is come that ye shall be parted every man to his own, and
shall leave me alone, and yet I am not alone because the Father is with me.
Christ was forsaken of his Disciples but not forsaken of his Father, so Paul, 2 Timothy 1. 16. At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me,
Psalm 41. 9 My familiar Friend in whom I trusted has lift up his heel against
me, those that have been acquainted with the secrets of your Soul may not only
grow strange to you but betray you, therefore do not overvalue any earthly
Friend: man will be man still, that God may be God, all in all unto his people;
and when we are deserted of men we must learn to trust in God who never fails
us, fail who will, Psalm 27. 10. When my Father and Mother forsake me, then the
Lord will take me up. And 142. 4, 5. I looked on my right hand and beheld, and
no man would know me, refuge failed me, no man cared for my Soul. I cried unto
thee, O Lord, I said thou art my refuge and portion in the Land of the living.
We are left alone for God to help us, the defectiveness of all Worldly Friends
shows us more of the goodness of God.

II. The Preparative Action, he went up into a Mountain to pray, and whilst he
prayed he was Transfigured.

1. In that he prayed, it teaches us to hallow all our actions by prayer, we
do not bid our selves God speed, unless we recommend our affairs to God;
whatsoever Assurance we have of the Blessing, yet we must Pray, Ier. 29. 10,
11, 12. For thus says the Lord, after seventy years be accomplished at
Babylon, I will visit you and perform my good word toward you, in causing you
to return to this place, etc. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and
pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you, Ezekiel. 36. 37. I will for this be
enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them. Therefore we should be
daily in the practice of this duty, and not look upon it as a work that may
well be spared. If Christ who as to his Divine Nature was equal with God,
surely we should often come and prostrate our selves before him in this act of
Holy Adoration. Christ had right and title to all, all was his due; yet he was
much in prayer; how dare we go about any business without his Leave, Counsel,
and Blessing, and usurp any of his Blessings without begging them by Prayer.

2. While he prayed he was Transfigured, Luke 9. 29. which teaches us two
things.

1. That we have the highest Communications from God in Prayer, for then
Christ's shape was altered. By Prayer the Soul has the most familiar converse
with God that possibly it can have, and also by the means of this duty God has
most familiar converse with us. In our Prayers to God we have experience of the
Operations of the Spirit, Romans 8. 26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our
infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit it self helps us with groanings which cannot be uttered, Jude 20. But
ye beloved building up your selves on your most holy Faith, praying in the Holy
Ghost, and in Gods answering our prayer we have Experience of the comforts of
the Spirit, and those spiritual solaces which he secretly gives to his People.
Hannah when she had prayed went away and her countenance was no more sad, 1 Samuel 1. 18. In praying we put forth the groans of the Spirit, in the answer,
God gives the joys of the Spirit, Psalm 34. 5. They looked unto him and were
lightened, and their faces were not ashamed.

2. That we should pray so as that the Heart may be raised and lifted up unto
God, and in some sort made like God; when Christ prayed to God he is made
partaker of the Divine Glory, as Moses also by conversing with God his face
shined, Exodus 34. 29, 30. This was extraordinary, but sure the oftener we
converse with God, the more Holy and Heavenly should we grow, more like him in
Spirit, be changed into the glory of the Lord spiritually, and so we are if we
be instant and earnest in Prayer, if we have Communion with God there will be
some Assimilation to God.

USE, It reproves our remiss feeble benumbed souls, there is no Life in
Prayer, no working up the Heart to God and Heaven; either our Prayers are
formal and cursory, James 5. 16. (...), Or our Prayers are doctrinal,
instructive rather then warning, we get lightly over duties, but we should get
life by Prayer; this duty is not to inform the judgment, but to raise the
Affections that they be all in a flame: or else we content our selves with a
dull narrative without getting up the heart to a sight of God and Heaven, or
are seldom in Praises or Adoration of the Excellencies of God.

SERMON. II.
MATTHEW. 17. 2. And he was transfigured before them and his face did shine as
the Sun, and his Raiment was white as the light. With LUKE 9. 29. And as he
prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his Raiment was white
and glistring.
IN both these Texts compared together, you may observe two things. 1. The
Circumstance of Time during Prayer. 2. The Transfiguration it self.


1. More Generally propounded, he was Transfigured before them.

2. More Particularly explained, by the change of his face and Raiment. The
form of any man is most seen in his Face, there was a glorious shining
brightness, Luke says the fashion of his countenance was altered, Matthew that
his Face did shine as the Sun. And in the glorious description of God in the
Prophet Habakkuk, it is said chap. 3. 2. And his brightness was as the light.
For his Garments, Luke says his Raiment was white and glistering, Mark chap.
9. 3. White as the Snow, so as no Fuller on Earth could whiten them, but
Matthew white as the light, which carries it higher, the works of Nature
exceed those of Art. The Transfiguration that was plainly to be seen in his
Face was accomplished also in other parts of his body, all his body was
clothed with Majesty, so as it could not be obscured and hidden by his
Garments.

Now First I shall speak of the circumstance of Time, and then of the
Transfiguration it self.

I. Of the Time, and as he prayed, Now what Christ prayed for is not specified.
If he asked common blessings and prayed only in order to his usual solace and
converse with God, it showed the success of vehemence in prayer; Christ prayed
at such a rate as that he was Transfigured and changed into the likeness of God
in prayer. 2. If he asked to be Transfigured for the confirmation of his
Disciples, it shows Gods readyness to answer fervent and earnest Prayers.

1. Of the First consideration, if Christ's prayer were of ordinary import it
teaches us, that we should pray so that the Heart may be raised and lifted
unto God in prayer, and in some sort made like unto God, let us state this
matter aright.

1. It must be granted that this shining of Christ's countenance as the Sun
while he prayed was extraordinary, and a dispensation peculiar to the Son of
God; so also was the shining of Moses his face while he conversed with God in
the Mount, Exodus 34. 29, 30. and for ordinary Christians to expect the like is
to put a snare upon themselves, for these things are proper only to the end for
which God appointed them.

2. This must be also considered, that the eminent and extraordinary passions
and affections in the soul do discover themselves in the body, especially in
the Face; for it is said of Stephen, that when he was heightened into a great
zeal for Christ, Acts 6. 15. That all that sat in the Council looking
steadfastly upon him saw his face, as it had been the face of an Angel. Angels
have not Bodies or Faces, but they often assume Bodies and then they appear
with a glorious and bright countenance as the Angel of the Lord, that appeared
at the Sepulcher, Mark 28. 3. His countenance was like lightning, and his
Raiment white as Snow. Now such a glory and gladness did God put upon the
countenance of his servant Stephen, that he looked like an Angel; something
extraordinary there might be in the case, but yet there was an ordinary reason
for it. Stephens mind was filled with such an incredible solace in the sense of
Gods love, that he showed no troubledness, but a mind so unconcerned and freed
from all Fear and sorrow, as if he had been among the Angels of God in full
Glory, and not among his Enemies who sought his blood, and so may God raise the
Hearts of his people sometimes, as if they had put their heads above the
Clouds, and were in the midst of the Glory of the World to come among his
blessed ones. If that were extraordinary, Solomon tells us Eccles. 8. 1. That a
man's wisdom makes his Face to shine, as it gives him readiness and tranquillity
of mind, and cheerfulness of countenance, guilt and shame cast down the
countenance, but Righteousness and Wisdom embolden it more particularly in
prayer; as our confidence and joy in God is increased, it bewrays it self in
the countenance, Psalm. 34. 15. They looked unto him, and were lightened and
their faces were not ashamed, they are revived and encouraged and come away
from the Throne of Grace other manner of Persons then they came to it.

3. That some kind of Transformation is wrought by prayer appears by these
Considerations.

(1.) That as God is glorious in himself, so he makes him that comes to him
partaker of his Glory. For certainly all communion with God breeds some
Assimilation and likeness unto God: it is clear in heavenly glory when we see
him as he is, we shall be like him, 1 John 3. 2. and it is clear also in our
Communion with him in the Spirit; for the Apostle tells us that by beholding
the Glory of the Lord as in a glass we are changed into the same Image, from
glory to glory even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. not only does
vision, or immediate intuition produce this effect, but also spiritual specular
vision or a sight of God in the Ordinances, produces a divine and God-like
Nature, inclining us to hate sin and love Righteousness; the more we are above
with God, the more we are like him: we see it in ordinary converse, a man is as
the company that he keeps, he that walks with wise men shall be wise,
(says Solomon) but a companion of fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 13. 20. now
it is not imaginable that a man should converse often with God fervently,
seriously and not be more like him. He that lives in a Mill the dust will
stick upon his clothes. Man receives an insensible taint from his company; he
that lives in a shop of Perfumes, often handles them, is conversant among
them, carries away somewhat of the fragrancy of these good Ointments, so by
conversing with God we are made like him.

(2.) Nearer we cannot come to God while we dwell in Flesh, then by lifting up
the heart to him in fervent prayer, this is the intimate converse and
familiarity of a loving soul with God; therefore it is called a lifting up the
heart to God, he will not come down to us, therefore we lift up the heart to
him, Lament. 3. 41. Let us lift up our hearts with our hands to God in the
Heavens, so Psalm. 25. 1. Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul, and Psalm 86.
4. Rejoice the soul of thy servant, for unto thee do I lift up my soul, so
Psalm 143. 8. cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my
soul unto thee. All these places show that there can be no sincerity and
seriousness in this Duty, unless there be this Ascension of the soul to God, it
is an act of spiritual Friendship, therefore called an acquainting our selves
with God, Job 22. 21. now as acquaintance is kept up by frequent visits, so
prayer is called a giving God a visit, Isa. 26. 16. In their trouble they have
visited thee. Well then here is the greatest intimacy we have with God. In the
word God speaks to us by a proxy and Ambassador, another speaks for him: in
the Lords Supper we are feasted at his cost and remember him, but we are not
admitted into his immediate presence, as those that are feasted by the King in
another room then he dineth in, but prayer goes up to God and speaks to
himself immediately, and therefore this way of commerce must needs bring in
much of God to the soul.

(3.) In fervent prayer we have a double advantage, we get a sight of God and
exercise strong love to God, and both conduce to make us like God.

(1.) We get a sight of God, for in it (if it be seriously performed) we turn
our back upon all other things, that we may look to God as sitting upon the
Throne, governing all things by his power for his Glory. By Faith we see the
invisible one, Heb. 11. 27. surely if we do not see God before the eye of our
Faith, when we pray to him we Worship an Idol, not the true and living God; who
is and is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Our hearts should be
shut up against the thoughts of any other thing, and confined only to the
object to whom we direct our Worship. I reason thus, if a Christian foreseeth
the Lord before him in all his ways, and keeps always as in his eye and
presence, surely he should set the Lord before him in his Worship and in his
prayers, Psalm 16. 8. a good Christian does always keep as in Gods eye and
presence, much more when he calls upon his Name; now every sight of God does
more affect and change the heart, as none but the pure in heart see God; so
none see God but are most pure in heart, there is a self-purifying in moral
things, purity of heart makes way for the sight of God, Mark 5. 8. so the
sight of God makes way for the purity of Heart, John Epist. 3. 11. He that
does evil has not seen God, a serious sight of God certainly works some
change in us.

(2.) In prayer a strong love to God is acted, for it is the expression of our
delight in him, Job 27. 10. Will he delight himself in the Almighty? Will he
always call upon God? Now we are changed into the likeness of him in whom we
delight in. Love transformeth and changes us into the nature of what is loved;
there is the difference between the Mind and the Will, the Mind draws things
to its-self, but the Will follows the things it chooses, and is drawn by
them as the wax receives the impression of the Seal. Carnal objects make us
carnal, and earthly things, earthly; and Heavenly things, Heavenly; and the
love of God, Godly, Psalm. 115. 8. They that make them are like unto them, so
are all they that put their trust in them, stupid and senseless as Idols, it
secretly stamps the heart with what we like and esteem and admire.

4. There are Agents in Prayer to help us to improve this advantage. (1.) The
Humane Spirit. (2.) The New Nature. And (3.) The Spirit of God.


1. The Humane Spirit, or our Natural Faculty; so that by our understandings we
may work upon our Wills and Affections, surely God makes use of this, for the
Holy Ghost does not work upon a man as upon a block, and we are to rouse up our
selves and to attend upon this work with the greatest seriousness imaginable.
The Prophet complains, Isa. 64. 7. There is none that calls upon thy name,
that stirs up himself to take hold of thee, without this it is but dead and
cold work, and if there be no more than this, it is but dry litteral work; not
that fervent effectual prayer, which will change the heart, (...), Iam. 5. 16.
the (...) were those that were inspired and possessed by a Spirit, therefore it
must be a prayer that not only has Understanding and Will in it, but Spirit
and Life in it. However we are to put forth our utmost endeavor and raise the
natural Spirit as far as we can.

2. The second Agent is the new Nature which inclines us to God as our chief
Good and last end: This also must be taken in, for the Holy Ghost does not blow
as to a dead Coal, the New Nature is made up of Faith, Hope and Love, and all
these must be acted in Prayer; Faith, or the firm belief of Gods Being and
Providence and Covenant; for how shall they call on him in whom they have not
believed, Romans 10. 14. Then Love to God, or desire of the fruition of him in
Heavenly Glory, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God,
Jude 20, 21. If I do not love God, and desire to enjoy him, and delight in as
much of God as I can get here, certainly there will be no life in Prayer, or no
Ravishment and Transport of Soul, no spirit of Desire animating our Requests,
and no spiritual Solace and Delight in our converse with God. Hope is also
necessary to fervent praying, for a man coldly asks for what he does not hope
for. Hope respects both Means and End, supplies of Grace by the way, and our
final Fruition of God in Glory; this is called Trust in Scripture, and is the
great ground and encouragement of Prayer, Psalm. 62. 8. Trust in the Lord at all
times, pour out your souls before him. Prayer is the act of a Trusting soul.
Now these Graces quicken our Natural Faculties, as they elevate and raise our
Hearts and Minds to God and Heaven.

3. The third Agent in Prayer is the Holy Spirit: He is sometimes said to pray
in us, Romans 8. 26. sometimes we are said to pray in him, Jude 20. The Divine
spirit exciteth those Graces in us which incline us to God; he raises our
Minds in the Vision and sight of God; in thy Light shall we see Light, Psalm.
36. 9. and he raises our Hearts to a Desire after, and Delight in God, for all
that spiritual solace, and Joy is called Joy in the Holy Ghost; for both
unutterable Groans and unspeakable Joys are of his working, Rom 8. 26. The
Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
uttered; compared with 1 Pet. 1. 8. In whom though we see him not, yet
believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. Well then, these
work a kind of an Ecstasy, if you would pray so as to be transported,
transformed in Prayer, something you must do as Reasonable Creatures, something
as New Creatures, and the Spirit influenceth all, and causes the Soul to
follow hard after God; we must put forth our utmost endeavor, stir up the Gift
of God in us, and though we cannot command the influences of the Spirit, yet he
is never wanting to a serious soul, as to necessary Help; Pray thus and you
will find as the Help of the Spirit in Prayer, so the Comforts of the Spirit as
the Success of Prayer.

5. As there is daily and constant Prayer in which we must ever bewray a
seriousness and sincerity, for these daily supplies of Grace, so there are
extraordinary occasions, because of some great Business, Conflict or
Temptation, in those the Heart and Mind, must be more then ordinarily raised
and stirred. In every Prayer of Christ there was not a Transfiguration, and we
read of our Lord Jesus that in his Agonies he prayed (...) more earnestly then
at other times, Luke 22. 44. and upon eminent occasions as the necessities of
the Saints are greater, so their Acts of Prayer are more earnest. On these
weighty occasions many Christians are wholly swallowed up with the thoughts of
God, and carried beyond themselves by their High Love to God and earnest
Desires of the Spiritual Blessings they stand in need of, so that they seem to
be rapt into Heaven in their Admiration of God and Delight in him.

Application.
Use, To Reprove our feeble remiss and benumbed Requests. There is no Life in
our Prayers, no working up of the Heart to God and Heaven, no flames of Love,
no Transports of Soul by the Vision and sight of Faith, no holy and ardent
desires after God or spiritual Solace and Delight in him.

Reasons.
1. We pray Cursorily, and go about Prayer as a Customary Task for Fashions
sake; we come with a few cold Devotions Morning and Evening, and so God is near
in our Mouths, and far from our Reins, Ier. 12. 2. Oh take heed of this;
nothing breeds slightness and hardness of Heart so much as Perfunctory Praying.
The Rule is continue instant in Prayer, Romans 12. 12. and it is said of the
Saints that they served God instantly day and night, (...), Acts 26. 7. that
they might come to the Blessed Hope, with the united Service of all their
Powers and Faculties.

2. Our Prayers are Doctrinal and Instructive, rather than Affectionate and
Warming. We get Light by other Duties, but we should get Life by Prayer, this
Duty is not to inform the Judgment, but to raise the Affections, that they may
be all Flame; other duties are feeding duties, but this is a spending duty; an
egression of the Soul after God, Psalm. 63. 8. My soul follows hard after
thee. A Man may better spend two hours in Hearing, than half an hour in
Praying, if the Heart be employed in it as it ought to be, in the fight of God,
and an earnest desire after him: The Prayers in scripture are all supplications
or doxologies, there is no excursion into Doctrines and Instructions.

3. Else we are lamenting sin, and spend the time in confessing sin, which also
has its use in the seasons thereof, but are seldom in Praises or Adorations of
the Excellencies of God, and the wonderful Mysteries of his Love in our
Redemption by Jesus Christ, yet it is said Psalm. 22. 3. Oh Lord that inhabitest
the praises of Israel. These are the things that do most ravish the heart, and
raise it in the Contemplation of that glorious God to whom we speak; and fill
us with the Ecstasies of Love, that we may be more like him, Holy, Wise, and
Good, as he is Holy, Wise and Good.

4. We think a dry Narrative to be enough, that is, the fruit of a humane
spirit or a mere product of Memory and Invention, is a sufficient Prayer,
without acting Faith, Hope or Love in it, or those spiritual and heavenly
desires, which are the Life of Prayer, Psalm. 10. 17. Lord thou have heard the
desire of the humble, thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear
to hear. The Ardency of Humble Addresses, is Gods own Gift, and he will never
reject and despise those requests that by his own spirit and appointment, are
direct and brought to him.

But what if I have not those strong and earnest desires? I answer, yet keep
not off from Prayer; for

1. Good desires must be asked of God, for it is said he prepares the Heart.

2. Such desires as we have must be expressed, and that is the way to increase
them, and to quicken us more. A sincere Heart that would serve God with his
best, finds more in a duty, than he could expect: and by Praying gets more of
the fervency and Ardours of praying, as a Bell may be long a raising, but when
it is up it jangleth not as it did at first.

3. Those cold Affections which we have are killed by disuse and turning away
from God, therefore go to him to get thy heart warmed.

II. Of the second Consideration. If he prayed for this Transfiguration,
Observe,

That God often answers his People in the very time while they are praying,
Isa. 58. 9. When they call I will answer, and when they cry he shall say, Hear
I am. This has been the course of Gods dealing with the Prayer makers all
along; Abel, Genesis 4. 4. God had respect to; it is (...), set his offering on
fire. Daniel prays, and says he, Dan. 9. 21. While I was speaking in Prayer
the Angel Gabriel was sent unto me. And he said, at the beginning of thy
supplications the commandment came forth. While many of the Disciples were
gathered together praying, God sent Peter to them, Acts 12. 12, 13. While
Cornelius, was in the Act of Prayer, at the ninth hour of the day, which was
the Hour of Prayer, he saw in a Vision the Angel of God, Acts 10. 3. to 9th.
ver. while Peter went up to the house top to pray, then he had the Heavenly
Vision; so when Paul was in Prayer Ananias was sent to him, Acts 9. 11. Behold
he Prays, and then God takes care of him, so Acts 4. 31. When they had
prayed, the house was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost.
Thus God delights to Honor his own Ordinance, and to reward the waiting
soul, that is frequent and constant in this way of waiting upon God, which
should encourage us to be more frequent and serious in this work. You shall see
how in the very Act of Prayer God has, (1.) Averted Judgments, (2.) Bestowed
Mercies and Favors.

1. He has put a stop to Judgments; Psalm. 99. 6, 7, 8. Moses and Aaron among
the priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his Name. They called upon
the Lord, and he answered them; he spoke unto them in the cloudy pillar, they
kept his testimonies and the ordinance that he gave them. Thou answerest them,
Oh Lord our God, thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest
Vengeance of their Inventions. The drift of the Psalmist in this place, is to
show by eminent Instances of Holy Men that were most notable for Prayer, how
they have stopped Judgments when they begun to be executed. Moses, at his
Prayer God was propitiated, after the provocation of the Golden Calf; for it is
said, Exodus 32. 11. Moses besought the Lord his God. Verse 14. The Lord
repented of the evil which he thought to do. The second, Aarons making an
Atonement for the People whereby the Plague was staid; Numb. 16. 46. Take a
Censer quickly, for wrath is begun. And Verse 48. presently the Plague was
staid; upon Samuels prayer the Philistines were discomfited when they were
overrunning Israel, 1 Samuel 7. 5. with 9, 10. ver. With every one of these God
was pleased to talk and commune as a Friend; such Honor was God pleased to put
on these his Faithful Servants, and when the people had provoked God, and Gods
wrath was already gone out against them for their crying sins, their prayers
were so effectual as to divert the plagues and obtain Remission.

2. So powerful also are they for obtaining Blessings, Elijah, Iam. 5. 17, 18.
though a man of like passions with us, yet he could lock Heaven, and open it at
his pleasure, 1 King 18. 42, 45. The Rain came as soon as Elijah put himself
into a zealous posture to obtain it. Often success has overtaken the prayer;
and the Blessing has been gotten before the supplication has been ended; Isaac
went out to meet with God to meditate or pray, and he espied Rebecca afar off,
Isa. 65. 24. Before they call I will answer, and whilst they are yet speaking,
I will hear. Oh therefore let us not entertain hard thoughts of God, as if he
did not regard our suites and requests, and prayer were a lost Labor.

II. I come now to the Transfiguration it self, as it is here propounded and
explained.

Doct. That one necessary and solemn Act of Christ's Mediation and Manifestation
to the World, was his Transfiguration before competent Witnesses.
This was one solemn Act, and part of Christ's Manifestation to the World, for
we have the Record of it here; and it was necessary, for Christ does nothing in
vain; and here are competent Witnesses, three persons of eminent Holiness,
before whom all this was done, and they were Eyewitnesses of his Majesty, and
Ear-witnesses of the Oracle, which they heard from Heaven, or the Voice from
the excellent Glory.

I shall open,

First, The Nature of this Transfiguration.

Secondly, The Ends of it.

First, The Nature of this Transfiguration. It was a Glorious Alteration in the
Appearance and Qualities of his Body; not a substantial Alteration in the
Substance of it: It was not a change wrought in the Essential form and
substance of Christ's Body, but only the outward form was changed, being more
full of Glory and Majesty, then it used to be or appeared to be.

Two things are to be handled; 1. How it differed from his Body at another
time, whilst he Conversed here on Earth. 2. How this change differed from the
State of his Body as it is now in Glory.


1. How his Body now Transfigured, differed from his Body at other times during
his Conversing with Men. Though the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him always,
yet the state of his Body was disposed so, as might best serve for the decency
of Humane Conversation; as the Sun in a Rainy Cloudy day is not seen, but now
as it might cover his Divine Nature, it would break out in Vigor and Strength.

(1.) It was not a Change or Alteration of the substance of the Body, as if it
were turned into a Spiritual Substance; no, it remained still a true Humane
Mortal Body with the same Nature and Properties it had before, only it became
bright and glorious.

2. As the substance of the Body was not changed, so the Natural Shape and
Features were not changed, otherwise how could it be known to be Christ, the
shape and Features were the same, only a new and wonderful splendour put upon
them.

(3.) This new and wonderful splendour was not in Imagination and Appearance
only, but real and sensible. If it had been in Imagination, show and
Appearance, it would make Christ like those Deceivers who would dazzle the Eyes
of Beholders with a false Appearance; as Magical Impostors, or those Apish
Imitators of Divine Glory; as Herod, Agrippa, of whom we read Acts 12. 21, 22,
23. how he appeared in Royal State and made an Oration, and they said, the
voice of a God, and not of a Man. Josephus tells us the manner how he sat in
the Sun, with glistering Garments of Cloth of Silver, and when the Sunbeames
did beat upon it the People cried him up as (...) as something higher and more
excellent then a Mortal Creature. No, this was not a fantastical
Representation, but a real Impression of Divine Glory on the Body of Christ.

4. Although this appeared in the face chiefly, as the most conspicuous part of
the Body; the Text says, his face did shine as the Sun, yet more or less the
other parts of his Body were clothed with Majesty and Glory; and thence was
the splendour derived to his Garments.

2. How his Body Transfigured, differed from his glorified Body, this must be
stated also, for Christ by his Transfiguration, was not admitted into the
fullness of the state of Glory, but only gives some glimpse and resemblance of
it. These two Estates agree in the general Nature, but some Clarity, Glory and
Majesty is put upon Christ's glorified Body that was not now. But the difference
is

1. Partly in the degree and measure, the Clarity and Majesty of Christ's
glorified Body is greater and more perfect. Here is a Representation, some
Delineation, but not a full exhibition of his Heavenly Glory.

2. Partly in continuance and permanency this change was not perpetual, but to
endure for a short time only, for it ceased before they came down from the
Mount.

3. The subject or seat of this Glory differed, the Body of Christ being then
Corruptible and Mortal, but now Incorruptible and Immortal. If Christ's Body had
been Immortal and Impassible, then Christ could not die.

4. Here are Garments, and a glorified Body shall have no other Garments than
the Robes of Immortality and Glory in Heaven. Christ shall be clothed with
Light as with a Garment.

Secondly, The Ends of it. By this Transfiguration God would show

1. What Christ was. 2. What he should be. And 3. Also what we shall be.
1. What Christ was. The Dignity of his Person and Office; that he was the
Eternal Son of God, and the Mediator of the New Covenant; the great Prophet
whom God would raise up to his People.

(1.) The Dignity of his Person was seen, for the Transfiguration was a Ray of
the Divine Glory. It was not the Addition of any Glory to Christ which he had
not before, but a Manifestation of the Glory which he had, though obscured
under the Vail of our Flesh, for the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him
bodily; Col. 2. 9. And we beheld his glory as the glory of the only begotten
Son of God, Ioh. 1. 14. But it is said, 2 Pet. 1. 17. that he received from God
the same Honor and Glory. This is spoken of him as Mediator, the glory of the
Son of God Incarnate was so obscured for our sakes, that he needed this Solemn
Act to represent him to the World.

(2.) His Office. The great Prophet of the Church, Hear ye him. A greater
Prophet then Moses. Moses saw the Face of God, but he was in the Bosom of God:
Moses his face shone, but not as Christ's, for it could be hidden by a Vail;
Christ darts his glory through his Garments: Moses his shining was Terrible,
Christ's was Comfortable, the Apostles were loath to lose the sight of it.

2. To show what Christ should be; for this was a pledge with what glory he
should come in his Kingdom; Matthew. 16. 27. it prefigured the glory of his
second coming. Thus for the Confirmation of their Faith Christ would give his
Disciples a glimpse of his Glory; he knew they would be sorely assaulted and
shaken, by the Ignominy of his Cross. But what is all this to us? we see not
his Glory.

(1.) What was once done and sufficiently Attested, needs not to be repeated,
but it is a great satisfaction to us that we have a glorious head, and chief;
when we suffer for him we need not be ashamed of our Sufferings, the Apostles
urge this concerning us as well as them.

(2.) The immediate Manifestations of him who dwells in light inaccessible
would undo us, while we are in our mortal Bodies. Blessed be God that he has
chosen fit means to reveal himself to us, that we may behold the glory of the
Lord in a Glass, 2 Cor. 3. 18. by the Ministry of the Word and other
Ordinances. The Israelites were sensible how little they could endure him who
is as it were all Sun, and all Light, and all Fire, Exodus 20. 18, 19. Let not
God speak to us least we dye. Elijah wrapped his Face in a Mantle, when God
appeared unto him, 2 Kings 19. 13. when Christ appeared to Paul from Heaven, he
trembled and was astonished, and was three days without sight, as you may see
Acts 9. 9. there was a special Reason, why an Apostle should see him in Person.

(3.) We shall see this Glory when fit for it, Ioh. 17. 24. Father, I will that
they whom thou have given me may be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory which thou have given me. The Queen of Sheba took a long Journey to
behold the glory of Solomon, that was but a Temporal, Fading and Earthly Glory.
Now much more Transcendent is the Glory of Christ's Body in Heaven; this we
shall see to all Eternity.

3. To show what we shall be; for Christ is the Pattern, primum in unoquoque
genere, etc.

(1.) It shows the possibility of our having a glorified Body. When the Lord
is pleased to let forth and communicate his Glory, he is able to adorn and
beautify our Earthly and obscure bodies, the body of man in its composition
has a great mixture of Earth which is dark and obscure. Now God can make this
clod of Earth to shine as the Star or Sun for brightness, Phil. 3. 21. Who
shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things to
himself. We are apt to say, How can it be? if we consider the infinite and
absolute power of God, and this Instance of Christ, it will make it more
reconcilable to your thoughts, and this hard point will be of easier digestion
to your Faith.

(2.) The certainty of it as well as the possibility, for Christ assumed our
body not for Passion only, but for Glorification; that therein he might be an
instance and pattern to us. For if the head be glorious, so will the members
also, how base soever the people of God seem to be in this World, yet in the
Life to come they shall be wonderfully glorious, Mark. 13. 43. The Righteous
shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. So Colossians 3. 3, 4.
Now our Life is hidden with Christ, but when he who is our Life shall appear,
we shall appear with him in Glory, 1 John 3. 2. When he shall appear we shall
be like him, for we shall see him as he is. 2 Thessalonians 1. 10. Christ shall
be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe, all these
places show we shall be partakers of this Glory.

3. The manner; Glorification takes not away the substance and natural
properties of the body; for there is a glorious Transfiguration, but no
abolition of the substance of Christ's body, it was the same body of Christ
before, and after Transfiguration. Glory freeth us from natural infirmities,
but it does not strip us of natural properties, Christ has showed in his own
body, what he can or will perform in ours, these same bodies but otherwise
adorned, (...), and with these eyes shall I see God, Job 19. 26, 27. (...),
This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality, 1 Cor. 15. 53.

USES.
1. Be Transformed, that you may be Transfigured, be ye transformed by the
renewing of your minds, Romans 12. 2. the change must begin in the Soul, 2 Cor.
3. 18. and thence it is conveyed to the Body; the luster of Grace makes way
for the splendour of Glory, Prove. 4. 18. The path of the just is as the shining
light, which shines more and more to the perfect day. The way of the wicked is
an increasing darkness, Ignorance, Sin, outer Darkness.

2. Be contented to be like Christ in reproaches, disgraces, and neglect in the
World, that you may be like him in Glory, bear the reproach of Christ, Heb. 13.
13. Let us go forth therefore unto him without the Camp bearing his reproach,
Heb. 11. 26. Esteeming the reproach of Christ, greater riches then the
Treasures of Egypt; prefer it before all earthly honor, Acts 5. 41. And they
departed from the Council rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for his name, and 2 Samuel 6. 22. I will yet be more vile and base in my
own sight. Your Lord is a glorious Lord, and he can put Glory upon you.

3. To wean our hearts from all humane and earthly glory; what is a glorious
House to the Palace of Heaven; glorious Garments to the Robes of Immortality?
The glory of Christ should put out the glory of these petty stars, that shine
in the World, as the Sun puts out the fire. We have higher things to mind; it
is not for Eagles to catch Flies, or Princes to embrace the dunghill.

4. Since this glory is for the Body, do not debase the Body, to make it an
instrument of sin, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4. Possess your vessels in Sanctification and
Honor, do not offend God to gratify the Body, as they do, Romans 14. 13. who
make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. Do not spare the body
to do God service, Acts 26. 7. Unto which promise our twelve Tribes instantly
serving God day and night hope for to come, for which hopes sake, King Agrippa
I am accused of the Jews, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these promises (dearly
beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

SERMON. III.
MATTHEW. 17. 3. And behold there appeared to unto him Moses and Elias talking
with him. With LUKE 9. 30, 31. And behold there talked with him two men, Moses
and Elias, who appeared in glory, and spoke of his decease which he should
accomplish at Jerusalem.
HAving spoken of Christ's Transfiguration, we come now to speak of those
special Accidents and Adjuncts which happened at the time of his
Transfiguration. Here are two mentioned.

1. The extraordinary Apparition of Moses and Elias. 2. Their conference with
our Savior.
In the First,

1. The persons who appeared, Moses and Elias.

2. The manner of their appearing, Luke says, they appeared in Glory. Since
the Scripture affixeth a behold or note of Attention, wherever this History is
mentioned; it will not be unprofitable for us to consider it a little.

First, Who appeared, Moses and Elias, these were there in person, as well as
Christ was there in Person, for it is not a Vision but a thing really done and
transacted, Christ would have but two, being to give us a glimpse only, not the
full luster and splendour of his Glory and Majesty, as he will at the last day,
when he shall come in the Glory of the Father, and all his holy Angels with him.

But why these two?

1. With respect to the Gospel or new Law which he was to set up. It is for the
confirmation thereof that Moses and Elias appear talking with him, showing the
harmony and agreement between them, and the subordination of their dispensation
to Christ and Salvation by him. Moses was the person by whom the Law was given,
and Elias was a principal Prophet. The Law is represented by Moses, and the
Prophets by Elias. Both did frequently foretell and prefigure the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, and all the Scripture which was then written, was
usually called by this term, Law and Prophets, Acts 24. 14. Believing all
things that are written in the Law and the Prophets, and Mat. 11. 13. for all
the Law and the Prophets prophesied until John, Luke 16. 24. They have Moses
and the Prophets let them hear them, so Acts 26. 22. I witness no other things
then those which Moses and the Prophets say should come to pass. So Mark 7. 11.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do you the same to them, for
this is the Law and the Prophets. Well then the Books of the Old Testament are
frequently and solemnly thus called, Law and Prophets; the Messiah was spoken
of and foretold in both, and the godly before his coming waited for him as
such. One place I had almost forgotten, Romans 3. 21. The Righteousness of God
without the Law is manifested being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets.
Which shows that not only the person of Christ was set forth, but also his
institution and Gospel dispensation. Well to manifest this consent here is Law
and Prophets, Moses and Elias friendly conferring with Christ, or rather
attending upon him, as servants upon their Lord. Christ and Moses, Christ and
the Prophets are not at variance as the Jews suppose, but here is a fair
agreement betwixt them.

2. With respect to the Persons themselves, there are many special Reasons;
these had been the most faithful, and laborious servants of the Lord, and
public eminent instruments of his Glory, Moses a giver of the Law, and Elias a
restorer of the Law. Moses faithful in all the House of God, and Elias zealous
for the glory of God. Both had ventured their lives, Moses by encountering
Pharaoh, and Elias Ahab. Both had seen the glory of God in Mount Horeb, and
spoke with God also, Moses Exodus 33. 11. He saw the Lord face to face, and
spoke with him as a man does with his Friend, and Elias 1 Kings 19. Both had
fasted forty days as Christ also did, therefore conveniently were these chosen.

3. With respect to our Profit and Instruction, Christ would not choose two
Angels, for this service, but two Men. Here the business was not to see
glorified Spirits, but glorified Bodies; therefore the Angels having no Bodies
of their own, and must appear in assumed Bodies if in any, are not fit;
therefore two Men that had Bodies wherein they might appear.

But you will say, if two men must appear in glorified Bodies, why not Enoch
rather then Moses, who was translated into Heaven, and remains there with a
glorified Body as well as Elias.

Answ. Enoch had no public charge, Enoch lived before the legal dispensation,
these both belonged to it, and were chief in it, of great Authority among the
Jews, Enoch has an honorable Testimony in the Word of God, but had no public
office and charge in the Church, which the other two had, and managed with
great Fidelity. By the appearance of Moses the whole legal Economy is supposed
to appear in his Person, and by the appearance of Elias, the Prophetical
Ministry, which was a kind of Chancery to the Law, is supposed to appear also.
Both do as it were deliver over to Christ their whole dispensation, and lay it
down at his feet, as the Magistrates that are to go out of office, solemnly
resign the ensigns of their Authority to him that succeeds, and also they
come both to reverence the majesty of their supreme Lord. In short it is for
our comfort that one that died, and one alive in glory, should come to show
that Christ is Lord of quick and dead, Romans 14. 9. Moses was dead, Elias
translated, these two come the one to give a pledge of the glory of the World
to come; the other of the Resurrection of the dead; which is the way and
introduction to it; and both these persons come to attend and adore our
Savior, and do homage to him.

Secondly, They appeared in glory, that is in a corporeal shape, shining with
brightness and glory, as Christ's body did, bating only for the degree and
proportion, that there might be a difference between the Lord and his Servants.
Now whether they appeared in Bodies formed and assumed for the present purpose,
and to be laid down again as we do our Garments, or in their own proper Bodies,
is often disputed by Interpreters upon this occasion. That they appeared in
bodies is certain, for bodily acts, and properties are ascribed to them, as
their talking with Christ, their being seen by the Apostles, for a spirit
cannot be seen. If in bodies why not their own? It is as easy to the Lord to
cause them to appear in their own bodies, as in a body assumed for this special
purpose, and service; and they were known by the Disciples to be Moses and
Elias, not by the external Lineaments, for they never saw them in person
before, but either were made known to them by some internal Revelation, or by
Christ's words, or by some words of Moses and Elias themselves, but which way
soever they knew them, certain it is they knew them, and took them to be Moses
and Elias, therefore Moses and Elias they were, both as to Soul and Body. The
Apostles that were admitted to this Transfiguration, were not to be deceived by
a false appearance, for they were admitted to be confirmed in the Truth of
Christ's Person and Office, that by what they saw they might confirm others. How
would it weaken the Testimony, if what they saw appearing before them in glory,
were not the bodies of Moses and Elias, but only other bodies assumed.
Concerning Elias the matter is without difficulty, for since he saw not death,
but was translated both body and soul into Heaven, why should he lay down his
own body and take another to come and serve Christ upon this occasion? cause
sufficient there was why he should come from the blessedness of Heaven to Mount
Tabor, no cause why he should lay aside his own proper body. It is no loss nor
trouble, but advantage to blessed and heavenly Creatures, to be serviceable to
their Redeemers Glory, though it be to come out of the other into this World.
But concerning Moses the matter is more doubtful, we read that he died in Mount
Nebo, and his body was buried by God in the Plains of Moab, so that his Grave
was known to no man unto this day, Deuteronomy. 34. 5, 6. Some think it was preserved
from putrefaction by the extraordinary power of God, that he might resume it at
this time. The Jews say that God sucked out Moses soul from his body with a
kiss, and afterward restored it again, and so he lives in immortality; but he
that looks for Divinity among the Jewish Rabbis will much sooner find a
ridiculous Fable, then any sound Doctrine; suffice it to us that he was really
dead, and buried, and his body mouldred into dust, as our bodies are, and now
on this special occasion, raised out of the dust, but after this whether it
were laid down in dust again, or carried into Heaven it is not for us to
determine, it may be either according to the Analogy of the Christian Faith: if
his body returned to corruption again, surely it is a great honor that it was
raised up for this special use, I say it was a great joy to these Prophets to
see all their predictions fulfilled in Christ. If we say it entered into Glory?
what inconvenience was there; If God would indulge him this peculiar
Prerogative to be raised from the dead, and enjoy blessedness both in soul and
body before the last day. He granted it to Enoch and Elias, and those who came
out of their Graves after Christ's death, Matthew. 27. 53. the great Harvest is at
the last day, but some first fruits before.

Secondly, Their Conference with our Savior; they talked with him says
Matthew, they spoke of his decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem
says Luke; they talked with Christ not with the Apostles, here is an
Apparition to them, but no parley and intercourse between them and the
glorified Saints. The Saints that are glorified are out of the sphere of
commerce of the living, nay it is a question whether they heard at all what was
said to Christ, but of that in the next verse.

Here observe three things. 1. What they spoke of Christ's death. 2. The notion
by which his death is set forth, it is (...). 3. The necessity of undergoing
it, in the word (...), which he should accomplish at Jerusalem.


1. What they spoke of none could divine, unless it had been told us, and the
Evangelist Luke tells us, that it was of his death. This Argument was chosen.

1. Because it was at hand, the next solemn Mediatory Action after this was his
Death and Bloody sufferings, after he was Transfigured in the Mount, he went
down to suffer at Jerusalem.

2. This was an offense to the Apostles that their Master should dye, Matthew.
16. 22, 23. Then Peter took him and began to rebuke him saying, be it far from
thee, Lord, this shall not be unto thee.

3. This was the Jews stumbling block, 1 Cor. 1. 23. We Preach Christ Crucified
to the Jews a stumbling block.

4. This was prefigured in the Rites of the Law, foretold in the Writings of
the Prophets. In the figures of the Law it was represented, Heb. 9. 22. and
almost all things are by the Law purged with blood, and without the shedding of
blood there is no Remission, especially the Apostle urges the entering of the
High Priest with Blood to the Mercy-seat, verse 23, 24. All the legal
Sacrifices were slain, and their blood brought before the Lord. So the
predictions of the Prophets, Isa. 53. 10. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise
him, he has put him to grief, when thou shall make thy soul an offering for
sin, etc. And Dan. 9. 26. The Messiah shall be cut off but not for himself. In
short, that Christ should dye for the sins of the World, was the great thing
represented in the Law and Prophets. Rabbi Simeon and Rabbi Hadersim out of
Daniel, that after Messiah had Preached half seven years he shall be slain.

5. It was necessary that by death he should come to his Glory of which now
some glympse and foretast was given to him, Luke 24. 46. Thus it is written,
and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and rise from the dead the third day,
that is, with respect to the predictions, verse 44. All those things which were
written in the Law of Moses, and the Prophets and the Book of Psalms concerning
me may be fulfilled, and again Luke 24. 21, 26. Oh fools and slow of heart to
believe all that the Prophets have spoken, ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, and to have entered into his Glory.

6. The Redemption of the Church by Christ is the talk and discourse we shall
have in Heaven, the Angels and Glorified Spirits are blessing, and praising him
for this, Rev. 5. 9. Thou art worthy for thou were slain, and have Redeemed us
to God by thy Blood. The Angels verse 12. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to
receive power, and riches, and wisdom and streneth and glory, and honor and
blessing. The Redeemed Church and glorified Saints and Angels have all one song
and one praise, the honor of the Lamb that was slain.

7. It is an instructive pattern to us, that Christ in the midst of his
Transfiguration, and the Glory, which was then put upon him forgot not his
Death. In the greatest advancements we should think of our desolution, if
Christ in all his Glory discoursed of his death, surely it more becomes us,
as necessary for us to prevent the surfeit of Worldly pleasures; we should
think of the change that is coming, For surely every man at his best estate is
vanity, Psalm 39. 5. In some places they were wont to present a deaths head at
their solemn Feasts; merry days will not always last, death will soon put an
end to the vain pleasures we enjoy here, and the most shining glory will be
burnt out to a snuff.

2. The notion by which his Death is expressed, his decease (...), which
signifies the going out of this Life into another, which is to be noted.

1. In respect unto Christ his death was (...), for he went out of this mortal
Life into Glory, and so it implies both his suffering Death, and also his
Resurrection, Act. 2. 24. God has raised him up, having loosed the pains of
Death, because it was impossible he should be holden of it. The Grave was like
a Woman ready to be delivered, it suffered Throws till this blessed burden was
egested.

2. With respect to us Peter calls his death (...), 2 Pet. 1. 15. I will
endeavor that ye may be able after my decease, the death of the Godly is a
going out but from sin, and sorrow, to glory, and immortality, as Isreal's going
out of Egypt, (whence the second Book of Moses is called Exodus) was no
destruction and cessation of their being, but a going out of the House of
Bondage into Liberty. Paul says, I desire to be dissolved, (...), Phil. 1. 23.
a setting sail for the other World. In Scripture language the body is the
House, the soul is the Inhabitant, 2 Cor. 5. 1. We know that if our earthly
house of this Tabernacle were disslolved, we have a building of God, an House
not made with hands eternal in the Heavens. The soul dwells in the body as a
Man in a House, and death is but a departure out of one House into another not,
an extinction but a going from House to House.

3. The necessity of undergoing it, in the word (...), this word accomplish
notes three things.

1. His Mediatorial duty, with a respect to Gods Ordination, and Decree
declared in the Prophesies of the old Testament, which when they are fulfilled
are said to be accomplished. Whatsoever Christ did in the work of Redemption
was with respect to Gods Will and Eternal Decree, Acts 4. 28. To do whatsoever
thy hand and counsel determined before to be done. Now this was the more
binding being it was a declared counsel in the Prophesies and Figures of the
Old Testament, therefore Christ cried out at his death, John 19. 30. It is
finished, or accomplished. Meaning principally that the Prophesies, and
Figures, and Types which prefigured his death were all now accomplished.

2. His voluntary submission which he should accomplish, notes his Active and
voluntary concurrence; it is an active word not passive, not to be fulfilled
upon him, but by him; for though his death in regard of his Enemies was violent
and enforced, yet he voluntarily underwent it for our sakes: no man could have
taken his Life from him unless he had laid it down, John 10. 18. it was not
forced upon him, but he yielded to it by a voluntary dispensation; as to men it
was an act of violence, but as to his Father, it was an act of obedience; as to
us, an act of Love; on Christ's part his Enemies could not have touched him
against his Will, as indeed they cannot also one hair of our heads but as God
permits.

3. That it was the eminent Act of his Humiliation, for this cause he assumed
humane Nature: his Humiliation begun at his Birth, continued in his Life, and
was accomplished in dying; all was nothing without this for less could not
serve the turn, then the death of the Son of God: then all sufferings were
undergone which were necessary to take away sin, therefore there is a
consummation or perfection attributed to the death of Christ, Heb. 10. 14. By
one offering he has perfected for ever them that are Sanctified, there is done
enough to expiate sin to open a way to Heaven and Happiness, this accomplisheth
all that is necessary, by way of Merit and Satisfaction.

Now what shall we learn from hence, for surely such solemn actions of Christ
were not in vain.

I. A notable Argument to confirm the Christian Faith, namely, the consent
between the Law and the Prophets, and Christ: for Moses and Elias are all
Christ's Ministers and Servants agreeing in one with him; and therefore appear
at his Transfiguration where he is proclaimed to be the beloved Son of God, and
the great Doctor of the Church, whom all are bound to hear under pain of
Damnation.

I will prove two things,

First, The Necessity of this Appearance both to the Jews, and us Gentiles.

1. To the Jews in that Age, for there were three Opinions concerning Christ,
some had a blasphemous Opinion of him, as if he were an Impostor, and called
him Samaritane, and Devil; so the chief Priests and Pharisees. Matthew. 27. 63.
We remember that that Deceiver said, while he was yet alive, after three days
I will rise again. And Matthew. 12. 24. This fellow does not cast out devils, but
by Beelzebub the prince of the devils. Generally they looked upon him as an
Enemy to Moses; Ioh. 9. 29. We know that God spoke to Moses, as for this fellow
we know not whence he is. Others had a more moderate Opinion, who were alarmed
by his Miracles, and convinced by his Holiness, Mar. 6. 14, 15, 16. Some said
it is Elias, others said it is a Prophet, Ieremias or one of the prophets, but
Herod said it is John whom I beheaded, who is risen from the dead, and
therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him. Herod's Conscience could
not digest John's Murder, therefore he twice says it is John, it must needs be
John. The third Opinion was that of the Disciples, Thou art the Christ, the son
of the living God, Ioh. 6. 69. Now to set all at rights, to confute the
blasphemous Jews, to rectify the moderate Jews, to confirm the Disciples, here
come Moses and Elias to justify him; they would not have owned him if a
Blasphemer and Impostor; nor have come from Heaven to honor him, and do him
homage, if he had been an ordinary Prophet; therefore they appear in Glory, and
talk with him of his Death.

2. With respect to the Modern Jews, and us Gentiles; this Apparition was
necessary to confirm us in the Faith both of Christ's Person and Office; that he
was the great Teacher sent from Heaven, to make known the way of Salvation to
lapsed Mankind, and Moses and Elias must be hereafter silent, now the great
Prophet and Doctor of the Church is brought forth, and no other Revelation or
Dispensation is to be expected or regarded, now he is brought forth. There is
need that this should be sufficiently evidenced, partly because Christ had the
Law of Moses to repeal, which was well known to the Jews to be Gods own Law, or
else they and every true Subject of God might refuse to obey him; partly
because he had a new Law to promulgate, even the Law of Faith and Gospel
Ordinances; and so must manifest his Authority before they can be received and
submitted unto with that firm Assent and Consent which is necessary; partly,
because he himself was to be received and entertained as the Redeemer of the
World, who had Expiated our sins by his Decease at Jerusalem, which was a new
work, yet Man's Salvation lay upon it. And his Death there was Clouded with many
Prejudices; for they put him to death as a false Prophet, guilty of Blasphemy
and Sedition: Therefore it needed to be made manifest that such a Man of
Sorrows, reckoned among Transgressors, was the Savior and Redeemer of the
World.

Secondly, The Sufficiency of this Evidence. For if Moses and Elias appear in
Glory to Countenance this Dispensation, and declare their hearty Concurrence
and Consent; there is no Reason Jew or Gentile should scruple it; if Moses the
Lawgiver, and Elias so zealous for the Law, consent; why should the Jew refuse
the Gospel so agreeable to their Dispensation, or the Gentiles question a
Doctrine so long ago manifested to the Church by God long before Christ and
his Apostles were in being. Those that lived in so many different Ages, could
not lay their Heads together to cheat the World with an untruth. There is a
double Argument may be drawn hence.

1. The Matter of Fact; Moses and Elias did appear to Witness their Consent.
Now this depends upon the Testimony of the Apostles present, whose Testimony
was by other means ratified and made valuable, 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17, 18. For we
have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty. For he
received from God the father, honor and glory, when there came such a voice to
him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased.
And this voice which came from Heaven, we heard when we were with him in the
holy mount.

2. Their Consent in Doctrine, which is obvious in all their Writings, the
Apostles related nothing concerning Christ, but what Moses and the Prophets had
foretold, and what was History in the New Testament was Prophecy in the Old;
either as to the Person of Christ, or as to his Kingdom, the Duties and
Privileges thereof; Ioh. 5. 39. Search the scriptures, for in them ye think ye
have eternal Life, and they are them that testify of me. So Ver. 45, 46, 47.
Do not think that I will accuse you to the father, there is one that accuses
you, even Moses in whom ye trust. For had ye believed Moses, ye would have
believed me, for he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his writings, how will
ye believe my words? The Old Testament bears witness of Christ's Person,
Natures, Offices, Birth, Life, Sufferings, and the Glory that should ensue, 2
Pet. 1. 19, 20, 21. We have also a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do
well that ye take heed, as to a light that shines in a dark place, till the
day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts. Knowing this first, that no
prophecy of the Scripture is of any private Interpretation. For the prophecy
came not in old time by the will of men, but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost. The Apostles taught the same things the Prophets had
written, only applied them to Jesus of Nazareth whom they had Crucified, that
they might know that he was Lord and Christ. The Heathens take notice that at
that time when Christ appeared, there was Vetus and constans Fama; Sueton. Ex
antiquis sacerdotum libris Tacitus. That their King Messiah should come.

USES.
1. For Confutation of the Jews, and to show their obstinacy in not receiving
Christ as the Messiah, God had told Moses, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. I will raise them up a
prophet from among their brethren like unto thee, and will put my words into
his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him, and
whosoever will not hearken unto him, I will require it of him. Which cannot be
understood of any other Prophet, but Christ the Messiah, for it is said, Deuteronomy.
34. 10, 11. There arose not a Prophet in Israel like unto Moses who knew the
Lord face to face in all the miracles and wonders which the Lord sent him to
do. But the Messiah does match and overmatch him, he was a Man as Moses was;
for the Promise was made on that occasion, let me hear the Voice of the Lord
God no more, nor see this great Fire, that we dye not; says God, they have
well spoken, I will raise up a Prophet like unto thee from among their
Brethren; he must be a Lawgiver as Moses, but of a more perfect Law; he must be
such an One as should see God face to face; he is of a Divine Nature, approved
to the World by Miracles, Signs and Wonders. As Moses was, so Christ; Moses
divided the Sea as dry Land, Christ walked upon it; Moses healed the bitter
Waters that were sick, Christ raised the dead: All the prejudice is, that he
changed the Law of Moses into the Rites and Institutes of the Christian
Religion. Answ. That was necessary the substance being once come, that the
Shadows and Ceremonies should be abolished; and besides, these were proper and
peculiar to one Nation in the World, namely Iudaea; the Exercise permitted but
in one only place of that Country, namely Jerusalem; whither they were all to
repair three times each year; but the Messiah Law was to be common to all men,
serves for all Countries, Times, Places, Persons, for he was to be the Light of
the Gentiles as well as the Glory of his people Israel, how should Nations so
far distant from Jerusalem repair thrice every year; or a Woman dwelling in
England or America repair thither for purification after every Childbirth,
Lev. 12. When Moses delivered the Law to them, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. The Lord thy God
will raise thee up a Prophet like unto me, unto him shall thou hearken. And the
Prophets when they prophecy of his Law, Isa. 2. 3. The Law shall go forth out
of Sion, and the word of God from Jerusalem. Moses's Law was published from
Sinai, not from Sion; but the preaching of the Gospel begun at Jerusalem, and
from thence was spread over all the World. Again it is said, Isa. 42. 4. The
Isles shall wait for his Law; that is the Maritime Countries. I pursue it no
farther now.

2. To us Christians. Our Religion is true, Oh let us be true in the profession
of it; otherwise it will little help us in the day of our Accounts, 2 These. 1.
8. Taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ. You stand upon the Vantage-ground, but are not Taller in
Stature than Heathens and Jews. Disciples in Name, not in Deed; Ioh. 8. 31. If
ye continue in my words, then are ye my disciples indeed: Christians of Letter,
not of the Spirit. Oh Reverence Christ, if Moses and Elias did him Homage. When
we have found Truth let us look after Life; and having owned the true Religion
express the Power of it.

II. The next thing we learn is the Necessity and Value of Christ's Death. For
Moses and Elias insist upon his Decease at Jerusalem; which quite contradicts
the Jewish deceit and establishes the Christian Hope. The Death of Christ for
our Redemption is the great Article of the Christian Faith, the thing foretold
and prefigured by Law and Prophets, Luke 24. 44. and the ground of our Comfort
and Peace, Isa. 53. 4, 5. Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our
sorrows, yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted. But he
was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities, the
chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed.

Let us Consider, 1. The Notions by which Christ's Death is set forth.

2. The Necessity of it.

First, The Notions by which Christ's death is set forth. Two solemn ones: A
Ransom; And, A Mediatorial Sacrifice.

1. A Ransom; (...) Mat. 20. 28. (...), 1 Timothy 2. 6. Who gave himself a Ransom
for all. A Ransom is a Price given to a Judge, or one that has power of life
and death, for to save the life of one capitally Guilty, or by Law bound to
suffer death, or some other evil and punishment. This was our Case, God was the
supreme Judge, before whose Tribunal Man stands guilty, and liable to death;
but Christ interposed that we might be spared, Job 33. 24. deliver him from
going down to the Pit, for I have found a Ransom. There is a Price or
Recompense given in our stead.

2. A Mediatorial Sacrifice, Isa. 53. 3: When thou shall make his soul an
offering for sin: Ephesians. 5. 2. Christ has loved us, and has given himself for
us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. He has
undertook the Expiation of our sins, and the propitiating of God; Gods provoked
Justice would not acquit the Controversy it had against us, till it were
appeased by a proper Sacrifice; 1 Ioh. 2. 2. He is the propitiation for our
sins.

Secondly, The Necessity of it.

1. The sins and guilty Fears of Mankind, needs such a Remedy; we are
naturally sensible that the punishment of death is deserved and due to us by
the Law of God, Romans 1. 32. They which commit such things are worthy of death.
Now these Fears are not easily appeased, Micah 6. 6, 7. Wherewith shall I come
before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? shall I come before him
with burnt-offerings, with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with
thousands of rams or with ten thousands of rivers of Oil? Shall I give my
first-horn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my seul?
Christ came and died to free us from them, that we might serve God cheerfully,
Heb. 2. 14, 15. Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and
blood, he also himself took part of the same, that through death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is the devil, Heb. 9. 14. How
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered
himself without spot to God purge your consciences from dead works to serve the
living God.

2. The Glory of God requires it.

1. To declare his Justice, Romans 3. 25, 26. Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to delare his Righteousness, for the
Remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. To declare I
say at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of
him which believes in Jesus. If God will pardon sin, there must be a fit means
to keep up the Honor of his Justice, and the Authority of his Law; for sin is
not a wrong done to a private party offended, but a disobedience to Authority,
and disturbeth the order of Government.

2. To declare his Holiness, that he is a Pure and Holy God hating sin. This
was demonstrated in the Sufferings of Christ, and the dear rate at which it was
expiated: for if this was done in the green Tree, what shall be done in the dry.

USES.
1: Oh then be affected with this great Mystery, the death which the Son of God
accomplished at Jerusalem; look upon it under a double Notion, with respect to
his Fathers Command, it was an Act of Obedience, carried on with such Humility,
Patience, Self-denial, Resignation of himself to God, Charity, Pity, as the
like cannot be done by Man or Angel, Romans 5. 19. by the obedience of one many
were made Righteous. Phil. 2. 7. He humbled himself, and became obedient to the
death, even the death of the Cross; this commends Obedience to us. it was an
Act of Love, Gal. 2. 20. Who loved me and gave himself for me. Rev. 1. 5. To
him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood. He thought no
price too dear for our Salvation, let us love him again who loved us first; 1
Ioh. 4. 19. We love him because he first loved us. And be contented to suffer
with him and for him, that we may enter into his Glory; Romans 8. 17. If so be
that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together, if he call us
thereunto.

2. Feel the Virtue of it in Heart and Conscience. In Heart, by our dying to
sin, then we are planted into the likeness of his death; Romans 6. 5. They that
are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof.
Gal. 5. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we
being dead to sin should live unto righteousness. Then Glory in it, Gal. 6. 14.
God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world. In Conscience, 1 Ioh.
5. 10: He that believes in the son of God has the witness in himself, etc.
Heb. 12. 24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling that speaks better things than the blood of Abel; does it appease
our guilty fears, and purge our Consciences from the stain and guilt of sin.

III. The State of Future Glory and Felicity.

1. The dead in the Lord are not perished, but live for ever with God in
Heaven; for here they appear long after their departure hence, Luke 20. 38. He
is not the God of the dead but of the living, for all live unto him. They all
live to God though they are gone out of the sphere of our commerce, they have
another Life with God. Now fix this in your hearts, for many carry it so as if
there were no Immortality or Life to come; we do not vanish into the Air when
we die; Moses is somewhere, and Elias somewhere, in the Hand of God, and can
appear when God will have them.

2. The Saints appeared in a true, and in their own Bodies, to establish the
Faith of the Resurrection; their bodies were reserved for this use; one of them
was already in Glory in soul and body, the other now raised out of the dust
after many years Burial; and why cannot God gather up our dust again and
enliven it, that we may accompany Christ at his coming.

3. This Instance shows also the Degrees of Glory. All the Saints have their
Portion in Bliss, but not a just equality. Moses and Elias appeared in Glory,
not Enoch; nor were any of the rest admitted to this solemnity. Here were three
choice disciples, when the rest stood at a remote distance; so two glorified
Saints, but the rest not admitted to this Honor, but stood waiting for his
glorious Ascension. There is difference on Earth in the Worldly State, some
have greater Riches, Honors and Dignity than others; difference in the Church,
both in Gifts and Graces; yea a difference in Hell, some have a hotter, others
a cooler punishment; so in Heaven, according to eminency in Holiness and
Faithfulness with God; otherwise there would not be a suitableness in Gods
dispensations.

4. The perfect subjection of the glorified spirits to the will of God, either
to remain in the Vision of God, or to be employed in the service of their
Redeemer; we should think that a self-denial, which they count an Happiness, to
come from Heaven to Mount Tabor; they take up, or lay down a body, as God
pleases. Heaven is a state not only of perfect Happiness, but of exact
conformity to God.

5. We shall have the Company of the Blessed Saints in Heaven. The disciples
here did not only enjoy the company and sight of Christ, but the company and
sight of Moses and Elias, being glorified Saints; so in the Heavenly Life; Mat.
8. 11. It is made a part of our blessedness in the Kingdom of God, to sit down
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; And Heb. 12. 23. Ye are come to the general
assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God
the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect. Here we are
joined to them by Faith and Hope; there by sight and Fellowship. The company of
wicked Men is now grievous and tedious to us, Ezekiel. 2. 6. but we shall have
better company hereafter, here we often part with our choicest Friends and
Acquaintance, but there we shall meet and never part more; It is not to be
imagined but that we shall have the comfort of our glorified Fellowcreatures.
The Body has its Objects and Felicity fit for a Body.

6. The Saints shall know one another, as the disciples knew Moses and Elias,
though not by Countenance, having never seen them before, but by Revelation;
Christ told them who they were, and we who have known before our old
Acquaintance shall know them again. Memory is not abolished, but perfected; we
shall make one body, one society; now we shall not converse as strangers,
Abraham knew Lazarus, Luke 16. 25. Ministers, 1 These. 2. 19. What is our hope
or joy or crown of Rejoicing, are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus
Christ at his coming. Christ's Argument, Luke 16. 9. Make to your selves friends
of the mamon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail they may receive you into
everlasting habitations. Angels know not only themselves, but all the Elect
now; how else do they Minister about them, they know the least believer, Math.
18. 10. Take heed that ye offend not one of these little ones, for I say unto
you, that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which
is in heaven. And they are at length to gather them from the four Winds, Matthew.
13. 41. The son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out
of his kingdom all things that do offend.

7. The Conference of the Blessed Saints; we shall be with them, speak to them,
hear them speak to us, though not after an earthly manner. We have now Bodies,
and so Tongues and Lips, which are the Instrument of Speech; Ears, which are
the Instruments of Hearing; now these would seem vain, and to no purpose, if
there were no use of Speech and Hearing. It was a blessed thing for Peter,
James and John, to stand by and hear the conference between Christ, Moses and
Elias, 1 King 10. 8. Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants which
stand continually before thee, and hear thy Wisdom. Much more may it be said
here.

USE. Well then, Christian Religion is True, Christ's Death Necessary, Eternal
Life Certain, Oh let our Time, and Hearts and Care be taken up about these
great and glorious things, Meditate on them, seek after them, first begin with
the sureness of Christian Doctrine, that you may lay a good Foundation that
Christ is the Teacher of the Church, who has brought life and immortality to
light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. then penitently sue out your Pardon, in
the name of Christ, depending on the Merit of his Death, and make this Eternal
Life and Happiness your choice, and the scope of your Life and Conversation, 2
Cor. 4. 18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen, for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are Eternal.

SERMON. IV.
MATTHEW. 17. 4. Then answered Peter and said unto Jesus, Lord it is good for us
to be here; if thou will let us make three Tabernacles, one for Thee, and one
for Moses, and one for Elias. With LUKE 9. 32, 33. But Peter and they that were
with him were heavy with sleep, and when they were awake they saw his Glory,
and the two men that stood with him. And it came to pass as they departed from
him, Peter said unto Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here, and let us
make three Tabernacles, one for Thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias, not
knowing what he said.
WE are upon the Adjuncts of Christ's Transfiguration.

The first was the Appearance of Moses and Elias talking with him.

The Second is the entertainment which the Apostles gave to this glorious
dispensation, or their behavior under it. Three Things are Observable.

1. Their Posture for some while, and Peter and they that were with him were
heavy with sleep. 2. Peter's Motion when they were awake, let us build here
three Tabernacles. 3. The Censure of it, not knowing what he said.
First, Their Posture after the Transfiguration was begun, and Peter, and they
that were with him were heavy with sleep. This sleep might arise either from a
common natural cause, or from a special cause peculiar to this dispensation.

1. A common natural cause, being tired with labor in ascending the Mountain,
for it was (...), exceeding high. Or it was with watching, for they tarried
there all night, and Christ continued long in Prayer, and possibly being a
little withdrawn from them, as in his Agonies, he was Transfigured before them.

2. The special cause of this sleep was the extraordinary Apparition, as the
Prophets often were in a deep sleep and trance, when they saw the like, Dan. 8.
18. As the Angel Gabriel was speaking to me, I fell into a deep sleep, with my
face toward the ground. Again Dan. 10. 9. When I heard his voice, then was I
in a deep sleep. So the Prophet Zechariah in the midst of his Visions, Zech. 4.
1. The Angel of the Lord wakened me as one in a deep sleep, any eminent passion
causes sleep, and they were astonished so with these visions and
representations, that nature fainted under them, and they fell into a sleep, so
the Apostles seeing Christ in the midst of fervent Prayers Transfigured before
them.

Now whether it came from the one cause or from the other, we must conclude
this sleep was a weakness on their parts, but directed and overruled by God for
just and wise Reasons.

1. It was a weakness and infirmity on their part, for questionless they were
to attend with all vigilance to this manifestation of our Saviors glory, and
observe the passages of it, why else did he take them into the Mountain a part,
but as Witnesses of it, as they were to watch in his Agonies, so in his
Transfiguration it was a fault then, Mat. 26. 40. When he comes he finds
them asleep. What could you not watch with me one hour. But the best men are
clogged with humane infirmities, in the most glorious manifestations of God to
them.

2. The Providence of God is to be observed in this sleep; that which came to
pass through their Fault was ordered by Gods Providence, for if they had been
awake they had heard all the discourse that passed between Christ and the two
great Prophets, which neither their present condition, nor the state of the
time did permit. Christ had told them that he should suffer an ignominious
death, which they did not thoroughly understand, nor could they reconcile it
with the present thoughts which they had of the Messiah, nor was it fit for
them to hear all, how the death of Christ was foretold in the Prophesies
prefigured in the Sacrifices, shadowed out in all the rest of the Types of the
Law, and sung of in the book of Psalms to satisfy the Justice of God, and open
a way for his Mercy, and the gift of the Holy Spirit. Christ would not have the
great work of his dying hindered, and these things they were not to learn from
Moses and Elias, but he would teach them himself after the Resurrection, Luke
24. 44, 45, 46. These are the words that I spoke unto you while I was yet with
you, that all things must be fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses,
and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning me, then opened he their eyes
that they might understand the Scriptures, and said unto them, thus it is
written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead the
third day. And the full knowledge of them was reserved till the pouring out of
the Spirit on the day of Pentecost: if they had heard them now they would have
begotten scruples, and troublesome thoughts in their minds, and hindered the
present service.

Observe hence our weakness during the time we are environed with mortality,
that we cannot bear up long under spiritual duties, either our hearts are soon
overcharged with wonder and astonishment, or else we yield to natural
infirmities; however let it be a warning to us against sleepiness in the
worship of God. It is true the best may be surprised with it, as here Christ's
Disciples; yet it was a sin in them to be asleep when Christ was at Prayers,
and it is a sin God has severely punished, witness Eutychus, Acts 20. 9. And
there sat in the window a young man named Eutychus, being fallen into a deep
sleep, and as Paul was long Preaching he sunk down with sleep, and fell down
from the third loft, and was taken up dead. Mark though the Sermon continued
till midnight, and it was a youth that slept, yet he fell down as dead: it was
a small sin, a sin of infirmity, a boys sin, yet God would leave this warning,
I do not animadvert too severely upon this infirmity, only give you caution;
Christ praying all night on mount Tabor, this weakness prevailed on these
choice Apostles, and elsewhere during the time of Christ's Agonies, yet we are
to strive against it, and be sure it may be said of us as of them, Mark 26. 41.
The spirit is willing but the flesh is weak. Make conscience of avoiding this
sin, do not compose your selves to sleep, do not come to these duties spent
with labors, and Worldly cares, nor clogged with excess of meat or drink, nor
having defrauded our selves of necessary refreshing by sleep, by vain pleasures
the night before.

Secondly, Their carriage when they were awake, when they awaked they saw his
Glory, and the two men that stood with them, they saw Christ transfigured
before they fell asleep, but I think they saw not Moses and Elias before, but
now saw them, that they might give testimony of it to the Church, not by common
fame, and hear say, but as eye Witnesses, and they knew Moses and Elias either
by information from Christ, or some secret instinct and Revelation of the
Spirit, or as hearing some part of the discourse they heard enough to show what
they were, or what the general matter of their discourse was. But that which is
most remarkable is Peter's motion and proposal, It came to pass to pass as they
departed from him, just as they were parting Peter said, Lord it is good for us
to be here, let us make three Tabernacles, one for Thee, one for Moses, and one
for Elias. He mentioned no distinct Tabernacle for himself and fellow
Disciples, because they would be with Christ attending on their Master in his
Tent.

The Motion in the general is rash, sudden and unadvised, but being made by a
good man though under a passion, there is something good and something bad in
it.

1. That which was good in it is, he yet retains his Reverence.

1. That he submits his proposal to the judgment of his Lord and Master,
wherein he expresses his Reverence of Christ, Lord if thou will; he desires a
continuance of this dispensation, leaves it to his consent, acknowledging
herein his Wisdom and Authority.

2. It shows the valuableness and felicity of conversing with Christ, and the
glorified Saints; for when but two of them appear in Glory talking with Christ,
Peter said it is good to be here, to continue and abide in this place together
with thy self, Moses and Elias. What a blessed dignity is this, the Glory of
Heaven is so ravishing and satisfactory to the soul, that the soul can rest in
the least glimpse and degree of it. If a glimpse, what is the fullness, if the
splendour of his humanity not yet Glorified be so great what is the Glory of his
Godhead? If a fight of these things at a distance, what is the participation,
when the Glory shall be revealed in us, or we shall appear with him in Glory?
If Moses and Elias, what is the company of all the Saints and Angels? If it be
thus at Mount Tabor, what will it be in Heaven, when all the World is renewed,
and refined, and the Church gathered together in one great Assembly.

3. The nature of a state of Glory, and how easily it makes us to forget all
things here below, Peter had a Family, and Household affairs to mind, for we
read in the Gospel that his Wives Mother was sick and cured by Christ, Matthew.
8. 14. he had Friends and a Brother called Andrew, who was one of the Disciples
of Christ, left below in the Valley, John 1. 40. nay he forgot his own present
condition of Life, which could not long brook his remaining in that Mountain
without the supply of Food, and other necessaries. Now all this shows that
when we are translated to Heaven we shall be so ravished with that kind of Life
we shall have there, as that all sense and memory of things that we have left
behind shall cease, as Peter being ravished with this sight and spectacle,
thinks not of Kindred, Friends or Household, or any kind of Worldly comfort,
but says only it is good to be here; so that it teaches us, that the
delights of the other World, make us forget all our concernments here below,
all shall be forgotten and swallowed up in that heavenly delight we shall have
there.

2. That which was Evil in it.

1. That he mistook the nature of the present dispensation, this was to be a
representation not a Fruition, to be transient and momentany, for confirmation
not possession, rather a viaticum, a bit by the way, then a Feast. It was good
and commendable to be affected with joy, and delight in the presence and
company of Christ, and Moses and Elias, but it was not to be rested in as their
full Reward.

2. If this request had taken place, the work of our Redemption had been
hindered, what had become of Christ's Death and Passion, which he should
accomplish at Jerusalem; all our happiness depends on that, and if God should
give way to our carnal desires, what mischief would ensue. If Christ had
hearkened to him he would not have gone up to Jerusalem to suffer, nor would
any man living have dared to lay hands upon him while he continued in this
Glory and Majesty.

3. This request was injurious to Moses and Elias, that they should utterly
forsake their Heavenly Mansions for an abode on Earth, and therefore to desire
their continuance there, was to desire their loss, they were a little time to
appear on Earth with Christ, and then to return to their blessedness, or to the
enjoyment of the sight of God in the third Heavens.

4. It was injurious to Christ, to hope to learn something from Moses and Elias
which Christ could not teach them, and to equal them with his Lord and Master,
in building Tabernacles for all three alike and without difference, was some
lessening of his respect to Christ. If they were to learn any thing from them
they were to consult the Books not the Persons, Luke 16. 29. They have Moses
and the Prophets, let them hear them, and the desires of extraordinary means
argues a contempt of ordinary.

5. It was an error to imagine that Tabernacles were necessary for Moses and
Elias, who now appeared in such Heavenly Glory in the Mount, they needed not
earthly Houses, and Tents, to dwell in, to defend them from the injuries of the
weather, neither had they such present conveniences to prepare them.

Thirdly, The censure of the Holy Ghost, Luke says, not knowing what he said,
In Mark chap. 9. 6. He wist not what to say, for they were sore afraid. They
were words of a man in a Rapture, or surprised with great astonishment. There
were two affections dazzled with the Majesty of this Glory, and transported with
joy; there was also a great fright usually, (...), such things as bring a hurt
occasion fear, and also things of excellent Glory, such as surpass our present
meanness; as here the change of Christ's Person, and the glorious Appearance of
the great Prophets, so long since separated from the commerce of mankind.

Observe, before we proceed, the inconvenience of great and excessive Passions,
they make us speak we know not what, Peter is an instance in Scripture, let us
keep to him, you see him surprised with a great passion of fear, when at
Christ's command a great draught of Fish came to hand in an unlikely time, Luke
5. 8, 9. Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord. For he was astonished,
and all that were with him, at the draught of Fishes that they had taken, you
find him at other times transported with a passion of excessive Reverence or
Humility, John 13. 8. Lord thou shall never wash my feet. With a passion of
Love, or Pity to his Master, Lord let it be far from thee, this shall not be
unto thee, when his Master had foretold his death, Mark 16. 22. in case of
contempt of Christ: here with a passion of joy or ravishment, or transport of
soul, Lord it is good for us to be here. Now all these passions were
religiously exercised, but it is dangerous when Religion, which should bridle
and govern our passions, is made the matter and fuel of them. Passionate joy,
or passionate fear, passionate reverence, or passionate zeal, and anger, may
easily transport us to some uncomely action or motion, for though in all these
there was Religion at top, yet sin at the bottom; and therefore you see how
much it concerns us to moderate and reduce our selves to a due temper, for
passion causes us to do things without and against reason, yea to speak and do
we know not what, and when Religious matters over heat our affections we may
err exceedingly.

Now having opened this part of the History, let us observe something that
conduces to our practical instruction.

I. Doctrine, That the state and condition of the glorified Saints, is a most
delightful state and condition.
For when Peter had but a glimpse of it in the transfiguration of Christ, it
seemed so ravishing and transporting, that here would he abide and stay by it;
so was he affected with joy in the company and presence of Christ, and Moses,
and Elias, appearing with him, that all his natural comforts and relations were
forgotten. This would compensate all, if once we be gotten into this blessed
estate, we shall never desire to come out of it and part with it, this which
the Disciples had, was but a little glimpse, and taste of the Life to come, this
must needs be so; it is called joy, Mat. 25. 21. Enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord, and fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. 11. In thy presence there is fullness of
joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore, no better estate can
be expected. The Soul is at rest as having obtained its end. And it is also
proved by the privileges and benefits the Saints shall enjoy in the world to
come.

1. A Freedom from all Evil, which here are matter of Grief to us. And 2. The
Fruition of all Good, which may any way bring Joy, and Delight and Contentment.
1. There is a Freedom from all Evil. There is a twofold evil, either of Sin or
Punishment. In Heaven there is neither Sin nor Misery.

1. To begin with sin, that is the worst evil, because it makes us hateful to
God, and grieveth the Saints most, Romans 7. 24. Oh wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this Death. If any man had cause to complain
of Afflictions, Paul much more being often imprisoned, whipped, stoned, but his
lusts troubled him more then scourges; and his captivity to the Law of sin more
then Prisons. Gods children are most weary of the World, because they are
sinning here, whilst others are glorifying of God, and enjoying God and the
company of his blessed Ones. Now in Heaven there is no sin, Ephesians. 5. 27. there
is neither spot nor blemish nor wrinkle on the face of the glorified Saints,
their faces were once as black as yours. But now they are washed in the Lambs
blood and fully cleansed, now with much ado we mortify sin, but then it is
nullified; but if we subdue the power of sin we do not get rid of the being of
it, but then we are rid of all at once, of all sin, and temptation to sin.
There was a Serpent, a tempter in Paradise, but there is none in Heaven; the
devil is shut out, and the old man is left in the Grave never to rise more.

2. There is not the least evil of Affliction, Rev. 21. 4. All tears shall be
wiped away from their eyes, whatsoever is painful and burdensome to nature, is
a fruit of sin, a brand and mark of our Rebellion against God. Therefore when
sin is done away, Affliction which is the fruit of it, is done away also. In
Hell there is Evil, and only Evil; in Heaven Happiness, and only Happiness;
here our wounds are healed, but the scars remain, something to put us in mind
that we have sin yet dwelling in us, but there all the effects of it cease,
there is neither death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain.

2. They shall enjoy all Good things, which shall bring Joy and Comfort to
them, in blessedness there is a confluence of all Good, our joys are full and
eternal.

1. There is the immediate sight and presence of God, and Jesus Christ, who
shall be all in all to them, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Now we see through a glass darkly,
but then face to face, now I know in part, then shall I know as also I am
known. And John 17. 24. Father I will that they also whom thou have given me,
be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me;
for thou love me before the foundation of the World. We are brought into the
presence of him who is blessedness it self.

2. The society of all the blessed Angels and Saints glorified, Mat. 8. 11.
Many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham and
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. The perfection of all Heavenly gifts both in soul and body.

(1.) In Soul, that is the Heaven of Heaven, 1 John 3. 2. Now are we the sons
of God, but it does not yet appear what we shall be, but this we know that when
he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, Psalm 17.
15. When I awake I shall be satisfied with thy Image and likeness, by knowing
we come to Love, and by loving God we know him, there is Vision, Assimilation,
Satisfaction, the object is efficacious, the intimation vigorous and clear, the
subject prepared for the impression.

(2.) In Body, Phil. 3. 21. Who shall change our vile Body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, the body shall be endued with all
glorious qualities as brightness, strength, agility, it is a body wholly
impassible and incorruptible, fit for the operations of a glorified soul, and
with it shall for ever remain a glorious Temple of the Holy Ghost, therefore it
is good to be here.

USES.
1. Let this draw forth our Love to such a blessed estate, which is so full of
delight and contentment, and wean us from these things which are most pleasing
in the World.

1. The best estate in the World is but vanity, altogether vanity, Psalm 39. 5.
mingled with some grievances. Wealth has its incident cares, and Honor its
tortures; and all pleasures here are but bitter sweets: there is a Worm that
feeds on our gourd, and will in time wither it. At last death comes and
then the lust of the World is gone, 1 John 2. 17. The World passes away and
the lust thereof. The Godly themselves have but a mixed estate, because of
remaining infirmities, they live here in a Vale of tears and snares, and sin
does not gasp its last till death removes us from this sinful flesh, and puts
us into the sight of God himself: Wherefore the Saints are groaning and longing
for the parting day, when putting off the flesh we shall put off sin, and come
and dwell with God for ever.

2. None are translated unto Heaven, but such whose hearts are there first, 2
Cor. 5. 2. In this we groan earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our
house which is from Heaven: Phil. 1. 23. I desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ, Romans 8. 23. We that have the first Fruits of the spirit groan
within our selves waiting for the Adoption, the Redemption of our bodies. A
Christian waits and longs for a purer state of bliss and immortality; the
first Fruits show what the Harvest will be, and a taste what the Feast will
prove: though they are thankful for this refreshing by the way, yet they are
longing to be at home, cannot be contented without it.

3. The excellency of this estate requires it, if it be not worth your desires
and best Affections it is little worth. Christ procured it for us by a life of
Labors and Sorrows, and the pangs of a bitter cursed death, and when all this
is done shall not we desire it and look after it, that is foul ingratitude. Oh
then let your Hearts be upon it, desire must go before delight.

2. To move us to labor for it, and seek it in the first place, and to get it
assured that we have a part in this blessed and joyful condition, Mat. 6. 33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, Luke 13. 24.
Strive to enter in at the strait gate. So 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give diligence to make
your calling and election sure. What profit is it to know that there is such a
blessed and joyful estate if we have no? interest in it. Heaven is worth our
pains, and will bear all the cost we can lay out upon it, so the children of
God thought, Acts 26. 7. Unto which promise our twelve Tribes instantly serving
God day and night, hope to come, if we do not desire it, we do not believe it;
if we do not labor for it we do not desire it.

3. Let us comfort our selves with the hopes of this blessed and joyful
condition.

1. Against all the miseries and afflictions of this present Life, these are
necessary, we would sleep too quietly in the World, if we did not sometimes
meet with thorns in our beds, we should be so pleased with our entertainment in
the way, as we should forget home; but God awakeneth us out of our drowsy fits
by sharp afflictions, as if he said, arise, depart hence, this is not your
rest, Micah 2. 10. while we wallow in sensual comforts, our hearts say it is
good being here.

2. When there is a joyful and blessed condition beyond them; it is some
comfort in this shipwreck of man's felicity, that we can see banks and shoars, a
landing place, where we may be safe and enjoy our repose, To you that are
troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus Christ shall be revealed from heaven
with his mighty Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. Here our days are sorrow and our travail
grief, but there is our repose.

3. That our joy and contentment is so infinitely above our sorrow, and
trouble, 2 Cor. 4. 7. so that in all the troubles and sorrows of this Life, we
may look beyond them and through them, to the joy and comfort of the Life to
come. This joy is set before us in the promises of the Gospel, Heb. 12. 2.
Christ for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, etc. and Heb. 6.
18. Who have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us, we see it
by Faith though not by sense.

II. Doctrine. That one of the diseases of mankind is, that we catch at
felicity without considering the way that leads to it.
Peter seeing and apprehending this estate to be an estate of Happiness, and
Glory, does not consider what he must first do, and first suffer, before he
could come to converse with Christ, and the glorified Saints. Our Savior had
lately told him that he must deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow
him, but Peter overlooketh all this; and says it is good to be here: he would
be glorified before he was abased, and had suffered all the afflictions
foretold, and would have his wages before he had done his work. Every one would
enjoy Christ's Glory and Happiness, but we do not like his yoke, are loath to
submit to his Cross. If we would enjoy happiness with Christ, and the glorified
Saints, we must be humbled with them, and suffer with them first. But we would
triumph before we had fought any battle, and receive the Crown before we have
run our Race, and reap in joy, before we have sowed in tears, or performed that
necessary work that God requires at our hands.

Now the Reasons of it are these.

1. Because by nature we love our own ease and contentment, Genesis 49. 15. He saw
that rest was good. We are loath to undergo the Cross, and desirous to enjoy
Happiness and Glory before and without Afflictions; but this is an untimely and
preposterous desire, proceeding from self-love. God has appointed another
order, that the Cross, should go before the Crown, Romans 8. 17. If so be that we
suffer with him that we may be glorified together.

2. From the Libertinism and yokelessness of our natures, and that Spirit of
unsubjection, which is so natural to us, Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind is enmity
against God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be,
Psalm 2. 3. Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from
us. Duties are more displeasing to the flesh, then Happiness, and we like
pardon and Life, more then we like strictness, purity, and that watching and
striving, and waiting, and exercising our selves unto Godliness, which the
Scripture calls for.

USE.
To press us to get this disease cured, and our Hearts reconciled to our duty,
as well as to our Happiness. These Considerations may be an help to you.

1. God is a Governor, as well as a Benefactor; and must be respected in both
Relations; and therefore we must not only desire and wait for his benefits, but
submit to his Government; his Government is seen in his Laws, and Providence.
In his Laws he appoints our Duty, in his Providence he appoints their Trials;
to refuse either, is to question his Sovereignty; Psalm. 12. 4. Who have said,
With our tongues will we prevail, our lips are our own, who is Lord over us.
Exodus 5. 2. And Pharaoh said, who is the Lord that I should obey his voice to
let Israel go, I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go; so also not
to submit to his Trials. Therefore now, if we love God as a Benefactor, we must
be subject to him as our true and proper Sovereign, who will bring us to Heaven
in what way he pleases.

2. The Terms and Means appointed conduce to mortify our Love to the false
Happiness; for one great part of Religion is to draw off our hearts from the
vain Pleasures and Honors of the World, the other part is to carry us on in
the pursuit of the true Happiness; a Recess from the World, and an Access to
God; Mortification and Vivification. We shall sit down with present things, if
we abandon our selves to our sensual Inclinations, Luke 16. 25. so that our
desires of the true happiness will be feeble, and easily controuled, if we
submit not to the means.

3. The care and due observance of the Means, shows the value and Respect to
the true Happiness. If we do not labor for it, and suffer for it, we do not
value it according to its worth. There is a simple, naked Estimation, and a
practical Esteem; Naked Approbation, Romans 2. 18. And know his will, and
approvest the things that are excellent, being instructed out of the Law. The
Practical Esteem, is a Self-denying Obedience, Romans 2. 7. To them who by
patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory, etc. Then they respect means,
and end together, and submit to the one, to obtain the other. If the wicked are
said to despise Eternal Happiness, it is not simply as Happiness, nor as
Eternal; for they that love themselves would be happy, and everlastingly happy,
but it is in conjunction with the Means, as the Israelites despised the
pleasant Land, and murmured in their Tents, Psalm. 106. 24. Yea they despised
the pleasant land, and they believed not his word, but murmured in their tents,
and hearkened not to the voice of the Lord. The Land was a good fertile Land,
but afar of; and because of Giants, and walled Towns, and so no thought worthy
the pains and difficultiest to be undergone. Heaven is a good place, but out of
Indulgence to the Ease of the Flesh, we dislike difficulties, and strictness of
holy walking.

4. The difficulty of Salvation lies not in a respect to the End, but the
Means; and therefore the Trial of our Sincerity must rather be looked for
there. There is some difficulty about the End, to convince men of an unseen
Felicity; but that may be done in part by Reason, but savingly and thoroughly by
the Spirit of Revelation, Ephesians. 1. 18. The eyes of your understandings being
enlightened that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the
riches of the glory of his Inheritance in the Saints. But man is sooner
convinced, than converted, than drawn off from worldly Vanities, that he may
seek after this happiness, and usually we have a quicker ear for offers of
Happiness, than Precepts of Duty and Obedience. Balaam, Numb. 23. 10. Oh that I
could die the death of the Righteous, and that my latter end were like his.
Ioh. 6. 34. Evermore give us this bread of life. But a true Christian, if by
any means I may attain to the Resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3. 11.

5. The Necessity of this Self-denying, Resignation of our selves to God to
bring us to Heaven in his own way is necessary. That we may begin with God;
Luke 14. 26. If any man come to me and hate not father and mother and wife and
children and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
disciple. And also that we may be true to him, and go on with him and be
fortified against all the difficulties we meet with in the way to Heaven, Heb.
11. 35. Others were tortured not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain
a better resurrection, that none of these things move us. Acts 20. 24. Mat. 20.
22. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized
with the baptism that I am baptized with?

6. There is such an inseparable connection between the End and Means, that God
will not give us the one, without the other: if we believe, mortify, wait,
suffer, then shall we reign with him, otherwise not.

Doct. III. Much evil would ensue, if we had our Desires in all those thing
that we think good for us.
Peter said, It is good for us to be here, but alas how ill would it have been
for the World if Christ had abode still in the Mount. Peter's instance shows
us two things.

1. That we are apt to consult with our own Profit, rather than Public Good.
The World needed him, he had great business to do in the Valley, but he would
be in the Mount. It is our Nature, if it be well with our selves, to forget
others. Peter little minded his Fellow Apostles, the Redemption of the World,
the Conversion of Nations, etc.

2. How much we are out when we judge by present sense, and the Judgment of
Flesh. We consult with the ease of the Flesh, and so desire Rest more than
Pains and labor; what pleases rather than what profits. Peter says, It is
good to be here, but he must labor first, suffer first, before he enters into
Glory.

Well then, Let us learn by what measure to determine Good or Evil.

1. Good is not to be determined by our Fancies and Conceits, but by the Wisdom
of God: for he knows what is better for us, then we do for our selves; and
the Divine Choices are to be preferred before our foolish Fancies; and what he
sends and permits to fall out, is better for us than any thing else. Could
we be persuaded of this, how would we be prepared for a cheerful Entertainment
of all that is or can, or shall come upon us. God is wiser than we, and loves
us better than we do our selves. The Child is not to be governed by his own
Fancy, but his Fathers Discretion, nor the sick Man by his own Appetite, but
the skill of the Physician. It is Expedient God should displease his People, for
their Advantage; Ioh. 16. 6, 7. Because I have said these things unto you,
sorrow has filled your heart. Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is
expedient to you that I go away. We are too much addicted to our own Conceits;
Christ's dealing is expedient and useful, when yet it is very unsatisfactory to
us. He is to be Judge of what is good for us, his going or tarrying, and not we
our selves: We are short-sighted Creatures, distempered with Passions; our
Requests many times are but Ravings, we ask of God we know not what, as the two
Brethren, Matthew. 20. 22. we pray our selves into a mischief and a snare, and it
were the greatest Misery if God would carve out our Condition according to our
own Fancies and Desires.

2. That Good is to be determined with respect to the chief Good, and true
Happiness. Now what is our chief happiness, but the Enjoyment of God. Our
happiness does not consist in outward Comforts, Riches, Health, Honor, Civil
Liberty; or comfortable Relations, as Husband, Wife, Children; but our Relation
to and Acceptance with God. Other things are but additional Appendages to our
Happiness: Matthew. 6. 33. (...), they shall be added to you. Therefore Poverty
is good, Afflictions are good; they take nothing from our essential, solid
happiness, rather help us in the enjoyment of it, as it increases Grace, and
Holiness, and so we enjoy God more. Surely, that is good that sets us nearer to
God, and that Evil that separateth us from him. Therefore sin is evil because
it makes an estrangement between us and God, Isai. 59. 2. Your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you.
But Affliction is good, because many times it makes us the more earnestly to
seek after him. Hos. 5. 16. In their affliction they will seek me early.

Therefore every Condition is good or evil, as it sets us further off or
draws us nearer to God; that is good that tends to make us better, more
like unto God, capable of Communion with him; and conduces to our everlasting
happiness. So it is good that man bear the yoke from his youth, that he be
trained up under the Cross, in a constant Obedience to God, and Subjection to
him, and so be fitted to entertain Communion with him. If Afflictions conduce
to this end they are good, for then they help us to enjoy the chief good.

3. That Good is not always the Good of the Flesh, or the Good of outward
Prosperity; and therefore certainly the Good of our Condition is not to be
determined by the Interest of the Flesh, but the welfare of our Souls. If God
should bestow upon us so much of the Good of the outward and animal Life as we
desire, we could not be said to be in a good Condition: if he should deny us
Good Spiritual, we should lose the one half of the Blessings of the Covenant by
doting upon, and falling in love with the rest. The Flesh is importunate to be
pleased, but God will not serve our carnal Appetites. We are more concerned as
a Soul than as a Body; Heb. 12. 10. He verily chastened us for our profit, that
we might be partakers of his Holiness. Certain it is, God will chasten us for
our profit: What do we call Profit? the good things of this World, the great
Mammon which so many Worship? If we call it so, God will not; he means to
impart some Spiritual and Divine Benefit, which is a Participation of his own
Holiness. And truly the People of God, if they be in their right Temper, value
themselves, not by their outward enjoyments, but by their inward Improvement of
Graces; 2 Cor. 4. 16. For this cause we faint not, but though our outward man
perish yet the inward man is renewed day by day. A discerning Christian puts
more value upon Holiness wrought by Affliction, then upon all his Comforts; so
that though Affliction be evil in it self, it is good as sanctified.

4. A particular Good must give way to a General Good, and our Personal Benefit
to the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, and the Glory of God. The Advancement of
Christ's Kingdom, or the good of the Church, must be preferred before our
Personal Benefit or Contentment. Paul could want the Glory of Heaven for a
while, if his continuance in the Flesh were needful for the Saints; Phil. 1.
24. To abide in the flesh is more needful for you. We must not so desire good
to our selves, as to hinder the good of others. All Elements will act contrary
to their particular nature, for the conservation of the Universe, so for the
Glory of God. That may be good for the Glory of God, which is not good for our
Personal Contentment and Ease. Now the Glory of God is our greatest Interest;
if it be for the Glory of God that I should be in pain, bereft of my Comfort,
my sanctified subjection to the Will of God must say it is good: Ioh. 12. 27,
28. Here you must have the innocent Inclination of Christ's Humane Nature;
Father save me from this hour; and the overruling sense of his Duty, or the
obligation of his office, but for this cause came I to this hour. We are often
tossed between Inclination of Nature, and Conscience of Duty; but in a gracious
heart, the sense of our Duty, and the desire of glorifying God, should prevail
above the desire of our own Comforts, Ease, Safety and Welfare. Nature would be
rid of Trouble, but Grace submits all our Interests to Gods Honor, which
should be dearer to us than any thing else.

5. This Good is not to be determined by the Judgment of sense, but by the
Judgment of Faith, not by present feeling, but future profit. That which is not
good may be a means to good. Affliction for the present, is not pleasant to
natural sense; nor for the present, is the fruit evident to spiritual sense;
but it is good, because in the issue it turns to good, Romans 8. 28. All things
work together for good to them that love God, etc. While God is striking, we
feel the Grief, and the Cross is tedious; but when we see the end, we
acknowledge it is good to be afflicted, Heb. 12. 11. No affliction for the
present seems joyous but grievous nevertheless afterward it yields the
peaceable fruits of righteousness to them that are exercised therein. A Good,
present, is the cause of Joy; and an Evil, present, is the cause of Sorrow: But
there are two termini diminuentes, terms of abatement, (...), and (...),
present sense, and the conceits of the sufferer. When we are but newly under
the affliction, we feel the smart, but do not presently find the benefit; but
within a while, especially in the review, it is good for me. It is matter of
Faith under the Affliction, it is matter of Sense afterward. Gods Physic must
have time to work. That which is not good, may be good; though it be not good
in its Nature, it may be good in its Use; and though for the present we see it
not, we shall see it. Therefore good is not to be determined by Feeling, but by
Faith. The Rod is a sore thing for the present, but the bitter Root will yield
sweet Fruit. If we come to a Person under the Cross, and ask him, What is it
good to feel the lashes of Gods correcting hand? to be kept poor, sickly,
exercised with losses and reproaches, to part with Friends and Relations, to
lose a beloved Child? he would be apt to Answer No. But this poor Creature
after he has been exercised, and mortified, and gotten some renewed Evidences
of Gods Favor; ask him then, Is it good to be afflicted? Oh yes, I had been
Vain, Neglectful of God, wanted such an Experience of the Lords Grace. Faith
should determine the case when we feel it not.

Well then, Let us learn to distinguish between what is really best for us, and
what we judge to be best. Other Diet is more wholesome for our Souls than that
which our sickly Appetite craveth. It is best many times when we are weakest,
worst when strongest, all things are good as they help on a blessed Eternity,
so sharp afflictions are good. That part of the World, that is governed by
sense will never yield to this. You cannot convince a Covetous Man that the
loss of an Estate is good, or a worldly rich man that Poverty is good; or an
Ambitious man, that it is good to be despised and contemned; or a sensual
Voluptuous Man, that it is good to be in Pains; that the Body be afflicted for
the good of the Soul, they will never believe you: But those that measure all
things by Eternity, they know that Poverty makes way for the true Riches; and
Ignominy for the true Glory; Want, for fullness of Pleasures; and Misery
mortifies Sin.

SERMON. V.
MATTHEW. 17. 5. While he yet spoke, behold, a bright Cloud overshadowed him: and
behold, a voice out of the Cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased; hear ye him.
IN this branch of the story two things are remarkable, and there is a Behold
prefixed before either of them, to excite our Attention. First they see a
bright Cloud, and then they hear a voice out of the Cloud.

First, Of the Cloud, and while he yet spoke, behold, a bright cloud
overshadowed them, it was not a dark cloud as upon Mount Sinai, when God gave
the Law, but a bright one, yet not so bright and lightsome, but that it was
mixed with some obscurity. It was no natural and ordinary cloud, such as are
commonly engendered in the air above us, but extraordinary, and supernatural,
created by God for this occasion. The use of it was double.

1. To convey Moses and Elias out of their sight, when this conference was
ended: therefore some expound that which is said, Luke 9. 34. They feared as
they entered into the Cloud after this manner, the Disciples feared when they
saw Moses and Elias entering into the Cloud, that is involved and covered in it.
It is said of Jesus Christ himself, when he ascended into Heaven, Acts 1. 9. A
cloud received him out of their sight.

2. To be a token of the extraordinary presence of God, whose voice immediately
came out of the cloud, as also to vail the glory thereof, which was best done
by a Cloud, a thing of a middle nature between terrestrial and Celestial
bodies. When Solomon builded the Temple the Lord showed his special presence,
thereby filling the House with a Cloud, 1 Kings 8. 10. This way of Apparition
God uses to moderate the splendour of his excellent Glory. We are not able to
behold God as he is, and must not pry into his Glory, there is a Cloud and vail
upon it.

Secondly, They heard a Voice, and behold a voice out of the Cloud which said,
this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him.

1. Observe, That there was a voice distinctly, and audibly, heard. Though God
did sensibly now manifest his presence in the Mount with Christ, and did
audibly speak to them, yet he did not appear in any distinct form, and shape
either of man, or any other living Creature, but all was done by a voice out of
the cloud, so Deuteronomy. 4. 12. Ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no
similitude, and verse 15. take good heed to your selves, for ye saw no
similitude in the day that the Lord spoke to you in Horeb, least ye corrupt
your selves, and make to you any graven Image. The similitude of any figure,
etc. The voice of God, may with less danger come to us then any sight or
representation of him.

2. The matter or what this voice said, This is my beloved Son, hear ye him. By
this voice there is.

1. A Testimony given to Christ. 2. A command to hear him. Or (1.) The dignity
of Christ, he is the beloved Son of God, in whom he is well pleased. (2.) A
suitable respect bespoken for him.
The words are few, but yet contain the sum of the whole Gospel, and they are
spoken not by a Man, nor by an Angel, but by the Lord himself, and therefore
they should be entertained with the more reverence. The Apostle Peter who was
one of the parties present, could never forget this Testimony of the Father,
concerning his Son Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 17. He received from the Father
Honor and Glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent Glory.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; and besides what Christ
speaks of another voice from Heaven, is true of this, John 12. 30. This voice
came not because of me, but for your sakes; not so much to encourage him in his
suffering as to our edification and instruction. All the testimonies given unto
Christ from Heaven tended to point him out to sinners, as the true Messiah,
approved and accepted of God; therefore these words should ever be in our
minds, especially when we draw nigh to God in solemn duties.

I shall begin with the Dignity, Honor, and Glory of Christ solemnly declared
from Heaven; there are three things in it.

1. The Relation between him and the Father, He is a Son. 2. The dearness of
that Relation, His beloved Son. 3. The complacential satisfaction which he
takes in him, and the price of our Redemption paid by him, in whom I am well
pleased.
Doctrine, That it is the main and principal point of the Gospel, and of great
necessity to be known and believed to Salvation, that Jesus Christ is the
Beloved Son of God, in whom he is well pleased.
1. I shall open this Testimony given to Christ. 2. Speak of the importance and
weight of it.
I. Of the Testimony given to Christ.

1. Let me open the term that expresses his Filiation, that he is Gods Son.
Christ is the son of God properly so called, a Son only begotten, John 3. 16.
God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son. Eternally begotten
Prove. 8. 22, 23. I was set up from everlasting, the Lord possessed me in the
beginning of his way before his works of old. A Son coequal with his Father,
John 5. 18. The Jews sought to kill him because he said, God was his Father,
making himself equal with God, (...), his own proper Father. So co-essential,
of the same substance with his Father, John 1. 1. In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. Now thus is he the Son
of God.

Why is it mentioned there.

1. To show the special dignity of Christ above all others: he is the Son of
God, Christians are the Sons of God, but in a different manner, he by nature,
we by Adoption. Tho God have many sonsby Creation and Adoption, yet Christ is
his Son in a peculiar and proper way; by eternal Generation, and communication
of the same Essence, (...) that Son, that beloved Son, so a Son as none else is
the son of God, properly so called.

2. To distinguish him from Moses and the Prophets, from Moses Heb. 3. 5, 6.
Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a servant, but Christ as a son
over his own house, whose house we are, etc. so from the rest of the Prophets,
Heb. 1. 1, 2. God at sundry times and in diverse manners spoke in times past
unto the fathers by the Prophets, but has in these last days spoken to us by
his Son, whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the
World. This is the great Doctor of the Church, now as to meekness above Moses,
as to zeal above Elias, as to familiarity and communion, he was with God, and
was God.

3. To show the old Prophesies were fulfilled, which foretold the union of the
two Natures in his Person, the predictions concerning one whose name should be
Immanuel, God with us, and who should save and redeem the Church, Isa. 7. 14.
And of a child that should be the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, Isa. 9.
6. This the Prophets foretold that he should be God, and the Son of God, Micah
5. 2. His going forth is from Everlasting, though born at Bethlehem; so the bud
of the Lord, and the fruit of the Earth, Isa. 4. 2. The man Gods fellow, Zech.
13. 7. and in many other places the union of the two Natures is asserted.

2. He is the beloved Son.

1. That God loved Christ, Christ is the object of his Fathers Love, both as
the second Person and as Mediator. As the second Person of the Trinity, two
things are wont to attract love, nearness, and likeness; they are both here,
nearness, he was in the bosom of the Father, John 1. 18. The only begotten
Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. Likeness is
another loadstone of Affliction, Heb. 1. 3. He is the brightness of his Glory,
and the express Image of his Person, such as the Father is so is Christ.

2. As Mediator, so God loves him on the account of his obedience, John 10.
17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life for the Sheep,
John 3. 35. The Father has loved him and put all things into his hand, the
Father approved Christ's undertaking for sinners, delighted in it as an
excellent way of glorifying his name, and recovering poor creatures out of
their lost condition: and rested satisfied, and was pleased with his death, as
a sufficient ransom for poor souls. Well then God loved him so as to trust the
souls of all mankind in his hands, and to appoint him to be the great Mediator,
to end all differences between him and us, and the more he does in pursuance of
his Office, the more beloved he is and acceptable to God.

2. The testimony of his love to him as Mediator; for his unspeakable rejoicing
in him, as second person in the Trinity, we are not competent judges of. It is
described Prove. 8. 30. I was daily his delight rejoicing always before him.
The mutual complacency which the divine persons take in one another is there
set forth; God delighted in Christ, and Christ in God. But in the second love
as Mediator, God expressed his love to him in two things; the gift of the
Spirit, and the Glory of his humane nature.

1. The gift of the Spirit, John 6. 34. God gives not the Spirit in measure to
him, for the Father loves the Son, and has put all things into his hands.
This was the great expression of his love to Christ as Mediator, not to make
him a visible Monarch of the World, but by the gift of his Spirit to be head of
the Church.

2. The other expression of his love to him as Mediator, was the gift of
Everlasting Glory, John 17. 24. Father I will that those whom thou have given
me, should be where I am, and behold my glory, for thou have loved me before
the foundation of the World. Gods love to Christ as Mediator, was manifested in
exalting him to glory, and this Everlasting. These are the great expresses of
Gods love to Christ, as God incarnate or appearing in our nature.

3. Why is it put here.

1. To show the end for which Christ came to represent the amiableness of God,
that he is Love, 1 John 4. 8. and has love for his children. Christ is the
pattern of all, for he is first beloved, and the great instance and
demonstration of Gods love to the World.

2. To intimate the redundancy of this Love, it over-floweth to us, for Christ
being beloved we are beloved also, Ephesians. 1. 6. he has made us accepted in the
beloved, to the praise of his glorious Grace. It is an overflowing Love, he is
loved and all that have an interest in him are loved. There is a twofold love
in God, the love of Benevolence and complacency; The Elect from all Eternity
are loved by God with a love of Benevolence, whereby he willed good unto them,
and decrees to bestow good upon them: but the love of complacency and delight,
is that love whereby God accepts us, delights in us, when he has made us
lovely as his own children, reconciled them by the death of Christ, renewed
them by the Spirit of Christ, and furnished them with all the Graces which make
us acceptable to him, and precious in his sight.

3. To show the kind and manner of the expressing of his love, to his redeemed
ones. Christ prayed John 17. 23. That the World may know that thou have loved
them as thou have loved me, and ver. 26. That the love wherewith thou have
loved me may be in them, that is by the gift of the Spirit and Everlasting
Glory. Though Christ was the beloved Son, yet his state was but mean, and
despicable in the world; he was afflicted, a man of sorrows, pursued to the
Death, even a shameful, painful, accursed Death; yet all this while he was full
of the Holy Ghost, of his Graces, Comforts, and afterward received to Glory,
and so will he love us. At this rate and Tenor, his love binds him not to
give us worldly greatness, but if we have the Spirit, and may be welcomed to
Heaven at the last, we have that which is the true discovery of Gods Love. So
he manifested his Love to the only begotten Son, and therefore the adopted
children should be contented with this Love, if by the Spirit they may be
enabled to continue with Patience in well-doing, till they receive Eternal
Glory and Happiness.

3. The next thing is (...), in whom I am well pleased. This is to be
interpreted of Christ as Mediator, or God Incarnate; for this was twice spoken
at Christ's Baptism, Mar. 3. 17. and now at his Transfiguration, both imply his
Mediatorship. For his Baptism had the notion of a Dedication, he did then
present himself to God as a Mediator for us, to be the Servant of his Decree,
as we in Baptism dedicate our selves, to fulfill the Precepts which belong to
us, and as we are concerned to promote his Glory in the World, Christ presented
himself as a Mediator, that is as a Prophet to acquaint us with the way of
Salvation, as a Priest to pay a perfect Ransom for us, as a King to give us all
things, and defend and maintain all those who submit to his Government, till
their Glory be perfected, and they attain unto their final Estate of Bliss and
Happiness. Now then God from Heaven declared himself well pleased; and now
again, when Christ had made some Progress in the Work, confirms it for the
assurance of the World.

This then must be Interpreted, 1. As to Christ. 2. As to those who have
benefit by him, and interest in him.


1. As to Christ. He was well-pleased: Partly, as to the Design; the Reparation
of Lost Mankind: Partly, as to the Terms by which it should be brought about:
Partly, as to the Execution and Management of it by Christ.

1. As to the Design. God was wellpleased, that lapsed Mankind should be
restored, at the first God was pleased with his Creation, Exodus 31. 17. on the
seventh day he rested, and was refreshed, that is recreated in the View of his
Works, as the effects of his Wisdom, Power and Goodness. And Psalm. 104. 31. The
Lord shall rejoice in his works. The Lord saw all to be good, in the beginning
and working not to be repented of: This was Gods Rest and Sabbath, to take
delight in his Works. When he looked on it altogether, behold it was exceeding
good; but afterward Man, the ungrateful part of the Creation, though the
Masterpiece of it, in this visible and lower world, fell from God his Creator,
and preferred the Creature before him, to his Loss and Ruin; then God was so
far displeased, that he had Reason to wish the destruction of Mankind; it is
said Genesis 6. 6. That it repented God that he had made man. That is, he was
displeased with us, estranged from us; no more contented with us, than a man is
in what he repents of: For properly God cannot repent, but this is an
Expression to show how odious we were grown to him, Psalm. 14. 2, 3. The Lord
looked down from heaven upon the children of men to see if there were any that
did understand and did seek after God. They are all gone aside, they are
altogether become filthy, there is none that does good no not one. Alas there
is a lamentable appearance of Mankind to Gods sight, now nothing good to be
found in them; an universal Defection, both in Piety and Humanity. But then
Christ undertook the Reparation of Mankind, and the Design was pleasing to God,
that he might not lose the glory of his Creation, and all flesh be utterly
destroyed, Col. 1. 19, 20. It pleased the father that in him should all fullness
dwell, and having made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to
reconcile all things to himself. The restoring of fallen Man to Friendship with
God, and all things tending to it, were highly pleasing to God, namely, that
Jesus Christ, the second Person in the Trinity should become a Mediator, for
that end he had a great Affection and liking to this thing. (...), it is the
same word used here, the thing is highly pleasing to God, that the Breach
should be made up; that man who had lost the Image, Favor and Fellowship with
God should be again restored, by renewing his Heart, reconciling his Person,
and admitting him again into Communion with God, who was was so justly provoked
by him. God stood in no need of our Friendship, nor could any loss come to him
by our Hatred and Enmity; only it pleased the Father to take this way, Isa.
53. 10. For it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief, when
thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall
prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands.

2. He is pleased with the Terms. God who is the Supreme Governor of the
world, and the offended Party, stood upon these Terms, that the Honor of his
governing Justice should be secured, and the Repentance and Reformation of man
carried on. Strictly these must be done, or else man must lie under his Eternal
Displeasure; if one be done and not the other, no Reconciliation can ensue. Now
that God is highly pleased with the satisfaction and compensation made to his
governing Justice, Heb. 10. 6, 7. In burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin
thou have no pleasure. Then said I, lo I come to do thy will O God. Ver. 10. By
the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Christ
once for all. God rejected all other sacrifices, but was fully satisfied with
this, as enough to expiate the sin of Man. Christ delighted to give it, and God
delighted to accept of it. He paid a perfect ransom for us, besides or above
which he craved no more, but rested fully content in it; for the other, the
Renovation of Man's Nature, to put him into a capacity to serve and please God,
for God would not admit us to Privileges without change of heart, and
disposition, Acts 5. 31. God exalted him to be a prince and savior, to give
repentance and remission of sins. In short God is so satisfied with these
Terms, that (1.) He seeks no farther amends for all their wrongs, Romans 3. 25.
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood to
declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past. (2.) No
farther price for what they need, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Ye are not redeemed with
corruptible things as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ,
as of a lamb without spot and blemish. The repentance of a sinner is pleasing
to him, there is Joy in Heaven; Luke 15. 7. Joy in the presence of the angels
over one sinner that is converted. A Feast was made at the return of the
Prodigal. As I live says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of a
sinner. Our Conversion is more pleasing to God, than our Destruction.

3. He is pleased with the Execution and Management of it by Christ, he carried
himself in the office of the Mediator, according to what was enjoined him, Ioh.
8. 29. I do always the things that please him. Ioh. 5. 30. I can of my self do
nothing, as I hear I judge, and my Judgment is just because I seek not my will,
but the will of the father which sent me. And did finish all that was necessary
for the Redemption of the Elect before he died, Ioh. 19. 30. When Jesus had
received the vinegar, he said, It is finished; and he bowed his head and gave
up the ghost. Evidences of this are his Resurrection from the dead, Act. 5. 30,
31. The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree,
him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give
repentance to Israel, and remission of sins. Heb. 13. 20. The God of peace
brought again the Lord Jesus from the dead, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant. As pacified in Christ, received into glory, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Certainly God is well pleased since he has given not only a Discharge, but a
Reward. The gift of the Spirit, for renewing the heart of man, which is the
great pledge of Gods being satisfied; Ioh. 7. 39. This he spoke of the spirit,
which they that believe on him should receive, for the Holy Ghost was not yet
given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified; a sure evidence that our
ransom is paid, Acts 5. 32. And we are his witnesses of these things, and so is
the holy Ghost, which he has given to them that obey him. A Sacrifice of
infinite value and esteem.

2. That he is well-pleased with us, who have an Interest in him. In our
natural Estate we are all displeasing unto God, whatever we are in the purpose
of his decree, we must look upon our selves as we are in the Sentence of his
Law, so children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. Enemies by our minds in evil works, Col.
1. 21. Estranged from the womb, Psalm. 58. 3. so that all of us, were cut off
from the Favor of God, obnoxious to his wrath, this is our miserable Condition
by Nature, that we were no way pleasing to him, for without faith it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. A sinner as a sinner can do nothing
acceptable; indeed God having found a Ransom, is placabilis, but not placatus,
not actually reconciled to us, till we are in Christ, and he is placandus
antequam placendus; to be appeased, before he can be pleased; he is not
actually reconciled, till we are in Christ.

2. Awakened sinners are not easily satisfied, so as to look upon themselves as
pleasing unto God: for the Conscience of Sin is not easily laid aside, nor is
the stain soon got out. And though the grant be passed in Heaven, yet we have
not the sense of it in our own hearts, for it is the Blood of Christ can only
do it. Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ who through the
eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God purge your Conscience from
dead works to serve the living God. The Carnal offer thousands of Rams, and
Rivers of Oil, and the fruit of the body for the sin of their soul, Mic. 6. 6,
7. They would give any thing for a sufficient sin-offering; yea the renewed and
pardoned, have not so firm a peace as to be able always to look upon themselves
in a state of well-pleasing, therefore often beg that God would dissipate the
Clouds and cause the Light of his Countenance to break forth upon them, Psalm.
80. 19. Turn us Oh Lord God of Hosts, cause thy face to shine and we shall be
saved. So that when there is a grant of Pardon and Peace and Access to God, we
have not always the sense.

3. Yet the Ground is laid as soon as we have an Interest in Christ, God is well
pleased with us; if you consent to his Mediation, and take him in his three
Offices, as a Prophet, Priest, and King. As a Prophet, hear him; the business
is put out of all Question, that God will love you because he loved Christ.
When you depend on him as a Priest, you have Reconciliation and Access to God;
Romans 5. 1, 2. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access by faith into the
grace wherein we stand. When you subject your selves to him as a King, Col. 1.
13. He has translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son. Christ is dear to
God, and to him all the Subjects of his Kingdom are dear also. So that if you
will be more explicit in your Duty, you may be more explicit in your
Comforts; if you will receive his Doctrine, so as it may have Authority over
your Hearts; if in the Anguish of your Souls, you will depend on the Merit of
his Sacrifice, and give up your selves to live in a constant Obedience to his
Laws. You will find him to be a dear Son indeed, one very acceptable with God,
for you also will be accepted with him, for his sake.

II. Concerning the weight and importance of this Truth.

1. It is propounded as the Foundation upon which God will build his Church;
Mat. 16. 16, 17, 18. And Simon Peter answered and said, thou art Christ the Son
of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon
Barjona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my father
which is in heaven. And I say unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock will I build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

2. It is the question put, to those that would enter upon Christianity, Acts
8. 37. If thou believe with all thy heart thou may: and he answered and
said, I believe that Jesus is the son of God. When they were serious in the
Profession, that was enough, 1 Ioh. 5. 1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the
Christ, is born of God.

3. This engaged the hearts of the Disciples to tarry with him, when others
murmured at his Doctrine. He that cleaves to this Profession, carries himself
accordingly, whatever Temptations he has to the contrary, we believe and are
sure that thou art that Christ the Son of the living God.

4. For this End the Scriptures were written, These things are written that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Christ the son of God, and that believing ye
might have life through his name. Ioh. 20. 31. By obedience to his Laws,
dependence on his Promises.

5. This is the ground of Submission to Christ in all his Offices, why we
should hear him as a Prophet in this place, (which I shall more fully make
manifest in the next Sermon) why we should depend on him as a Priest, for the
virtue of his Oblation and Intercession; if God spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things, Romans 8. 32. 1 Ioh. 4. 10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but he
loved us, and sent his son to be the propitiation for our sins. 1 Ioh. 2. 1. If
any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous.
The blood of Christ is of high Esteem and infinite Value, both as to Merit and
satisfaction, to purchase all manner of blessings for us, and to satisfy Gods
provoked Justice for our sins. And if the Father be so well-pleased with him,
what can he not obtain at his hands; which is an encouragement in our Prayers
and Supplications. So for our Improvement of his Kingly Office, which respects
Duties and Privileges; our duty with respect to the Kingly Office, is
Subjection; Psalm. 2. 12. Kiss the Son left he be angry, and you perish in the
midway. Because Christ Jesus is the Son of God, he should be submitted unto
and embraced with the heartiest Love, and Subjection; for to Kiss, is a sign of
Religious Adoration; Hos. 13. 2. as they kissed the Calves, and offer Homage
and hearty subjection; as Samuel kissed Saul, because God had anointed him to
be King over his People; 1 Samuel 10. 1. So for Privileges; he is God coequal,
co eternal with his Father, able to protect all those that apply themselves to
him, till he bring them to Eternal Glory and Happiness; and therefore it is
said, 1 Ioh. 5. 5. Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes
that Jesus is the Son of God. That is the fortifying Truth; this both
cautioneth us against all the delights and snares, and supports us against all
the terrors and fears of the World. If we have the Son of God for our Prophet,
Priest and King, we ought to carry our selves with greater Reverence, Trust and
Subjection.

USES.
1. Believe it, lay up this Truth in your Hearts by a firm and sound* Belief.
There are in Faith three things, Assent, Acceptance, Dependence. The Matter in
hand calls for all these.

1. A firm Assent. For here we have the Testimony of God concerning his Son;
the Apostle tells us, that he that believes not has made God a liar, because
he believes not the Testimony of God concerning his Son, 1 Ioh. 5. 10. The
great Testimony is this, that we have in hand that Jesus is his beloved Son
with whom he is well pleased, that he will give Pardon and Life to all that
hearken to him, embrace his Person, receive his Doctrine, believe his Promises,
fear his Threats, obey his Precepts, the strictest of them. Oh labor to work
it into your Hearts, that indeed it is so. In matters of Fact, we receive the
Testimony of men, two or three credible men; why not in matters of Faith, the
Testimony of God, evidenced to us by this solemn action, an account of which we
have from Earwitnesses, and Eyewitnesses, who were men that hazarded their all
for the delivery of this Truth, and yet referred us to the surer word of
Prophecy, 1 Pet. 1. 19. He was owned as a Son, Psalm. 2. 7. Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee. As a beloved Son, in whom God is well-pleased,
Isa. 42. 1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, my elect in whom my soul
delights. If you be not wanting to your selves, you may have this witness in
your hearts, 1 Ioh. 5. 10. He that believes on the son of God, has the
witness in himself. Oh let us not give the flat lie to God. Rouse up this
languid Faith; is this true, or is it a cunning devised Fable.

2. Faith is an Acceptance of Christ, or an entering into a Covenant with God by
him. You must have the Son, 1 Ioh. 5. 12. He that has the Son, has life. Ioh.
1. 12. As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of
God, even to them which believe on his name. Receiving, respects Gods offer.
God gives Christ, and we receive what God gives; to what End? why he gives
him as King, Priest and Prophet, to dwell in our hearts by Faith; to rule us
and guide us by his Word and Spirit; and maintain Gods Interest in us against
the Devil, the World and the Flesh, till we come to everlasting Glory.

3. Dependence: He is able to save to the uttermost, all that come to God by
him, therefore on him alone should we depend for all things necessary to
Salvation. Two things persuade this dependence.

(1.) That nothing can be done without Christ, Acts 4. 12. Neither is there
salvation in any other, for there is none other name under heaven given among
men whereby we must be saved. Nothing can be done without Christ, that may be
effectual to our recovery, either for the paying of our Ransom, or for the
changing of our Hearts. Alas, what could we do to please God, or profit our own
Souls? The work would cease for ever if it should lie upon our hands.

(2.) That he can do what he pleases for the good of his redeemed ones; Ioh.
17. 2. As thou have given power over all flesh that he should give eternal
life, to as many as thou have given him. All that Christ did for our salvation,
did highly content and please the Father; he is satisfied with him, he can make
us lovely in his sight; Ephesians. 1. 6. To the praise of the glory of his grace,
wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved. And will now joy in his
People, Isa. 65. 19. and rest in his Love, Zeph. 3. 17. Well then, let us
believe; Faith is a ratifying Gods Testimony concerning his Son; we believe
what God has said, that Christ is his Son, we receive him as he is freely
offered, and subscribe to this declaration. The Father says from Heaven, This
is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him; so penitent Believers
must answer back again, This is our beloved Redeemer, in whom we are
well-pleased, let the Father hear him. He has somewhat to say to the Father as
well as to us; his Doctrine concerns us, but his Intercession is made to God.

II. Entertain it with Thankfulness, that such a Remedy should be provided for
us argues the unspeakable Love of God; 1 Ioh. 4. 9. In this was manifested the
love of God to us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world,
that we might live by him. That God should bestow his Son upon us to procure
our salvation. God tried Abraham's love in sacrificing his son, but manifested
his Love to us, in sending his own Son; he spared him not, but delivered him up
for us all. Now that such a Remedy and Ransom, is found out for us it should
leave an Impression of Gods love on our Hearts, that we may love him again, who
first loved us, 1 Ioh. 4. 19. Think nothing too dear for God, who thought no
rate too dear to purchase our Life and Peace. As our salvation was precious to
him, let his Glory be dear to us; only let me tell you, this Love must not be
confined to a bare act of our Reason, but you must pray to God to shed abroad
this love in your hearts by the Holy Spirit, Romans 5. 5. that so you may study
to love and please God, prize Christ and his precious Benefits above all things
in the World, and live to him who died for you, that you may feel the
constraining Efficacy and Force of Love.

SERMON. VI.
MATTHEW. 17. 5. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well-pleased, Hear ye him.
1. THe Design and Intent of this Scripture is to set forth the Lord Jesus, as
the great Mediator, as appears.

1. From the occasions upon which this Voice came from Heaven; at his Baptism,
which was Christ's dedication of himself to the work of a Redeemer and Savior,
and now at his Transfiguration, to distinguish him from Moses and the other
Prophets, and publicly to instal him in the Mediatory Office.

2. The matter of the words show his fitness for this Office, for here you have.

1. His Dignity; not a servant, but a Son, Heb. 3. 5, 6. Moses verily was
faithful in all his house as a servant, but Christ as a son over his own house.
Now the old Prophesies foretold the Union of the two Natures in his Person, and
necessary it was that our Mediator should be God-Man. There is a Congruity
between his Person and Office; one fit to be familiar with Man, and naturally
interessed in his Concerns, and yet so high and near the Father, as may put a
sufficient value upon his Actions, and so meet to Mediate with God for us.

2. The Dearness between God and him, my beloved son; Christ is the Object of
his Fathers love, both as the second Person in the Trinity and Mediator. The
one is the ground of the other, for because he loved him, he entrusted him with
souls, Ioh. 3. 35. The father has loved him, and put all things into his
hands; the Elect and all things else; all power that conduces to their
salvation. Afterward loved him as Mediator; Ioh. 10. 17. Therefore does my
Father love me, because I lay down my life that I might take it again. Now such
a beloved Son is fittest to Mediate for us, and to come upon a design of Love
to demonstrate Gods great Love to wretched sinners, and to be a pledge of that
love which God will bestow upon us who are altogether so unworthy of it.

3. His Acceptableness to God, who is well-pleased with the Design, the Terms,
the Management of it.

II. This work of Mediator Christ executes by three Offices of King, Priest,
Prophet. For he is Head and Lord of the renewed state; a Priest, to offer a
sacrifice for sin, which having once offered, he for ever represents in Heaven;
he was also to be Teacher of Mankind to acquaint us with the way of salvation.
These Offices are often alluded unto in Scripture, Rev. 1. 5. The faithful
witness, the first begotten from the dead, the prince of the kings of the
earth. So Heb. 1. 2, 3. God has spoken to us by his son, he having by himself
purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high. The effect
of them is more briefly described, Ioh. 4. 6. I am the way the truth and the
life. The way was opened by his Passion, and is kept open by his Intercession.
Truth as a Prophet. Life we have from him, as Prince of Life, or Head of the
renewed Estate. So the effects, 1 Cor. 1. 30. But of him are ye in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, sanctification and
redemption. Wisdom as a Prophet to cure our Ignorance and Folly; Righteousness
and Sanctification as a Priest; Redemption, as the King and Captain of our
Salvation. The same Benefits which he purchases as a King, he bestows as a
Priest, reveals as a Prophet. These three Offices were typed out by the
Firstborn, who were Heads of Families, and also Prophets, and Priests.

3. That though all the three Offices be employed, yet the Prophetical Office
is more explicitly mentioned, partly as suiting with the present occasion,
which is to demonstrate that Christ has sufficient authority to repeal the Law
of Moses which the Prophets were to explain, confirm and maintain till his
coming. But now Moses and Elias appear in Person to certify their consent, and
God his Approbation, from Heaven, to that new Law of Grace which Christ should
set up. Partly because it is not necessary that in every place all the Offices
should be mentioned, sometimes but one; as where Christ is called either King,
Priest or Prophet; sometimes two, together, Heb. 3. 1. Prophetical, Sacerdotal;
Consider the apostle and high priest of our profession Christ Jesus; sometimes
his Prophetical and Kingly, Isa. 55. 4. Behold I have given him for a witness
to the people, and for a leader and commander to the people. Partly because if
Christ be received in this one Office, he will be received in all the rest; for
as a Prophet he has revealed that Doctrine which establishes his Kingly and
Priestly Office; for he has revealed all things necessary to salvation, and
therefore his own sacrifice and Regal Power. Lastly some think all expressly
mentioned here; thus Christ is Gods beloved Son, and therefore the Heir of all
things, and Lord and King, in whom he is well pleased; that is, pacified and
satisfied with his offering as a Priest, or appeased by his complete sacrifice.
Hear him as the great Prophet and Doctor of the Church.

This premised, I come now to observe.

Doct. That Christ is appointed by God the Father to be the great Prophet and
Teacher, whose voice alone must be heard in the Church.
I. That Christ is the great Prophet and Teacher of the Church appears.

1. By the Titles given to him, he is compared with Moses, the great Lawgiver
among the Jews, The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the
midst of you like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. He was to
be like a Moses, but greater than Moses; a Lawgiver as he, a man as he, one
that saw God Face to Face as he, a Mediator as he, but far other in all
respects; a better Law, a more glorious Person, a more blessed Mediator,
working greater miracles than ever did Moses, so he is called our Rabbi or
Master; Mar. 23. 8. One is your master even Christ, and ye are brethren. The
supreme Authority, the original hight is in Christ: We are not Leaders and
Teachers, but Fellow Disciples; so Heb. 3. 1. Consider the Apostle and high
priest of our profession, Jesus Christ. Again, he is called the Angel or
Messenger of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. Christ with a great condescension took
upon him the office of his Fathers Ambassador to the Church, to promote the
Covenant of Reconciliation, between God and Man, and make offers of it in
preaching the Gospel, and he it is that does by this Spirit persuade the Elect,
and does make his Covenant sure to them. Once more; he is called Amen, the
faithful and true witness, Rev. 3. 14. there can be no prejudice against his
Testimony; he can never deceive, nor be deceived; it is so, it will be so, as
he has said, Amen is his Name.

2. By the Properties of his Office; he has 3 things to qualify him for this
high Office.

1. Absolute supreme Authority; and therefore we must hear him and hearken to
him. This is usually made the ground and reason of the Gospel invitation, to
invite sinners to submit themselves to seek after God in this way. As Matthew.
11. 27, 28. All things are delivered unto me of my father, and no man knows
the son but the father, neither knows any man the father save the son, and he
to whomsoever the son will reveal him. Come unto me all ye that are weary and
heavy laden, etc. There is no true knowing of God but by Christ, and the Gospel
Revelation which he has established; therefore here must we seek rest for our
souls. So Ioh. 3. 35, 36. The father loves the son, and has put all things
into his hands. He that believes on the son has everlasting life, and he that
believes not the son has not seen life, but the wrath of God abides on him.
First his Mediatorial Authority is acknowledged, and then Faith and Obedience
to the Gospel is called for; for to the sentence of the Son of God we must
stand or fall. So when Christ instituted and sent abroad his Messengers, to
invite the World to the Obedience of the Gospel, Matthew. 28. 18, 19, 20. All
power is given to me both in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you. He has absolute and supreme Authority to gather his Church, to appoint
Ministers and Ordinances, to bestow the Spirit, to open and close Heaven and
Hell as he pleases, to dispose of all affairs in the World for the furtherance
of the Gospel, and to enjoin the whole World obedience to his Commands, and to
embrace this Doctrine,

2. All manner of sufficiency and power of God to execute this Office; Ioh. 3.
34. For he whom God has sent, speaks the words of God, for God gives not
the spirit by measure to him. The former Prophets had the Spirit in a limited
measure, bestowed on them by God, for such particular purposes as best pleased
him. Therefore all their prophesies begin, Thus says the Lord, as having for
every particular Message and Errand new Revelation; but on Christ the Spirit
descended once for all, and commanded the belief of all and obedience to all
that he should say. Therefore it is said, Col. 2. 3. In him are all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. He is Ignorant of none of those things which
are to be known and practiced in order to our eternal salvation; they are
deposited with him to be dispensed to us.

3. There is in him a powerful efficacy. As he has absolute Authority to teach
in his own name, and fullness of sufficiency to make known the Mind of God to
us; so he has power to make his Doctrine Effectual. As when he dealt with his
Disciples, after he had opened the Scriptures, he opened their Understandings,
Luke 24. 25. so he opened the heart of Lydia, Acts 16. 14. He can teach so as
to draw, Ioh. 6. 44, 45. He can excite the drowsy Mind, change and turn the
Rebellious Will, cure the distempered Affections, make us to be what he
persuades us to be. There is no such Teacher as Christ, who does not only give
us our Lesson, but an heart to Learn; therefore to him we must submit, hear
nothing against him, but all from him.

II. About Hearing him; that must be explained also.

First, What it is to Hear. It being our great duty, and the respect bespoken
for him In the hearing of words there are 3 things considerable; the sound that
comes to the Ear, the understanding of the Sense and Meaning, and the assent
or consent of the Mind. Of the first, the Beasts are capable, for they have
Ears to hear the sound of words uttered. The second is common to all Men, for
they can sense such intelligible words as they hear. The third belongs to
Disciples, who are swayed by their Masters Authority. So that, Hear him, is not
to hear as Beasts, nor barely to hear as Men, but to hear as Disciples; to
believe him, to obey him; to believe his Doctrines and Promises, and to obey
his Precepts. For his Authority is absolute, and what he does say, does warrant
our Faith, and command our practice and obedience. I gather this partly from
the word Hear, which not only signifies Attention and Belief, but Obedience, as
1 Samuel 15. 22. To obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat of
rams. Where to obey and hearken, are put as words of the same import and
signification. Partly from the Matter of Christ's Revelation; he has revealed
not only Doctrines to inform the Mind, but Precepts to reform the Heart and
Practice. If we assent to the doctrine, but do not obey the precepts, we do not
hear him. Therefore to hear him is to yield obedience to what he shall teach
you; and when Christ comes to take an account of the entertainment of the
Gospel, he shall come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not
God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Partly too from the
intimate connection there is between his Prophetical and Regal Office. Christ is
so a Prophet, that he is also a Sovereign; and does not only give us Counsel
and Direction, but a Law, which we are to observe under the highest penalties.
If the Gospel were an arbitrary direction, which we might observe or not
observe, without any great danger to our selves, surely it were folly to
despise good Counsel; but it has the force of a new Law from the great King
and Lawgiver of the World, therefore it must not only be believed but obeyed;
Heb. 5. 8. He that is the chief prophet of the church, is also the king of
saints. Partly also from the near connection that is between Faith and
Obedience. The Matter which we believe is of a practical concernment, and does
not require only a simple Faith, or bare belief, which were enough in points
merely speculative; but a ready Obedience. It is said Romans 16. 26. The
mysteries of the gospel are made manifest to all nations for the obedience of
faith. They are not matters of speculation and talk, but practice; and
Blessedness is pronounced on such as hear them and keep them; Luke 11. 28.
Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. Many hear and talk,
hear and stuff their Minds with Notions, but they do not frame themselves to
the practice of what they hear. Many question not Christ's Authority, but yet
they do not regard his Doctrine. Now Faith does not only silence our doubts,
but quicken our Affections, and enliven our Practice.

Secondly, How can we now hear Christ, since he is removed into the Heaven of
Heavens, and does not speak to us in Person.

Answ. Surely it does not only concern the Believers of that Age, who
conversed with Christ in the days of his Flesh; but it is the general duty of
all Christians to hear Christ; for during the whole Gospel dispensation, God
speaks to us by his Son. Heb. 1. 2. The Revelation is settled, and not
delivered by parcels, as it was to the ordinary prophets. Now we hear Christ in
the Scriptures, Heb. 2. 3, 4. How shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation? Which was first spoken by the Lord and afterward confirmed to us by
them that heard him. He began to speak and to declare the Gospel both before
and after his Resurrection; and they that heard him were especially the
Apostles, who being endued by the Holy Ghost declared it first to the Jews,
and then to the Gentiles to whom it was continued by diverse signs and wonders,
as to the Apostles, and to extraordinary Messengers. Christ says, Luke 10. 16.
He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me. The despising of the
Messenger, is the despising him that sends the Message. A man's Apostle is
himself, is a Jewish Proverb. As to ordinary Ministers he says, lo, I am with
you to the end of the world, Mar. 28. 20. they are taken into part of the
Apostolical Commission and Blessings; they preach in Christ's Name, and we as in
his stead pray you to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 20. so that it is his Voice and
his Message, he affords his Presence and Assistance unto the Worlds end. If
you receive it with Faith and Obedience, you are in a Course and way which will
bring you to Everlasting Blessedness: but if you stand out obstinately against
his Message, you are in the way to Everlasting Misery, for refusing Gods
methods for your Redemption.

Thirdly, The Properties of this Hearing or Submission to our Great Prophet.

1. There must be a resolute Consent or Resignation of our selves to his
Teaching and Instruction. All particular duties are included in the general.
First, we own Christ in his Offices, before we perform the duties, which each
of those offices calls for at our hands and from us; before we depend on him
as a Priest, or obey him as a King. As we receive him with thankfulness and
love, as our dearest Savior, and with Reverence, and a consent of subjection,
as a sovereign Lord; so also with a consent of Resolution to follow his
directions, as our Prophet and Teacher, being convinced that he is sent from
God to show us the way of Life and Happiness; Ioh. 6. 63. Lord to whom shall we
go, thou have the words of Eternal Life. His Doctrine shows that there is
such a thing, how it was purchased, which way it may be had, by Gods offer and
the terms prescribed. Before we take any particular direction from Christ about
this or that duty, we must first consent in the general, that he shall be our
Teacher and Prophet. A particular consent to Christ in this Relation is as
necessary as to any of the rest.

2. This Resignation of our Souls to Christ as a Teacher, as it must be
resolute, so it must be unbounded and without reserves. We must submit
absolutely to all that he propounds, though some Mysteries be above our
Reason, some Precepts against the Interest and Inclination of the Flesh, some
Promises seem to be against Hope, or contrary to natural probabilities. There
are some Mysteries in the Christian Religion, though not against Reason, yet
above Natural Reason. Now we must believe them upon Christ's word, Captivantes
omnem intellectum in obsequium Christi, 2 Cor. 10. 5. Bringing into Captivity
every thought into the obedience of Christ. All our disputings and reasonings
against the Christian Doctrine, must be captivated by a submission to the
Authority of our Teacher and Prophet. A Disciple is to be a Learner, not a
Caviller; and some Principles are not to be chewed, but swallowed as Pills on
the credit of the Physician, when it appears on other Grounds that Christ is
the great Teacher sent from God. And as there are Mysteries above our Reason,
so there be duties against the Interest and Inclination of the Flesh. Many of
Christ's Precepts are displeasing to Corrupt Nature; to deny our selves, to take
up the Cross, to mortify our Appetites and Passions, to cut off right hands,
and to pluck out right Eyes, that none shall be saved that are not Regenerate
and Holy; that non-condemnation is the privilege of those that walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit; that if we live after the Flesh, we shall dye;
that we must not seek great things for our selves; that we must hate Father and
Mother, and our own life, if we will be Christ's Disciples: Flesh and Blood can
hardly down with these things: that there shall be such an exact day of
account, such eternal torments in the other World: yet if this be revealed by
our great Prophet, as reason must not be heard against Christ, so the flesh
must not be heard against Christ, nor the World heard against Christ; so if
some of our Hopes exceed the probability of natural causes, Romans 4. 18. he
against hope believed in hope, as the Resurrection of the Body, we must believe
and obey him in what he offers and commands, notwithstanding the
contradiction of our carnal minds, and hearts, in what is hard to be believed,
and practiced as well as in what is easy.

3. It must be speedy, as to the great solemn acts of submission, do not delay
to hear him, Heb. 3. 7. To day if you will hear his voice harden not your
hearts. Christ must not be put off with dilatory shifts, if we refuse to hear
to day, Christ may refuse to speak to morrow. The Father has his time of
waiting, the Son of his Gospel-offers, the Spirit of his earnest motions: it is
dangerous to slip our day, therefore if you will hear him, hear him now? hear
him betimes, the season falls under the precept as well as the duty, now
while it is called to day.

4. Your consent to hear him must be real, practical, and obediential, verifyed
in the whole tenor and course of your lives and actions: for Christ will not
be flattered with empty Titles, why call ye me Lord, and Master, and do not the
things which I say? Luke 6. 46. if you pretend to hear his word, you must do it
also, for you do not hear to please your minds with knowing, but that you may
make it your serious care and business to serve, love and please God. Many
study Christianity to form their opinions, rather then reform their Hearts and
Practice. The great use of Knowledge, and Faith, is to behold the love of God
in the face of Jesus Christ; that our own love may be quickened and increased to
him again. If it serve only to regulate opinions, it is but dead speculation,
not a living Faith. A naked belief is but the sight of a Feast, it is the
gracious soul does eat and digest it; when our Faith is turned into Love, and
Obedience that is the true Faith.

III. The reasons why this Prophet must be heard.

1. Consider whose voice it is who speaks, the only beloved Son of God, or
God himself, and surely when he speaks he must be heard, Heb. 12. 25. See
that ye refuse not him that speaks from Heaven, for if they escaped not who
refuse him that spoke from Earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn
away from him that speaks from Heaven. It is Christ does speak, and God by
him, commanding us to repent and believe the Gospel, now to refuse him is a
high contempt. God when he gave the Law he spoke on Earth, but when he spoke by
Christ, he spoke from Heaven; for Christ came from Heaven to acquaint us with
the mind of God, and having done it is returned to Heaven again; from whence he
sent down his Spirit on the Apostles, who revealed his Gospel to the World.
This was a Mystery hidden in the bosom of God, and brought to us thence, by his
only begotten Son, surely with all humble submission we should attend unto and
obey his Word, Psalm. 103. 20. Bless the Lord ye his Angels, that excel in
strength, that do his Commandments, harkening to the voice of his Word.

2. The matter which he speaks, and we hear the Doctrine of the Gospel, it is
the most sweet excellent and comfortable Doctrine that can be heard, or
understood by the heart of man, Prove. 8. 6. Hear says Wisdom for I will speak
of excellent things, and the opening of my lips shall be of right things. This
is the brightest light that ever shone from Heaven. The profoundest Wisdom, the
greatest Love, and Mercy that ever was or can be shown to sinful wretches, of
the highest concernment to man, because his Everlasting state lies upon it, a
state of Everlasting woe or weal.

Three things I shall take notice of.

1. The way of Reconciliation with God, manifested and discovered out of his
intimate Love to us. Man had fallen from the Love of God to the creature, and
was conscious to himself of having displeased his Maker, and so lay under the
fears of his vindictive Justice. Now God by Christ declares his Love to the
offender, in the fullest and most astonishing way, Reconciling himself to him,
and shows his readiness to forgive, and save him, 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a
faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the
World to save sinners, of whom I am chief, and 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ
reconciling the World to himself. Oh what should be more welcome to the creature
than this news, of this pardoning Covenant founded in the Blood of Christ.

2. Our duty exactly stated with convenient motives to enforce it. Not only the
comfort of man is provided for, but also our subjection to God, and that upon
the freest and most comfortable terms, that we should serve him in love, and
glorify, and please him, that we may be happy in his love to us: for the sum
of Religion is to love him, and keep his Commandments, John 14. 21, 23, He
that keeps my Commandments he it is that loves me, and if any man love me
he will keep my Words, to love him is our work, and to be beloved of him is our
Happiness, and verse 24. He that loves me not keeps not my saying, and the
word which you hear is not mine, but the Fathers which sent me. The Gospel is
the very Word of God, both the Fathers and the Sons, it is an act of loving,
serving, and pleasing God, for this is the Word Christ preached, that we love
God, and Christ loves us again.

3. A prospect of eternal Happiness, 2 Timothy 1. 10. He has brought Life and
Immortality to light through the Gospel, this is news, but darkly revealed
before, and without this man, knew not how to satisfy all his capacities and
desires, but was like Leviathan in a little Pool. Nay we have not only a
prospect of it, but the offer of it as a reward appointed, if we will be
sincere in our Faith, Love, and Obedience, 1 John 2. 25. This is the promise
that he has promised us even eternal Life. Everlasting Joy and Blessedness is
propounded to us, Oh then hear him, if this be that he speaks of.

3. The Danger of not hearing this Prophet.

1. For the present to continue to slight and contemn the Gosple, is the mark
that you are in a carnal perishing condition, 2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gosple is hid
it is hid to them that are lost, John 10. 3. My Sheep hear my voice, and verse
16. Other Sheep are there which are not of this fold, and they shall hear my
voice. Christ's Sheep whether Jew or Gentile, they have all the same character,
they all hear his voice, and verse 27. My Sheep hear my voice, and I know them
and they follow me. They distinguish his voice, own his voice, obey his voice;
so John 8. 47. Whosoever is of God hears Gods Words, ye therefore hear them
not, because ye are not of God, so that you lose all this comfort, if ye do not
hear the voice of Christ, and his faithful Servants.

2. For the Future, Deuteronomy. 18. 19. Whosoever will not hearken to the words which
that Prophet shall speak in my name, I will require it of him, that is, he must
look to answer it another day. Peter renders it Acts 3. 23. Whosoever will not
hearken to that Prophet shall be destroyed among the people. It is not a bodily
punishment but eternal torment, John 3. 36. The wrath of God abides on him.
Mark 16. 16. He that believes not shall be damned. Thus you see how dangerous
it is to refuse this Prophet.

USES.
1. Of Conviction, to the carnal Christian for not submitting to Christ's
Authority. All Christians do it in pretense, but few that do it in reality.
Does his Word come to you, not only in Word but in Power?

1. Do you seriously come to him that you may have pardon, and life. When
Christ had proved that he was the Son of God, the great Prophet of the Church,
by the testimony of John, the testimony of his works, the testimony of his
Father, and the testimony of the Scriptures, John 5. 40. And ye will not come
unto me that ye may have Life, though John, his Works, the Father, the
Scriptures, will prove him to be what he was, the Messiah; the Savior; and
Redeemer of the World; yet they would not come to him, nor believe, but
wilfully rejected him, and their own blessedness: What the Jews did wilfully,
carnal Christians do lazily, they prize his Name and slight his Office, do not
come to him to be taught, sanctified and drawn to God.

2. Do you respect the Word of the Gospel, entertain it with Reverence, and
Delight; as the Voice of the great Prophet? Do you meditate on it, digest it as
the seed of the new Life, as the rule of your actions, as the Charter of your
Hopes? A good man is described to be one that delights in the Law of the
Lord, and meditateth therein day and night, Psalm. 1. 2. and again Psalm. 119.
97. Oh how I love thy Law, it is my Meditation all the day long. But alas few
are of this temper, Hos. 8. 12. I have written to them the great things of thy
Law, but they were counted as a strange thing, they contemned the Word of God,
as if its directions were of little importance, or did not concern them. Most
men live like strangers to the Word of God, little conversant in it, as if
there were no great hazard in breaking it.

3. Do you mingle it with Faith in the hearing, that it may profit you, Heb. 4.
2. and feel the power of it for your good, but rather you shun it, run from it,
John 3. 20. They that do evil hate the light, and will not come to the light,
least their deeds should be reproved. The Word is a torment, rather then a
comfort to you, you are afraid it will be found too true.

4. Do you receive it as the Word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. It may be you do not
contradict the divine Authority in the Scriptures, but do you soundly believe
them, and know the certainty of those things wherein you are instructed, Luke
1. 4. Have you done any thing to prove the supreme Truth, that Jesus is a
Teacher sent from God? Most men's Faith is so weak and slight, because it is
taken hand over head, there is no deepness of Earth, Mark 13. 6. You have some
light sense of Religion, but slight impressions are soon defaced, and truths
easily taken up are as soon quitted, the more we search into the grounds of
things the more we believe, Acts 17. 11. The Bereans searched the Scriptures,
whether those things were so or no.

5. Does it come to you as the Mediators Word, not in Word only but in Power, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. There is a convincing power in the Word, Acts 2. 37. When they
heard these things, they were pricked in the heart, and said to Peter and the
rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren what shall we do? Many have not felt
this power, but they fear it, John 3. 20. Every one that does evil hates the
light, neither comes he to the light, least his deeds should be reproved. A
converting power, when it becomes the seed of a new Life, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Being
born again not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God
which lives and abides for ever. A comforting power, giving the heirs of
promise strong consolation, Heb. 6. 18. Do you find any thing of this in your
hearts, is it ingrafted in your souls, James 1. 21. Receive with meekness the
ingrafted Word which is able to save your Souls.

6. Do you hear him universally? it is said of the great Prophet, Acts 3. 22.
him shall ye hear in all things that he shall say unto you. Many will hear him
in the offers of pardon, but not in the precepts of duty, you must take his
whole Covenant, the Promises for your Happiness, the duty for your work.

7. Do you hear him so as to prefer God and Christ, and the Life to come, above
all the sensual Pleasures and vain delights, and worldly Happiness, which you
enjoy here? Religion is obstructed, not soundly received: if your hearts be not
taken off from these things, Luke 8. 14. That which fell among Thorns are they
which when they have heard go forth, and are choked with cares and riches, and
pleasures of this life, and bring no fruit to perfection. He is not a Scholar
of Christ, who is not more devoted to the Love and Obedience of God, then any
sensual satisfaction here below, unless you can renounce the Devil, the World
and Flesh, and give up your selves to Christ, to be taught, sanctified and
saved, and brought home to God, to enjoy him in Everlasting Glory; and taught
how to deny Ungodliness and Worldly lusts, Titus 2. 12.

USE.
II. Advice to weak Christians.

1. To excite themselves to obedience by this hear him when dead and lifeless.
Many times the heart is dull and needs quickening, Conscience grows sleepy
and needs awakening, you are too bold in sinning, cold and careless in
spiritual and heavenly things. Now the first means to quicken us is Christ's
divine Authority, 2 Pet. 1. 16. For we have not followed cunningly devised
Fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his Majesty, when there came such a voice to
him from the excellent Glory, this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.
When you are customary in Prayer, and Hearing, it is Christ's will, I must do it
as I will answer it to him another day.

2. When you do renounce some beloved lust, or pleasing sin, urge your hearts
with Christ's Authority. Remember who tells you of cutting off your right
hand, and plucking out your right eye. How can I look the Mediator in the face,
if I should wilfully break any of his Laws, prefer the satisfaction of a base
lust, before the mercies and hopes offered me by Jesus Christ.

3. In deep distresses, when you are apt to question the comfort of the
Promises, it is hard to keep the rejoicing of Hope, without regarding whose
Word and Promise it is? Heb. 3. 6. Whose house are ye, if ye hold fast the
confidence and the rejoicing of hope firm unto the end.

SERMON. VII.
MATTHEW. 17. 6, 7, 8. And when the Disciples heard it they fell on their faces,
and were sore afraid. And Jesus came and touched them, and said, arise be not
afraid. And when they had lift up their eyes, they saw no man save Jesus only.
IN this part of the History are Three Things. 1. The Disciples Fear and
Astonishment, verse 6. 2. Their Comfortable and Gracious recovery by Christ,
verse 7. 3. The Event and Issue of all, verse 8.


1. Their Astonishment, they fell on their faces and were sore afraid; their
falling on their faces was not out of Worship, and Reverence, but
consternation, as those John 18. 6. As soon as he said to them I am he, they
went backward and fell to the ground. The causes of their fear must be enquired
into. These were holy men, the flower of Christ's Disciples; they were men in an
holy action, for Belshazar in his cups to tremble were no news, they were not
in the presence of an angry God, it was a Gospelvoice that they heard, This is
my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. They had not a full
dispensation of his glory, but only a glimpse of it, and that under a cloud and
revealed in Mercy; yet they were sore afraid. Upon any Visions and Apparitions
of the divine Majesty, Gods Servants fell to the Earth, Ezekiel. 1. 28. When I saw
the appearance of the likeness of the Glory of God, I fell on my face; Paul
when Christ appeared to him from Heaven, he fell to the Earth, Acts 9. 4. Rev.
1. 17. When I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. Abraham was cast into great
horror, Genesis 15. 12. when God appeared solemnly to enter into Covenant with
him. So Isa. 6. 5. Then I said, woe is me, for I am undone. So Daniel chap. 10.
8. 9. When I saw this great vision, there was no strength in me; for my
comeliness was turned into corruption, and I retained no strength, yet I heard
the voice of his words, then was I in a deep sleep upon my face, and my face
was toward the ground.

Now I shall give the special reasons why the manifestation, and appearance of
God to his great Prophets did breed this astonishment and Fear. (2.) What
general Note and Observation, may be concluded hence for our profit.

1. The special Reasons why these manifestations and appearances of God to his
great Prophets do breed this astonishment and fear, they are Two.

1. To humble them to whom he vouchsafed so great a favor. To humble them
least the Glory of these heavenly Visions should too much puff them up.
Therefore there was ever some weakness discovered in those that did receive
them; Jacob wrestled with God, but came off halting and maimed, though he
prevailed, Gen 32. 31. when he came off from seeing God face to face, he halted
on his thigh. Paul was wrapped into the third Heaven, yet presently buffetted
with a messenger of Satan, least he should be lifted up with the abundance of
Revelations, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Corruption remains in us and we are not able to
bear these favors, which God manifests to his choice Servants, and therefore
there is something to humble them, in the dispensation, and to keep them from
being puffed up with pride, something that is a balance to the great honor
wherewith God has honored them.

2. All those that received Visions from him to teach his people, God would
season them by leaving a stamp and impression of his excellency upon them. This
was the preparation of the Prophets, and a preparation of the Disciples to fit
them for the work of the Gospel. A due representation of Gods glory and
excellent Majesty does qualify them for their duty; they are fittest to carry
Gods message and describe him to others, who are thus qualified and prepared,
and have some reverence and awe of God impressed upon their own hearts, and
have felt the power of his great Majesty, 2 Cor. 5. 16. Knowing the terrors of
the Lord we persuade men.

The General Conclusion and Observation which we may draw from thence is this.

Doctrine, That God is of such glorious Excellency and Majesty, that we are not
able to bear any emissions, or extraordinary Representations thereof in this
state of frailty.
1. I will prove that God is a great God, and of glorious Majesty. 2. Give you
the Reasons why we are not able to bear the extraordinary manifestations
thereof in this state of frailty.
1. That God is a God of great Majesty, and ought to be reverenced by all that
have to do with him. The point being a matter of sense, and evident by natural
light, needs not to be proved so much as improved.

1. Scripture represents him as such Dan. 9. 4. He is called the great and
dreadful God, so Deuteronomy. 7. 21. A Mighty God and terrible, and Nahum 1. 5. A
great and terrible God is he, and again Job 37. 22. With God is terrible
Majesty.

2. This eminently shines forth both in his Works of Creation and Providence.
1. Creation, in the stupendous Fabric of the Heavens, Ier. 32. 17, 18, 19. Ah
Lord God, behold thou have made the Heaven, and the Earth by thy great power
and outstretched arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee, etc. In that
mighty Collection of Waters in the Sea, we cannot look upon that vast expansion
of the Firmament, that huge body of Waters in the Sea without some religious
horror, what is the God that made all this, Ier. 5. 22. Fear ye not me, says
the Lord? will ye not tremble at my presence? which have placed the Sand for a
bound to the Sea, by a perpetual decree that it cannot pass it, and though the
waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet
can they not pass over it. 2. Providence, whether in his way of Mercy or
Judgment. Mercy; what a Majestic description of God is there, Ps. 50. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5. yet there his presence in his Church is described. The drift of the Psalm
is, to set forth Gods Power and Majesty when he comes to call the Gentiles, and
to set up the Evangelical way of his Worship, when the light of the Gospel
shall shine forth from Sion, Psalm 5. 5. by terrible things in Righteousness
will thou answer us, Oh God, thou God of our Salvation. Though God is a God of
Salvation, yet the way of his delivering them carries Majesty and Terror with
it. So his Works of Judgment, Psalm. 119. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of
thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments, when the wicked of the Earth are put
away like dross. A Lion trembles to see a Dog beaten before him, and it is
imputed as a fault to the wicked, that they do not take notice of it, Isa. 26.
10. They will not behold the Majesty of God.

3. His Greatness and Majesty is such, that we cannot comprehend it, Job 36.
26. Behold God is great and we know him not, nor can the number of his years be
searched out. The Greatness of God cannot be known, but only by way of
Negation, that he has none of those infirmities, which may lessen his being in
our thoughts, or by way of comparison, that he is above all, God is greater
then man, Ier. 36. 12.

4. So great that he is fain to put a covering on, to enterpose the Clouds
between us and him, for we are not able to bear his glorious and majestic
presence, Ioh 26. 9. He holds back the face of his Throne, and spreads his
Cloud upon it. What would become of us, if he should discover all his Glory:
this is his condescension to the lower World, to appear under a vail, and cover
his Throne with Clouds.

But though we do not know his full Majesty, yet there is enough discovered
both to Faith, Reason and Sense, that God is great and glorious, both in
himself and in all his Works. Scripture declares it to Faith, and Reason will
soon subscribe to so evident a Truth, that he that made and sustaineth all
things, must needs be a great God. What other conceptions can we form of him,
when we look to the Heaven, and this Earth which he sustaineth by his great
Power, and he declares himself to Sense by his daily Providence to be a God of
great Majesty.

The proof of it needs not so much to be spoke to as the improvement of it,
which we are called upon for every where.

1. It is a Mercy that being so great, he takes notice of us, Psalm. 8. 3, 4.
When I consider thy Heavens, the work of thy Fingers, the Moon and Stars which
thou have ordained, what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of
Man that thou visitest him. When we consider how the Majesty of God shines
forth in the heavenly Bodies, and those many glorious Creatures God has made
besides us: we may wonder that God should esteem of man, and take care of man;
and be so solicitous about man's welfare, who was formed at first out of so vile
materials, as the dust of the Earth, and is still of so very frail, infirm and
mortal condition, and has carried himself so unthankfully to God, that he
should take care of him above his whole Creation, Psalm 113. 6, 7. The Lord our
God dwells on high, who humbles himself to behold the things in Heaven and
Earth. That the great God of such glorious Majesty should take notice of Worms,
and behold us not only by visiting, over-seeing, and governing the affairs of
this lower World, but should condescend to this low estate of ours, in taking
our flesh; whose Excellency and Majesty is so great, that he might despise the
Angels, of whom he has no need: but to stoop so low toward men is matter of
wonder, praise, and adoration.

2. We should be humble in our conversing with him, considering what he is, and
we are, Job 42. 5, 6. I have heard of thee with the hearing of the ear, now
mine eye sees thee, therefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes. This should
keep his children in a holy awe. Oh how low should we lie before this great
God, Genesis 18. 27. Who am I that am but dust and ashes, that I should speak unto
God.

3. That we must not please our selves with the performance of ordinary service
to him, but we should raise it to an eminent degree of Worship and Adoration,
Psalm. 48. 1. Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised in the City of our
God, and Psalm 145. 3. Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised. Alas the
best we do is much beneath God. what low thoughts had Solomon of his stately
Temple, 2 Chr. 2. 6. Who is able to build thee an house, seeing the Heaven of
Heavens is not able to contain him, who am I that I should build him an house?
Thus should we see, that our best resolutions and performances come much short
of the excellency and greatness of God. All formality and lifeless service
proceeds from hence, that we have not due and raised thoughts of his Majesty
and Being, Mal. 1. 14. I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts. The
greatness of God calls for other service then usually we give to him: he gets
nothing from us that is perfect. But surely we should not put him off with our
refuse, but spend the best of our strength, time, parts, and affections, in his
service. Superficial dealing in it argues mean thoughts of God, it is a
lessening of his Majesty.

4. We serve a great Master, and so may expect great things from him. He
discovers himself unto his people according to the greatness and Majesty of
his Being, Ps. 126. 2, 3. The Lord has done great things for them, yea the
Lord has done great things for us whereof we are glad. Kings or Princes do not
give pence or brass Farthings, but bestow Gifts becoming their Magnificence.
The Heathens were forced to acknowledge it, and the people of God do willing
acknowledge it, so Joel 2. 21. Fear not, O Land, be glad and rejoice, for the
Lord will do great things. Be the Mercies never so rare, the way never so
difficult, God is able to accomplish them.

5. This should banish the fear of man, as to any danger can come from them to
us, or to any attempts against God, Matthew. 10. 28. Fear not them which kill the
body, but are not able to kill the Soul, but rather fear him who is able to
destroy both body and Soul in Hell fire; they may threaten great things to us,
but God threatens greater. See Exodus 18. 11. Now I know that God is greater
then all Gods, for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly God was above them.
There is a greater being we have to depend upon.

6. Because God is of such Majesty and Greatness, we should quarrel at none of
his dealings, for he is too high to be questioned by the Creature, and his
Counsels are carried on in such a way as we cannot judge of them, no more then a
Worm can judge of the affairs of a man; he is great in Counsel, and wonderful
in working.

7. This should keep his children in an holy awe, Heb. 12. 28, 29. Let us have
Grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with Reverence and Godly Fear, for
our God is a consuming fire. When we come in the Holy Assemblies, Genesis 28. 17.
How dreadful is this place. In our general course we must not slight his
frowns, nor despise his favors, all comes from a great God, nor behave our
selves irreverently in his presence, but still walk as those that have to do
with a great and glorious God.

II. That in this present state we are not able to bear any extraordinary
manifestation of his Greatness and Majesty.

1. Because of his Glory, which would consume and swallow us up. This was a
Voice from the excellent Glory, 2 Pet. 1. 17. Now if this excellent Glory by
the Vail of the Firmament were not obscured, man were not able to bear it, Job
37. 20. If man speak, he shall be swallowed up. 1 Timothy 6. 16. He dwells in
light which no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see, till
we are received to Heaven. Thus it is, his Glory would kill us, his Voice
confound us. There is a mighty disproportion between Mortal Creatures, and the
infinite Majesty of God; the brightness of his Glory soon burdeneth, and
over-burdeneth the infirmity of the best Creatures.

2. Because of our Weakness.

1. Natural: We faint when we meet with any thing extraordinary, and therefore
no wonder if we are astonished with the near approach of the Excellent Majesty
of God, and made unfit for any action of Body or Mind. If we cannot look on the
Sun, how can we see God? our Felicity in Heaven would be our Misery on Earth:
This Wine is too strong for old Bottles.

2. Sinful Infirmity, consciousness of guilt is in it also, and our
disconformity to God through sin, Isa. 6. 5, 6. Woe is me, I am for undone, I am
a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips,
and mine eyes have seen the king, the Lord of hosts. So Peter, Luke 5. 8.
Depart from me, for I am a sinful man; this raises a fear in us upon every
eminent approach or discovery of Gods Glory. Before the Fall, God and Adam were
Friends; he would have endured God to speak to him; yet after the fall the
appearance of God became terrible. When he hears his voice, he is afraid and
hides himself, and something of this fear sticks to the best of his People,
and when God is eminently near it is discovered. For persons that have sin in
them, to be near to so Holy and Glorious a Majesty, that is a part of the
reason of this Fear and Trouble. Well then, both these causes go together, the
Representation of the Majesty of God, and the sense of our own frailty and
weakness.

USE.
Is to press us to two things; I. To press us to an holy Awe and Reverence,
when we come near to God. II. To take heed that our fear of God do not
degenerate into a slavish fear.


First, To press us to an holy Awe and Reverence of God, when we draw nigh unto
him. Surely we should in all our Worship have such thoughts of God, as may
leave a stamp of Humility, and some Impressions of the Majesty and Excellency
of God upon us; and we should fall upon our faces, though not in a way of
Consternation, yet in a way of Adoration. And because usually we bewray much
slightness and Irreverence in our converses with God and Approaches to him, I
shall press it a little.

1. I will show how the Scriptures in the general do call for this Holy Awe of
the Majesty of God in all our Worship. Psalm. 111. 9. Holy and reverend is his
name, and therefore never to be used by us, but in an awful and serious manner;
Psalm. 96. 4. The Lord is great and greatly to be praised, he is to be feared
above all Gods* Whether we pray, or whether we praise God, still the heart must
be deeply possessed with a sense of his Excellency, and we must admire him,
above all created or imaginable greatness whatsoever, and so mingle reverence,
with our most delightful Addresses to him. Again, Psalm. 89. 17. God is greatly
to be feared in the assembly of his Saints, and to be had in reverence of all
that are round about him. Holy Angels, and sanctified Men, who of all Creatures
have nearest Access to God, should most adore and reverence him, because they
are best acquainted with him, and have the clearest sight of him that mortal
creatures are capable of. The Angels are an assembly of holy Ones, that always
behold his Face; therefore always Lauding and Glorifying God: So God is said
to be terrible in his holy places, Psalm. 68. 35. whether Heaven, or the Church;
indeed the awful carriage of his people in his Worship should be one means to
convince of the Excellency and Majesty of God, 1 Cor. 14. 25. The Apostle
shows there, that an Unbeliever coming into the Christian Assemblies when
they are managed with Gravity and Awe is convinced and judged, and will fall
down on his face and worship God, and say, God is in you of a truth. That is,
seeing their Humility, brokenness of Heart, hearing their praises and
admirations of God, and seeing their orderliness and composedness of Spirit;
whereas rudeness, slightness and irreverence, does pollute and stain the glory
of God in their Minds.

2. Other Addresses will not become Faith and Love.

1. Faith, for whosoever comes to God must fix this principle in his Mind,
that God is, Heb. 1. 6. We do not worship God aright if we do not Worship him
as Believers, and if we worship him as Believers, we will worship him with
reverence, and godly fear. Faith gives us not only a thought of God, but some
kind of sight of God, and sight will leave an impression upon the heart of
reverence and seriousness; surely a sight or believing thought of God should be
able to do any thing upon the soul. It is the great work of Faith, to see him
that is invisible, Heb. 11. 27. We should in our whole conversation live as in
his sight, and live as those that remember God stands by, and sees all that
we are about: but especially in our worship, we then set our selves as before
the Lord. Pray as to our Father, that sees what we do, Mat. 6. 6. Pray to thy
father which is in secret and thy father which sees in secret, will reward
thee openly. Hear as before the Lord, Acts 10. 33. We are all here present
before God to hear all things that are commanded thee of God. Then the Soul
should turn the back upon all other things, that the mind may be taken up with
nothing but God.

2. No other worship will become Love. Worship is an act of love and delight.
Now love is seen in admiring the Excellencies of that glorious Being whom we
love, and ascribing all to him, as being deeply affected with his Goodness,
Rev. 4. 10. The four and twenty elders fall down before him that sat on the
throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their crowns
before the throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, honor
and power; for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and
were created. They fell down not out of astonishment but reverence, and cast
their Crowns before the Throne. Whatever Honor they have, they had it from
God, and are content to lay it at his feet, from whom they have life, and
being, and all things. They have such an high esteem of God, that before him
they cannot be too vile. They are unworthy to wear any Crown in Gods presence,
and are content that their Honor be a footstool to advance and extol his
Glory. Certainly those that are heartily affected to God will go about his
Worship, as with Cheerfulness, so with Humility and Reverence.

Secondly, To take heed that our Humility and Reverence, do not degenerate into
servile Fear and Discouragement. It is apt to do so even in the best of Gods
People. We can hardly keep the middle between the extremes, our Faith is apt to
degenerate into presumption, and our Humility into despondency of Spirit, and
our Fear into discouragement and distrust. So hard a matter is it to serve the
Lord with fear, and to rejoice with trembling, Psalm. 2. 11. or to walk in the
fear of God, and in the comforts of the Holy Ghost.

Therefore to avoid this Consternation, do two things.

1. Consider how amiable God has represented himself in Jesus Christ, and how
near he is come to us: and within the reach of our Commerce there is a new and
living way, through the Vail of his flesh, Heb. 10. 20. So that though our God
be a consuming fire, yet there is a screen between us and this Fire; though if
he should draw away the Vail, a glimpse of his glory would kill us, yet this
Glory being veiled, we may have access with confidence, Ephesians. 3. 12. There are
naturally in our hearts fears, estrangedness and backwardness from God; but now
God is incarnate, and has been manifested in our flesh, we may have more
familiar thoughts of him, and they are made more sweet and acceptable to us.

2. Get your own peace with God made and confirmed to you more and more, Romans
5. 1, 2. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. So Ephesians. 2. 18. He preached peace to you which were afar off, and to
them that are nigh, for through him we both have an access by one spirit to the
father. See the breach made up, between you and God, and be very tender of
putting it to hazards any more. God that is a consuming fire to guilty souls is
a Sun of Righteousness to the upright; when we are accepted in the beloved,
those thoughts of God which guilt will make amazing and terrible, will be
through peace comfortable and refreshing.

Secondly, Their comfortable and gracious Recovery by Christ, Ver. 7. And Jesus
came and touched them, and said, Arise, be not afraid. He relieveth and helps
them by three things. 1. His Approach. 2. His Touch. 3. His Word.


1. His Approach; he came to them, you must understand having laid aside his
glory, which he had in the Transfiguration, that he might more familiarly
converse with them, and without prejudice. Because of their weakness and
infirmity he lays aside his Majesty, and reassumeth the habit of his
Humiliation; as Moses did put a Vail upon his face, that the people might
endure his sight and presence. Gods appearing at first may be terrible, but the
issue is sweet and comfortable, a still calm Voice followed the Earthquake,
Wind and Fire, 1 Kings 19. and God does good to his People, after he has
humbled them and proved them, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. Here when the Apostles lay like dead
men, Christ came and put new life, and strength into them. He came of love and
pity to them, that nothing more grievous might happen to them; either loss of
life or senses. He would not let them perish in these amazements.

2. His Touch. He touched them. Christ's Touch is powerful, and a means of
Application. Usually thus Christ conveyed and applied his Power, Mat. 8. 3. He
touched the leper and cleansed him. Mat. 8. 15. He touched Peter's wives mother,
and cured her of a fever. So Matthew. 9. 19. He touched the two blind men, and
they received their sight; and in many other places, so this touching of the
Apostles, was to apply his Power, and to recover them out of their Trance.

3. His Speech. And said, arise and be not afraid; The glorious voice of the
Father affrights them, and the gracious voice of the Son reviveth and
refreshes them. He comforts those whom the terrors of the Almighty had cast
down, he does not chide them for their fear or little Faith, as he does at
other times, he considered the greatness of the Cause, their natural Infirmity:
the governing of which was not in their power, and the terribleness and
suddenness left no time for deliberation; therefore he does not chide them, but
encourages them. The like was done in other cases, as to Ezekiel in his
Trance, Ezekiel. 2. 1. Son of man arise, stand on thy feet, and I will speak to
thee. So to the Apostle John, Rev. 17. 18. When I saw him, I lay at his feet as
dead; and he laid his right hand upon me, saying, Fear not, I am the first and
the last. So here, be not afraid. We must reverence Christ, but not be scared
at him. Such a fear as may stand with our duty is required, but not that which
disableth us for it, or discourageth us in it, that is no more pleasing to God
than security.

1. Observe Christ's tender care over his Disciples, in their faintings and
discouragements.

1. That he comfort and reviveth his Disciples. Christ alone can help us,
and confirm us against our fears: the disciples did not stir, but lay prostrate
upon their faces, till he came and touched them, and said, arise, be not
afraid. In all the troubles and perplexities of his People, he will be owned as
the causer and curer of them, Hos. 6. 1. Come let us return unto the Lord, for
he has torn, and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up. So
Job 5. 18. He makes sore and binds up, he wounds and his hands make whole.
As all our troubles and perplexities are from his hands, so must the healing
be. If he make the wound, all the World cannot find a plaster to heal it; and
no wound given by himself is above his own Cure; and he wounds not as an
Enemy, but as a Surgeon; not with a Sword, but a Lancet. All other means are
blasted till we come to him.

2. That he is exceeding ready, and has great Pity and Tenderness toward
them. As appears by laying aside his Glory and coming to the Disciples, when
they came not to him; and speedily, that he might not leave them long in the
Trance, least worse effects should follow; and is he not like affected to all
his people, in their perplexities and troubles? Yes verily. See Isa. 57. 16. I
will not contend for ever, nor will I be always wroth, for the spirit should
fail before me, and the souls which I have made. He speaks as if he were
afraid, lest man's spirit should fail, being long overwhelmed with terror and
trouble. So the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2. 7. Comfort him least he be swallowed up with
overmuch sorrow. The Lord Christ is full of bowels and compassions, pitieth
his people in their Infirmities, Fears and Troubles.

2. The manner and way which he takes is considerable also, by touch and
speech. The touch notes the application of his Power; and in his speech he
says, Arise, be not afraid. Christ does not love to confound, but comfort his
Servants, and therefore takes this double course, by secret power enlivening
and strengthening their hearts, Psalm. 138. 3. I cried unto the Lord and thou
answerest me, and strengthenest me with strength in my soul. That is, God did
secretly support him and strengthen him, under the trouble. He does it also by
a word; therefore we read of Gods speaking peace to his People, Psalm. 85. 8. I
will hear what God will say, sor he will speak peace to his people and his
saints. Besides an inward strengthening, there is a necessity of a word from
Christ's own mouth, ere we can cast off our Discouragements. Besides his
touching or his laying his right hand upon us, there is need of his word to us.

USE.
It teaches us what to do when we have serious thoughts of appearing before
God: For the case in hand is about those that were affrighted and disquieted
with Divine Visions, which was occasioned by natural frailty, and partly by a
sense of sin. Now all of us must shortly come into Gods presence, but who can
dwell with devouring burnings? If your thoughts be serious, you will find that
it is no slight thing, to appear before God, who is our Creator and our Judge,
and who is an holy and glorious God, to whom we have carried it very
unthankfully, and undutifully. Now who can relieve you in these perplexed
thoughts, but the Lord Jesus Christ: get a word from him that your Iniquity is
taken away, and your sin purged; Isa. 6. 7. and wait on him, till he settleth
your souls in the peace and hope of the Gospel, Isa. 57. 14. and then you are
relieved in your Agonies of Conscience; stand up, be not afraid, the Gospel is
a Sovereign Plaster, but his hand must make it stick.

Thirdly, The Event and Issue of all, ver. 8. And when they had lift up their
eyes, they saw no man save Jesus only. This intimates two things.

1. That this Testimony from Heaven did only concern Jesus Christ, for Moses
and Elias vanish out of sight, and Jesus is left alone, as the Person in whom
God is well pleased, and all the Church must hear him. When they are withdrawn,
Christ remains as Lord and Head of the Church, and so it shows the ceasing
of Moses his Law and the continuance, and Authority of the Law of Christ. The
Apostle tells us, when that which is perfect is come, that which is in part
shall be done away. They only prophesied, prefigured Christ to come, but now
upon the Exhibition, the Legal Ordinances vanished.

2. That God manifests himself for time, measure and degree, as he himself
sees fit for our good: for the Vision is removed, when the intent of it is
obtained: Here the spiritual Banquet does not always last, Heaven is a
perpetual Feast, but we must not look upon Earth to be feasted always with
spiritual suavities. There is no permanency, but perpetual Vicissitudes in our
enjoyments within time, we have clear and cloudy days in the World, a feast, a
desertion, Cant. 5. 1. etc. I am come into my garden, my sister my spouse, I
have gathered my myrrh with my spices, I have eaten my honeycomb with my
honey, I have drunk my wine with my milk; eat O friends, drink, yea drink
abundantly, O beloved. I sleep but my heart waketh, it is the voice of my
beloved that knocks, saying, Open to me my sister, my love, my dove, my
undefiled, for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the
night, etc. And Ver. 6. I opened to my beloved, and my beloved has withdrawn
himself and was gone. After the greatest manifestations of Christ's love, there
may be a withdrawing; we cannot bear perpetual comforts, and God reserveth them
for a better time; when we are more prepared for them. There must be Day and
Night in this World, and Winter and summer; but in Heaven it is all Day, there
is a perpetual sunshine never clouded nor overcast.

FINIS.

