THE BASTARD: A TRAGEDY.

DVM PREMOR ATTOLLO^



LONDON, Printed for M. M. T. Collins, and Gabriell Bedell, and are to be sold
at their shop at the Middle-Temple-gate in Fleetstreet, 1652.

Prologue.
NO Comic Scene shall here salute your eye,
Whose scoffing Vein may tickle, till you lie
Half breathless in your mirth, and so at best
Bribe your applause with some new minted jest.
The Tragic Buskin traverses our stage
In bloody Fillets, fitter for this Age,
Where Treason, Murder, Lust, and every Vice
Grows impudent, and rifles for the Dice.
Translation is no crime; We here impresse
A Spanish BASTARD in an English dress;
And lay him at your Doors, that some of You
Moved with a milder Genius might bestow
Some favor on our Outcast; by your hand
Our Brat must dye or live, must fall or stand.
We crave your Charitable smile, the rather
Because he is not so Wise to know's own Father.
And Pallas-like (if w' are not too profane!)
He had no Mother but his Father's brain.
Thus Fatherless and Motherless! We sue
For him in humble flexures unto you:
My Faith assures me, many of you have known
To make some Bastards which you durst not own
For shame or fear; and some of you may be
Mistaken in your Fathers Pedigree;
Your favor cannot shame you; may h' invite
Your bounty, though but in a smile or mite.
Some Childless Signior, take him to his feet;
'Twere Cruelty to let him lie in the street:
A sin! alas! a shame! a sin! that He
Should beg upon the Parish-Charity.
He Is born, and must be kept! faith! think upon it,
And stand his Godfathers once at the Font:
His boon is not ambitious; since it is such,
Deign him your Patronage, h'wo'nt cost you much.
True Charity should feel no stomach qualms;
Know, Sirs, a BASTARD may deserve your Alms:
We crave your serious Thoughts, if any Crime
Render him odious, blame his Fate, not him;
He scorns Censorious Critics; and don't fear
To stand the Bar to a judicious Ear;
For though to be a BASTARD be his Fate;
His Wit is sterling, and legitimate.
Exit. Enter GASPAR. The world so swarms with Bastards now, that I
Need not despair for want of Company;
I Am in among the Throng, although you say,
I came through the back-Doore, or by the wrong-way,
I care not; if I may some Portion merit,
I am content, I beg not to inherit;
Though Bastardisme can make no Title good,
Yet know a BASTARD may have Noble blood;
And challenge Kindred with the best: my Name
Would not be made the White for squint-eyed Fame
To dart her Arrows at, had every Front
Its Lineage and Descent well drawn upon it;
Nor would the world need Spectacles: it is known
Though I Am a BASTARD, not a common one;
Yet, that my Name is in my forehead placed,
Blame the Printer, 'twas he made me brazen-faced:
Perhaps he feared, lest I should stray, so some
(Reading my Name) might easily bring me home.
Well! this poor favor sue I from your breath,
That, since I must be pressed, 'tmay n't be to Death,
And that the Ballads may not rack my Fame,
A BASTARD craves this Portion, a good Name.
Drammatis Personae.
ALONZO, A Merchant, Father to Mariana. ALVAREZ, An indebted Merchant, Father
to Picarro. FREDERICK, A rich old Humorist, Father to Balthazar. ALVARADO,
Uncle to Don Praepontio. PRaePONTIO, A foolish Gallant, contracted to Varina.
CHAVES, A Florentine, Mariana's Paramour, formerly Contracted to Eugenia.
RODERIGVEZ Brother to Eugenia. BALTHAZAR, Contracted to Mariana. PICARRO,
Husband to Mariana. GASPAR, A Bastard, Servant to Alonzo. THOMASO, Servant to
Chaves. RVBIO, HEBES,
Servants to Praepontio.
MARIANA, Daughter to Alonzo. VARINA, An Orphan in the Guardianship of Alonzo.
EVGENIA, Sister to Roderiguez, and deserted by Chaves. CATALINA, Mariana's
Maid. CORINNA, Variana's Maid.
PRIEST. TAILOR, FIDDLERS, MASQUERS, 2. VARLOTS, 3. BOYS, GUARDS.
The Scene SIVILL.

THE BASTARD.
ACT. 1.
SCENE 1.
Enter Alonso and Gaspar. Alonso. ARt sure he will come?


Gasp. I Am sure he promised me.
But Debtors words are like to whirl-winds, here
And every where when they should pay. This money
Is worse then bird-lime, or a Tertian Fever,
And will stick close to their possession
That have it; specially to pay.

Alon. Then thou
Beleev'st he will not come?

Gasp. 'Ts no point of Faith, Sir,
But I do think so: send for him to Trucks,
To Passage, or Primero, and he will find
Ryals of eight, and Pistolets to play,
Or pawn his plate for it; but to pay your debt,
Tush! it is a trifle.

Alo. What? six thousand Duccats?


Gas. Faith! were it seven, the Hollanders (he will tell you)
This year surprised the Flota; and the ships
From the Indies by the inauspitious blasts
Of the ill-boding North, are still kept off;
And then he will kiss away his hand in kindness,
With Beso las manos, criado de vuestra merced,
And for these terms expect forbearance.

Alo. What
Shall I do then? I need my money, and
Must have it immediately.

Gas. Faith get it then
Which way you can; For on my conscience*
He will not pay you, less you fairly set
An A^g^^^ill on'^ shoulders; clap him up,
And then never fear your money.

Alo. That were base;
Unworthy in me, who have still professed
My self his friend, to be the first that should
Shipwreck his Credit, which in the Cities eye
Shines bright; the chiefest glory of us Merchants
Is Alvarez: no! I do know him honest,
And sure he will pay; if not, the sum's not great,
I can forbear't.

Gas. Six thousand Duccats is
A sum of money, many an honest man
Would wish his patrimony.

Alo. Say it be,
It is too little to o'repoize the worth
Of Alvarez: For should I once begin,
His other Creditors by my example
Would lay their Actions on him, keep him fast
For ever coming forth.

Gas. Faith! not much matter,
There let him lie, and keep the pavement warm,
Tell to the silent Walls how he has wasted
His wealth in riot, and by Drabs contracted
A foul consumption both to corpse and purse;
Make the dumb stones his Confessors, they will melt
Perchance into contrition, and weep
To see him made their Captive.

Alo. You Are too cruel;
I must not be so, lest that Widows prayers
Whom he has cherisht, should draw vengeance on me,
And Orphans tears shed for his loss, rise up
In swelling Cataracts to overwhelm me.

Gas. Consult with reason, Sir: this childish pity
Is an effeminate passion, shake it off:
Say he has spent his own rich patrimony,
And others wealth in purchasing a Name
To his posterity; pray tell me Signior,
Will that Name pay his debts? Or will those men
That have been better for his wealth, afford
Him so much kindness; 'twere but gratitude
As to content you and an hundred more
He stands engaged to: Let me rule you, give me
Leave, I Will arrest him in my own Name, so
You may pass blameless: pray you do, when others
Have seized on all, you will wish perchance you would taken
My foolish counsel.

Alo. Hold your tongue, I will not
Injure my friend so, I Will first lose it; tell me
What Cash affords your Desk?

Gas. Ten thousand Duccas.


Alo. See it told out with expedition;
My daughter's to be married, and must have
That as a part of portion.

Gas. Married, Cousin?
You Will not be so ignoble to infringe
Your promise to me?

Alo. 'Twas an ill one, better
Broken then kept.

Gas. Did I for this, when you
Deplum'd of your Estate, to shun the frown
Of envious Fortune, was constrained to cross
The surly Ocean, and so steer your slight
Into the Indies, with a little remnant
Of your left wealth, content your Creditors,
Bring up your daughter only upon hopes
To have her for my pains, as then you know
You did oblige your self, that now another
Must reap my harvest: Let me tell you, Sir,
It is not honest in you:

Alo. How now Bastard?
Dare you be muttring? Is It not more then I
Am any way obliged to, to maintain
Thee in the fashion of a Gentleman,
Make thoe my fellow, but thy tainted blood
Thinks to pollute mine? Urge me with a promise
Unjust as that was? You may pass, the door
Stands open for you, and your Pasport's writ,
Take your course, Bastard.

Gas. You're my Fate, your tongue
Has power to transform my thoughts, create
Anew my resolutions; I confess
From you I have my meat; my life depends
On your beneficent Genius: I offend
Even to damnation, should I be ingrate
In my respect to you: I Have left my hopes,
Your promise Let he now has quite washed out,
No print of it remains within my breast:
Join her in Hymeneall rites with whom,
And when you please; my worst desires shall be,
Heavens give her joy.

Alo. Now thou art honest, Gaspar.
I see thou do affect me, I Will provide
To solemnize thy nuptials with some One
To thy advancement.

Gas. Sir, Your bounteous hand
(I know's) too liberal: may I have his name
That must enjoy my Mistress?

Alo. Balthazar!
Don Frederiques heir! But stay ^^'s Varina's portion
Already told and ticketed?

Gas. Yes, Sir, and set apart.

Enter Praepontio and Rubio. Prae. Save you Sir; or rather as we say in French,
Bon jour:
Is my illustrious Mistress stirring yet?

Alo. She Is none of the earliest risers: please you walk in and eat an
Olive, taste a cup of Alicant, and by that time she will come.

Prae. I thank you, Sir; but my stomach has not yet digested the crudities of
last nights Symbolum


Rub. It might have done, I Am sure you fasted.


Gas. And has not left picking his teeth yet.


Prae. Yet if you please, my renowned Uncle, that must be, we will vouchsafe to
warm our palats with a jar of your Monturkie.


Rub. He means to Fox himself, that he may have Rhethorick to Court his
Mistress: For, Facundi calices quem non fecere disertum, Dull Cups make men
eloquent.


Prae. My diminutive and defective knave, seal your lips.


Rub. He Is afeard I should cozen him of some of the Monturkie he hopes for.


Alo. How fares your Uncle?


Prae. Well, very well; he has sent my Mistress a copy of his countenance, and
here she come.
Enter Varina. Strike me not dead with those bright eyes, retort
Those splendent Sunbeams on your self, who only
Can bear such piercing clearness.

Gas. Mark his postures, he will kiss her shoo-strings.


Rub. Nay, eat the Rushes she treads on: look how Pythagorically he gapes? he is
turned Astronomer!


Gas. Have you measured the length of hen physnomy, or taken the height of her
forehead yet?


Rub. But Master, you must salute her.


Prae. Divine, ambiguous, and transparent creature, I salute you with this b --
b -- bus: my complements were not cut out according to the garb of the time;
but my words are sufficient interpreters of my internal affections, and so
sweetheart I love you by this b -- b -- bus.


Var. A little of this, Sir, is sufficient.


Prae. Nay! thou shall have thy belly full of it, my little Duck.


Gas. I never heard of a belly full of kisses before.


Prae. Lend me your hand to feed on!


Rub. Beware, Mistress, he eat it not, he is sharp set I assure you, he had
nothing but an Eringo root and a clove of Garlic for his collation.


Alo. Sir, Praepontio, My Necce deserves none of these complement.


Prae: How, Sir? you are her Uncle, and so your tongue is privileged; but if
another had presumed to speak so profane a syllable upon her merit, mark me,
if thunder-thumping Jove had said it, mark me, I would have pulled him by the
fore-top, or lug'd him by the ears.


Alo. I doubt not of your valor; but my business Urges my have.


Prae. And so does mine.

(He untrusses himself.)
Rub. He Is ready to bewray himself.


Alo. Say, will your Uncle make her a Jointure?


Prae. Will he? A man of your reverend complexion to demand that question? Will
he? He shall, in spite of his nose, old dotard! or else I would, as we say in
Italian, prove him, Al stulti loco, that is to say, wholly a fool: But he has
done it already, Sir, Look here, Sir.

(Pulls out a sealed parchment.)
Alo. Why then we will contract you.
You are content, Varina, to have this Gentleman.

Var. Since you command it.


Alo. You Will use her kindly, Sir.


Prae. Curse upon this magnificent corpse else; she shall have her Moletto's in
green Jackets to stoop to her, when she pleases to perfume the air with her
odoriferous countenance; and her Negro's to lay their heads for her to tread on.


Rub. And if you, Master, be not able for night work, and so forth, send for
me, I can do that.


Alo. Well, I Will trust you with her: Gaspar, let us go.


Prae. Farewell.
Exeunt Alo. and Gasp. Come Gentlewoman, me thinks I am as lusty as Nestor in
his second Age.

Rub. You may believe him, Mistress.


Prae. It seems to me that your beauty operates with my body, as the Sun with
the year; which makes the year throw off its russet mantle, and becoming young,
to take on its green coat: Now methinkes my bones, frozen with Age, are
dissolved, and distill into my Codpeece.


Rub. These words are in you, as the Primrose in the midst of Winter, but the
Primrose stinketh not so bad as your breath.


Prae. Now my former vigours return to my vitals; Atlas was but a weak Boy,
which could not scarce bear up that with his Shoulders, which with my little
finger I am able to sustain: Now could I with a kick of my heel, strike a Lane
through the Alps, and so make an in-road for dusky Neptune, I tell thee my
sweeting, Adonis, when he was beloved of Venus, was not so beautiful as I am.
Troth thou art supereminently beautiful too: Jove would think it no
disparagement to be a Cuckoo, a Swan, a Bull, on any thing, to enjoy the
beatitude of thy sweet society; Great Hercules would to school, and learn to
spin again for thy enjoyment, In brief, Lady, I love you.


Var. In brief Sir, though my Uncle pleas to think me worthy of no better a
spouse then your ridiculous self, in serious terms I cannot affect you it is
not the quaintness of your language that can charm me. If Cupid have no more
powerful darts then what drops from your tongue, he can wound but little. Sir,
it will argue your prudence to desist from this your enterprise, for my part I
had rather be of the society of Danaus daughters, and torment me in the
abissive Hogsheads, then be your bedfellow. But we poor Orphans being shuffled
out of our own estates, must be disposed of at the pleasure of our Guardians,
even to any one. But, Sir, in short, I shall esteem more highly of a wise man
in his shirt, then of a fool in his richest Trappings: and for my own part, I
cannot love you.


Rub. Never marry her then, Master: for if you do, you may chance be a kinsman
to the great Turk, and blazon the Horns for your Arms.


Prae. You do but jest, you speak not heartily?


Var. You Will find I am in earnest. Farewell, you know my resolution.


Exit. Prae. O Rubio, call her back.


Rub. Will she come when I call her?


Prae. Conjure her then.


Rub. I am no Negromancer, I never studied the black Art in all my life: But
do you hear Dona Varina I call you, I conjure you to come unto my Master Don
Praepontio. Sure, Master, she is no Devil, for if she were, she would have
risen at my conjuration.


Prae. But what shall we do to get her?


Rub. Faith, Sir, you and I and half a dozen more good fellows will rifle for
her, you shall have Dice will run nothing but sixes.


Exeunt. Scena secunda.
Enter Varina sola. THis doting Don thinks that his years have made
Him wise, in fishing with a golden bait,
And does presume his gold has power so far
For renovation of his aged Corpse,
As had Medea's enchanting spells to Aeson:
He thinks that women's aims are fixed on lands,
And that they frame their love on Silver-mines.
Treasure's no loadstone for a maids affection.
Alas! He does mistake our Sex in this,
Though Gold be welcome to enrich our train,
Yet not so far as that we should neglect
The chief of all, the person of a man:
Should we permit the flowers of our youth
Thus to be nipt by Ages snowy Winter,
And so bereave our selves of all those joys
Which Nature has conferred on our Sex,
While blooming in our youth, for earth and dirt?
No! it is not so, this is my resolution;
Gold with a Man is good, but if I choose,
I Will take the Man, and will the Gold refuse.
Exit. Scena tertia.
Enter Roderiguez solus. Unhappy eye! which did attract those beams,
To set my heart on fire! Unhappy ear!
Which did with such a greediness suck in
The charmings of her lips! and then convey
Them through thy winding palace to my brain,
Which works and beats, as if the Cyclops held
Their Forge within my head: Unhappy man!
Thus to become a slave unto thy passion!
Confine these lovesick thoughts, or drive them out,
Lodge not such enemies within thy breast,
They Will be thy ruin! But (alas!) my power
Is transmigrated to another breast;
Yet would it were, so might I hope at length
My love might crowned be with good success.
Dry up thy eyes.
Enter Chaves. Cha. Good morrow to you, Sir!
What passion has surpised you, that you seem
Another man? Eugenia's well, I hope.
Discover, friend, what strikes thee in these dumps;
Your eye betrays you, somewhat is amiss,
Prithee what is it?

Rod. Chaves, thou art my friend,
And 'twere a sin not to impart it to thee.
Here lately was a Lady, which my eye
No sooner did discover, but my heart
Was all involved in flames, a sudden ague
Seized upon all my limbs, that to approach
Nearer, or speak I could not: in this ecstasy
I stood awhile unmovable, till she
Quitted the place.

Cha. What is she? never despair,
Have her thou shall, though she were made of gold.

Rod. Varina is her name, she is well endowed
With all that Art or Nature can bestow;
That --

Cha. Feed not thy self with these; prithee what is she?
Where lives she? Pray reveal it.

Rod. Sir, her Father
Was a rich Merchant of this famous City,
Who dying in the Indies, left this his Orphan
Sole heir to his estate; which he bequeathed
Unto Alonza's care; he has betrothed her
Unto a foolish Lord, one Don Praepontio,

Cha. Expel these clouds of sorrow, we will make our wits
Outreach his wealth! Come! let us write a letter,
I Will have it safe conveyed; once get admittance,
And she is thine own.

Enter Varina. Var. Most sacred Goddess, to whose sacred shrine
The greatest Kings, nay Jove himself has bowed,
Contain my passions, keep my sudden Love
Within the bounds of maiden modesty,
Sweet Roderiguez! now me thinks I see
Majesty couched in thy serene brow,
Upon thy tongue enthroniz'd Eloquence
Within thy looks Cupid in's best array;
And when thou go, the humble ground does sink,
As if submissive to thy stately Port;
But Stay! my Passions, stay; let us pawse awhile,
My affections must not lead me in a maze;
Discretion does advise that Pallas rule,
And Cupid serve; she will me best direct
To my terrene Elysium, Pause awhile,
Listen to Judgments dictates; they are best.
The Carthaginian Princess lost her life,
And credit too by her too quick affection;
Phillis confiding in Demophoons vows
Did lay her Bridal pallet in the grave:
Repentance soon made Oenoes angry tongue
Condemn the rash credulity of her ears.
And so may I Varina, if I yield
To Passions hair-brained, wild instructions:
Then set a bay unto thy loves swift Current;
See his affections first, and if he prove
Loving to thee, Varina, do thou Love.
See, see the Object of my best respect;
Oh! did my heart enjoy that happiness
As does that Gentleman, whose subject ears
Such music entertain, as hovering spheres
Yield in their proper motions, his breath
Falls on his shoulders as does Zephyrus
On Flora's party color'd vestments, ah!
Why do I languish thus? I Will speak to him,
It is as fit for maids to court, as men;
If that the truth were rightly scanned; but niceness
And Custom do forbid it; its no sin
If well we weigh it in its proper balance;
Then set the better foot before, and try,
(She goes forward, but slies back) Oh! what exploit began I to attempt?
What, casting off the weed of modesty
To cloth my self with impudence? O fie!
Should it be said, Varina did disrobe
Her self of grace, and virgin-purity,
And turned masculine, to court a stranger?
No! back, base Cupid! thy Rhet'rick I scorn
Now in my second rumination, 't may be
That time will quench this burning Aetna in me,
Or heavens inspire him for to know my love:
Grant one of these ye Gods, and pity me,
Afford your help in this extremity.

Exit. Cha. Be it so, I Will send the letter.


Rod. I hold the mission of a letter best,
One line, one sentence with premeditation,
Quickens, does bear a greater prevalence
Then words extemporary can expect:
Words are like infants, whose unwelcome birth
(If premature) bring death unto their mother.

Cha. Let it be so. --


Rod. It shall be so, Apollo guide my pen,
And let thy Heliconian Fountains yield
Liquor unto it, that the thing I write
May there prevail, where rests my souls delight.

Exeunt. Scena quarta.
Enter Chaves and Picarro drawing. PIc. Come, come Sir, draw, or by this hand
and sword
I Will be your Priest.

Cha. Sure you mistake, I am not
The man you look for.

Pic. You shall find, my eyes
Have their true object: Coward, prate not, draw,
Let s view thy weapon.

Cha. Sir, your habit speaks you
A man, and noble, I admire your judgment
Should be so rash to quarrel with me, who
Never injured you, and to my knowledge, till
This time, never saw you.

Pic. All your Rhetoric
Shall not excuse your carcass, turn and fight,
Or perish.

Cha. Tell me why, and then you will find
I am no Coward.

Pic. Hear my reason, You
Have offered me an injury; I must not
Put up, while you do walk with that same nose:
Make have and draw; Draw, or this slave shall beat
Courage into thee, Coward.

Cha. Well, perforce
Since you will tempt a danger from my arm,
Receiv't.
Picarro falls. So now, I hope, you will yield the cause
Made you so valiant.

Enter Mariana. Mar. Stay, for pity save
Picarro's life, take mine, as you're a man,
Bridle your fury.

Cha. Do I dream? who speak?


Mar. A hapless Virgin! let the prayers and tears
Of one that never sued before, redeem
His life's dire forfeit: if you be so cruel,
That naught but blood will suit your anger, here
Sheath your bright weapon in my breast, my blood
Will sooner quench your irefull heat; kill me,
And let him live.

Cha. Sure she has stolen from heaven
An Angels utterance; had Ulysses heard
This Siren minurize, the mast had been
Too weak to hold him; Orpheus might have learnt
New notes to fit's harp; had a salvage Scythe,
Or untamed ^^re, when manacled they drive
Whole flocks of men before them, on whose flesh
Death strait should riot, hear her speak, their fierceness
Would soon relent, they would forget the sweetness
Of their inhuman banquet, and let loose
Those they had marked for slaughter.

Mar. Pray you Sir.


Cha. Historians truly may relate how stones
Followed Amphion to the Theban walls;
How lofty Ossa and Banchaia danced
At overhearing the Odrysian Lyre;
That Dolphins at Arions Harp grew tame,
And coucht their scaly backs to bear him out
Of Neptunes foamy surges; likely it is
And possible, since one Accent from her lips
Can work far greater miracles, I would raise
A man that long had bedrid lain; nay, were he
Witherd with feeble age, should she smile on him
He well might laugh at sage Meden's charms:
Tell Aeson then, that her blessed look had made him
Fuller of youthful vigours, then the force
Of her enchanted herbs infused into him.

Mar. Then you will save him? --


Cha. Look, how dark sorrow's beautified? how comely
She Is in her tears? they sit upon her cheeks
Like Erythraean pearls enchas'd on grounds
Of true Vermilion: Foolish Lapidaries!
What need you borrow of the frozen Zone
Congealed Ice? catch these drops, they are more precious
Then most transparent Crystal; I would fain
Grant thy request, but that I should too soon
Be exiled from that blessing which your presence
Fully affoords me; yet it is too unholy
That she should kneel, I Will raise her.

Mar. Here I Will lie.
(He offers to raise her.) Prostrate for ever, less you please to save
Picarro's forfeit life.

Cha. How happy, Heavens!
Is he in being vanquished, to have
So fair a saver? would my life had been
Put at his mercy: For your sake I Will grant
Him life on this condition, That he tell
What made him be my enemy.

Mar. This morning
If I mistake not, passing by our coach
As we were coming from our Vineyard, you
Pulled up the Curtains, drawn before, to see
Who were within, which he in heat of blood,
Took as a wrong, and followed you.

Cha. I Am sorry
I was discourteous.

Mar. Come Picarro, Signior,
I am your worths true servant.

Exeunt Mar. and Picarro. Enter Roderiguez and Boy. Rod. How now Chaves?
What drawn so near the City? pray heavens! my stay
Has not endangered you: met you with thieves?

Cha. With one has stolen my best of Jewels; Sir,
I am undone; lost friend for ever.

Rod. Why?


Cha. Look I not strangely over I did? My looks --


Rod. Why? What should aile you? Are you frighted, Sir?


Cha. Do not my eyes speak my hearts falsehood? Ha!


Rod. Chaves, dear friend, how fare you? Is all well?


Cha. I prithee be my Priest, and sacrifice
My treacherous carcass to Eugenia, do it,
And when I yield the Ghost, I Will tell thee friend,
That I fare well: never stare on me, my life
Is a worse torture then the rack, or wheel,
Ixions plague is but a play-game to it
Nor his that rolls the revoluble stone,
Nor that of proud Prometheus, on whose heart,
The Insulting Vulture preyes.

Rod. Alas! he raves!
What cursed Friend tempts you to be thus desperate?

Cha. Desperate? Kill me, let thy Rapier do it,
Never muse upon it, I deserve to die:
Do justice on me.

Rod. Tell me why, and then
Perchance I Will do it.

Cha. Hear me then, Suppose
I had a beauteous sister, you Roderiguez
Should vow her service, proffer her your love,
Get my consent, her fathers, and her heart too,
And aster fool both him and her, and me.
Should I not kill you, think you?

Rod. Yes, I deserved it.


Cha. Then here is my sword, I Have done all this and more,
The vow's I made to your Eugenia's nothing,
A dream, an airy shadow, you are fooled,
Your father's cousned by my hopes; it is true,
I love another.

Rod. It Is impossible;
Your fury makes you utter this.

Cha. By the hopes
I have that thou will kill me, I have spoke
No more but truth, by all that is good I have not:
I love another. --
I stole her countenance, but she my heart.

Rod You're a treacherous man,
Base and unworthy, take your weapon back,
Defend your self.

Cha. I will not, I confess
I have deserved death, but it grieves me, that
By thy hands I must suffer; but my fate
Is irresistible: Dispatch me.

Rod. Stay,
E're I do kill thee, think how ominous
Thy crime is: young men will abhor thee, virgins
Hearing thy fault, will with their imprecations
Heap tortures on thee: Poor Eugenia! Sister!
I grieve for thee most: Are you ready?

Cha. Yes!
Not to resist, but to be sacrificed.

Rod. I Will not become his Butcher: for the name
Of Friend, so often vowed between us, holds
My arms, I cannot strike him; live to see
Heaven work thy ruin: I Will not be thy Priest.
Farewell, false man, and look who e're thou wed,
She Will be a faithless strumpet to thy bed!

Cha. Thou lie, return, I Will fight: --
She, I now love, is one, thou oughtst not mention
Less on thy knees with reverence: one, whose looks
Would even allure a Hermit, who had spent
His years in solitude, to leave his Cell,
And heavenly contemplations, to admire
Her perfect essence, dare thou prophecy
Her for a strumpet? were thou armed with thunder
This arm should reach thee, Clouds of lightning shall not
Secure thee: Know Sir, she is one, whom Angels
Would to enjoy, desert their bliss, and vote
No less then adoration due unto
Her heavenly virtues --

Rod. He Is past hopes! more sisters
I have, more friends so worthy as himself
I never can hope for: Sir, I pity you
And can my service help you ought in gaining
Your Love, command it.

Cha. Mean thou thus?


Rod. You use not
To find me faithless: not my sisters wrong
Shall make me prove disloyal: may I know her
Is your new Mistress?

Cha. There Is my misery,
I know her notmy self, but it is the same
Was in the Coach we overtook.

Rod. Is It she?
That Is Mariana, Daughter to Alonzo
The Indian Merchant, I am well acquainted
With Garspar, noble Chaves: he, who is
Her Fathers Cash-keeper, him we will use as means
To win her for you: Our Varina lives
In the same house: come! let us about it.

Cha. Heavens prosper our designs, and may our fate
Make us in them, them in us fortunate.

Exeunt. Scaena quinta.
Enter Varina Sola. THose Sulphurous flames, which Aetna's fiery panch
Assidually into the air does vomit,
Bear not such force as does this Paphian fire:
Unconstant supposition never taught me
This instant lesson, but experience:
That poisoned token in the Centaures blood,
Which made Alcides burn in living flames,
Had not such vigor, as these parching fires:
Which, while I fan with sighs, and think by groans
To puff them out; the more (alas) they flame:
If not extinguished by some timely showers
My heart must turn an Aethiop: Come! sweet Boy!
Enter Boy And sing a Lachrymae unto my woes
A mournful Lachrymae, that from my eyes
Whole Seas of brinish liquor may arise
To drench this heat; I cannot now admire
That Cupids Father was the God of Fire.
Boy sings. 1.
Sweet Cupid hear
A Maiden vow;
Though thou art blind, thou have an ear;
Let him, whom I love, know
What pain and smart
Lies burning in my heart,
To this my humble boon dispense
Thy sacred influence;
And (though to cure thy eyes:)
Let not a Virgin full thy Sacrifice.
2.
Sweet Venus, see,
And make me blessed
Visit me in this misery,
Connive at my request:
Assist thy Son
Till he has done.
His mystic rites, and with new fires
Fulfill a Maids desires:
Else here I Will prostrate lie
For ever, and will Swan-like, singing die.
3.
Lendme a quill, etc.

Var. Enough! this yields but nutrimental food
Unto my dumpish humors; go, begone,
Exit Boy Poor soul! how art thou tortured in distraction,
And discomposed in various resolutions:
Sometimes to speak is countenanced as good;
But modesty steps in, and checks my impudence:
Then silence is thought best, but that would wrong
That noble Person that deserves my Love:
Thus while I practice for to quench the fire,
I do increase it, and it flames the higher.

Enter Thomaso (Chave's man) Tho. Save you, sweet Mistress, the noble Roderiguez
Desires but so much favor at your hands
As to peruse this his most humble missive.

Var. He may command a greater thing then this.

(She reads it)
Tho. I hope the Heavens do prosper our Achievements;
Her countenance warrants a good acceptande.

Var. You may for this time depart, and tell your Master,
That matters of such weight, desire some pawse:
Before we make an answer: Friend, too morrow
About this time you may expect it here:

Tho. All humble thanks, sweet Lady: at that time
I shall attend your pleasure: all sweet happiness
That can be wished, attend you.

Exit. Var. Friend! Farewell!
See how my storm is turned into a calm,
My clouded night into a sunshine day,
My heart but now deprest almost to death,
Revives, and grows too ample for my breast,
My fears are banished, and my joys become
Redundant and superlative: to you
O heavens! my duty does return her thanks!
And testifies it by her grateful hands.
(holds them up to heaven.) He, for whose sake I would exchange the world,
Now throws himself a servant at my feet:
But let me guide me in my bliss, and wear
My fortunes wisely in a formal fashion:
I must not countenance his suit too soon,
But bridling up my Love with judgments reins:
Keep at a distance, counterfeit my mind
To be so far estranged from Venus Court,
That 'twere as hard to make a Proselite,
As me a Soldier in the Paphian field:
Should I be prone and facile to his will,
In some few days my kindness would grow stale:
The shadow, when pursued does fly, but turn
Your back, and it in duty follows you:
Should I concede too soon, and not deny,
I should infringe the custom of us maids,
Who in the things we most of all desire,
Must feign neglect, or else a mere dislike:
Well then, how e're I Will play a maidens part,
And make me stubborn, though I break my heart.

Exit. Scaena Sexta.
Enter Gaspar, Mariana, Catalina. Gasp. FAith! you're a cunning Lover, I had
thought
I had deserved more interest in your trust,
Then that you thus should steal your nuptials, and
Never let me know on it, where is my gloves?

Mar. Why Gaspar?
Why should thou think I should be married?

Gas. Cause
I know it is truth; your Father has disclosed
The party to me.

Mar. Party? prithee speak;
And do not rest; what is that thou prat'st of? husband?
And Hymenaean rites?

Gas. As if you knew not!


Mar. Not I truly.


Gas. Nor shall you know it then for me, I might
Incur much danger, should I be but seen
To kiss your hand thus, discourse with you, in brief
It Is to the jealousest, most ignoble man
In all the City: so farewell, there is all
That I dare stay to tell you.

Cata. Bless you, Mistress.


Mar. Cousin, good cousin, leave me not, before
You have explained this riddle, on my life
I Will not disclose you told me.

Gas. May I trust you?
Mark then your fate, Your father has decreed
You for Don Balthazar old Frederiques heir,
They are agreed.

Mar. Save me Saints, I Would rather
Be wedded to a Leaper; one half bedrid,
Laden with gout, and all diseases, would not
Be half so odious to me: is it not he
That should have had Varina?

Gas. The same.


Mar. Sweet Gaspar,
Make some obstructions, and do thou, sweet Jove,
Be an impediment to that decree.

Gas. Cousin, alas! I have quite wearied him
With my petitions, but he is deaf as Nereus
Is to the shipwrackt Mariners, or rocks
Unto the bellowing surges of the Sea.

Mar. Thou have been always honest, Gaspar, and
A Friend, a Father to me: in this strait
I Will try thy love; advise which way I shall
Escape these nuptials; say, is it possible?

Gas. I shall be proud to do that office, Kings
Would glory in; to do you service, Saints
Would sure disert their bliss: Do you but speak,
Breath but one accent from those lips, the winds
Will all contend, which shall be first made blessed
With its conveyance; your sweet voice can charm
The Sirens silent, force the Crocodile
To leave his feigned weeping; at your looks
Palms would renew their freshness; aged hearts
Grow young again, Scythians be mild; if ever
Rash Phaetons sisters had beheld those drops,
They never more would boast their Amber tears
To be more precious.

Mar. Push! you flatter me!
What means this ceremony?

Gas. And had those creatures
Book-blinded men, that dream of other worlds,
Tell of Elysian blessings, known the joys
Are in your love, they would have lost themselves,
As I have done, in contemplation
Of this surpassing happiness, you bless
With its enjoying.

Mar. You are tedious, tell me
How to evade this mischief.

Gas. Pradon me,
I Am in a labyrinth, subtler then the cave
That held the Cretan Minotaure; it is easier
To catch wild Boreas, make Neptune calm
When he most rages, then to give your worth
Its just Encomiums. I Am so far transported
With rumination on it beyond my self,
That I have quite forgot your first demand.

Mar. Pray tell me Cousin, How may I delude
Balthasars nuptials?

Gas. It Is difficult,
There is but one way left, and that is to wed
Another, e're you come unto his bed.

Mar. Faith! any body, honest Gaspar, bring
Some aged Lazar from the Hospital,
Or towing Galliego, and I Will love
Him rather then the other, let me see
Whom thou would wish me to.

Gas. An honest man,
One I dare swear that loves you.

Mar. Nominate him:
By all that is good, I Will love him.

Gas. She Is my own.
I Will take you at your word --
(aside.) Behold the man, the true Idolater
Of thy perfections, one whose every thought
Is on thy virtues, how to give them reverence
Due to their merits.

Mar. This is brave, proceed,
You're Courtly grown, what spirit has infused
This unaccustomed phrase into you?

Gas. Your
Love which has power to give a dumb man utt'rance,
Make Idiots Orators to fill the world
With new inventions; consecrate this Age
Only to Poets, whose immortal lines
May celebrate thy praises. Though thy Father
Could be so perjured after a thousand oaths,
To seek to rob me of my interest in thee,
Yet the known goodness of thy Nature tells me,
Thou Wilt not be perjured too, I Am sure thou wilt love me.

Mar. Reason good, base man!
Did all this painted process tend to this?
Were Balthazar a man composed of vices,
Il'd sooner cast my self away on him,
Then on thy baseness: Loving'Coz. farewell!
You may go meditate to get a wife,
And ruminate on your most base desires
In the Grand- Placa. Walk, Sir.

Exeunt Mar. and Cat. Gas. Is there no thunder left in heaven? Has earth
Left all it is fear, it shakes not at the hearing
Of such inhuman perjuries, until
It have a rupture vast enough to swallow
At once the world, that it may never produce
Again such treacherous animals, as my fate,
My cursed fate torments me with: I am
A proper man, I Have limbs enough* because
I have a blemish in my blood, my Mistress
Rejects me; Thus should I in open Court
Sue for her as my wife: I have no means
To stand against her Father, and it is gold
That rules the Law now. Well! since all will be
Villains, why should I practice honesty?
I Have brains as well as other men, my spirit
Tells me, there is means to right the wrong. Who Is this?

Enter Roderiguez. Rod. Gaspar? the man I looked for.


Gas. Don Roderiguez!
What drew you hither?

Rod. Sir, my business is
Now with your self; Your Master has a daughter
I have a most deserving friend affects
Her dearly, will thou be a means to gain
Her favor for him?

Gas. I did take you Sir,
To Have been a person of more real worth
Then thus t'assay a servants loyalty;
Think you my Masters daughter shall become
A prostitute? If this be all your business,
I must not stay to hear it.

Rod. Thou mistak'st,
I have no such intention, thou shall raise
His daughter with a marrige to a man
Of noble Blood and Fortunes.

Gas. But her Father
Has promised her to one he will not break with.
You cannot have her.

Rod. Hold! there is gold, thou shall
(Gives him money.) Persuade her love my friend, I know thou can,
My honest Gaspar. --

Gas. Sir,
I am a man whom stepdame Fortune made
To eat my bread in servitude, my Master
Is all the hopes I live by, and my trust
Has gained me some respect above a servant;
Should I undo his purpose, cross this match,
For your sakes, I should win the execrations
Of all true servants; and perchance your selves
Seeing me false to him, would fear t'impose
Confidence in me: pray receive your gold,
I must not do it.

Rod. Come! thou shall, the man
Thou do it for will raise thee far beyond
Thy expectation, Gaspar.

Gas. May I trust you?


Rod. What needs these doubts?

Gas. Then know my Mistress hates
The person whom her Father would bestow
Her on in marriage; would your friend, or you,
Or any one, there is in the City you may hire
To kill him, then admission will be easy.

Rod. Most excellent! his name? he is sealed for death.


Gas. Balthazar, Frederiques heir, to morrow night
Your friend and you come to the window, and
Bring something that may please her, and never doubt
You shall have gentle audience.

Rod. I Will about it.


Exit. Gas. Do, on your shoulders I my self will rise
To quit my Masters monstrous perjuries.

Exit. ACT. 2.
SCENE 1.
Enter Varina sola. THus have I framed, though long first, my rescript,
As well as the poor Minerva of my brain
Enabled me; it is tart enough, I Am sure,
To vulnerate and pierce a heart of steel:
If his affection's biased with virtue,
He Will re-addresse to me to work the cure,
What Pelias wounded, it alone could heal;
The limb that is burnt we hold unto the fire,
Loves wounds must have their Balsam from that hand
That made the Ulcer. Stay! th'Times Clock does prompt me
This hour Thomaso promised to be here,
To bear my answer back. He comes: Your actions
Enter Thomas Are comments to your words, and what your tongue
Of late expressed, your diligence performs.
Tho. Right worthy Lady, should I vilify
My faith by misperformance, I should think
My self degenerate from what I was.

Var. Your words engage my faith; friend, there is my answer.


Tho. Thanks worthy Lady, this shall surely have
Acceptance far more gracious from your servant,
Then such a Jewel which the Egyptian Queen
(To add a complement to sumptuousness)
Dissolved drank unto her Anthony.

Var. Then bear it to him instant, it may be
His expectation may be harrass'd out:
For what desire commands us to expect,
Time, if protracted, makes us disgust;
Haste therefore, and farewell.

Exit. Tho. Adieu! sweet Lady!
Now if this Letter bear a gentle sense,
And gives a Fiat to Rod'riguez suit,
His heart will mount so high with joy, that it
Enter Roderiguez. Outstrips imagination. Noble Sir --

Rod. What news Thomaso? come and glut my ears
With comfortable tidings.

Tho. Whether such
As you expect, Sir, or the contrary,
Resides not in the confines of my knowledge.

Rod. Spoke you not with her at the time prefixed?


Tho. Yes! and her mind salutes you in this paper.


Rod. Came this from her?


Tho. I had it from her hands.


Rod. Had thou encompast all this Universe,
Especially the East and Western India,
And ransackt either of them for their pearls:
Or had thou ripped the bowels of the earth,
And laid her hidden treasure at my feet,
It could not have procured the hundredth part
Of that content, as does this piece of paper.

Tho. Still may't be multiplied, and augment
Your wished beatitude a thousand fold.

(He reads it.) Rod. What have we here? A slat denial? Ha?
Hard-hearted Lady! had thou spectacles
Which might so help thy optitick faculties,
As to behold my bleeding heart, thou could not
Choose but relent, and love me for my love.

Tho. Patience, noble Sir --


Rod. It Is cruelty! alas sh'ad courteous been
Had she procured my death, or my proscription:
But thus to charact'rize my torments, and
To dally with my flames, does argue she
Studies the Art of inhumanity.

Tho. Let not such thoughts find harbor in your breast,
Exile them thence.

Rod. They took possession:
And cannot easily be extruded thence.

Tho. Why then encounter her your self, and speak:
Let not a Letter daunt you, storm again:
Your parts do speak you man, and you may win her:
It may be she observes formality,
In these her actions: and for fashion sake
Her tongue says no (as maidens use to do)
When as her mind thinks yea: good Sir, about it.

Tho. Thy Councel's prevalent, and I Will observe,
Next time I Will try her: and my reasons shall
Triumph victorious, or in th'Duell fall.

Exeunt. Scena secunda.
Enter Hebes Solus. OH! my decayed panch! is it not a miserable case that a man's
belly should never see a piece of roast beef, nor ones guts feel one drop of
double drink in two years? There Is one Mr. Want, a lean Gentleman of our
Parish, has so debarred me from sustenance, that I scarce weigh threescore on
each side, besides feet, head, legs, and offall. There Is an old shaver they
call Don Praepontio, that lives hereabouts, that maintains his men every day in
holyday bellies, and their chaps strut, as if they were created for nothing but
to blow bagpipes: now, if I could scrue into his service, my spiny Carcass
would begin to whine as a dog after flesh, when his chaps run over. But soft,
sure this is he.

Enter Praepontio and Rubio. Heb. I Will make as if I knew him not, and praise
him to's very face, and then I Will warrant you.


Prae. Thus perambulating all alone, I ruminate on the multiplicity of those
joys, that my Varina might afford me.


Heb. Save thee honest friend.


Prae. Why? what art thou?


Heb. What am I? Thou see I am neither horse nor mare, bull nor cow, hog nor
pig, dog nor rat, mouse nor cat, fish nor flesh, nor good red herring: but as I
may say, a mere man.


Prae. My Mistress will be well taken, Rubio, to hear this fellow talk; but
say, art a mere man, can thou keep thy money, and not grease the ale-wifes
fingers with it?


Heb. How? grease the ale-wifes fingers with it; nay I should prove a very fool
then: for she might then grease my face with her talons, for not paying my
reckoning.


Prae. Well spoken of a fool.


Heb. I, by my faith, Master, was it.


Prae. I mean, can thou keep thy money from spending?


Heb. I, Master, if I had it.


Prae. Will thou live with me?


Heb. I, Sir, an't please you, I Am dissolved on that point already.


Prae. Go, stand at the Curtains, and seal your lips. Did thou invite her,
Rubio? you must wait very attentively at her elbow, and if perchance a drop
fall from her mouth, you must be sure to catch it, I Will have it put in a
reliquary: but does not my great ruff become me admirably? will she not like
me, think thou, in this suit? I will coin words shall make her in love with
me.


Rub. You will bewitch her with your very looks, never doubt it; you look now
more completely then the great Mogull, or the Archduke.


Prae. I have a Lions Countenance.


Rub. Nay, a Bears rather, or a Baboons, you look so smug on it, Master.


Prae. But did thou see what an admirable piece of Poetry I consarcinated in
my bed; nay, in my sleep, Rubio?


Rub. Some drowsy Poem.


Prae. Ovid de Art Amandi was never like it: Hold my Cloak Rubio, do you see?


Rub. I see your backside, Sir.


Prae. But mark my Verses, how melodiously they run upon their feet.


Rub. They gallop.


Prae. Mark. Hem -- hem -- hem.

If you would old Natures wonder
See, list while I her praise out-thunder:
Her head a Cedar over-growes,
Her rosy Cheeks, and radiant Nose,
Her hands Lillies, for eyes behold
Amber or Barbary Gold:
From her middle to her knees,
Guess what monstrous rarities
Lie hid: the Tropic Zone cannot
Burn, or cast forth flames so hot,
As does my heart, it is she must heal me,
Or Death will with his paws bemeale me.
How like thou it?


Rub. Horribly, beyond expression.


Prae. I will write a whole volume of such Elegies, and put down Lope de vega,
or Gacilasso's Poems.


Rub. You must get tunes to them, they will pass for excellent new Ballads.


Prae. O! my Uncle!


Alv. O! my wise kinsman, what says your Mistress?


Prae. O Uncle! she is the noblest, wittiest woman that ever I encountered with
since I gallopt over the Alps; she surpasses me in ingeniosity for all my
travels.


Rub. And my Master, God bless his worships Coxcomb, told her, you would give
her Holland Cheese, Parmasane, and Calves-head to breakfast if she would have
him.


Prae. Nay, Uncle, she asked me if you would give her your land at Granada.


Alv. And what did thou answer?


Prae. Peace, sirrah, Uncle, aspect my judgment in being responsible: I said,
I, that he will, if I thought the old dotard would not, I would dash out his
brains.


Alv. Thank you Nephew! How then?


Prae. For, quoth I, although he were hanged, or drowned, or dead any way,
though the Devil should carry him away in a Harricane, I should have his land,
being as I am, eldest son to his eldest sister; is it not so Uncle? I know my
Pedigree.


Rub. Master, you need no Herald to blaze your worth, you can do it
sufficiently your self.


Prae. True! very true; but Uncle, shall I dance with my Mistress anon, I long
to meet her in a measure, I can so caper it.


Enter Alonzo, Varina, and Servant. Alv. Here comes your Mistress, and her
Uncle.


Prae. Pray let me accost them.


Alv. Welcome noble friends.


Prae. For your part, Sir, a posteriore I salute you thus; and your Sir, thus,
with this Italian Frisco: But as for you, my superabundant Mistress, accept the
Foet^^ of my Minerva for your congratulatory welcome.


Var. It Is pity, servant, you are not pictured with a Laurel wreath in your
forehead.


Rub. Or rather with a Coxcombs Crest, Mistress.

( Aside.
Prae. But my most inestimable Mistress, I must dictate to you, That you
vilify my brains fecundity, in not applauding my ingenious conceptions, since
sure you love me.


Rub. Better then she loves Plum-porredge, or Minc't-pyes, I dare protest.


Prae. Tell me then, thou Masterpiece of Nature.


Rub. Mistress-piece, Sir, she is a woman.


Prae. Does not the superficies of my countenance demonstrate as much love as
Don Quixot's, or Gerardo's, the unfortunate and ominous Spaniard? am not I kin
to the Family of the Guzmans, think you?


Rub. Alias, Goosman; alias, Goodman Goose.

(aside.)
Prae. And am I not the most acute, complete, polite Itinerator that ever
caper'd over the Alps, and the Pyrenaean mountains, and the most sublime and
ingenious Poet that ever drank of the Heliconian, Castalian, and Pierian
Fountains: Have not I sixteen languages exactly, perfectly, and perspicuously.


Rub. Sixscore, Master.


Prae. Come, my supereminent Mistress, let us expatiate to refresh our palats
with our delicious banquets, the minc't pies, and the Plumpudding which my
English Cook made me, will be cold else. Come, sirrah, follow.


Exeunt. Heb. Now my sweet guts and garbege, my Fathers old Boots were never so
liquor'd and greased as you shall be.


Exit. Scaena tertia.
Enter Chaves, Roderiguez, and Boy. Cha. Have thou the Song? Boy?


Boy. Yes, Sir.


Cha. Are the Musicians ready?


Boy. They expect behind you pillar.


Cha. But art thou sure this is her window?


Rod. The same, never fear, we shall have audience.


Boy sings. 1
Hail Mariana! let thine eyes
From their sable Clouds arise,
And dart their fire
(At our desire)
To re-illuminate the skies.
2
The Moon is down, the Stars do hide]
Their luster, and our zeal deride,
Vnveil thy beams,
Those goldenst eams
Will vye them in their greatest pride.
3
Shine forth sweet light! one gentle ray
Will drive, our dismal night away;
And make us deem
Sol mounts his Team;
Our zeal shall swear it is break of day.
4
Let us, sweet Saint, thy virtues know,
How great a brightness they can show,
Tell us the Sun
Is backward run,
And that he has reverst his Plough.
5
Shine out sweet Venus, thou can soon
Transcend the Taper of the Moon,
And with thy light
Quicken the night,
Turning our Morning into Noon.
6.
Hail! Mariana, cast an eye
With a relenting sympathy;
Vnvail the books
Of thy sweet looks,
And let me read my Destiny.

Rod. So now depart, and charge the Musicians they say nothing.


Boy. I will Signior.


Exit. Rod. The window is opened, friend, list who speaks.


Mariana and Catalina, out at the window Mar. I marvail, Catalina, who bestowed
This Music on us; it was good and sweet.

Cat. Some one, that dogged you home from Alvarado's,
Some Amorado.

Rod. Speak Sir, now or never.


Cha. All peace content and joy attend you Ladies.

Mar. What man art thou, that when Nights Curtain's drawn,
And with her sable mantle vails the skies,
Dare venture on our secrets?

Cha, One, you promised
When for your sake I saved Picarro's life,
To keep in memory.

Mar. Sir, if you are he,
I am obliged, I confess, to honor
Your nobleness, but these untimely hours
Admit no conference: for your Music, Sir,
We give you thanks; so much I love you, that
I Will not endanger you, if you be seen,
You run your life's dire hazard, Sir, good night,
Fair thoughts attend you.

Cha. Stay! for Loves sake, were there
Dangers as thick here, as there is stars above us,
I would contemn them all; if death it self
Should here encounter me, l'ld scorn the fury:
Tell him his hand had here no power; your presence
Makes men immortal.

Mar. Cause you shall not, Sir,
Condemn me of discourtesie; I Will stay,
But to your purpose, let me know it briefly;
Or I must be unmannerly.

Cha. Why then,
In brief I love you, and desire your love.

Mar. And is this all, good night! --

Cat. Hear him out, Mistress, he is an honest Gentleman,
I know by's words;

Cha. My zeal could tell you, Lady,
That your are fair; you know it; that your eyes
Clothe night in days robes, and eclipse the stars
With their bright luster; that you are the model
Of Natures artifice, her true Idea,
In whose brow Art and Beauty wedded meet,
But these, dear Mariana, and the like
Pedantick terms, I leave to those whose loves
Are in their lips; I Will be as plain in speech,
As zealous in respects; my deeds shall speak
My Love no Changeling

Mar. But I cannot, Sir,
Nor must not love you many one would feed
Your flames with frustrate species to deride
Your passions, but I do carty with me
More honest thoughts: as you have been, I Will be
Brief: save your labor Signior, they are fruitless,
You sing to the deaf, and plough the sandy shore,
I must not love you.

Cha. I Am obliged to you!
It Is well and nobly done to put an end
To my hot tortures, view this blade, the same
Which for your sake I did restrain from shedding
Picarro's blood for better ends; shall now
(goes to stab himself.) In bloody Characters write me thy Martyr.

Rod. Hold! hold! for heavens sake; hold! --
What mean you Chaves?

Cha. Nothing, but to open
A vein that is stopped; it is good for me to bleed:
My sword will be a good Phlebotomist,
I Am sick of the Plurisy; a burning fever!
It Is better once to die, then thus to live
In lingering flames; and piecemeal crumble: ha!
Be thou my friend; and since my Life cannot,
Let death now make me pitied: Let me die!

Mar. You're a faint hearted Soldier; what dashed
At first repulse? admit I could afford
You heart-room in my breast: you might well think
Me very light, should I at once be wonn
Without experience of your Loyalty:
Besides, our Countries use permits not Children
To choose their husbands: It Is my Fathers care,
Get his consent, and peradventure I
May yield to love you.

Cat. Do sweet Mistress, he is
A very honest man: I Would take his word.

Cha. Look! how the enamored air hangs over her lips
To suck a blessing from them? I can think
Now 'twas no fable, that bold Boreas
Rapt fair Orithya, since I see him haste
To ravish thee of that too precious breath,
Thy words expire with; it will make his own
Sweeter then Syrian winds, when naught but Myrrh

And Bysse perfume them.
Mar. You're too hasty Sir.
It is impossible that I should love you,
I am contracted.

Cha. Yet it is in your power
To love your servant.

Mar. If Anatomists
Tell truth, that say, In The Center of our hearts
There is a little Concave, where resides,
Our best affections; then your Augury
Must needs be truth, for all the love lies there,
Is to another worth engaged.

Cha. Make me
But of your privy Council, pray reveal him.

Mar. Then know, since first I saw you, I have been
(The night will hide my blushing to your face)
A true devotarist to your lovely virtues;
Deride me not, dear Signior.

Cha. I am
Ravished beyond my hopes, my heart's too narrow,
Too strait-lac'd for th'exuberance of my joy.

Enter Balthazar. Balt. This is the house: now Gaspar I shall see
Thy truth, I hear some mutt'ring. --

Mar. Walk round the house, my maid shall let you in.


Bal. It Is she, I hear her voice, and here he comes.
Sir, stay, you must not pass so.

Rod. What art thou?
That thus presum'st to over-hear our secrets,
And rashly tempt thy death.

Bal. I am a man,
Thy equal every way.

Rod. About your business,


Cha. Sirrah, be packing, or I Will send you hence.


Balt. Were you encompassed with hot lightning, armed
With Corslets made of Dragons maile, your breath
As poisonous as a Vipers, or a Toads,
Yet I alone would dare t'encounter you.

Rod. You're very valiant: Frenzy prompts you thus,
Or else it is some fat Fleming, who being drunk,
Has lost his way to th'Brothell, and does think
To find his drab here: Friend, you have lost your way:
Be wise, and save your carcass by a retreat:
You I walk, nay make a leg, and thank me too
For letting you to pass, or I shall teach
Your noll more manners.

Bal. Teach thy self, false man,
More honesty: which of you is it, that
Thus Courts my Mariana? cause to him
I only speak.

Cha. It Is I.


Bal. Then let me tell you:
You injure one, that never injured you:
She Is mine, betrothed to me:

Cha. I Am sorry 'twas
My hapless fate to meet you in this place,
I shall but poast you through the Avernal Lakes
On Ambassy to Pluto: and desire
Those Deities to fit you with a Mistress:
You Will have her forcibly, although you see
She cannot love you? gentle friend, put up!
This is a glorious quarrel, every drop
Of blood, that is spilt, will have a Crown beyond
The palm of Martyrs* For my Mistress? come!
Address your self to prayers first.
(Draws.)
Balt. Prithee stay:
Thou seem a person qualified, before
We fight and die (for that one of's must do)
Think what unworthy and inhuman cause
You stand to justify with blood: her Father
Has given her me, before whole Quires of Saints,
(Heavens hierarchy) we were contracted: do not,
Blinded with lust, run headlong to a sin,
So foul and horrid: hazard not your souls
Lasting salvation in a quarrel, so
Unjust on thy part: say, 't should be my fate
(As it may be) to kill you: what a mass
Of endless woe thou pluckst upon thy head?
Had thou no other crimes to charge thy soul,
Think what a monstrous, and ignoble sin
Is supplantation in this kind of wrong:
Above Astraea's Laws? A Christian, Sir,
(As you should be) at naming this would have
A frigid palzy in his veins: pray, tell me,
Feel you no Earthquake in you?

Cha. Thus, and thus
I Will Catechize you.
(Stabs him)
Bal. Oh!

(falls)
Rod. So preach in hell:
We have full entrance now, but least the noise
Disturb the house, we'd best depart, and come
When the next night in favor to us shrowds
Sleeping Olympus in her dusky clouds.

Cha. I do approve your counsel: --


Exeunt. Balthazar rises up. Bal. So! they are gone: I Am hurt, my loss of blood
Makes my legs falter: Fool, to shed a drop
In an effeminate quarrel: can the name
Of woman pass without fell execrations
Through these parcht lips? henceforth I will evade them,
As the infectious scum of pestilence:
To Troy once famous one base Helen brought
A final ruin: fair Persepolis
Had still stood Asia's glory, had not Thais
(That obscaene Thaiuml;s) by her witchcraft made
Fond Alexander to consume't by fire:
Each woman is a plague: I justly may
Curse their whole sex, since Mariana's false.
I must be silent.

Enter Gaspar. Gasp. Balthazar?


Bal. Who art thou?


Gasp. It Is I, your servant Gaspar! are my words
Not truth: have you not met with them: Alas!
I fear you're wounded: Sir, base villains! --

Bal. Yes doubly Gaspar, for my bodies harms
Surgeons may cure them: but the wounds my mind
Suffers, 's past help of plasters: Oh! I bleed:
These are but scratches, here is a wound indeed.

Gasp. Faith! think not on it, Sir, she may be honest,
Though she has suitors: women will delight
In the plurality of servants.

Bal. But
That she whostood the Goddess of my love,
Whose truth should Angels with me 've sought to blast,
I should have judged them liars: should be thus
Inconstant, false: this puts me quite beyond
The confines of all reason!

Gasp. Good Sir! patience.


Bal. Patience! what is that? pray carry me to some
Infected Pesthouse, or foul Hospital,
Where all diseases flourish: where no sound
Person can enter, but he must return
Full fraught with all contagions: there I Will steal
From one a plague sore; rob another of
His purple spots, this of a fever, till
I have engrossed all maladies, that carry
A spreading rancour with them, and that have
Death in their bosoms: then I Will straitway come,
And keep society with none, but women:
Til the whole sex have shared of death, and those
(For some will live) that do remain to keep
Earths store alive, be so infected, that
Their future issue be all monstrous: Tell me,
Should I not fit her then for this, and all
That bear the name of women?

Gas. Sir, you grow
Outrageous in your passion; your blood
Carries a fervor, that will not let this pass
Without revenge; I Will work the means, if you
Have heart to act it.

Bal. Will thou do it?


Gas. Never fear't:
Go to your lodging, dress your wounds, you may
Inform her Father at your leisure.

Bal. Well,
I Will rest upon thy care, and make my hand
In thanks retaliate thy just deserts.

Gas. O! that I could but borrow for this instant,
A vipers breath to blast thee, but it is well,
Vines clip not Elms for nothing, I must twine
About them subtly, till they kiss the earth,
Or else my ends will have abortive birth.

Exit. Scena quarta.
Enter Varina. Var. NOw should I be intrapt in my own Gin,
Whom should I blame, but only my false heart?
Should that unkindnesse dropping from my pen,
Extinguish quite poor Roderiguez flame,
On whom should I disgorge my troubled stomach,
But on my self? it is pretty to consider
How I expose my self unto a wound,
To make another bleed. --

Enter Roderiguez. Rod. Pardon, sweet Damsel, this my bold intrusion,
Urged not by rude behavior, but by love.

Var. Sir, you're a stranger; but if it be void
Of ill intent, your pardon's quickly sealed.

Rod. If that to evidence the true affection
I always bare unto your noble self,
Be ill intent, then my access is conscious.

Var. To court me with your love, Sir, it is strange,
I Am a poor Orphan, one whom Fate decreed
To hang my Fortunes on another girdle,
Time sure has proved himself a cunning Artist,
That in so short a space could frame a subject
For your affection; it is not long a go
My eyes took their first notice of you.

Rod. Time.
Is not that cunning Artist, but your virtues,
Which through the winding unequal of my ears,
Conveyed this winding admiration to my heart,
It Is not your means, sweet Lady, but your love
That I now covet: For your guardians favor,
I weigh it little, so you will grant me yours:
Throw not those angry fireballs of thy eyes
Upon me who am Touch-wood, lest I here
Moulder to ashes; bid them that they keep
Fast their Artillery; it is your milder beams,
Those rays of favor that we now request.

Var. Though I am conscious of no demerits
Residing in me, that might claim these praises,
These pick-thanks of your tongue, I think my self
Too good to entertain a scornful jeer;
For honors sake forbear't.

Rod. Wretched mistake!
That you should once conceive my heart could lodge
The least base thought that is Traitor to your honor!

Var. But hear me, Sir, Once walking with my Nurse
For recreation in our shady groves,
She told me her prophetic spirit feared
Some false One would betray me to his love,
And to my ruin.

Rod. If 'twas me she meant,
The Sibyll lied.

Var. However, it breeds suspicion.


Rod. What demonstration of my zealous faith
Can this your incredulity exact?
Shall I contend in combat with the Lion?
Or else affront the ugly foaming Boar?
What is it that I shall do? Speak, and it is done:
Shall I betake my self to the Russian Fields
In The midst of Winter, where my faithful blood
May freeze to Coral, and my sad laments,
Congeal with the air? Shall I devote my self
A sactifice to Aetna, or to Neptune?
Shall I atchieve to fetch the golden fruit
From th'scaly Dragon? pluck fell Cerberus out
From's stinking den? These, or a thousand more,
I Will do at your command.

Var. To promise, Sir,
Is easy, when performance lags behind.

Rod. 'S your heart so prepossest, that there is no room,
No corner left to hold one grain of faith?

Var. I Will try your love; here, take this, drink it off.
(gives him wine) Leave not one drop in the bottom of the cup.

Rod. What e're it be, I Will banish fear and do it.

(drinks.)
Var. Is It off?


Rod. It is.


Var. Then know that thou art poisoned.
This is that draught which to Ulysses mates,
In stead of drink sage Circe did extend;
It Is venoms quintessence, rank poison.

Rod. Poison?


Var. Yea, poison! not the ugly Toad includes
Worse venom then that potion.

Rod. Methinks,
I feel no alteration in my blood.

Var. I know that too. Th'time for its operation
Is not yet come; some sev'n hours hence, and then
A deadly fire raging within thy breast,
Shall make thy Arteries crack, and tear thy nerves:
An Iron girdle shall not hold thy body
It shall so swell with this envenomed draught.

Rod. Alas! good Lady, you much fail in the end
For which you practice this; you plot my torture
By fear of death, alas! you do mistake,
My love shall own you for her greatest friend:
For thus to live, deprived of your love,
Is worse ten thousand times then death it self.
Then, thank you for this cruel courtesy,
I will not style you cruel, or hard hearted,
But pitiful, a kind and loving Lady,
And so will limb your virtues to the life:
This kindness chalenges my best respects;
First, that you fix a period to my flames:
Next, that I dye a sacrifice to you:

Var. What? Art thou glad to die, and proud to fall A victime by my hands?


Rod. Your victime, Lady!


Var. Do not dissemble, in the heavenly Quire
There Is no permission for an hypocrite
To be a Chorister; do not palliate
Th'internall thoughts with such Hypocrisy.

Rod. I scorn the Title of an Hypocrite,
I lived your Lover, and will dye your Martyr.

Var. Then am I sorry for my cruel act.
There, take thou that, and work thine own revenge
(gives a bodkin.) While time permits.

Rod. It shall not be, sweet Lady.
First, should these eyes behold these wretched hands
Pluck forth my entrals: should my harmless soul
When it is transported over Charons passage,
But have intelligence that you were injured.
It would return, and kill your enemy.

Var. What needs a further trial of thy love?
Then know, that draught I gave thee was not poison,
But is as cordial as the Hyblaean neclar.

Rod. This is beyond the fadome of my weak
Conception's, that you durst expose your life
To one, whom you (for ought he knew) had injured.

Var. I durst expos't to thee, I knew thy heart,
Forgive me now the rude assault I made
Upon thy patience: here accept my hand,
My heart, my love, it is all thine own.

Rod. This gift
Is more to me then the Oriental Empire,
Which lies embroidered with earths chiefest treasure,
Pactolus, nor proud Tagus cannot bring
So rich a Present to their native Prince,
As is Varina's love: Alas! one kiss
Stolen from her lips, is worth the Grand-Signiors bliss.

Exeunt. Scaena quinta.
Enter Gaspar, solus. I Will be an Argus, for no other name
Will better sit me; I will watch this Io,
I Will dive into her secrets, and her maids;
I Will look with Eagles eyes into her ways,
And went she through her actions as the snakes
Glide over the stones, yet would I find their tract.
Exit. Scena sexta.
Enter Alonzo, Frederique, Picarro. Alo. LEt me persuade you, Brother, to
surcease
This endless suit, what wilt advantage you
To keep his carcass?

Fred. Why ran he in debt?
I could have kept my money.

Pic. Sir, my Father
Does not deny to pay you, all he asks
Is time of payment.

Alo. Can he offer fairer?
He owes me money, yet I so respect
Alvarez credit, that I Will take his word
Without security.

Fred. And because you
Will play the fool, and lose your money, must
I do so too; let me then have his land.

Pic. Sir, if you will take my bond, I will oblige
My self, and all the land my Father leaves me,
To give you satisfaction.

Fred. Keep your land,
Sow garlic on it, I will have naught but money*
Give me my money.

Alo. You're the strangest man
That e're I dealt with, had not you far better
Take that then loose all* say, he die in prison,
What will you get then?

Fred. 'S body, that I Will sell
To the Dice-makers, they shall put his bones
To the same use they were at while he lived,
He may thank's gaming for it, the Dice, and ^s Drabs.

Pic. My patience will not hear this* Covetous man,
Were It not for th'reverence I ow, this house,
Thou should not thus abuse thy betters --

Fre. He
Threatens, bear witness, Sir, I Will have your tongue
Bound to the peace.
Enter Balthazar.
Alo. Balthazar, pray persuade
Your Fathers patience.

Bal. Where Is your daughter, Sir?
Not stirring?

Alo. Yes! -- Mariana!

Enter Mariana
Ma. Did you call?


Bal. My business, Sir, is private.


Alo. We'll withdraw.


Exeunt Alonzo, Frederique, Picarro. Bal. Good morrow, Mistress, slept you well
last night?
Your eyes look red, I doubt you slept not well.

Ma. What makes you look so ghastly?


Bal. Faith! I dreamed
Last night, that being underneath your window,
I heard men talk there, and you answer.

Ma. Dreams
Are foolish fancies, and it is witchcraft, Sir,
To credit them.

Bal. Nay more, I heard you vow
Love unto one, and bid him come and enter
Into your Conclave; you do understand me?

Ma. Yes! that you dreamed so.


Bal. And as he was going,
I staid his passage, and he wounded me.
And when I wak't, blushing Aurora told me
That I was wounded.

Ma. Sir, You did but dream,
Believe it not.

Bal. Yes, Mariana, see
This Crimson livery which your servants bounty
Last night bestowed upon me, it is a brave one,
Does't not become me finely?

Ma. Saints protect me!
How came you hurt, my dearest Balthazar?
You are not wounded?

Bal. This is brave, she will
Persuade me she is innocent. O woman!
How various are thy humors? thy devices?
How sly thy projects? Men with ease can find
Natures obscurest reaches, overreach
The craft of Serpents, tame wild beasts, and bring
All things to their subjection, only woman
With her deceit, surpasses man, confounds
His best capacity. But tell me, Mistress,
Did you not see me wounded?

Ma. I? These eyes
Would have turned blind at such a sight; let us see!
Is your wound dangerous?

Bal. Heavens! I think deceit
Has left its room in Hell, and built its mansion
Within thy breast: Is It possible your face
Can be so full of impudence, to swear
A thing so false?

Ma. He raves! I Will call for help!


Bal. Yet more Maeanders! tell me hypocrite,
My fine dissembler, who it was you set
To be my Butcher? I Will not seek revenge;
But (as my duty is) go kiss his hands,
Prostrate my neck unto his honored feet,
Because my Mistress loves him.

Ma. Las! he is frantic!


Bal. True! you have made me, Mariana, were there
Any evasion to excuse thy crime,
I should be ready to believe thou might
Be blameless yet! But I have proofs that banish
All probabilities, my ears can tell
That you are turned Harpy; Oh! there is no trust,
No faith in woman left!

Mar. Yet in this fury?
Dear Balthazar, what have your jealous eyes
Observed in my behavior? You should think
That when my Fathers will has made me yours.
I should fall off and take another.

Bal. Nothing!
My eyes and feeling fail me, all my senses
Were wrapped in ecstasies of endless pleasure,
To think you were my Mistress: I do know
That you are virtuous, your affection's wholly
Bent to my love; let me but kiss your hand,
But touch it only, and you will soon perceive
With what an equal temper I can do it;
I Am none of those who carry hot-houses,
Stoves in their blood, I Have been too cold a Lover,
Too modest with you, therefore you reject me.

Mar. Yet more outrageous?


Bal. And have taken one
Some strange-backt monster, whom perchance you have seen
Out of your window in the Placa, take
The quick Strapado nimbly, or have born
Some massy burden, and his big-made joints
Never crack beneath his ponderous weight, that promised
An abler body to content your lust,
More raging then a Goats; be brief, who is it?
Some slavish Galliego, that has stolen
My interest in thee?

Ma. You're a foul mouthed man!
Come you to rail? you shall find fuel friend
To feed your fire with, till its hear has burned
Thy intrails out; I love another, go,
And tell my father on it, nor you nor he
Shall know his name: it was the same that hurt you,
You may go tell, Sir.

Bal. Impudence, declare
(draws his sword.) Or perish.

Mar. Murder!

Enter Alonze, Frederique, Gaspar.
Alo. How now Balthazar?
What drawn upon my daughter? it is not fair.

Mar. Pray give an ear unto my short request;
As you're my Father, kill me, e're my name
Be blasted thus by this ignoble man,
Whose head has forged a crime against me; Fiends
Would never have dreamed of.

Bal. Strumpet!


Alo. Sir, desist.
You have done more already then you will answer.

Mar. He charges me, that underneath my window
Last night some people hurt him; that he heard
Men talk to me: which how it is possible,
And you not hear it, judge your self: but malice
Never wants a subject to defame.

Bal. Your servant
Can verify my words as truth.

Gas. Who I?
Did not the reverence which I ow this house,
Withold me from the fury which the lie
(You call me as a witness to) had stirred?
In these hot veins, you should be taught, base man,
How to create such Fabrics.

Bal. Slave! we will
Have vengeance.

Gas. Yes! we mean to have it, Sir.
You Will walk, or by this Rapier

Bal. Walk awhile, I shall
Live to dissect thy treacherous Corpse, as small
As crumbs or Atoms.

Exeunt Balth. Fred. Mariana. Gas. Hark you, Signior,
The goodness that your goodness makes me owe
Your Family, obliges me to be
Nice in a point, that does so near concern
Your houses reputation: Balthazar
Said naught but truth, for Mariana has
Assiduall suitors.

Alo. Had the a Devils spleen,
Or Serpents breath, thou could not blast her goodness?

Gas. First should this weapon rip my entrals out,
E're I would be so impious as to seek
To blast her fame: honest? her sex may raise
After her death Mausolaean monuments,
Or some tall Pyramid, as to the chastest,
E're crowned the name of women Nature first
Would go awry, the Ocean lose its course;
E're she her virtue. Lass! Sir, I do only
Tell, she is frequented.

Alo. Why did you deny this?
When he did charge you with it?

Gas. Though to you
In private I give notice; think not, Patron,
I am so careless of your Daughters honor,
Or your good name: (although in things of truth)
To back her foes. I do believe, her spirit
Flowing with noble thoughts rejected him
Only to place her love upon another,
Of higher merit.

Alo. Then it seems you know
Whom she is frequented by?

Gas. Your'e pleased to call
My faith in question, Sir.

Alo. Next time he comes,
Be sure you give me notice; that is your charge

Gas. I Will loose this worthless breath else, when you see,
You will believe it, mean time what you please,
Do Sir: Be sure you shall behold that she
Shall miss her match by my fine treachery.
(Aside)
Exeunt. ACT 3.
SCENE 1.
Enter Roderiguez, Varina, and Corinna. Rod. THy Uncle, Love, holds still a
jealous eye
On all my actions: and I am advised
By my friend Gaspar, that is suspicious ears
Are still behind the hangings: that the servants
Have from him in commands to watch who visits
Your self, or Mariana, 'twill be best,
And safest in my judgment, in his presence
That thou forbear to cast a smile upon me:
And that like old December I should look,
With an unpleasant and contracted brow:

Var. Why? can thou change thy heart, my Dear, that heart
Of flesh (thou gav'st me) into Adamant,
Or rigid Marble? can thou frown on me?

Rod. You do mistake me, sweet, I mean not so
To change my heart: I Will change my countenance,
But keep my heart as loyal, as before.

Var. In troth I cannot credit it, that thou
Can cast a frown on me: I prithee try.

Rod. Then thus! --


(He tries and cannot, they smile on each other.) Var. I prithee, sweet, betake
thy self to school,
This Lesson thou must learn, in troth you are out.

Rod. Well! I must learn and practice it, or we
Shall blast our budding hopes.

Var. Come! try again!


Rod. But if I try, and prove a good proficient:
If I do act my part discreetly, you
Must take it as a Play, not as a truth,
Think it a formal, not a real frown?

Var. I shall.


Rod. Then once more thus,


(He frowns, and says, IN faith Mynion I Will look to you: she swounds.) Cor. My
Mistress has
The falling sickness of us maids! help Sir!

Rod. Why how now, sweet? I did distrust thy weakness:
Now I have learnt my part, you are to seek.

Var. Faith! 'twas my weakness, when I did perceive
A cloud of rage condensed on thy brow,
My heart began to melt: but pardon, sweet!
'Twas an effeminate infirmity.

Rod. This must be left: the world must be deluded,
With outward species; we must blind their eyes
With mists and shadows: Faith! thou must disclaim
Thy childishness, and arm thy self with valor:
Grow masculine my dear* an El'zabeth,
An English Eliz'beth, whose grave aspect
Though woman may decline thee almost man.

Var. It must be so, or my effeminat heart
Will prove our ruin.

Enter Gastper. Gas. What? you're always billing?
Measuring your lips together? All the house
Is in an uproar: and your Uncles eye
Rolls up and down in every corner: haste,
Or you will be taken: Don Praepontio came
To visit you, Varina: is enraged
To find you absent: all your nuptial robes
(He says) are fitted, and your bridal bed:
Next Thursday is designed to knit your hands:
The Priest will then in readiness attend:
This was the substance of his errand.

Var. Gaspar!
I Have thought thee still my friend: and thy advise
(I know) is sound: Contrive, which way I may
Shun Don Praepontio's bed; and keep my honor
Reserved for Roderiguez.

Rod. Honest Gaspar!
Model some way: it is not an armed Legion
Shall stop my passage, till I do efect it:
Gaspar, thy Counsel.

Gas. Sir, your obligations
Have beamed so freely on me, that my brain
Is wholly at your service: and this Lady
May likewise challenge, as her just desert,
What lies within the verge of my small power.
My counsel deems it best, that when the Church
Expects their near approach, in some disguise
You Roderiguez with some other blades,
Lay Don Praepontio breathless, and in haste
Convey your prize, Varina, to some Cottage
Which lies sequestered from the Cities eye:
There Is the best safety, till the Inquisition
Is out of breath: and smiling fortune offer
A time, when you may marry her in peace.

Rod. Your policy is orthodox, my hand
Shall ratify it with a bloody seal.

Exeunt. Scena secunda.
Enter Praepontio, Alvarado, Rubio. Alv. Nephew! you now are entering into the
world,
Let me advise you, who am well experienced,
Be not too credulous, trust none without
A good assurance: try before you trust.

Prae. I warrant you, Uncle, your wealth linked with my wit, will make me an
unparalleled Gentleman, they will elect me Alcalde Major, next year, or else I
say there is no prudence in the gray-beards of the City.


Rub. Very pathetically spoken, when you are Governor of the City, I hope you
will give me a good Office.


Prae. Yes! thou shall have the honorable function of hangman: how like thou
it?


Rub. Marry Sir, I do not like hanging very well.


Prae. Who art thou?


(Enter Tailor) Tay. Your worships Tailor, Sir.


Prae. That is to say my worships thief, alias theif to my worship.
Are my wifes nuptial Vestments ready?

Tay. To the putting on Sir.


Prae. Have thou perfumed the clasps and keepers?


Tay. They will take no perfume, Sir.


Prae. Have thou made her petticoat to the behind or before?


Tay. On the side, Sir, according to the French Fash'on.


Pra. Yes! that is best. We Spaniards must now tout ala mode France.


Tay. And her gown needs no fardingale Sir.


Prae. Well, very well: give your attendance to morrow, and you shall have a
quarter of a chicken and a le^man for your dinner.


Rub. Afford 6 panvilos, he may chance eat your dishes else.


Prae. What Is that?


Tay. A busque.


Prae. Must she wear it behind or before, or between her legs to keep them from
interferring!


Tay. No! Sir, but on her breast, to hide her great belly.


Prae. Are the Fiddlers bespoken? has the shoo-makers brought home my
embroidered pantofles, I mean to dance in them: bid the Millainer put
ambergrease enough on my shirt, I shall stir till I stink else.


Rub. Of sweat Sir?


Prae. I, what else?


Alv. Come, Nephew, you had best go visit her to night.


Prae. I Will go before you Sir.


Exeunt. Scena Tertia.
Enter Alonzo, Mariana, Gaspar. Alo. Come you egregious strumpet
(Drags her, his sword drawn) Abstract of impudence! what has my patience
Made thee presume of my connivency:
So much vile, Mynion, that your wanton lust
Durst gallop like a posthorse: run at base
In sin, and fearless meet lasciviousness:
As if that Saints and men had been as deep
Involved in sleep, as you in sin: and now
To see Your lust dance Anticks? must my house
Be made the stews, the sinful receptacle
Of you and your Adulterers? you could laugh
At me, contemn my age; Alas! poor man!
The Gout does hold him captive in his Couch,
We need not fear him: I did hear you Mistress,
And would have entered then, but that I thought
It more revenge, I held it greater Justice
To send thy soul (grown filthy) unto hell
Glutted with pleasures. Come, you will tell me, Mistress,
Who 'twas, was with you.

Gas. Thus outrageous?
Fie! Patron! such a passion would befit
A husband better then a father: Age
Should furnish you with better temper, Cousin:
Sweet, wipe thy eyes: in troth it is but a trick
Common to such young folks, to have a servant,
A friend in private to supply their wants:
Be not so passionate, you must forgive her.
Pardon, good Sir.
(Holds him)
Alo. Stand by, or I shall turn
My rage on you! Insatiate Strumpet! was not
The man I destined for your husband, good:
(Too good for thee) but that thy wanton eyes
Must choose another? Must the Patrimony
I thought to leave thee, the estate I purchased
With such a care become a salary
To your hot sin: your Bastards shortly will
Call Grandfather, and look for portions
Out of my wealth, but I Will prevent it, Mynion:
Speak briefly!
(Mar. kneels down)
Ma. What? that I have sinned? O Sir!
Remember I Am your daughter, let that name
Move you to pity of my fact, which youth,
Unbridled youth occasioned: though my crime
May challenge death, as it is desert: your hands
Ought not to be deaths messengers: 't suffices
That I have sinned, add not to my delict
By making you a parricide: dear father,
Forgive me.

Alo. No! Thou'st laid a stain upon
Our houses honor, which thy wanton blood,
Naught else can wash away.

Ma. O! rob not Heavens
Of their prerogatives; let them revenge
Your quarrel, for my mothers sake, whom often
You said my feature represented, spare me:
For her sake do it.

Alo. Nay, for her sake rather
I must be moved to butcher thee, who fear not
So to profane her image, which remains
Better decipherd in thy perfect essence,
Then in her monument: Thoud'st better 've pulled
Her sacred relics from their Urne, defiled them,
Cast out her ashes on a dunghill, then
Committed this, for which her glorious soul
(If Saints can weep) makes heaven a sea: O Girl!
Shame! that thou art my issue: I conceited
If there had ought been good in Nature, then
Thou had been Mistress of it: now I see
(Grief to my age!) I was too fond: Affection
Made me adore an Idol: I was cozened:
There is no trust in mortals.

Gas. Pray you, Sir!
You are too much distempered: faith! her fault
Is not worth half this anger: take her up,
Let not the earth pollute those limbs, the pride
Of Natures workmanship, you may behold
In those fair Orbs true penitence, those tears
Were of sufficient virtue to restore
A person damned to paradise: forgive her:
Or you're too cruel, Signior.

Alo. Let her then
Reveal her Partner.

Gas. That demand's unjust,
If she should do it, men should fear hereafter
To preasure women, when they see that threats
Can force Discoveries: good Sir, ask it not,
It Is too unreas' nable.

Ma. What said my Father?


Alo. Marry, ungratious minyon: I would know
Whom you have chosen for your stallion,
To glut your never-sated Orke withlust.

Ma. Is It me you mean Sir? slack your passion, Sir. --


Gas. Conceal him, if you do affect his life.

(Whispers to her)
Ma. These lips yet tepid with his frequent kisses,
Before they utter ought to hurt him, shall
Be closed for ever, rather rot with Cankers.

Gas. Noble Virago!


Alo. Then resolve to die.


Ma. I care not, here is my bosom, rip it up,
And steal an acute Eagles eye to pry
Into my hearts small caverns, and explore
His name, that writ there, yet it will remain
Hid in some little Concave, that your fury
Shall never know it: kill me, I shall smile
On ugly death: embrace her with a soul
Triumphant as a Martyrs, I will perish
A thousand times, e're once I will disclose
That precious secret.

(Gaspar holds him) Alo. Do you brave me? do you?
Let go my hands.

Gas. I must not, will not let you
Draw mischief on your self: go in sweet Coz!
Let me alone with him.

Exit Mariana Alo. Stand off: Let go,
And let me follow her.

Gas. For what? your rage
Shall not have way to do an act: which done,
You Would wail in tears for ever, should you kill her,
Think what a crime you onerate your soul which,
Next, what a scandal would ensue: a man
Of your known worth at this age to become
A Parricide on such a daughter, only
For keeping close her friend: Why should you be
Inquisitive to know him?

Alo. TO have revenge.


Gas. Why so I did imagine: banish rage,
And hear with reasons ears: be sure your daughter
Has placed her love on some base one, she dares not
Make privy to your ear, should she disclose him,
You would, she thinks, have vengeance for her fault:
Were he a person noble, she would haste
To tell his name, boast of her choice: how say you?
Is not this reason?
(Lets go his hands)
Alo. Very true!


Gas. He being
A man so worthless, 't would disgrace you more
In seeking vengeance, for the humourous world
Apt to suspect the worse, would judge the Cause
Of your revenge to be, as it is: and so
You lay your own dishonor, and your daughters,
Open, which else might sleep unmention'd, none
But you and I are privy to it, and e're
A syllable should pass in your disgrace
Out of my mouth, I would be dumb.

Alo. But Gaspar!
What shall I do with her? For Balthazar
Will publish her disgrace, so all will shun
Her hated Nuptials: I Will go make her enter
Among barefoot Nuns into some Monastery,
Spend the long remnant of her blooming youth
In holy prayers and penitence: I Will make
The poor my heirs, found sacred Hospitals,
Build Colleges with my revenues.

Gas. Madness!
Religious madness! that is the ready way
To sell her to damnation: will her spirit,
(Can you conceive) which now does pass the limits
Of Liberty, endure a Cloister? Balthazar?
Fear not his clamours; wise men will impute
Them to his passion; 'cause h'as lost her, rather
Then to her merit: Patron, you may find
Some younger Brother noble as her self
To be her husband; Gold will make her seem
A virgin, though a Mother.

Alo. Honest Gaspar!
I know thou love me.

Gas. As I do the bliss
I hope for.

Alo. And, alas! ungrateful I
Have been too negligent of thy worth, but thou
Have inurn'd all those acts.

Gas. 'Ts my Duty.


Alo. Once
I promised thee her marriage, and in Justice
She is thy wife; and sure Astraea's angry
For the injury I did thee, and imposes
This heavy cross upon me; will thou now
Solemnize with her Hymen's sacred rites?
Be not dismayed; although her hair-brained youth
Has run into an error, rather due
To heat of blood, then her condition,
She may be honest.

Gas. Honest! I dare swear
She will be truly virtuous, but the meanness
Of my poor fortunes makes me worthless, I
Have a spot in my blood, which would dishonor
Your family, reserve that, Sir, for one
Of noble and illustrious Parentage;
Whose worth and quality may add a title
Unto your houses fame; for my part, I
Nourish no such thoughts; all the height my poor
Ambition soars at, is to be esteemed
Your humble slave still.

Alo. You Are too humble, Gaspar,
Erect thy Spirit, man, thou had a Father
Had fire in's veins; come, thou shall marry her;
I do command you.

Gas. Your commands are laws,
As sacred to me as are Oracles,
I must not break them.

Alo. Thou will wed her then?


Gas. Since you command it.


Alo. Now I see thou love me.
Call me no more thy Patron, but thy Father.
I will acquaint my daughter with my will.

Exit. Gas. Have I not labored finely? has my brain
Not won the Laurel wreath? She is my own,
And what care I now what the envious world
Can say of me? They Will call me Cuckold, that is
In my esteem, as much as they should call
Me Signior: Let her take her pleasure, she,
Not I, does sin: I Am sure she will afford me
My fill at night too. Happy Age! when all
Were common, when old Natures laws were read
Without a Comment: every man was free
For every woman: then none feared the stab
For kissing.
Enter Picarro.
Pic. Save you Gaspar.


Gas. And you too:
Sir, what is your business?

Pic. It Is not, Sir, with you,
It Is with your Master.

Exit. Gas. With your Master? Hem!
How scornfully this youth demeans himself?
E're long, when I am married, I shall be
Sir Don, or any thing.
Enter Alonzo and Picarro.
Pic. Good Sir, my Father
Commends him to you, and entreats you would
For satisfaction of the debt he owes you,
Accept his land at Cordova in mortgage,
And pay old Frederiques debt.

Alo. I grieve, Picarro,
That he should com to this; but it is his fate,
I Will do him any courtesy, return
This as my answer.

Pic. Honored Sir, I shall.

(is going out.)
Alo. A handsome man, and an observant son.
Call back Picarro, Gaspar!

Gas. Sir, Picarro.
My Father does request you to return.

Alo. Signior Picarro, I so much lament
Your noble Fathers case, that will you truly
Resolve me one thing, I will pay his debts
Without your mortgage.

Pic. 'Tshould be difficult
That I would not do for his liberty.

Alo. Are you in love


Pic. Not to my knowledge.


Alo. Could
You be content to have a Wife?

Gas. Corinna
Were a fit match for him.

Pic. Yes, of your choosing.


Alo. You Have seen my daughter Mariana, what
Say you to her?

Gas. She is contracted, Sir,
Surely he will not break his promise with me.

Pic. Your daughters worth's beyond my hopes.


Alo. But say,
That you should have her, could you her affect?

Gas. Sure! sure he jests.


Pic. Nothing but heaven and bliss,
I should desire more then her love.

Alo. Picarro;
I do so much commiserate thy Father,
And thy own sufferings, that I am resolved
To give her to thee; and thy land shall be
Her Jointure.

Gas. Do I dream? Ha! ha! I hope
I shall not be deluded, Patron, Father,
What do you mean?

Alo. Peace! slave! I Will tell her of it.


Exit. Gas. But surely, Patron, you will not deal thus?
Hark, Sir, you mean to marry her?

Pic. I do.


Gas. You see this sword?


Pic. I, what of that?


Gas. Nay nothing.
It is a pure Toledo blade, it cost
As it is really worth, twelve Duccats, Sir.
But if you marry her, you have a woman.

Pic. I hope she is no Hermaphrodite.


Gas. No, but
She Is something else, a Whore.

Pic. Out slave! you are frantic.


Exit. Gas. O! that I were but valiant, had but heart
Great as my wrongs are, or but so much power
As would suffice to right them; I could pull
The Crystal Axell that supports the Spheres,
Down to the earth, that all the world might perish
Together with my self, since all have sworn
To be stark villains with me: I Am resolved
Flectere si nequeo Superos, Acheronta movere.
To Hell, I Will now address me.
Enter Balthazar.
Bal. Thou art come.
Now to thy period, Bastard! 'twas your plot
To bring me among my enemies, on purpose
To have me slain, but I have escaped to be
Thy ruin. Say thy Prayers. --

(draws his Sword) Gasp, What mean you, Sir?


Bal. To kill thee, slave, and so set free the earth
From bearing such an execrable monster,
Such an inhumane villain.

Gas. As your're noble,
Lend me a little utterance, till I cloth
in vocal sounds, a business that concerns
Your honor nearly.

Bal. But be brief, thy breath
Will blast me else.

Gas. You come, you say, to kill me?
I Am glad that Nature has afforded life
To such a wretch as I am, till my blood
May do a person of your worth a pleasure.

Bal. And is this all?


Gas. Forbear a little, hear me;
You do suppose it was my plot to bring
You to your death, I do confess.

Bal. What? Speak!


Gas. That won with gifts, I did entice you thither
To your destruction: But, hear me, Sir,
There Is none so vile, but may repent; and since
Your Fate afforded you a happier lot,
Then to be slain, forgive me: if the blood
Of such a miscreant, can ought avail you,
I Will give it you my self, you shall not stain
Your noble hands with my poor homicide.

Bal. Rare! excellent villain: But methinks those tears.
And looks, spring out of feigned penitence;
Disclose the man that hurt me, and I Will pardon
Thy horrid fact, and raise thee.

Gas. Willingly:
'Twas he must be her husband.

Bal. Picarro.


Gas. Picarro.


Bal. May I believe you? Is this truth?


Gas. Else kill me.


Bal. Farewell! there is gold.


Gas. But stay, if one so vile
As I may give you counsel?

Bal. Any thing
That tends to his destruction.

Gas. Your hot breast
Thirsts for revenge; let it be noble, he
Off'red you public wrong, let your revenge
Be public too!

Bal. As how?


Gasp. As thus, to morrow
When he returns from's wisht-for Nuptials,
Meet him, and kill him, then escape into
The Church, 'twill be your Castle and Asylum;
It Is brave and safe.

Bal. Ingenious Gaspar, think
He Is dead already.

Exit. Gas. This hits right, let all
Perish; I care not, if I rise, who fall.

Exit. Scena quarta.
Enter Roderiguez, Chaves, Engenia disguised. Rod. It Is strange, my Father, Sir,
should come to hear on it


Cha. It was that knavish Boy that did betray us.


Eug. Pray, Sir, be pleased to return your answer.


Rod. Friend, you may walk, I Have nothing to return.


Eug. Then without bashful fear, or flatrery,
You are a noble villain.

Rod. How now, Sirrah!


Eug. Is not your Fathers love to be esteemed
Before your friends? Does not your natural duty,
You ow him, stir a fury in your blood
Against that traitor? Poor Eugenia! she
Wearies with tears, even grief it self to think
Of this cursed perjury, and her brothers Spirit,
Which either does for fear, or fond affection
To that ignoble perjurer, permit
Him breath without revenge; but were it mine,
As it is your case, I would devour him up
Like some wild Anthropophagus: Let Nature
Convince you, kill him.

Rod. Hold your peace, and walk,
Be gone, or I --

Eug. What dare thou, noble villain!
Thy Father on his blessing charges thee
To take revenge; and do thou only not
Contemn his will, but keep society
With his cursed Enemy; mark his cursings, Sir,
Think on his blessings.

Rod. Honest friend! the love
I bear your noble quality assayes
Me to detain still with you, but my duty
Commands me not t'incurre my fathers curse.
I must desert you.

Cha. Prithee doc, kind Coxcombe!
I Am glad I Am rid of thee.

Rod. Yet e're we part,
Think on my sisters merit, how, her virtues
Transcend your Mistress qualities; next view
The peril that you are in; Should it come
To Balthazar, that you did wound him, death
Would sure ensue; but for our former love
Let me entreat you be reclaimed.

Cha: Imust not,
Nor will not, you may:

Rod. Sure! I am bewitchd,
To love him, when I offer to relinquish
His Company; there is something loads my feet
With lead, I cannot leave him, fellow, go,
Return this answer to my Father, that
When I come home, I Will satisfy him, why
I did not do his pleasure, so be gone --
Without reply:

Eug. Well Sir.


Exit. Enter Catalina. Cat. O! Sir Chaves! what shall we do Sir Chaves? my
Mistress --


Rod. What of his love? are we discovered?


Cat. O! worse! she is to be married.


Rod. Married?


Cat, I marry, married too morrow at Saint Saviors Church.


Rod. Alas! poor man! to whom?


Cat. I know not; oh! I know not!
(wrings her hands.) Hold him.
(Chaves sinks down.)
Rod. Good Sir cheer your self.


Cha. Some lucklesse serene blast me, may a damp
Thick as Thyestes serene blast me, may a damp
Thick as Thyestes darkness spring from Dis,
And muffle up the world in endless night;
That none may see those nuptials, which I Will make
Fatal as Jasons; tell your faithless Mistress
In stead of pines, I Will send her tapers, Yew,
And deadly Cypress to make green her bed,
Where virgin Laurel and such harmsess boughs
Dare not approach for fear of blasting; Fiends
Will be her Bridemaids; surely I was borne
With all good stars my Opposites. Is It too morrow?

Rod: Yes Sir too morrow? pray, why rave you thus?


Cha. I pray Sir tell me, may we not, e're then
Borrow some toylsome woodnetts, and invite
The gallant youth of the City to go hunt
In yonder deserts?

Rod. Why? what then?


Cha. To take
The salvage walkers of the wilderness,
Bulls, Wolves and Tigers, and manure them up
In yonder spacious Amphitheater:
And then set fire on it; till their flaming throats
Roar, howl, and raise a Clamor, which may rend,
Like some huge thunderclap the trembling Earth,
That all, e're then, might sink to hell, ha! is it not
Brave? lett's about it, friend.

Rod. Why should you be
Thus cruel? Sir, your rage transports you.

Cha. Whither?
Now I know, maid, when she has seen her own,
She Will view my nuptials.

Cat. 'Ll you be married too?


Cha. Married? I Will study to surpass her falsehood,
Her curious eyes, I make no doubt, have chosen
A handsome Bridegroom?

Cat. Yes! indeed.


Cha. To let
Her see how much I scorn her and her beauty,
I Will wed me to a Creature, in whose looks
Foulness is truly charactered, whose eyes
Are poisonous as a Basilicks, and scarce
Afford their Owner light enough to see
Her bodies horrid edifice, whose frame
Is the true substance, which Anatomists
Aim to decipher in their strange dissections
Of livelesse Mortals; tell her it is to death
I Will wed my self; the grave shall be our bed.

Rod. It Is none of hers, it is her fathers fault;
Study prevention, or you lose her.

Cha. Did you
Not, tell me she was to be married?

Rod. Yes! but I hope we shall find means to hinder't.

(Whisper)
Cha. I Will take your Counsel.


Exeunt. Scaena quinta.
Enter Balthazar and Boy with a pistol. Bal. BRing the pistol hither? is it
charged?


Boy. It is sir:


Exit. Bal. Begone, then quickly. Now Picarro breath
Till 9. a Clock, no longer; hug thy Mistress
Suck poison form her lips till then, and glory
That thou bereav'dst me of her.

Enter Eugenia Eug. Is your name


Balthazar? son to Frederique?


Bal. Yes! friend.


Eug. I come to tell you, that you have been wronged,
Sold to destruction.

Bal. All the Town knows that,
Thou needst not come to tell me on it, perchance
My wounders sent you to explore my secrets;
Prithee about thy business.

Eug. Can that front,
Those limbs of yours which style you man, endure
Such an abuse without revenge? I come
T'informe who 'twas that hurt you.

Bal. Pish! I know them.


Eug. And can they live unstigmatiz'd for villains?
Surely you know them not, they are strangers here.

Bal. Did not Picarro hurt me?


Eug, He poor man!
Is injured to be wedded to a strumpet.
Chaves, one Chaves wounded you.

Bal. What Is he?
What is that Chaves?

Eug. A base villain, Sir.


Bal. How know thou this?


Eug. By's own confession, Sir,
It Is he that wounded you, and gracious Themis
Has you decipherd for her instrument
Of vengeance; Chaves is his name, on forfeit
Of all the lives I have, I Will make good what
I told you, and conduct you to the person
That injured you.

Bal. Picarro then is guiltless?


Eug. As is my self.


Bal. Chaves! well let him walk
Till I can meet him, then it is odds, this Arm
Shall pay his falsehood; but Picarro must not
Pass thus, depart not from me, friend.

Exit. Eug. No Sir
Now perjured Chaves is thy Fate at hand,
And if Eugenia lives, thou shall not stand.

Exit. Scena sexta.
Enter Alvarado. Varina. Praepontio. Alonzo. Rubio. Hebes. Fiddlers. Prae. PLay
louder Picroes, that string's made of an Usurers gut, it sounds like the
jyngling of a mony-bag. Fie! on these Gitterns and Treble-base viols, they are
not comparable to an Italian barbiton; march on my dear Colloquintida, Uncle,
you are not so merry as the solemnity of my presence deserves. March on
fiddlers, the furmitee my English Cook promised to make me, will be burnt too
else: but what is that Rubio?


Rub. O Sir! a piece too rare for vulgar eyes,
And worthy only your perspicuous judgment:
An Epithalamium I composed on your wedding, you will allow my
Mistress Bride to kiss me for it?

Alv. Nephew, it will serve better at home then here.


Var. Good Huband! Without Ceremony.


Prae. Good Husband? How sweetly her throat utters it? All the Pricksong in St.
Saviors is not like those two words; but lead the way while I support my
magnificent Corpse, with my Mistrisses fain. Arm through this dark Entry; they
say it is haunted with spirits; but if they come, we'll conjure them.

( Going in he is stabbed by Roderiguez and Chaves, who in disguise snatched away
Varina privily) Oh! The Cramp, the Spavins, the Yellow Janders, the Grincoms,
the wambling Trot, or some such Belly vengeance has put my guts out of joint. I
tell you, Rubio, untruss my points.


Rub. So you may chance contaminate my fingers. Alas! You bleed.


Prae. Is my blood red or yellow?


Rub. It Is white, Sir.


Prae. Oh! Dismal, dismal! Don Praepontio's guts are too big for his belly.


Alv. Alas! My Nephew's wounded! Look about who hurt him?


Rub. 'S life, here is nothing but the walls, unless they be invisible. Master,
you do but dream, you are not wounded.


Prae. I am neither Husband, nor Master now, but I must die; I leave my body to
be buried; and good Uncle, sweet Wife, and honest Rubio, put a musket, powder
and shot into the Coffin with me.


Rub. Look how those Rosy cheeks convert to Dazies!


Prae. On my blessing do as I bid you, or my furious Ghost will haunt you; for
since it was some Spirit of the Buttery; because I loved wine well; or
Hobgoblin, because I used to lick the Cream bowls, that has done me this injury
to kill me; I will when I come among them be revenged; for sure it is, I must
go whisper two or three words with Pluto and his Fraternity; bury me in a
Coletta, or Buffe jacket, that Rapiers may no more hurt me.

How rawbon'd Death's with his black dart
Ready to pierce my Lions heart?

Alv. Alas! Poor Nephew, he bleeds?


Prae. Yet, Uncle, I will spite of his nose bequeath my movables; First, to my
seet Wise Varina I give all my Plate and Jewels; and to my Uncle all that I
have in my Closet. viz. Two Holland Cheeses, three pound of Raisins Solis, etc.
And to thee my servant Rubio, all that I have in my Pockets, as also the
Handkercher wrought with Coventry blew, and my Needle-case and Thimble, etc.
But good Rubio, pup my sneezing box with me into the Tomb, it will clear my
eyes.

Oh! I can speak no more, for now to Heaven does go

The Valiant soul of Don Praepontio.

(dies.)
Alo. But where is my Niece? Varina! Oh! She Is gone;
This is some cursed plot; let us in, and send
^oasts to way-lay them, ever they take to Sea,
Dispatch out Hew and Cries; that may arrest them,
And bring them back to judgments bar. Hard fate!
What plagues of grief hang on my aged head,
And drop their vengeance on my hoary hairs
In showers of blood? Was It not enough my daughter
Defamed my Family by her goat-like lust;
But now my Niece, Varina must conspire
With Villains to disgrace me? Could her baseness
No safety find, but by her Husbands blood?
Rebellious Children! Know a Fathers hand
Provoked, strikes hard; and though I do endure
Your faults a while, my vengeance shall strike sure.

Exeunt. Heb. Oh! My sweet Master. I am undone, I am undone, many an
Ashwednesday and Goodfriday nights supper must my belly make; I was no sooner
come from being an under-Scullion to be an under-Cooke; but now I must
Crab-like crawle backward from being an under-Cooke to be an under-Scullion, or
any thing! Oh, miserable! Well, I will go in, and fill my belly now, though I
fast the longer afterward; if fate has decreed that all the fat must be in the
fire, it must be so; my belly must pray patience; I fear this next year will be
nothing but Ember weeks.


Exit. ACT. IV.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Chaves, Roderiguez, without disguise and swords drawn. Cha. CUrse on my
fate!


Rod. Have patience, Sir, we shall
Remove your grief too; or in streams of blood
We'll swim to our desires.
Enter Gaspar.
Cha. O! Signior, Gaspar!
Why had not we your notice of this wedding?

Gas. It was so closely carried, that my ears
Could never be privy to it; what ailes my Master?
Why, Sir, so pensive? Fear not, Sir, my Mistress
Will love you still; but I do sound you come
To Butcher her new Bridegroom; Is It not so?

Cha. Thy augury's most true; these swords but now
Reak'd in the streams of Don Praepontio's blood;
To help my Friend Rod'riguez to his Love.

Gas. In troth the World's well rid of such a fool!


Cha. And yet are thirsty; we must sail through blood
To our desired port; tell her ^'ll drink
A health unto her in Picarro's gore;
I once did in obedience to her will,
Spare it, but 'twas by Fate reserved to be
Drawn empty now, and this enraged hand
Shall break the Conduit up; 'twill do me good:
In expectation here I Will wait, until
I find and kill him --

Gas. No! don't kill him now:
Twere too unholy to profane those rites,
Besides, he is armed with th'choisest of his friends,
That should you kill him, 'twere impossible
You should escape the aestrum of their fury,
Patience awhile, bridle your wrath, I Will plot
To do it more easy: Pray be pleased.

Cha. Thou were
Hatched in a Pigeons nest, thou art so timorous
Tell us of murder, not of safety, rather
Let Us study to create new ways to kill
Though to destroy the world; and so to be
Earths common Executioners; then that
He should enjoy and crop those blessed Roses.

Gasp. What if he do? he has but what you left,
He Will prick his Fingers ere he pluck that rose;
Before to morrow night his Glass is run.
Pray, Sir, with draw, be sure on it.

Rod. Good Sir, do.


Cha. Your counsel shall prevail.


Exeunt. Gas. So let them go, had this fresh Gamester entered
And killed Picarro; and her Father known
It Was he enjoyed her, he would have procured
A pardon for him, and have given him her,
So I Would been cozened, but I Am rid of all:
Balthazar kills Picarro, then himself
Suffers; Praepontio's killed by Chaves, whom
The Law for that fact strait shall apprehend,
And soon condemn as guilty; so not one
Is left to be an obstacle.
Enter Boy.
Boy. Sir, my Master bids you not expect him, he will not come.

Exit.
Gas. He will not come? how now? He call them back:
Oh! that I were but registered the first
In Coxcombes catalogue, to place my hopes
On One, when others offered to effect them.
Villains had need to see with Argus eyes,
They Will be most fools else, when they seem most wise.
Exit.
Scena secunda.
Enter Mariana and Catalina. Cat. FAith! Mistress do not grieve so, you do wrong
The beauty of your face; should your new husband
See this, he would grow suspicious; dry your eyes
For shame, 'ts a sin to weep in wedding shoes.

Ma. Denude me of these gaudy garments, get
Funestal vestments for my new attire:
Lend me a book to pray on, and entreat
The Priest that married me; to com again;
I Would speak with him.

Cat. Still in this moestfull tune;
You will not dye I Am sure?

Ma. Pray, keep those flowers
To straw my Coffin with, and tell the Virgins
That came to grace my nuptials, I invite
Them to my Obsequies.

Cat. Bless me! Mistress, better
Chaves were hanged, then you should kill your self
For him, your husband is a proper man,
And for Sir Chaves, you may have him too,
Dye, quoth you, faith! that were a trick indeed;
Be merry, Mistress, come, you shall; this is
Your wedding day.

Ma: My day of burial call it;
For so it will be, I have lost the May,
The flower of Brides, my Virgin glory, and
I know, my husband hearing what has past
Twixt Balthazar and me, will be most curious
In searching; when as needs he must, he finds
Me for a Virgin thrust on him, to be
Not so, he will kill me.

Cat. Is this all your fear?
Mercury water, or some Cypress berries
Will cozen th'cunningst searcher of them all.

Ma. I must not trust it. Catalina, thou
Have always loved me!

Cat. Yes truly, Mistress.


Ma. Thou would be loath to see me murdered?


Cat. Bless you, good Mistress!


Ma. Thou art fair and young --


Cat. Faith, reasonable; I Have seen many a worse
Face in a Ladies habit, I Will assure you.

Ma. And I dare say a Virgin --


Cat. Yes, in truth,
The more's my grief.

Ma. Will thou supply my room?
And be the Bride to my new husband?

Cat. I
Would not, forsooth, lose my Virginity.

Ma: Come, be not squeamish, when he is in bed
And th'Candle's out, then I Will frame an excuse
To rise, and thou shall com into my place;
And after he is asleep, I Will come again.

Cat. For your sake, Mistress, I will do it, and get
A drug to make him sleep.

Mar. Do, prithee do.
It Is late, about it.

Exit Catalina. Enter Alonzo, Alvarez, Picarro. Alo. Son! you're beholding to
the youth of the City,
In the solemnity of these your Nuptials,
They have procured a Masque, they stand without.

Enter Masque. Balthazar sings, I.
False and foolish are the toys
Of Worldly joys,
The Paphian Goddess only rules
Frantastick Fools:
Then why should I (simplicity!)
Thus dote upon her Deity.
Rursus: 2.
Woman is light as a feather,
Or the Weather:
More inconstant then the wind
Is her base mind:
Fickle still, can only be
Constant in inconstancy.
Rursus. 3.
The rose which plucked I have refused,
Another choos'd:
Mars did hug Venus, Sir, yet she
Could satisfy
Black Mulciber. Your wife does know
To draw Actaeon on your brow,
And make your Cornu-copia be
Triumphant to Eternity.
Dance.

Pic. This is a strange Epithalamium?


Alo. It Is a strange Song! and a far stranger dance!


Alv. It Is rare and new! it carries mystery with it.


Pic. Who is the chief to whom we owe our thanks?


(Balthazar discovers himself.) Bal. It Is I, Picarro! Sir, it is I, your Mistress
Knows me, I did provide this Masque on purpose
That you might know, how you are injured.

Pic. Explain your Riddle, be our Oedipus,
W' are yet in darkness.

Bal. Thus, Sir, That old man
That led the woman, represents Deceit,
And she his daughter Lust; the next pair, he
On the right hand is Treachery, who lead
In me deciphering True Affection:
And the last couple which came after us,
The first of them is Wantonness, who pulls.
Lust from me, and does give her to that person
Who signifies a Cuckold and a Fool.
You understand me!

Pic. It Is a Paradox.

Bal. Then know, your wife's a hateful prostitute,
Her Father is a Villain, you a Cuckold.
I Will say no more.

Pic. You Have said enough already
To seal you to damnation.
(Draws)
Ma. O Sir, stay,
Give Losers leave to speak: his fury moves him
To be thus passionate.

Pic. But that I will not
Stain with your blood my Nuptials, you should know
How false your tale is: but there is other times
To meet with you.

Bal. I shall be ready when
You please to call me.

Exit Masque. Alv. It is strange me thinks
That Balthazar should be so spiteful, Brother:
This must not pass thus.

Pic. No! I shall hereafter
Have vengeance.

Ma. He deserves ten thousand deaths
For such a wrong.

Alo. What muse you on, Sir; Ha!


Pic. Balthazar, Sir, has always been a man
Of good esteem, I marvel he should raise
Without occasion, such a calumny.
(Mariana swouns)
Alo. O! help my daughter!


Alv. Hold her, else she falls!


Pic. Heavens shower down Balm to cure her, or let loose
Some blasting lightning, that may sear me up
Till I convert to ashes: see, her breath
In little streaks flies from her, to make sweet
Death with its precious flavor; send for hither
Those curious men that strive to give new life
To Carcasses, those that do spend their studies
In Image-making; let them here receive
A perfect pattern, afterward to cut
All women's Marbles by.

Alo. There Is life! there is life!


Pic. She beautifies uncomly death! Might she
Remain thus uncorrupted, she would make
A Statue passing all the Alabasters
We can erect, in memory of her name.

Ma. Oh! Oh!


Pic. That breaks her heart strings! Blessed Saint!
Fly not so fast, sweet soul; I Will rob the Turtle
Of his swift wings, but I Will overtake thee, that
In thy society I may mount to yonder
Celestial region, for thy sake they will not
Deny admission; the Saints are rimerous
To lose their mansions; for her merit asks
A Crown above a Martyrs.

Alo. Son!


Pic. Behold!
Her spotless soul attired in white, ascends
In a clear Chariot, drawn by virgins: strait
I come, stand off.
He offers to make unready)
Alv. She will recover:


Pic. Yes!
When she is among her fellow-Angels, then
She may recover life, a glorious essence
Due to her goodness; Earth was too unworthy
To bear so rare a jewel, fitter far
For Heavens rich wearing; yet you have done well
A while to stay me, while I steal a blessing
From those pure lips; though they are cold, one kiss
From them will glut me; which delight has equal
To that she is gone to.
(he kisses her)
Alo. Her eyes open.


Pic. Look,
The Torches fade at such a brightness, surely
In this short trance she has lost that little remnant
She had of human essence; and 's become
Wholly immortal, and deserves our knees.
(he kneels) Why gaze you on me? is it not just? A saint
Merits this honor.

Ma. You all hate me; why
Did you recall my spirits from the bliss
They almost had attained to?

Pic. I Will support thee,
And if thou fall'st, my arm shall keep the earth
From touching thee; 'twill grow too proud to bear
So rich a burden.

Ma. O Picarro! I
Had thought you would had a better faith in me,
Then to grow jealous at the false report
Of a base man; I will not live to have you
Deem so ignobly of me.

Pic. Were this breast
Armed with th'obdurate shells of Tortoyses;
Or mal'd with s^^les of Dolphins, I would force
A passage into it, that you might behold
Each thought that is there, if any one but savor
Of jealousy, then utterly detest me;
But I will make this slave an expiation,
A very Anathema for this injury
Which he has with such impudence aver'd
Against thy honor.
(Enter Catalina with bottles and glasses.)
Ma. I believe you, Sir.
Fill me a bowl of water, I Will begin
Your Nuptial health.

Pic. Let it be wine I Will drink't.
Were liquid metal.

Mar. Father-in-law, to you.


Alv. Brother, to you.


Alo. Son, to you; and may she
Be made a mother by you.

Ma. Catalina.

(Whispers.
Cat. I Have done.


Pic. Come! Fill it till it overflow,
Or bring a bigger glass.

Ma. It Is needless, Sir.


Pic. He that denies to pledge't, I Will flit his wezand.


Alv. Alonzo, it grows late, it is time the Bride
Had put the Torches out; we'll see her bedded.

Pic. I do prefer the pleasures of this night
Before all treasures, or the earths delight.

Exeunt. Scaena tertia.
Enter Chaves, Roderiguez, Gaspar, with a Torch. Cha. Is It possible he should
be gone so soon
To bed? It Is yet scarce ten a clock.

Rod. O Gaspar!
Lend me thy Torch, by heavens me thinks 'twere easy
To set the House on fire, and burn the villain
In her embraces.

Gas. So you would burn her too!


Cha. Faith! not much matter, since I left her, all
My Ice is turned to Marble, could I not
Borrow yon star for one half hour, and cast it
Like to a ball of wildfire through yon hole,
To make the chamber hotter? Were It not pretty
If from the top of yonder Pyramid
I could embrace the Moon, and pull her from
Her watery spears, to sindge their plumes? Say friend,
May I not do it?

Rod. What strange temper's this?
His mind runs on the Moon, What? Lunatic?

Cha. Look where the death-full Owl flies: Hark, her wings
Flask in the air, t'invite the Dawes that nest
In yon tall steeple to deride me: is there
No heat in nature left? Am I converted
So soon to water? Yet my eyes are dry.
They cannot weep a flood, sufficient
For a new general Deluge: Look! I quake
Like to a frosty Polander, when wrapped
In Iron sheets, he lays him down a man,
Over night in th'Field, and in the morning rises
A Cake of Ice, or Snow-ball. Is It not cold?
My limbs do play on th'Organs.

Gas. It Is your fancy:
You're passionatly mad.

Cha. I do not walk yet --
Bare, with a long Horn armed, nor kiss the dust
With naked feet; but I will learn, these garments
Are very ponderous: when I Have rent them off,
I shall begin to be a Bedlam.

Rod. Gaspar,
Prithee persuade him.

Gas. Sir, you do conceit
Because your project mist to night, your love
Is lost for ever; do not so, to morrow
We Will have a night as opportune as this,
To kill her husband.

Cha. Yes, if he would die,
When we do vvish him dead, or could our eyes
Kill him, and never look upon him; so
I do believe he might be slain, but else --

Gas. Hear me a little, if I do not show
A way to kill him --

Cha. That Is an easy thing:
Level a Canon at him, blow him up
With Gunpowder.

Gas. But hear me, Sir, to morrow
You and your friend, with others I Will procure,
In strange disguises shall present your selves
There in a Masque; I Will tell you are my friends,
And in the Dance one of the men I Will hire
Shall kill him; you shall not be touched in this.
How like you't, Sir, is it not a good conceit?

Cha. Good, very good, could my deeds but effect
What you have spoken -- but I fear he has
Some charms about him, steel nor poison will
Enter his body: so 'ts impossible;
That what you here advise can e're be done.

Gas. Yes! fear not, Sir, I Will visit you to morrow.


Cha. Do, and forget not what you promise now.


Rod. His care and vigilance is far beyond
Our thoughts.

Cha. Then let him glut himself to night.


Gas. It surely, Sir, shall be his last good night:
Men may shun public, but not private spite:

Exeunt. Scena Quarta.
Enter Mariana, Catalina. Ma. Come! you are a wily strumpet; faith! thou did
Excellent well! but not one word: I Will go
And dress me; --

Exit. Enter Picarro. Pic. Sure I have drunk the blood of scorpions,
Sucked mandrakes juice or henbane seed, my heart
Is almost hurnt to ashes: Catalina,
Fetch me some water.

Cat. Here Is some ready Sir.


Pic. Give me another cup, I hate that bowl:
'Twas that I drank last night in: was it not you
Filled me the wine?

Cat. It was.


Pic. Was nothing in it?


Cat. Nothing, but wine and sugar, Sir.


Pic. What Is this?


Cat. Some of the sugar spilt on the side of the cup:
I Will wipe it off.

Pic. Stay, is this sugar, minion?
I Have found you out, you're hired to poison me:
This is a drug, speak quickly, say by whom
Or perish.

Cat. O good Sir! if I had thought
I should have had no better a requital,
I Would not have been so kind.

Pic. So kind? as how?
Be brief, or this shall spoil your utterance.

Cat. A Maidenhead deserves more favor, Sir.


Pic. Impudent devil! who'd to do with that?


Cat. Last night you had it, Sir.


Pic. Dye, Monster!

(goes to kill her)
Cat. Hold, Sir, for Heavens sake! I confess, my Mistress --


Pic. What of my Love?


Cat. To say truth, Sir, she hired me
To give y' a sleepy potion, having lost
The blossom of her honor, she procured
Me to supply her place, and laid me by you.

Pic. But is this truth? ha! whore!
(Pulls out Mariana) Egregious strumpet, was it not sufficient
To make me be the pack horse of thy lust;
The common father to thy odious fry:
The loathsome compound of laciviousness
Thou have within thee? but thou must betray
My chaste embraces to the sinful arms
Of a foul harlot, on that sacred night
When I was full with hopes of the reward
Of my true love: ask mercy quickly; pray,
For I will kill thee.

Ma. Holy Angels guard me!
What mean you dear Picarro? Heavens and Saints
Help, as I Am guiltless.

Pic. Guiltless? so's the Devil;
A plague upon this cursed effeminate sex!
Would curses wound as does the Mandrakes groan,
I would invent as bitter searching terms,
As cursed, as harsh, as horrible to hear
As lean-fac'd envy in her loathsome Cave;
My tongue should stumble in my earnest words,
My eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint,
My hair be fixed an end, as one distract,
Yea, every joint should seem to curse and ban;
Oh! I could thunder out a Volley of Curses,
A rapsody of banefull execrations!
(He turns aside)
Ma. What? do thou turn away, and hide thy face;
I am no loathsome Leaper, look on me;
What? art thou like the Adder waxen deaf?
Be poisonous too, and kill thy forlorn spouse.

Pic. Thou have a place about thee, where the furies
Take up their mansion; I do know, thy eyes
Can with false tears outvy the Crocodile:
Thy tongue can altercate more several notes,
Then the Hyaena's, and can sweetly charm
As does a Siren, warble forth as sweet
Notes as a Philomel: it is bootless now
To seek to palliate thy Crimes, thy partner
Revealed it all: repent, and do it quickly:
Or (...) damned, I care not.

Ma. Must I die?


Pic. (...) ^ould, though Queens upon their knees in tears
(...) pardon, Saints implore thy life,
(...) ^ot save it: can thou nourish hopes
Of ought but death, when thy inhumane Acts
Tell thee thou have deserved to suffer for them
More then eternal tortures?

Ma. O Picarro!
Remember what I am, not what I have been,
I Am now your wife; Sir, if I have been tempted
To that Venerean sin: 'twas e're religion
Had made me yours: you were not injured by it,
And though for fear of being discovered, I
Did thrust this hapless maid into your bed,
Though It be a fault, that well might merit death,
Damn me not for it: give me leave to make
My peace with Heaven, and then I Will yield to die:
Thank you to kill me.

Pic. If I let her talk
A little longer, she will persuade me: come,
Hold up your hands for mercy, make short prayers,
And this shall say Amen unto them, pray --
(Holds up his Sword)
Ma. Since your stern rage will not permit you hear
A word of mercy: for your own sake do not
Draw double vengeance on your self: poor Girl,
'Twas I that caused her sin: a twofold murder
Will lie too heavy on you.

Pic. Sure my hand
Has got the Palsy: yet before thou dy'st,
Discharge thy conscience of one crime: thy soul
Will be the lighter: tell me this, what Fiend?
What Devil in humane shape? for man would never
Have tempted thee to sin, 'twas that betrayed,
Thee to his Lust?

Ma. I Am sure you have heard my Father
Contracted me to Balthazar.

Pic. What then?


Ma. Thinking that he should have been married to me,
I let him have my honor, little dreaming
Of what has happened since: remember once
I saved your life, for that good turn afford
A little Leisure.

Pic. Mariana, since
Thou art dishonest, it is impossible
Virtue should rest in women: sure some Saint
Of your deceitful sex has fled to Heaven
With all your women-vertues: otherwise
Thou Would had a share in it.

(Offers to strike) Ma. E're you strike, one word
E're I be silent ever: there must come
A day, when you must dye too, when your faults
Must be ripped up, as mine are now: and then
You Will find it written in your Conscience-book,
As first and greatest of your sins, that you
Not only were a parricide, but that
You damned a soul too, which will be required
Of your poor Ghost: then that will quake to see
Me wrapped in flames, when it remembers how
Your anger caused it: rather shut us up
Poor Recluses in some strict Monastery,
Where we may weep, till in our tears we swim
To mercy, with our prayers beg heavens to shower
Their blessings on you.

Pic. I will have a Cave,
A darksome Spelunk in some Wilderness,
Where never grass grew, where the balefull tops
Of Yew and Cypress banish Titans light,
Where never harmless bird nor beast does live
For the foul Airs infection, where the howles
Of wolves and goats (such as your selves are) shall
Joined with the screech owls and the ravens notes
Make but harsh Music to you, all that is there
Shall be an Emblem of that Stygian Grove
You both deserve to enter.

Mar. Ought but death
So never so horrid.
Enter Gaspar.
Gas. How now? is the wind
In this door? what? is she discovered?

Pic. Fly hence, who e're thou art, if thou will save
Thy soul from spilling, but yet stay, thou art
(If any good be on the earth) an honest
Plain-dealing man, thou told'st me that, which now
I find too true: but I rejected thee,
Now to my woe I rue it.

Gas. Las! Sir! I
(Aside with Picarro) Was grieved to see a man of your true worth
So basely cozened, to be cast away
On such a Mammet: why? that very hour,
That luckless hour you came here, I had found
Her whoredom out: she was but thrust on you,
When all refused her: Me(poor man!) her Father
Tempted with gold, did vow her, and when I,
(Because I knevv she was a whore) rejected
His urged proffer: he resolved to vail her
A Nun, but that your coming did prevent it:
To your undoing,

Pic. Knevv her father then,
That she was false?

Gas. Knevv he? it was his plot --
Against my persuasions (Heavens they know) to vvrong
Your noble self, and I for love to virtue
Would then have told you, what you know not, but
You deemed me frantic: I could weep an Ocean
To think how you, Sir, are by them deluded,
But 'twas your fortune, it is past help.

Pic. I prithee
Go to the sacred Church, and bid the Sexton
Evacuate the vaults and monuments
Of the old bones that many years have kept
Their rotten habitation there; and bid him
Make the Churchyard one sepulcher: I Will bring
Bodies enough to fill them; not the plague
Shall be more pestilent, then my vengeance.

Gas. Sir,
You Have found me true to you, and since my Master
Could be ignoble, Justice and the zeal
I ow to goodness, urges me to aid
You in revenge: Let it be thus.

Pic. As how?


Gas. I came to you now to crave license, that
At night I might have brought a masque to grace
Your Festival: Let it go on, I Will hire
Men in the Masque to kill her, force her Father
That he may see his error.

Pic. Kill him too.


Gas. I, Sir, what else!


Pic. 'Twas Balthazar she served.
What time of day is it Gaspar?

Gas. Early yet,
Near seven a clock.

Pic. My business calls away;
You will not fail at night.

Gas. Question't no more.


Pic. Mean time be sure that none, good Gaspar, speak
With these base strumpets, let none have access.

Exit. Gas. No! not the wind, Cousin, poor Cousin, had you
Not better have had me then these rude Ruffions?
There s no way now but death.

Ma. O! Cousin, yet
When I behold thee, I can fear no peril:
I know thou wilt save me.

Gas. 'T may be so, but what
Would you do for him, that should save you?

Ma. Any thing.


Gas. Though many that receive such injuries
As I have done, would be more prone to vengeance,
Then mercy: yet if you will love me, Cousin,
I Will save your life, and kill this same Picarro.

Mar. Do it, and by this hand I Will marry thee.


Gas. By this same kiss I will, before your maid!


Gas. I, Gaspar, save our lives, and marry us both.


Gas. Keep close your Conclave, stir not out, I Will plot
A means to save you: the plot is in my brain.

Exit. Ma. We are alive yet, Catalina, Women
May sometimes overreach the archest villains:
Gaspar, I Will fit you: you may chance expire
Before us: Scorcht men use to shun the fire.

Exeunt. ACT 5.
SCENE 1.
Enter Roderiguez and Priest. Pri. SO smile the Heavens upon this holy Act,
That future hours with sorrow chides us not:

Rod. Amen! Amen! but come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of Joy,
Do then but close our hands with sacred words:
Then Love-devouring death do what he dare:
It is enough, that I but call her mine.

Pri. These violent delights have violent ends:
And in their triumph die like fire and powder,
Which, as they kiss, consume: the sweetest honey
Is loathsome in its own deliciousness,
And in the taste, confounds the appetite:
Therefore love moderately, long love does so,
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Enter Varina. Is this the Lady? Oh! so light a foot
Will never wear out the flint, or bruise the street,
A Lover may bestride the Gossameres,
That idle in the wanton Summer-air:
And yet not fall: so light is vanity.

Var. Good even to my Ghostly Father!


Pri. Daughter,
Thy spouse shall give thee thanks here for us both.

Var. As much to him, else is his thanks too much.


Rod. Varina, if the measure of thy joy
Be heaped like mine, and that thy skill be more
To blason it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbor Air, and let rich Musicks tongue
Unfold the imagined happiness, that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
(Kisses her)
Var. Conceit more rich in matter, then in words
Brags of his substance, not of Ornament,
They are but beggars that can count their worth:
But my true Love is grown to such excess,
I cannot sum the sum of half my wealth.

Pri. Come! come with me, and holy rites shall give
A fiat to your Love: I Will join those hands
(As you have done your hearts) in Hymen's bands.

Exeunt. Scena Secunda.
Enter Eugenia, Balthazar. Eug. This is his lodging, I believe, he is scarce
Out of his bed yet: walk, Sir, down the lane,
While I go in, and train him out: but then
Be sure you do dispatch him: least he wound you,
And grown enraged with some petty scratch
Shread your subdued Carcass into mamocks:
You know his voice? I^ll go.

Exit. Bal. Be expedite.


Enter Picarro, drawn. Pic. This way he went, they told me: Well o'retaken:
Were you at prayers, or at confession lately?

Bal. Why Sir, I hope you are no Priest, Picarro?


Pic. I must be yours, I come to shread your corpse:
And send it minced to Pluto's balefull table:

Bal. You're welcome, Sir, but say, I play the Butcher,
(Draws) Strike you down first, and ripping up your offall,
Should throw them to Diana's yelping troops?
I know your quarrel.
(Picarro runs at him, Balth. falls)
Pic. Gramercy hand! I Have played the Butcher now:
And felled the Beast: procumbit humi bos!
While thou have sense left, cry for mercy, think,
Think what a horrid, sacrilegious sin
Thou have committed: does not thy soul tell thee
(Now when thy faults appear) that thou art damned?
Without redemption?

Bal. I hope not, as yet
Cannot I remember what I Have injured you in:
That you should take my life; my last nights act
Was naught but truth.

Pic. I know that, but 'twas thou
That had her honor, that bereav'dst her of
Her virgin purity: and when thou shedst
For all thy Crimes one drop, for this weep seas:
They Will scarce wash white thy spotted soul again.

Bal. Did Mariana tell you this?


Pic. Thy conscience
Tells thee that this is truth.

Bal. It is not truth.
Trust me now dying, she is as chaste, as she
Was born for me, it is one Chaves, that
I did stand here to kill; he whor'd her: O!
(dies)
Pic. Some Angel keep thy soul in, till, thy tongue
Reveal that villain, Chaves? he is a stranger,
I know him not: you will glory, faithless Mistress!
That you have made me kill your enemy:
My friend, that stood to right me: but that Chaves,
I Will find him out, though he were hid in mists,
And quartered in the Clouds, my searching eye
Shall make a quick discovery, and inroll
Him in the list of my engaged foes;
But in this labyrinth I Will have a Clue
To guide my steps unto his final fall.
Enter Catalina as a Mistress Disguised. Mariana as a Servant. Disguised. Some
friendly whirlwind hurl me hence with speed,
Into some desert wilderness, which woman
Yet never polluted with her steps; -- they fly me:
Good creatures, stay! forgive me: sure this tongue
Has injured you: good? (can that adjunct be
Fit for a woman): if you know your selves
Bankrupt of female vices, to be heirs
Of your lost sexes goodness: pray, you tell me,
And I Will adore you with that reverence,
I would do Saints, be proud to say hereafter,
I met two virtuous women.

Cat. Surely Sir,
You have received some monstrous injury
From woman; makes you out of charity
With all that sex; yet be not so, your mother
Was but a woman.

Pic. Very true, you seem
Indu'd with sense; had you but known the wrong
I have received from one, that should have been
More honest: you will then, I know, confess,
I speak not without cause.

Cat. You're married, Sir?


Pic. Yes!


Cat. And it is your wife has injured you?
But tell me, did you love her?

Pic, Just as you have seen the Ivy cleave to the Oak,
Or hony-bearing Woodbine to the Thorns,
So dear she was to me.

Cat. And can that fact,
How foul soever, change that love into
So dire a hatred? Look but on the King
Of beasts, the Lion, when his Lioness
Sins with the Leopard; though he storm, yet when
She Has washed her self, he strait forgets it: sure
Your wife has washed her spotted soul in tears
For her delict, take pity on her: I,
Although a stranger, must persuade you.

Pic. Sooner
To set the world on fire, then to forget
Her faults.

Cat. I knew a damosel once, both young
And beauteous, that offended, she was wed,
And ever her Nuptials had been false.

Pic. My wife:
Sure't was my wife.

Cat. Nay, more: to cloak her fault
She got another to supply her room
On the wedding night.

Pic. You know our story: sure't
Could be none else but she.

Cat. And yet her husband,
Pitying her youth, did pardon her.

Pic. A man,
Molded of patience, or of baseness, but
What did she then?

Cat. Why? He immured her up
In an observant Nunnery, to pay
The tribute of her sin with Penitence;
And she is a convert now: do so, when next
You see your wife, take that good course, and do not
Damn her and your self too!

Pic. Alas! My wife
Committed more then this, for when her throat
Was underneath my sword; she feared not then
To irritate Heavens vengeance with a lie,
A wondrous lie, you see yon Gentleman.

Cat. Yes, what of him?


Pic. That injured man, she told me
Was he, that had enjoyed her, made me kill him,
And yet Heavens justice, gave his dying lips
Leave to reveal her partner.

Cat. Know you him?


Pic. His name is Chaves!


Cat. Chaves?


Pic. Judge you Mistress:
Merits she not a Chiliad of deaths?

Mar. Her own tongue, Sir, shall be her judge; she does.

(discovers)
Pic. What Is Pluto's gates blown open, and Cerberus gone?
How came these Harpies?

Mar. I have run, Picarro,
A weary race in sin, and the last post
Being almost mine, I falter; I have stolen
Forth of my Chamber, with intent to leave
Your loathed sight for ever: to have fled
With my loved Chaves hence; but that your words,
Thought of my sin, the fear of Dis and vengeance
Has made a convert of me; kill me now:
I die repentant.

Pic. Since thou ask'st thy death,
I will not be so cruel, thou shall live
To be my pitties Trophee: could I pardon
Thy fault, would you be honest?

Mar. O, Sir, do not
Make a poor contrite, now more miserable,
My life's to me grown odious: Sir, your thoughts
Run on my slaughter, but my minde's on Heaven:
Aver it not, one word of life may hinder
My resolution: you have seen the palm
(That sweet date-bearing tree) hang down its head
(As't were to beg an Ax) toward the Earth,
To cut it up, when void of fruit and moisture
It seems a scorn unto its neighbor trees:
Of me it is a true Emblem, I have lost
My fruit of Virtue, am become the shame
Of womanhood: do justice, rid the Earth
Of such an impious burden.

Pic. Wretched soul!
Thou shall not die.

Mar. I do desire it.


Pic. Come!
Take up your vail, and follow me.

Mar. To death.


Pic. Yes! Mariana, die upon his Course
( brings her to Balthazar:) Thou made me murder.
(stabs her.)
Mar. One stab more: so now
Methinks I Am well, lend we your prayers, and shed
A tear for me, Picarro!

Pic. Yes! I Will help
T'imbalm thy Corpse with my salt drops: but now
Since thou art dying, for the love I bore thee
While I did think thee virtuous: discharge
Thy soul of such a Ponderous crime, reveal
That Chaves to me.

Mar. No, I must not, Jove
Will be incenst against me more in peace
With all I Will yield this little puff of breath;
This flash of air, my life, to the hands of death:
Him I forgive that most has wronged you, yet
That you shall know, you are beholding to him;
It Is he that saved your life at my request:
My blood converts to jelly, I am cold
As Mrable-dew within: my minute comes,
Close my poor eyes, Picarro, say I die
A penitent, that is all. Oh!
(begins to die)
Pic. Receive her, Saints,
To your society: how sweet she looks?
She Is yet alive.

Cat. O no! Her breath is gone

(weeps)
Pic. Surely she is, it cannot be such beauty
Should rest in a cold Carcass: I could wish
It were undone; or that my hand had been
Blasted, ever it had struck her: had thou carried
Virtue in this fair mansion, thou had made me
Too happy! --
( Offers to kill Catalina.)
Cat. Sir, you will not kill me too?


Pic. No! I have done enough, yet more blood must
Follow: help, take her off the sordid Earth,
Too good to bear her, and then bear her in:
Be private as the night is.

Exit. Cat. I will, Sir.


Mar. So, is he gone? This Catalina I
Have done to purchase my enfranchisement:
Infuse some balsame to my bleeding wounds,
Distilled by some divine Paeonian hand:
And now, Picarro, will I seek thy death,
And unto Chaves plot a quick escape:
Then to the Church or Chapel we will hit
To make complete our wished felicity.

Exeunt. Scena Tertia.
Enter Eugenia: Chaves. Eug. A little further, Sir, I left him: Master,
Here Is Signior Chaves. Heavens protect me, see
My Master's slain.

Cha. By whom?


Eug. I know not, Sir:
I Am by this reason destitute of means
To help me, here a stranger: please you, Sir,
To grace me with employment: I should study
To do you faithful service.

Cha. Friend, I care no,
And if I do.
Enter Roderiguez.
Rod: Sir, I am now arrived
At my long wished for port of bliss and wealth;
The holy rites are done; she is my own;
It is the greatest now of my misfortune,
That yours laggs still behind.

Cha: Our love returns
Thanks to your wish: Heavens crown your love with joy;
Long live in peace and bliss; and may your issue
Puzzle Arithmetic to number them;
Accept my thoughts, good friend, they are good, though they
Tumble from my distracted brain; if ought
Can add unto thy happiness, but wish it,
And my affection shall cry Amen!

Rod. Your love commands my duty to return
Whole Floods of thanks; your wish is so complete
'T needs no addition. Sir, what fellow's that?
May he be conscious to our secrecies?

Cha. Yes! He is trusty, it is an honest fellow.


Rod. Gaspar has been with me, and full of tears
Told me, since last night we are discovered;
Your Mistress had run her lives hazard, had not
Gaspar --

Cha. Relieved her, is it not so? That fellow
Was born to do me good.

Rod. Her jealous spouse
Perceiving that she did affect some other,
Had slain her, had not she begged life till night,
And then we in our Masque must kill him.

Cha. Brave!
Excellent! It Is beyond imagination;
Come, let us in and make us ready.

Exeunt. Eug. Well!
I Will wing my feet, until my zeal can find
Picarro out, and unto him reveal
My Masters secrets; save his life, and then
He will kill Chaves; so I shall revenge
His (slighted) perjury; and if I live
Chaves shall die, my brother I Will forgive.

Exeunt. Scena Quarta.
Enter Gaspar and Varlots. Gas. Come, come! My noble Lads! The time grows on,
The Masquers will come by and by; here hold!
There Is 40. Ducats; spare you no man's life
I bid you kill.

Var. I warrant you, Sir, we are old dog at it, they die if they had Cats lives.


Cas. Well said my Trojans! I shall live to make
You walk the streets in Velvet, Plush, and Scarlet;
Fie! on the Dutch serges and these fustian doublets;
Men of your quality to walk in such
Vulgar accoutrements?

Varl. We are Soldiers, Sir.

Gas. I Will have you all made Captains, go behind:
And when I hem, be nimble as the Eeles:
Away my bullies.
Enter Picarro.
Pic. tell me treacherous Gaspar!
What evil have I merited of you,
That you should be so perjured as to plot
My ruin purposely to free that Strumpet?
Should it be true, I might well style thee villain:
I scarce believe it.

Gas. It Is a lie beyond
The Devils forging, think Sir, had my heart
Been so malicious, I would have appeared
Again before you? you may easily see
The motive of their feigning this in hopes
By blaming me to save themselves, to make you
Beholding to them for the dear engagement
Of freeing you from danger, more for spite
That I love you and hate them: they imagined
Thus to betray me to your rage: receive
Dear Sir, my weapon, if you can conceit
That I can be so impious, kill me, do it
I do beseech you.

Pic. I should first conceive
All false and base before thy loyalty:
Thou have been always honest true, to me.

Gas. Villany't self would not deceive your goodness:

Enter Engenia.
Eug. Is not one Signior Gaspar here?


Gas. He Is here;
What would you friend?

Eug. My Master, Signior Chaves
Commends him greatly to you, and desires
To speak one word with you.

Pic. Chaves? what is he?


Gas. One of the Masquers.


Eug. Though a stranger to you,
Because I see you are a Gentleman;
I Will save your life: know Cozened man, the masque
Is nothing but a dance unto your death:
That Gaspar has betrayed you to that Chaves
That whor'd your wife: he does expect without,
To kill you: it is enough, farewell, be wise

Exit. Pic. Thou now art grown to that vast height in sin,
That Dis would gape and swallow thee, but that
The prime Fiends fear that thy vile treachery
(Should thou come thither) would so far outshine
As does Hyperion in his fullest Orb,
The smallest Pleiad; so they should not be
Respected among the infernal Regiments.
Thy crafts are now disclosed thy faults ripped up.
I Will send thee strait with a deserved doom,
To keep society with the Harpyan troops,
And Fiends of that Tartarian Republic.

Gas. Still you're so credulous; just Judges use
E're they condemn, to hear both parties speak;
I understanding Chaves to have wronged
You in your wife, that you might vendicate
The highest style in vengeance-book, I went
And told him all, he has related, promised
You should be slain: but this was my intent,
Only to train him hither to his death,
That as they both had sinned, they both might suffer
Vengeance together.

Pic. Why knew I not this?

Gas. 'Twas my intent you should have known't, he only
Anticipated my relation.
That you should know, I lie not -- hem! hem!
(varlets appear)
Pic. What are these?


Gas. Why these are they I hired to do the act,
To send them both to hell: tell me, my lads
Of steel, did I not swear you to decide
One Chaves into Atoms?

Var. Yes! sound truth!


Gas. And whom 't should please Picarro to command?


Var. Yes! on our honest words!


Gas. Lo! here comes Chaves masqued-hem!
Enter Chaves masqued There stand the men Picarro, that must kill him.
(varlets wound)
Cha. Treason! I Am murdered, yet scorn to perish.
Unvengeanc'd, you shall know I have a spirit.
(offers to draw.) Eugenia's curses hang upon my arm,
Or Virgins tears have glu'd my sword so fast,
I cannot unsheath it: Oh! my strength decays.
(falls) Tremble not earth that thou must bear me, see
Engenia waited on by glorious Troops
Of constant lovers, comes t'upbraid me with
My perjury, but I Will not hear it. Oh!
(dies.)
Gas. O Sir, you thought you could defloure our virgins
Without revenge, in Balthasar's destruction
You did triumph; and you have slain Picarro;
Look! he lies weltring in his gore; I hope
You Will pay me nobly for betraying him?
You shall enjoy your Mistress I she expects
Within your presence!
Enter Roderiguez masqued.
Rod. Ha! Picarro slain?
(stumbles at Chaves.) My zeal has been too tardy; I have lost
My share of honor in this noble act.
(looks and sees it is Chaves) Heavens bless me, where is that villain that
durst draw
This noble blood? villain this hand shall be
(draws and running at Gaspar is stabd by varlets) Thy Executioner! Treason! 's
hell broke loose?
Has Pluto sent these Bandogs out? yet take
(runs at Gaspar.) One thrust from my revengefull arm, 'twill make
Some expiation for my noble friend,
And these my wounds! Alas! my hand's grown weak,
Yet will I lay me by his noble corpse,
(he falls) We'll brethren be in death: and know our Ghosts
Shall make you run distracted! poor Varina!
As my last pledge of love, in streams of blood
Dropped from my own veins, will I drink thy health:
Farewell my Dear; may heaven commiserate
Thy sadness, and protect thee. Oh!
(Dies)
Pic. 'S This he
That stole Varina to his lust?

Gas. It Is he,
It Is Roderiguez, Chaves his Comrade
In all his villainies; it is he that slew
Praepontio at his wedding, and conveyed
Varina to her ruin, and his lust.
This Lady is a stranger
Enter Eugenia in her own dress, finds
Eug. May mine eye
Chaves dead, goes to his corpse. Now see the ruin of this perjured villain!
Now my disguise is useless, Heaven has owned
My cause at length, and its due vengeance showered
Upon his perjured head; Heavens plagues are sure.
Perfidious Chaves,
That cursed hand that helped
Thee to fulfill thy lust, now work't thy fall:
Balthasar's death, Picarro's wrong is now
Retaliate in this thy ruin: but stay,
Some vengeance fall from my provoked hand;
stabs him with a bodkin, Eugenia gives thee this, and this; nay take
One more for her account, perfidious slave!
As if thy perjury could not wrong enough
Eugenia, and the honor of our house;
Thou must seduce my brother to thy part,
Make him copartner in thy crimes; for him,
For Roderiguez sake, I Will give thee this:
(stabs him) Nor shall my Fathers grief unpunisht go;
One stab for him: me thinks my rage now sits
Triumphant in her element; while I
Feed it with wounds, and make his blood repay
Both principal and Interest of my tears!
We thank you Gaspar, and Picarro both,
For this our bloody banquet. He! who is this?
(Sees her brother) My brother! Cursed villains! who durst be
So cruel a Phlebotomist, to strike
One vein of his? dear brother! might I fetch
Prometheus-like, new fire from the heavenly axell
To put in this pure Carcass: could my breath
Infuse new life into thee, I would lay
My self upon thy lips, and kiss, till all
My vigours transmigrated into thee:
But since the heavens are deaf, and death will deigne
No audience to my wish, thy sister shall
(tabs her self) Lay her thy Bedfellow: and with one stroke
In Crimson-streams swim with thee unto bliss. Oh!
(dies)
Gas. More objects still of ruin? this will be
A bloody Poppet-play: --
Enter Varina
Vari. This way he went.
Now fortune do thy worst, I scorn thy frown,
Deride at those contractions on thy brow:
Speak louder with thy threats, and spare not me,
Varina now will live in spite of thee.

Gas. Varina! welcome home, Ged give you joy:
Faith! it is not handsome thus to steal a wedding:
When shall I have my Gloves? Picarro, see!
Varina bids you joy.

Pic. She claims my thanks.


Var. Saw you my husband lately, Cousin?


Gas. There!
There he is in bed with Chaves.
(She swounds and dies)
Pic. Help, she falls!


Gas. Faith it is no matter: this is she, whose skill
Helped Chaves to his Mistress; and so fooled
Balthazar of his hopes: it was her Counsel
Betrayed poor Mariana; 'twas her head
That forged all the plots against your honor.

Pic. Excellent Gaspar! do see you are honest!
Above all malice, thou shall share estates
With me, thou do deserve it, friend.

Gas. All this
I Have done for you, illustrious Sir, and now
Reward me how you please: would I have been
False, Sir, I could have had that man's estate,
But your love is more worth then all the worlds:
What doom must Mariana, Sir, expect?

Pic. She had escaped, and I by chance did find her,
Stealing to Chaves tabern, and in rage
I sent her to the Devil for a pawn.

Gas. Ha! Am I cozened? you did well, 'twas Justice,
The Law does free you, for you only slew.
Your wife, and her Adulterer.

Pic. O Gaspar!
What means this murderer?

Gas. Hem! shallow fool!
(They stab Picarro) Glory in Mariana's death? you may
Get a new wife so beautiful.

Pic. Slave! Bastard!
Have thou no spark, or jot of goodness left?
The salvyge Arab, or the horn-foot Satyr
May but commence thy pupils, cruel slave!
Who e're begot thee, sure thy mother drew
Her blood from the Bassarides, or was
Of near alliance to that cursed Hag,
That into fritters sliced her only son:
Hell was thy Cradle, and some Harpy did
Perform the office of a wretched nurse:
Thy heart can study naught but treachery,
But! Oh! I feel the angry hand of death,
Gripe my small arteries, and Atropos
Has bit my thread of life. Forgive me Heavens!
Treason! Oh! Treason!
(dies)
Gas. Look me dead, fond man
To vex thee more, 'twas I that first betrayed
Thy wife to Chaves: I that did procure
Balthazar to have murdered thee, and now
At last, when I was all disclosed, came over
Thy stupid brain, only in one thing crossed,
(In Mariana's death) my plots has hit,
They Are all o're-reach'd by one poor Bastards wit.
Enter Mariana and Catalina. Is not this Mariana? sure it is.

Ma. O horrid spectacle! what wretched hand
Durst to attempt this execrable fact!?
Chaves, Picarro, and Balthazar slain?
Poor Roderiguez, and Varina too?
What unknown Lady's this? (methinks her face
Speaks her allied to Roderiguez!) Oh!
Let me but kiss those lips, and send my soul
(goes to Chaves) With thine into Elysium to dwell:
Lo! in these windows that let forth thy life,
I power the helpless balm of my poor eyes:
Avaunt! thou dreadful minister of hell!
Thy power could touch but their mortality:
Their souls thou could not hurt: Avaunt, begone:
If heaven have any grievous plague in store,
Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,
O! let them keep it till thy sins be ripe,
And then hurl down their indignation
In showers of fiery Vengeance on thy head.
Behold, the pattern of thy Butcheries!
See! Villain! See! how my Poor Chaves wounds
Open their congeald mouths, and bleed a fresh:
Blush! blush! thou lump of baseness! Bastard! blush!
Within whose breast more snakes and Hydra's dwell
Then in the Stygian and Lernaean Dens;
For it is thy presence that exhales the blood
From cold and empty veins, where no blood dwells;
May Heaven with lightning fry thee into death,
Or let the inhiant Earth Devour thee quick,
As it does swallow up mp Chaves blood.

Gas. Cousin, you know no Rules of Charity.


Ma. Villain! thou know no Law of God or Man.
No beast so fierce, but knows some touch of pity.

Gas. I slew them not.


Ma. Then say they were not slain.
But dead they are, and Devilish Slave by thee.

Gas. I did not kill your Chaves,


Mar. Then he lives.


Gas. Nay, he is dead, and by Picarro slain.


Mar. Take heed, that monstrous lie will choke you; did
Not you kill my dear Chaves?

Gas. I grant; yes!


Mar. Do grant me? he was only fit for Heaven.
And thou unfit for any place, but hell,

Gasp. He lives that loves you better; then he could.


Ma. Name him.


Gas. Your friend and servant, faithful Gaspar.


Ma. Where is he?


Gas. Here.
(She spits at him) What? do thou spit at me?

Ma. Would it were mortal poison for thy sake:
Out of my sight thou do infect mine eyes.

Gas. Thy eyes sweet Cousin, have infected mine.


Ma. Would they were Basiliscks to strike thee dead.


Gas. That you may know, how little I respect
Your love; receive this token from my arm.
(Kills her, Catalina runs out.)
Varl. What shall we do now, Signior?


Gas. You must swear
Balthazar killed Mariana, Chaves
Balthazar; Chaves and Varina fell
By mad Picarro's arm; then in revenge
Roderigvez killed Picarro: this is brave,
'Twill hold out water well; but where is this wench?
This devil Catalina? heavens! she is gone!
We Are all betrayed, undone.

Enter Alonzo, Alvarez, Frederique, Catalina with guards. Gas. O noble Patron!
Behold the ruin of the stateliest structure,
Dame Nature, ever built by those cursed villains

Alo. My daughter!

(Swounds)
Gas. Comfort Signior! Let your reason
Put reins unto your passion! Courage!

Alo. What? comes Gaspar now to comfort me?
Came he right now to sing a ravens note,
Whose dismal tune bereft my vital powers,
And thinks he that the chirping of a wren
By crying comfort from a hollow breast,
Can chase away the first conceived sounds?
Hide not thy poison with such sugared words;
Lay not thy hands on me, forbear I say,
Their touch affrights me with a serpents sting;
Thou balefull messenger! out of my sight;
Upon thy eye-balles murderous Tyranny
Sits in grim majesty to fright the world:
Look not upon me, for thy eyes are wounding;
Yet do not go a way; come Basilicks,
And kill the innocent Gazer with thy sight;
For in the shade of death I shall find joy?
In life, but double death, now she is dead;
Come hither, Alvarez, and fright thy soul
With a new Gorgon; see! see! where thy son
Lies weltring in his gore!

Alv. Who did this murder?


Gas. He, that foul monster, and this cursed villain
With that, came rushing in and slew your daughter --
First, then Picarro killing him, was slain
By these two varlotts:

Alo. Quick, lay hold on them!
First with strong ropes we will bind them to the rack;
And with hott Irons extort their sparkling Eyes.

Cat. Sir, credit not this villain! by his means
Chaves enjoyed your daughter; 'twas his brain
That hammered all this mischief; and at length
When Mariana would not own his love,
With his own hand he stabd her! is it not so?
Bastard!

Gas. Confide not in these feigned Comments! --


Fred. Confess you varlots, or I Will rack you!


1. Varl. He
Hired us unto it; and first by his Command
Fell this man Chaves by our impious hands:
And after, Roderiguez: then this Lady
Seeing her Brother slain, did with her bodkin
Open her veins and laid her by his side;
Next this Varina, whose young spouse was lately
Massacred here, now swouns into her death;
Then by this man's command Picarro fell,
And by his own hand Mariana, thus
Ended this Tragic Scene.

Cat. It Is doubtless true;
But 'twas Picarro that slew Balthazar.

Gas. Am I betrayed? clap, thunder at my fall,
For Fame shall speak me for as slye a Bastard,
As Sin e're viewed; you will laugh when you do see
My limbs distended on the torturing Rack:
But you shall lose your aim; since I must die,
I Will please my self in choosing of my death.
But know, Alonzo, 'twas your baseness, that
Urged me to this revenge; which you must feel
A little nearer; you your self shall fall.
(stabs him.) Curse on you all! this hand shall now set free
My self from your intended tyranny.
stabs himself.
Alv. Hold! hold his hands! we'll him in piecemeal tear,
And throw his carcass for the Dogs to feed on;
The earth never bore a monster like him.

Fred. Hold!
Keep life in him, till we complete his torments,
That his black eyes may see the vengeance due
To his deserts; which plagues shall studied be.

Gas. It Is past, I Am going now, my blood is pale,
It comes thin from my heart strings: may you all
Perish, alone the Bastard does not fall.
(Dies.)
Alv. Convey these bodies in, our grief shall swell,
And study torments that may equal Hell.

Exeunt: ERRATA.
Page 4. line 21. for Dull read Full. P. 9. l. 18. for with r. which P. 16. l.
37. for disert r. desert. P. 20. l. 46. for optitick r. optic. P. 21 l. 10.
for they r. they have. P. 30. l. 12. Exit. and penult. for this winding, r.
their. P. 33. l. 21. for wilt r. will it. P. 40. l. 19. for panvillos, r.
panuillos. P. 64. l. 33. r. Las! Sir, I.

FINIS.
EPILOGVE.
NOw we have done, 'ts the greatest of our Fears,
You Will say, W'ave led you hither by the Ears
To see some strange Conceit: But when you came
You found our 'Spitall-wits, both Blind and Lame:
Faith! if w'ave made you Fools! 'twere best you be
Silent, that you may have more Company.
If any injury be done, We do
Acknowledge, it is only done to you:
We cooked it for your Palats, if the Meat
Disrelish, don't indict us for a Cheat:
We hoped to please: if ought disgust, We wish
You Would think it but an ill-cookt Spanish Dish.
Your Patience claims our Thanks: Let GASPAR have
Your Favors hang like Scutcheons over his Grave:
His Death has Justice satisfied: from you
We do (on his behalf) for Mercy sue.
Let not your hasty Censures raise those stones
Which do Inurn him, or disturb his Bones,
And throw his Ashes in the air, be wise,
Lest his proud Dust rise, and put out your eyes.
Bridle your Passion: 'twere sin, your breath
Should sting his Name, and blast him after Death.
My Fancy prompts Me, that your Votes will give
(Attested by your hands) a large Reprieve
Against Envie's doom, and that his Genius shall
Not be condemned as quite Apocryphal:
If any strain's unsav'ry, or don't fit
Your Humor, say it is a Bastard-Wit:
It is our hopes in Country, Court, and City,
If not your Love, We shall deserve your Pity.
FINIS.

