THE LOYAL LOVERS: A Tragi-Comedy. Written by Major COSMO MANUCHE.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Eglesfield at the Brazen Serpent in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1652.

The Names of the Persons presented.
Corianus, A noble person betrothed to Apfia. Adrastus, Loyal Comrades.
Albinus, Loyal Comrades. Symphronio, Loyal Comrades. Gripe-man, A
Committee-man. Sent-well, A creature of Gripe-man's, an Informer. Sodom, One
of the Synod. Atheos, Governor of a Sea-town. Rogastus, A Lieutenant under
Atheos. Mettle, Servant to Adrastus. Perjurus, Servant, and Clark to Gripe-man.
Letesia, Daughter to Gripe-man. Apfia, Servant to Letesia, disguised, and
called Clarathea. Riggle, A common strumpet. Soldiers. A Book-cryer.
The SCENE Amsterdam.

The Author to his Honorable Friends.
THink me not proud as poor, when you shall see
I borrow not in my necessity.
And should I steal, (though common in this age)
I should (by some) be trap't in every page.
Then hue and cry comes forth, swiftly pursued
At length I Am taken, guilty found, and mewed.
Now, as for Justice, (faith) I Am like to find
Her, like Fortune musfled, if not stark blind.
All Deprecations then, when deprehended,
Little avail me; The Judge ascended
Appears two Critic would bees, point blank swears
That all the wit they found about mee's theirs.
Which grant it were, let it be praised by sense,
And 'twill be found not worth 'bove thirteen pence,
Which wants of halter proof. Now 'twere ill done
To hang a man never robbed 'twixt sun and sun.
Nor have I stolen by night, (as I can think)
Unless 'twere home to bed full freight with drink.
But such, as wanted virtue to infuse
The Heliconian fire into my Muse.
I know you will guess what beer and ale can do,
Where daily care's had to procure that too.
My Jury now (might I but choose) should be
Such as has lived high, and know misery.
And if such quit me not, I Am sure they will say,
'Twas (partly) want of money spoiled my play.
Since I Will not steal, nor borrow, give me wit;
It Is in your power to make me purchase it.
I cannot blush to own what comes from friends,
Give, and forgive, I have obtein'd my Ends.
THE LOYAL LOVERS: A Tragi-Comedy.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Adrastus, looking on his watch. Adrastus. MY Youths have forfeited their
pottle;
It Is almost ten of clock. --
Enter Book-cryer.
Book. Come new new new new
Who buys my new books here?

Adrast. What books have you got there, Sirrah?


Book. Newly come forth, and newly printed.
Why (Sir!) here is, how conspicuously the Hogans are conculcated by their own
Adulation.

Adrast. Those are hard words, Sirrah.


Book. But altogether in fashion, I can assure you, Sir.


Adrast. Not with those that understand them not.


Book. Sir, you do most prodigiously mistake; there being an order they should
pass without exception where there is the spirit of pronunciation.


Adrast. Pray let me have more facetious language, and less of your spirit.


Book. Sir, I know your mind, And shall endeavor to pleasure you presently.
Let me see, here is A true, perfect, and exact account of Justice Dapper, and
his Clark's Sodomitical revenue, to the great disabling, and impoverishing the
Active, and well-affected Females.


Adrast. Come give me that, what others have you?


Book. Why here is another, of a famous Doctor's miraculous obteining the
Philosophers stone.


Adrast. Does your book speak how?


Book. Yes Sir, that either the Stone, or a perfect receipt to obtein it, was
preserved in a wrack, and cast on this shore; which he has purchased, to the
unspeakable content of all his believers.


Adrast. What is the price of them both?


Book. A groat Sir, I can assure you.


Adrast. Sirrah, that is too much, here is three pence for you.


Book. Why Sir? Justice Dapper, and his Clerk's revenue is worth three pence;
And do you think the Philosophers Stone cost me nothing.


Adrast. Here Crackrope, here is your money.
You make a brave trade of this, Sirrah.

Book. In troth Sir, but a bare livelihood; (or where I get
A penny by the Philosophers stone, there is Dapper and his Clark
Gets ten pounds by the well-affected female.

Adrast. It Is very probable; for they often for a touch
Change Dross into Gold. Farewell Sirrah.

Book. Thank you good Master, I hope to have rare news for you next week.
Come new new. who buys my choice new new here?
Pox on it. Here Is a dispensation for oaths necessary, sticks damnably on my
hands;
The people refusing to buy, as if they had it all by Rote. --

Exit Book. Enter to Adrast. Albinus, Symphronio. Albin. Adrastus, good day to
you: what, at your study thus early?


Adrast. A study your neglect invited me to spend my idle time.


Albin. Term not that neglect (Dear friend) which we will confess
A fault of Drowsinesse.

Adrast. Come, come, you are sluggards both. I hope you will confess
You have forfeited your pottle.

Symph. We have. And when you please demand it;
You Will find us ready pay-masters.

Albin. But what books were you so seriously meditating on?


Adrast. Strange books, which we will peruse
When you shall pay your forfeits.

Symph. It wants not much of noon, what think you of it now?


Albin. I, I, let us march.


Adrast. It Is sure too soon.


Albin. Not to be merry, we have been sad too long.


Adrast. Then lead the way.


Albin. Come let us walk Symphronio, it is we must pay:


Exeunt Omnes. Enter Gripeman and Sent-well. Gripe. Sent-well, me thinks thou
art not half so active as thou were wont.
Sure thou art grown rich of late.

Sent. It Is (as you say) of late, if I be rich.


Gripe. It Is thy own fault thou art not. Thou art young,
When I was at thy years, I would have stirred my self i-faith,
Such getting times as these.
Why there is old Firmstand would make half a dozen of us.

Sent. Yes, a weary with running up and down after him
As I have done. I have followed him, like his shadow,
Daily this half year, and to no purpose.

Gripe. Sentwell, you give me no account of the five pounds
You had of me to furnish your Comrades
That undertook to trap him.

Sent. Had it been more 't had gone; I am out of purse an Angel
About that business. You reckon still what you are out of purse,
But do forget what I have brought you in.
(I will not say by my just information)

Gripe. I do remember, I do remember, Sent-well,
But could we trap old Firmstand,
We might lie still and rest a month.

Sent. Sir, I have tried all ways man could invent to undo him:
Intruded into his company, not only once or twice,
But times innumerable; And Proteus-like, varied my shape,
And faced him down that I was not my self.
Yet he, so cautious (still) in drink, or other ways,
That not a syllable, tending to the States abuse,
I e're could hear him utter.

Gripe. Why then we must another way to work before he leaves the town:
He never (yet) saw Perjurus my Clark.

Sent. Never, to my best of knowledge.


Gripe. It must be so, Sent-well: Perjurus and you shall to his
Lodging go; And under some pretense of business
That Perjurus shall seem to have with him,
Fall in discourse ot'h State.

Sent. Which he will hardly do, or if he should, he will cautious be
What language he delivers.

Gripe. No matter, if that will not do, Perjurus and you shall swear.


Sent. We heard him speak treason against the State.


Gripe. Right, very right.


Sent. Not so very right neither. Sir, you know me to be your creature,
But you have so slenderly rewarded me for such like actions,
I know not what to think on it.

Gripe. No more, no more, all shall be well. I must away to see
There Is no injustice done about sharing the VViddows goods
We caused to be plundered. Sent-well, let me alone
'Bout eight of clock this evening to plot your business
For old Firmstand; and for thy part,
Thou shall have trebble share. --

Exit Gripe. Sent. I think so too. The trebble Gallows, if we had our due. --


Exit Sent. Enter Letesia, Clarathea, and Perjurus. Clarath. Mistress, have
you any acquaintance in the Change?


Letes. Not I, Clarathea: Have Thou?


Clarath. Not I truly; but it matters not much, for I have often
Found strangers to part with their Commodities
At cheaper rates then those that would be thought our friends.

Enter Adrast. Symph. Letes. You wagg, speak softly, or you will be heard.


Adrast. Now by the Gods I have not seen a rarer piece.
In all my travells.

Symph. Beshrew me but she is handsome.
Let Us walk and observe her.

Adrast. Dear Symphronio, wait an opportunity to accost her maid, and know
Her name and being. --

Exit Letes. Clarath. and Perjurus. Symph. So quick, she is gone, I Will follow
her, and it shall go hard but I Will be
Able to give you punctual satisfaction. --
Exit Symph, and enters immediately. But do you hear, you will not be scrupulous
to pay
this debt, and pimp when flesh invites.

Adrast. No, no, my friendship stand engaged.


Symph. I Will take it, farewell. --


Exit Symph. Adrast. I feel an unaccustomed qualm, I hope I am not caught.
If I mistake not, she more then ordinarily eyed me.
Why how now Adrastus? have I stood the shock of so many sparkling eyes, to
shrink now in thy prime of judgment? but 'twill away again I hope.
Yet why may not she deserve my love? I have made no vow that I have broke,
nor ere profaned at Cupid's Altar: Venus assist me then, and let it work.

Enter Albinus. Albin. Noble Adrastus, what all alone? where is Symphronio?


Adrast. Faith I have employed him in a business, he will not be scrupulous in
telling thee.


Enter Symphronio. Albin. See here he is come. Sure 'twas some merry business
he looks so pleasant 'bout the mouth. Symphronio prithee make us partakers of
your mirth.


Symph. That you shall, just at the turning out ot'h change
I gave the Maid a pull by the coat.

Albin. What Maid, in the name of Cupid?


Symphr. Thou man of ignorance, be silent, and give ear.
She turned about, and with a smiling countenance
Told me I was mistaken, they were not for my turn.
Her Mistress hearing her, looked back, and blush't,
Then caused her man go forward.
I, resolved not to return unsatisfied, fell on again,
And with a civil Confidence told her I had a reasonable
Request, she, in two or three words could satisfy.
At which she made a stand, and gave me leave to ask her Mistress
Name, and dwelling. She readily answered,
'Twas more then she had Commission for to do.
Yet for that I looked like an honest Gentleman,
(That could not harbor a dishonorable thought) she would. --
Albin. hums by. She told me her father, -- And there she stopped, and sigth'd,
As if she thought him unworthy so heavenly a child.
At last she brought it out, telling me, her Master
(Father to that Gentlewoman) was called Gripe-man;
His dwelling in the High Street; And this his Daughter
And only child, was named Letesia.
I courteously thank't her, and so departed.

Albin. Hey day, what stuffe's here? all this ceremony for a wench?
You might have courted (with less ado) the holiest
Sister in the City, and have sped too.

Adrast. Peace, peace you wag; upon my soul she is
A virtuous creature.

Albin. Prithee engage not thy soul for the female sex, they are brittle ware.


Adrast. Thou would adore her sex during life,
Did thou but see her face.

Albin. Is it a friend of yours that has the letting of her out,
You so extol her?

Adrast. Leave jesting; By Jupiter I dare swear she is virtuous;
Would I had never seen her face.

Albin. By Cupid he is serious; nay if the wind blow there,
Come, come, let us pack.
No cure for love like a good cup of sack. --

Ex. Om. Enter Letesia Clarathea. Letes. How now Clarathea, what taken up in the
streets by Gallants?


Clarath. Not by Gallants, Mistress; And for taking up the place
Was not convenient; which had it been
I should have saved him that labor,
And have taken up for him.

Letes. You should.


Clarath. Faith like enough, had we been both agreed.


Letes. Thou art a mad soul, but faith deal truly with me,
What his business was.

Clarath. Cannot you guess?


Letes. 'Twere strange I should;
Do take me for a Witch?

Clarath. No I Will besworn, nor I believe he neither; for if he had,
He would not have so earnestly enquired after you.

Letes. After me?


Clarath. Even so; his business was to know your name and habitation.


Letes. Prithee wench be serious.


Clarath. By my maidenhead it is truth.


Letes. That Is but a ticklish oath, may I believe it?


Clarath. Seriously, most true.


Letes. And did thou tell him?


Clarath. I did indeed.


Letes. Urged he to know no more?


Clarath. But only so. It Is your father calls, Away. --


Ex. Omnes. Enter Riggle, Sodom following her, and Mettle following him. Sod.
That Lady should be right by her swimming gate.
I am provoked, and must have ease. -- calls.
Sister, sister, his't, his't, why sister.

Rigg. Would you ought with me, Sir?


Sod. Lady, it is dark.


Rigg. It Is very true. Sir! Can you make it lighter?


Met. You may with standing on your head;
For there is no doubt you burn below. -- aside.

Sod. My directions (Fair Lady!) will be
No stumbling block to you.

Met. No, I dare swear, she will by them find
A very even way to hell.
This is some zealous brother troubled with rebellious flesh.
I will observe them further. -- aside.

Sod. If my heartily proffered service appear not troublesome,
I shall perform the duty of a servant,
And wait upon you home.

Rigg. Sir, I thank you. But me thinks your habit
And your language are not well matched.

Sod. However matched, they shall agree to do you service.


Met. This is no Rogue. aside.


Rigg. Sir, to give you answer. I am this night to encounter
With a friend about some business
That much concerns my livelihood.

Met. I believe so; And may concern his death
If he procure not the better Surgeon. aside.

Sod. Lady, shall I request you make me then so happy
As let me know where I may wait on you to morrow?

Rigg. So it be in the evening, where you please.


Sod. Pray name the place most convenient for you,
And I Will not fail to attend you.

Rigg. What think you of the Naked-boy in Flesh lane?


Sod. The hour now, and I Will not fail you, Lady.


Rigg. 'Tween four and fiveith' evening,


Sod. Till when, your faithful servant.
Lady, all happiness attend you.

Ex. Sodom. Met. O here is rare sport for Mounsieur Albinus,
Ex. Rigg. My masters friend.
Well, Brother Zealot, if my wits not fail,
I Will have an excellent Cure to cool your tail.

Ex. Mettle. Enter Adrastus, Albinus, Symphronio, and Drawer, as in a Tavern.
Albin. Drawer, be sure you let us have that that is right.


Draw. Sir, I Will play with any Vintner (confined within the circuit
Of a hundred mile) Canarie against Canarie.

Albin. Well Sirrah, let your wine be rich as your words,
And I Will bet on your side.

Draw. I Will warrant you Sir.


Ex. Drawer. Albin. Mettle, welcome to town.
Enter Mettle. How do our friends in the country?

Met. All well, Sir. Sir, here are letters for you. gives Adrastus letters.


Adrast. Sirrah, I looked for you two days ago.


Met. Sir, your letters speak my occasion of stay. Adrast. reads to himself.


Symph. And how? And how honest Mettle?


Met. Your faithful servant, Sir.
I have rare sport in chase for you.

Albin. For me, Mettle?


Met. For you Sir, if you please pursue it.


Symph. Here is a cup of Sack to your welcome to town, Mettle.


Met. I thank you, Sir.


Albin. Nay give him the other cup. What news Adrastus?


Adrast. The news is, they write to me for news.


Albin. Adrastus, Lore your top sail: Vive la Roy. -- Albinus drinks.


Adrast. Come, away with it; Symphronio, to you.


Symph. Thanks good Adrastus.


Albin. Come Mettle, the rare sport you talk off, what is it?


Met. Why Sir? some hour since, making enquiry for my master,
(Though somewhat dark) I could discover a zealous Brother
In hot pursuit of a wench; he followed her,
I followed him: at length with complementall language
He assaulted her, who seemed somewhat shy at first;
At last, pretending earnest occasions for her excuse this night,
She engaged to morrow evening to meet him, 'twixt four and five.
The bargain driven thus, they parted several ways.
I followed the wench, and pretending my self to be his man,
Told her, my master had considered, and would request her
The meeting might be by three in the afternoon.

Albin. What design had thou in that?


Met. Sir, as thus: That if in case you and my master
Fancy a scene of mirth, l'le bring you to the place
By three oth' clock, where (without doubt)
You Will find her. Then you have time enough before he comes,
For to contrive (which without doubt she will consent to)
Some punishment fits your mirth, and worthy so base an abuser
Of the Commonwealth.

Albin. Excellent Mettle! Here drink this for me. -- gives him money.


Met. You bind me to you, Sir.


Albin. Adrastus, Pox of your melancholy, there is no denial,
You must (in this design) along with us to morrow.

Adrast. I shall consider of it.


Albin. Consider me no considers, you must go with us.


Symph. He must, he must.


Adrast. Mettle, come hither. -- Adrast. and Mettle whisper. Met. goes of.


Albin. Prithee Adrastus, ingeniously tell me,
Does not this wench, this she fayrie-female trouble thee?
Thou were not wont to be thus off the hooks.

Adrast. Will thou not laugh at me, if I should confess?


Albin. Faith no: I ever could distinguish between a friend
Seriously deserving pity, and objects fit for laughter.

Adrast. I know not what you call being in love,
But if I not enjoy her, I must forget
There can be joy on earth.

Albin. Enjoy? Do know what it is thou would enjoy?
She may be (for ought I can perceive) thou know
Not worthy thy affection.

Adrast. Can there be so much beauty
Without a world of virtue and desert?

Albin. Symphromo, you know her fathers house.


Symph. If what lier maid delivered to me be true, I do.


Albin. Adrastus, few hours will make known if she worthlly deserve,
Which when discovered, and that I find her worthy thy affection,
Employ Thy Albinus: And if I fail to serve Thee, to my last drop of blood,
May misery enforce me take up arms against
My natural Prince.

Symph. The same wish I; And I know nothing worse.


Adrast. My noble friends, I thank you, and cordially believe you,
What e're (through weakness) I deserve.
Now for contrivance, how to obtein that happy hour
Wherein I may reveal my thoughts to her, (none else being by)
To me appears miraculous.

Albin. That, I Will engage my life, you speedily shall do.


Adrast. It is impossible, how can thou contrive it?
It were a happiness I dare not hope for.

Albin. Be not too incredulous, this I Will perform,
Or never draw sword again.

Symph. My life for it, what he undertakes, he will confidently
Go through with.

Adrast. O Symphronio, I know his will, would he had power equal!


Albin. I hope on the condition I do your business, you will
Accompany us to morrow to Mettle's Wench and holy Brother.

Adrast. I will, and what lies in me to increase your mirth
I really shall act.

Albin. Why that is well said. Now for your business.
Some time this night will I procure a suit of clothes, with which
(My periwick left off) I well may pass for round amongst the Synod.
The issue of my business expect to hear to morrow.
Drawer, Drawer, to pay? --
Enter Drawer.
Draw. Sir, you shall know presently. --


Exit Drawer. Adrast. Name but your hour of return,
And we will expect you here.

Albin. There Is no place better; by nine or ten in the morning
I will be with you.
Symphronio, give me a note of the old man's house and name. --
Enter Drawer:
Symph. That at our lodging you shall have.
Drawer, what is to pay?

Draw. Four shillings and a penny.


Symph. Eighteen pence club will do it.
Drawer, the rest take for your pains.

Draw. Thank you Gentlemen, you are very kindly welcome.
Peerce, show a light down stairs.
It Is all paid ith'Kings-head, --
Ex. Om. Enter Letesia sol. How have I lost my liberty? Was ever Maid betrayed
By her eyes as I have been?
Dote on I know not what, or whom?
Must I languish for what I know's impossible to obtain?
Thy hopes, Letesia, at best, are but that he is noble, and a single man.
Suppose this be, where shall I find him, or of whom enquire
To ease my troubled soul?
I may as well search for a Diamond in the main Ocean lost,
And hope (alike) to find it.
And yet, how much desirous is my troubled heart
To entertain something like hope?
Why should his friend (for sure he must be so)
Enquire after me? give my Maid money for discovering
My name and dwelling? All this is nothing,
And yet it may be something: No it cannot neither;
For 'twas his friend enquired, and sure his business
Only concerned himself.
Letesia, Thy little hopes is dash't. But if his friend
Come in his own behalf, I may enquire of him.
And that will breed a jealousy, and may, suspecting
Him his rival, kill him, (which heaven forbid)
That must not be.

Enter Clarathea. Clarath. This is the third time
I have taken you alone in melancholy postures.
Venus grant you are not in love.

Letes. In love, with what?


Clarath. That (if you please) lies in your breast to resolve me.
There is one of the pitifull'st holy brethren within
To speak with your father, that ever eyes beheld.

Letes. Know thou his business?


Clarath. Not I, but something he pretends to have with him
Of much concernment.

Letes. Know's my father of his being here?


Clarath. Not yet.


Letes. I Will then go call him.


Clarath. See, see, they are here.


Enter Gripe-man, and Albinus disguised. Albin. Good morrow to you, fair
Mistress.


Letes. The like to you, Sir.


Gripe. Letesia leave us till I call you.


Letes. I shall Sir. --


Ex. Letesia and Clarathea. Gripe. Now when you please, begin your business.


Albin. Sir, the common report of your just carriage in the holy cause
You undertake, has encouraged me to make my case known
To you, the well handling of which (I doubt not) but will
Be very advantageous to us both.

Gripe. You say wonderful well, and to the purpose.
Pray proceed.

Albin. A repetition of such truths as I could justly deliver
To your ample satisfaction, how laboriously active
I have been in the advancing this great cause,
Would be too tedious for you to undergo the hearing of;
Though my present condition must invite you to believe, -- looks on himself.
I have been rather not rewarded at all, then meanly.

Gripe. Sir, it is believed. Pray proceed to your present business
Now in hand.

Albin. I shall. And, to be short, thus stands the case.
There is (and not far hence) a wanting Gentleman
Whose former rate of living being high, will easily be wrought
The only instrument to work our ends, his acquaintance
Being great with a young Gentleman has long born
Arms against us; And one that only trusts this
Gentleman with his absconded living.
Now your promise that he shall share (of what your
Known Authority may easily wrack from him)
I Will stand engaged, makes him your creature.
A brace or two of thousands will not be hurtful,
And may be spared from twenty, which this my friend
Will make appear, not only that he is worth,
But where it is.

Gripe. Honestly spoken, very honestly spoken, and to he purpose,
Home to the purpose. And let me tell you, you need
Not doubt, but that your care, and wisely managing a business
So much concerns the general Good, shall largely be
Rewarded beyond your expectation;
Believe it honest Gentleman it shall.

Albin. Sir, I doubt it not. But for my friend, when he has
Discovered what we can wish to know,
We Will hold him to it.

Gripe. Right, right, our shares will mount the higher.


Albin. The rest I have to say, is, That I could wish,
And heartily, you would delay no time in being known
To this same Gentleman. Your summons shall procure
His presence here, or where else you please, at two
Hours warning. Though (if my poor advice may stand)
I think your house the only place.

Gripe. By any means my house, Sir. And let me entreat you
Make it yours, and your friends. Faith, what think you
Of a piece of Beef, and bring your friend?
Come, come, you shall dine with me to day. Clarathea, Clarathea, -- he calls.
Fetch me a pint of sack, and call Letesia in. --
Enter Clarathea. That baggage will have the green sickness,
She Is spoiled for want of exercise.

Clarath. Sir, will you have a whole pint?


Gripe. No words be gone, I say a whole pint.


Clarath. Miraculous! he is not long lived sure.


Ex. Clarath. Albin. Well Sir, since you will have it so, I have considered,
We Will be your guest. --
Enter Letesia.
Gripe. And welcome, heartily welcome honest Gentleman.
Letesia, take special notice of this Gentleman and his friend, that when they
come,
You bid them welcome, as my poor house can make them,
They will deserve your acquaintance and respect.

Letes. Sir, your commands, and their desert will merit much more
Then I can be serviceable in. But, to my power, I Will labor to deserve
From both forgiveness.

Albin. Such Angels of light, are only capable of forgiving
What we poor mortals trespass.

Gripe. No more, no more: Beshrow me Sir, this savours of the Court.


Albin. Pray Sir, let your charity extend so far, to credit me,
I hated much that Idol. --
Enter Clarathea with wine.
Gripe. Well said wench, Fill, fill.
Sir, here is to you, and your noble friend.

Albin. Thank you, worthy Sir.
Health to you. Fairest Mistress.

Letes. Your servant, Sir.


Albin. Lady, you cannot drink.


Gripe. She is a very pingler, a very pingler.
Come Sir, the other cup to you.

Albin. Thank you Generous Sir. -- Drinks.
Verily it is more of the creature, then I have
So liberally tasted (in a fore-noon)
This sanctified ten years.

Gripe. Sir, time (at present) is precious with me, having a very
Great influence on the affairs of this Country,
And must take leave, but shall not fail you at the hour of twelve.

Albin. Till when, I humbly take my leave.
Fair Mistress, your faithful servant. --

Ex. Albin. Gripe. Letesia. I have invited this Gentleman and his friend
To dine with me to day, let us have some things extraordinary,
'Twill not be lost: so good morrow, Girl.

Ex. Gripe. Letes. I do believe so: you seldom do invite those you loose by.
You Powers above! lay not your heavy judgments on a feeble
Maid for het fathers sins; For I much sear the crooked
Paths he treads, portend our house no good.
Just Powers! protect the innocent.

Exit Letesia. Enter Adrastus, Symphronio, Mettle, Drawer, as in a Tavern.
Draw. What wine is it, Gentlemen?


Symph. Your best Canarie.


Draw. I Will draw you a pint of the best in the town, Sir


Ex. Drawer. Symph. Adrastus, what is it a clock by your watch?


Adrast. It Is somewhat more then nine. -- looks in his watch.
Albinus promised to be here before noon.

Symph. My life on it, that he will perform. And were you not
Acquainted with his change of habit, I am confident
You would not know him.

Adrast. Is he so metamorphosed?


Symph. As e're man was: He looks so like a factious Brother,
That the Synod, though utterly against any enjoying
Pluralities but themselves, could not less bestow upon him
Then three Benefices.

Adrast. 'Twere rare sport to be a spectator how he behaves himself.


Symph. We shall have that at large when he returns.


Enter Drawer with wine. Draw. Sir, there is one below desires to speak with
you.


Adrast. Why did not bid him come up?


Draw. Faith (Sir!) he looks so like a factious Brother,
I thought you would be offended.

Adrast. Go, prithee bid him come up.


Exit Drawer. Symph. It Is he; we must take no notice who he is
Before the Drawer.

Adrast. By no means.


Enter Albinus and Drawer. Albin. Save you, Gentlemen.


Adrast. You are welcome, Sir! I am glad to see you well.
Pray sit down. Drawer, reach a chair.
And how does our noble friend? Drawer is called without.

Draw. I come, I come; Anon, anon, Sir.


Ex. Drawer. Albin. In perfect health; And how, and how, Gentlemen?
Faith, how do you like my shape?

Adrast. I hardly can believe that thou can be Albinus.


Albin. Very likely; nor that you are (this day) to dine with Letesia
Your fair Mistress.

Adrast. Yes; that I shall be to dine with her I doubt not.


Albin. Thou man of little faith.
Mettle, fill me a glass of sack.

Met. Here (Sir!) here is wine.


Albin. Here Symphronio, here is to Hollands Masterpiece.

Adrast. You are very merry Albinus.


Albin. And so may you be if you please,
I am sure you have cause enough.

Adrast. Prithee Mad-cap be serious, Did thou see her?


Albin. Yes, by this flesh and blood did I, and feel her too;
Had I not loved thee well, I had become my own petitioner
And deceived thy trust.

Adrast. Dear Albinus, be serious; And let me know
The event of thy proceedings.

Albin. Mark then, and rejoice, for by our friendship
I Will utter naught but truth.

Adrast. Then I believe thee; Prithee proceed.


Albin. Then thus: This morning early (as well Symphrenio
Can witness) I parted with him. And as he directed,
Toward Gripe-mans house I steered my course.
Where when arrived, and knocking at the door,
There comes a wench, demanding what my business was.
I, in a zealous tone (as if I had worn my own clothes)
Told her, I desired to speak with her Master; (whose condition,
I had ever a pint of wine with a poor botcher, his near
Neighbor, sufficiently enquired) she entreated me come in,
Telling me, her Master (she thought) was ready, but not
Come down. Away she went, and no sooner gone,
But down comes a bad father (for so I am given to understand)
To a most virtuous child. I told him I had a business
To impart that much concerned him. He immediately
Had me into a handsome parlor, where I was blessed
With a sight of (I must confess) your beauteous Mistress;
(If e're my eyes beheld one) her father commanded his
Daughter and Maidservant forth the room, which they
Obediently obeying, I began my story, which as we go
I Will tell you; for dine with him this day, I have engaged my self you shall.
And this, dear friend, is truth.

Adrast. I know not how to husband this poor life I hold
To make thee satisfaction.

Albin. Nay, if you complement, I Will dis-engage my self again.


Adrast. Thou know with thee I cannot.
Come, we will knock off, and all go to my chamber.

Albin. Where you must smug your self up for your encounter.
Mettle, we must not forget three of clock this afternoon,
The whore must be remembered.

Met. And the rogue too, or I am much mistaken.


Adrast. Mettle, pay you the reckoning; Come, let us go.


Met. I shall Sir. --


Ex. Omnes. ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Gripe-man, Adrastus, Albinus, and Letesia, as from dinner. Adrast. SIr,
we thank you for your noble entertainment, and shall as men
You highly have obliged (to the uttermost of our poor power)
Faithfully serve you.

Gripe. Gentlemen, you are heartily welcome to such poor fare you have found.
And what was amiss to day, Letesia,
Pray let it be your care next time to mend.
For (Gentlemen!) I shall expect you will be my daily Guests.
Sir, pray a word with you. --
Gripe. Albin. whisper aside*
Adrast. Sir, we humbly thank you, and rest your grateful servants.
Lady, content; wait on your fair soul.
May I deserve the honored title of your servant.

Letes. Sir, I want a judgment to pay desert, yet never hated
Where I never found any.

Albin. Sir, be confident I shall not fail (speedily)
To put it in execution.

Gripe. I doubt it not.


Adrast. Lady, the gratefull'st of your poor servants kisses your hand,
And humbly takes his leave.

Letes. Your servant, Sir. --
Ex. Gripe. Adrast. Alb. It Is he: You just Powers! that have vouchsafe't
To hear the poor petitions of a distressed Virgin,
Be still assisting the humblest of your handmaids.
What should his business with my father be?
There must be strange pretenses of large profit in it,
They hardly else should be invited here.
My youth, and unexperience I have in Cupid's school,
Puts me in doubt of what I fane would credit.
I do confess (I blush to speak the rest) I eyed him more then
Became my modesty to do; (I hope he thought not so)
And if I not mistake, his looks betrayed much more of love
Then business with my father. Yes, yes, it must be so,
And yet it may be otherways. Suppose (which Venus grant he may)
He love me (if it be possible) as well as I love him,
The hopes I have to enjoy him with consent of my father, is so little,
Despair awaits that thought.
His looks speaks too much of honesty to be rich enough, (as times go now)
For his consent, No, no, Lotesia, it must be one dares lift his hand
Against his sacred Prince, (which sure he dares not do)
And by sinister ways hoard up unlawful Wealth,
Must (by my fathers choice) be made my Bridegroom.
But I Will as soon embrace a Leper,
As tie my self to what my soul abhorres.

Enter Clarathea. Clarath. What meditating, Mistress, who your noble Guest
should be,
You dined with all to day?

Letes. That requires but small study;
They are men that come 'bout business to my father.

Clarath. My maidenhead upon it, you will not find it so.


Letes. Why do thou laugh?


Clarath. To think how you mistake.


Letes. Prithee, unfold thy riddles, and let me know thy thoughts.


Clarath. Cannot you call to mind, you e're did see one
Or both of them before?

Letes. Never to my best of knowledge.


Clarath. Why then I can assure you these are the very Gentlemen
We sawith' Change the one of which enquired of me
Your name and dwelling.

Letes. That cannot be, they were all Gentlemen.


Clarath. If you examine strictly, so you will find these to be.
For know, he that we took to be the pitiful holy brother,
Is, in disguise, the Gentleman enquired of me for you.

Letes. It is impossible.


Clarath. It Is so; That I should be mistaken.


Letes. What should this mean, Clarathea? Can thou guess?


Clarath. Yes, that one (for both I cannot think)
Would fain make love to you.

Letes. What e're it be (dear wench!) keep secret,
Till time reveal the event.

Clarath. Be confident of me; for when Clarathea shall betray
Your trust, may she live neglected,
And dye forgotten. --

Ex. Letes. Clarath. Enter Adrast. Symphr. as in a Tavern. Adrast. Symphronio,
Your haste has brought us hither an hour
Before our time, and it is too soon to drink
After so full a meal.

Symph. 'Twas well considered; Let me alone to drive away some
Time without the help of Sack.
Mettle has perfectly got the part I gave him (if the
Bulls pizill put him not out)
And I have mine ex tempore.

Adrast. Does the Rogue know he shall be basted?


Symph. Gently, he does: But I am resolved to try his utmost
Patience; see here, they are come. --

Enter Albin. and Mettle. Albinus, we are resolved
(Not knowing how we may be encountered
When our expected company arrives) to pass by drinking
For half an hour. Mettle, you are perfect in the part I gave you:

Met. Sir, I have not con'd this three days, yet
Dare prefume I am perfect.

Symph. Well, look to it, you know your forfeit, if you but miss a word.


Met. If you are ready, come what will, I Will run the hazard.


Albin. But where are your properties?


Met. For those, I shall furnish my self below. --


Ex. Mettle. Albin. Pox on it, I shall never hold out without some drink.
Drawer!

Enter Drawer. Draw. Here, Sir.


Albin. Sirrah, fetch us a quart of sack. --


Enter Mettle with a black gown, and pen, ink, paper, and books. Adrast. Here Is
Mettle. Prithee Albinus forbear your sack,
They Will soon dispatch the Scene.

Albin. Well sirrah, let the sack alone till we call.


Draw. I shall, Sir.


Ex. Drawer. Albin. Come, come to your sport, prepare, prepare.


Aldrast. Albin. seat themselves. Mettle in an old black gown seats himself
behind a curtain, with some books, pen, ink, and paper before him, personating
Phanaticus a Priest. Symphronio standing behind the hangings till his cue to
Enter, personating Fly-blow a Butcher. Mettle draws the curtain, and turns
over some accounts. Phanat. Let me see, let me it, gotten this week by incomes
From Mistress Dunce a Common Council man's wife, -- Three pounds, a gold Ring
two silver spoons worth thirty seven shillings.
From Mistress Zeal widow, -- forty shillings.
From Mistress Tartwit a Cooks wife, -- three pounds.
From Mistress Fat a Tanners wife, -- fifty shillings.
From Mistress Phime Feather-woman and widow, -- one pound ten.
From Mistress Grease a Tallow-chandlers wife, -- one pound two.
From Mistress Error widow, -- forty shillings.
From Mistress Extortion a Broakers wife, -- Tastetie to line a cloak.
From Goodwife Shuttle a gifted Weavers wife, -- two fat Geese.
From Mistress Fly-blow a Butchers wife -- a filver bowl worth three pounds.
Why here is nineteen pound, nineteen shillings got with much ease.
How willing these poor souls, in body, and in purse,
Are to contribute to the Elect!
For (to say truth) we are chosen, but it is to cozen them.
I must abscond: My spiritual exercise grows too laborious.
O for a Cornish Curate from beyond sea, to officiate in my
Absence but for one month!
Would they forbear me on the seventh day, I should rub out
Much longer, and please much higher on the week days.
But to stand two hours spending (to no purpose) is too much.
Symphronio personating Fly-blow, knocks at Phanatious his door. Who Is there?
Upon my life another client.
A Greek or Hebrew book displayed does well. spreads open some books.

Fly. Here Is one desires admittance to you.


Phanat. Who would you speak withal?


Fly. With your reverend self, divine Sir.


Phanat. O he is right, hoe is right. -- opens the door, Fly blow enters.
Come in, Friend.

Fly. Save you, holy man.


Phanat. You also: What may your business be?


Fly. A scruple Sir of conscience, I fain would be desolved in.


Phanat. Resolved, you would say, friend.


Fly. It Is very right, resolved I fain would be.


Phanat. Time with the Elect is precious, but to such good works
As these we are called; Friend, open your case.

Fly. Sir, I am poor but however have brought that with me,
That shall show I am willing (to my utmost strength,
And ability) to give you satisfaction for your pains.

Phanat. Honestly spoken, very honestly spoken,
And conscientiously; pray begin.

Fly. Then thus I shall discover my secrets to you.
I find my self (of late) much given to rebellion,
Toward a poor woman, yet, young and lusty.
A neighbors wise of mine, who (I fear) if I enjoy,
Will lie very heavy on me.
Now, Sir, I have endeavored to become a true
Subject to my self, but finding my endeavors no way prevalent,
I shall desire to be resolved, how far
Your dispensation (she being none of the Elect)
Will extend toward the satisfying our venial desires,

Phanat. How far inclinable to your desires find you our Sister?


Fly. Verily Sir, comfortably enclining.


Phanat. Is her husband of able body for the procreation of the Elect?


Fly. That case is doubtful, and much to be feared,
He having known her this two year and upward
Without fruit thereof;
The woman having ever been laboriously endeavoring.

Phanat. Brother, enough, enough, I say.
I have with attention heard you; and shall (as considering
It my own case) instruct you for your best advantage
Both of soul and body.
As for your rebellion, if your cause be wholesomly
Advantageous to your profit, you may rebel,
As many others, and my self (at present) do.
But so to rebel, as of necessity must be prejudicial to you
(Our sister being impoverish't) I shall advise you to take
This comfortable admonition from me, which is,
That you put on the Armor of Providence,
And cleave to a more beneficial sister.

Fly. Divine Sir, I thank you; and do begin to find your
Wholesome and comfortable admonition effectually to operate.
And that you may perceive, I came not altogether unfurnish't
With what, I hope, shall (in some reasonable measure)
Satisfy you. -- Fly. lays off his cloak and discovers a Bulls pizil.

Phanat. Good Sir, I doubt it not.


Fly. You shall not need; Behold this ell of mettle, -- advanoeth his pizil.
It Is a good one: the Bull it once belonged to
Cost me eight pounds.
Marry, I shall give nine for yours, if you waste it not
Too much in the service of the Elect.

Phanat. Sir, what is your meaning?


Fly. That you shall soon discover.
Now hear me with attention:
Thou Metropolitan Imp of Satan, Monster of mankind,
Thou compound of Fornication and Adultery.
Nay, nay, stir not, nor let nothing of noise come from
Thy perjured tongue, which know can mollify as much as tears can rocks.
Now, in a softly tone, answer me (if it be possible) nothing but truth
(A thing by thee rarely uttered) to what I shall demand.
You know one Fly-blow a Butchers wife.

Phanat. Fly-blow, Sir?


Fly. Yes, Fly-blow Sir. Know, wretched miscreant, she has discovered
Thy black soul to me; and should thou but utter one
False syllable to those known truths I shall ask from thee,
By all the Gods, I Will add to my intended fury, and geld thee.

Phanat. Forbid, you Powers, geld me; I am undone then.
Sir, I shall confess any I know, you please to ask me.
Good Sir, be merciful. Geld me.

Fly. If truth so long forgotten by thee can be again remembered,
You may be merciful to your self, and save your Dowcets.

Phanat. Thank you, good Sir; and be confident, what you shall
Please demand within the power of my utmost knowledge,
You fully shall be satisfied.

Fly. Then to the purpose: How long have you been acquainted
With Mistress Flye-blow?

Phanat. Verily, I shall most punctually resolve you.


Fly. Sirrah, answer me not in that sniv'ling tone
You cheat the world with.

Phanat. Why, Sir, it is some eight weeks and odd days
Since first I did enjoy her.

Fly. Villain, did you enjoy her then?


Phanat. Pardon me Sir, I mean no otherways then
The sanctified company of a zealous sister.

Fly. Alter that tone (I say) or I shall whet -- pulls out his knife, and
offers to whet it at his steel hangs by his side.
You understand the rest.
Sirrah, be short; what money, and moneys worth have you had
Of her? For Villain, know, that misled
Woman is my wife. Phanaticus starts.
What do you start? (I must confess, I blush to own her)
Come, be brief, and to a penny satisfy my demand,
Or you grow fat, and sing well.

Phanat. I understand you, Sir, and shall cast it up to a penny.
Let me see, my book will tell me; let me see, -- turns over his book of
accounts.
The eleventh of August last, -- twenty shillings.
August the eighteenth, -- ten shillings.
The second of September, -- forty shillings.
The fourteenth of the same Month, -- twenty shillings.
The first of October, -- A silver bowl, to the value of three pounds.
This is to a penny, what she has been pleased to bestow.

Fly. And upon what terms did you receive it?


Phanat. Merely her charity, for good
And wholesome admonition.

Fly. Indeed such admonition requires consideration,
Which you shall have. Come, come, deposit
What with your Mountebanck tricks
You have juggled from her.

Phanat. No consideration, Sir, for the pains
I have taken with your wife.

Fly. For that, let me consider -- yes, I have thought
Of some valuable consideration, worthy your care and pains,
But you must stand to my courtesy,
The bowl and money being tendered me.

Phanat. I thank you, Sir, most kindly.


Fly. Nay, nay, for that, let it alone,
Till you see what I shall deserve.

Phanat. Here is to a penny, Sir, what I have received of her. -- Phanat. takes
out of a desk the bowl and money.


Fly. Now, Sir, how ever you have played the knave
By deluding my wife, you shall be sure
To find me a man of my word. -- Fly-blow beats the Priest egregiously with a
Bulls pizil.

Phanat. Hold Sir, if you be a man, consider, and be merciful;
Good Sir, consider my Coat.

Fly. 'Twas well remembered; I shall, I shall, and lay it on so much
The harder, you may feel the better through it.

Phanat. O Sir! draw in your pizil, (if you be a man) and spare me
Till the next Lords day is past, or I shall be unable
To scatter the sanctified seed of Reformation into the bowels
Of our dear Sister-hood.

Fly. Their reverent hearing, and your instructions
Claims good places in hell.
Sirrah, give thanks I am out of breath; Farewell.
Cheat me once more, I Will send thee home to hell --.

Ex. Fly-blow. Phanat. I do believe you; A plague go with you, and your pizil.
The Rogue has made jelly of me.
Complain of this, I dare not for my credit, which, I must more
For my profit, then my conscience value.
This must not unrevenged go thus,
The slave is honest, that claws enough for me
To ruin him, and his whole family. -- Mettle pulls off his gown in great fury.

Enter Symphronto. Albin. How now, Mettle? This was but a rehearsal,
When is your real day of performance.

Met. Zwounds, I know not what jest there was on my side,
But I have all the reason in the world to believe
He was in earnest.
You shall excuse me for acting the sinner again in jest.

Symph. Indeed thy natural doing of it is in earnest,
Though we applaud thy sufferings in jest.
But how? but how, i-faith Mettle? was it not smartly performed?

Met. Yes, on my side, I Will besworn.
A plague on it, my gown had no lining in it neither,
Which you never considered.

Symph. Pox of a bad memory, I had spared thee else --.


Enter Drawer. Draw. There is a Gentlewoman below enquires for you, Mettle.


Met. Tell her I Will wait upon her straight.


Albin. Drawer, bring up some of your best sack.
Another Scene as long as this had choked me.

Draw. I shall Sir. --


Exit Drawer. Adrast. Mettle, take your Lady into the next room,
And as you find her tractable to your defignes, acquaint us.

Met. I shall Sir.


Symph. She must have my assistance to persuade her to it.
Come Mettle let us to her. --

Ex. Symph. and Met. Enter Drawer with wine. Albin. Drawer, fill me a brimmer.
Adrastus, here is to the fair Letesin, earths richest Jewel.

Adrast. Too rich (I fear) for Mortals to enjoy.


Albin. Such another desperate word, and, by all the Gods, I Will court
Her for my self, and hope to enjoy her too. And, I think, I look
As like a Mortal (in this shape) as any brother in town.

Enter Symph. Riggle, and Mettle. Symph. Save you, Gallants. Pray bid this Lady
welcome.


Albin. I hope you speak not in the plural number.
What think you, Lady, do I appear a Gallant? -- shows his clothes.

Rigg. Sir, though it be a thing much given to people of my profession
To pry into the habit of a man, I look into the mind
And nobler part, and where I find most worth,
I there most honor.

Albin. Spoke like the Queen of Amazons;
I must salute your judgment.

Rigg. Sir, you mistake, those were my lips you kiss't.


Albin. Lady, my ambition was to come as near
Your judgment as I could.

Adrast. Lady, your servant. -- salutes her.
Nay, pray sit down.

Symphronio, 'twas well this
Gentlewoman had virtue enough to guard her,
I should suspect her being with you alone else.

Symph. Make you no body of Mettle? Or do you think,
Because he pleasures you sometimes,
He Will pimp for all your friends?

Adrast. What say you to this, Mettle?


Met. I say, Sir, it is an office I never understood.


Rigg. That Is very strange, truly.


Met. To you, I do believe it is; I think I had best take up
The next room against our Brother comes;
He must not know she is in our company.

Albin. By no means. Carry a pint of wine into it,
As if she called for it.

Met. I shall, Sir. --


Exit Mettle. Rigg. It Is a precious youth.


Albin. Lady, Health to your dearest servant. -- Drinks


Rigg. Thank you, noble Sir. --


Enter Mettle. Met. I must have this pint pot, he is below already.


Symph. Mistress, pray go into the next room,
And act your part toth' life.

Rigg. Let me alone; he is not the first knave
That I have made a fool of.

Ex. Rigg. Albin. Not by a brace of thousands. Now will she pick his pocket,
And he lay felony to our charge,
Then where lies our scene of Mirth?

Adrast. Faith, under the lash. Symphronio, how do you
Like the Vermin you have had conference?

Enter Mettle. Met. They are together, the Rogue kiss't,
You might have heard him hither.

Adrast. Gentlemen! what is your plot? as yet
I am a stranger to your design.

Symph. Mettle, and I have studied that.
What it is, the event shall show. But now you talk of plots,
How goes your business forward?

Albin. Adrastus, art thou not a hungry?
Thou feed'st (to day) on nothing but thy Mistress eyes,
And those you fell upon without any grace.

Adrast. I do confess
I hardly know what other food we had; but as for grace,
The Gods send thee but half as much.

Albin. Symphronio, he is now admitted.
He has got the Old man's good will.

Symph. What, to marry his Daughter?


Albin. Soft, and fair; there is somewhat more goes to getting his good will.
He has free admittance to visit his fair
Mistress when he pleases,
Marry, I believe, you might have had
Fathers, Mothers, and all the Kinns
Consent besides, (in a less time) to have matched with your Lady
You parted with but now.

Symph. Thou look like one that would
Have married us, had we been both agreed.

Enter Mettle from peeping. Met. The Rogue drinks like a fish, and she plyes
Him with half pint draughts; she has much ado
To keep his hands above board: the other cup will ripen him for your company,
Then it is my cue to Enter.

Adrast. Will not the rogue be troublesome?


Albin. Not long, if he drink so fast. And it
Shall be my care that he shall want none here.

Adrast. Mettle, how does she bear her drink?


Met. Hang her, she will bear any thing is laid upon her.
Now will I enter.

Ex. Mettle. Albin, And we prepare to entertain the slave with gravitie.
Is all contrived, Symphronio? What punishment we
Lay upon the Rogue? for something we must do worth his
Remembrance.

Enter Mettle. Symph. It is, it is; all is contrived.


Met. She has prevailed upon the Babe of Grace.
And he prepared to enter. --

Enter Sod. drunk: and Riggle. Rigg. Come near, come near, good Cousin.
Here Is none but are my special friends,
I can assure you.

Sod. Save you, Gentlemen.


Albin. You are most nobly welcome. Mettle,
A chair there for the Gentleman. Mistress, pray sit here.

Rigg. Thank you, good friend: why, I had thought I had lost you all.
I think I have not seen you, nor your friends here, these eight or nine days.

Met. This whore is got half drunk, and she will do it rarely. aside.


Symph. Lady, it is true; but blame not us, but our occasions, that enforced us
To it: our business now being over, we will be your daily visitants.
Sir, a health to the greatest honourer of this fair Ladies
Virtues. -- drinks to Sodom.

Rigg. Cousin, the Gentleman drinks to you.


Sod. Thank you, noble Sir.


Symph. Help the Gentleman to some wine.


Met. Here Sir, please you drink. gives Sodom wine.


Sod. Thank you, Sir; Lady, here is to you.


Albin. Sir, she should have it last.


Sod. Say you so? Then here is to you, Sir,
This fair Ladies servant.

Albin. Thank you, Sir; Mettle, help the Gentleman. Sodom drinks and falls
down, they help him up, and laugh.


Met. Help, help, the Gentleman is troubled with the falling sickness.


Adrast. How is it, Sir? cheer up, all is well again.


Rigg, How is it, Cousin? what, not well, sweet heart?
Pray fetch him some strong water.

Albin. A pint at least. Courage, noble Sir; how is it?


Sod. Very well. Sir, -- but that I have got the hey-cot.


Albin. Your Cousin, Mistress, is drunk.


Rigg. I hope not so.


Sod. Verily not drunk -- I am -- not drunk -- I must
Confess I -- I -- I have tasted liberally of the creature,
But you shall see -- I am not drunk;
Here Is to our Prince.

Adrast. How dares he drink that health?


Albin. I thank you, Sir.
He dares (now) drink his health, he dares not name
But to revile, when he is sober.
That Is bravely done. Sodom drinks.

Sod. You Will pledge me, Sir?


Albin. That I will.
Here, Lady, here is to you.

Rigg. Thanks, noble Sir.


Met. The beast sleeps, the wine works rarely.
Shall I produce? The engine is in the next room.

Symph. Come, bring't in, bring't in,
Exit Mettle. 'Twill cleanse him better then a purge.
Sir, do you hear? do you hear? joggs Sod.
Come, come, he is fast.
Enter Mettle with a blanket. Gentlemen, we must have all your hands.

Adrast. With all our hearts.


Rigg. Do you want my help?


Albin. No, Mistress, you have acted your part already.
We four make the complete number.
Lady, pray shut the door.
Come, in with him, in with him, in with him. -- they put him in a blanket and
toss him.
So, so, it is pretty well for the first heat.
Something he would have said, could he have spoke;
He grumbled vilely.

Rigg. Incomparable sport! Fie, fie, you let him breathe
Too much. So, so, to work again. they toss him as before.

Adrast. Prithee, let him down, it has wrought;
The Rogue stinks like a pole-cat.

Rigg. How rank a Traitor smells.


Albin. Very true; especially, in the nostrils of the righteous.
The Rogue has tired me; he looks white,
I fear we have killed him.

Symph. No, no, he breathes.


Albin. How, do you like this sport, Lady?


Rigg. So well, I fain would have some more of it.


Adrast. The slave has put my shoulders out of joint.


Met. What, shall we leave him so?


Albin. We must per force, till we have breathed our selves.


Rigg. He that is weari'st I Will supply his place.
I fain would help to give him the other stool.

Symph. Let him recover first, and then for the other bout.

Mettle, Fill me a glass of sack.

Adrastus here is to the dish you feasted on to day.

Adrast. Thanks, dear Friend, this Vlllain has almost
Broke my wind. Lady to you. -- drinks to Riggle.

Rigg. Your poor servant thanks you, Sir.


Adrast. Mettle, fill some wine; Come, now for the other bout.


Symph. A match, come Gentlemen, four corners and a fool.


Albin. A knave, I am sure; come, ho-vast. they toss him as formerly.
So, so, so; it is well, it is very well; Gently, gently, down with him; he
grumbles.
He is not drunk, but he has tasted so liberally of the creature.
All this will not bring him to his senses.

Met. Here Is money fallen out of his pocket.


Adrast. Sirrah. diminish not a penny of his ill-got coin,
But put it in his pocket.

Met. I shall, Sir.


Symph. Mettle, help me to a Butchers prick or two.


Met. Here Is a brace of great pins, if they will do.


Symph. Yes, yes, they will serve; give them them, -- Symph. pins the blanket
about Sodom.


Rigg. I Will swear you have performed it rarely.
What follows now? --

Enter Drawer. Symph. Drawer, take you a care of this beast in man's clothes,
Here let him lie (without disturbance) till he wakes.
Take charge of what he has,
That nothing be diminished.

Draw. Sir, be confident, none shall come near him but my self.


Albin. Sirrah, make him pay the reckoning, and if he enquire
(As questionless he will) tell him we are all strangers;
If he refuse to pay, we will.
Here Is for your pains.

Draw. Sir, I thank you, and carefully will perform your will.


Met. Good holy Brother, I must make bold to pin
This paper on your breast. -- pins a paper on Sodome's breast.
Farewell, my fleshly Saint.

Symph. We are all indebted to this Lady for our Scene of mirth,
Without whose help we had done nothing.
Lady, here is half a piece to keep you honest.

Rigg. Thank you, courteous Sir, I shall endeavor to practice,
And what in my power lies, I shall be glad to serve you in.

Adrast. Your servant, Lady.
Come, let us go, the sport will be his wonder,
When he wakes, which (by the Drawer)
We shall know at full. --

Ex. Om. but Sodom. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Sodom pined in a blanket. Where have I been? Was ever man in such a
plight as I?
Sure I have been cast into a sleep, and hung in some painted
Cloth, to personate the prodigal.
What Is here? a paper pined upon my breast?
Perhaps I am in Turkey, and this my price of sale.
I must make bold to see how I am valued. -- pulls the paper off from his
breast, and reads.
Here lies a fleshly saint did lately prank it,
Instead of sheet, does penance in a blanket.
This may be all true, And I believe the Author might have writ
To'st too. Yes, yes, it must be so, for I am pocky sore.
They have given me purging comfits too, for I Am
Damnable moist behind; What company was I in?
I remember nothing but a whore, and that she would
Needs carry me to some friends of hers, and they have used me thus.
No hat, nor cloak, -- feels in his pocket, and pulls out his money.
It Is strange, they should not be thieves,
And stranger that any other should use me thus.
Here Is all my money to a penny.
I shall unfold this mystery in time.
I hear by a-non, a-non, Sir, this is a tavern.
The door is locked, and I must knock,
Though to my shame, I do it. he knocks.
Draw. A-non, a-non, Sir.


Enter Drawer. Sod. Who ever used me thus, sure they dare not
Speak of it, for fear I come to know it, and punish them.
Drawer, how came I in this pickle?

Draw. Do you not know, Sir?


Sod. Not I; prithee, honest Drawer, tell me, and
I Will be thankful to thee.

Draw. Sir, I cannot tell, I do assure you.


Sod. Who was in my company? Did you tend this rome?


Draw. I did, and if I not mistake, there was three or four Gentlemen
And a Gentlewoman.

Sod. Know thou any of their names?


Draw. Not I, nor can remember I e're saw any of them before.


Sod. Where is my hat and cloak?


Draw. I have them safe below.


Sod. That Is some comfort yet; how long stayed the company here?


Draw. Four or five hours.


Sod. Is the reckoning paid?


Draw. Not a penny.


Sod. Why did you let them go?


Draw. What Authority had I to stay them?
They gave me charge of your hat and cloak, and said you lost the reckoning,
Which you not being in a condition to deny,
They gave me charge of you, and went their way.

Sod. What is to pay?


Draw. A mark, within a penny.


Sod. Fetch me my hat and cloak, and here is your money.


Draw. I shall, Sir.


Ex. Drawer. Sod. This Drawer is a rogue, and privy to my sufferings,

But I must hold my tongue,


Enter Drawer. Draw. Sir, here is your cloak and hat.


Sod. And here is your money.


Draw. I hope, Sir, you will remember the Drawer.


Sod. I would I had as much reason to remember you
As you have me,
I made you rare sport, without all doubt.
Here take your blanket, are not the corners stretched?
A very pretty wholesome way of purge,
A plague of such Physicians.
This is the fruits of wenching: show me the stairs;
I Will cautions be, how I come in such snares. --
Ex. Om. Enter Letesia Sol. What should this business be, my father laid, so
strickt
A charge on me to use them with respect?
It Is out of some strange hopes of profit they assure him.
How I should learn it out? I know not. --
Enter Clarathea:
Clarath. Mistress, the Gentleman that dined here is at door.
Enquiring for your father; shall I admit him in?

Letes. Why, thou know my father is not within.


Clarath. All Is one for that, I believe you can do his business better;
I Will call him in --
Ex. Clar.
Letes. Clarathea, Clarathea: -- she calls.
This wench, will shame me.

Enter Clarathea and Adrastus. Clarath. Sir, my Master is not within.
Here Is my young Mistress, please you to impart
Your mind to her.
I think I have given him hint enough,
His looks speak him not faint hearted.
I Will leave you both to vent, or burst. -- aside.

Adrast. Fairst Mistress, I have something of importance
Ex. Clarathea. To impart to your father.

Letes. Truly, Sir, he is abroad, but if you please to expose some
Little time to the hazard of his coming home,
You are most kindly welcome.

Adrast. Virtuous fair, One I thank you. And since your
Noble soul has denied to honor me with this your
Courtous invitation, Pardon me, sweetest, if I endeavor
Not to let slip these happy minutes, the Gods (for ought I know)
Has lent us to enjoy for our unmatchless happiness. -- She starts.
Nay start not, sweetest fair One, I have no frightful
Story to relate; I have forgot all things of horror
Since I became unable (more) to serve
My too much injured Prince.

Letes. You have been then in these unhappy wars?


Adrast. Pity it had been, I should have lived to see my Prince
Engaged, And I in debt to nature for my health
And limbs, and been a looker on.

Letes. You speak like one our Prince may justly call his
Loyal subject; it had been happy we had all been such.

Adrast. Lady, so entirely I loved and honored you,
(E're you delivered this your Loyal soul.)
That were it (in nature possible) this might have added.
Know then, I have escaped these wars, to be (by your virtuous self)
Adjudg'd to live or dye.
Can you love? love me so, to make me yours.

Letes. Sir, it is a question, requires much more deliberation, then
A sudden answer. I must confess, it were a means
To quench those flames (you do pretend to burn in) should I,
And to a stranger to, so easy part, with what (so much)
Concerns my life and honor?

Adrast. Mistake me not, sweet saint, it is but a hope I beg,
Which a small encouragement (from you) will make me proud of.
Nor can I possibly urge, or dare expect that satisfaction from you,
That may impair your honor; let me but hope,
And it shall be a happy prologue to my ensuing story.

Letes. Sir, The hope you can expect from me, and I in honor give,
Is this; I nothing see, but that your person, and your noble mind,
Deserves a far more worthy wife then I can be.
But, Sir, I have a father, whose choice I must prefer (in duty)
If he gives consent, it is probable I may not repent it.

Adrast. You have with joy unspeakable transported me
Above the clouds, there let me drop, my fall might be the greater.
O! unsay that again; that very name of father has chilled my blood,
And sounds despair to my beguiling hopes.
Too well, I know what choice your father aims at;
Nor is fit you should obey him, where the choice he makes
Tends to your ruin.
Can the Woolf and Lamb embrace? Or can there be
A sympathy, where nature has made antipathy?
Nor are you obliged (by duty) to obey him in what is unjust.
You know his soul is black with sin, Forgive me, Dearest,
That I am forced to put you in mind, of what, I know,
You gladly would forget. Can you expect to enjoy one happy hour
With him, whose sole delight must be to hoard up wealth,
Gotten by base sinister means.
Besides the daily curses (for his sake) you will have.
Your door washed too, with tears of Orphans, and such
Oppressed poor, as he shall hourly boast he has undone.
For know, sweet Creature, the free access we at this present have,
To your fair self, is only that we will assist him
In the ruin of a young Gentleman (for ought I know)
Unborn; but as we do pretend, knowing his griping way of gain,
That I thereby might have the happy means
To make my love known to you.
I am a Gentleman, though (I must confess) a husband
Far unworthy so Angelical a Beauty.
Nor have I to my wish (for your virtuous sake) means
Worthy your acceptance. But what I have, (though not so poor to want)
Shall be enjoyed by me, only to do you service.
And as you are known to be your fathers Heir,
You may suppose his wealth, more then your virtue, is what I aim at,
Make me but happy in your self,
Let him enjoy his pelf; which, when I covet,
May I live long forgotten of my friends, and loose you love,
Which (with my life) must in one grave be buried.

Letes. Sir, what you have said touching my fathers life,
I could with tears wish were not true.
And for your love to me, I thank you, which
(To my poor power) I Will labor to requite.
Pray take this for present answer.
Indeed, I am not well, and must retire; only
This, your language, I shall seriously weigh, and at our
Next meeting resolve you more at large.
So heavens preserve you. --

Ex. Letesia, Adrast. Angels protect thee, sweetest of thy Sex. --


Ex. Adrast. Enter Gripe-man, Sent-well, and Clarathea. Sent. We have been at
Old Firmstand's Lodging, but to no purpose.
He left the town three days since, but will return for certain
Two days hence at furthest.

Gripe. It was ill luck you mist him, but since his stay from town
Will be so short, the matter is the less.
Sent-well, here is money for your present wants,
You must about a business presently for me,
You know the Golden-head.

Sent. Very well, Sir.


Gripe. There lies a Gentleman, his name Adrastus,
I think you have seen him.

Sent. Marry have I, Sir.


Gripe. So much the better: Be sure you dog him
Forth his Lodging, and if you house him in a tavern (as ten to one you will)
Use all the slights you can to Riggle into his company,
Which, if you cannot do, be sure you take a rome, or wait so near him,
You may discover what their discourse is.
And let me know what you can gather this night;
And if their plot (contrived) stand right, it is rare.
I Will firk my youngsters when they come to share.

Sent. Sir, I Will do my best, and doubt not to perform your will.


Gripe. Go, go about it straight, make haste. --
Ex. Sent. Yes, yes, it must be so; Gripe. pulls out a letter. and reads it to
himself.
There Is danger in delays: The Girl
Must from temptation, or she is lost.
Some few months more she will be headstrong,
And carve her own bits, which I Will in time prevent. -- he calls Letesia.
Letesia.
Enter Letesia. Letesia, here is news for you.
Your uncle Miser, writes old Avaritia, likes well of
The match between his son and you.
And that because he would have you near one another,
He thinks it fit you should be at his house,
And sojorn there a while, till things between us
Fully are agreed on.
You see, Girl, what a care I have of your well doing;
My thoughts are often hammering about your good,
When you full soundly sleep; young Avaritia
Will make a wealthy husband for thee.
Up with your trinkets, and prepare to go:
Nay, no study, I have said it, and it must be so. --

Ex. Gripe. Letes. Indeed it must not. Good Avaritia, match in your own
Dunghill, it will avoid a bastard breed.
Money makes men adored, faith not by me;
Virtue and honor crowns felicity.
Enter Clarathea. How now, Clarathea? Ar't sure Sent-well is employed
To pry into his actions?

Clarath. Am I sure I live? I stood by when your father gave the charge,
And the Villain undertook it greedily.

Letes. How shall we do to give Adrastus notice of it?
This slave will discover else, they do delude my father,
And then we are all undone.

Clarath. Why, faith, for once, (to do you service) I Will to
His Lodging my self. I heard what directions my Master
Gave him. Let me alone to acquaint him with the plot;
But now I think on it too, I Will not go neither.

Letes. Dear wench, why not?


Clarath. Why Faith, cause you will be jealous.


Letes. Prithee, leave thy jesting, by my life not I.
It Is more then time thou were gone.

Clarath. You have prevailed; and I resolved to venture. --
Ex. Amb. Enter Atheos, richly clad, admiring himself. Marry, Sir, this is
something like.
I see my Tailor can fit me without taking measure of my conscience.
The same quantity serves, how large so ever,
Fools report it is streach't.
What a handsome bugbear it is, to 'fright men out of a happiness,
Their reason (were not enslaved, by doting on a world in the moon,
To recompense their pining Misery) must prompt them to enjoy. -- puts off his
hat.
Persist in beggary, do, and let your admired conscience
(Ushered in with rags, and meagre chops)
Attend you to your graves; Where (if your dust
More brighter shine then mine)
Be thankful to the Glowworm
Let me embrace this world, till I forbear
(For conscience sake) to enjoy, with full delights
What lust unsatisfied desires.
This dumb God I Will adore, Money, to thee
I Will sacrifice, thou art my Deity.
How now, Rogastos?
Enter Rogastos. How draws the lungs of our new Government,
The air of profit, (sweeter then are the Arabian winds)
Into our garrison?
Does conscience (still) part freely with her outward
Garments, trusting the soul for to re-cloath the body?

Rogast. As yet they gallop to their sufferings, as we can wish;
Only the Lady that we ravished,
Hangs still an arse.

Athe. She still continues firm in belief,
It was the private Soldier.

Rogast. She does; but wonders much there is no severer search
To apprehend what (foolishly) she terms her foes.

Athe. For that we shall (with fair pretenses) gild
Much thicker then her eyes can pierce.

Rogast. As thus; the wrack shall force a guiltless prisoner
To confess the fact, which done before such
Witnesses as soon shall publish it,
We may (with safety) murder him,
And it cried up for Justice.

Athe. Securely contrived, (my better Genius) and politickly;
But we will forbear a while, to try what gentler
Means may work upon her (easily) beguiled faith,
Which I shall make my study.
Rogastos* haste, and give order the Foot
Be all drawn out.
That part oth' spoil we seized on last, I intend
For to distribute to all an equal share,
As well to those remained in garrison,
As the party marched to take it.
It will unanimously beget a will to Act
What ever I prescribe.

Rogast. Your judgment's deep and noble.
What you command, I Will see (with careful speed)
Shall be performed. --

Ex. Rogast. Athe. Well, go thy ways, Conscience is merciful,
And troubles not thee.
Why, here is a Proselyte newly converted to our side,
Out-doe's us all in mischief.
I can dispense to trot, in what some in the world
Call sin, but love not to run off my legs too soon.
Humanity commands me hate the violence
Of his tyranny, which (for our own ends)
We must privately embrace, how e're intend
For to depresse his fury.
It Is policy makes us conspicuous to the world,
Which we, with sly hypocrisy must
Endeavor to consociate, and then this little.
World's our own. --

Ex. Atheos. Enter Adrastus, Albinus, Symphronio, and Mettle. Adrast. How am I
obliged to fair Letesia for this discovery?
Her virtue will redeem her fathers soul.
Devoted pilgrims with their tears,
Could not have cleans'd by prayer.

Albin. She Is thy own, Boy; this very act of here is
Confirms it.

Symph. Adrastus, we must have gloves; and for her
Garters, let Albinus and I alone.

Adrast. Would it were come to that.


Albin. Nay, if you cannot stay, Mettle knows where
To help you to a cooler.

Met. Would I had one for you, as hot as I could wish.
Why, Sir, do you think my Master wants a pimp?

Albin. No, I Will besworn, as long as thou serv'st him.


Adrast. Mettle, he does abuse thee. Go see if thou
Can discover such a person sneaking here about, Letesia's
Maid described, and bring me word.

Met. I shall, Sir. --


Ex. Mettle. Albin. Letesia goes contrary to the rules at court.
They choose to entertain, such as may stand for foils to beauty.
Were but that wench (she keeps) trick't up like them,
She would outshine them all.

Adrast. Me thought she did deliver her message to me,
Not like one bred to serve.

Albin. What punishment shall we invent, to inflict upon
This Rogue, has undertook to pry into our actions?

Adrast. That must be thought on.
Where shall we dine to day?

Symph. Faith at some tavern, if but to see what
This same Rogue dares do.

Albin. Agreed,


Enter Mettle. Adrast. What have thou discovered?


Met. I have, Sir, a Rogue, marked out for such designs,
Has walked some half a dozen turns about the door.
You may easily know him, A short squat Villain,
Crop't close to a large ear pendent, with a broad blew list,
Crook't backed, splay feet,
And a seared Conscience, Sables.

Albin. Herald-like spoken, but that he left out his Arms.


Met. Give me but leave, and I Will engage
To torture his black soul to death.

Adrast. Pray try your art, and take your own freedom.


Albin. But, Mettle, Must not we share in the laughter of his sufferings?


Met. You shall, Sir, and be an Actor too.


Adrast. Mettle, go you before: Bespeak a dish or two of meat
Where we last night sup't.

Met. I shall, Sir.


Adrast. You two shall go the back way, and I Will take this.


Symph. Come, Albinus, then we will take this. --


Ex. Om. Enter Letesia, Clarathea. Clarath. I dare say he loves you; for when
I had delivered
My message to him (poor Gentleman!) o're-joyed,
He knew not what to say. Till anon, collecting his scattered
Spirits (ashamed I should take notice of his passion)
He made me this answer; Sweet heart!
Pray (from me) thank your fair Mistress for this
Noble Courtesy: And let her know, the life I hold
(Too poor a thing to part with in recompense of this great favor)
Is only by me valued, but as it is here is to dispose of,
I took my leave of him,
And what I could to avoid it, he forced me
Take a piece, and bid me tell you,
Sometime this afternoon, he would
Not fail to wait on you.

Letes. But art thou sure he will come?


Clarath. Are you sure that you would have him come?
So sure am I he will come.

Letes. Dear wench! what (in this straight of trouble) shall I do?
My father has plotted with his brother Miser,
That I must into country, there to be made sure
To that most sordid wretch, young Avaritia.
This must I be forced to do, or study quick prevention.

Clarath. Study? I understand nothing of study in it.
Too well you know your fathers temper,
Whose resolutions are unalterable.
What then can you resolve, but bag and baggage (with Adrastus)
To be gone to some secure place of safety?
And you do not know, things being past his reach to compass, how the
Gods may work his alteration. -- Letes pauses.

Letes. I have thought on it; And must conclude it so.
I had rather marry an Ethiope, then one
I shall be shamed to own. You Gods above, forgive
My disobedience to my father, which you well know,
Virtue and honor both enjoin me so. --

Ex. Om. Enter at several doors Sent-well and Mettle; Mettle falls down as in a
trance, Sent-well takes up Mettle who looks distractedly. Sent. How now friend,
are you used to these same fits?
Now (by my life) it was a shrewd one.

Met. It Is gone; have you no harm, Sir?


Sent. What harm? I understand you not,


Met. Did you not see it then?


Sent. What do thou mean?
What should I see?

Met. The Gods protect me from such another sight of horror;

Sure it has hurt your shoulders.

Sent. What thing? what hurt? what, or whose
Shoulders? Art thou not mad?

Met. Not yet; I do not know what such
Another sight may do; For sure in a more horrid shape
The Devil never appeared.

Sent. Do take me for a Devil?


Met. You were not far from one but now,
When he sat upon your shoulders.

Sent. Upon my shoulders?


Met. I am glad (for your own sake) you neither saw
Nor felt it: I am afraid there is some fearful sin
Sits black upon thy soul, that is unrepented of.
You Powers, protect me from such encounters! Farewell. --

Ex. Mettle. Sent. What should this mean? me thought he did appear
Too truly 'frighted to abuse me; His action could not be
Counterfeit; his color went and came:
I am a Villain, that is certain.

Enter Albinus, he starts back, throws of his hat and cloak, draws his
sword, looking distractedly. Albin. Heavens, protect the man. What art thou?
I do conjure thee in the names of all the Gods, speak,
Why in that hideous shape do hang on that man's shoulders?

Sent. Who, mine, Sir, do you mean?


Albin. Why do not speak to it? See, see, it is down and beckons thee.
As if the business it had on earth, concerned thee only.

Sent. Heavens bless me, Sir, I see nothing.


Albin. Look, look, there it walks; speak to it (I say)
It beckons thee to follow it: So, so, now it is gone,
Just there it vanished.
Into what a cold clammy sweat 't has put me?
The Gods guard me from such foul fiends.
How do thou feel thy self?

Sent. Sir, truly, not well. I am somewhat 'frighted
At what, you say, you saw.

Albin. It is impossible; Did thou not see, nor feel it.


Sent. Not I, Sir, truly.


Albin. It Is wondrous strange.
Friend, look into thy conscience, and
There search if unrevenged blood
Cry not for justice.

Sent. Truly, Sir, I never had a hand in murdering any body.
I must confess, many a poor soul I have undone. aside.

Albin. Thy conscience be thy judge, which well examine,
And I am confident you will find it clogged
With fearful crying sins. --

Ex. Albin. Sent. It Is true, it is true, they are crying sins indeed.
These are no idle fancies; this Gentleman is a stranger too,
And did but confirm what the former saw.
Me thinks my sins circle me round, and in a ring
Unmask't, appear each in their horrid shape.
Gripe-man, (thou Author of my ruin)
Thou now appear'st a monster. 'Curse on the time,
I ever saw thy face.
You Gods (above) forgive me. It Is time well spent,
My eyes being open (now) for to repent.

Exit. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Adrastus, Albinus, Symphronio, and Mettle. Adrast. COuld you perceive it
wrought at all upon the slave?


Albin. Rarely; the Rogues bones made music in his skin.
I strongly do believe (if the slave be not quite given over)
It will convert him.

Symph. Hang him, flint hearted slave, he is unrecoverably spent.


Met. He vanished like our Devil, he has
Quit his employment upon it.

Albin. I tell you, he is converted.


Adrast. Symphronio, prithee tell me, Were it
Not strange Albinus should turn converter
Of the wicked?

Smph. Strange as a frost in August.


Albin. Yet you had hanged your self, had I not wrought you means
To court your fair Letesia and what had then (think you)
Been of your soul become?

Symph. Adrastus, What can you say to that?


Adrast. I grant he did a pretty handsome cure (indeed)
His Masterpiece.

Albin. Indeed, your Mistresses.


Adrast. Time calls away to visit her.
Gallants, where shall I see you some two hours hence.

Symph. We Will wait you at our Lodging.


Adrast. Agreed.


Albin. Adrastus, My service to the fair servant
Of your fairer Mistress.

Adrast. Hangs your mouth that way?


Albin. No, you mistake, all that I have stands
That way.

Adrast. That may be doubtful. Farewell.


Albin. May all thy undertakings prosper,
To thy noble souls desire. --

Ex. Omnes. Enter Letesia, Clarathea. Letes. Sure, wench, thou did mistake;
Art sure he promised to be here?
It Is more then two of clock.

Clarath. By none but Lovers clocks; I know it wants of two. -- Knocks as door.
Now, what say you? Am I mistaken?
Upon my life it is he. --

Ex. Clarath. Letes. My modesty will not give me leave to acquaint him
With what (more then the world besides) my heart desires.
You Gods, I hope he will move it first,
That we escape together, for I shall never do it.

Enter Adrastus, Clarathea. Adrast. The joys the Gods delight in most,
Still wait upon you, fair One.

Letes. I should ungrateful be, should I not wish you share in them.


Adrast. Preserver of my life, so much have you engaged your creature,
It were a study too presumptuous for mortals to requite.

Letes. If I have done you any, truly, I am glad. But -- She pauses.


Adrast. But what, blessed Saint?


Letes. But I much fear, it will not lie within the
Compass of my weak power to do you more.

Adrast. Rob me not of a joy, the hopes of
Has transported me.

Letes. I am, by the express command of my father, charged into the
Country, and there to try how I can like a suitor of his choosing.
And one (he is resolved) whether I like, or not, must be my husband.

Adrast. It Is an unjust resolve; (I do perceive, your Maid
Is no stranger to your counsels, Lady.)

Letes. I should ill reward the service she has done me,
Should I requite it with distrust.
There Is nothing (I dare think) I dare not trust her with.

Adrast. It is a noble performance, to be faithful,
And deserves high reward.
Now since you are pleased to acquaint your poor Creature
With what so near concerns you,
I humbly shall request what you resolve to do in it.

Letes. Sir, you urge to know what lies not in my power
To satisfy.
I gladly would be assisted (by some
Judicious friend) what I should do
In such a weighty business as this is.

Adrast. Then it is no time to dally.
Do you love me so, to make me Master of your self?
A happiness (by all the Gods) I would not change
For what (besides) this world affords --
Letes. pauses.
Clarath. Pray Mistress speak -- no -- Sir, she does.
Be confident (I know) she does.
Is this a time to nourish bashfullnesse?
Sir, pray think what is to be done,
And for the rest,
Take poor Clarathea's word.

Letes. Thou art not mad.


Clarath. No, nor would have you so tame, to fool your self
Out of the joys you aim at, next to heaven.
Pardon me, Sir (I pray) if I appear too saucy.
'Twould make one mad to know as much as I.
And see how doubtfully she would appear, in what
(I know) is in her heart confirmed.
Sir, she is yours. Will you confess it Mistress?

Letes. It is a truth, my breast (spite of resistance)
Will it self discover.

Adrast. May I enjoy this blessing without envy from above?
No enamored God descending to forbid the banes. takes her by the hand.
Religious fires, without passion kindled,
Temperately burn, and last to outlive the envious world,
Whose narrow breasts we will give leave to suspect,
Not comprehend our joys. -- kisses her.

Clarath. Why this is as it should be. Come fondlings,
Now we shall have you as bad as the other side.
Leave billing, and resolve what is to be done.

Adrast. Thanks, good Clarathea, for thy remembrance;
For I had almost lost my self in joys unspeakable.
My dear Letesia, (so I dare call the now)
Have thou made choice of any course to steer in this
Same sea of trouble, mixed with joy?

Letes. Truly, not any I; My shallow judgment is too weak
To comprehend what is to be done in things of this high nature.

Clarath. Sir, That Is your part to act.

Adrast. Which I, with all respectfull care will labor to perform to our
Souls comfort. And to our great assistance, I have two noble Friends I dare
Call trusty, as thou thy best Clarathea.

Clarath. Sir, be confident, that little life I have, shall willingly (in toil)
Be spent to see your joys completed.

Adrast. It is believed, Clarathea, and it shall be my careful study to find
Out some noble way of requital. My Letesia, I now must leave thee
Till my next return, which shall be speedy, as our safety shall permit.
My trusty Friends (I must impart my secrets to) expect
My coming; whose help I must make use of in our speedy flight.
This kiss, and so we part. kisses her.
My person moves, with thee remains my heart.
Farewell, thou faithful servant.

Ex. Adrast. Clarath. The Gods protect you, Sir.


Letes. Amen to that. Clarathea, thou have played the wagg
Sufficiently to day, and yet I do forgive thee.
For, I confess, I am glad it is out; I would not have it to do
Again, for half my fathers ill-got coin.

Clarath. And now you talk on it,
You should do well for to provide good store of it.
You know not what may happen.

Letes. Happen what will or can, I Will not diminish one penny
Of his wealth, so many curses goes along with.
No Clarathea, he shall not say I robbed him.
What money, and jewels of my own
I have, i will carry with me, the rest let him enjoy.

Clarath: I think I hear him Cough^, come let us away. --


Ex: Om: Ent: Adrastus, Albinus, Symphrenio. Albin: Did not I tell thee
Adrastus, that her Maids message was a prologue of confirmation to your late
scald bliss. Well the Gods give the joy, thou have the mine of virtue, her
Maid's, a handsome scab, and well qualified. I read it in her face.


Adrast: Albinus: Thou do not know the worth that is in that Virgin thou
talks't of, by all the Gods (setting Letesia aside) I know not where to match
her, believe it, she is not what she seems to be, (I mean) not born in so low a
condition, but by some misfortune fallen to it.


Symph: I must confess, her language, shape, and carriage speaks her of better
breeding, then her presents state makes known. But what course (Adrastus) do
you intend to take, you cannot hope to have her Fathers will to this.


Adrast: It Is true; And therefore would advise with you, what is to be done her
Father being resolved (speedily) to send her out of Town.


Albin: Let him do so, then seat her on the way, and bear her to some place of
safety, in which we will both assist you with our lives and fortunes.


Adrast: Noble friends, I thank you. But that must not be the way, for first,
her Father will not send her with a less guard then two, from whom, we cannot
take her (with our security) without we take their lives (which all the Gods
forbid) but they will pursue us strictly. No, no, I have contrived a way much
safer. You Albinus, (since you have pleased to proffer me (so fairly) your
assistance.) I shall request to visit the old man in your accustomed disguise,
it will clear me from suspect. You shall enjoy Symphronio here in Town; And fair
Clarathea: who I intend to leave, to give me constant notice how her Master
takes his Daughters flight, as also which way his genious drives in search of
her, while fair Letesia, and I, steer to Geetrudenberghe, where (by Mettle) you
shall have timely notice what is further to be done. How like you this
contrivance?


Symph: Why very well, as can be wished.


Albin: It stands for me, on goes my moldy Clothes again, i will once more be a
brother. And when I know my part, let me alone to act.


Adrast: The next is, that you prepare all things in such a readiness.


Letesi: Clarathea, here is somewhat in this Letter
I fear me will displease thee.

Clarath; That is impossible, if it may tend to do you service, -- Letesia
reads Adrast. Letter.


Letesi: Virtuous fair one, I have since my departure from thee (with the
assistance of my faithful Friends) concluded of our remove, which will be so
sudden, that I must request thee to prepare those necessaries you take with
you, to be in a readiness at a minutes warning. Remember me to thy faithful
Servant, who, I must request to stay behind (some small time) to observe her
Masters actions. My noble Friends (I leave behind) will upon the receipt of a
Letter from me, accompany her to Geetrudenberghe where we shall stay their
coming. Fail not to burn this Letter.

Thine to Eternity, Adrastus.


What says my Deer Companion, is it not too great a trouble to inflict upon thy
patience, to stand the shock of my Fathers fury, when he shall know I am gone?


Clarath: Not any, I am better acquainted with his temper, (let him but hold
his hands) then to be troubled, at what his tongue can utter.


Letesi: Come then my best Clarathea, for till it be thy will to alter it, I
still shall call thee so, we must go pack up for our remove, for it is to me
unknown, how soon we shall be summond.


Clarath: What you command, I ever shall with joy obey. --


Ex: Om: Ent: Atheos: Rogastus. Athe: Rogastus, the orders from our General
speak, we must be careful both by Sea, and Land, what strangers we admit into
our Garrison. Pray let it be your care to see the word be given, that no^ an
Officer of mine may plead ignorance for his neglect. Something there is in it
that much concerns the State: And as I guess, they fain would make a stop, of
some that would desert this Land, which we must look too.


Rogast: Sir, can you guess what Persons they should be they aim at.


Athe: Faith not, my Major will return this Night, of whom I do expect some
Letters of import.


Rogast: Sir, it is strange to me, the sword being in our hands, we should from
time, to time be put of thus, and not receive our pay.


Athe: It Is true, but a little patience pays us. For know, the time approaches
near for us to pay our selves, (a frugall way our Masters have all had before
us) and now our turn comes next, there being a powerful At my raising to
oppose us. The which, before we can encounter, the Country we must drive, as
what concerns us most. And Rogastus, he is a fool, sense ruin we intend that in
the act, cannot get enough to spend.


Rogast: It Is happy news, I long to be at the sport. How I shall laugh to see
the Bacon eating churles upon their knees for six pence in the hundred of their
own coin which i will in State deny them.


Athe: Rogastus take order that your sentinels, bawl not for relief, as they
have used to do. Your Corporals use no justice, in their relief, but as
affection guids them, which, let me but find out, I Will lay them neck, and heels.


Rogast: Sir, it shall be my care to see it remedied. --


Ex; Om: Ent. Gripe-man, and Clarathea. Gripe: Tell me when she went, and where
she is, or by my vexed soul, i will rip thy hear out, and find it there.


Clarath: You may rip it out if you please, which when you have done, it will
but confirm your error. Pray Sir, Argue but reason, would it not ill become
your servant to examine you, where you go, and what your business is abroad?


Gripe. Why tell me, Thou Witch, could she conveigh her things forth of the
house without your knowledge? Go, not a syllable of reply. Find her me out or
i will invent tortures unheard of for thee.


Clarath. Sir, The Witch you threaten, cannot conjure for your Daughter, I will
assure you.


Ex: Clarath. Gripe. I am undone, betrayed, to my eternal ruin. Where should
this Whore be gone? some villain has intic't her. I Will find her hants out, if
the expense of my estate will do it.


Ent: Albinus disguised as formerly. Albin. Save you worthy Sir.


Gripe. Not so worthy, as you conceive. I am not worthy my own Child's keeping,
but I will turn the infide of this whole Land outward, but I will find her.


Albin. Good Sir do, and all honest men shall thank you, we then shall have it
right again.


Gripe: I tell you Sir, I have lost my Child, my only Child, and I must find
her out.


Albin. If you find her out, she must be above one and thirty, and then (I
hope) she is past crying. Sir you are not well, i will visit you so me other time.


Gripe: I cry you mercy Sir, I am distracted, nor can you blame me much. My
Child, my Daughter, my only Child is gone.


Albin Pray Sir whither.


Gripe: You do not mock me Sir.


Albin. Not I can assure you.


Gripe. Why then I tell you, she is gone (for ought I know) to the Devil. --
Ent: Sent-well. Sent-well: My joy, and comfort's gone.


Sent. Your torments then are coming.


Gripe. You are a comforter for the Devil. -- Sent: starts back feighted, and
looks behind him.


Sent. Again, where, where, the Gods protect me; where, what Devil.


Gripe. Art thou Mad too.


Sent. Yes, and it is you have made me so, look back upon your sins; That Devil
you talk of else, will haunt you, as he has done me.


Gripe. Leave of thy idle talk, and send thy spirits abroad to find out my
Letesia.


Sent. If she be lost find her your self, for so you shall for me, know (if she
be gone) it is a just plague the Gods have laid upon you for your cursed life.
I Will be no more your Drudg, and instrument of wickedness, you have undone my
soul, and body. You now may list me down, amongst those wretched souls, made
miserable by your tyranny. The Catalogue of which is infinite: But i will unmasque
you; And to the world display such horrid truths, shall vex the Friends of hell
to see themselves (by you) out down in villainy.


Gripo. I am amazed, the whole world's conspired against me. This Villain is
possessed. O my brains, my brains. Great Lucifer, I do conjure thee summon
Boniface, Mahomet, Copernicus, Matchiavil, Ecphantus, and all thy Learned
Polliticians in thy black Caos to invent a torment (yet unheard of) to inflict
upon this slave. For it is resolved you dye. This Council set, your torments
(then) grow nigh --


Exit Gripe. Albin. I fear, he is distracted past cure, you touched him to the
quick.


Sent. I speak but truth Sir: And I wish it may do good on him, he has long
gone astray. --


Ex: Om. Ent: Rogastus: Adrastus. Letesia, and Mettle. Rogast. Sir, you stir
not a foot further without a Pass.


Adrast: Which I could easily have procured, had I suspected any strictness in
your Garrison.


Rogast: Sir, the favor will be great, please you to let me have a Lodging in
the Town, which I shall pay for. to their full content. And for your cutesie, I
shall study some noble requital, worthy your acceptance. And that I press thus
earnestly is in the behalf of this young Gentlewoman unused to travel.


Rogast: Pray be satisfied, we have no lodging, or if we had, we keep none in
our Garrison for Whores.


Adrast. Thou foul mouthed Villain, take what thou deserve. -- Adrast:
strikes him, they both draw. Rogast falls.


Letesi: The Gods be merciful, and gurard my Love.


Rogast: Villain; Thou have slain me.


Adrast: Thou lys't, my sword did but it is office, it was thy tongue that hurt
thee. -- Ent. Soldiers.


1 Sold: Kill the slave, has murdered our Lieutenant.


2 Sold: Hold, let us carry him to our Governor.
Bear the Lieutenant to his Quarter, make haste, and call our
Surgeon, least he bleed to Death -- Ex: Sold. bearing of thy Lieutenant.
Come Sir, you that dare kill our Officers in our
own Garrison, you, and your Minion,
must along with us.

Adrast. Honest Soldiers, as you are men, procure in some good
House, a Lodging for this Gentlewoman, for which,
I liberally will reward you.
What I have done, my life shall answer.
Lay not uncivil hands on her, ner'c harbored evil thought.

1 Sold. Trouble not your self. The Governor will provide
Lodging for you both, shall hold you Letesia faints away.
Look to the Wench, she faints.

Adrast. Angels protect thy Life, how it is sweetest.


2 Sold: She comes again unto her self. Mistress cheer up, (poor
Gentlewoman) here is none shall hurt you.


Letesi: I can receive no harm, if he be well.


Adrast. Why I am well (my Dear.)
Soldier, your Language speaks Christianity.
Pray drink this, your reward is still behind -- Gives him money
if you will assist this poor distressed Maid.

2 Sold: Sir I thank you, but can do nothing till our Governor has disposed
of you. Then if we can do you, or her any service, you shall command us. --


Ex: Om: Ent: Albinus. Sympronio. Symph: Was he so much enraged.


Albin: By all the Gods, he will run mad, (I fear.)
And that same Rogve, that we posest, the Devil haunted so,
is so far from jealous that we did abuse him.
That he will engage his soul (which now he does intend
to Husband to his best advantage.)
The Devil really haunted him.

Symph. Works it any good on the flint hearted slave.


Albin: The most reformed man alive; And preaches nothing


Gripe-man: but he is damned. And that he thunders in his ears, to the great
terror of his guilty Conscience.


Symph: How takes Gripe-man such language from his Mercury?


Albin: Why faith, but scurvily; And conjures up the Devils to invent unheard
of torments to afflict him.


Symph: I cannot guess, till he has spent his fury.
I long to hear of Adrastus his safe arrival with his Mistress,
would one of us had gone along with him,
he was but weakly guarded, with his Man Mettle.

Symph: It was his own desire.


Albin: It Is true, his Letters, which I speedily expect, will clear our doubts.
--


Ex: Am: ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Gripe-man: Sol: BE merciful you Gods; And let me see my Child
before my breath depart this totterd mansion.
But how dare I invoke the Gods that must be just
in punishing my unexampled life.
How gashly (now) the wounds in my black Conscience
does appear. So numberless, and mighty are my horrid sins.
The remnant of my life, only to think them over
would be too little, what time would they require
(then) to be sorry for.
First, let me (with advantage) make amends, those many
souls by my unheard of Villainies, made miserable,
whose Prayers, may as a Cordial refresh my far spent soul.
My horrid treason against my just, and sacred Prince
for vengeance cal's aloud.
The ruin of my Country, which (to my best of power)
I have been actor in. The least of which considered,
I am but gently scourged.
O my Letesia, poor innocent Girl, thou have not fined
to be a sufferer with they cruel Father. It Was I conspired
thy ruin -- it must be so, my covetousness
to match her to young Avaritia, has forced her to this flight.
You Gods above, restore me but my Child; And i will become
your faithful Penicent.
And what I have unjustly from poor souls detained,
I will restore, till all cry hold, they h've gaind. --
Ex Enter three Soldiers. 1 Sold: Have you heard how the Council of War has
disposed of the young Gallant that wounded our Lieutenant, it was a shrewd hurt,
it was ten to one he had not killed him.


3 Sold: I hear he shall be hanged.


2 Sold: You are mistaken, for when he had his sentence to be hanged,
hating so base a Death, he proved he had been an Officer
In the late war against us. And must be shot to death.
Trust me, I pity him, he seems a gallant person.

1. Sold. Me thinks it is great injustice he should die,
The Lieutenant (as the Surgeon does give in) being likely
To recover.

2. Sold. It Is true, but since it is their pleasure he shall die
What cannot they pretend to take away his life.
They say he fell upon our Guard, and that (though not
Discovered) he had more aid which fled, though
I dare say, there is nothing of it true, could I but save his life
I willingly would venture a limb.

1. Sold. And he that shoots him, may his hands rot off for me.


2. Sold. Amen, say I. Come let us to the Parade, where we
Shall know, what hour he dies, and who are
Chose his marks men. --
Ex. Om. Enter Atheos, Sol. My eyes have not beheld a more diviner shape.
Her beauty has inflamed me to that height, I must
Enjoy her, though I survive no minutes after.
She dotes upon that slave that wounded my Lieutenant, for which
He dies, for when she knows him dead, her love
Like the affections of most women, will die with him.
But should she continue obstinate, and hate me, as having
Power to save his life, I then were further off obtaining
My desiers. But I will court her high. Rich gifts are
Baits, that beauty often bites at. Laborious cunning,
With a weighty purse, in time will do it.
If nothing will prevail, this follows next by course
What I not fairly can, I Will do by force. --

Ex. Enter Albin. Symph. Albin. I wounder much we hear not from Adrastus:
I know no reason for it, I have been strangely troubled
Since his departure, the Gods grant all be well.
Symphronio: you shall along with me to old Gripemans
To see if he continue in his Frantic fury.
Besides we shall of Clarathea, understand what course
He has taken in search of his fair Daughter.

Symph. God when you will I am for you. --


Enter Mettle. Albin. Mettle: I somewhat fear the goodness of thy news
Thy looks betray some sad mischance. -- Met. weeps.
Nay, if thou weep'st it is vain but to suspect it.

Met. It Is sad indeed. For if you make not haste, you will never see
My Master more alive.

Symph. Is he so dangerously sick.


Met. No, Sir, he wants no health, this letter will take you off -- gives
Albin. a Letter.
From wondering at my language.

Albin. He must not long outlive him, by whose means he falls. -- Alb. reads.

Symphronio peruse those sad contents. -- Symph. reads.
Come, come Symphronio: 't is no time to grieve;
But to resolve, what 's to be done, where is fair Letesia:

Met. She is close prisoner in the Governor's house,
And none but such as he appoints, comes near her.

Albin. Poor Gentlewoman, I will redeem thy Adrastus
Or perish in the attempt.
Symphronio: I shall entreat thee, stay (yet) a while
In Town, and visit Gripeman as my Brother:
The rest contrive thy self, only to see what course
He steeres to find his Daughter.
Clarathea shall along with me, her present service
May stand Letesia: in some sted.
And be confident, you shall (by Mettle) speedily hear
From me, how all things stands.
For so it may fall out, that you may do great servis
For Adrastus here.
Mettle: run to Clarathea: tell her, she must provide
(Immediately) to go a long with me to her Mistress.

Met. I shall Sir,


-- Ex. Met Symph. Since you conceive my stay may be a furtherance to my
Distressed friend, I faithfully shall study (here) to act
Whatever your directions shall employ me in,

Albin. Thanks noble Symphronio: Fare thee well
My brains are all on fire.
I long to act, what, I in heart desire

-- Ex. Am. Enter Atheos, Letesia. Athe. Lady, you do exceed in grief, you
wrong your beauty
To lament for what is not in your power to remedy:
He is but a man you grieve for: And there are more
In The World as handsomely active as he.
Clear those fair eyes, and tell me, if my self
(I must confess unworthy) may deserve your love.

Letesi. Do you love me then.


Athe. My actions (fair one,) shall satisfy that doubt.


Letesi. I take you at your word, then set my husband free.


Athe. That Is not within the compass of my power to do.


Letesi. You are a dissembler, and profane the name of Love.
This is not nobly done to triumph over a weak woman,
(Through her ill fate) your slave:
The conquest you will gain by it, may well be added
Amongst the Trophies of your great victories
Achiev'd in this rebellion.

Athe. Lady, the usage you have found (and from a stranger too)
Deserves more civil language. But i will forget it.
And doubt not, this foolish passion over,
But you will consider, and be sorry for it.

Letesi. Never. For know, lay it in thy power to make me empress
Of the World. I would not outlive my husband
Many hours to enjoy it.

Athe. Lady. I see this is no time to urge a serious answer from you.
But yet remember, you are in my power, and (if you please)
You may be happy. Think on it.
So fare you well.

-- Ex. Atheos. Letesia. Where am I, or of whom can I expect relief.
Was ever wretched creature so miserably unhappy as I am.
And shall Letesia live, and my Adrastus die,
And I his murderer?
Thou might have lived brave soul the pattern (still)
Of virtue. But I have robbed the World of such a juel
The Gods esteemed too rich, to bless this earth with.
I must (in justice) sacrifice my life to him that I have ruined,
For on my knees (before the gods) I vow -- she kneels:
When I shall understand his death, caused by this
Act of mine, one hour not to outlive him.
There is no hope of mercy (on honorable terms)
From such a heap of sin, as this.
Was ever woman courted (by a villain) to her dishonor
Just in the act of murdering her husband?
And shall I not revenge thy death (brave soul)
It is decreed.
That hand that murders thee, that heart shall bleed.

-- Ex. Letesia. Enter Albinus, and Clarathea, both disguised Albin. Could
thou (Clarathea) readily find the way to the
House we came from.

Clarath. Most undoubtedly I could.


Albin. And give perfect directions to Letesia.


Clarath. Such, as she shall not miss.
But Sir, are you confident, they will be honest, in what
(I must confess) they cheerfully have undertook
to be most secret in?

Albin! O Clarathea. The woman was my Nurse, whose milk
Innocent, as the Livory it wore, still sympathized
With Loyal blood. She can betray nothing
But her own fear, how much she wants to do.
Not suffer for her friends.
Adrastus and Letesia's lives, thrown upon less assurance
Might (though in their safeties) justly
Have called me murderer.
Pre thee Clarathea: how do I look, May I not pass -- turns him about,
For current, without a superscription written
On my back, this is a Traitor?

Clarath. You may. But Sir, the danger's great you undertake.
Do thou consider mine, and slight thy own.
Thou wonder of thy Sex. Thou make me (blushing)
To confess, that when I have paid my debt to friendship
By laying down this inconsiderable life.
I have but initated thee, a woman.

Clarath. Pardon me worthy Sir, I do confess, I may resolve,
But yet, may stagger too, in the performance of such a piece of friendship
Had I not a guide to light me, more strange
Than is a blazing Star.

Albin. It is too pitifully strange (indeed) to find true friendship.
Farewell (brave soul.) Be careful of the hour -- takes her by the hand.
And directions of the way. For Letesia's impatient Love,
Should she but miss Adrastus: some few minutes,
Might be occasion of their certain ruin.
This kiss, so, farewell earth -- Kisses her.
Our meetings next in Heaven.

-- Ex. Albinus. Clarath. And may the noble example of thy friendship
Be as a Star to future ages
To light them unto virtue.

-- Ex. Clarath. Enter Gripeman. Symphronio. Gripe. Sir, if I not mistake you
are a stranger to me.
What may your business be.

Symph. Sir, I am brother to a Gentleman (made happy in your
Acquaintance) his name Adrastus.

Gripe. Away out of my sight, I know your business well.
Sir, know, I have left those cursed ways, that would have
Headlong hurried me to Hell. Be gone I say.
And if you be his brother, tell him I do advise him
To repent, and not betray his friends.

Symph. This is strange, he is converted.
I must another way to work. -- Aside.
Sir, you do mistake my business. My brother not being well,
And sorry to think what he had undertaken, sent me
To let you know his change of mind.
And bade me tell you, in any thing that is noble, and honest,
He faithfully would serve you.
But to betray a friend, or do an act unworthy,
He would not for the World.

Gripe. It Is honestly resolved, you now are welcome.
I love your brother for it. Young man follow his steps.
And covet not by base sinister ways to hoard up wealth,
Least thou be Father but of one virtuous child, -- He weeps.
And have that taken from thee.

Symph. Sir, your tears has easily gained credit in my belief
It has been your sad case.

Gripe. Indeed it has, and could I but enjoy my Child,
I would (with comfortable tears) labor to wash
My too bad sins away.
But 't was my fault, seeking to match her to a covetious
Wretch, she thus deserted me.

Symph. Suppose, in this her time of absence, she should bestow
Her self on a more noble choice, though not so rich,
Could you forgive her, and (with joy) receive
Your Child again.

Gripe. O worthy Sir, there is Music in your tongue, receive her,
Yes, next to the joys above, on earth, I know none like it.

Symph. I am glad to hear you say so,
And though I am a stranger, to your Daughters flight
And place of being, keep your house, and I doubt not
But ere long to be the happy bringer of the joyful news
Your Daughter's well, and show you where she is.

-- Ex. Symph. Gripe. Blessings go with thee, thou art my good Angel.
How gracious are the Gods (so soon) to hear my prayers.
The hope I have of what I would enjoy,
Has made me young again.

-- Ex. Gripe. Enter Adrastus, Albinus as in Prison. Adrast. Dear friend leave
off to urge it.
Can thou believe Adrastus, values his wretched life
At such a rate to purchase it with the loss of thine.
I should be branded for a Coward upon record, should I accept it.
No, no, Thou miracle of friendship, preserve thy noble life,
To employ it in thy Prince, and Countries cause.
There wants such guides to honor, and desert.
Poor Letesia: I call the Gods to witness, were it not to part
With thee, my death, would be as welcome as my sleep.
But since it is the pleasure of the Gods, we shall not here
(On earth) enjoy. I freely do bestow her on thee. Albinus,
Take her, and be confident, thou will find her worthy
Thy acceptance. And may you live long, and happy
And once a year,
Water my sad remembrance with a tear.

Pardon me Adrastus, for I must speak my thoughts.
Your language, or religion, I am mistaken in.
You would bequeath fair Letesia to me, your self
Resolves to Murder. Has she so ill deserved,
For her return of Love, and loss of friends
(Only for your sake.) And will you requite her love
With taking away her life.

Adrast. Protect me innocence, I understand you not.


Albin. You shall do then. For know, Letesia has sworn
Not many hours to outlive you, which she will perform
Maugre, the Worlds resistance.
Can you deny, to save that noble life, that has engaged her
Own (so far) for yours, and make her own white hands
The instruments of her death. Be merciful, if not for pity,
For shame of the World, which will cry out in Ballads
Against the Murder. Clarathea too (That faithful'lst of
Servants) at the same time shift's clothes with your Letesia:
Who will not fail to meet you at the house appointed.
Where should she miss you, her impatient Love might put
The whole frame of our great business out of joint.
And, for that you do suppose, I loose my safety in preserving
Yours, you much mistake, I have not gone so simply to work
But I have secured that.

Adrast Make me but happy in that assurance.
And i will desire to live, if but to call thee friend.

Albin. Know then, I have bribed, some of your guard
To assist me in my escape. Come, come, no words, withdraw,
And let us shift our clothes. Be confident in your going out,
And no man can suspect you.
Be sure, keep fresh in your remembrance, the directions
To the house you meet at, as what most near concerns you.
I cannot hear, therefore make no reply,
No complements (dear friend) when death's so nigh.

-- Ex. Om. Enter Atheos, and Soldiers. Athe. Where stands the wind,


1. Sold. North East.


Athe. Run to the Key, and give order, the long Boat be made
Ready, and manned with able men. I Will out to Sea anon,
Two, or three leagues. Saw you your Lieutenant lately.

2. Sold. Sir, I did this morning, and found him pretty hearty.


Athe. Where are your Sergeants.


2. Sold. Sir, I left them at their quarter but now.


Athe. Go, and from me give them strickt charge they speedily
Draw out all those commanded men I gave them order for.
I Will have the prisoner shot before I put to Sea.

-- Ex. Athe. 3. Sold. Now what say you, you that were confident
He should not die for this.

2. Sold. Why, I say I am sorry for it, and could almost die for him:
There is no Justice he should suffer death for this;
For what he did he was provoked too by uncivil language.

3. Sold. It Is all the Justice (now) in fashion, every man in office
Makes his will, his Law. Were all the Soldiers
In the Garrison of my mind, he should shoot him himself
And that (I think) he dares not do, and
Look him in the face, come let us go.

-- Ex. Sold Enter Atheos and Clarathea in Letesias habit. Athe. It Is your
best way to tell me where she is gone.


Clarath. It lies not in my power, or if it did, can you think
I, that have undertaken thus much for her, will now betray her.

Athe. Art' not afraid of Torture.


Clarath. Not I, I can assure you, I came to undergo
What you d are lay upon me.

Athe. That Is nobly spoken yet. Let me but this night enjoy thee
And i will not only forgive thee all, and set thee free our
Garrison; But generously reward thee.

Clarath. Sir, I thank you for your courteous proffer, but i will not buy
My freedom at that rate, Had my Sister stayed
(Perhaps) you might have had her consent.

Athe. She jeers me. -- aside.
I do believe I should, was she your Sister then.

Clarath. She was.


Athe. And do you love her so well to die for her.


Clarath. Indeed I do.


Athe. Then speedily prepare, your time is short:
Or will you (yet) consent, do but consider, what it is to live,
Which weighed with what you foolishly deny,
And you must yield in reason.

Clarath. Indeed I must not, and when I do to save this wretched life.
May all diseases mankind hates most
Proclaim it on my forehead.

Enter 1. Soldier. Athe. So brave:


1. Sold. Sir, the prisoner wounded our Lieutenant is fled,
And another in his clothes left in his room.

Athe. Then (by the Gods) the Marshall shall to Torture.
This is brave juggling. Lady, you know (now) who this
Valiant villain is, that dares die for his friend.
But you have Engines (I doubt not) now at work
For your escapes. But i will prevent them.
And since you are so valiant you dare die,
You shall have your desire. Soldier, run to the Goal
And let the Gallant know, at five a clock this evening
He dies. For, by my Tortured Soul, at my return from Sea,
Ex. Sold. (Without you do repent, and yield to my desires)
You both shall suffer death.

Clarath. You Will ease me of a pain, there is nothing else
Can quit me from.
-- Ex. Om. Enter Adristus, Solus. What are we men, we should desire to live in
this frail
World, where there is nothing certain, but uncertainty
To day, with the rising of the Sun, raised to the height
Of what our joys can aim at. And by his setting,
Ruined, and forgotten: A friend -- The Ecche,
It Was friend I said. -- Answers friend.
Hark how theretorting Echo (shrilly) through the grove Echo answers again.
Conveighs the name of friend, and rests its self,
As weary in the Toyling search
Of what deserved that name.
And shall my friend, (the worthiest of what deserves
That Title) die to preserve my life. No
Dear Letesia: whom (by the Gods) I love, and value
Next my honor, thou must excuse me.
Too well (I know) Albinus did but pretend the way
Of his own safety, to encourage me, in the securing mine.
How soon that fatal sentence of his death
May be pronounced, I know not.
Something I must pretend to fair Letesia, of business
For some time, which will be difficulty obtained.
Forgive me (my Letesia.) my honor is more than life
Justice, and friendship (now) parts man, and wife.
-- Exit. Enter Albinus in Adrastus clothes, and two Soldiers.
Sold. Sir, it is the pleasure of our Governor, that I should let
You know, about five a clock this evening, you must prepare to die.

Albin. Thanks honest Soldier, there is for thy news -- gives him money.
He shall not take me unprovided?
Know thou what death, he is resolved I suffer

1. Sold. Shot, I believe Sir, for there is no order to the contrary.


Albin. It is a noble death, I thank him for.


2. Sold. Would I could save your life.
It Is pity such true friendship should be cut off.

Albin. Thank thee, noble Soldier. -- A great shout without.
What may this shout of joy proclaim.

1. Sold. Truly, Sir I know not,
-- Enter Corporal. How now Corporal, know you the reason of this shout.
Hark, the great Guns are fired too.

Corpor. Yes, it is to welcome a Gentleman ashore
That this day saved our Governor's life.

2. Sold. By what strange means, there was no storm at Sea.


Corpor. No, no, 't was thus. Our Governor, no sooner had put out to Sea,
(Whether to take the air, or make himself Sea-sick,
I know not) But a small Boat of Pirates, well manned
With Musketeers, hid in a small creek, whipped out,
And got between our shore and them. Who being far
Too nimble for our Boat, having more Oars,
Soon boarded them, who to save their lives were forced
To yield. When (to the amazement of our Governor,)
This Gentleman now landed, (and then their Captain)
Clap't in our Governor's hand, a good broad sword,
Bidding our men (if ever) now fight for Liberty, and enjoy it.
Himself giving a brave testimony to our doubtful men
By the death of two, or three of the chief Pirates, that he was in earnest.
This done, they all fell to it. The Pirates distracted at this
Surprisal, not knowing what to think (and less to do)
The major part was soon cut off, the rest brought prisoners in*
In this same skirmish, we had but two men hurt.
And this brave Gentleman (the preserver of their lives)
Received two wounds in the shoulder.
Now you may judge, whether our Governor has not just
cause (nobly) to entertain this stranger.

2 Sold. Come let us go see him.
Sir, we wish it lay within the compass of our powers to serve you.

Albin. I thank you honest Soldiers.

-- Ex: Om: Ent. Letesia. Sol. disguised. I was a cursed to let him go, what
business can he have here
in a place he is a stranger to.
His noble soul will not endure to let Albinus suffer
in his cause. And this a plot (by him) contrived for to
procure my safety. You powers above, that looks with joy
on penitential tears. -- She weeps.
behold a poor beblubbered Maid on bended knees -- She kneels.
to implore your mercy.
Let not your vengeance fall upon the innocent, for the
Guilties sake, spare my Adrastus, and lay your load on me. She rises.
But if my cruel Fathers fins cannot be washed off, but with
our bloods, we will make one sacrifice.
And since our bodies are denied to enjoy,
our bloods shall mingle.
And drop out life together.

-- Ex. Letesi. Enter Atheos: The new arrived Strainger. And Soldiers. Athe.
Worthy Sir, you are welcome to your Garrison,
for whils't you please to stay in it, it must be so.
My life, I hold of you, which when you please command
I Will sacrifice to serve you.

Straing. Sir, your b re acknowledging me your servant, has wiped off, what I
have, or can be serviceable in, and made me (now) your Debtor, which I shall
never be unable to confess, although not pay. It was my love to virtue, and my
Country, commanded me to do no less, then to endeavor your safety (together
with my own) from such rude slaves as those, for whom (I must confess I did,
(but sore against my will) some small service, having been late their Prisoner,
which gained me that command, you saw I had amongst them.


Athe. Sir, you shall over come in this, and all things else. And be assured,
what entertainment this Country can afford (within the bounds of my command)
shall not be wanting to serve you.

I have a sight to entertain you with, (it is probable) you have not often seen.
Soldiers, are the marks men ready, I gave command (to day) should be drawn out.


1 Sold. They are Sir.


Athe. Go, and give order to the Marshall, he bring the Prisoners forth to
execution. -- Ex: 1 Sold. Com: Sir, will it please you walk, where I shall
show you a handsome Creature, which will needs taste death, for to preserve her
Sisters life. The like example of friendship in a Gentleman for his friend, one
that I never yet saw.


Straing. Is such examples of friendship common in these parts?


Athe. These are the first, and rarest (should they hold out touch) I ever saw,
or heard of. Will It please you walk.


Straing. Your servant waits you Sir. --


Ex: Om: Enter As on the Parade, Albinus bound Clarathea in Letesia's Habuit
vaild. Adrastus disguised. A Guard of Soldiers. Albin. Dares that Villain
Tyrant (your Governor) hope to find mercy in the other world; That can commit
such horrid murder on a harmless Virgin, that hates bad deeds as much as he
does Virtue? You Gods above, redeem an innocent Maid forth from the jaws of
this Rebellious Woolf. The act appears so horrid, it will not let me dye in
peace.


2 Sold. Peace, here is our Governor.


Ent: Athe. and Strainger. Albin. Yea, I will hold my peace. You Tyrant,
Governor, Villain, Monster of Men. -- Albin unvails her. Look on this heavenly
form, as innocently fair -- Straing: starts at sight of Clarathea. as thou ar't
sinful soul. And tell me, if thy flesh not tremble to be her murderer.


Straing: You Powers (above) protect me, what vision's this. I is some Angel,
has asum'd that shape to make my wounds bleed fresh.


Athe. Sir, are you not well.


Straing. Somewhat there was, that I have seen, much like that face that
troubles me. Good Sir, what may her Name be.


Athe. Mistress, what may we call your Name.


Clarath. Tell now, the unfortunate Clarathea.


Albin. Cheer up (brave Maid.) Thou art so far from acting what may beget a
fear, Angels rejoice, they have begged thee from this world, to enrich their
Throne, whilst this admiring world gropes in the dark, as wanting virtues
light. -- Clarath. spies the stranger.


Clarath. Thou sacred Spirit speak. It Was kindly done to come and bear me
company, to the other world -- Clarathea. faints away.


Albin. Help, help, she faints.


Straing. It Is she it is she, you Gods, rob us not of our joy so soon, Gentlemen,
for Heavens sake help. --

Enter Letesia disguised.
Apfis speak one word of comfort, It Is thy Corianus calls thee. So, so, she
breaths again. Sir, If I have ought deserved at your noble hands, (in what you
may) assist this virtuous Maid, in whose well being, consists my life.


Athe. Soldiers (some of you) lay by your arms. And run for my Sedan, fly you
Villains. Ex: Sold Dear Lady, pardon your penitent servant, who only did
intend to show you Death in him to see how bravely you could bear it out.


Clarath, Does my Corianus live, or do I Dream.


Corian. Thou comfort of my soul. Thy Corianus lives. Lives to enjoy, what the
rich Oceans treasure should not buy for me. My best Apfia: Embraces her.


Athe. Sir, this passion tells me, she should be of some value to you. And I am
gladly happy it so falls out, that I may serve you for the life I hold.
Soldiers make ready, and fire at that stout Villain.


Adrast. Hold, hold I say. Thou foul mouthed tyrant. There is more worth lodged
in that noble breast of his then would redeem (forth from the jaws of hell) thy
soul designed for Ruin. -- Falls on Albinus his Neck. Let all the unreconciled
world, that stands deriding at the Name of Friend, wash their bespattered
souls; And here fall down, and worship. O Albinus, thou have out done story,
for where invention found not charity to purchase a belief in thee, they may
behold their error. Here you tyrant, take the blood you thirst for, -- Tares
open his Doubles, and pulls of his Disguise I am the mark you aim at: It Was I
that wounded your Lieutenant.


Apfia. My Dear Corianus, if you have any power to prevail speak for these
worthiest of Men; They will deserve your love, as Persons I have been preserved
by.


Corian. Sir, Then I must beg (what it you please to grant) you everlastingly
engage your Creature. That since your Lieutenant (unfortunately wounded by this
Gentleman) is past Deaths present danger, that all may be forgot between your
self, and those two Gentlemen (the unparalleld examples of true friendship) for
whom, besides what obligation, my Apfia charms me with, I am bound (upon my
knees) to plead for. And will engage, they shall deserve your love; And prove
your Grateful Servants.


Athe. Sir I have given you the power, dispose of them, and me as you please.
Soldiers, unbind the Gentleman, he is no more your Prisoner. And now we stand
all three your Debtors for the lives we hold.


Adrast. Worthy Sir, what you have (so liberal,) engaged for us. -- Turns to
Corianus. shall be performed. My Life you have preserved, which I shall husband
to the best advantage (in all obedience) to your commands.


Corian. Sir, I must proclaim my self a Traitor to my own reason, should I no^
endeavor to preserve those lives, I must in mercy to my self (if i will seek
honor) Imitate. Letesi, takes of her Disguise.


Letesi. And does Letesia live, to see her Dear Adrastus free, worthiest of
Maids, I joy to see (as for my self) thee lodgd in those blessed arms thou gave
for Dead. Thy virtue has redeemed us all.


Apfi. I never could do service worthy your acceptance till this hour. And what
(through weakness) I may want to serve you. I know my Coranius (gladly) will
perform.


Corian. Lady Apfia's Friends, commands the Life I hold. Come my Apfia, I shall
unfold thy Fathers plots, and charge he gave his servants to confirm me Dead,
which (once) began to grow disputable, through the festering of a wound he gave
me. --


Ent; Symph, and Gripe man. Adrast. Symphronio.


Symph. The very same I can assure you.
Sir, (if I mistake not) this is your Virtuous Daughter. -- Turns to Letesi,
Letesi. starts back.
Ney, flinch not fair Letesia.
I bring you none but friends.

Gripe. And lives my Letesia; My Child, my Daughter? -- Adrast. and Letesi.
kneels.


Adrast. Yes, and Adrastus your Son to, I can assure you.


Gripe. My blessing on you both; And with it, all I have.


Adrast. Worthy Sir, (my Father now)


Gripe. Come come, no words; All is forgot, all is forgot.
My joy is too great for me to contain.
This sight, has filled my veins with youthful blood,
I hardly can believe I am mortal.

Athe. This is a Day of joy, worthy remembrance. And Gentlemen; And Ladies,
what I have done displeasing to you. Pray forgive it. And if you please to
solemnize your joys in this poor Garrison, what is, and the Country can
afford, is yours.


Althe. We humbly thank you Sir.


Gripe: And should accept this noble curtefie, did not my House call home,
which pray command as yours. Where I, with Feasant, Cock, Parteridg, and
Plovers, will nobly feast you; And these Loyal Lovers.


THE AUTHOR To his Honorable Friends.
WHat such a weak foundation can support,
yo' have read, which well may serve the vulgar sort,
as a good Winters tale, where brown bowl sense,
may stagger the attentive Audience.
At least so highly please, that the whole pack
shall swear, in Ale's more virtue then in Sack.
But how amongst your worthier Breasts, it will take,
or what impression in your judgments make.
Lo, I submit too, yet dare hope no less,
Then that your mercy'l save me from the Press;
which if I am squeezed to Death with, it is my fate,
some Dye with too much, I for want of wait.
To his dear Friend the Author.
In stead of Epilogue, i will chide thy Wit,
at least thy judgment for suspecting it.
Has't thou so nobly taught Friends what to do,
and fears't to suffer mongs't the Loyal crew,
who let us thee loose by this, plainly discovers,
was never (yet) truly Friend to Loyal Lovers.
Ed: Ashen.


