A VINDICATION Of the LOYAL London-Apprentices: Against the false and
scandalous Aspersions of Richard Janeway, in his Lying Mercury published June
14.
Room, Room for a Man of the Town,
That takes delight in Thriving;
That daily bustles up and down,
And nightly lies Contriving.
For Printing and Inventing Lies,
There Is none that can come nigh him;
And Loyal Youths does scandalize,
Who now in Print defy him.
IT is but just (by way of Retaliation) to fling that Dirt in his face, with
which he endeavors to bespatter those truly Loyal Apprentices, who deserve not
that Character which he so unworthily bestows upon them, and indeed is most
proper and fitting for his own Scribbling Worship: Alas good man! he is afraid,
lest in showing their Loyalty, and acknowledgments of their Sovereign's
Goodness to all his Subjects in general, (whereof the Youth of this City are a
part, and perhaps, if occasion presented, a very serviceable part) might be an
ill Example (in his sense) to the unthankful remaining part of his Majesty's
Subjects.

But now why our False News-monger should make that a Crime, which is so
universally approved of by all the Loyal Protestant Church of England, I know
not: But I am apt to hold the same opinion of a great number of Judicious men,
that it was a chief Fundamental of the late 41. Rebels, and is now the same of
the present 81. (Vouchers of the same Good Old Cause) to represent to the
Public by their foul-mouthed Trumpeters Janeway, Care and Curtiss, and that in
so horrid a shape, a thing so implicit in its real intention, that no Snake
hid in the Grass, nay nothing of ill can lie couched, (like your Fanatic
Petitions) under so plain a demonstration of our cordial Affections and Service
to his most Gracious Majesty, whom we beseech God long to preserve in his Holy
keeping.

Although the Fanatic Party have been so forward to forestall the World with
the substance of our Address, before its presentation, which (by the way) is a
little uncivil; yet I hope his most Sacred Majesty will (through his Princely
goodness) vouchsafe us a kind reception of our Names, and therewith the Hearts
and Hands, nay and in good time the Purses of many thousands of his
well-wishing Youthful Subjects.

I do assure you, good Mr. Impartial, that we have great hopes to think his
Majesty will not be offended, to see and know the difference and nature of the
London Youth, as to what they were in 41. when with their Noise and
intolerable Insolence, they forced his late Majesty of Blessed memory, from
his Royal Palace of Whitehull, to seek another among a more peaceable and
civilized part of his Subjects: whereas We, in detestation and abhorrence of
such wicked Principles, such Rebellious Actions, and such Diabolical Examples,
(a thing not at all pleasing to your Unsanctified Palate, which we plainly see
by the grumbling of your Gizzard) do now offer up our Lives and Fortunes to the
Service of so gracious a Prince, under the benign Influence of whose happy
Government, you merit not to enjoy that Liberty, Peace and Tranquillity which
you now possess.

And now, good Mr. Devils-Egg, for surely thou art but the mere Spawn of that
grand Father of Lies, Monsieur Saucer-eyes, who is continually dividing and
disturbing the peace of the greater World, as thou (one of his Emissaries) do
in this our little one, by stuffing thy Partial Mercury with detestable
Forgeries, and Inventions of thy own, weekly distracting and perturbing the
minds of the People with strange, and New Plots, and Lies, the mere product of
thy own fruitful Brain.

Had thou been so civil to have let Us and our Address pass unregarded by thy
damnable and malicious Pen, perhaps I had not troubled my self to give thee a
touch of mine. Indeed I might have spared my self the labor of Characterizing
thee, since thy own malice is conspicuous enough to every Impartial eye; thy
weekly lying Mercury stuffed with thy own nonsense, folly, madness, does but too
plainly demonstrate to the World thy Machivillian Principle, and be-Jesuited
Opinion; Sure thou have commenced Doctor at Billingsgate too, or else thou
could never have been so expert at creating such vilifying and scandalous
Notions which thou bestowest without Fear or Wit upon all those who do not
cohaere with thy schismatical sentiments. I wonder how thou could have the
impudence to call a thing so modest, as our Address is, a second Part of
Captain Tom, when thou thy self, and every ordinary capacity, cannot but
perceive it a thing of a quite contrary hue. But now pray observe what
scurrilous names he fastens upon the promoters of our Address, nothing less
than Chevaliers, Wise Acres, Pater-nos-torians, and such like stuff, the mere
froth of his own Invention; 't was well the name of the Street where the
Promoters inhabit, was so pat to the Purpose to bring in a Tory or Tantivy at
the end of it, or else it had not been worth a farthing. But then he goes on
and tells you some unthinking Lads were wheedled and drawn in to sign that
mischievous Paper, (Monstrum horrendum!) without so much as a sight of it
themselves, or having it read to them: this is a Swinger, and sounds but so
like a Phanatical Invention, that none but their own credulous Gang will
believe it, and needs but little Confutation; for none subscribed it, but what
must of necessity see it, and read it, it being so plain upon the same Paper as
the Nose on a man's face, And then a little further he begins to banmter upon
the Cooks and Chandlers of New-Sarum, as if none else had subscribed it in that
Town beside them, and then adds he, it is no matter who has the honor to
Address, that have so Noble and Worthy persons as the Cooks and Chandlers of
Sarum to lead the way, but this is so like Janeway, as if it was spued out of
his mouth.

O but now he tickles you off with some State-maxims of his own, that perhaps
we have done ill, by giving example to other young (Phanatical Rascals) Lads on
the contrary project of Petitioning; (and vexing his Majesty, say I) indeed we
heard that the old Herd of Schismatics, having put some of their names to a
Petition which was disliked, and rejected, do threaten to procure many hands of
the young fry to a new Petition, far more numerous then ours was, to affront
the King to the highest degree of indignity imaginable, but the event of this
time must show. And to conclude, he tells you that the most who subscribed this
sham paper as he calls it, were mere Ruffians, and beggarly Vermin; O most
notorious untruth, when it is very credible, that the more Genteeler and better
sort of young Trads-men, were the chief Subscribers and promoters of a thing,
we shall never have cause to repent, as thou falsely imaginest by a Phanatick
supposition of being made Slaves at the expiration of our Apprentiships, when
we expect to be most free, I am almost assured that almost all the now
Apprentices, (maugre all thy designs to the contrary,) will prove for the next
age a better Generation, more obedient subjects to the King, and kinder
Neighbors to our selves, then many of our Masters are at present; but what can
any man expect from a Cat, but her skin? and what indeed can we expect from
such a generation of Vipers, in whose veins runs the same blood, which from 41,
to 1660 overspread the greatest part of this our Island?

Ingenuously did that great Wit speak, when mentioning the distractedness and
inhumanity of the late Rebellion, that the King of Spain was Rex Hominum, the
French King Rex Asinorum, but the King of England (to his sorrow) was Rex
Diaboloram; for shame therefore cease your impudent Scribbling in persuading the
people to Disloyalty, cease to use your wheedling tricks to cause the people to
play the second Part to the same Tune of 41: Alas we are sensible, you only
want a daring Oliver to head the Master, and be your General once more; but by
the way take notice that the last of 2 Cheats acted in one age will not take
effect; And last of all to conclude, cease to Write any more notorious
falsehoods, especially, against the Templers or Apprentices, lest the first Pump
you, and the last Thump you, or else break your Windows: so Vale, Mr. Janeway.

Written by J. M. a London-Apprentice.

