THE Fourth Volume OF LETTERS Writ by a Turkish Spy, Who lived Five and Forty
Years, Undiscovered, at PARIS: Giving an Impartial Account to the Divan at
Constantinople, of the most Remarkable Transactions of Europe; And discovering
several Intrigues and Secrets of the Christian Courts (especially of that of
France) continued from the Year 1649, to the Year 1682.

Written Originally in Arabic, Translated into Italian, and from thence into
English, by the Translator of the First Volume.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Henry Rhodes, near Bride-lane, in
Fleet Street, 1692.

Mahmut The. Turkish Spy.
Aetatis suoe 72. F. H. van. Hove. Sculp:



TO THE READER.
EXPECT no more Commendations of our Arabian Author; or Apologies for any Thing
that may seem liable to Censure in his Letters. There is no End of answering
the Cavils of those, who to gain the Character of Critics, will create Faults
where they find none; and impute the very Oversights of the Press, to the
Ignorance of the Author, rather than a Book shall escape free from Censure.

What is wanting in the Style, where it may be supposed to come short of the
Original, must be laid to the Italian's Charge, who undertook the First Version
of so Remote a Language. For, the English Translator has endeavored to follow
him, as close as the difference of Idioms will admit. And all the World knows,
That the English Tongue is none of the most Copious and Significant. But, if
this shall seem an Invidious Reflection, substituted in the Room of a Passable
Excuse; the English Translator, in Honor both of the Foreign Copies, and his
own Native Language (for he is a true Englishman both by Blood and Affection)
is willing to take the Blame of all Defects on himself. Assuring you, That
whatsoever Roughness or Want of Elegance; Whatsoever Carelessness of Expression
is to be found in the English Translation, though it may be a Fault indeed, yet
it is purely owing to the Candor of him who has committed it. Since, the Chief
Reason of such Neglect is, because he was loath the Reader should lose the
Original Sense, for the sake of a Sweet-Period, or a Delicate Cadence.

If in other Places he seems affected, as in retaining the Turkish or Arabic
Words, where they might as well have been rendered English; this also was out of
Respect to his Copy, where those Words are left, as, we may suppose, they were
found in the Original Arabic.

This is addressed to such Gentlemen, as have procured the Italian Copies of
these Letters. For, we are informed, That they are in the Hands of some English
Travelers, who had a Curiosity to compare the different Translations together.

However, to Evidence that this is not spoken in Partiality to our selves, but
with Equal Regard to that Learned Foreigner, who first brought these Letters to
Light; It will not be amiss to exhibit such Probable Reasons, as might induce
him to leave Some Arabic Words untranslated rather than Others, though they
had both the same Sense.

The best Method of clearing up this Point, will be by producing Instances,
such as that, Page 53, at the Bottom: Where the Word [Vizirs] is retained by
the English Translator, because it was not changed by the Italian. Doubtless,
it had been as easy to say [The Seven Chief Spirits, Angels, Chancellors or
Ministers Above] as [The Seven Vizirs.] But since the Italian Copy has not
altered the Word [Vizirs] the English Translator thought fit to let it stand.
And he conceives, it is proper enough in both Versions; because it better
expresses the Thought of the Turkish Author, than any Italian or English Word
can do, being a Title of Dignity peculiar to the Ottoman Empire: Where the
Credulous People are made to believe, That their Monarchy, with all its
Officers of State, is exactly Modeled according to the Pattern of the
Celestial Court and Kingdom. Therefore, it appears very Natural in a Turk, to
call the Ministers of Heaven by the Title of Vizirs, Beglerbegs, Bassa's, or
whatsoever other Appellatives are used by them, to express the Dignity of their
Grandees on Earth. And who would go to spoil his Sense, for the sake of a Word?

Besides, not to let this Passage fall, without due Remarks; Is it not Common
in our Bible to call God, [Lord of Lords?] And how can this be otherwise
expressed in Arabic, but by the Title which is appropriated to the Principal
Governors of Provinces, whom in their Language they call Beglerbegs? It is
equally usual in Scripture, to style God [King of kings] a Title frequently
assumed by the Eastern Monarchs. Nay, in our Common Discourse, here in England,
it is Customary to give to God, the Title of [The King of Heaven.] And why may
we not as well give to the Archangels and Angels, etc. the Titles which are
ordinarily applied to the Princes and Nobles on Earth?

But however, if this will not appear allowable in a Christian, yet no Man can
wonder at a Turk, when he hears him use his Native Dialect, speaking of the
Potentates Above. And if this be granted, I hope, neither the Italian will be
blamed for preserving the Peculiar Phrase of an Eastern Author; nor the English
Translator be accused, for following so Polite a Pattern.

This Instance had not been pressed so far, but in Hopes that what is already
said, may serve as a Plea for several other Examples of like Nature in this
Volume: Where it is impossible for any European, to express the Full Meaning of
an Oriental Author, without reserving some Words of his very Language. And in
this, the Italian Translator is chiefly vindicated; from whose Copy, the
English in such Cases, had no reason to swerve. And thus much may suffice to
answer all Objections about the Style.

As to the Matter it self, it appears full of Instruction, in Historical, Moral
and Political Affairs. Nor need any Man wonder, if he encounters some Passages
which may be found in other Writers, both Gentile and Christian; since the
Author of these Letters professes, That he has taken much Pains to peruse the
Treatises of the Ancients, both whilst he studied in the Academies, and during
his Residence at Paris, he often frequented the Libraries in that City; whereof
there is no Scarcity. He spent a great Deal of Time, in reading Modern as well
as Ancient Authors. By which Means, he not only improved his Knowledge in the
Universal History of Former Time, but grew Familiar with the most Remarkable
Occurrences in Europe, during these Later Centuries. So that in some of his
Letters, one would swear, he had read Sabellius, Petrus Justinianus, Philip de
Comines, and other European Writers. For, he seems to come very near them, in
relating some Particular Stories. And it may be supposed, that he took this
Advantage to oblige the Turkish Grandees to whom he writ, by inserting in his
Letters, such Passages as they were wholly Strangers to.

There need no more be said, but that you may expect another Volume of these
Letters very speedily. Farewell.

A TABLE OF THE LETTERS and Matters contained in this Volume.
VOL. IV.
BOOK I.
LETTER I. MAhmut the Arabian, and Indefatigable Slave to the Grand Signior, to
Mahomet, the most Illustrious Vizir Azem at the Port. p. 1 He congratulates his
Assumption to the Chief Vizirate; Remonstrates his own Grievances, and craves
his Protection.

II. To the Kaimacham. p. 6 Of the New Troubles in Paris, and of Eliachim's
being seized, which forced Mahmut to abscond from his Lodgings.

III. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew, at Vienna. p. 10. He acquaints him with the
same News, and forbids any Dispatches till farther Order.

IV. To Adonai, a Jew at Venice. p. 11 On the same Subject; and of an Attempt
to Rob the Treasury of Venice. A Relation of Tiepoli's Conspiracy.

V. To Mahummed, Hodgia, Dervise, Eremit, Inhabitant of the Prophetic Cave in
Arabia the Happy. p. 14 Of the Contempt the Franks show to the Beasts: Several
Remarkable Instances of the Tenderness which the Ancients showed to the Dumb
Creatures.

VI. To the Kaimacham. p. 24 Of his Return to his Former Lodgings. The true
Reason of Eliachim's being seized.

VII. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. p. 27 He informs him of the same
Matter, and relates the Entertainment he found at his Return; his Hostess being
newly delivered of a Son.

VIII. To Adonai, a Jew at Venice. p. 30 Of a Marble Statue, with a Mysterious
Inscription on it.

IX. To the Reis Effendi, Chief Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. p. 32 Of a
Peace Concluded between the French Court, and the Parliament of Paris. A
Description of the King's House and Gardens at Ruel.

X. To Gnet Oglou. p. 36 Of the Death of Egri Boinou. Of the Eastern Jealousy.
A Memorable Example of Seleucus's Justice.

XI. To the Captain Bassa. p. 40 He informs him of a League into which the
Cossacks, Circassians, Mingrelians and other Nations were engaged in against
the Port. The different Character of those People. Some Remarks on the Life of
Ismael Sophi.

XII. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior. p. 46 He Congratulates his
New Honor, and advises him to be Cautious of the Vizir Azem.

XIII. To Chiurgi Muhammet, Bassa. p. 49 He acquaints him with the Flight of
Mahomet, the Son of the Dey of Tunis; and his Conversion to the Christian
Religion.

XIV. To Sale Tircheni Emin; Superintendent (...) ^he ^oyal Arsenal at
Constantinop^^ p. 53 Of the Wars in the Black Sea; the History of Pachicour the
Circassian Pyrate^.

XV. To Melec Amet, Bassa. p. 59 Of the Murder of Dorislaus, the English
Ambassador at the Hague, with other Matters.

XVI. To the Venerable Mufti. p. 62 He accuses the Septuagint and all the
Christian Translations of the Bible, of Flatness, Errors, and not rightly
Rendering the Original Hebrew. Some Particular Remarks on the Psalms of David,
and Canticles of Solomon.

XVII. To the Chiaus Bassa. p. 70 Remarks on the German, Suedish, and English
Affairs. A Discovery which Osmin the Dwarf made, of a Letter from the Captain
Bassa, to Cardinal Mazarini.

XVIII. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior. p. 76 He informs him of
Great Injuries done by Lightning, in France. Discourses of the Pleasures of a
Country Life; and complains of his own Entanglements.

XIX. To Kenan Bassa, Chief Treasurer to his Highness at Constantinople. p. 80
He Congratulates his Advancement, and exhorts him to Moderation. Putting him in
Mind also of the Cheats that have been committed in the Treasury.

XX. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother. p. 86 Of the Pleasure he takes in Reading
his Travels. He informs him of the Progressive Conquests made in China by the
Young Emperor of the Tartars. He advises him to wait on Kerker Hassan, Bassa.

XXI. To Kerker Hassan, Bassa. p. 93 He gives him a Short Account of China, to
encourage him to learn more from his Brother.

XXII. To Chornezan, Bassa. p. 96 Of several Royal Marriages and Funerals, in
Europe. Remarks on Eclipses, and what happened to the Sun in the Days of
Jehoshua and Ezekiah.


BOOK II.
LETTER I. TO Muhammed, Eremit, Inhabitant of the Prophetic Cave, in Arabia
the Happy. p. 101 He desires his Assistance and Counsel, in several Scruples
that entangle his Conscience.

II. To Minezim Aluph, Bassa. p. 111 Of the Imprisonment of Three French
Princes of the Blood.

III. To the Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. p. 116 He
acquaints him with the Indiction of the Jubilee at Rome. Discourses of the
Sabbatical Year among the Jews; and of the Secular Games among the Ancient
Romans.

IV. To the Flower of High Dignity, the Most Magnificent Vizir Azem. p. 122 Of
the Valor of the Bassa of Buda and his Son. Remarks on the French Campagnes. He
defends the Justice of the Ottoman Port, in Releasing the Bailo of Venice, and
strangling his Interpreter.

V. To Sedrec Al' Girawn, Chief Page of the Treasury. Of the Custom in the
East, to prefer Men of Merit, though of Mean Birth, to Places of Trust. The
Contrary Oversight of the Franks. A Story of Pasquil in Rome. Of the Removal of
the Three Imprisoned Princes to Havre de Grace. The Revolt of Bourdeaux.

VI. To the Kaimacham. p. 131 He acquaints him with the Loss of the Box,
wherein all the Letters writ by the Ministers of the Port to him were
contained; and what Fears he was in about it.

VII. To the same. p. 136 He informs him that a Negro, Slave to Eliachim the
Jew, had stolen the Box of Letters: Who being examined by Tortures even to
Death, confessed he had hid it in the Earth.

VIII. To Solomon Kuslir Aga, Prince of the Black Eunuchs. p. 140 Of the
Affront done to the Port in the Claim the Tartars made to the Tutelage of the
young Sultan. Of the Cruelty often exercised on the Princes of the Ottoman
Blood.

IX. To Gnet Oglou. p. 144 He complains of an unjust Reproof given him by the
Reis Effendi, on the Account of Kenan Bassa, and justifies his own Conduct and
Integrity.

X. To the Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. p. 149
Mahmut expostulates with him about his supposed Crime, in writing freely to
Kenan Bassa. Acquaints him with the Orders he received from the Vizir Azem, and
other Principal Ministers of the Divan, to that Purpose. Of the Murder of an
English Ambassador at Madrid, and of a Fight between the Scotch and English.

XI. To Solomon Aga, Principal Chamberlain of the Women's Apartments in the
Seraglio. p. 153 Of the Disorders and Mutinies among the Janissaries. Of the
French King's Guard of Switzers. Ill News from Candia. The Bravery of the
Maltese Knights. Of the Death of the Prince of Orange.

XII. To Kisur Dramelec, Secretary of the Nazarene Affairs at the Port. p. 157
He rallies him for his angry Letter.

XIII. To Minezim Aluph, Bassa. p. 161 Of the Release of the Three Imprisoned
French Princes. And of Cardinal Mazarini's Private Departure from the Court.

XIV. To Isouf, his Kinsman at Fez. p. 164 He discourses with him of his
Travels in Asia; Challenges his Promise to send him an Account of Africa.
Several Remarks on that Quarter of the World.

XV. To Kerker Hassan, Bassa. p. 170 He complains of the Injuries had been done
him by Ikingi, Master of the Pages, and by others. Desires him to intercede for
Leave to return Home, professing himself weary of this Employment.

XVI. To Chusaein, Bassa, the Magnanimous Vizir Azem, and Invincible General of
the Ottoman Forces in Candia. p. 175 Mahmut complains of the Instability of all
Sublunary Things. Of the Cruelties exercised toward some of the Sultans,
Vizirs, Bassa's, and other Ministers of the Empire. Reflections on the Death of
the Old Queen. Remarks on the delightful Confinement of the Ethiopian Princes
of the Blood.

XVII. To Nassuf, Bassa of Natolia. p. 181 Of a Quarrel between the Dukes of
Brandenburgh and Newburgh.

XVIII. To Vseph Bassa. p. 186 Of the Misunderstandings between the Queen of
France and the Prince of Conde, since his Enlargement. Of the Prince's Flight
from Paris.

XIX. To Solomon, his Cousin, at Constantinople. p. 190 He reproves his former
Libertinism: Endeavors to rectify his Mistakes about Hell: And gives him good
Counsel.

XX. To Enden Al' Zaidi Jaaf, Beglerbeg of Dierbekir. p. 193 He congratulates
his Happiness, in being Lord of the Earthly Paradise. Of a Tree Five Hundred
Miles High in Dierbekir. Of the First Parents of Mankind, according to the
Tradition of the Indians. With other Matters.


BOOK III.
LETTER I. TO Abdel Melec Muli Omar, President of the College of Sciences at
Fez. p. 199 He discourses after the Manner of a Sceptick, on the Difference in
Religions.

II. To the Kaimacham. p. 207 The Sentiments of Isouf Eb'n Hadrilla, an Arabian
Philosopher, concerning the Original of Mankind, and their being born in a
State of War. Of 150000 Livers promised as a Reward to those who should bring
in Cardinal Mazarini Alive or Dead. Of the Return of that Minister to the Court.

III. To the Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. p. 212
More of the Domestic Troubles in France.

IV. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior. p. 217 He relates several
Examples of the Wisdom and Morality that is found in the Brutes.

V. To the Captain Bassa. p. 223 He expostulates about the Ill Success of the
Mohammedan Fleets: And relates to him a Vision which he had in Paris: With the
Ceremonies that went before it. Advises him to make a Descent in Italy. Informs
him of a Terrible Sea-Combat between the English and the Dutch.

VI. To the Kiaya Bey, or Lieutenant General of the Janisaries. p. 228 Of the
Corruptions crept into the Discipline of that Order: Which he counsels him to
Reform. Of an Insurrection in Paris: With other Matters.

VII. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. p. 234 Of a Duel Fought between the
Dukes of Beaufort and Nemours. The Parliament of Paris divided. The Roman
Catholic Religion restored in Cologne.

VIII. To the Kaimacham. p. 236 Of the French King's Return to Paris, and the
Universal Joy of his People for the same. Of the Rebellions in Syria and Egypt.

IX. To Dgnet Oglou. p. 240 Of the Unhappiness of Kings. Particular Reflections
on the Deposing of Sultan Ibrahim; and the Minority of Sultan Mahomet.

X. To Melec Amet. p. 245 Of a French Lord, who being close pursued by his
Enemies, escaped over an Arm of the Sea, by the Strength of his Horse, for
which Service he immediately Killed him. Of Carabuluc, Sultan Selim's Horse.
Remarks on the Birth of Alexander the Great, and the Burning of Diana's Temple
at Ephesus. Of the Imprisonment of Cardinal de Retz. Of the Taking of Dunkirk
and Casal by the Spaniards.

XI. To the same. p. 250 He discourses of a Comet which at that Time appeared
in the Heavens, above the Sphere of the Sun.

XII. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Grand Signior 's Customs. p.
253 He Congratulates his New Preferment, and Counsels him not to be Hasty in
growing Rich or Mighty. Of Cardinal Mazarini's Return from his Second
Banishment.

XIII. To Kerker Hassan, Bassa. p. 257 He thanks him for the Favor he had
shown to his Brother. Of the Honors which the French King bestowed on Cardinal
Antonio Barbarini. Of certain Prodigies.

XIV. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. p. 260 He endeavors to wean him
from the Prejudices of Education; and to convince him, that Other Nations are
in as fair a Way to Paradise as the Jews.

XV. To the Sublimely Wise, the Senior of Excellent Dignity, Abul Recowaw'n,
Grand Almoner to the Sultan. p. 267 Of the Difference between Impudent Beggars,
and the Truly Indigent. A Remarkable Instance of a certain Cardinal's Charity.
He recommends to him in Particular, the Case of a certain discarded Timariot.

XVI. To the Captain Bassa. p. 272 Of several Sea Fights between the English
and Dutch. And particularly of that, wherein General Trump was Killed.

XVII. To Sale Tircheni Emin, Superintendent of the Royal Arsenal at
Constantinople. p. 274 Of a Wonderful Ship built at Rotterdam by a French
Enginier, which should perform Miracles. He discourses of Spouts at Sea.

XVIII. To Murat Bassa. p. 280 Remarks on the New English Commonwealth: On the
Young King of Scots, and on the French Affairs.

XIX. To Afis, Bassa. p. 282 Of diverse Prodigies and Disasters in the
Low Countries. Of the Whale and its Guide. Of the Narrow Escape the French King
made as he was Shooting a Partridge.

XX. To Dgebe Nafir, Bassa. p. 288 He congratulates his Succession in the
Dignities of Chiurgi Muhammet, Bassa. Of the taking St. Menehoud. Of Oliver the
English Protector.


BOOK IV.
LETTER I. TO Bedredin Superior of the Convent of Derviches, at Cogni in
Natolia. p. 295 Remarks on the Birth and Life of the Messiah. A Character of
the Essenes.

II. To the Venerable Mufti. p. 302 Of a Letter sent out of Armenia by the
Jesuits, to some of their Order in Spain, concerning the Opening of the Earth,
and swallowing up of Mahomet's Tomb.

III. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior. p. 305 Of the Reverend
Esteem the Ancients had of the Beasts. Several Instances of this Nature.

IV. To Mustapha, Berber Aga, at the Seraglio. p. 311 Of the Imprisonment of
the Duke of Lorrain.

V. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. p. 314 Of the Unwritten Traditions of
Moses, and of the Written Law. Encomiums on the Alcoran.

VI. To Dicheu Hussein, Bassa. p. 324 Of Cardinal Mazarini's Policy, in
Marrying his Nieces to the French Princes of the Blood.

VII. To Dgnet Oglou. p. 328 He descants on the Accidental Loss of his Sight
for Two Days. A Digression concerning the Wisdom that is to be found in Brutes.

VIII. To Afis, Bassa. p. 333 Of the Preparations for Crowning the Young King
of France. Discontents renewed at Paris, on the Death of the Archbishop.

IX. To Murat, Bassa. p. 330 Of certain Witches apprehended in France. Of
Pancrates, a Magician of Egypt; and of Zyto a German Conjurer.

X. To Chornezan Mustapha, Bassa. p. 341 Of the Proposals between Queen
Christina, and Charles Prince Palatine, her Successor.

XI. To Sale Tircheni Emin, Superintendent of the Royal Arsenal at
Constantinople. p. 345 Of the Blowing up of Graveling by Gunpowder, and of a
Mill that took Fire.

XII. To Mehemet, an Eunuch in the Seraglio. p. 348 Of Mahmut's Antipathy to
Spiders. A Discourse of Antipathies. Of a People in Africa that feed altogether
on Locusts.

XIII. To the Kaimacham. p. 352 Of the Coronation of the King of France. Of the
Duke of Lorrain's being removed into Spain. With other Matters out of Sueden
and Moscovy.

XIV. To Gnet Oglou. p. 354 He discourses of the Uncertainty that is to be
found in History. Of the Disagreement between the Chronologies of the East and
West.


LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS. VOL. IV.
BOOK I.
LETTER I.
Mahmut the Arabian, and Indefatigable Slave to the Grand Signior, to Mahomet,
the Most Illustrious Vizir Azem, at the Port.
I Congratulate thy Ascent to that Top of Honor, the First Dignity in the
Empire Ever Victorious. It Is thy Turn to be now Exalted in the Orb of Fortune:
Let not this High Station make thee forget, That that Wheel is always in
Motion. But consider, That since the Advance thou have made, was not but by the
Fall of thy Predecessor, thou have the less Reason to think thy own State
secure.

I am no Fortune Tellers; nor would I be so rude, as to Prognosticate Ill Luck
to my Superiors. But, Men in Eminent Dignity, have Need of a Monitor: And, it
is Recorded of a Great Monarch, That he Commanded One of his Pages, every
Morning to salute him, when he first awaked, with these Words, Remember, O
King, that thou art a Mortal.

Let this Example, Supreme Minister, plead my Excuse, and incline thee to
pardon the Freedom which Mahmut takes; who by this, thou see, is no Flatterer.

Certainly, all Sublunary Things, Ebb and Flow like the Waters. And, though Men
may sometimes enjoy a Springtide of Felicity; yet Fate has Hidden Sluices,
which in a Moment, shall convey the Mighty Torrent to some other Channel.

I my self have in some Measure experienced this, who am but a Puny in
Comparison with thee. Yet Destiny and Chance, are allotted to the Little, as
well as to the Great. The Worm encounters as many cross Contingencies, in her
humble reptile State, as does the Towering Eagle, in all her lofty Flights and
Ranges, through the wide-stretch'd Air.

In my Infancy I was snatched from the Cradle, and from the Arms of my Mournful
Mother: Mournful on Two Accounts, the Death of a Husband, and the Necessity of
parting with her Child. Yet this Early Separation, turned to my Advantage, and
her Comfort. The Sequel of my Good Fortune, invited her to forsake her
Solitudes, and follow me to the Imperial City; where she exchanged her
Melancholy Widow-Hood, for the Society and Love of a Merry Greek: Whilst Fate
had another Game to play with me; it being the Will of Heaven, That from the
Delights of the Seraglio, and the Honor of serving the Greatest Sovereign in
the World, I should fall into a Cruel Captivity, and be compelled Ignominiously
to drudge for a Barbarous Infidel. Afterward, I gained my Liberty, and applied
my self to study in the Academies. I will not boast of the Proficiency I made:
But, at my Return to Constantinople, thou know, my Superiors thought me
capable, of doing the Port Service in this Place. Thus Providence sports with
Mortals, and by an Unaccountable Clew of Discipline, leads them through the
Mazes of this Life.

How I have discharged my Trust here, I dare Appeal to All; yet can please
None. Every Man will be my Judge, to give Sentence against me; and some, I
believe, would willingly be my Executioners: Which, at certain Times, carries
me into so deep a Melancholy, that I even join with my Enemies, and condemn my
self, though I know not for what. Surely, say I, so many perspicacious Men
cannot be all in the Wrong, and I only in the Right: they must needs see some
Faults in me, which I cannot discern in my self: doubtless I Am Partial, and
never changed the Order of Aesop's Wallet. Then I reflect on these Thoughts, as
the mere Product of Melancholy: For, after the strictest Examination of my
Conduct, I find my self Innocent of those Things, whereof I Am accused. Yet,
whilst I am justifying my Integrity toward my Great Master, my Sadness returns
again, and tells me, That without Doubt, I have some Ways offended God and his
Prophet, who, for that Reason, suffer the Envious to persecute me; and drive me
into a more intimate and familiar Converse with my self, that so by making a
frequent Scrutiny after the Cause of my Outward Misfortunes, I may discover the
Secret Crimes, which I may have committed against Heaven, and which lie hid
under my Inadvertence and Oblivion.

Then I Am filled with a Thousand Scruples about my telling Lies, and taking
False Oaths; though I Am dispensed with for all these Immoralities, by the
Sovereign Arbiter of the Law. In a Word, I know not sometimes what to think.
And, were it not, that my Agency in these Parts, meets with some Success, I
should often conclude, That I either lie under some Curse of God, or Charms of
Men; That either Heaven or Hell, have a Peculiar Hand in Afflicting me.

But, all this may be only the Fumes of my own Distempered Spleen. And, the
Indulgent Judge of Men, may pass a Milder Sentence on me, than either I do my
self, or my Fellow-Mortals. He is Transcendently Benign and Merciful: And, our
Sins of Frailty, appear in his Eyes, but as small Atoms in the Rays of a
Morning's Sun; which, though they be Innumerable, yet the least Breath of Wind,
blows them all out of Sight.

By what I have said, it is apparent, that I have Regard both to thee and my
self: To thee, as the Supreme Disposer of Life and Death, under the Grand
Signior; to my self, as one culled out for a Victim by the Malicious, and lying
at the Feet of thy Noble Nature, begging thy Protection. My Enemies are
Industrious to ruin me, and lay hold on all Opportunities to accomplish it.
The Sentence which they could not procure from thy Predecessor, they may hope
to draw from thee by their False Informations. This makes me use Pre-Caution in
my own Defense; hoping to forestall their Malice, by this Humble Address.

Imitate thou the Divine Nature; and be not severe, in remarking the
Peccadillo's and small Delinquencies of thy Slave. If I turn Infidel or
Traitor, I crave no Favor.

That Supremely Merciful and Gracious, the First and the Last of the World, and
Lord of Paradise, heap on thee as many Blessings every Day, as would employ my
swiftest Wishes a Thousand Years; and grant, That thou may find Admittance
into the Place full of Rivers, whose Springs take their Rise, from the Bottom
of the Rock of Eternity.

Paris, 17th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1649. according to the Christian
Style.
LETTER II.
To the Kaimacham.
THE Troubles of this Kingdom, which a while ago seemed to be composed, are now
again broke out afresh. The Private Grudges of Some, and the Ambition of Others
of the Nobility, have once more put all in Arms. This City is Blocked up by the
Prince of Conde's Army, who has not been long returned from Flanders. The King,
the Queen, with Cardinal Mazarini, and the whole Court, are at St. Germains en
Lay, whither they went by Night. This abrupt Departure, gave fresh Courage to
the Seditious, and at the same Time, furnished them with new Matter of
Accusation against Cardinal Mazarini, who, they say, has stole away their
Sovereign from them. The Parliament have declared him, an Enemy to the
Government. They are levying Soldiers as fast as they can; and Provisions are
laid in, as if they were to sustain a long Siege. Several Princes and Grandees,
are come over to the Citizens, having deserted the Court; among whom, is the
Prince of Conty, Brother to the Prince of Conde. Yet the Parisians are
distrustful of him, and have Consigned his Sister, as a Hostage for his
Fidelity; not knowing, that his Desertion is Real, being occasioned by some
Quarrel between him and his Elder Brother.

It Is said, That Cardinal Mazarini has taken a Resolution to depart the
Kingdom, that so he may avoid the Tempest that threatens him from all Hands.

The Queen has sent Orders to the Colonels, that serve under Marshall Turenne
in Germany, commanding them to abandon that General, who, they say, has
declared for the Parliament, and sent to offer them his Service.

On the other Side, the Citizens endeavor to strengthen their Party, by
sending to all the Parliaments of France, to desire their Conjunction, in
espousing the Quarrel of this of Paris.

The Companies which the Burghers of this City have raised, wear this Motto in
their Ensigns, WE SEEK OUR KING.

In the mean while, the Archduke of Austria, keeps near the Frontiers of this
Kingdom, with an Army of Twenty Thousand Men; and sends frequent Proposals to
the Parliament, in Order to a Peace.

Whilst I was writing the last Word, News was brought me, That Eliachim the Jew
is seized, and clapped in Prison at St. Denis, which Place is in the King's
Hands. I cannot learn the Reason of his Confinement, but am apt to suspect,
it is on the Score of his late appearing among the Rabble of Paris, whereof I
gave an Account in a Letter to the Aga of the Janissaries.

The Surprise I am in at this Unfortunate Accident, puts me upon a Thousand
Thoughts. I know not what Course to take for my own Safety. If Eliachim's
Papers should be searched, Mahmut must be discovered; and then, if I tarry in
the City, I cannot escape a Prison: For, though at this Juncture, one would think
this Place, a sufficient Protection from the Court; yet the Hatred they bear to
the True Believers, and the Discovery of so Important a Commission as mine,
would supersede their Intestine Animosities. I should infallibly be either
delivered up to the Court, or sent to the Bastile. If I go out of the City, my
Danger is yet greater; all the Passes of the Country, being narrowly watched,
and strongly guarded by the King's Soldiers. This made me at first, resolve to
deferr the Conclusion of this Letter to another Time, whilst I provided for my
own Safety; as thinking it impossible, to convey any Intelligence out of France
undiscovered. But being informed of a Courier, that was just going from the
Parliament, to the Archduke of Austria; and fearing lest I should never have
the Privilege of Pen, Ink and Paper again, I have ravished a few Moments, from
that little Time I have left to shift for my self, that so I might give thee
Notice of this Accident.

I have written also to Nathan Ben Saddi at Vienna, to prevent any Dispatches
from him, till farther Order. Both these Letters I venture in the Hands of a
faithful Messenger, who has caused them to be sewed up in the Heels of his
Shoes, to prevent Discovery. He travels under the Protection of the Courier.

I have not a Minute left to say more, than that I am at this Instant parting
from my Lodging; my Books and other Things being packt up, and Porters ready to
carry 'em away. If I get safe out of the House, I must change my Habit and
Name; and so lay the Foundation of a New Concealment, till the Issue of this
Adventure, shall direct me what to do.

Adieu, Illustrious Kaimacham, and expect to hear more in my Next; or, let my
Silence convince thee, that Mahmut is no longer at Liberty.

Paris, 26th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER III.
To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
IF thou have any Dispatches coming for me, and it be yet in thy Power to stop
them, use Wings in doing it: for, I fear, we are discovered in this Place. Thy
Brother Eliachim, is arrested by the King's Orders. What is laid to his Charge,
I know not for certain: Neither is it necessary for thee, to be informed in
that Point. But, if his Confinement be owing to some Services he has lately
done me, we are all lost. His Papers will be searched, which must of Necessity
betray our Secrets: And then, we have Nothing to expect, but the severest
Execution of the Christians Fury and Revenge. I am in no small Confusion at
this Accident, having scarce Time to provide for my Concealment. Send no more
to Paris, till thou receivest farther Advice. We are all in Arms, this City
being blocked up by the Queen's Troops; so that I know not well which way to
shift for my self, and escape a Thousand Scrutinies, which they will every
where make into the Affairs of a Stranger. But, that Fate which overrules
Humane Contingencies, will, I hope, rescue me out of this Danger: To which I
commend both thee and me; bidding thee Farewell, as if I were never to write to
thee again: For, so the Issue may prove.

Paris, 26th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER IV.
To Adonai, a Jew, at Venice.
I Have something more Respite now, than when I wrote last to thy Brother
Nathan at Vienna, to inform him of Eliachim's being made a Prisoner. I was in a
greater Hurry at that Time, than the Ninth Sphere. All my Motions were swift. I
went Backward and Forward, like the Planets; but had no Leisure to stand still,
as they do sometimes. In a Word, I have run over the whole Zodiac of Policy,
to seek for a New House; that wherein I Lodged, being like to prove too hot for
me. At Length I have found one, wherein I hope to meet with no Malevolent
Aspects, but to remain as before, in a Friendly Conjunction with the Moon;
behind whose Splendors, I may lie covered, from the Inquisitions of peering
Mortals.

To speak more Intelligibly, I am for the Present, removed to other Lodgings in
this City, the better to shelter my self from the Storm which seems to hang
over my Head, since Eliachim was seized. Yesterday, I wrote to the Kaimacham,
and to Nathan Ben Saddi, to give them an Account of this Accident. This goes
along with the same Messenger; for, I durst not confide in the Posts, during
the Present Disorders of this Kingdom.

I received a Letter from thee, wherein thou informest me, of an Attempt that
has been lately made, to rob the Treasury of Venice: Which, according to thy
Description, is very Rich and Magnificent; not to be matched in Europe.
Perhaps, if thou had seen the Wealth that is preserved in the Church of St.
Denis, a City not far from Paris, thou would be of another Mind. But neither
of us can make proper Comparisons, having not seen both Places. The French
extol the Latter, and say, it far exceeds that of Venice. But, they may speak
Partially; it being the Humor of all People, to magnify the Grandeur of their
own Nation: And, the French come not short of the Rest of the World in
Vainglory. However it be, it was a vast Attempt, and full of Infinite
Difficulties and Perils, to Rob the Vaults of a Church, in the Heart of that
Great and Populous City, where all the Riches of the Seigniory were Reposited.
It is an Argument of the Greatness of their Souls, who durst undertake so
hazardous an Enterprise.

But, this is not the First Time the Venetians have been in Danger, to lose
that Prodigious Mass of Wealth. A Poor Grecian once found a Way, through Marble
Barricado's Underground, to enter those Golden Cells; from whence he carried
away, to the Value of Twenty Hundred Thousand Zechins in Jewels. But, making
one of his Countrymen acquainted with it, the Villain betrayed him to the Doge,
who caused him to be Hanged.

That Commonwealth, has been all along very Happy in Discovery of Plots, and
other Mischiefs intended against Her. I know not whether thou have heard, of
the Famous Conspiracy of Tiepoli; who not content with the Life and Estate of a
Private Gentleman, sought to render himself Sovereign of Venice. And, to this
End, insinuated into the Affections of many Thousands of the Citizens; whom he
kept in constant Pension for above Nine Years together, under the Notion of
assisting him, to revenge certain Injuries he had received from a Roman
Gentleman. They were all to run with their Arms into the Streets, when they
should hear the Name Tiepoli uttered aloud, and often repeated.

But, when the Day was come, whereon he was to put his Designs in Execution,
and the Alarm was given in the Streets, and Old Woman made such Haste to look
out at her Chamber-Window, to see what was the Occasion of the Tumult, that she
threw down an Earthen Vessel; which falling directly on the Head of Tiepoli,
Killed him, and so put an End to the Rebellion. For which happy Accident, the
Senate settled a Yearly Pension of a Thousand Zechins, on the Old Woman during
her Life, and the same to be paid to her Heirs and Posterity for ever.

Send me no Dispatches, till thou have received another Letter from me, which
will direct thee what to do.

Paris, 27th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER V.
To Mahummed, Hadgia, Dervise, Eremit, Inhabitant of the Prophetic Cave, in
Arabia the Happy.
THE Franks (who are more ready to find Faults in others, than to amend their
own) censure the Mussulmans, for extending their Charity to Beasts, Birds and
Fishes. They laugh at the Alms we bestow to feed Dogs, Cats and other Living
Creatures; and ridicule the Tenderness of such, as go into the Markets, and buy
the Birds that are there sold, on Purpose to restore them to their Native
Liberty. They say, it is a sufficient Demonstration of Piety, to relieve the
Necessities of Men; and, that it is but a Fruitless Hypocrisy, to show Kindness
to the Brutes, who, in their Opinion, have neither Souls nor Reason, and
consequently are Insensible of our Good Offices toward them.

These are the Charges of Western Raillery, the Scoffs of the Obdurate, with
which they load the Generous Orientals, the Hearts transfixed with Universal
Love. What would they say, if they had heard of thy Heroic Piety, who not only
affordest Protection and Relief to those Creatures whereof we have no Need, but
even abstainest from the Flesh of all Animals, though the Prophet himself has
indulged us the Use of some, for our Necessary Food, and without which many
plead, that we cannot sustain Life? Oh! excellent man, born for the Reproof and
Light of the Age, how is the Soul of our Great Lawgiver exhilarated, when he
beholds thy Innocent and Unblemished Life? The Treasury of Heaven, is enriched
with thy Good Works, the Fertile Harvest of Virtues, the First Fruits of the
Purity of thy Nature! From thy first Descent into that Holy Cave, the Angels
who Register the Words of Men, Never heard thee utter a Syllable that could be
reprehended. Thy Thoughts ravish the Heart of God himself with Joy. The
Universal Spirit full of Eyes, Watcher of the Universe, would fall Asleep, were
it not Rowz'd by the strong Vibrations of thy sublime Soul. Thy Contemplations,
are Themes for the College of Those, who were Assistant in Forming of All
Things. Were it not for such as thee, the Angel of the First Motion, would
cease to Whirl the Globes of Light through the Heavens: The Orbs Above would
grow Rusty, and all the Wheels and Springs of Nature, would stand still. Oh
Elect Idea, before whose Purified Essence, the Sun himself appears full of
Blemishes! Humane Wit cannot find thy Equal on Earth: Thou art the Impress on
the SEAL OF THE PROPHETS, the Soul of the Soul of Mahomet!

In thus celebrating thy High Perfections, if I have offended thy Modesty, thou
have the Goodness to ascribe it to the Excess of my Affection, which carries me
beyond Human Regards. I would fain be an Imitator of thy Incorrupt Life. For,
let the Christians say what they please, I will ever esteem Abstinence a Divine
Virtue. I have consulted the Sages of Old, that I might learn what was the
Practice of Former Times, whilst Human Nature was yet in its Infancy, before
the Manners of Men were Debauched. I have perused the Select Writings of the
Ancients, the Records of Truth, and void of Fables. And, believing that such
Memoirs will not be unwelcome to thee, I presume to lay them at thy Feet, as a
Mark of that Profound Veneration, I owe to the Tenant of the Darling of God.

These Historians say, That the First Inhabitants of the Earth, for above Two
Thousand Years, lived altogether on the Vegetable Products; of which they
Offered the First Fruits to God: It being esteemed an Inexpiable Wickedness, to
shed the Blood of any Animal, though it were in Sacrifice, much more to Eat of
their Flesh. To this End, they relate the First Slaughter of a Bull, to have
been made at Athens, on this Occasion. The Priest of the Town, whose Name was
Diomus, as he was making the Accustomed Oblation of Fruits on an Altar in the
Open Field (for, as yet they had no Temples) a Bull came running from the Herd,
which was grazing hard by, and eat of the Consecrated Herbage. Upon which,
Diomus the Priest, moved with Zeal at the Reputed Sacrilege, and snatching a
Sword from one of those that were present, killed the Bull. But, when his
Passion was over, and he considered, what a heinous Crime he had committed;
fearing also the Rage of the People, he persuaded them, That a God had appeared
to him, and commanded him to Offer that Bull in Sacrifice, by Burning his Flesh
with Fire on the Altar, as an Atonement for his devouring the Consecrated
Fruits. The Devout Multitude, acquiesc'd to the Words of their Priest, as to an
Oracle. And, the Bull being flayed, and Fire laid on the Altar, they all
assisted at the New Sacrifice. From which Time, the Custom was Yearly observed
among the Athenians, to Sacrifice a Bull. And by them, this Method of Religious
Cruelty, was taught not only to all Greece, but to the Rest of the World. In
Process of Time, a certain Priest, in the Midst of his Bloody Sacrifice, taking
up a Piece of the Broiled Flesh, which had fallen from the Altar on the Ground,
and burning his Fingers therewith, suddenly clapped them to his Mouth, to
mitigate the Pain. But, when he had once tasted the Sweetness of the Fat, not
only longed for more of it, but gave a Piece to his Assistant, and he to
others: Who all pleased with the newfound Dainties, fell to Eating of Flesh
greedily. And hence this Species of Gluttony, was taught to other Mortals.
Neither is it Material, what the Hebrew Doctors object against these
Testimonies, when they introduce the Son of Adam, Sacrificing Living Creatures,
in the Infancy of the World; since, thou know, many Errors are Inserted in
the Written Law, from whence they take this Story.

They say also, That the First Goat that fell by the Hands of Men, was killed
in Revenge for the Injuries it had done the Owner of a Vineyard, in browsing on
his Vines; such an Impious Deed, having never been heard of before.

This is certain, That the Egyptians, the Wisest and most Ancient People in the
World, having received from the First Inhabitants of the Earth a Tradition,
forbidding Men, To Kill any Living Creature; to give the greater Force to this
Primitive Law of Nature, they Formed the Images of their Gods, in the
Similitude of Beasts: That so the Vulgar, struck with Reverence at the Sacred
Symbols, might learn to abstain from Killing, or so much as Hurting the Dumb
Animals; under whose Forms, they Represented whatsoever among them was esteemed
Adorable.

Yet, lest any in his Lifetime, should by Accident, or otherwise, have
transgressed the Law of Abstinence, they used a kind of Expiation for the Dead,
after this Manner. The Priests took the Bowels out of the Belly of the
Deceased, and putting them in an Earthen Vessel, they held it toward the Sun;
and calling Witnesses, they made the following Speech, in Behalf of the Dead: O
thou Sun, whose Empire is Universal, and all ye Other Powers, who give Life to
Men, receive me into the Society of the Immortal Gods. For, so long as I lived
in this World, I Religiously persevered in the Worship of those Deities, which
were made known to me by my Ancestors. I always Honored my Parents, who begat
my Body. I never Killed any Man or Beast, nor have been Guilty of any Black
Crime. But, if whilst I lived I have trespassed, in Tasting any of those Things
which are Forbidden; it was not my Sin, but the Fault of these Entrails, which
are here separated from the rest of my Body. And having said this, they cast
the Vessel into the River, on the Banks of which, the Ceremony was performed;
Embalming the Rest of the Body, as Pure and free from Sin.

After the same Manner, the Persian Magi, or Wise Men, practiced Abstinence.
And, to imprint in their Disciples, a Tenderness and Friendship toward the
Beasts, they called them, according to their different Stations, either Lions,
Hyaena's, Crows, Eagles, Hawks, etc. And, their Garments were Painted all over,
with the Various Figures of Animals; thereby insinuating, the Doctrine of the
Soul's Transmigration; and inculcating this Mystery, That the Spirit of Man,
enters successively into all Sorts of Bodies: Which, thou know, is not
remote from the Faith of True Believers.

It would not be amiss, as a Testimony of the Practice of the Ancients, to
insert a Memorable Address, which the Reformed Priests of Crete, were wont to
make before the Altar of Jupiter. O Divine Governor of the Hundred Cities, we
have led a Holy Life, from the Time that we were Initiated in thy Mysteries,
and forsook the Nocturnal Rites, and Bloody Feasts of Bacchus: We are now
Purified, and Clothe our selves in White Vestments, the Emblems of our
Innocence: We shun the Society of polluted Mortals; neither approach we to the
Sepulchers of the Dead, nor Taste of the Flesh of any Thing, which has been
endued with Life.

Such also was of Old, and to this Day is, the Abstinence of the Indians; among
whom, the Brachmans perform the Office of Priesthood. These, the Ancient
Grecians called Gymnosophists. They are all of one Race, neither will they
admit a Stranger into their Order. They live for the most Part near to Ganges,
or some other River, for the Sake of their frequent Purifications. Their Diet
consists, of Milk Curdl'd with sour Herbs. They feed also on Apples, Rice, and
other Fruits of the Earth; esteeming it the Height of Impiety, to taste of any
Thing that has Life. They live in little Hutts or Cottages, every one by
himself, avoiding Company and Discourse; employing all their Time in
Contemplation, and the Service of the Temple. They esteem this Life, but a
Necessary Dispensation of Nature, which they Voluntarily undergo as a Penance;
ardently thirsting, after the Dissolution of their Bodies; and firmly
believing, That the Soul by Death, is released from its Prison, and launches
forth into Immense Liberty and Happiness. Therefore they are always cheerfully
disposed to Die, bewailing those that are Alive, and Celebrating the Funerals
of the Dead, with joyful Solemnities and Triumphs. Among their Good Works, it
is accounted an Act of great Reputation and Virtue, to build Hospitals for
Beasts as well as Men: And, in every City, there are great Numbers of such, as
spend all their Life, in tending on Sick and Wounded Animals, or such as have
no Sustenance elsewhere. And, this is no Novel Institution, but delivered down
to them by Tradition, from Immemorable Ages.

The Precepts also of Triptolemus and Draco, the most Ancient Lawgivers of the
Athenians, are a Testimony of the Innocence and Sincerity of the First Ages:
For, they comprehended all the whole System of Piety and Virtue, in Practicing
these few Rules:

Let it be an Eternal Sanction to the Athenians, To Adore the Immortal Gods: To
Reverence the Departed Hero's; to Celebrate their Praises with Songs, and the
First Fruits of the Earth; To Honor their Parents; And neither to Kill Man or
Beast.

I could relate to thee, Examples of Abstinence in the Ancient Lacedaemonians,
Spartans, Jews, and almost all Nations of the East: Nor are there wanting some
Testimonies of it, in these Western Parts. This Kingdom of France, was in Old
Times Instructed by a Kind of Prophets or Philosophers, whom they called
Druids; who took up their Usual Residence under Oaks. These taught, the
Transmigration of Souls; and therefore, prescribed Abstinence from Flesh; and
showed to Men, the Method of Worshipping God with the First Fruits of the Earth.
From hence they sailed over into Britain, and planted themselves in that
Island, propagating the same Doctrines; and were Reverenced by the People, as
Sacred Oracles.

By all which it is Evident, That the tender Regard which the True Faithful
have for the Brutes, is no Innovation, or singular Caprice of Superstition, but
the Primitive Practice of the Ancients, the Universal Tradition of the Whole
Earth. Nay, the Eastern Christians, for the most Part, live an Abstemious Life;
such as the Grecians, Armenians, Georgians, Mingrelians, and others that are
scattered up and down in diverse Parts of Asia. These following the Examples and
Traditions, of the Apostles and Primitive Fathers of their Churches, either
taste not at all, or very sparingly, the Flesh of Beasts, Birds and Fishes.
But, the Nazarenes of the West, boast of I know not what Liberty they have, to
Eat, without Scruple, of all Things; having the Dispensation of the Roman
Mufti, whom they call the Vicar of God. Hence it is, that these Religious
Libertines, are not afraid to gorge themselves, even with the Blood of
Slaughtered Beasts, which their own Law forbids 'em to taste. And they prop
themselves up in their Impiety, by saying, That the Pope has Power, to Change
the Traditions and Ordinances of the Apostles, and even of Jesus the Messiah
himself. Hence proceeds their Derision of those, who show any Tenderness to the
Brutes; for, they are hardened in their Gluttonous Cruelty, and are but one
Remove, from the most Salvage Cannibals.

But thou, Holy Man of God, pity these Infidels, and pray that Mahmut, may be a
sincere Disciple of thy Purity.

Paris, 16th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER VI.
To the Kaimacham.
I Am returned to my former Lodging again, the Case of Eliachim, being not so
bad as my Fears. The Occasion of his Confinement, were certain Words he spoke
against the Proceedings of Cardinal Mazarini and the Court, in Company of such
as were Officious to oblige that Minister. This was done at St. Denis, not far
from Paris; where they immediately caused him to be taken into Custody by the
King's Guards, who quartered in that Town. It has cost him a considerable Sum
of Money, to purchase his Liberty; which he now enjoys, as before. I had other
Thoughts, when I first heard the News of his being seized; and that it was, for
some Seditious Expressions: For then I called to Mind, how he had Acted last
Year by my Order, during the Tumults of Paris; and concluded, That some Unlucky
Accident had now betrayed him. Which if it were so, would infallibly bring me
into the same Danger. This made me so suddenly change my Habitation, and put a
Stop to the Dispatches of the Sublime Port. I thought no Caution too much, to
preserve the Affairs of my Commission Indemnified; and, that it were better to
offend, in being too Wary, than too Secure. If I have taken wrong Measures in
thus absconding, it is for want of fuller Instruction from my Superiors. I wish
they would honor me with Particular Rules, in Case of such Emergencies: Then I
should steer my Course, without running the Hazard of Rocks or Sands. I have
often desired to know, Whether, if I were discovered, I should own my self an
Agent for the Grand Signior. But none of the Ministers have vouchsafed to
direct me in this Point: Whereby, I may commit an irreparable Mistake, if such
a Thing should happen.

Adonai the Jew, informs me of an Attempt lately made to rob the Treasury of
Venice; which, according to his Description, is very Rich and Magnificent. He
says, there are Twelve Crowns of pure Gold, and an equal Number of
Breast-plates of the same Metal, set with all Sorts of precious Stones of
Inestimable Value: A Hundred Vessels of Agat: Threescore Services for the
Altar, all of pure Gold, enriched with Diamonds, Sapphires, Emralds, and other
Stones of Price. There is also an Vnicorn's Horn, above the Purchase of Money.
There are Fourteen Unpolished Pearls, as large as a Man's Fist. The Ducal Cap,
is valued at a Hundred Thousand Zechins: With many other Rareties and Costly
Ornaments, too tedious to be inserted in a Letter.

Certainly, so much Wealth, was never destined to fall into the Hands of Little
Private Thieves: It is a Booty, fit for Kings and great Generals, the Licensed
Banditi of the Earth. So many Glittering Jewels, would tempt the Honesty of an
Angel: And, he would be glad to adorn the Apartments of his Heaven, with these
Radiant Drops of the Sun, which he sees on Earth.

I have met with some pretty Relations of the Boldness of Robbers, but none
that ever matched the Bravery of this Enterprise; which was no less, than to
Rob one of the most Potent States in the World, of her Chiefest Treasure.

He wanted not for Impudence, who, when the Emperor Charles V. was removing his
Court, and all the Officers were busy in packing up the Goods, entered the
Chamber where the Emperor was; and having made his Obeisance, fell roundly to
pulling down the rich Hangings of Tissue, which by the Help of his
Confederates, he carried away, with Abundance of Plate: No Body ever
suspecting, but that he was one of the Emperor's Servants, till the Person
came, whose Office it was to remove those Goods, and then the other was known
to be a Thief.

I have heard of a Spaniard, who, on a Great Festival, when the Priests had
finished the Service of the Altar, and were retired to their Lodgings, went
very boldly and took the Golden Vessels off the Altar, and carried them away
under his Cloak, as though he had been the Steward of that Church, no Body
suspecting any other.

I kiss the Hem of thy Vest, Illustrious Kaimacham, and pray, that thou may
monopolize the Choicest Blessings of Heaven, and have thy Share of the Riches
of the Earth, without Danger of losing them to Great or Small Thieves.

Paris, 16th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER VII.
To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
NOW thou may continue thy Dispatches as before. Our Fears are vanished:
Eliachim is released, and all Things are in Safety. Thou have no Reason to tax
me with Timorousness, in so abruptly forsaking my Habitation, on the bare
Foresight of far-fetched Possibilities; when thou shall consider, that there is
no arming against Contingencies in the Moment they arrive, and that he who
trusts all Things to Chance, makes a Lottery of his Life, wherein, for One
Happy Event, he shall meet with Ten Unlucky Ones. To what Use serves that
Apprehensive Faculty, which Nature has posted as the Corpse du Guard of our
Lives and Fortunes, allowing it the Senses for Scouts and Sentinells? To what
End, I say, serves this Watchful Faculty, but to take the Alarm at doubtful
Emergencies; to rouse our Caution, that so we may make Provision, and be in a
Posture of Defense, against whatsoever may happen?

News came, that Eliachim was seized, for Seditious Words against the
Government. I was conscious, that both he and I, had been Guilty of more than
bare Words in that Kind. Therefore, what had happened to him, I looked upon as
due to my self also; and, that my Confinement would soon follow, if I took not
speedy Care to prevent it, by seasonably absconding. This was the Reason of my
sudden Departure, which cannot justly be ascribed to Cowardice, since 'twas the
Effect of Common Prudence.

Now I Am returned to my Old Lodging again, where the Joy they are in for the
Birth of a Son, will not give them Leisure to reflect on my Affairs: So that I
am received by my Host, without the least Jealousy or suspicious
Animadversions. Brim-full of Mirth and Jovial Thougts, the Good Man Compliments
me, and proclaims his better Fortune: Invites me to sit down with his Friends,
and partake of the Gifts of Ceres and Bacchus. This thou know, is the Custom
of the whole Earth, at the Birth of Mortals. They make merry over one, that is
born to the same Miseries as themselves; who, the first Moment he draws the
Breath of Life, is enrolled in the Register of Death; and from the Womb, makes
swift and direct Advances to the Grave.

However, I sat down with the Rest, to comply with the exhilarated Humor of
my Host. I eat, drank, and seemed Merry with the Company. Yet, at the same
Time, I could not but nauseate my Entertainment, and disdain the extravagant
Profusion of Spirit, which appeared in every one of this vain Assembly. They
all talked eagerly; and, one Man's Words, drowned those of another: Whilst an
Universal Laughter, confounded the Sense of all. Then I praised in my self, the
Modesty and Order observed in our Eastern Banquets and Feasts, where no
uncomely Gestures or Actions, escape the well-nurtur'd Guests; no loud talking
or Braying like Asses, but every one strives to suppress the Motions and
Appearances of a too forward and Indulgent Mirth, and contain themselves within
the Bounds of a decent and civil Reserve. Such were the Feasts instituted by
Lycurgus, among the Ancient Lacedaemonians; where, such as were Friends and
Acquaintance, met together and refreshed themselves, without Riot and Luxury.
They conversed together interchangeably, after the Manner of Philosophers, or
Men of the Law: Discoursing soberly either of Natural Things, or Civil Affairs:
Mixing facetious and witty Jests, with their more serious Talk, without
Clamor, Scurrility or giving any Offense. But, these Western People, think
themselves not Merry till they are Drunk, nor Witty unless they be Rude. They
play a Thousand Wanton Tricks, like Apes; and, the greatest Buffoon, is the
best Company.

Wherefore, sick to see Men so much degenerate from themselves, I made my
Excuses, and retired to my Chamber, where I presently set Pen to Paper, to give
thee an Account of my Return.

If thou continuest thy former Resolution, of following the Dictates of Reason,
in Matters of Religion, thou will quickly find, that thy Rabbi's have taught
thee to believe in Fables, which accord neither with Reason, nor Common Sense.
Follow the best Guide, and be Happy.

Paris, 16th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER VIII.
To Adonai, a Jew at Venice.
THY Pen is now free again: Write as soon and as often as thou will; our Fears
are dissipated, and all goes well. If thou can inform me of any more
Remarkable Passages and Adventures, spare not to oblige me with frequent
Letters. And, to encourage thee, I will relate to thee a Story, which is
Recorded in the Histories of Naples.

In former Times, there was a Statue of Marble, standing on the Top of a
Mountain in Apulia, with this Inscription on the Head, which was of Brass, ON
MAY DAY AT SVN-RISING, I SHALL HAVE A HEAD OF GOLD. No Man in all those Parts
could be found, who was able to unriddle this Mysterious Expression; and
therefore, it was not regarded for many Ages. But at length, in the Reign of a
certain Prince, there was a Saracen, who having seen and considered the Statue,
with the Inscription, proposed to explain it for a certain Reward. The Prince
hearing of this, and being greedy of the Novelty, sent for the Saracen; and
bargained with him for a Thousand Crowns, to unfold this Riddle. He waited till
May Day came, and watching the Image that Morning Early, he observed the Place
where the Head cast its Shadow, just as the Sun rose. There he ordered certain
Men to dig: Which when they had done, and were got pretty deep in the Earth,
they encountered a Prodigious Treasure of Silver, Gold, and Jewels. With which
the Prince was so well satisfied, that he doubled the Saracens Reward, and sent
him Home into his own Country, laden with rich Presents. Doubtless, there is
much Wealth buried by Men in the Earth. For, in Former Times, they were of
Opinion, That if they should die suddenly, in the Wars or otherwise, such
Riches as they had hidden in the Earth, would serve them in the Other World.
And this is the Practice of the Indians to this Day; as my Brother informs me,
who has been among them.

Strange Blindness! that Men should think the Immortal Soul, needed the
Assistance of Silver, Gold, or any Material Substance, after she herself is
divested of the Body, and become a Naked Spirit.

Let thou and I have a Nobler Idea of our Selves, than to fancy we shall be in
Want of the Glittering Dross, in that Invisible State, whither we are all
hastening. There are no Mony-Changers in that World of Spirits. If thou have
Superfluity, hide it not in the Earth, but give it to the Poor, and thou shall
receive it again, transformed into a Substance more refined and radiant than
the Stars.

Paris, 16th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER IX.
To the Reis Effendi, Chief Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
THE Intestine Quarrels of the French, seem to be like those of Lovers; whose
Choleric Intervals, serve but to give a new Edge to the Returns of their
Affection. As if One of these Passions, was made to whet the Other, and make it
more sprightly: Or, as if Love would grow dull and feculent, were it not
sometimes rowz'd and fermented by Anger.

But, I believe, there is a greater Mystery, in the Reconciliation between the
French-Court and the Parliament of Paris. Some Ends of Policy, have hastened
both Parties to clap up a Peace, while the secret Rancour remains unpurg'd.

Perhaps the Union of so many Princes and Nobles with the Parliament, might
incline the Queen to milder Counsels, than her own Spanish Genius. Besides, the
Conjunction of the other Parliaments of the Kingdom, the Revolt of Normandy,
Gascoigne and Provence, with many Eminent Cities, were very prevailing Motives.
But, that which was of greatest Force, was the Want of Money and Men to carry
on the War, which could not be raised without vast Difficulty, during these
Public Alienations.

Whatever were the Inducements, a Peace was concluded about the latter End of
the Third Moon, at a Place called Ruel, not far from Paris, where the King has
a House of Pleasure, seated in the Midst of a little Paradise. In one of my
Letters to the Kaimacham, I formerly described the King's House and Garden, at
St. German en Lay. This is but a little Chiosc or Bower, in Comparison of that
Stately Palace. Yet what is wanting in the Grandeur of the Fabric, is supplied
in its elegant Contrivance, and the Richness of its Ornaments. And, as for the
Garden, it comes not far short of the other; there being in it all Manner of
curious Waterworks, Groves, Solitudes, Fountains, Statues, and whatsoever the
Ingenuity of these Western Artists could suggest, as proper to render this
Place agreeable to the Melancholy Humor of the late Queen Mother, Mary de
Medicis, to whom it belonged during her Life.

When you enter this delicious Eden, your Eyes and Ears are presently deceived,
by the Counterfeit Notes and Motions of all kinds of Birds, which perpetually
Sing, as the Water tunes their Throats. A little farther, you see several old
Gentile Statues, adorning Two Fountains: And, among the rest, a Crocodile, big
as the Life; who by the Harmony he makes, seems to have a Consort of Music in
his Belly, as Regular and Sweet, as that of the Italian Society at
Constantinople, which thou have often heard.

As we depart from this, full of Complacency and Admiration at the Exquisite
Imitation of Nature in these Contrivances, we fall insensibly into a Place
exactly like what the Poets describe when they speak of Elysium. It is a Grove,
the Tops of whose Trees are so thick interwoven, that the Sun appears no
otherwise through them, than as if he were behind a Cloud or in an Eclipse. So
that the Darkness of this Place, and solemn Murmur the Winds make on high among
the Tops of the Trees, fills it with a Kind of Sacred Horror. Which has often
made me think this Wilderness, something like that which Historians describe,
when they speak of the Avenues to the Temple of Jupiter Ammon in Egypt. For, in
the very Center of this Grove, stands the House. A Place, one would think,
fitter for a Convent than a Prince's Court. At best, it appears but like a
Royal Hermitage, a Cell consecrated to Kingly Melancholy.

I could not forbear making this Digression, when I mentioned Ruel to be the
Place where the Peace was concluded, between the Court and the Parliament. This
Encomium, is a Tribute which I owed, for the Satisfaction and Pleasure I have
often received in this Retirement. Besides, I thought an Idea of such a Garden,
would not be unwelcom to thee, who art a Lover of Solitude.

The Coadjutor of Paris, who is an Archbishop, is highly affronted, that this
Peace was concluded without him, who had a chief Hand in beginning the War. He
labors to inflame the People again, and reduce all to the old Confusion, being
an Irreconcilable Enemy of Cardinal Mazarini. So that we expect another
Insurrection in a short Time: For the French cannot be long Idle.

Happy Minister, I leave thee under the Wings of that Spirit which guards the
Elect, and bid thee Farewell.

Paris, 15th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER X.
To Dgnet Oglou.
SHall I tell thee, I mourn for the Death of our Friend Egry Boinou, whom thou
say, a Fever snatched from us the First Day of the Moon Regib? That Fever,
it seems, was the Effect of his continual and excessive Grief for the Loss of
his Eyes; so that we may say, he has been dying ever since the Hour that Fatal
Sentence was put in Execution. And, shall we grudge our Friend a Release from
so lingering a Death? At best, it was but the Winter of Life, wrapped up in Clouds
and Darkness: Now like the Serpent, he has cast his Slough, lifts up his Head
with new Vigor, sports himself in the Meadows of Paradise, and basks in the
Warmth of an Eternal Spring.

'Twill not therefore be a Mark of our Affection to him, but only a Discovery
of our Self-Love, to condole the Occasion of His Happiness, because it has
lessened Ours, by robbing us of his beloved Company and Friendship. Besides, we
know not, but that he may still continue to be our Friend, even in that
Invisible State; and either manage our Interests Above, or at least protect us
from Dangers here Below. We are ignorant of the Laws, and Constitution of that
Kingdom of Spirits; and, for ought we know, the Souls of just Men after Death,
may become the Tutelar Genii, or Guardian Angels of their Surviving Friends and
Relations. Let it be how it will, doubtless Egry is Immortal and Happy; and,
'twill be Envy in us, to repine at it. Rather let us congratulate the Time of
his Decease, as the Day of his Nativity; and leave Mourning, to the Crowd of
Mortals, who do a Thousand Things, without ever thinking what they are about.
They tread in the Steps of their Fathers, never examining, whether they be
Right or Wrong: Custom and Education have almost banished Reason from the
Earth. Is it not a pleasant Spectacle, to see the Kindred of an Old Rich Miser
(for whose Death they had long waited, like Harpies for their Prey) now flock
about his Lifeless Carcass, howling out a Thousand forced Lamentations; whilst
in the mean Time, their Blood dances in their Veins for Joy? Yet however, this
carries a Show of Civilized Manners, and is better than the Barbarous Custom of
the Scythians and Massagetes, who when their Old Men grew Useless and
Troublesome, were wont to Sacrifice them, and make a Banquet with their Flesh;
or the Thebarenes, who threw their Aged Friends alive down Precipices. These
were Salvages: But, much more so were the Hircanians and Bactrians, who cast
their Aged Parents yet living, to be devoured by Dogs: Which Inhumanity when
Stasanor, the Deputy of Alexander the Great, endeavored to suppress, they had
like to have Deposed him from the Government: So prevalent is the Force of a
Received Custom, on the Minds of the Unthinking Herd.

Let thou and I therefore, not supinely take up with Common Practices; but,
like Men of Reason, let us adjust the Last Offices we owe to our Friend, whilst
we pour forth some Devout Oraisons for the Health of his Soul, without
disturbing his and our own Repose, with fruitless Lamentations. And, since we
are bereaved of his Society on Earth, let us prepare to follow him, and render
our selves agreeable Company at our next Rendezvous in Heaven.

It was an Unjustifiable Rigor in Sultan Ibrahim, to deprive him of his Eyes,
because he had only cast 'em unhappily on one of the Sultana's, as she entered
the Garden. This Jealousy, is the peculiar Vice of the East. Yet they are more
severe in Persia, where it is present Death, to be within Two Leagues of the
King's Women, when they travel the Road. But, I never knew, that Eunuchs were
thus punished. Or, is there such a Difference between a White and a Black
Eunuch, That the One deserves to lose his Eyes for beholding that by Chance,
which the Other is honorably rewarded for having Access to, and seldom being
out of their Sight?

This was the worst Punishment that Seleucus, the Lawgiver of the Locrians,
imposed on them that were Actually caught in Adultery. Which puts me in Mind of
a Notable Instance of this Man's Justice: For, when his own Son was accused,
and proved Guilty of this Crime; at once to show the Tenderness of a Father,
and the Incorruptible Severity of a Judge, he first caused One of his own Eyes
to be put out, and then One of his Sons: Thus taking on himself, Half the
Penalty; that so, the Law might be satisfied in the Whole, and yet his Son not
be Totally deprived of his Sight.

Thou tellest me no News of our Armies, nor what Alterations have been made
amongst the Ministers of the Port, since the Death of Sultan Ibrahim. We have
various Reports here; and some say, that the New Vizir Azem will be no
long-lived Man. I desire thee, to write often to me, and send me what
Intelligence thou can.

Let nothing slip the Knot, which has fast'ned us so many Years together, in an
entire Friendship: But, let us carry that Magnet with us to our Graves; that,
at what Distance soever we may be buried, our Souls may by the Force of that
Attractive, find one another out, and converse together, in that Region of
Silence and Shadows.

Paris, 9th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER XI.
To the Captain Bassa.
I Know not where this Letter will find thee; on the Shore, or at Sea. If thou
art in the Watery Wilderness, I have no Art to trace thee. There are no certain
Roads in that Inconstant Element. It is a mighty Plain, without Path or Track.
And though there be certain Stages in it, yet thy Arrival at them, is timed at
the Pleasure of the Winds and Waves, which will not obey even the Orders thou
have received from the Grand Signior, Lord of the Four Seas. Perhaps, thou art
in pursuit of some Venetian Ships, or other Christian Vessels, the Corsairs of
the Mediterranean. Or, thou may be Careening thy Fleet, in the securer
Retreats of the Archipelago. Thou may be within a Minute of a Wreck, or just
entering a Harbor. Wherever thou art, may Heaven preserve thee from the Dangers,
which always threaten such, as trust their Lives to a piece of Wood: For, there
will be great Need of thee, if our Intelligence be true in these Parts.

It is reported here, That the Cossacks, Circassians, Mingrelians, and other
People who Border on the Black Sea, and Obey not the Law brought down from
Heaven, are entered into a League against the Blessed Port, and have covered
those Seas with a Mighty Fleet; while the Prince of Georgia, rushes down from
his Mountains, with an Army of Forty Thousand Armenians, Persians, and
Borderers of Mount Caucasus: That the Former have taken a Thousand of our
Trading Saicks, and are advanced as far as the Ferry of the Bull, which thou
know, is but Six Hours Sail from the Imperial City: That the Latter, have
made Incursions into the Territories of the Grand Signior; put all to the Sword
who resisted 'em, as they marched along; burnt and laid waste the Country: And,
that all the Greeks and Armenians, flock to them, threatening an Universal
Defection from the Ottoman Empire.

As to the Truth of these Reports, I can ascertain Nothing; but am inclined to
believe, the Cossacks are troublesome at Sea, and that they may have drawn some
of their Neighbors into a League, those Pilfering Nations, who live by Rapine
and Spoil, on both Elements. Our small Vessels trading on the Black Sea, full
of Riches and empty of Arms, must needs be a Temptation to those Pirates, who
are the most dextrous at a Robbery, and the boldest Fellows in the World. The
Merchants of these Parts, who have had some Traffic at Caffa, and other Towns
on the Banks of the Black Sea, give a frightful Description of those
Tempestuous Waters, and no Good Character of the People that Border on them.
The Cossacks, they say, are Valiant and Mercenary; the Circassians Hardy and
Bold; the Mingrelians Sly and Crafty; and the Georgians, of an Astral
Complexion, capable of all Virtues and Vices. The First seldom act, unless
encouraged by the King of Poland, or the Czar of Moscovy; and then they are
content with their Pay, and the Lawful Plunder of War. The Second are never
Idle, when there is hope of Prey, whether they fight their own Cause, or are
employed by others; and fear neither Hunger, Cold, nor any other Extremity, for
the Sake of a Prize. The Third are Good at a Stratagem, and would steal a Man's
Teeth out of his Gums, if he be not wary; Great Cowards, yet desperate in their
own Defense, when they see no Medium between Fighting and Death. As for the
Fourth, they seem to be a kind of Mungrels, a Medly Race, whose Character is
compounded of the Other Three.

They are Stout and Witty, Dext'rous at a Cheat, and no Bunglers at an
Ingenious Theft; Great Liars; full of Compliments and External Civilities, but
Perfidious and Implacable in their Revenges.

Yet, after all, I cannot believe the Prince of this Country, who is a
Tributary to the King of Persia, would venture his Government at Two such
desperate Stakes, by breaking the Peace, concluded by his Sovereign with the
Grand Signior, and so drawing upon himself the Vengeance of them both.
Therefore, he is either secretly abetted by that Monarch, or else the News is
false.

Would thou know, how this Country came to be Subject to the Crown of Persia?
It was Conquered by Ismael Sophi, to whom the Persian Historians, in Flattery,
give the Epithet of Great. He was the First of that Name, and of the Persian
Kings, that refused to obey the Orthodox Successors of the Sent of God. This
Prince, was Valiant in the Field; and no Coward at Wine, if we may believe one
of his Courtiers, who wrote Memoirs of his Life. He Records Sixteen Battles,
wherein he always got the Victory; and Twice that Number of Royal Debauches,
when he showed the Strength of his Brain, in the Company of Foreign
Ambassadors; with whom he would always Carouse, before they departed his Court,
that he might sound the Depth of their Instructions; for, none were able to
cope with him, at the Juice of the Grape. And he always esteemed that Liquor, a
Friend to Truth.

If he suspected his Ministers of State, or any of the Governors of Provinces,
he used to invite them to a Banquet; where, in the Midst of his Drinking, he
unravelled their Secret Inclinations and Counsels; being the most dextrous at
picking the Locks of a Man's Heart, of any one living. They never went Alive
from his Presence, if by one false Step in their Carriage, though it were but a
Word too passionate, or a Look less composed to Resignation, he could discover
or frame to himself the Grounds of a just Jealousy. It being ever his Maxim,
That Credulity, was the only Vice, could ruin a Happy Prince. He had another
Saying also, That Persia was Fertile of Men, but Barren of Faithful Officers.

I cannot admire these Cruel Strains of Policy. Yet Kings have Reasons for
their Actions and Words, which we cannot comprehend. The Philosophers say, That
Wine was given Us by the Gods, to mitigate our Cares; and, for a Time, to make
Us Equal to their Divinities, in the free Enjoyment of Our Selves. And, though as
a Mussulman, I am not bound to subscribe to the Principles of Pagans; yet as a
Man, Partaker of Flesh and Blood, I think he doubly mis-uses that Liquor, who
perverts it to the Ends of Cruelty.

But, this Monarch had other Thoughts, when by the Assistance of the Georgian
Forces, having subdued the Regions Bordering on the Caspian Sea, at that Time
in the Hands of the Ottomans, he invited the King of Georgia to his Tent, under
Pretense of a Festival Joy for their mutual Success. The Unwary Prince,
trusting to his own Merit, and the Faith of his Neighbor, ventures him self
with a Small Guard to the Camp of Ismael. The Persian entertained him, with all
the Outward Demonstrations of Affection and Gratitude, for his repeated Aids:
But, in the End of the Feast, taking Exceptions at some Words the King of
Georgia spoke, in Praise of his own Soldiers, he commanded his Eunuchs to seize
on him, and carry him to the Tent of the Unfortunate (so they called the
Pavilion, or Cage of the Grandees fallen into Disgrace.) Then he gave swift
Orders, for the Georgian Soldiers to be Manacled. And, having thus done, he
bestowed the Government of Georgia, on one Luarzab; on Condition, that he and
his Successors, would embrace the Faith of Hali, and pay Tribute to the Crown
of Persia.

From this Luarzab, has the Government of Georgia descended, not in a Line of
Blood, but at the Pleasure of the Persian Kings, to him who now holds it,
Shanavas-Can; Who, I believe, has more Wit, than to hazard his Possessions, for
the Sake of a Chimaera.

In thus roving from my first Point, thou can not blame me, since thou thy
self actest by the Rules of Navigation, which vary according to the Bias of
the Needle. Thou followest one Magnet, and I another: Yet, let us both meet in
the Center of Duty, we owe the Grand Signior.

Paris, 23d. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER XII.
To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior.
Thou will say, it is an unmannerly Way of Congratulating thy New Advance, to
begin my Address with Complaints. Yet, Friendship overlooks Punctilio's. It Is
not the first Time, I have trespassed on thy Generous Temper. I am indisposed,
and cannot act the Courtier, though I am ravished to hear the News. It is some
Support to my Languishing Spirits, that whilst I am crumbling and dwindling
away into the Little Principles of which I was made, thou my Friend art growing
in the Bulk of Mortal Greatness, in the Favor of our Glorious Sultan.

However, I cannot but suspect the pretended Kindness of him who raised thee, I
mean the New Vizir. Neither have thou much Reason, to take this sudden
Reconciliation for any other, than a Masque of his Old Malice. He cannot forget
the Quarrel between thy Father and him, on the Account of Dara Meseck, the
Lieutenant General of the Janissaries; when the brave Old Cheik, put a Stop to
the designed Revenge of this Inhumane Upstart.

Assure thy self, that he who has made his Steps, to the Grandeur he now
possesses, over the Neck of his Master, will not spare any, from whose Wit or
Power he may fear a Shock: And, he knows both thy Experience and Interest too
great, not to mistrust the Son of his Enemy.

Besides, the eminent Command thy Brother has over the Spahi's, must needs be
an Additional Caution to the Man, whose Name sounds no where so sweetly, as in
the Chamber of the Janissaries.

Thou art sensible, that the newly revived Animosity, between these Military
Orders, threatens a Calamity to the Ottoman Empire, which cannot be diverted,
without a Sacrifice on one Side or other. And, since the Spahi's have engaged
so many Potent Bassa's in their Quarrels; who can expect to fall, but the
Mighty Favorite of the Infantry?

He knows this very well; and, to prevent his own Ruin, he resolves on Thine
and thy Brothers: Thine, under the Masque of Friendship, till by his Wheedle,
he has drawn thy Brother to Constantinople; where he will not fail to be
strangled, that so a Creature of the Vizir, may be promoted in his Room. And,
what will become of thee after this, I leave to thy own Judgment.

Perhaps, thou will despise the Advice of a Sick Man, and impute my Fears to an
Excess of Melancholy; from which Distemper, thou know, I am seldom free.
But, I tell thee, my Reason labors under no Hypochondriac Disorders, though my
Body may. I am no Enthusiast, when I counsel my Friend to avoid an Apparent
Danger. However, if thou think it needless for me to busy my self in such
Cases, I have done. But I shall never cease to pray for thy Prosperity, as
often as I comply with the Law, in Kissing the Floor Five Times A Day, and
Repeating the appointed Oraisons of Faith.

Methinks, when I write to thee now, my Pen is at a Loss. I am puzzled for a
Style suitable to thy New Honor, and our Old Friendship.

But, if I take too much Liberty, ascribe it to the Sincerity of my Affection,
which knows not how to be reserved or strange to a Person, whom once I could
call my Other self: For, no Wider is the Distance between Friends.

Paris, 5th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER XIII.
To Chiurgi Muhammet, Bassa.
I Know not, whether what I am going to relate, will be News to thee, or to any
of the Ministers Residing at the Sublime Port. However, it is so to me; and I am
commanded, to conceal nothing of Moment that comes to my Ears.

Mahomet, Eldest Son of Achmet, the Dey of Tunis, is now at Rome, having
embraced the Christian Religion. People relate variously, the Motives that
induced him to this Change. Some say, 'twas Interest; he having held a Private
Correspondence with the Viceroy of Sicily, who promised him, in the King of
Spain's Name, to make him Lord of several large Territories in the West Indies.

Others say, 'twas Discontent at his Father's Government, and Austere Carriage
toward him; the Old Man, having forced him to marry the Bassa of Tripoli's
Daughter against his Inclination.

But the greatest Part, ascribe this Change in Religion, to the Force of his
Conscience; which, they say, was convinced by a Miracle, of the Truth of the
Christian Faith. For, as they relate, being once at Sea in a Vessel, wherein
were many Christians, and a Dreadful Tempest arising, the Mariners, who were
all Mussulmans, seeing the Havoc that the Winds and Waves had made of the
Ship-Tackle, gave over all for lost; and fainting under so much Labor,
Watching and Terror as they had undergone, lay down, and let the Ship drive
wherever the Storm would carry her. But, there being a Christian Priest
aboard, Esteemed a very Holy and Blameless Man, he excited the Christians, to
appease the Wrath of God by some extraordinary Acts of Devotion. Then they all
made a solemn Procession on the Decks of the Ship, the Priest carrying before
them, that which they call the Sacrament, Imploring the Mercy of God, and often
calling on Jesus and Mary. When behold, as the Priest stood aloft on the Poop,
reading aloud Part of the Gospel, the Storm suddenly ceased, the Clouds were
dispersed, the Air grew Serene and Calm, and the Vessel got safe into Harbor.
Upon this, they say, Mahomet, when he came ashore, took that Priest along with
him, desiring to be instructed in the Christian Belief; making a Vow also, That
he would renounce the Law of the Mussulmans, and embrace that of Jesus.

This is what such, as are Zealous for the Honor of the Christian Faith,
relate concerning this Princes Conversion. However it be, it is certain, That
he privately made his Escape from Tunis by Sea, and bent his Course directly
for Sicily; where, in a few Days he landed, and was received by the Viceroy,
according to the Dignity of a Prince. A while after, he was baptized by an
Archbishop, who gave him the Name of Don Philippo, by which he is called in
all Places.

They say, he was a little scandalized at first, when he saw with what Freedom,
the Sicilian Women appeared abroad in the Streets, and conversed with Men; but,
that afterward, he took a great Delight in their Company, especially those
that could sing well, or play on any Instrument of Music, to which he is much
addicted. And therefore, he chooses to frequent those Temples, where their
Service is performed with Variety of excellent Music, as it is in all great
Cities. And for ought we know, the Character which the Christian Priest gave
him, of this Harmonious Manner of Worshipping God, might have no small
Influence, on a Man naturally affected with that Science. Certainly, Music has
a mighty Force on our Affections; and, it is a Proverb here in the West, That
he who does not love Music, has no Soul. One of the Ancient Philosophers,
defined the Soul it self, to be a Harmony. And another, was so sensible of the
various Effects of this Science, in raising Different Passions in Men, that he
left it as an Aphorism, Such as the Music is, such are the People of a
Commonwealth. Whence, it was the Great Care of such, as took upon them to form
the Manners of Youth, That no Tunes should be played in their Hearing, which
Naturally provoked to Levity and Wantonness; but Grave and Martial Strains,
such as prompted Heroic Thoughts, and disposed them to Virtue. The Italians,
are great Masters of this Science; and the Airs which they compose for their
Church Service, are very deep and ravishing. Which causes their New Proselyte,
Don Philippo, to pass his Time very attentively, during the Celebration of
their High-Mass, and their Even-Song. They report, that he will turn Jesuit.

He went from Sicily, loaded with Gifts and Presents, and came to Rome, the
Seat of the Christians Chief Mufti, whom they call the Pope. He is much
honored and caressed by the Holy Father, and all the Cardinals, who have told
him so many fair Things of the Nazarene Faith, and showed him so many Sacred
Relics of Antiquity, that he thinks himself already within the Verge of
Heaven, and that Rome is no other, than the Suburbs of Paradise. There is
something very charming and sweet, in the Conversation of the Christian
Prelates, if they be Men of Learning, as most generally they are. And, it is no
wonder that such Polite Company, should prevail much on the flexible Temper of
a young Prince, who is as a Pilgrim in a strange Country, where he can hear
Nothing, but perpetual Eulogies of the Christian Religion; nor see any Thing,
but Objects, which serve only to confirm in his Mind, a Venerable Idea of that
Faith he has embraced. Besides, they say, he is fallen deeply in Love with a
young Roman Lady. So that there is no Hope, of rescuing him from the Power of
so many Enchantments.

Therefore, giving him over as lost, let us pray the Omnipotent, to establish
Us in his Truth; That neither Interest, Passion, nor an Erroneous Conscience,
may ever be able to make us swerve from the Law written in Heaven; but, that we
may adhere to God and his Prophet, with a Thousand Souls.

Paris, 5th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER XIV.
To Sala, Tircheni Emin, Superintendent of the Royal Arsenal at Constantinople.
WE are all alarmed here, with the News of I know not what boisterous
Adventures of the Cossacks, and their Neighbors, that possess the Ancient
Kingdom of Colchis. Had I not a firm Faith in the Alcoran, 'twould fill me with
Panick Fears. But, no Attempts can prevail, against the Men fighting under the
Shadow of the Prophet. He descended with a Consummate Authority, from the
Monarch who commands all Things. The Mandate of Heaven, will disperse the
Infidels. The Seven Vizirs Above, were Witnesses to the Words, whose Eccho's
caused Thunder, when the Prophet retired from the Steps of the Throne. Had not
Moses given him warning (who remembered the Noise in the Mount) the Apostle had
lost his Address, and been confounded before the Angels. But, encouraged with
the Whisper of the Man with Horns, he made no Default in his Conge: And, with
little Loss of Time, arrived to the Ninth Sphere, where he proclaimed the
Nesiraum; and, all the Inhabitants of that Orb, resorted to the Banner which he
had in his Hands. The Prophet told 'em, 'Twas only for a Trial of their
Fidelity. They made Obeisance, and retired. From that Place, he made no
Scruple, but that the Elect in Heaven and Earth, would obey the Divine Patent.
He finished his Descent Triumphantly, and pitched his Feet on Mount Vriel.
Those that believe Hali, say, It Was on the Top of the Ragged Rock. But let
Heretics alone in their Infidelity. Be it where it pleased God, he spoke the
Words that shall never be Reversed, when he displayed the Heavenly Silk, and
said, Whoever takes up Arms against this Banner, shall be reputed an Infidel;
He shall be exterminated from the Earth.

I often think on these Passages in the Holy Memoirs, the Collections of the
Life full of Wonders. Then I comfort my self with this Thought, That if all the
Vncircumcis'd in the World, should enter into a Combination, they would not
succeed against the Men, fighting under the Commission with the Seal.

I have sent a Letter to the Bassa of the Sea, acquainting him with the News of
this Expedition of the Cossacks. Since which I am informed, that these People
are Headed by a famous Pirate in those Parts, a Man of a daring Spirit, and
capable of the boldest Undertakings. The French Merchants, who have traded in
the Black Sea, give him a High Character; and portend great Injuries to the
Ottoman Empire, from the Success of his Arms: For, they say, he is a Good
Captain, both by Sea and Land. I have heard several different Stories of his
Birth and Education: But, this I am going to relate, comes from the best Hands,
and seems most probable.

His Name is Pachicour, a Circassian by Birth, but bred up in a Sea-Town of the
Vkrain, near the Mouth of the Niester. He left his Native Country, at the Age
of Twelve Years, out of a Desire to see Foreign Parts; Embarking himself,
unknown to his Parents, in a Vessel of Podolia, which then was ready to set
sail from Bala-Clag. He carried with him a small Sum of Money, which he had
purloyn'd from his Father, and served as a Fund of his future Fortune: For,
arriving at a certain Town in Podolia, he frequented the Keys, and offered his
Service to several Merchants; one of which, observing in his Face the Marks of
a Promising Genius, entertained him in his House. He lived with him Seven
Years, and performed his Office so well, that he made him his Factor to
Constantinople.

Pachicour discharged his Trust there, with much Profit to his Master, and
Honor to himself. So that at his Return, several Merchants entrusted him with
their Goods; and sent him to trade at Caffa, and other Towns on the Black Sea.
His Judgment and Reputation increasing with his Years, he became in Time famous
in all the Trading Towns. And, such was his Credit in the Vkrain, that all the
Merchants put their Vessels and Goods into his Hands: So that he sailed many
Times with a Fleet of Twenty Ships, having the Disposal of all the Goods,
committed to his Management. He grew so Rich in Time by his Dealings, that he
was able to drive a Considerable Trade for himself. And then it was, he began
to lay the Foundation of a Design, which he has since executed. His Genius was
too Active, always to be confined to this slow Way of growing Great: Therefore
he was resolved at one Blow, to raise his Fortune to the Pitch he aimed at. He
was the only Broker, Banquier and Merchant, wherever he came.

It was no difficult Thing, for a Man of so vast a Credit, to raise an
extraordinary Stock; and Pachicour could easily silence the Alarms of
Conscience. There happened also a Juncture, very proper for his Design. For,
while he was at Isgaou, a Port of Circassia, Day and Night projecting how to
exalt himself, a War broke out between his Countrymen and the Mingrelians. The
Latter appeared with a Navy at Sea, which alarmed all the Maritime time Parts
of Circassia. Pachicour whose Invention was always busy, took a Hint from this,
to accomplish his Plot. Expedition was his chiefest Game. Therefore he speedily
made the utmost Use of his Credit, among the Podolian Merchants, and other
Foreigners residing at Isgaou. And, when he had amassed together prodigious
Sums of Gold, for which he only gave them Bills of Exchange, he privately sends
away this huge Treasure, with all his Jewels, Tissues, and other Rich
Merchandise, to his Fathers House, who lived not many Leagues from this Town.

Within Two Days after this, the Mingrelian Fleet made a Descent at Isgaou,
sacked it, carried away Two Thousand Captives, and went to their Vessels again.

Pachicour, who knew how to make an Advantage of this Opportunity, privately
fled after his Wealth, as soon as the Mingrelian Fleet appeared before the
Place. And it happened, that most of his Creditors were made Slaves, and
transported to Mingrelia. He had no Need to take any farther Care, but how to
secure his Riches from his Pilfering Neighbors: For, the Circassians, are all
Professed Thieves. He therefore makes haste to his Father; and having gratified
him for his Trouble, he in a short Time purchased Four Men of War, with which
he sets up for a Pirate, infesting those Seas, and Robbing all the Merchants,
except those who had formerly entrusted him. His Bounty and Valor, charmed all
that served him. And, his Fame spreading with his wonderful Success, many
Circassians put out to Sea, and joined with him: So that in a little Time, he
made no small Figure in the Kingdom of Neptune. Seeing himself Commander of a
Powerful Navy, he found out quickly the Mingrelian Fleet, and engaging with
them, got a Glorious Victory.

Soon after, a Peace was concluded, and Pachicour was declared Admiral of all
the Circassian Sea-Forces: To whom the Mingrelians were obliged by Treaty to
join theirs, and to obey Pachicour's Orders. In a little Time, this fortunate
General became so famous, that the Cossacks sent to him an Agent, and entered
into a League; furnished out Three Hundred Vessels, and joined the Circassian
and Mingrelian Fleets.

This is the Bottom of the New Expedition, which makes so loud a Noise in these
Parts.

Thou who art Master of the Arsenal, wilt know what Measures are fittest to be
taken, against this bold Infidel, if he persists to break the Peace of the most
Serene Empire. Yet, though he is an Enemy, let us not envy him the Praises,
that are due to his Wit and Courage. He seems to surpass the Sneaking Thieves
of his own Nation; and undertakes Nothing but Sovereign Cheats, and Noble
Thefts, such as would pass for Virtuous Actions, in a Man of a Higher Birth.

I do not plead for Robbery, nor take the Part of an Infidel; but, if I had
Time to tell thee, some Heroic Passages of this Pirate, thou would say, he
is worthy of a Generous and Favorable Usage, should he become a Captive. In
another Letter, I will oblige thee with a Relation, which will not be unwelcome
to a Man, who gives not Sentence with the Vulgar. I had more to say on another
Subject, but I am interrupted. Pardon the Effect of my Duty to the Grand
Signior.

Paris, 19th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER XV.
To Melec Amet, Bassa.
THere is News arrived here lately, of the Murder of the English Ambassador at
the Hague. His Name was Dorislaus. He was sent by the New Governors in England,
to make an Alliance with the States of Holland, and to satisfy them in
Reference to their late Proceedings against their Sovereign. It Is said, his
Negotiation would have had but little Success, in Regard the Prince of Orange,
who is President or Chief over the States, and who married the Daughter of the
English King, takes to Heart the untimely Death of his Father-in-Law, and
cannot be reconciled to his Murderers. Yet, it is to be thought, that Princes
are no farther touched with one another Misfortunes, than concerns their
Interest.

However, on the 3d. Day of the 5th. Moon, some Scots entered into the Lodgings
of the Ambassador, and having dispatched him with several Wounds, made their
Escape. It is not certainly known, who set these Assassins at Work. People
descant variously, as their Affections bias them. Some reflect on it, as a
Judgment Justly inflicted by God, though by an Unjust Act of Men, on one who
had been a Notorious Promoter of his Sovereign's Death. Others censure it, as a
most Impious Sacrilege, in Regard the Persons of Ambassadors, are by the Law of
Nations, esteemed Sacred and Inviolable; and, the Injuries which they suffer,
are interpreted, not only as done to their Masters who send them, but to all
Mankind: As if Human Nature it self were wronged, in the Persons of Public
Ministers.

Indeed, there is no Method of establishing or conserving Friendships and
Alliances between different Nations, if their Agents be not secured with an
Immunity from Affronts and Violences.

The French relate a pretty Passage of one of their Kings, who before he came
to the Crown, being Duke of Orleans, had received very ill Usage in his Travels
from a certain Italian Lord, called the Baron of Benevento. After this Prince
was possessed of the Kingdom, the same Italian Lord was sent Ambassador from
the Viceroy of Naples, to congratulate his Accession to the Throne of his
Ancestors. Some French Courtiers, who had been Witnesses of the Injuries this
Lord had formerly done to their Master, now persuaded the King to Revenge
himself, by causing some gross Indignities to be done him, whilst he had him in
his Power. To whom the Wise Monarch replied, It becomes not the King of France,
to revenge on the Ambassador of Naples, the Injuries which the Duke of Orleans
received from the Baron of Benevento.

It Is said, the English Nation have demanded Satisfaction of the Hollanders,
for the Murder of their Ambassador; but were answered, That they themselves,
ought first to Expiate the Murder of their King.

The Scots have Revolted from the New Government in England, and are yet in
Suspense, Whether they shall set up the Son of the Late King, or Form
themselves into an Independent Republic. The Irish are steadfast to the
Interests of the Crown. And many Islands in America, subject to the Kings of
England, have now denied all Obedience to the New English Government, which
seems to tend toward a Democracy.

There is much Talk of one Cromwell, the General of the English Forces in
Ireland. This Man from a Private and Obscure Estate, is ascended to the Dignity
of a General, having purchased this Command, by his Conduct and Valor. The
French extol him, for the Greatest Soldier of this Age: And, if Fame be true,
he is no less Statesman.

As a Mark of the Respect I owe thee, thou will receive with this Letter, a
Pistol of Curious Workmanship, which being once charged, will deliver Six
Bullets, one after another. If thou acceptest this small Present, it will be an
Argument of thy Friendship.

Paris, 19th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER XVI.
To the Venerable Mufti.
I Have often wondered at the Lethargy, wherein the Nazarenes seem to be
drowned. They forget what they read in their own Bibles: They there encounter
with Expressions, which savor of the East. Every Page of the Written Law,
relishes of the Dialect which is Pure and Lively; though the Translators, have
cropped the Flower of the Sense. I have read their Bible in Greek, Latin, and
French; but none of these Languages, express to the Life the Original Hebrew:
Nor can it be expected. It is impossible to screw up the Dull Phrases of
Europe, to the Significant Idioms of Asia. We may as well expect Dates to
spring from a Reed: And for that Reason, it is forbidden the True faithful, to
Translate the Volume of Light from the Original Arabic: Which is no other,
than Hebrew in its Ancient Purity.

This is the Language of those, who dwell above the Seventh Orb. It Is the
Dialect, wherein God converses with the Pages of his Divine Seraglio: Wherein
all the Records of the Celestial Empire are writ. And when he issues out Orders
to the Ministers and Bassa's of Heaven, Hasmariel the Secretary of the Immortal
Divan, uses no other Character or Speech, but that which is peculiar on Earth,
to the Sons of Ismael, the Inhabitants of the Region on the East of the Red
Sea. In fine, this is the Language, wherein the Omnipotent thought fit to
discover his Pleasure to Mortals.

Believe Mahmut, when he tells thee with profound Submission, that he has taken
some Pains to pry into those Languages, which have been the Channels of Divine
Knowledge. I have been peculiarly ambitious, to study the Anatomy of Oriental
Words: And it would be no Hyperbole to say, I have learned to dissect even the
very Syllables: Wherein the various placing of Points and Letters, alters the
Sense, or at least makes it Ambiguous. So Significant and Mysterious, are Our
Sacred Characters.

I speak not this in Peevishness, or to vindicate my self, from the Contempt
which Ichingi Cap' Oglani has put upon me. I have no Emulation in that Point.
Nor can any little Spur of Pedantick Ambition, make me forward to contend with
a Man, whose whole Talent consists, in knowing and remembering other Men's Works;
as if he had studied at Athens, only for this End, to learn the facetious Art,
of turning his Brains into a Catalogue of Books: But I reflect on the Learned
among the Nazarenes, who are chiefly to blame, having the Custody of the Book
delivered to 'em from the Jews. And among them, the Translators of that Volume,
are past Excuse; for, they have deflowered the Original, and robbed the Virgin
Language, of its Beauty and Honor: While the Rest are Witnesses, and silent
Abettors of the Rape, in concealing the Indignity has been done to the Letters
Formed by the Finger of God, and full of Divine Mysteries.

In thus accusing the Christian Interpreters of the Bible, I do not patronize
the Critical Whimsies of the Jewish Caballists. They are exploded by all Men of
Sense. Yet there is a Medium, between the Excess of that affected Niceness,
which has rendered the One Ridiculous, and of that studied Carelessness, to
which the Obscurity of the Other is owing. As the Hebrews, by pressing the
Letters too close, have squeezed out Divine Chimaera's; so the Christians, in
using too slack a Hand, have scarce gained a gross Draught of Common Human
Sense, leaving the Genuine Elixir of the Writer's Meaning behind.

I will not lay much to the Charge of the Translators, employed by Ptolomy
Philadelphus, King of Egypt. These were no Christians; nor yet in the Number
of those, who Adored the Celestial Bodies and Elements: Nor did any of them,
pay their Devotions at the same Altar with that Egyptian Monarch, who was a
Worshipper of the God Serapis: But they were Jews, Seventy, or Two more in
Number, as the Tradition goes. And, being every one Commanded severally to
Translate those Manuscripts, which the Jews esteemed the Oracles of God,
without conversing with, or seeing each other; it is said, their Versions all
agreed to a Syllable.

This is the Story of the Jews, and seems to be Credited by the Christians: Yet
some have found many Errors and Incongruities, in that Celebrated Copy. And,
it is easy for an Impartial Eye, especially in the Head of an Oriental, to spy
many more.

But the Latin, which they call the Vulgar Translation, is full of Mistakes.
And the Pretended Saint who made it, should have gone farther than Palestine,
for his Intelligence in Ancient Hebrew. His Name (if I mistake not) was
Hieronymus. He passed many Years, in a Cell near the supposed Tomb of the
Christians Messiah, in the Holy Land: Where, they say, he was Inspired with the
Knowledge of Hebrew; and from thence, ventured upon a Translation of the Old
Testament.

Thou will not expect a Certificate of these Things from Mahmut, who only tells
thee what he has read in Christian Authors, whom they call the Historians of
their Church.

But, I can assure thee, 'twas no Spirit of the East, assisted this
Ecclesiastic in his Version. For, he comes far short of rightly rendering the
Lofty Hyperboles, Apposite Similitudes, Elegant Figures, and other Ornaments of
Speech, peculiar to the Writings of those, who first see the Rising Sun. Such
are all those, penned in the East: From which we must not exclude the
Manuscripts of Moses, and the Rest of the Hebrew Prophets, Poets, Historians
and Philosophers. Of these does the Old Testament consist; except one Book,
writ by my Coutryman Jub, who Five Times foiled the Devil, in so many set
Combats before God.

What shall I say then, of the Translations that have been made of their Bible
in other Languages, not so Copious and Significant as the Latin?

Since the Division arose, between the Roman Catholics and Protestants, their
Bible has been taught to speak the Dialect of all or most Nations in Europe.
Yet, such is the Unhappiness of the Franks, that the more they tamper with the
Language of Great Purity, the worse they succeed. Which has occasioned some
Learned Men, as I am inforrn'd, to mark above a Thousand Faults, in the Last
French Version of that Mysterious Book.

What Room will they leave for the Censures of the Mussulmans, if the
Christians themselves are thus Critical, upon the Grand Patent of their
Salvation?

It would be an endless Task, to recount all the Errors that may be discerned
in the Various Traducts of the Bible, by any Man that has Conversed in the
East. Neither will I entrench on thy Patience, to gain the Character of a
Critic.

Permit me to glance only on the Psalter, or the Odes of Sultan David. How flat
and dull are the Measures of the Christian Translators? How low have they sunk
the Sense of that Royal Poet? He never begun to warble forth any of those
Divine Songs, till first Inspired by a Seraph, whom he had lured down from
Paradise, by the Melody of his Harp. That Seraph, was Master of the Music
Above, as the Hebrew Doctors teach. Every Time David played on his Instrument,
Ariel (for so was the Spirit called) made his Descent, and sung with a Grace
which cannot be expressed. The Docile Poet, soon learned both his Notes and
Words. Seven Hundred Times, David touched his Harmonious Strings, and so often
the Angel stood by him with the Book of the Quire. He taught him Seven Hundred
Sonnets, that are Chanted by the Lovers in Paradise. But the Devil stole 'em
from the King, whilst he was gazing on another Man's Wife, bathing her self in
an adjoining Garden.

Yet there are above a Hundred Hymns remaining, which David composed by Memory
out of the Former. But, some Sects among the Christians, have turned 'em to the
Ballads of the Vulgar.

So have they dealt by that surpassing Poem of Solomon, taught him by the
Etherial Tutor of his Father. For Ariel was enamored of One of the Virgins of
Paradise, at the same Time, that Solomon enjoyed Pharaoh's Daughter, and had
newly built for her a Seraglio of Cedar. The Heavenly Lover therefore, to
accommodate himself to the Passion of the Mortal, taught him One of the
Pastorals of Eden, a Song peculiar to his Own Amor.

But the Nazarenes, have turned it to a dry and Insignificant Allegory, by
their Glosses: Putting an Affront also upon Rhetoric and Poetry, in Wording
their Translation.

If I should go on, and number the Mistakes they have made in the Writings of
the Prophets, and other Books of the Old Testament, though it were but in this
General Manner, I should tire thee out: But to recount the Particulars, would
be a Thirteenth Task for Hercules.

Yet after all these Defaults of the Learned, neither they nor the Ignorant can
be excused from Wilful Blindness, in shutting their Eyes against the Twilight,
which appears in the Worst Translation, and is sufficient to direct any Man to
the East, where Wisdom shines in her Perfect Splendour.

There are Expressions all over the Scriptures, which point to the Laws,
Customs, Habits, Diet and Manner of Life, used in the Regions First Visited by
the Morning-Sun. These are the same Now, as they were of Old. And the
Mussulmans of this Age, observe no other Rule of Life, but what was practiced
by the Patriarch Ibrahim, above Three Thousand Years ago, and by all the
Faithful of those Times. Our Marriages, Circumcisions, Funerals, Prayers,
Washings, and all other Ceremonies, of Religion or Civility, are the same Now
as Then. There is Nothing added or diminished, save the Faith and Obedience we
owe to Mahomet, the Ambassador of God, and to the Volume put into his Hands by
Gabriel, Prince of the Divine Messengers.

Our very Habits, and the Manner of our Building; our Salutations, and whole
Address, are the same at this Day, as the Scripture tells us, were in Use in
those Ages next after the Flood, among the Patriarchs and Prophets, and among
all the True Believers, the Posterity of Ibrahim: Especially the Descendants by
the Right Line, the Stem of Ismael, the Eldest Son of him, who entertained
Three Angels at Once in his Tent.

Yet the Infidels will not consider it: But persuade themselves, they are the
Only Children of the Faithful Ibrahim; pretending to practice, in I know not
what Figurative Sense, the Life we lead in Truth: Cheating themselves with
Empty Symbols, while we enjoy the Substance.

But thou, Great Successor of Ibrahim and the Prophets, vouchsafe to pray for
Mahmut, That whilst his Duty to the Grand Signior obliges him to dwell here in
the West, and to converse with none but Infidels, he may still retain the Faith
of the East, the Devotion of an Ismaelite, and the Purity of a True Believer.
Still crying in his Heart, even in the Temples of the Infidels; There is but
One God, and Mahomet his Messenger.

Paris, 5th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER XVII.
To the Chiaus Bassa.
THE Peace agreed on last Year between the Germans and Suedes, is not yet fully
established and confirmed. There has been a Cessation of Arms since that Time.
And now the Duke Amalfe, on the Emperor's Side, the Duke of Vandort for the
King of France, and he of Ersken for the Crown of Suedeland, are met at
Norimbergh, to conclude a Final Ratification of the Articles.

During this Consult, the Suedish Army, are permitted by the Emperor's
Agreement, to Quarter up and down in Seven Circles of the Empire, and not to be
discharged, till all their Arrears are paid at the Cost of the Germans. It Is
said, it will amount to Three Millions of Sequins. This War has lasted near
Thirty Years; in which, above Three Hundred Thousand Men have lost their Lives.

As to the English Affairs, the Prevailing Party there, have declared that
Ancient Kingdom to be a Free State, and the Monarchy is Abolished by a Public
Act. Nevertheless, after Charles was beheaded, his Eldest Son was Proclaimed
King, both in England and Ireland, by some of the Nobles and Gentry, that were
Friends to that Royal Family. And in Ireland, a certain great Duke appeared at
the Head of a Numerous Army, in Behalf of the Young King's Interest, having
laid Siege to the Metropolis of that Kingdom; which, with one other Town, were
the only strong Holds, that resisted the King's Party. But in the 8th. Moon,
the Army which the English States had newly sent over to that Island, engaged
with the Forces of this Duke, entirely routed them, killing Two Thousand Men on
the Spot, and taking many Thousand Prisoners, with all their Ammunition and
Baggage. This being seconded with other Victories, in a short Time, reduced
that Kingdom, under the Obedience of the English States.

In the mean Time, I hear no pleasing News from the Levant. Vessels daily
arrive in the Havens of France, who confirm each other's Relations, of a
Dreadful Naval Combat, between Our Fleet and that of the Venetians; wherein
they say, we have lost Seventy Two Galleys, Threescore Merchant-Vessels, and
Eighteen Ships of War: That in this Fight, Six Thousand Five Hundred Mussulmans
have lost their Lives, and near Ten Thousand were taken Prisoners.

I tell thee, these are great Breaches in the Navy, which, belonging to the
Lord of the Sea and Land, has assumed to it self the Epithet of INVINCIBLE.
These are Blemishes in the Ensigns of high Renown; Reproaches to the Empire,
which we believe is to subdue All Nations. I reflect not on the Courage, or
Conduct, of the Captain Bassa. Neither am I willing to help forward the Ruin
of a Man, who cannot expect to be honored with a Vest, a Sword, or any other
Marks of the Sultan's Favor for his Service in this Sea- Campaign. I am
Naturally compassionate. It Is not in my Praise I speak it; for, I believe this
Tenderness, to be rather a Vice of my Constitution, than to have any Rank in
the Morals, much less to be of Kin to the Family of Virtues. I pity a Man
falling into Disgrace, on whom the Weather of the Seraglio changes, from which
he must expect Nothing but Clouds and Storms. Those Tempests will prove more
Fatal to him, than any that ever tossed his Fleet on the Ruffled Ocean. In all
Probability, he will suffer a Shipwreck of his Fortune, if not of his Life.
Therefore, it is with extreme Regret, I must say that which may hasten his Fall.

But I am commanded, not to conceal any Intelligence that relates to the
Interest of the Sublime Port; nor to spare the Son of my Mother, if I know him
Guilty of Criminal Practices.

All that I have to lay to the Charge of the Bassa of the Sea, is, a Private
Correspondence which he holds with Cardinal Mazarini. This I discovered by the
Assistance of a Dwarf, whom I have often mentioned in my Letters to the
Grandees of the Port. I need not repeat to thee, what I have said already to
them, of the Birth, Education and Genius of Osmin, (for, so is the little Spark
called) nor of the Method I have put him upon, to wind himself into the Secrets
of the Public Ministers. Only thou may report to the Divan, That this
diminutive Man, continues to pursue his Advantages of Access to the Closets of
the French Ministers, whereof I gave an Account last Year, in a Letter to
Chiurgi Muhamm^t Bassa.

Thou may assure them also, that when he was Yesterday in the Chamber of
Cardinal Mazarini, he cast his Eye on a Letter, which lay open on the Table;
whilst the Cardinal was in earnest Discourse, with an Extraordinary Courier
from Rome. He had not Opportunity to read more than the Superscription, and a
Line or two of the Matter; which contained these Words:

The Mild Commander, The humble Shadow of the Bright Star of the Sea, Bilal
Captain Bassa.
To the most Illustrious Prince of the Kingdom of the Messiah, Eminent among
the High Lords of Holy Honor, the Sublime Directors of the People of Jesus,
Assistant to the Chair of Sovereign Dignity, the Seat of the Roman Caliph,
Julio Mazarini, Cardinal, and our Friend. May whose later Days, increase in
Happiness.
THY affectionate Letter and Presents, were delivered safe to me, as I lay at
Anchor with the Fleet under my Command, not far from the Island of Chios. And
as a Mark of my Acknowledgment, and good Will to thee, and all the Nazarenes; I
embraced in my Arms, the Noble Captain, Signior Antonio Maratelli, who had the
Honor to be trusted with this Negotiation. I immediately disrobed my self, and
caused that brave Italian, thy Messenger, to be vested with my own Garment, as
a Pledge of --


Before Osmin could read farther, the Cardinal approached the Table, and took
up the Letter, letting fall some Words to the Courier, by which the Dwarf was
confirmed in his Suspicion of the Bassa's Perfidiousness, and that this Letter
newly came from him. He posted immediately to give me an Account of this
Passage; believing it to be, as it is, of great Import. For, he has a singular
Regard for the Family, which first exterminated the Greeks from Constantinople.

Thou know what Use to make of this Intelligence. I am not Cruelly inclined,
but I must do my Duty. The Rest I refer to thy Prudence.

I will only advertise thee of One farther Remark of Osmin; who by comparing
what he has seen now, with a Discourse he once before overheard between
Mazarini and a French Nobleman, whilst he lay under the Cardinal's Table,
(which I have inserted in one of my Letters) concludes, That the Bassa there
mentioned by the Cardinal, was this same Bilal Bassa, who was at the Instance
of the Janissaries, made Bassa of the Sea.

I could not without making my self an Accomplice, conceal so foul an
Ingratitude to the Grand Signior, and so Villainous a Treason against the
Empire, which holds the First Rank among all the Dominions on Earth.

Paris, 24th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER XVIII.
To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior.
WE have had a violent hot Summer in these Parts, with much Thunder and
Lightning; which has done considerable Damage to the Farmers, in burning their
Hay and Corn in their Granaries. Complaints arrive here daily from all the
Provinces, That Heaven has consumed their Harvests.

This the Court-Party interpret, as a Judgment on them for their Rebellions;
causing it to be iudustriously spread about in all Companies, That Heaven is
Angry with the Inhabitants of Guyenne, Bourdeaux, and other Provinces, for
taking up Arms this Year against their Sovereign. I know not how far this
Censure is Justifiable: But, it is observed, That the People of these Rebellious
Provinces, have received more Apparent and Irreparable Injuries by the
Lightning, than those of other Parts. Several Members of the Parliament of Aix,
were found dead in their Beds, after a Tempestuous Night of Lightning. And,
next Day, the Roof of the House where they Assembled, fell down and killed
several.

In the Great Church of Bourdeaux, as they were Celebrating their Mass, a Ball
of Fire broke in from behind the Altar, smote down several Images, and filling
the Church with an Intolerable Stink, flew out at a Window, without doing any
farther Harm. And a great Bank of Money, raised by this City to pay their
Soldiers, was all melted down by Lightning, to the Astonishment of those who
saw it; for, it was done in the Daytime, the Grandees of Bourdeaux being
present. It would be endless, to recount all the Mischiefs that have been done
in those Parts. We had no great Harm here, save that almost all the Wine in the
City, was turned to a Kind of Vinegar in one Night. Which the Philosophers
attribute to the Peculiar Energy of Lightning; which plays the Chemist with
this Liquor, and in a Moment separates and drinks up its Vital Spirits, leaving
only a Mortuum Caput behind.

The Season has been so hot during the Dog Days, that the Air it self seemed
Combustible; and the very Winds, from whence we looked for Refreshment, were
like the Breath of a Stove: All Things seemed ready to take Fire, as if the
Elements waited for the Grand Conflagration. Heat was the Cry every where.
Men's Bodies were scalded with Internal Flames; the Shade of Trees afforded no
Relief; the Fountains could not allay their Thirst. All Nature seemed to be in
a Fever, ready to expire.

Now those Fervors are abated, and we begin to have Frosty Mornings. The
Nitrous Air, restores Men's Appetites; Abundance of Rain, has new-moulded the
gaping parched Earth, and produced a Second Spring. The Husbandman comforts
himself with the Hopes of Another Crop of Hay, to repair the Loss of the
Former, which the Lightning robbed him of. In the mean Time, the Winds are very
busy, in disrobing the Trees, and scattering not only their Leaves, but also
the Fruit that is not gathered, on the Ground; whereby a Banquet is prepared
for the Hogs in every Orchard, who claim as much Right to feed on what lies on
the Common Table, as their Owners. And it is no Unpleasant Music, to hear a
Herd of Swine, set their Teeth at Work on the Wind-fallen Apples. At least,
this Spectacle and Noise, is delightful to me, who have been without Appetite
these Three Moons, and but just begin to recover my Stomach. I often ride out
of Paris, on Purpose to take the Country Air, where my Bread tastes more
savourly, than in the City. There appears something so Harmless and Innocent in
the Faces and Behavior of the Rusticks, as Effectually relieves my Melancholy.
I cannot discern in them, any Signatures of Court-Craft and Villainy. Their
Conversation, chears my Spirits. I love to hear them talk of their Rural
Affairs. My Eye follows the Ploughmen with Envy. Then I could wish it had been
my Lot, to have been bred up in some homely Cottage, where I might have tended
Oxlen, Sheep or Asses; all which, act Regu^arly according to their Nature:
Whereas, he that is the Servant of Princes, is compelled to do many Things
contrary to his Reason; which is the greatest Unhappiness can befall a Man. How
sweet is the Sleep of the Husbandman by Night, and how void is his Mind of
imbittering Cares by Day? He rises with the Lark, and is as cheerful as that
pretty Bird, saluting Aurora with a Song or a Lesson on his Pipe. He snuffs up
the wholesome and fragrant Dew of the Morning, as he walks over his Lands. He
beholds with Admiration and Pleasure, the Gilded Clouds and Tops of Mountains,
when the Sun comes forth of his Bedchamber in the East. He spurs himself on to
his daily Labor, by the Example of that Active Planet, following his Work with
Content and Joy. His Food is Pleasant both in his Mouth and his Belly; he feels
no after-Pangs through Satiety; but well refreshed and nourished with his
Homely Diet, he lies down with the Lamb, and sleeps in Peace, never dreaming of
State-Intrigues, or the Plots of the Mighty. Thus he passes his Life, in a
Circle of Delights.

Tell me, Dear Hali, are not these proper Objects of Envy, to a Man in my
Circumstances? Or, can thou blame Mahmut, who has neither Health of Body,
nor Peace of Mind, for wishing himself in a Condition, which would entitle him
to both? I am entangled in a Thousand Snares: My Employment is a Perfect
Riddle. I must say and unsay the same Things, as often as Occasion requires. I
must tell an Hundred Lies, swear and forswear my self everry Hour, if the
Interest of the Grand Signior be at Stake. I must be a Mohammedan, Christian,
Jew or any Thing that will serve a Turn; Dissemble with God and Man, Blaspheme
the Prophets, Curse the True Believers, and my self too, rather than baulk the
Cause I am engaged in. And yet, all this while they will persuade me, I am a
Good Man, and shall go to Paradise. As if the Mufti's Dispensation, were
available to cancel the Express, Positive Law of God! Do they think to amuse me
with such Umbrages, and send me muzzl'd to Hell with my Eyes open? I tell thee,
I have a Conscience, and such a Conscience, as will not let me be at Rest in
this Manner of Life. It were better to die, than to live stained with so many
Prevarications. I know not what to do, amidst so many Terrors: I feel my Body
decay apace, and hastening toward its Dissolution; What will become of me, if
I should die under the Burden of so many Sins? What Answer shall I be able to
make, to the Two Inquisitors of the Grave, the Angels who shall Examine me, Who
is my God? and, Who is my Prophet? and, What is my Faith? The Darkness of that
Region of Shadows, will not be sufficient to hide my Blushes, and the Confusion
I shall be in at so pressing a Trial.

All my Comfort is, that I have yet Friends left, to whom I may freely vent my
Thoughts, and ask their Counsel.

If thou have any Remains of that Friendship that has been between us, weigh my
Case thoroughly, and tell me, Whether I am not lost for Ever, without a Change
of Life? Flatter me not, neither use the Artifices of Civility, in palliating
my Crimes. But, search my Wounds, and give me thy Advice without a Veil; and
Mahmut shall esteem thee, the Physician of his Soul.

Paris, 24th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER XIX.
To Kenan Bassa, Chief Treasurer to his Highness at Constantinople.
IF I have not addressed to thee before, attribute it to my Ignorance of thy
Quality and Person. As soon as I heard of thy Advancement to this Important
Trust, I resolved to salute thee, as becomes a Slave in my Post, and to wish
thee all the Happiness thou can desire. Yet, when I congratulate thy Rise,
remember, I do but welcome thee to a Precipice, a mere Pinnacle of Fortune,
where thou have no Reason to expect secure Footing. The Blast of an Envious
Mouth, will make thee totter. Thou breathest in an Element, full of Tempests.
The sly Practices of a Rival, may undermine thee; or, the more open Frowns of
thy Sovereign, may cast thee down. Thou art ever liable to the Malice of the
Vulgar, and not a little in Danger of thy own Weakness, the Inseparable
Companion of Humanity. If thou should once look with Disdain on those that
are beneath thee, the vast Distance and Height of the Prospect, may make thee
Giddy. Therefore, it will be good for thee, to have thy Eyes always fixed on thy
self. That will prove the best Chart, by which to steer thy Course, through the
Rocks and Sands, which on all Hands threaten the Life of a Courtier. It will
not be amiss also, to place before thee, the Examples of Wise Men, thy
Predecessors. There is a greater Force in these, than in the best Counsels;
because, Matter of Fact, leaves no Room for Distrust: Whereas, Men are
Naturally jealous of those who pretend to instruct them. We are all fond of our
own Reason and Judgment; and are apt to suspect him of some Design, who seeks
to persuade us, though to our Good. Besides, there is a Species of Pride, a
Punctilio of Honor in Mortals, which will hardly permit us to yield our selves
in a Condition, to need another Advice: Whence comes the Arabian Proverb,
which says, A Man prosits more by the Sight of an Idiot, than by the Orations
of the Learned. We all love to make our own Experiments, and sooner trust any
Sense than our Ears. Therefore, the Lacedaemonians caused their Slaves to be
made drunk in the Presence of their Children; that from the Squalidness of the
Spectacle, they might conceive a Hatred against that Vice, which by all the
Instructions in the World, they would never learn to abhor.

The Crimes of some in thy Station, have more of Sobriety in them, but less
Honesty. Wonder not at the Expression, nor accuse me of Impudence. I reflect
only on the Wicked: Number not thy self among them.

Thou know, it has been an Ancient Custom for our Renowned Emperors, to
divert themselves at certain Times, with the Sight of their Inestimable
Treasury. I am no Stranger to the Ceremonies used at such Times. One would
think it impossible, amidst so much Caution, that the Grand Signior should be
defrauded of the least Part of his Wealth. I do not speak of the Chamber of
Arms, or those others which make up the Imperial Wardrobe. The Bulk and Weight
of those Rich Velvet Broccades, and other Furniture of Gold and Silver,
discourages the Theft. But who can number the Robberies that have been
committed among the Jewels, and Invaluable Rareties of the Mysterious Closet?
It has been found easy to conceal and transport from thence, whole Beds of
Diamonds and Chains of Pearl, undiscovered, I will not say unsuspected, at the
Times when Anakdar-Agasi gives Three Knocks, on the Cabinet of the Keys.

These are Hours of Munificence and Royal Bounty, when the August Lord of the
Mines, is pleased to gratify his Slaves with Gifts, and make them sensible
they serve Him, who commands this Upper World, and that Underneath.

No Prince can discommend this Domestic Sport of our Sovereign, when he makes
his Pages scramble for Diamonds and Rubies; since it gives him a Taste of his
own Humanity: Nothing being more agreeable, in Cases on this Side of Amorous
Jealousy, than to let others partake of our Pleasures. And, it is the peculiar
Delight of Kings, sometimes to lay aside their State and Grandeur, to be
familiar with their Attendants; making them their Companions, or at least,
their Proxies in many Enjoyments.

But, it is Pity this Favor should be abused, as it has been in the Instance I
mentioned. Thou art no Stranger to the Records of the Hasna, which tell us,
That when Gelep Chiaus-Bassa, was made Chief Treasurer in the Reign of Sultan
Mustapha, the Lucre of the Glittering Jewels had tempted him to defraud his
Master, to the Value of Five Hundred Thousand Sequins. Which, upon the
Information of Three Pages, and a diligent Search, were found in his Trunks.

It has been whispered also, That few have enjoyed that Office, who have not
purloyn'd Something from the Imperial Coffers. They say, it is an Hereditary
Theft, delivered by Tradition from one to another. Every Hasnadarbassi being
advanced to that Honor, by the Recommendation of his Predecessor, for the
Service he has done him in conniving at these Practices, which cannot be hid
from any of the Sixty who Guard the Royal Wealth.

Thou can not blame me, for putting thee in Mind of these Things; in Regard I
am commanded, to write with all Freedom to the Sublime Ministers, whatever
concerns the Interest of Our Great Master.

I have no more to say, but to desire thee, in transmitting what Money is
appointed for me, to be Timely and Punctual; to send Duplicates by different
Posts, that if one should miscarry, I may not be at a Loss: For, there is no
Credit for a Mussulman in Paris. Eliachim would supply me with what may suffice
a Dervich; but, it belongs to thee to take Care, that I want not what is
requisite for an Agent of the Grand Signior.

Paris, 22d. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER XX.
To Pestelihali, his Brother.
I Unwillingly Concluded my last Letter, before I had vented Half my Thoughts
on those Oriental Subjects, so full of Instruction and Pleasure. Thy Journal is
become my Pocket-Companion. I carry it with me to the Gardens and Solitudes,
and even to the Libraries, and Churches: To which Last, I am obliged to go
sometimes, That I may avoid Suspicion.

The Christians, when they enter the most Delightful Gardens of Paris, spend
their Time, and weary themselves, in walking forward and backward. They will
measure Several Leagues, in traversing one Alley: Which vain Custom, thou
know, is contrary to the Practice of the Eastern People, who love to solace
themselves, in sitting still under the cool Shades, and feeding their Eyes with
the Grateful Verdure of Trees, their Noses with the frequent Smell of Herbs and
Flowers, and their Ears with the pretty Melody of the Birds: All which, serve
as Helps to their Contemplation.

After this Manner, I many Times pass away some Hours in the Gardens of this
City, whereof there are great Plenty. And, when I am cloyed with the
forementioned Pleasures, then I take out thy Journal, and fall to Reading;
which winds up my Thoughts afresh' like a Watch that is down: Nay, it opens new
Sources of Contemplation, and serves as a Miraculous Talisman, to bring China,
India, and all the East, into the Place where I am; so Lively and Natural, are
thy Discourses of those Parts.

When I am in the Churches, it serves me instead of a Prayer Book: And, whilst
Others are babbling over they know not what, or, at least, they care not what;
I offer up to God the First Fruit of my Reason and Knowledge, which he has
given me to distinguish me from all Sorts of Beasts; whether in Humane Shape,
or not.

When I go to the Libraries, I compare thy Journal with the Writings of Others
who treat of the same Matters; and find, that thou agreest with some,
correctest the Mistakes of others, and in all, show a Genius elevated above
all others of the Common Historians and Travelers, who seek rather to amuse
the Reader with uncouth Stories and Adventures, than to Instruct him with what
is really Useful and Profitable.

Thus thy Journal, is become the Companion of my Solitudes, the Object of my
Studies, and the Help to my Devotions Abroad; and, it is no less, the Diversion
of my Retirement and Melancholy at Home. I am a great Admirer of Antiquity: And
therefore an old Craggy Rock, o'er-grown with Moss, and full of gaping Chasms,
is a more agreeable Sight to me, than the Flowery Meadows or Verdant Groves;
because the Former, looks like a Relic of the Primitive Chaos; whereas, I
know the Latter, to be only the Product of the Last Spring. It Is for this
Reason, thy Narrative affords me so vast a Delight, because it treats of the
most Ancient Kingdoms and Governments in the World: And is not stuffed, with
Chimaera's and Fables, as most Relations of those Countries are; but, gives a
sincere and true Account of whatever is Considerable, without touching on
Impertinencies.

But, above all, I am delighted with that Part, which relates thy Travels in
China: That Country, being of so vast an Extent, so Rich, so Populous; the
People so Industrious, Learned and Politic (besides the Antiquity of their
Empire, which cannot in that Point be matched by any Government under the
Heavens;) that the exact Knowledge of these Things, seems to me of greater
Moment, than any other Discoveries whatsoever.

What thou say of the Chinese Letters and Words, shows, that thou have made
some Inspection into that Language. And, thy Remarks on the long Succession and
Series of their Kings, is an Argument, That thou art no Stranger to their
Chronology, which takes in many Thousands of Years before Noah's Flood. Thou
art very exact in enumerating their Public Tribunals and Courts of Justice; as
also, in describing some Remarkable Bridges, Temples, Palaces, and other
Structures: Which serves to give the Reader a true Idea, of the Magnificence
and Grandeur of the Chinese Emperors; and of the Ingenuity of the People, who
seem to excel all others in Arts and Sciences. In a Word, it is evident, That
thou did not pass thy Time with thy Arms folded, whilst thou were in that
Kingdom. And; I know not how better to express the Esteem I have for thee, on
the Account of the Pains thou have taken, to Inform both thy self and me in
Matters of so great Importance, than by giving thee an Account of what Progress
the Tartars have made in the Conquest of that Empire, since thy Return to
Constantinople. In my Last, I acquainted thee, with the Coronation of the
Tartar-King at Pekin. Since which, Other Vessels are arrived from those Parts,
which bring an Account, that the Young Tartarian Conqueror, soon pushed
forward his Victories. And marching with an Army into Corea, (which Kingdom,
thou know, borders on China) the King of that Country, made his Submissions;
and entering into a League with Zunchi, held his Crown in Fee of that
Victorious Emperor.

Afterward, he hastened to subdue the Provinces which remained Unconquered.
His Method in accomplishing this Great Work, was by swift Marches, like another
Alexander the Great; and by laying Siege to the Principal City of a Province,
which he never failed, either to take by Force, or compelled to surrender, that
so they might escape Famine. And when this was done, he took Possession, both
of it and the whole Province, summoning the Cities of Lesser Note to surrender;
which they seldom refused, after they had beheld the Fate of the First. Thus in
a little Time, he became Master of all that spacious Empire.

The Fame of his Success, quickly brought Innumerable Tartars out of their
Native Country, to follow the Fortune of their Emperor. To these he gave the
Chief Offices of his Army, and continued the Chinese in the Administration of
Civil Affairs. And, as a Token of their Subjection, he commanded all the
Chinese, to cut their Hair short, and to Cloth themselves after the Fashion
of the Tartars.

They give a High Character of this Young Prince, who amidst so many Successes
and Triumphs, discovers not the least vain Glory, but contains himself within
the Bounds of a virtuous Moderation, ascribes all to the Decrees of Destiny,
and, is not in the least puffed up, with any of his Glorious Actions; which is
an Argument, of a Spirit truly Heroic. And yet, this Prince is an Idolater, as
are all the Tartars of that Nation; or rather, they are Men of no Religion,
which makes their Morals the more admirable. For, according to the Relation of
those who came last from China, the Tartars are a very Temperate and Continent
People, abhorring those Vices, which are but too common in other Parts of the
World, and from which the True Believers them selves are not Free. They are
Rigorously Just also, and punish all Manner of Fraud and Deceit, with Immediate
Death. As for their Conduct and Courage in the Wars, there is no Nation
surpasses them, Few are their equals. They are Passionate Lovers of an Active
Life, spending most of their Time on Horseback, either in Hunting Wild Beasts,
or fighting with their Enemies. And their Horses are the best and most
Courageous in the World. There is Nothing the Tartars so much despise, as the
Sedentary Life of Students and Learned Men; accounting them, the Burden of a
Commonwealth, Lazy Drones, fit only to be sold for Slaves. But Men of Service
and Merit in the Wars, they have in great Esteem; never failing, to reward such
with Dignities and Commands, proportionable to their Deserts and Capacities.
Nay, such is the Martial Genius of this Nation, That the very Women Ride to the
Wars with the Men, and perform Exploits above what is expected from that soft
and delicate Sex. Both Men and Women, are habituated from their Infancy, to
live in Tents or Wagons, there being very few Cities in all Tartary. There
they are inured to Hunger, Cold, Thirst, and all the Methods of a Frugal and
Hardy Life. This is that, which renders them Excellent Soldiers, and a Terror
to all the Nations round about them. This is that, which so soon Reduced all
China to their Obedience; the Chinese, among all their Virtues and
Accomplishments, being the most Effeminate People on Earth. This, no doubt,
thou have observed.

Brother, I advise thee, to go to Kerker Hassan, Bassa, our Countryman, and
present to him these Observations on the Tartars; which thou may easily do,
by transcribing what is for thy turn, out of this Letter. He Inherits his
Fathers Genius; who, thou know, was one of the Greatest Hunters in all
Arabia, and had a Character, not much different from what I have here given
thee of the Tartars. That Bassa, will take great Delight in these Memoirs, and
will think himself obliged, to make thee some proper Acknowledgment. He is
Generous and Great, and it lies in his Power to promote thee. I have writ to
him already, and have given him an Encomium of thy Ability. I will second it
with another Letter, in Answer to one I lately received from him, wherein he
desires a farther Account of China. I will inform him therefore, of several
Passages out of thy Journal. He, no doubt, to make a farther Trial of thy
Knowledge, will ask thee several Questions, relating to these Matters. So shall
thou have a fair Opportunity, of rendering thy self Conspicuous, and of gaining
his Esteem. Follow my Advice; take Time by the Fore-Lock, and the Event shall
prove Happy.

Paris, 8th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER XXI.
To Kerker Hassan, Bassa.
I Received thy Commands, and am proud of the Honor thou have done me, in
requiring the smallest Service at my Hands; especially, one of this Nature:
Which is an Argument, that my Former Relation of China, was acceptable to thee.
This I account my Honor and Happiness, that I have a Brother, who has made
such considerable Improvements in his Travels: For, it is to him, I owe the
Knowledge I have of that Country, and the other Parts of the East. As for my
Cousin Isouf, he would never vouchsafe to send me a Syllable, relating to his
Travels, though he had rambled throughout all Asia.

I desired this Favor of him in several Letters, but have received no Answer;
so that I know not, whether he be Dead or Alive. My Friends are very backward
in writing to me: And, unless it be some of the Ministers of State, who
sometimes honor me with a Dispatch, though very rarely, I hardly receive a
Letter from my familiar Friends and Relations in Twenty Moons. Which makes me
conclude, that Absence of so long a Date, has quite blotted me out of their
Minds.

As to what thou desire farther to know concerning China, my Brother says,
That Empire contains 4400 walled Towns and Cities; 3000 Castles and Towers of
Defense on the Frontiers, wherein are always Garrisoned a Million of Soldiers,
who are relieved at due Times, by others of equal Number. There are a Million
also constantly kept in Pay, to guard the Governors of Provinces, Ambassadors,
and other Officers of State. The Emperor of China, maintaining Five Hundred
Thousand Horse, to attend his Person. All this is, in Time of Peace. But, upon
any Revolt or Invasion, the Forces are Innumerable. There are in China 331
Bridges, Remarkable for their Strength and Magnificence, beyond all others in
the World. 2099 Mountains; Lakes and Medicinal Fountains 1472; 1159 Triumphal
Arches and other Monuments, erected in Honor of Valiant: and Learned Men; 272
Libraries, abounding with all Manner of Excellent Books. Temples 300000, and as
many Priests, besides the Convents of their Religious. They reverence 3036
Male- Saints, and 208 Female. All which have Temples dedicated to their Honor,
besides those which are consecrated to the Sun, Moon, and Stars, Fire, Air,
Earth and Water, and to the Heavens which comprehend All, and to the Celestial
Gods who rule All, and to the Supreme God, Creator of the Worlds. In these
Temples, they celebrate the Praises of their Gods and Heroes, with Music and
Songs, Incense and Sacrifices; believing, that all Things which are conspicuous
for the Excellency of their Nature, or from which Mankind receives any General
or Extraordinary Benefit, ought to be worshipped with Divine Honors. In this,
they differ not from the Ancient Pagans of Greece and Rome, who had almost as
Many Gods and Goddesses, as there were several Creatures in the World; so that
there was no Beginning nor Ending of their Superstitions: And, the most
Learned, and Contemplative of their Priests, found the Ceremonies of their
Religion, to be an Inextricable Labyrinth, where they were often lost.
Certainly, happy are the Faithful Mussulmans, who Adore but One God, the
Fountain of the Universe, without entangling themselves, in the Absurdities of
Infidels.

The Chinese, are great Admirers of Themselves, and their Own Nation;
believing, that no People can stand in Competition with them, for Learning,
Wisdom and Riches. They have a very contemptible Idea of all other Countries,
with their Inhabitants; Esteeming them, either as Idiots, or Monsters.

This Conceitedness, is owing to their Ignorance of the Rest of the World; for,
they seldom or never, travel beyond the Limits of their own Empire.

I could say a great Deal more of this People; but, it will be better for thee,
to hear it from my Brother, who has been there, and can give thee ample
Satisfaction in all Things, relating to that Empire. I have wrote to him, to go
and kiss the Dust before thy Feet. If thou make Trial of his Abilities, thou will find him improved by his Travels, a Man sit for Business, and one in whom
thou may confide; Which is a Virtue, never enough to be prized in these
corrupt Times.

In these Things however, mingle thy own Discretion, with the Kindness of a
Countryman, and the Affection of a Friend.

Paris, 8th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1649.
LETTER XXII.
To Chornezan Bassa.
WEre Ovid alive, the Events of this Year, would afford him Matter for New
Fictions. He would either tell us, that the Goddess of Love had set a Spell
upon Mars, and charmed him into Good Nature; or, that he had drank so large a
Draught of Nepenthe, as had made him forget his Old Trade, of embroiling
Mortals in Wars. However it be, Hymen seems to have the greatest Share in this
Years Actions. For, instead of Battles and Sieges, the Nazarene Princes have
been engaged in Encounters of a Softer Character, the Gentle Affairs of Love
and Marriage.

In the First Moon, the New King of Poland, whom they call John Casimir,
Married the Widow of his Deceased Brother. In the Ninth, the Prince of Hanault,
Espoused the Duke of Holstein's Daughter. And the last Moon was Remarkable for
Two Matches; One of the King of Spain with Anna Maria, the German Emperor's
Daughter; the Other, of the Duke of Mantua, with Isabella Clara of Austria.

These are all brushing forward in the Crowd of the Living; they are busy in
augmenting the Generations of Men: Whilst others of as High Blood, are gone to
increase the Number of the Dead; being enrolled amongst the Ghosts, and made
Denizons in the Region of Shadows.

The Empress of Germany, died in the Fifth Moon. The Duke of Braganza, in the
Ninth. The Duchess of Modena, in the Eighth. And a certain German Prince,
whose Name I have forgot, died in the Moon of October. Besides these, Death has
also Arrested Ossalmski, the Great Chancellor of Poland; Wrangel, General of
the Suedish Army; Frederick, the German Ambassador at Rome; Ferdinand, Elector
of Cologne; and the Viceroy of Bohemia, who was by his Enemies thrown out of a
Window, and had his Brains dashed out. So that though Mars may have seemed to lie
Dormant this Year, yet his Companion in Mischief, Old Saturn, has been very
Active, as the Astrologers say, who attribute all Events, to the Influx of the
Stars. Some are also of Opinion, that the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon this
Year, were Presages of the Death of these Great Persons. They might as well
plead, That the Daily Rising and Setting of those Luminaries, Portended all the
Tragical Events that happened on Earth; since it is not more Natural for them,
to continue Unalterably Moving from East to West, than it is for them to be
Obscured, at certain determined Stations, in their Journey, by Interpositions
which happen of Course.

We are Strangers to the Chronologies of the Chinese and Indian Gentiles.
Neither can any good Account be now given, of the Ancient Egyptian and Assyrian
Records. They run many Ages back, beyond the Common Epoch, of the Beginning of
the World.

But the whole System of Known History, relates but Two Extraordinary or
Preternatural Changes in the Course of the Sun, during these Six Thousand Years.

One, when that Luminary stood still in the Time of Jehoshua, General of the
Israelites, to serve the Ends of Destiny, and prolong the Light of the Day to a
double Proportion, till the Opposite Army was quite destroyed, and not one of
the Vncircumcis'd could escape the Swords of the Victorious Sons of Jacob.

That Day proved a long Night to their Antipodes. They turned themselves in
their Beds, when they had out-slept the Usual Hours of Night, and said in their
Hearts, Surely the Sun is fallen Asleep, or is Banqueting with the Gods of the
Sea. Perhaps Thetis detains him in her Embraces, whilst the Tritons fasten his
Slumbers with their softest Music: Or Neptune regales him in the Palaces of
the Deep. Thus the Disconsolate Nations argued in their Chambers. They were
alarmed with Fears of Unknown Events.

Such as dwelt on the Borders of the Earth, and were accustomed to mark the
constant Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, admired the Delay of the Usual Tides,
and asked, What what was become of the Moon? for, that Planet also, stood still
with the Sun.

The Light of their Souls was Eclipsed, and their Reason labored under a
greater Darkness, than that which troubled their Eyes. They were Ignorant of
the Works of God; and knew not, that the Celestial Orbs stood still at the
Command of the Spirit which formed them, even at the Word of the Prophet
Inspired from Above.

So in the Days of Hezekiah, King of the Jews, the Sun went back in his
Circuit, and all the Frame of Heaven was Retrograde, to confirm the Prophet's
Good News, when he told the Sick King, That Fate had prolonged his Life for
Fifteen Years. This was in the Days of Merodach Baladan, the King of Babylon,
who sent Ambassadors to congratulate Hezekiah's Miraculous Recovery.

Besides these, nothing has happened to the Sun, or any of the Heavenly Bodies,
beyond the Ordinary Course of Nature. A Man may as well Prognosticate from
Cloudy Weather, the Calamities of Emperors and Meaner Men, as from the Eclipses
of the Sun and Moon: Since, the One as well as the Other, obscures the Light of
mose Heavenly Bodies: And the Former, quite hides them from Us; which is the
greater Eclipse of the Two.

Let us pray Heaven, to grant us the continual Use of our Senses, and not to
Eclipse the Light of our Reason; and we need fear no Disasters, from the Common
Appearances of Nature.

Paris, 7th. of the Moon Chaban, of the Year 1649.
The End of the First Book.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS. VOL. IV.
BOOK II.
LETTER I.
To Muhammed Eremit, Inhabitant of the Prophetic Cave, in Arabia the Happy.
PArdon my Importunity, if I this once trouble thee with an Address of
Scruples, begging thy Counsel in the Affairs of my Soul. I seem to my self as a
Traveller lost in a Wilderness of Doubts and Uncertainties, without Guide or
Conduct. Not that I question the Truth of our Holy Religion, or mistrust the
Authority of the Sent of God. Certainly, I revere the Book of Glory, whose
Sacred Versicles, are transcribed on my Heart. But, there is wanting to every
Man, a particular Conduct in the Intricacies of this Life. I have not the Art
of applying the General Precepts of the Law, to my Own Personal Occasions and
Necessities. Infinite Difficulties arise from my daily Affairs. My Conversation
with Infidels, and the Duty I owe my Great Master, entangle my Conscience. I am
embarassed on all Hands; and whilst I study to conserve Purity, I find my self
still defiled.

I am no Heretic, nor in the Number of those who are Predestined to be
Damned, for the Injurious Love they bear to Hali; Injurious, I say, because it
derogates from the Honor they owe to Omar, Osman and Ebubecher, the True
Successors of the Apostle of God.

As I firmly believe the Alcoran, so I give an entire Faith to the Book of
Assonah, or the Agreement of the Wise; with the Writings of the Four Principal
Imaums, Haniff, Schasi, Melechi and Hambeli. And I am resigned to the Sentence
of the Mufti, as our Fathers were of Old, to the Oraculous Determinations of
the Babylonion Califfs. I Curse the Kyzilbaschi with as much Devotion, as I
pray for the Health and Felicity of True Believers. I spit at the Naming of
them, who deny the Chapter of the Covering, and the Versicles brought down by
the Squire of Gabriel, in Honor of the Prophet's Wife. I never lifted up my
Hand against any who descended from the Divine Messenger. And if in my Passion,
I have ever Cursed a Mussulman, I took of the Dust under his Feet, and laid it
on my Lips, before the Shadow of the Sun had advanced a Hairs-Breadth; and so I
hindered the swift Recorder of our Words, from Registring the Imprecation. For,
that Dust, I believe, has Power to blot out the Memorials, of our Evil Words
and Works.

When I meet a Santone, or one of those Divinely Mad, I put in Practice the
Lesson of Orchanes; and honoring the Holy Frantic, I fall down and Adore
Virtue, in that Contemptible Disguise.

I neglect none of the Purifications, Commanded by Our Holy Lawgiver; but
rather add those, that we Arabians have received by Tradition from our Fathers,
the Sons of Ismael: Yet, I hope, in Case of Neglect, some Indulgence is
allowable to a Mussulman, in a Country of Infidels. I use the Washing of Abdest
at all Times in my Chamber, where no Curious Eye can observe my Cleanliness; or
Suspicious Apprehension, draw Conclusions of my being a Mohammedan. But I cannot
thus practice the Washing of Taharet; there being not such Conveniences for
that Purpose in Paris, as in Constantinople. Yet, I am careful to supply this
Want, by other Methods of Purity; otherwise, I should be an Abomination to my
self. There is no Necessity, that I should frequent the Bath, who never touched
a Woman: Yet, I often go into the River, taking a Boat with me for that End,
and causing my self to be rowed half a League from the City, where in a little
Bay or Creek, I wash my whole Body, that I may do something beyond the
Obligations of the Law, to expiate the Involuntary Breaches of my Duty. Yet,
after all this, I cannot call my self Clean.

I Pray at the Appointed Hours; Or, at least, if the Affairs of my Commission
hinder me from complying with the Law, as to the exact Times of the Day, I
atone for that Neglect, by Watching the greatest Part of the Night. And, to the
Oraisons appointed by Authority, I add Supernumerary Prayers of my own, to
evidence the Sincerity of my Devotion.

I Fast, and give Alms, according to my Ability. I bestow much Time, in Reading
and Meditating on the Alcoran. In a word, I do all that my Reason tells me is
Necessary, to render me a Good Mussulman; and yet, I have no Peace in my Mind.
Methinks, I see Our Holy Prophet furrowing his Brows at me, and darting angry
Looks from his Paradise. He seems to reproach me with Uncleanness and
Infidelity. By Day my Imagination troubles me; and at Night, I am Terrified
with Fearful Dreams. Which makes me conclude, That notwithstanding all my
Obedience to the Law, and the strictest Care I take, to acquit my self a True
Believer, yet I am far short of my Aim; and therefore, I number my self with
those, with whom God is displeased.

It is impossible to express the Horror, which this Thought creates in me. I am
overwhelmed sometimes, with Melancholy and Despair. And, because I am forced to
keep my Grief to my self, without having the Privilege of Venting it to a Bosom
Friend, it is ready to burst my Heart.

This is my Condition at Certain Seasons; which I esteem as bad, or worse, than
those who are Doomed to Aaraf. For as they cannot enjoy the Felicities of
Paradise, so they are secured from the Torments of the Damned: Whereas, for
ought I know, my Portion may be in Hell. Will thou know how I redress this Evil
Temper of Mind, and what Method I take to cure my Melancholy? Receive it not as
Flattery, when I tell thee, Thou art my Physician, and the Idea of thy Innocent
Life, my Medicine. When I have rolled over Ten Thousand Thoughts, which afford
me no Ease or Relief, no sooner do I fix my Contemplation on the Solitary of
Mount Vriel, but a sudden Beam of Light and Comfort, glances through my Soul. I
promise my self greater Satisfaction from thy Advice, than from all the Imaums
and Mollahs of the Empire.

Tell me therefore, O Holy and Pious Eremit, how I shall dissipate these Mists
of Grief and Sadness, which envelop my Mind, and threaten to suffocate my
Intellect.

If in this Darkness and Confusion, I should apply my self to the Disciples of
Alhazan for Instruction, they will puzzle me with Intricate Niceties, about the
Essence and Unity of God: Whereas, I am too much troubled already, with
distracting Speculations. I seek not to dive into that which is
Incomprehensible, but to be Instructed in the Plain and Intelligible Way to
Happiness. What Imports it, Whether God be Good by his Goodness, or by his
Essence? This is, to throw Metaphysical Dust in my Eyes, and so leave me in a
worse Condition than they found me.

No better Light, must I expect from the Momsconderan: For, if they are strict
Observers of the Law, so am I, where the Precepts are applicable to my
Condition and Circumstances. But, I want a Direction in many Emergencies, for
which the Alcoran seems to have made no Provision, but leaves every Man, to the
Conduct of his own Prudence. And, I must confess, I dare not trust mine, in all
Cases of this Nature. Besides, instead of Interpreting to me in a plain Style
the Statutes of the Law, they will Confound me with High and Unintelligible
Notions of the Divine Attributes, which are sufficient to dazzle the Intellect
of the Brightest Seraphim. And, if they could once persuade me to be zealous
for their Speculations, I might in Time turn such another Religious Fool, as
was one of their Followers, the Poet Namisi, who being wrapped in his profound
Speculations of the Divine Unity, and hearing an Imaum pronounce the Sacred
Sentence, God is One, gave him the Lie, and told him, That he multiplied the
Divinity, in assigning it any Attribute, though it were only that which
expressed his Unity. For which Impudent Assertion, he was flayed Alive.

In as bad a Condition should I be, if I asked the Advice of the Muserin, those
Infidels in Masquerade, who under the Disguise of Mussulmans, deny the Being of
a God, assert all Things to come by Chance, and live without Hope or Faith of
Another Life. For, if this were true, that there were no Reward or Punishment
of Good or Bad Works, I would either soon make my Way to Earthly Happiness, by
not boggling at any Vice that would conduce to that End; Or, if I failed in
that Attempt, I would not tamely wait for a Martyrdom from Men, but bravely rid
my self of a Life, which was attended with Nothing but Misery.

Almost as bad as these, are the Hairet, those Mohammedan Scepticks, who dare
not trust their own Reason, but are ever Wavering and Irresolute. If I should
seek for Instruction at their Hands, they would answer me, God knows best what
I ought to do, and so leave me in the same Suspense as I was before.

Much Worse are the Guaid, those Morose Interpreters of the Law of Mercy, who
damn a Man Irrecoverably to Hell, for committing one Mortal Sin. This is enough
to drive all Mankind to Despair.

Indeed, the Morals of the Sabin please me, who seem to be perfect Mohammedan
Stoics, ascribing all Events to Destiny, and the Influence of the Stars. I
could willingly embrace the Advice of Philosophers, who appear so void of
Passion; but I could never join with them, in Adoring the Sun, Moon and
Constellations of Heaven, because the Alcoran has expressly forbidden it. And,
were there no such Prohibition, my own Reason would convince me, that I ought
as well to Adore the Fire for warming me and serving my other Necessities, or
the Water for quenching my Thirst and Purifying me, or my own Hands for feeding
me, as to pay these Divine Honors to the Celestial Bodies; since the one, as
well as the other, Act according to their Nature.

In a Word, of all the Innumerable Sects, into which the Mussulman Empire is
divided, I cannot expect entire Satisfaction from any; for, if they appear
Orthodox in Some Tenets, in Others they are manifestly Heretical. Yet, I cannot
but set a higher Value on Some, than Others, as their Doctrines and Practices
approach nearer to Reason and Truth. For, I am not yet such an Academick, as to
ask that Mock-Question, What is Truth.

Doubtless, our Fathers knew it, and the Messenger of God was sent to Divulge
it on Earth. But, if Ignorance, Superstition and Error have banished it from
Courts and Cities, let us seek it in the Deserts. Perhaps we may find this
Wanderer among the Rocks and Woods; or, it is possible She has sheltered her
self in some Den or Cave, as hoping for greater Favor from the Wild Beasts,
than from the Society of Men.

If Truth be no where to be found Entire, but has divided her self among the
Different Religions and Sects in the World, then, rather than miss of this
Divine Jewel, I will search for it in Fragments; and whatsoever is Rational and
Pious in any Sect, I will embrace, without concerning my self in their Follies
and Vices.

After all, the Munasihi seem to me, the only Orthodox and Illuminated of God,
who declining the private By-Ways of Schismatics, walk in the High Road of
Pristine Justice and Piety, following the Steps of the Ancients, and obeying
the Traditions which know no Origin. Among these, thou appearest as another
Pythagoras; confirming them by thy Example in an Innocent Life; enduring the
utmost Severities of Abstinence, rather than be Guilty of shedding the Blood of
those Creatures, which the Great Lord of All Things Created, to enjoy the
Herbage of the Field, and to partake of the Common Blessings of Nature, as well
as We.

To thee therefore I have Recourse, as to an Oracle. Tell me, O Sacred Sylvan,
am I not obliged to obey the Inspirations of my Nature, or Better Genius, which
tells me, It Is a Butcherly and Inhuman Life, to feed on slaughtered Animals?
Did not all those who aimed at Perfection, among the Primitive Disciples of the
Prophet, abstain from Murdering the Brutes? It Is true, the Messenger of God,
did not positively enjoin Abstinence from Flesh; yet he recommended it, as a
Divine Counsel. And, those to whom he Indulged the Liberty of Eating it, he
tied up to certain Conditions. Do not all the Religious Orders Preach up
Abstinence, both in their Sermons and Lives? I make no longer Doubt, but the
Corruption of Manners, and Voluptuousness of Men, are the Causes, that this
Ancient Sobriety is now disused and slighted. My own Experience confirms me in
this Opinion, who have often attempted to live in Abstinence; but, by the Force
of a Voracious Appetite, suffered my self to be carried back to my Old
Intemperance.

Yet, in Eating Flesh, I have been precisely careful, to observe the
Prohibitions of our Holy Prophet, so long as it was in my Power. I never
Knowingly tasted of Blood, nor of any Thing Strangled or knocked down. But, it
is Impossible for me to Assure my self of this; or that all the Flesh I Eat,
was killed, in Pronouncing that Tremendous Name which gave it Life. Neither
could I Once escape a Necessity, of Eating Swines Flesh.

But, I abominate my self for this Involuntary Crime. And, to obviate the like
Temptation for the Future, I will taste of Nothing, that has Breathed the
Common Air; being inclined to believe the Metempsychosis: Which, if it be true,
I wish for no greater Happiness, than that in my Next Change, my Soul may pass
into the Body of the Camel, which shall carry thee to Mecha.

Paris, 14th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1650.
LETTER II.
To Minezim Aluph, Bassa.
MY Intelligence from the Imperial Port, sometimes arrives late; either through
the Neglect of Kisur Dramelec, to whom that Care is committed, or through the
Badness of the Roads, which many Times are Impassable. Besides the frequent
Stops and Interceptions of the Posts, in this Time of War. Which is the Reason,
I do not always hear of the Alterations at the Seraglio, and the Changes that
are made in the Governments of the Shining Empire, till many Moons are passed.
Who is exalted, or who made Mansoul, are Things to which Mahmut is for a Time a
great Stranger.

Therefore, thou have no Reason to be offended, that I am thus late in sending
to thee my Congratulatory Address. But rest confident, that I wish thee
increase of Happiness, like the Sprouting of the Palm.

As a Mark of my Duty and Affection, I shall now acquaint thee with News, which
though it may seem of small Import to the Divan, yet has startled all Europe.

It is the Imprisonment of Three of the French Princes; not those of the
Ordinary Rank, but Branches of the Royal Stem, whose Names are not unknown in
the Seraglio, the Residence of Fame. They are, the Princes of Conde and Conti,
Brothers, and the Duke of Longueville, Husband to their Sister. They are the
Principal Subjects in this Nation; all Three, having the Majestic Blood of the
Kings of France, running in their Veins.

They owe their Confinement to Cardinal Mazarini, or rather to their own
Inartificial Conduct. The Prince of Conde, is a Passionate Man; and has never
learned, how to conceal his Resentments. When he first returned from the Battle
of Lens in Flanders, whereof I formerly gave an Account, the Insurrection in
Paris began. The Prince blocked up the City, and promised the Cardinal (against
whom alone all this Storm was raised) that he would either bring him back in
Triumph to Paris, or die in the Attempt. He performed his Word; and the
Cardinal rode through the Streets of Paris, in the same Coach with the King,
Queen, and all the Royal Blood after the Siege was raised, and a Peace
concluded. And the Prince, when he alighted out of the Coach, addressed himself
thus to the Cardinal: Now, Sir, I esteem my self the happiest Man in the World,
in that I have been able to perform my Engagement, in bringing Your Eminence
back to Paris; and that by my Presence, the Hatred which the Multitude have for
your Person, was repressed whilst we passed through the Streets.

This too nearly touched the Cardinal. And indeed the Queen, with all the Rest,
were sensible, that the Prince had too far over-shot himself, in this last
Expression. However, the Cardinal replied in a Kind of Modesty, not wholly void
of Choler and Disdain; Sir, You have not only obliged me to that Height, but
have done the Kingdom so considerable a Service in this Action, That I fear,
neither their Majesty's nor my self, shall be ever in a State, to make you
answerable Compensation.

Those who stood by, and heard these interchangeable Discourses, were apt to
interpret the First for a Reproach, and the Second as a Menace. Since it is not
unusual for Great Men, to overvalue the Services they do their King and
Country; and for Princes, when they cannot duly reward an Eminent Performance,
to turn their Gratitude into Hatred.

This is certain, that the Prince of Conde has presumed much, on the Merit of
his late Services; and, it was not easy for the Queen or the Cardinal, to
invent such Acknowledgments as he expected. For he imagined, they ought to deny
him Nothing, who had so often hazarded his Life for their Interest.

It was on this Ground, he thought he had a Right to interpose in a Marriage,
which Mazarini designed to make between one of his Nieces, and the Duke of
Mercaeur.

This Duke is of a Family, which has been a long Time at Variance with that of
the Prince of Conde: And therefore, the Prince was jealous lest the Cardinal,
by the intended Match, should fortify his Interest among the Prince's Enemies;
and so be in a Condition, not to want his Protection; the only Thing he was
ambitious of. For, could he have once reduced the Cardinal to this Necessity,
he himself had been absolute Master at Court. Therefore, he opposed the Match,
with all Vigor and Industry. This netled the Cardinal. He complains to the
Queen, of the Prince's Unkindness. She intercedes, and uses her utmost
Endeavors, to reconcile the Prince to this Marriage. But his Brother, the Duke
of Longueville, had so possessed the Prince with a Jealousy of the Cardinal's
Proceedings, that no Arguments could prevail on him, or overcome his fixed
Aversion for Mazarini's designed Alliance with the House of Vendosme (so they
call the Family, from whence the Duke of Mercaeur is sprung.) He rails at the
Cardinal, and lampoons him in all Companies. This begets ill Blood in the
Supreme Minister of State, who secretly resolves the Prince's Ruin.

In this, his Policy and Malice, exceeded the petty Revenges of the Prince; who
being of a frank, open Heart, contented himself with Railleries, and Satirical
Expressions, whilst the Cardinal concealed his Anger, under the Masque of
extraordinary Civilities; returning all the Contempts of the Prince, with a
Respect, which seemed to speak much Affection and Devoir.

He has been a long Time tampering with a Faction, which goes by the Name of
the Frondeurs. These were his Enemies, not so much in Hatred of his Person, as
out of a Zeal to serve their Country, which they imagined, was oppressed under
the the Conduct of this Minister.

These he has lately gained over to his Party, by representing to them the
Prince of Conde, as the Author of all those Evils, which they ascribed to
himself: Whilst at the same Time, he persuaded the Prince, that they had some
Design against his Person. Thus he artificially blinded both Parties, and
engaged them in mutual Revenges; privately animating the Frondeurs against the
Prince, and provoking the Prince, to seek the Ruin of the Frondeurs. By this
Trap, the Prince was inveigl'd to consent, and give Orders for his own
Imprisonment, whilst he was made to believe, the Arrest was designed against
his Enemies; and the People were satisfied, since they were persuaded, the
Faction of the Frondeurs had a Hand in the Plot.

The 18th. of the last Moon, the Three Princes were taken into Custody, and
sent to a Place, they call the Castle of the Wood of Vinciennes, some Leagues
from Paris. The same Day, the Queen sent for the Duchess of Longueville to
come to her; but, the wary Duchess, would not put herself into a Cage. She
immediately fled in Disguise, to a Sea-Town belonging to her Husband.

It Is said, the Prince of Conde had Notice given him, of his Designed
Imprisonment; but that he would not escape, projecting to himself some greater
Advantages, from the Discontents of the People (who now behold him as a
Patriot) than from a Clandestine, or Fugitive Liberty. This is certain, his
Coach broke on the Road, between Paris and Vinciennes; and it is thought, his
Friends might easily have rescued him: For, this Accident, occasioned a Stop of
Six Hours in their Journey; Time enough to have raised a Thousand Men to his
Relief, being only guarded by Sixteen Cavaliers. But it seems, he courts the
Cardinal's Persecution, that he may have deeper Grounds for Revenge. I know
not, whether his Policy is justifiable, or no: But if I were in his
Circumstances, I should hardly take this Method to gratify my Resentments;
which in all Probability I should not be in a Condition to accomplish, till the
Greek Calends, that is, Never.

Paris, 4th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1650.
LETTER III.
To the Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
THE Devotees among the Franks, talk much of the Jubilee that is to be
Celebrated this Year at Rome. They enrich their Phancies, with the Hopes of I
know not what Spiritual Treasure, which the Roman Mufti or Pontiff, will
distribute among the Pilgrims that resort to Rome, during this Holy Year.

This, as I am told, is Celebrated in Imitation of the Sabbatical Year,
formerly observed by the Jews, when they possessed the Holy Land. The Hebrew
Writers, such as Josephus and others, call That also the Year of Jubilee. Their
Cabbalists, like the Pythagoreans, pretended to derive Great Mysteries from
certain Numbers: And the Number Seven, was had in particular Veneration by the
Hebrews: Therefore they kept every Seventh Day, Week and Year, Holy. In the
Seventh Year it was not Lawful to till the Ground, plant Vineyards, or sow any
Seed. And when Seven Times Seven Years were expired, the Year of Jubilee was
proclaimed, being always the Fiftieth. They proclaimed it by Trumpets,
throughout the whole Country of Palestine, in the Forty Ninth Year. And the
Muezins cried in the Gates of their Cities and Synagogues, at the Beginning of
the Jubilee: Let every Man return this Year to his Own Possession and Tribe,
whether he be a Slave or Free. He that has sold his Houses or Lands, if he was
not before able to redeem them, let him this Year take Possession of his
Inheritance. He that is become another Man's Slave, and neither himself nor his
Friends can redeem him, let him this Year be dismissed, and sent Home to the
Family to which he belongs; for, henceforth he is Free, by the Indulgence of
the Law. Let no Man sow the Ground, nor gather the Fruits that grow of
themselves this Year. But, let the Earth as well as its Inhabitants, enjoy
Liberty and Rest; for, this is the Year of Grace and Divine Bounty.

After this Manner was the Hebrew Jubilee Proclaimed, and Observed. And, they
say, from hence arose the Custom amongst the Christians, who in many Things may
be styled the Jews Apes. But others say, that the present Roman Jubilee, is
derived from the Secular Games, Celebrated by their Pagan Ancestors; In Regard,
This was renewed every Hundred Years at first, even as Those Games were. Whence
it was, that the Crier in those Days, at the Indiction of the Secular Games,
said, "Come to the Plays which no Man Living has yet seen, nor shall ever see
again. For, Man's Life being Generally so Short, they thought it improbable,
that any Mortal should live to see this Solemnity repeated.

The Modern Jubilee, was first Published by Boniface IX. Bishop of Rome, in the
Year 1300 of the Christians Hegyra. At which Time, he promised Full and Entire
Remission of Sins, to all who should resort in Pilgrimage to Rome that Year.
After him, it was Celebrated every Hundred Year, accoring to his Institution,
till the Days of Clement VI. Who, at the Instance of the Roman Citizens,
reduced it to every Fiftieth Year. Then Urban VI. another Pope, reduced it to
the Thirty Third Year. And last of all, Paul II. contracted the Interval to
Five and Twenty Years. Which Space of Time, has been observed by all his
Successors to this Day.

If thou would know the Reason, why they have thus altered the Periods; It is
for Profit. For, in the Year of Jubilee, there is a vast Conflux of People,
from all Parts of Europe: Who bring a far greater Treasure into the Roman
Coffers, than they carry away from that City. Though the Pope, it is said, is
very Liberal of that which they call the Treasure of the Church: Which is a
certain Fund of Merits, and Superabundant Graces, left by the Messiah and his
Saints, in the Custody of this Prelate, to supply the Defects and Infirmities
of Sinful Men. And they believe, it is only in his Power, to dispose of this
Heavenly Wealth to whom he pleases. They talk also of Indulgencies and Pardons,
whereby the Holy Father can redeem Men from all Sin, and the Punishments that
are due to it. And this Wonderful Prerogative, they say, does not only benefit
the Living, but extends even to the Souls Departed; whom the Pope, according to
their Persuasion, can free from the Torments of Purgatory, and at his Pleasure
admit into the Gates of Paradise.

We that are Mussulmans, cannot declaim against the Doctrine of Praying for the
Dead, since it is practiced by all the Faithful. Neither have we Reason to
inveigh against Indulgencies, or Releases from Penance. But that the Power of
granting and dispensing these Favors, should be only reposited in the
Christian Mufti, will not accord with the Faith of a True Believer. We know who
swore by the Hoofs of his Swift and Faithful Elborach, which in One Night
carried him a Journey of Six Moons, that from thenceforth the Key of Aaraf, or
the Place of Prisons, was committed to him. Doubtless, the Omnipotent can
transfer his Commissions, when and to whom he pleases. If he once gave this
Authority, of Remitting Sins, to the Messiah, and Peter his Lieutenant, does it
follow, that all Peter's Successors, the Califfs of Rome, have retained this
Privilege? There have been many Good Men in that Seat, and not a Few Wicked:
Some Prophets, and some Magicians: A Catalogue interpers'd with Saints,
Martyrs, Butchers and Devils.

But it is evident, they forfeited their Authority, when they declined from the
Truth, from the unblameable Profession of the Divine Unity, and resisted the
Messenger of Heaven, sent to correct their Errors, reform their Vices, and
reduce Mankind to One Law of Purity and Light.

I write not Partially, nor am I embittered against the Patriarch of the
Romans. He is a Man like others, subject to the Will of Destiny. The Babylonian
Califfs and those of Egypt, Successively enjoyed the same Power, transmitted to
them from the Prophet, who sealed up all the Former Dispensations. Yet in Time,
through their Sins, they forfeited their Authority, together with their Empire,
when the Bright Osmans Conquered All Things. Then was the Prophetic Office
translated to our Mufti, the Guide of those who possess the Sepulcher of
Mahomet. To him all the World ought to have Recourse for Solution of their
Doubts, Direction in their Lives, Absolution from their Sins, and for the
Passport of Immortality, the Fefta required of all that enter the Gates of
Paradise.

But all Mortals, are Naturally tenacious of whatsoever advances their Honor
and Interest. Kings hug Empty Titles, that yield them no Profit. And the Roman
Bishops, are unwilling to acknowledge themselves divested of the Privileges,
which were once annexed to that Chair of Peter. They show the Keys, the Symbols
of a Power, which they have lost. And the Credulous Nazarenes believe, that
Heaven and Hell are Opened and Shut at their Pleasure. On the Eve of the
Messiah's Nativity, the Present Pope Knocked Three Times with a Golden Hammer,
at the Gates of the Principal Mosque in Rome. Which were then Opened, to
signify the ensuing Year of Jubilee; when the Christians are persuaded, that
Heaven is open to all that visit Rome in this Holy Time.

I wish thee a Life of many Jubilee's.

Paris, 9th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1650.
LETTER IV.
To the Flower of High Dignity, the Most Magnificent Vizir Azem.
WHEN I first heard the News of the Troubles that have been at Constantinople,
the Deposition of Mahomet, the late Vizir Azem, and the Advancement of the
Janizar-Aga to that Dignity, I imagined it had been Cassim Hali. But, it seems,
that Brave Old Soldier, is elevated to a more Lofty Station: He has entered the
Immortal Possessions, being translated to an High Seat: For, I understand, he
has his Rest in Paradise. On that Hero, be the Mercies of the Supremely
Indulgent: Whilst I turn my self to thee, his late Successor in that Military
Honor, but now the Lieutenant of the Shadow of God. I touch the Earth Thrice
with my Forehead, when I salute thee, Great Prince of the Vizirs, in Token of
my Humility and Reverence; and, in Remembrance of my Original: That I, who am
but the Product of Dust, a mere Worm, may not commit an Indecency, when I
address to the Bright Image of our August Emperor, who is the Type of the Sun.

In speaking to Persons of thy Immense Power, I strive equally to shun
Flattery, and Disrespect; endeavoring to deport my self with an Even Course,
between those Two Extremes, as Mariners steer between Scylla and Charybdis.
These are dangerous Places in the Sycilian Seas.

All Europe Celebrates thy Praises, and Extols thy Justice, for releasing the
Ambassador of Venice, Imprisoned in the 4th Moon of this Year. They say, since
thy Assumption to this Important Trust, the Ottoman Port is Reformed, and grown
more Civilized: (For, the Franks esteem all the Followers, of the Prophet who
could neither Write nor Read, as Barbarians.)

Here is much Talk, about the Defeat given to Our Forces in Hungary. The French
spare for no Encomium's on the Bassa of Buda, who fought valiantly, till his
Legs were shot off; and then caused himself to be carried up and down through
the Army, to encourage his Soldiers. Neither do they diminish the Glory that is
due to his Son, who received his Death, in defending his Father, at what Time
the Old Captain was taken Prisoner.

But they blame the Conduct of him who Besieged the Fort of Clissa, in Regard
he undertook it in the Wrong Season of the Year. The Defect of a General's
Judgment in such Cases, is many Times Fatal to an Army. The French are the best
in the World, at spying Advantages, and the most dextrous in making Use of
them. Most of their Campagnes, are spent in their Trenches, or in light
Skirmishes; seldom hazarding a Battle, unless on some unequal Terms, to their
own Interest; and then they never let slip the Opportunity. This commends their
Policy, but is no great Argument of their Courage: For, true Valor never
regards Dangers.

Adonai the Jew, sends me Word, That the Venetians are put in great Hopes, of
accommodating their Affairs with the Mysterious Divan, since the Release of
their Bailo: Yet, both they and all the Nazarenes, resent highly the Strangling
of his Interpreter.

They understand not the Measures of the Sublime Port, full of Wisdom and
Justice; and, that by the Terror of such Examples, the Ministers of the
Righteous Throne, seek to prevent future Wickedness.

In these Western Courts, a little Gold, or a great Friend, shall easily
palliate and procure a Pardon for the Greatest Crimes. Their Processes here,
are slow in the Execution of Justice: Being Strangers to the Impetuous Orders,
and swift Performance practiced in the East. Besides, this Interpreter sported
himself to Death, by the Licentiousness of his Tongue. He delighted to play
upon Majesty, and with an Insolent Lasciviousness of Speech, to deceive Him,
whose high, sublime and remote Intellect, uses no other Expressions of his
Wrath, but the Hands of his Mutes. It does not become the Emperor of the World,
to be profuse in Words, as the Christian Princes are, who take great Pains to
satisfy their Vassals, of the Justice of their Proceedings. They cannot
Condemn the Wicked without a Formal Process, wherein various Wits show their
Skill in canvassing the Cause, which, upon sincere Evidence, may be decided in
Two Words. This is the Masquerade of Christian Justice, a mere Trap for Gold,
the Secret of the Western Lawyers, who enrich themselves, at the Price of other
Men's Folly, and to the Disgrace of the Monarch, who there pretends to Command.

Should those Men of Law see this Letter, and know who wrote it, how would they
not Circumcise and Flay the minutest Dash of my Pen, to find Arguments of
Revenge against a Mussulman?

All Men are full of themselves, and their Own Principles: And the Nazarenes of
the West, are so brimming with them, that there is no Room left for Instruction
or Amendment. Like the Chinese, they boast of their own Science and Wisdom,
reputing all the Rest of the World Ignorant and Blind.

They are so Narrow in their Tenets, so Dogmatical in their Decisions, and so
conceited of All, that it is difficult for a Man who has conversed in a freer
Air, to frame himself to their Rules.

By what I have said, thou may determine, That it is no Easy Task for an
Arabian Native, bred in the Seraglio, to conform himself adroit, to the Humors
and Fashions of France. Yet, I curb all the Natural Propensions of my Birth,
Blood and Education, as much as in me lies, that I may serve the Grand Signior.
I am Incognito in all Respects, save those wherein I cannot be hid. And, I
would change my Masque a Hundred Times over, rather than fail of my Ends.

What can I say more to him, who only values a Slave for his Deeds?

I turn not my Back on thee, Sublime Idea of Absolute Power: but, retiring
after the most Respectful Manner of the East, I make a Thousand Obeisances,
till the Antiport has covered me from thy Illustrious Presence.

Paris, 17th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1650.
LETTER V.
To Sedrec Al' Girawn, Chief Page of the Treasury.
THOU will have Reason to wonder at a Man pretending Acquaintance with thee,
whom thou can not remember to have seen. It Is from my Brother Pestelihali,
thy former Master, I received the News of thy late Preferment, who art thy self
but Early in Years. Yet no Time is Unseasonable, to a Man Mature in Virtue and
Wisdom.

I knew thee an Infant, in the Arms of thy Mother, the Widow of an Arabian
Soldier, who served my Brother in the Wars of Persia. There appeared then,
such Evident Symptoms of thy future Wit and Dexterity, as prompted thy Father's
Captain, to take thee into his Protection and Care; and thy Mother by her
Charms, soon found a Way to his Bosom.

I write not these Things, to Reproach thee with the Meanness of thy Birth. Thy
Merits equal thee with those who are born of Nobles. It is not the Custom of
the East, to Prefer Men for their Parentage, or because they can show the Dusty
Statues of their Ancestors. That is the peculiar Oversight of the Infidels, to
give that Honor to Names, and Men of a Noisy Descent, which is only due to
Virtue. There are Families in Rome at this Day, who boast of their Pedigrees,
and that they spring from the Renowned Hero's, that are Recorded in the
Histories of that Empire. But, they Glory in their Shame; since they are quite
degenerated from the brave Qualities, which ennobled their Progenitors; and by
their sordid Actions, are become a daily Subject for the Descants of Pasquil.
This is an Image in a certain Public Place in Rome, to which in the
Nightime, they affix the Libels which they dare not own: A kind of dumb
Satyr, on the Vices of the Grandees; not sparing even the Chief Mufti of the
Christians, if he is Guilty of any Follies, which merit to come within the
Verge of a Lampoon.

It was no Contemptible Jest, which was in this Manner put upon the present
Pope, and one of his Nephews, at the latter End of the last Year. It seems, the
Good Old Father had advanced this Spark, from a Poor Ignorant Tailor, to the
Dignity of a Roman Baron; bestowing on him Offices, which brought him a
Revenue, sufficient to maintain his Title and Port. All the Ancient Nobility,
were disgusted at this: And some arch Wag was set at Work, to ridicule the
Pope's Conduct, and the New Baron's Honor. Wherefore, on the Day which the
Nazarenes Celebrate, with Great Solemnity, for the Birthday of Jesus the Son
of Mary; Early in the Morning, the forementioned Image, Pasquil, was observed
to be Apparelled all in Rags, and a very nasty Habit, with a Schedule of Paper
in his Hand, wherein was writ, How now Pasquil; what! all in Rags on a
Christmas- Day? (for, so they call the Nativity of their Messiah.) And
Underneath was Inscribed this Answer: Alas, I cannot help it; for my TAILOR is
become a LORD.

Yet, notwithstanding the Obscurity of this Man's Birth, and the Meanness of
his Former Trade, he became an Eminent Statesman, after the Pope had exalted
him to that Dignity; and lived with an Unblemished Reputation, whilst he saw
all or most of the Ancient Nobility, Pasquill'd every Day, for their Effeminate
Vices.

By what I have said, thou may be assured, that I have not the Less Esteem
for thee, because thou wast not the Son of a Bassa; since, had thy Father
lived, his Fortune and Courage might have promoted him to that Honor, or a
Command equal to it; and thou thy self art in a fair Way, to supply some Future
Vacancy, in those Great Charges of the Empire.

I have no News at present to send thee, save that the Three French Princes, of
whose Imprisonment I gave an Account to Minezim Aluph, are removed by Cardinal
Mazarini's Order, from the Castle of Vinciennes, to a Sea-Town called Havre de
Grace, for Fear they should be rescued by Marshall Turenne, who is much Devoted
to their Interests. The Princess of Conde, is retired to Bourdeaux, a City at
this Time in Arms against the King, having also with her the Young Duke of
Enguien, her Son.

The Marshal de la Meilleray, is gone with his Army to besiege this Place; and,
it is said, the King will soon Follow with the Whole Court. All Things seem to
protend another Relapse of this State, into the Old Disorders.

But this is not of so near a Concern to us that are Mussulmans, as the
Quarrels that I hear are broached between the Janissaries and Spahi's. They say,
the whole Ottoman Empire, is warped this Way and that Way, into Contrary
Factions; and that the Seraglio it self, is full of different Cabals, on the
Account of these Military Orders. It afflicts me with extreme Grief, to receive
Nothing but sad News from the Port, which is, or at least ought to be, a
Fountain of Joy to the Whole Earth. I pray Heaven avert the Omen; for it looks
with an Ill Presage, when the Champions of the Divine Unity, are thus divided
against themselves.

If thou will take my Advice, enter not thy self into the Secret of either
Party; but poising thy Affections with Prudence, stand Neuter to all Things,
but the Grand Signior's Interest. In that be as Zealous as thou can. As for
the Rest, wait the Decrees of Destiny.

Paris, 29th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1650.
LETTER VI.
To the Kaimacham.
GRaphul Eben Shahenshah, the Arabian Philosopher has said it, and every Man's
Experience confirms it, That no Humane Care can prevent the Accomplishment of
what Heaven has Decreed. There are certain Moments of our Lives, wherein Fate
delights to mock our Wit and Prudence, to baffle our strictest Caution, and
ridicule all our Conduct; That we may learn the Lesson of Resignation, and not
trust too much to our selves.

When I first saluted the Light of this Morning Sun, my Spirits were Serene and
Joyful: No melancholy Dreams, had left their Black Impressions on my Mind; no
sadning Thoughts, possessed my Soul: I awaked cheerful and sprightly as the
Lark. After I had Adored the Omnipotent, and performed my Accustomed Holy
Things, I began to reflect on my own Happiness, in that I had so many Years
served the Sublime Port, in this Station, full of Difficulties and Perils, yet
by no Misfortune, had ever betrayed the least Secret of my Commission. It
pleased me to think, I still passed for Titus of Moldavia, among the French,
who are the most apprehensive People in the World; and even in the Opinion of
Cardinal Mazarini, who, like Janus, has more Eyes than Two. I Embraced my self
(if I may so speak) in the Conceit of my Good Success; concluding, I was born
under Fortunate Stars, and that no Disaster could ever hurt me.

But I took wrong Measures of the Ways of Destiny, which are as Untraceable as
the Winds. For before Midday, my Sun was Eclipsed; the Air of my Soul ruffl'd
with Storms, and all my Joy turned to Mourning and Sadness.

Will thou know the Occasion of my Grief? It was this. In the Year 1645,
according to the Style of the Nazarenes, I received some particular
Instructions from the then Vizir Azem, putting me in Mind of the Hazards I run
in this Post, and giving me strict Charge, to bestow all my Letters in a secure
Place, whether the Transcripts of those I write to the Ministers of the Port,
(for I always retained a Copy of the Original) or the Dispatches I receive from
thence.

That Minister was afraid, lest I might some Time or other be discovered; and
consequently, that my Chamber would be searched. Therefore obeying his Hint, I
immediately carried all my Writings to Eliachim the Jew; knowing his House to
be free from any Jealousy of the State, and that the most Important Secrets in
the World, might be there an Age unreveal'd.

The Letters of my Writing, were enclosed in One Box, and those which I
received from the Invincible Port, in Another. And this was my Constant Custom
from that Time: As often as I writ to the Ministers of the Divan, or had perused
the Dispatches which came from them, I disposed of both in their proper Places,
leaving all to the Care of Eliachim.

But, neither his Caution nor mine, were sufficient to prevent the Resolves of
Heaven. It was determined Above, That we should lose some of these Papers.
Eliachim came to me to Day, before the Hour of Vlanamisi, all in Passion,
astonished, raving and staring like a Madman. As soon as he entered my
Chamber, he tore his Inner Vest, which was of Crimson Silk, fringed round with
Gold; and cried, We are undone, betrayed and ruined!

I presently thought of my Writings; and asked him, Whether they were safe. In
a Word, he told me he had lost the Box, which contained the Letters sent from
the Ministers of the Port to me, and that his Slave a Negro, whom he kept in
his House, was missing. Thou may imagine, Sage Minister, that this News put
me into no small Confusion. I presently suspected, that this Villain of a
Negro, had got the Writings, and was gone to Cardinal Mazarini with 'em: But
then recollecting with Cooler Thoughts, That this African understood not
Arabic, in which Language alone Eliachim and I used to converse; and, that
consequently, he never could know our Affairs, or read the Letters, which might
tempt him to such a Treason, I was at a Loss what to think of it: Neither am I
better satisfied now, though I have ruminated on it these Twelve Hours. Only I
think, if Cardinal Mazarini has these Papers in his Custody, he would have
given Orders before this Time, to seize the supposed Titus of Moldavia. For,
some of these Letters, take Notice of my having assumed that Name. But I cannot
perceive any Attempt has been made in that Kind, or that any Body has been to
enquire for me at my Lodging. For, I set Spies to observe, as soon as I
departed thence with Eliachim, which was about Noon. We are now together in a
Friend's House, where we shall continue till we hear farther of this Event. As
yet, we are in the Dark, and full of Fears: But Time, which brings all Things
to Light, will convince us, what we have to Trust to.

In the mean While, there is little News, save a Discourse of a certain
Convention at Norimbergh, and the Great Jubilee which is Celebrated at Rome;
where, they say, the Christians Chief Mufti, the Week before their Beiram, or
Easter, washed the Feet of Twelve Pilgrims; and that Cardinal Ludovisio,
entertained Nine Thousand of these Devotees at once, with a very Magnificent
Feast. They say also, That the Pope will get this Year Two Millions of Sequins,
by the Resort of Pilgrims to that City.

The King of Denmark's Resident at this Court, has received a Letter, which
Certifies him, that his Master has declared Prince Christian his Son, Successor
in the Throne.

They talk also, of a Marriage lately Solemnized between Charles, a German
Count, and Charlotte, Sister to the Lantgrave of Hesse-Cassel.

But that which most takes up Men's Ears, and employs their Tongues and
Thoughts, are the Civil Wars of this Kingdom; which is all in a Flame, by
Occasion of the Imprisonment of the Prince of Conde, and his Brothers. The
Citizens of Paris are very jocund, at the repeated News of the King's Ill
Success: For, they wish not well to his Arms, whilst employed against the
Malcontents.

Illustrious Old Grandee, I wish thee the Years of Nestor, and those Calculated
by Full Moons of Prosperity. But I pray Heaven avert from thee, some of his
Moments; wherein, they say, he was tormented with the Gout, as I am at this
Instant. It is a Pain hardly to be supported.

Paris, 11th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1650.
LETTER VII.
To the same.
BY the God whom I Adore, and by his Shadow, I swear, There is no Disloyalty in
Mahmut: Yet his Life is full of Temptations and Perils. The Box of Letters I
mentioned in my Last, is irrecoverably gone, and laid up in the Bowels of the
Earth; if we may believe the Confession of a Man, every Angle of whose Heart,
has been searched with exquisite Torments, even to Death.

Eliachim's Slave, the Negro whom I spoke of, mistook that Box, for one very
like it, out of which he had often seen his Master take Jewels: For, this is
the particular Merchandise of that Jew. And the Weight of each was not so
Unequal, as to rectify his Error. Lucre tempted him, and the desire of
Liberty. Whilst the Darkness (for he committed this Villainy before Sunrising)
and his own Guilty Fears, conspired to baffle his intended Theft. The Boxes
stood together (so Careful was Eliachim of the Sublime Secrets, as not to
venture 'em in a Place less secure, than that of his Jewels) and the Villain
hasty to be gone, and confounded for want of Light, took up that wherein were
the Writings, instead of his designed Prey, the Jewels. He went directly into
the Fields, purposing to bury this supposed Treasure in the Earth, in some
private Place, where he might take it forth at Discretion. But first opening
the Box, to supply himself with such Stones as he thought would be
unquestionable Pawns for Money, to answer his present Necessities, that so he
might the better provide for his Concealment; he was astonished, and his Heart
became like Lead, when he found Nothing but Papers, full of Characters, to
which he was wholly a Stranger. A Thousand Resolutions presented themselves to
him, in that Agony of his Mind, and he knew not which to fix on. Sometimes he
thought to carry the Box back again as he found it; and since his Design had
been thus strangely baulked, to Content himself till another Opportunity. But
then he considered, 'twas too late to return before his Master would miss both
his Slave and Box; for the Sun was now far advanced in our Hemisphere, and
Eliachim is an early Riser. In a Word, therefore he thought it the safest Way,
to bury it in the Ground, as he first intended had it been the Box of Jewels,
and so shift for himself. Proposing to himself this Advantage, in hiding the
Papers in a secure Place, That if they were of Value, he might at any Time make
Composition with his Master, by discovering where they were.

All that I have here related, is drawn from his own Mouth in the Midst of
Tortures. For Eliachim soon heard of his Fugitive Negro, who was seized on the
Rode to Lions, by some Correspondents of this Jew. Who having Intelligence of
it, took Horse immediately, and went to the Place. He did not think it safe to
make a public Business of it, or to arraign him before the appointed Judges of
the Country; But relying on the Justice of his Cause, and the Right of a
Master, he privately put him to Tortures of diverse Kinds, in a House where he
could command any Thing.

The stout African, at first denied that he had medl'd with any Box; saying, he
escaped purely for the Sake of Liberty. But when a Succession of diverse
Torments had quite overthrown his Constancy, he confessed all that I have
already related. Eliachim still suspecting worse, and that he only framed this
as a plausible Story to be freed from, or at least to respite the Pains he
suffered, caused sharp Thorns to be thrust under the Nails of his Fingers and
Toes; believing, that the Extremity of so sensible a Pain, would extort the
true Secret from him. But he could get Nothing else from the poor excruciated
Negro, though now almost ready to expire, than that he had hid the Box
Underground in a certain Corner of a Field, out of the City: To which he knew
not how to direct Eliachim, but promised to show it him, if he would carry him
alive to Paris.

This was no hard Task to perform, in the Opinion of the Jew; it being but a
Days Journey to this City, from the Place where they then were. But he was
deceived in his Hopes; and now all the Applications and Cordials they could
use, came too late: For, that very Night, the Negro breathed out his Soul.

However, when Eliachim came to Paris, he followed the Directions of his dead
Slave as well as he could, in searching every Corner of the Fields on that Side
of the City, where this Black had been seen to go out. But all to no Purpose.
He could find nothing; nor have we any Hopes, ever to see that Box again. Yet I
have many Qualms of Fear, lest some Time or other it should come to Light, to
our Disadvantage and Ruin.

I desire thy Instructions, Sage Governor of the Capital City, how I shall
deport my self, if it be my Lot to be discovered. As to the Remaining Box,
which has in it the Transcripts of my own Dispatches, I have taken it Home to
my Lodging. Believing it will be as safe here, as in the House of Eliachim;
since that faithful Jew, is no more exempted from Contingencies, than my self:
And I have no Servant to betray me.

This Kingdom abounds at present, in Treasons and Rebellions. The French spare
not to massacre one another, for the Sake of a Passion: While the Spaniards
make their Advantages of these Intestine Feuds. For, under Pretense of
assisting the Princes of the Blood, they get Footing in Picardy, from whence it
will not be easy to expel them. Leopold, Archduke of Austria, is at the Head
of the Spanish Army; and has taken several Towns, belonging to the French King.

When the Quarrels of these Infidels will end, I am not sollicitous; my
Thoughts being ever taken up, in the Service which I owe to the Empire of True
Believers.

I cannot bid thee Adieu, Illustrious Kaimacham, till I have assured thee, I am
macerated with Zeal for the Grand Signior.

Paris, 23d. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1650.
LETTER VIII.
To Solomon, Kuslir Aga, Prince of the Black Eunuchs.
AFter I had perused thy Dispatch, wherewith thou have honored the Slave
Mahmut; as I was full of Joy for the continued Demonstrations of thy Friendship
and Protection, so my Breast conceived an Indignation at the Affront, which has
been offered to the Sublime Port by the Cham of the Tartars, in presuming to
demand the Tutelage of our August Emperor. It is an Indignity to the Ministers
of Supreme Justice and Honor, Lights of the Imperial Divan, to whom is
committed the Cognizance of all Human Events; The Illustrious Vizirs, who
manage the Affairs of the Mighty and Invincible Sultan Mahomet, whose Throne
may God fortify, till the Moon shall no more appear in the Heavens.

Those People have been ever thirsty of Rule; and it is numbered among the
Virtues of their Ancestors, that they enlarged their Dominions by the keen Edge
of their Swords. But in all the Registers and Archives of the Empire, it has
not been found, that any of that Nation challenged a Right to Govern our
Sultans, though during their Minority. It is sufficient, That they shall have
the Honor (according to the Ancient Capitulations) to succeed in the Throne of
the Osman Princes, if ever that Sacred Line should be extinct: Which God avert,
till the Final Consummation.

It is a Wonder, they demanded not also his Royal Brothers, the other Sons of
Sultan Ibrahim; that so they might at one Blow, cut off the whole Osman Race,
and take Possession of the Vacant Throne.

I have not heard any Thing these many Moons, what is become of those Highborn
Infants; whether they are alive, or sacrificed to the Jealousy of the Sultan,
as has been the Custom. Here are various flying Reports concerning them. Some
say, that thou have conveyed away Sultan Achmet, and that he is privately
Educated in the House of a certain Georgian. The Blessing of Mahomet be upon
thee, and refresh thy Heart, if thou have taken this Care to preserve the Life
of an Osman Prince, which is more precious than a Hundred Thousand of Common
Birth.

As for Solomon and the Rest of that Sublime Race, the French give 'em over for
lost; And I cannot contradict 'em, for Want of true Intelligence. Besides, I
have Reason to fear it is too true: In Regard it has been the cruel Practice of
all, or most of our late Emperors, either to slaughter their Brethren as soon
as they ascend the Throne, or to put 'em to a more lingering Death and Martyrdom
in a Prison.

It Is true indeed, our present Sovereign is not yet arrived to those Years,
wherein Children commonly lose their Native Innocence. I believe, he suspects
none of his Brethren, nor harbors any unkind Thoughts against their Lives. Yet
Cruelty may be insinuated into his Tender Years, by the Artifices of his
Mother; especially against those of his Father's Blood, that did not also
partake of hers. For Sultan Ibrahim, thou know, had Children by other Women,
beside the Sultana Valede.

The Malteses think they have one of these Royal Infants in their Possession:
Thou know the whole Story of thy Predecessor's Voyage toward Egypt, with his
Beautiful Slave and her Son, whom these Infidels honor as the Offspring of
the Grand Signior. Thou art not Ignorant also, that this Infant with his Mother
were Banished, out of Jealousy, by the Order of Her who bore in her Womb Sultan
Mahomet, our Glorious Sovereign. The Remembrance of which makes me tremble, for
the Sake of the Young Princes, if there be any yet remaining alive. It is in
thy Power to certify me, and in doing so thou will rid me of much Anxiety.

I am but a Slave of the Slaves who serve the Grand Signior; and it is not
decent for me to descant on the Actions of our most Absolute Monarch, whose
Will is not to be controlled. But I am still a Man, and have some Share of
Humanity and Reason. Thou also art my particular Friend, and wilt permit me to
discourse with Freedom. Was it not a Bloody Feast, to which our King's Great
Grandfather, Mahomet III. invited Nineteen of his Brethren, on the Day of his
Inauguration? Was it not a cruel Act, to cause those Royal Guests, in whose
Veins ran the Blood of his Own Father, to be strangled, before they departed
from his Table? No less Inhuman was it of Mahomet, the late Vizir Azem, to
guide the Hand of this our Present Sovereign, when but Six Years Old, and
incapable of knowing what he did, to sign a Warrant, for the Execution of his
Father. Well may the Nazarenes call us Barbarians, when they contemplate the
Empire of the Mussulmans, supported by such Unnatural Methods.

Thou that have the Superlative Honor, of being the Immediate Guardian of our
Young Emperor, wilt pardon the Liberty I take. Ascribe all to the Force of my
Zeal and Loyalty. Thou art valiant and wise. Protect thy Charge, as the Crystal
of thine Eyes, which thou will not suffer to be hurt by the Dust of the Streets.

Paris, 14th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1650.
LETTER IX.
To Gnet Oglou.
NOtwithstanding all my Philosophy, I have not Command enough of my Passion, to
conceal it from thee, who have always been the Partaker of my Unequal Fortunes.
What ever Magnanimity of Spirit I pretended to formerly in my Sickness, it is at
present overcome by the Desire of Ease. At that Time, I remember, some Stoical
Considerations made me industriously hide from thee the tormenting Pains I
felt. I endeavored to disguize my Sufferings, and to paint my Misery in such
Colors, that it could hardly be distinguished from Happiness. But now I have
not Courage enough, to hide from thee my Fears and Apprehensions: And all
Seneca's Morals, are too little to hinder me, from complaining of the
Uncertainty that we daily experience in Human Affairs. This is a Theme so
Popular, that were not my particular Misfortunes very pressing, 'twou'd make me
sick to say any Thing on a Subject, that has been in every Man's Mouth, since
the Time that our First Father appeared among the Trees. Therefore thou may
be assured, I am not going about to make a Declamation, or play the Orator; to
expatiate and make large Descants, on the Instability of all Things. What I
have to say, refers to my self, and no body else, save to those who are the
Occasion of my Melaneholy.

In the 10th. Moon of the last Year, I sent a Letter to Kenan Bassa, the New
Hasnadar-Bassy. I have a Copy of it by me, as I always retain of whatever
Dispatches I send to the Sublime Port, whether to the Public Ministers, or my
Private Friends.

I have perused this Letter several Times within these Eight and Forty Hours,
and can find no just Ground of Offense, which that Grandee could take thereat:
Unless he was angry with me, for desiring him to be careful in transmitting my
Money. As for the Rest, I only obeyed the particular Instructions, I received
from Mahomet the late Vizir Azem: Who commanded me, not to spare the Greatest
Minister of the Port, if I had reason either to counsel or reprehend him. For,
said he in his Letter, To this End art thou placed at such a Distance, that
besides the Service thou do our Sovereign in disclosing the Secrets of the
Infidels, thou may also be free to write, whatever thou think will conduce
to his Interest, without standing in Fear of the Revenge of the Grandees. These
were the very Words, of the Prime Minister of the Ottoman Empire.

Now I only told him of some Miscarriages in his Predecessors, warning him to
be wary in his Station. Either he was offended at this Freedom I took, or
because I presumed to advise him how to order my Bills. Be it which it will. I
have had a severe Reprimand from the Reis Effendi, whom I have the greatest
Reason in the World, to esteem my Friend.

It would never have vexed me, had he wrote plainly, and not disguised his
Sentiments. But all was obscure, saving One blunt Expression, which convinced
me, That the real Ground of all this Anger, was my Letter to Kenan, wherein I
desired his Care as to my Money.

Can that Minister blame me, for being apprehensive of Want in a Foreign
Country, a Region of Infidels, where I have no other Commerce, but with
Courtiers and Strangers; where if I should be in the least suspected, they
would presently put me in Prison, which would hazard a Discovery of the Sublime
Secrets? Does he not know, That Money commands all Things; and that the
Greatest Potentates, obey the Power of Gold? It cannot be imagined, but that a
Man in my Post, has a Thousand pressing Occasions for Money, which it is
troublesome to express. And I have had very wrong Notions of my Employment, if
I deserve on this Account, to be reproved and threatened with such Politic
Circumlocutions: For, the Secretary charges me, with Unwillingness to continue
in the Service of the Ever Happy Port: As if he thought my Fidelity were
corrupted, or that I had an Inclination to the Nazarene Interest.

I tell thee, my Gnet, Perfidy I ever abhorred. This appears to me, the most
terrible and odious of all Vices. I could bear the Guilt and Reproach of a
great many Crimes, which have less of Malice in their Constitution. I am not
ashamed of many Venial Frailties, which I daily commit, though the Law is
severe against them. But, could any Man accuse me of Willful Treachery, and
Ingratitude, I would pray instantly, That the Luminaries of Heaven might be
extinguish't, and that no Terrene Substance, might henceforth have in it the
least Potential Light: That so I might neither be capable of seeing my self, or
of being exposed to the Eyes of Others. And the better to escape the Confusion,
which would attend that Horrid Guilt, I would not only avoid Human Society, but
if it were possible, I would run away from my self.

After all this, methinks such a Temper need not be suspected, as averse from
the Interest, to which he has so solemnly sworn.

I would not have troubled thee with the News of any other Affliction; but, to
be suspected of what I never was Guilty of, and to be menaced in dark
Mysterious Terms, not by an Enemy, but by my Friend, and one who has in his
Keeping the Immortal Records of my Zeal and Integrity; This cuts me to the
Heart. And I had no other Way to ease my self, but by venting my Anguish to
thee.

If any of the Ministers will charge me with Weakness, or want of Ability to
act in this Station, I should have no Reason to repine: Since none of them can
think so meanly of Mahmut, as he does of himself. I boast of Nothing, but a
Loyalty to my Trust, incapable of being corrupted.

But I forget that I am a Mussulman, and therefore ought to be resigned to the
Will of Heaven in all Things, without Complaint or Murmur. Besides, I am
infinitely obliged, in many Regards, to the Reis Effendi; and therefore, he may
be allowed to take his own Advantages. Perhaps his Reproofs may be Just, and
it is my own Peevishness that hinders me from discerning it. However, I could
wish he would henceforth express his Resentments with less Obscurity, and not
give me Grounds to apprehend the Loss of his Friendship.

For, where I once love, I hate a Changes. And if thou be of the same Mind,
We Two shall continue our Friendship, to the Other Side of the Grave.

Paris, 30th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1650.
LETTER X.
To the Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
IF thou will permit me to learn Something from Husbandmen, They say, it is not
profitable to plough the Fields whose barren Glebe brings forth Nothing but
Briars and Thorns. Such are the Grounds of Passion and Anger among Friends. Let
'em lie Fallow for ever. Perhaps, thou will call it Presumption in me, to
challenge such a Relation between us. Or, if thou ownest the Title of a Friend,
thou will claim a Right to reprove me. Be it how it will, Reproofs make the
best Impression, when they are given with Mildness and Moderation. Especially
they ought not to be founded on a Mistake, or false Apprehension. For they
appear like Arrows discharged in the Dark, which being shot at Random, may by
giving on undeserved Wound, make an Enemy of a Friend, or at least render a
Friend suspected to be an Enemy.

But I tell thee, I will not blow up the Embers of a Fire, whose Flame is
extinguished long ago, and whereof by this Time, I hope, there remains not the
least Smoke. I never loved to add Fuel in such Cases: Otherwise, had I returned
an Answer to thy angry Letter, in the Heat of my Resentments, I might have
played the Incendiary: For I had both Matter enough, and Passion sufficient, to
ventilate the already kindled Sparks. And, of this, I know thou art sensible.

Well! to make the best Construction of it. The Hasnadarbassy was affronted, I
believe, at the Freedom I took in advising him; not knowing that I had Positive
Orders to do so, even to the First Minister of State, if I saw Occasion. And to
vent his Choler, he misrepresented the Business to thee, hoping by thy Means,
to awe me into a fawning Acknowledgment of my supposed Crime. If this was thy
Intention in writing that sharp Letter, I smile at his Mistake; but am sorry
for thine, because I esteem thee my Friend. 'Twas but an Oversight in you both;
and so let it pass.

Thy Friendship I court, and refuse not his, nor that of any Officer of the
Seraglio. I honor all the Bassa's and Ministers of the Imperial Port: I show
to every one the Respect that is due to his Quality: But I am commanded to
write with Freedom to all, and not to speak, as if I had the Bearded Head of a
Barly-Stalk on my Tongue, which is apt to slip down a Man's Throat, and
threatens to choke him that speaks whilst it is in his Mouth. This Charge I
first received from the late Vizir Azem, Mahomet, and it has been since renewed
with fresh Instructions from others of Great Authority. They all tell me with
much Assurance, That one chief End of my being placed here, is, that being out
of the Limits of the Ottoman Empire, yet holding a constant Intelligence, I may
freely and without Fear, reprove the Vices and encourage the Virtues of the
Greatest Governors and Princes among the Mussulmans. Nay, I am threat'ned with
Punishment and the Sultan's Displeasure, if I neglect any Opportunity of this
Nature, or appear Partial and Timorous in my Reprehensions.

For, it seems, this is judged the most ready and effectual Method, to reform
the Corruptions that are crept into Court, Camp, and City: Since every Man is
obliged to communicate the Letters which he receives from me: And they are all
Registered by thy Care: Whereby the Grandees are compelled, either to live
within the Limits of Justice, and their Duty, or else to be the Discoverers of
their own Faults: Which will unavoidably bring them into Disgrace, if not to
the Loss of their Liberty and Lives; or at least put them to the Expense of
costly Presents, to make their Atonement. And, thou know, some Men would
almost as willingly part with their Lives, as their Money, which is their God.

After all this, I hope thou will not be displeased, if I perform my Duty. It
is not for me to be frightened with Menaces, or softened with Bribes. My
Integrity is Proof against the Pride of the one, and Baseness of the other. Yet
I have a great Esteem for the Treasurer and thee, with other Ministers who are
my Friends. I could, to serve such, freely hazard my Liberty, Fortune, and any
Thing but my Honor, which I value at a far higher Rate than my Life.

Thou may Register it for a Truth, That an English Ambassador was in the
6th. Moon of this Year, murdered by Villains in his Chamber at Madrid, the
Capital City of Spain. There has been also a Great Battle fought in Scotland,
between the Army of that Nation, who maintain their King's Interest, and the
Forces of the New English Commonwealth; wherein the Latter obtained a Signal
Victory, having killed Three Thousand on the Spot, taken Nine Thousand
Prisoners, Fifteen Thousand Arms, Two Hundred Ensigns, and all their Cannon and
Baggage. These are Prosperous Beginnings of that Republic, and redound much to
the Honor of the English General, Oliver, whom every Body extols for a Gallant
Man. And I can assure thee, these Western Nations are not barren of Hero's.

Principal Scribe of the Mussulmans, I wish thy Heart may be a Transcript of
the Best Copies.

Paris, 1st. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1650.
LETTER XI.
To Solomon Aga, Principal Chamberlain of the Women's Apartments in the Seraglio.
THese Tartars, of whom I spoke to thee in my last, are a strange Sort of
People in their Manner of Life. But we must not censure 'em, because we are of
Kin. I speak not of my self: For, though I am an Arab, yet the greatest part of
those who serve in the Armies of the Grand Signior, are descended from the
Crims. I mean, the Spahi's and Timariots. Thou know the Originals of these
Military Orders, and that they are more Honorable than the Janissaries; who
being Strangers by Blood, are brought up to the Lure of the Seraglio. They know
neither Father nor Mother, (I speak of the Tributary Youths) nor have they any
Partial Fondness for their Native Country. They are Educated in a perfect
Resignation to the Grand Signior, and his Chief Ministers: Yet often disobey
both, and not seldom put 'em in Hazard of their Lives. How many Vizirs, have
been sacrificed to a cunning Janizar-Aga; who to prevent his own Ruin, has
tempted those under his Command to Mutiny, and accept of no Atonement for
their pretended Grievances, less than the Life of the First Deputy. The Rigid
Fate of Sultan Osman, Uncle to our present Sovereign, will not be forgot by
those who love the Ottoman Family better than these Bastard-Hectors. Shall the
Empire of True Believers, be ruined by Renegades? Besides, their Discipline is
extremely corrupted; they marry, and follow Mechanic Trades, repugnant to the
Austere Manners of the Primitive Guards, who were wholly attentive to Martial
Exercises.

Were this to come to the Hands of a Janizary, he would curse me to the Pains
which have neither Medium nor End. Yet I had once a Friend of that Order,
Cassim Hali, the Chief Aga, a brave Man, and of the same Sentiments as my self.
He sought to reform that Disorderly Militia, but was opposed by the Wise Men in
Power. He would freely have sacrificed his own Grandeur and Interest, for the
Good of the Mussulman Empire; but was over-awed by those, who had no other
Interest, but in its Ruin.

Thou know who I mean; Neither am I a Stranger to the Heroic Bravery of the
Faithful Solomon, when he bearded the Bostangi Aga on that Account. That
Gardener was of the Faction, being the Son of a Janizany, and trained up in all
the Practices of the Seditious. It makes me ashamed, when I hear the Infidels
upbraid the Wisest of the Wise, the Supreme Monarch on Earth with Folly, for
permitting this Insolent and Mutinous Soldiery, to continue in the Empire. And
I tremble to think, That one Time or other, the Renowned Offspring of
Ertogriel, will owe its Ruin and Catastrophe, to these Disloyal Vipers, whom
it cherishes in the Seraglio.

Much more assured is the French King, of his Guard of Switzers; whose Fidelity
was never stained, with the least Infamous Brand of Perfidiousness, in taking
up Arms against their Master, whose Bread they eat. These are Mercenary
Soldiers, who travel out of their Native Country, to serve Foreign Princes; and
will shed the last drop of their Blood, rather than betray their Trust.
Therefore they are admitted into the Palaces, and nigh the Bed Chambers of the
Pope, and the King of France, with full Confidence of their Valor and
Integrity.

As for their Country, it is barren and poor, consisting chiefly of Rocks and
Deserts: Which occasions the Youth, who are generally very strong and hardy, to
seek their Subsistence Abroad, by serving in the Guards and Armies of
Neighboring Monarchs and States.

Some Regiments of the Switzers, now serve in the Wars of Candy, under the
Standard of Venice.

There are Vessels arrived lately in some of the French Harbors, which bring
News of the Ill Success of our Arms in the Siege of Candia, the Chief City of
that Island. They talk, as if above Two Thousand Mussulmans were blown up in
the Ninth Moon; and that Chusaein Bassa, discouraged by this Loss, and with the
Inconveniences of the approaching Winter, was forced to raise the Siege, in
the Moon of October.

The French magnify the Valor of the Knights of Malta, who signalized
themselves by many brave Actions, during this Siege. And if all be true, that
is related of these Christian Champions, we cannot in common Justice deny 'em
their due Character, and number some of them at least among the Heroes.

Otherwise, we should come short of these Western Nazarenes in Generosity, who
with no less honorable Expressions, extol the repeated Courage, and Invincible
Constancy of the Illustrious Chusaein, and the Alacrity of all the Mussulman
Soldiers, in the Service of our Great Master.

Yet they cannot forbear reflecting on the Cowardice of the Janissaries; who
after that fatal Blow, had they stoutly maintained their other Posts, that
brave Bassa would not so soon have quitted the Siege of this Important Place.

As for other News, I have little to acquaint thee with, save a seeming Calm at
present in this Kingdom of France, which has for the greatest Part of the Year,
been harrass'd with Civil Discords and Slaughters. Bourdeaux, the Chief City
which held out against the King, is now reduced to Obedience, the pacified
Monarch retired, and an Appearance of Peace.

The Queen of Sueden, we hear, was solemnly Crowned in the Tenth Moon of the
last Year, having declared for her Successor, Carolus Gustavus, Prince-
Palatine, and her Cousin.

In the same Moon, died the Prince of Orange; and soon after, the Count d'
Avaux, a French Grandee, and Minister of State.

In the mean Time, I rejoice to hear, that my old Friends are Alive and
Flourishing; and, that the Knot is not loosened, which was tied in our Youth.
May it continue firm, to the Day of the Earthquake, and to a Term Unlimited.

Paris, 29th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1651.
LETTER XII.
To Kisur Dramelec, Secretary of the Nazarene Affairs, at the Port.
IN the Name of God and his Prophet, what Occasion had thou to send me such
an angry Letter? Thou that art thy self but a Slave, as I am, to the Slaves of
him, whose Throne is above the Flight of the Eagle! Do thou think to frighten
Mahmut into a sordid Compliance with thy Ambition, whom Nothing can terrify, so
long as he preserves himself free from any Stain of Disloyalty? I tell thee,
I Am another Achilles, Invulnerable all over, save the Soles of my Feet, which
are the Emblems of our most tender Affections. There thou may wound me, with
the soft Arrows of pretended Friendship. But if once thou appearest, with the
Naked Face of an Enemy, I Am presently on my Guard.

Thou accusest me of many Crimes, whereof I was never Guilty; loadest me with a
Thousand undeserved Reproaches, and all to vent thy Choler: Threatening me with
Revenge, because I once excused the Lateness of my Address to Minezim Aluph
Bassa, then newly Vested by our Munificent Sultan, by laying the Blame on the
Badness of the Ways, or the Insolence of Soldiers by whom the Posts are often
intercepted in Time of War: or, in Fine, on thy Neglect in not supplying me
with more early Intelligence. Wherein it is easy to discern, That thou were the
last I would accuse to that Minister, though thou were Principally in the
Fault. For I was afterward informed, That the Posts were neither retarded by
any Impassable Roads, or stopped by the Orders of Military Men, but arrived
here at their accustomed Seasons. Wherefore thou have no Reason to be offended
at me, unless it be for the Shortness of my Accusation, and that it was
defective in Malice.

Thou would take it ill, if in my own Defense I should complain to the Vizir
Azem, of thy frequent Neglects in this Kind. But I scorn to vindicate my self,
at the Price of another Man's Disgrace and Peril. Only I advise thee, to
forbear threatening. It is a Reflection on thy Prudence, to menace a Man who has
no other Resentments of thy Passion, than to own himself obliged to thee, for
so open a Discovery of it. Would have the very Spleen of my Humor? I smile
at thee. Thou have made me as Jocund as Democritus. If thou know not who I
mean; He was a pleasant sort of a Philosopher, to whom all Human Actions, were
Objects of Mirth. There was another Whining Sage, that perpetually Wept. The
most Comical Passages, and such as moved all Men to Laughter, drew Floods of
Tears from his Eyes. His Name was Heraclitus. It is hard to determine, which of
these Two was in the Right. But I think I am not much in the Wrong, to be a
little pleasant with thee. Perhaps, it may put thee into a better Humor.
However, I would not have thee be displeased with thy self, for being of so
peevish a Disposition. It Is observed, That Passionate Men are always best
Natured, and free from secret Malice. Choler is as necessary as our Blood.
Without the Latter, we could not live; and if we were void of the Former, our
Lives would be as Vnactive, as that of Snails and Oysters. We should be
absolute Drones.

Hippocrates, the famous Physician, says, This Complexion is the most Noble of
all the Four, transforming Men to Heroes, and refining our Earthly Mold, to a
Constitution like that of the Immortal Gods; whose Bodies, according to the
Poets, consist wholly of an Ethereal Flame.

Therefore be not discouraged, neither repine at a Temper, which ranks thee
among those, to whom Sacrifices are made. On the other Side, take it not amiss
from Mahmut, if he tells thee, he has not Devotion enough, to become thy
Voluntary Victim.

Yet if I cannot be so Obsequious, as to throw my self away, by acknowledging
Crimes wherein I was never concerned, and for which I have a Natural
Abhorrence; rest satisfied at least, That I will serve thee as far as I can,
without entrenching on the Duty I owe to the Grand Signior. And be assured, I
will do thee no Harm, so long as thou observest that Rule.

In fine, I advise thee to order thy Steps, like a Man that is walking in the
Bogs of Egypt, where if he observe the Track of those who have gone before him,
he may be safe; but if his Foot slips, he Sinks in the Mire. Such is the Life
of Courtiers.

Paris, 18th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1651.
LETTER XIII.
To Minezim Aluph, Bassa.
IN the Beginning of the last Year I sent thee a Dispatch, wherein I acquainted
thee with the Imprisonment of Three Princes of the Royal Blood of France. Now
thou shall receive the News of their Liberty.

They were released by an Order from the King, on the 13th. Day of this Moon,
and arrived in this City on the 16th, which was Yesterday, attended by a
numerous Cavalcade, consisting of some Princes, diverse of the Nobility and
Gentry, and one would think, of Half the Citizens of Paris. Even those who
triumphed last Year, and made Bonfires for their Confinement; Yesterday
thronged out of the City, to welcome them Home with Acclamations of Joy, and to
congratulate their Release. So fickle and inconstant a Thing is the Multitude,
driven hither and thither, with every Artificial Declaration of Statesmen or
Pretense of Faction.

But there were diverse Princes and Noblemen, who from the First Hour of their
being seized, resolved not to leave a Stone unturned, to procure their Freedom.
The Grandees that were their Friends, retired to their Governments, and raised
Rebellions in the Provinces. All the Kingdom was harassed with Civil Wars. The
Parliaments decreed against the Court: And there wanted not Cabals of Seditious
Courtiers, even in the Palace of the King, to undermine the Royal Authority;
which the Cardinal Minister thought to establish, by the Imprisonment of the
Princes. In all Places, the King's Interest ran Retrograde.

Thou will not wonder at this when thou shall know, that the Princes of France
are not Slaves to the King, like the Bassa's of the most Serene Empire, who owe
all their Greatness, to the sole Favor of our Munificent Sultans. These
Princes, enjoy all that and more by Inheritance, which our Grandees acquire
only by their Merits, and the Smiles of their Sovereign. Hence it is, that
their Interest is rivetted in the Hearts of the People, who revere the Blood
Royal, in whatsoever Channels it runs.

Therefore thinking Men blame the Cardinal's Conduct in this Affair; saying,
There was neither Justice nor Policy in it. Indeed, if a Man's Wit is to be
measured by the Success of his Contrivances, the Censure of these People is
true. For the Cardinal seems to have made a Trap for himself.

As soon as he perceived the King was prevailed on by the Importunity of his
Uncle, the Duke of Orleans, and the Parliament of Paris, to release the
Princes, and that they had at the same Time earnestly begged of him, that this
Minister might be removed from the Court; he suddenly packed up his Movables,
and withdrew privately toward the Place, where the Princes were Confined:
Hoping, that though he had lost his First Point, yet he might make an
indifferent After-Game, by going in Person to the Royal Prisoners, and assuring
them, 'twas to him they owed their Release; since it was in his Power to carry
'em away with him, as also those who brought 'em the King's Mandate. For, he
traveled not without a considerable Guard.

It Is said, the Princes received him with seeming Compliments and Addresses of
Civility; promising their Friendship to the Cardinal, now a Voluntary Exile,
and in a worse Condition than themselves.

It is very strange that so great a Minister, who Inherited all that Absolute
Power, which his Predecessor Richlieu had at this Court, should thus on a
sudden abandon his Fortune. But it is thought, he is not gone to pick Straws.

However, he has by this timely Flight, avoided the Displeasure of seeing
himself compelled to depart by an Arrest of Parliament, which was published
within Two Days after he was gone; commanding him to depart the Kingdom, within
Fifteen Days.

The Wise Minister, foresaw this Disgrace approaching, and therefore thought it
more becoming his Honor, to depart of his own Accord: Having still the
Advantage, to reproach the State with Ingratitude, in that they have reduced to
such Streights, the Man by whose Auspicious Conduct, France had been elevated
to an Extraordinary Grandeur in Europe.

By this thou may comprehend, Illustrious Bassa, that there is no Stability
in Human Greatness; but that the Wheels of a Courtier's Life, run through
Unequal Tracks, often sticking in the Mire of the Valley, and not seldom
threatening to overthrow a Man, and cast him Headlong from the Precipice of a
Mountain. Against these Inconstant Turns of Fortune, I advise thee to be armed
with Moderation; since no Man can avoid his Destiny.

Paris, 14th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1651.
LETTER XIV.
To Isouf, his Kinsman, at Fez.
I Am glad to hear thou art alive. Thy Letter came in a good Hour; for I bear a
true Affection to those of my Blood, and have been particularly anxious for
thee these many Years. The Sun has Nine Times measured the Twelve Signs of the
Zodiac, since I received thy last Letter before this, or heard any News of
thee. It seems, thou have traveled a great Part of the Earth, during that Time.

'Twas kindly done of thee, to remember thy Sick Uncle's Request, when thou
were at Aleppo, in making Oblations for his Health to Sheigh Bonbac, the
Santone; and distributing Corban to the Poor, in Honor of Syntana Fissa.

Thou have sent me a large and satisfactory Account of thy Observations in
Asia: Yet I am sorry, thou had not Time to penetrate into the Religion and
Secrets of the Indian Bramins. I am more ambitious, to pry into the Wisdom and
Learning of those Philosophers, than into any other Species of Knowledge
whatsoever. Methinks, it is pity the Records of so vast an Antiquity, should be
concealed from the Rest of the World, and only known to those Happy Priests. I
protest, it is impossible for me to think of it without Envy. But perhaps, it is
the Will of Heaven, to lock up those Mysteries in the Remotest Provinces of the
East, as a Reward of their Constancy, in adhering to the Traditions of their
Fathers, which know no Origin; and as a Reproach to all other Nations, who in
Matters of Religion, have been Mutable as the Winds.

I have conversed with several Jesuits and others, who have been in the Indies;
but they seem to relate all Things Partially, out of a Natural Aversion for the
Manners of the East: And I knew not how to disprove 'em, till my Brother
Pestelihali undeceived me. He has also visited those Parts, and resided a
considerable Time in China. It is a difficult Thing for a Traveller, to keep
himself within the Bounds of Truth in his Relations; but, I believe, he has not
exceeded. Thy Journal, touches but lightly the Indian Affairs, not having
Leisure, as thou tellest me, to observe much. However, thou have made Amends in
thy Relations of Persia, Tartary, and the Land of the Curds.

I depend much on thy Promise of sending me a Journal of thy Travels in Africa.
To that Quarter of the World, I am much a Stranger; not having met with any
Authentic Relation, of the Regions in the South.

It seems, thou have been in Aethiopia, Lybia, Egypt; and, in Fine, all over
the Torrid Zone.

Historians tell Wonderful Things of these Parts. Herodotus mentions a Sort of
People in Africa, whose Bodies were more Venomous than Serpents. These
affronted once at the Winds, for driving the Sands of Lybia into their Country,
and filling up all their Wells and Streams, entered into a War against the
Kingdom of Aeolus; but the South Wind met 'em in their March, and buried 'em
under Mountains of Dust.

I do not represent this to thee as a Truth, though related by that Learned
Grecian. Thou may repute it for a Fable, as I do. But let this Passage be a
Hint, that I expect from thee none but Solid Remarks.

It would please me to be assured of one Thing, which perhaps thou have heard
of when thou wast in Barbary. Very credible Authors report, that when the
Phoenicians were expelled by the Israelites, and driven into this Corner of
Africa, they set up Two Pillars of Marble, whereon they Engraved these Words,
as a Lasting Monument of their Expulsion, WE ARE A REMNANT OF THOSE, WHO FLED
FROM THE FACE OF JOSHUA, THE ROBBER, THE SON OF NUN.

The First Invention of Ships, is by some ascribed to these People, whom
Necessity taught to seek Rest on the Unquiet Ocean; since the more Turbulent
Sons of Jacob, would not permit them to enjoy any Repose on the Land, having
harassed 'em from one Place to another, till at length they drove 'em to the
very Borders of the Earth. But, thou know, the Chinese pretend to the Use
of Ships, many Thousand Years before this Depredation of the Israelites. Every
Nation aims to be esteemed the most Ancient. And when there was formerly a
Dispute between the Egyptians and Scythians on this Point, it was adjusted in
Favor of the Latter; but the Chronologies of the Chinese and Indians, far
oxceed all others in the World. For they seem to outstrip Time it self in
Antiquity; at least, they transcend the Common Date of the World's Creation.

I have heard a Traveller assert, That as he was journeying through the Deserts
of Lybia, he discovered an Altar of Stone, with this Inscription on it, in
Grecian Characters, I POLYSTRATUS OF ATHENS, HAVE CONSECRATED THIS ALTAR, TO
ALL THAT IS GOOD IN HE AVEN; AND IF THAT ALL BE BUT ONE, AS SOME SAY, MAY THAT
ONE ACCEPT MY VOWS.

I desire thee to inform me, Whether thou have ever seen or heard of such an
Altar, when thou were in those Parts. You Travelers, must expect this Kind of
Trouble from your Friends. Every Body is Naturally Inquisitive, and Desirous of
Knowledge.

'Twill be acceptable also, to send me an Abstract of the Present State of Fez.
I should be glad to hear of the Health of Abdel Melee Muli Omar, the Superior
of the Magnificent College in that City, built by Al' Habu Ennor, King of the
Country. They say, it cost him Two Hundred and Forty Thousand Sequins.

It Is added, That in Fez there is a Mosque, near Half a League in Circuit: In
which are as many Gates, as there be Days in the Revolution of a Moon. And that
the Number of the Pillars which support it, is equal to the Year of the Hegira
wherein it was Founded; being encompassed also, by Seventeen High Minarets;
besides Innumerable Domes and Terasses. Having also 900 Lamps burning in it by
Night, and 300 Windows to let in the Light of the Day. The Revenue of this
famous Mosque, is said to be 36500 Sequins a Year. They relate many other
things of Fez, and the Provinces belonging to it. Of all which, I desire thee
to send me a Distinct Account.

I had almost forgot one Passage, which I have read in the Ancients, concerning
a certain subtle African, whose Name was Psaphon. This Man had trained up a
Parrot, to repeat very frequently these Words, Psaphon is a Great God. When the
Bird had perfectly learned his Lesson, he let it loose; which being accustomed
to a Domestic Life in a Cage, fled not presently to the Fields, but perched on
the Temple of the Town, where it was heard by the People, to utter the
aforesaid Sentence aloud, and very often. They Ignorant of the Quality of
Parrots, and led with Native Superstition, esteemed it an Oracle from Heaven.
Wherefore immediately flocking to the House of Psaphon, they offered Sacrifice
to him, and in all Respects treated him as a Divinity.

Whether this Story be true or no, it is certain, Idolatry had no better
Foundation, than Artifice and Lies: Unless we shall conclude with the Poet,
That Fear made the First Gods in the World. Cousin, let there be a frequent
Intercourse between us. It will be profitable to thee and me.

Paris, 5th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1651.
LETTER XV.
To Kerker Hassan, Bassa.
IT IS a Custom in the Court of Rome, that every Nation of the West, has a
Protector among the Cardinals there, who are Princes of the Roman Church. Such
I esteem thee, in the most Exalted Court of the East.

Arabia gave thee thy first Breath: But thy own Merits have lifted thee up to
the Dignity of a Bassa, a Prince of the Ottoman Empire, whose Limits far exceed
those of Modern, or even of Ancient Rome.

It Is from hence, our Countrymen address to thee, as to their Patron; using thy
Power and Mediation with the Grand Signior, in all their Necessities.

Among the Rest, wonder not that the humblest of thy Slaves, Mahmut, the Son of
thy Father's Neighbor, falls at thy Feet, in a Time of great Distress; in the
Agonies of his Spirit, the Hazard of his Fortune, and Peril of his Honor,
which he values more than his Life.

I complain not of the many repeated Abuses and Contempts I have received from
some in the Seraglio, to whom it belongs not, to meddle with Things out of
their Sphere, much less to discourage the Faithful Agents and Missioners of the
Grand Signior. Yet the Persecutions I have felt from their Hands, are such as
would drive another Man, less patient of Injuries, either to Revenge or Despair.

They have vilify'd all my Conduct in this Station; reproached my best Actions,
with the odious Characters of Imprudence and Disloyalty; and misrepresented the
smallest Peccadillo's (for which also, I have the Mufti's Dispensation) under
the Ignominious Title of Infidelity and Atheism. In a Word, they thirst after
my Blood: Nothing will satisfy their greedy Malice, but my Life.

I never was afraid to die, since I perfectly understood what it is to live.
Nor can I be fond of protracting my Breath, when my Great Master shall please
to call for a Surrender of it, for whose Service only it was given me. But it
would render the Scene of my Death Tragical, and strew my Passage into the
Other World with Thorns, to be sent out of This, under the Notion of a Traitor,
who have acted my Part, without a real Blemish.

Ikingi, that Learned Tutor of the Royal Pages, was the first that broached
this Enmity against me; (for I have forgot the Prevarication of Shashim Istham,
the Black Eunuch, since the Time he acknowledged his Fault with much Candor and
Ingenuity.) 'Twas that Athenian Sophist, who debauched the Integrity of my
Cousin Solomon; and persuaded the Unwary Youth, to enter into a Conspiracy
against his Uncle. But I reprehended my Kinsman's Folly in one Letter; and his
Answer, though late, convinced me, That he was not guilty of Malice, so much as
of Rashness and Credulity. I was extremely obliged to the Kaimacham, for his
Benignity and Friendship in this Affair. The good old Minister had a real
Kindness for me, and took no small Pains to penetrate into the Causes of my
Cousin's eager Passion, and Malice against me. At length he found it to be only
the Practices of Ikingi, who took Advantage of Solyman's Temper, equally Loyal
and Flexible; insinuated into his Youthful Mind, Monstrous Idea's of me; and,
in fine, set him a railing at me with a fierce kind of Liberty, wherever he
came. The wise Bassa soon opened my Kinsman's Eyes; brought him to his Sense;
and the Issue of all was, that Solomon writ me a Letter of Apology.

But since this, the Master of the Pages has laid new Trains for me, and drawn
a great many more to his Party. He has corrupted Mustapha Guir, an Eunuch, and
Page to the Old Queen; with whom I once held a Correspondence, and, as I
thought, had contracted a Familiarity and Friendship. But, it seems, it was
only an Appearance, without Reality. I could give thee a long List of those,
whom this Academick has taught to slander Mahmut: But I will not appear so
Revengeful. Besides, this is not the only Grievance of which I complain.

Shall I remonstrate to thee, most Excellent and Serene Bassa, the true Cause
of my Uneasiness? I am weary of living among Infidels. Favor me with thy
Assistance and Intercession, that I may have leave to retire from this Place,
and vindicate my self before the Faces of my Enemies. And having had that
Honor, rend'ring also a just Account of the Affairs wherewith I am entrusted,
I may visit my Native Country, and spend the Residue of my Days in Arabia, the
Scene of all our Prophet's Great Actions; the Place where I first drew my
Breath. I languish for the Aromatic Air of Admoim, the Crystal Fountains, and
Cooler Shades of that Happy Province. I long to see the Groves which encompass
the Village of my Nativity, the Turrets of thy Father's House, and the Mosque
of Hasen the Prophet. For, though I took no Notice of these Things in my Infancy;
yet having once seen 'em in my Riper Years, when I were able to make more
lasting Reflections, I shall never forget these delightful Objects, so long as
I live.

If this be an Infirmity, pardon it, Illustrious Arab, since it is Natural to
all Men. Thou thy self, have enjoyed the Pleasure of revisiting that sweet
Region: Pity Mahmut, who burns with Desire to taste the same.

Or, if this shall be thought too great an Indulgence, to the poor Exiled
Mahmut; yet it will be easy for thee, who art a Favorite, to obtain of the
Grand Signior, that I may at least be recalled from this Employment, and some
body else substituted in my Place. There are those among my Enemies, who are
Ambitious of the Fatigue; and Ikingi, my Old Friend, would exchange all the
Honors he is possessed of in the Seraglio, for this Obscure, yet Hazardous
Post. It Is Pity but such a Man's Thirst of Perils, should be gratified.

But if after all that I have said, my Superiors shall think it expedient to
continue me here, I am resigned: Only desiring, that from henceforth my
Slanderers may be suspected, as Men ill affected to the Sublime Port, for
traducing a Man that has waded through a Thousand Difficulties, Temptations and
Perils; and served the Ottoman Empire in this Station, fourteen Years, without
making a false Step, or Transgressing the least Point of his Instructions.

I hear that Chusaein Bassa, is made Vizir Azem. The French have a very great
Opinion of his Valor. They are generally Impartial Critics in Martial
Affairs, scorning to deny a Brave Enemy his Due Character.

We are at present barren of other News, save a New Arrest of Parliament
against Cardinal Mazarini, and all his Kindred and Creatures; whereby they are
declared Enemies to the State, and charged with a long Catalogue of Crimes,
whereof perhaps they were never Guilty.

Here are also some flying Reports of the Cardinal's Death: who, they say, has
poisoned himself for Grief of his ill Success in this Court. But I esteem this,
only as the Froth of his Enemies Malice, who really wish him Dead; and, to
discourage his Friends, give it out that he is so.

Serene Bassa, I commit my Affairs to thy Protection, beseeching thee, to do
the Office of a Countryman and a Friend, to the betrayed for God.

Paris, 26th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1651.
LETTER XVI.
To Chusaein Bassa, the Magnanimous Vizir Azem, and Invincible General of the
Ottoman Forces in Candia.
I Am not much above Forty Three Years Old, yet have seen Great Changes in the
World, mighty Revolutions in Kingdoms and States, and the Death of many
Sovereign Monarchs, Illustrious Generals, and Wise Statesmen. Doubtless, all
Sublunary Things, are subject to Vicissitude. There appears Nothing Constant
and Settled, but the Heavens and Stars. They indeed persevere in their
Immutable Courses, never change their Orbs, nor start from their Eternal Posts.
The Sun rises and sets at his accustomed Hours, and the Moon exactly observes
the determined Periods of her Increase and Wane; These vary only, as the
Seasons of the Year, with Exquisite Regularity, and Constant Returns.

But here below, there is an Universal Transmigration and Metempsychosis of
States, and Forms of Things: A Perpetual Flux and Reflux of Human Events. Men
die hourly, and others are hourly born to supply their Places. One Age treads
close upon the Heels of another. And we who live at present, as we walk in the
Steps of our Fathers, so shall we follow them down to the Grave, where our
Flesh by a new Metamorphosis, shall be turned into the Bodies of Worms, Insects
and Serpents: And what shall become of our Souls, is Uncertain.

I was born in the Reign of Sultan Achmet, from whom our present Sovereign is
the Sixth Emperor, that has ascended the Glorious Throne of the Ottomans. May
God grant him a Long Life, and a Series of Years blessed with Continual Health,
and Victory over his Enemies. I pray Heaven also, to perpetuate thy New Office,
to the last Period of the Sultan's Life; and in wishing this, I say all that
can be expected.

But when I reflect on the frequent and bloody Tragedies, that have been acted
in the Seraglio since I can remember, and the many Sacrifices that have been
made of Sultan's, Vizir's, Bassa's, and Principal Ministers of State, besides
the Massacres and Butcheries of Meaner Persons; It makes me melancholy, amidst
the Joys I conceive for thy late Exaltation; and fills me with Fears, lest my
good Wishes to the Grand Signior and Thee, who art his Right Hand, should by
some sinister Decree of Fate, be almost as soon disannulled as pronounced. I
pray Heaven avert my melancholy Presages.

The Death of the Old Queen (the News of which is lately arrived at this Court)
does but revive and increase my Apprehension, of Greater Tragedies to come:
Because one Act of Cruelty, still propagates another. Revenge is Prolifick, and
Mischief is never at a Stand. It Is true indeed, as it is not decent to insult
over the Ashes of Illustrious Persons; so neither has a Loyal Mussulman, any
great Reason to mourn for the Fall of a Woman, by whose Connivance her Royal
Son, and our late Great Master, Sultan Ibrahim, fell a Sacrifice to the Mufti's
Indignation. 'Twas an Unnatural Part in a Mother: And we may say, the Divine
Justice has overtaken her, in making her Grandson sign the Warrant for her
Death, with the Consent of that very Mufti, at whose Instigation she had
consented to the Murder of his Father.

Yet after all, may not she have left behind her a Party in the Seraglio, or at
least in the State, who will study to revenge her Fall; or, however, do some
Mischief to prevent their own? Let me not seem to contradict my own Arguments;
and whilst I plead against Revenge and Cruelty, appear an Advocate for those
Inhuman Passions. I do not mention the surviving Creatures of this Unhappy
Queen, to excite in thee, false Sentiments of Justice, suspicious Chimaera's of
a possible Conspiracy, and so stimulate thee to punish them by Anticipation,
for Crimes of which perhaps they never will be Guilty. I rather suggest these
Things, that after so many Tragedies in the Royal Family, a Stop may be now put
to future Mischiefs; lest, whilst Men pursue a particular and self-Interess'd
Revenge, the Contagion should spread, and Cruelty become Universal, and
Infinite.

Let it suffice, that no less than Three of our Sultans, have been Deposed and
Strangled within these Thirty Years: Not to mention the Deluge of Royal Blood,
that has overflowed the Private Chambers of the Seraglio, the Prisons of the
Ottoman Princes Brothers, or Sons to the Emperors formerly Reigning.

These were Barbarous Cures of untimely Jealousies; and it is Pity that such
Royal Massacres, should ever be repeated again. Why should the Posterity of
Ottoman, be in this Regard the only Unfortunate Princes on Earth? Were it not
much more Noble, and equally Wise, to take the Measures of Ethiopian Policy,
where, to prevent Sedition and Discords about Succession, the Princes of the
Blood are confined indeed, but to a very Pleasing Liberty: Whilst they have
Palaces, Parks, and Large Fields at Command; are served by a Princely Train,
and denied no Lawful Pleasures, within the Pale of their Restraint: For there
is an exceeding high Mountain in the Country, the Top of which is very
Spacious, containing large Tracts of Ground, many beautiful Seraglio's,
furnished with whatsoever can contribute to the Enjoyment of these Princes, or
at least to compensate for their Want of greater Liberty. This Mountain, is
environed with a high and strong Wall, having but one Entrance, and that
guarded by Soldiers; so that no Man can go in or out, who has not the Emperor's
Warrant, or at least a Permission from the Prime Minister of State: For he,
upon the Death of the Emperor, immediately calls a Council of the Supreme
Officers, who from among these Imprisoned Princes, choose him whom they think
most worthy to succeed. The rest, who never felt the Appetite to Reign (for
they are carried to this Place in their Infancy, and kept in perpetual
Ignorance of State Affairs) pass away their Time without Envy, or repining at
the Exaltation of their Brother. Addicting themselves wholly to the Innocent
Delights of that Rural Life, or to the Study of Books, whereof they have great
Plenty in their Libraries, and those altogether treating of Matters of Divine
or Natural Speculation. Whereby, though they know nothing of State-Artifices,
and Intrigues of Courts, yet they become able Philosophers, and versed in all
the Liberal Sciences.

Would to God our Ottoman Princes (I mean the Younger Brothers) had but half
this Liberty granted them. Then the Infidels would have no reason to call the
Exalted Port, a Nest of Vulturs.

But we must not find Fault with the Actions of our Sovereigns, though they
tend to the Scandal and Ruin of the Mussulman Empire. Yet I know to whom I
write these Things; having often heard thee declaim against this Barbarous
Custom, of shutting up the Royal Offspring in a Dungeon, without Light or
Comfort during their Lives; which many Times are also Cruelly shortened, by the
Hands of the Executioner.

But, turning our Eyes from the Tragedies of the East, let us fix 'em on the
Affairs of the Nazarenes in the West.

The chief Discourse at present is, about a Marriage lately solemnized between
the Emperor of Germany, and the Duchess of Mantua. She is his Third Wife
successively; for Polygamy is not allowed, even to the Sovereigns, in these
Parts, where the Priests bear all the Sway.

The Posts from Sueden inform us, of the Death of General Torstenson, of whose
Exploits in Germany thou have often heard. That Empire is very Unfortunate,
spending its Time and Vitals, in Unprofitable Assemblies and Consults, whilst
her Active Enemies, take whole Provinces from her with Ease: But this need not
grieve Us.

Great Atlas of the Mussulman Empire, I wish thee the Continence of Scipio, the
Fortune of Alexander, and the Temperance of Cato; who when he was marching
through the Sands of Lybia with his Army, all ready to expire with Thirst, and
one of his Soldiers brought him his Helmet full of Water, as a rare present in
that General Distress gratified the Soldier for his Gift, but spilt the Water
on the Ground, saying, That since there was not enough to satisfy the Whole
Army, he would not taste a Drop, and that he was Unworthy to be a General, who
would not endure as much Hardship as the meanest Soldier.

Paris, 26th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1651.
LETTER XVII.
To Nassuf, Bassa of Natolia.
PRaise be to God, Lord of the Seven Heavens, and of all that is within their
Circumference: These Western Nazarenes, are always a quarrelling. They are
resolved to do their Parts toward the fulfilling the Mussulman Predictions, and
those of their own Prophets. It makes me smile, to see these Infidels employing
their Arms against each other, contending about Petty Rights and Possessions,
whilst they neglect the General Conservation and Defense of Christendom, from
the Impetuous Torrents of our Invincible Armies.

The Elector of Brandenburgh, is entered into the Duchy of Mons with
considerable Forces, pretending to adjust, I know not what Differences, between
those whom they call Catholics and Protestants.

'Twould be too tedious for a Letter, to run back to the First Original of this
War, and trace it down from above a Hundred Years ago to the present Time.
Besides, it is of no Import to a Mussulman, to hear a long Story of the
Marriages, Deaths, Heirs, and Law-Disputes of these Petty Infidel-Princes. Yet,
that thou may know something of it, I will relate the whole Business as
briefly as I can.

In the Year 1546. William Duke of Mons, Juliers and Cleves, married Mary the
Daughter of Ferdinand I. Emperor of Germany, and by this March obtained of the
Emperor (whom they call Caesar, as they did the Ancient Emperors of Rome,
whose Successor he pretends to be) some Privileges, touching the Succession of
his Children, and their Right to his Dominions: and particularly, that this
vast Estate should not be Divided, but rest in the entire Possession of One
Heir-Male, or in Default of that, it should descend to the next Female, which,
as I am told, is a Custom in Germany; that so the Grandezza and Authority of
Princely Families, may be supported.

I will not trouble thee with the Particulars, which would take up a Volume.
But in short, it appears, that notwithstanding all the strict Provision that
was, or could be made; this great Estate, after it had remained Sixty Years
United, was at Length Divided between Two Princes, both claiming an Equal Right
to the Whole; Yet to prevent Wars, and Effusion of Blood, each was contented
with Half. These were Wolfgang, Duke of Newburgh; and Ernest, Marquess of
Brandenburgh. In whose Families, the Parted Succession has continued to this
Day.

The Occasion of the present Quarrel, is their Difference of Religion; the Duke
of Newburgh being a Catholic, and he of Brandenburgh a Protestant. It seems,
the Brandenburghers had formerly made Inrodes on those of Mons and Juliers,
carrying away Captive their Priests and Dervises from their Altars and
Convents, and detaining them in Servitude, for many Years, contrary to certain
Articles that had been drawn up between 'em. They also used them with great
Cruelty, and committed a Thousand Insolences on the Roman Imaums, wherever they
got 'em in their Power.

Thus their Affairs continued, till the late Agreement at Munster. Since which
Time, the Duke of Newburgh endeavored to free his Subjects from their former
Calamities, and restore things to their Ancient State.

The Elector of Brandenburgh, making this an Occasion of War, has now invaded
the Dominions of the said Duke. He is not gone in Person, but has sent a good
Soldier, whom they call Otho Sparr, with Four Thousand Men to begin the
Campaign; who, it is said, will be followed by a greater Army.

But before he took the Field, the Elector of Brandenburgh had an Interview and
Conference with the Duke of Saxony about this Affair, who is also a Protestant:
So that it is thought, no small Disturbance will arise in the Empire. All Joy
and Peace to True Believers!

He of Brandenburgh, has caused a Declaration to be spread abroad full of
Specious Pretenses, that so his Conquests may be the more easy. He talks of
nothing, but restoring the People of Juliers and Mons to their Ancient
Liberties and Rights, both in Civil and Religious Matters; promising the
fairest Things in the World, to those that obey him, and receive his Armies
with Friendship: On the other side, threatening to treat those who resist him,
with the utmost Severity that is due to Traitors and Rebels. And all this, for
the Sake of Two or Three Insignificant Ceremonies and Opinions, wherein they
differ; mere Trifles, Litteral Whimsies, the Sport of their Doctors, the Spawn
of Wanton and Luxuriant Brains. For, no greater was the Original Difference
between the Lutherans, and those of the Roman Church. One will be saved by the
Strength of his Fancy, which he calls Faith, without doing any Good Work
toward it: The Other toils all his Lifetime to merit Heaven, and thinks he can
never do enough to obtain his End. He wears out the Pavement of Churches, and
makes the Skin of his Knees like that of a Camel, with perpetual Kneeling, and
Praying to Images and Pictures. And after all, they may be both damned, for
ought I know, for their Ill Lives. They tear and devour one another like Wild
Beasts, and think to gain Paradise by their Unnatural Zeal.

The Duke of Newburgh has published a Manifesto against the Proceedings of
Brandenburgh, and solicited the Duke of Lorrain's Aid, as also that of
Leopold, Archduke of Austria. What will be the Issue, no Man knows; but
oft-times, a small Spark kindles great Fires: And it is not impossible, that
this little Feud, may set the whole Empire in a Flame.

Mighty Bassa, I pray Heaven bless thee with Peace, Health, and thy due
Revenue. If these be not enough to make thee Happy, I wish thee an Increase of
Honors, and all the Glorious Fatigues which Mortals court as their Way to
Bliss.

Paris, 20th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1651.
LETTER XVIII.
To Useph Bassa.
SUspect me not: I have an equal Esteem for thee, as I have for the other
Bassa's and Ministers of the Divan. But I find it difficult to please any. They
are Captious, and every one would have all my Letters addressed to himself: As
if I were placed here to serve Particular Interests, and not the Public.
However, I cannot but acknowledge the tacit Honor they do me, in being so
covetous of poor Mahmut's Correspondence. I wish I were in a Condition to be
more Partial: Then I would quickly make thee and some others sensible, which
are the Persons, for whom I have a peculiar Regard.

But as the Case is at present, I must observe the Instructions I have
received; and, by Turns, write to All.

Wherein, if I fail of Arithmetical Proportions, I will make Amends by the
Rules of Geometry: If I write but seldom to some, I desire that the Length of
my Letters, and Solidity of the Matter, may be accepted as a proper Supplement.

But, thou have no Reason to complain on this Score, unless it be of thy self,
for traveling into Remote Countries, whither I knew not how to follow thee
with Letters, or any other Way. Besides, the former Friendship that has been
between us, is a sufficient Counterscarp against all Suspicion of Neglect on my
Part, who am a Thousand Times obliged to thee for so many repeated Favors. For
the sake of God therefore, and All that is Good, wound my Heart no more with
these Undeserved Reproaches: But believe steadfastly, That Mahmut can never be
ungrateful and false.

Thy Letter is a Miscellany, of Friendly Complaints and Compliments. Thou
give me a Character, to which I do not pretend. It Is true, indeed, and I
thank God and my Good Stars for it, that I was not born Blind, Deaf, or Dumb.
Nature gave me my Senses free from any Manifest Defect; and I have an
Indifferent good Memory. When I was Young, I had an Inclination to read Books;
and Fortune has since favored me, with many Opportunities for that Purpose.
But I found the most profitable Study to be, that of MY SELF, to which all the
Laborious Pains of the Schools and Academies, serve only as a certain Gradation
and Discipline. Nay, without these, a Man may attain all the Knowledge that is
Necessary to the Accomplishment of his Nature; For so did the First
Philosophers, before Books or Letters were extant. If thou will be perfectly
Wise, read the ALCORAN, and the UNIVERSE; After that, peruse THYSELF. Thou will
find, Matter of Wonder and Improvement in Each; but most of all, in the Last:
For, Man is a Medley of all Things.

Were this Lesson well learned and practiced in the Court of France, there
would not be so many little Quarrels among these Infidels; or at least, such
Petty Originals, would not produce so many Fatal Consequences.

From the first Time the Prince of Conde with his Brothers, were released from
their Imprisonment (whereof I have given an Account to Minezim Aluph) there
appeared much Coldness in the Queen's Reception of 'em, and their Addresses to
her. On both sides they were at a Loss, how to behave themselves: For, all
their Civilities were forced. It Is true, there was a Splendid Umbrage of
Reconciliation; but it soon vanished. Their suppressed Passions, discovered
themselves by Degrees, and at length broke out into open Enmity.

The Queen appeared full of Condescensions, and Favors: But Young Conde, is as
full of his Merits and brave Exploits; remembering what Services, he has done to
this Crown. Besides, he is not void of Suspicion and Jealousy, lest all those
Excesses of Royal Kindness are strained, only to render him more secure, and so
entrap him a second Time with greater Advantage. The Horror of his First
Imprisonment, is yet fixed in his Mind; from whence it will not be easy to
efface it. Three Principal Servants of the Queen, were Banished, to remove his
Fears: For, he imagined them to be Instruments of Correspondence between the
Queen and his old Enemy, Cardinal Mazarini. Yet she published a Declaration,
signifying, That the Cardinal should be for ever Banished, not only from the
Court, but from the Kingdom.

And this Moon, the King being come of Age, invited the Prince to the
Ceremonies usual on such Occasions: Which Conde apprehended as a Snare, and so
fled out of Paris.

The Event of these Emergencies, is yet in the Secret Pages of Destiny: But in
all Likelihood, a Civil War will follow. People are whispering, caballing and
making Parties on both Sides. All the Powder in Paris, is engrossed and gone;
but no body knows by whom. Some say, the Prince is posted into Flanders; others
report, that he is retired to his own Government, there to raise an Army. The
most knowing averr, That wherever he is, he has Two Hundred Thousand Sequins in
Bank, to give Life to his New Designs, let them be what they will.

Think not this News of small Importance, Serene Bassa: But when thou hear
of the Civil Wars among Christians, especially in the Realm of France, the
First and most Victorious Empire of the West, look on thy Right Hand and on thy
Left; for our Holy Prophet, or his Herald, is near at Hand.

Paris, 22d. of the 9th. Moon, the Year 1651.
LETTER XIX.
To Solomon, his Cousin, at Constantinople.
THou see, what thy Libertinism has brought on thee. For my Part, I am Sick
in reading thy Letter, full of Melancholy, and the worst Kind of Enthusiasm.

Had thou followed my Advice, or if that be contemned, had thou but obeyed
the Precepts of thy Father, an honest Man, and one that went down to the Grave
in Peace, thou would have Lived as happily as other Men; but now thou art
overwhelmed with Hypochondriack Vapors, and Dreams of a sickly Brain. I
counsel thee, to purge thy self with Hellebor; for thou have more Need of that,
than of Books. In all my Life, I never heard such Religious Nonsense from a
Mussulman, as thy last Letter is stuffed with.

I have not Patience to make Repetitions, or answer every Particular Whimsie of
thine. But in God's Name, what makes thee fright thy self with such a Wrong
Notion of Hell? It is a Common Maxim in Nature, That Nothing Violent, is
Permanent. Either therefore, the Pains of the Damned are not Infinitely
Intense, or else they are not Eternal in their Duration. Thou will say, The
Alcoran it self asserts the Eternity of those Torments. But do thou
understand the Figurative Manner of Speech used in that Divine Book, and in all
our Eastern Writings? Is it not Common to call a very High Mountain, the
Mountain of God? As if all the Mountains and Valleys of the Earth, were not
equally his. So, to express an Uncertain Length of Time, it is Customary to use
the Epithet [Eternal.] Thus, we in ordinary Conversation say in Arabia, I love
You Eternally, I will serve You, fight for You, etc. Eternally; and the same of
the Contrary Passions: And yet we all know, we shall live but a few Years.

But, granting that the Alcoran speaks in a Literal Sense; it does not follow,
That those Pains are without Intervals of Rest. We read of the Tree Zacon,
which grows in the Center of Hell: But who will interpret, what is understood
by this Plant?

Cousin, make use of thy Reason; and practice the best Things. As for our
Condition after this Life, trouble not thy self; for no Man knows, what will
become of him when he goes Hence. However, we cannot believe, the Supremely
Merciful Delights in Cruelty.

There is a Path, which the Eagle has not winged, nor the Serpent traced,
though it is obvious to both. But their own Rashness blinds them, and they
cannot discern the Way of the Wise. There are Men of towering Speculations, and
others very Crafty; yet neither one or 'tother, can grope out the Direct Road
to Bliss. If I may advise thee, let Nature be thy Guide. Do nothing, but what
Humanity prompts thee to: It Is this alone, distinguishes thee from other
Animals. Honor the Memory of thy deceased Parents, love thy Friends, and be
generous to thy Enemies: Do Justice to all Men: Observe the Purifications and
Prayers prescribed by the Law: But give no Credit to the Fables of Infidels. It
is common here among the Christians, to paint Hell with Horrid Flames, and
Devils flying up and down with red-hot Prongs, to toss the Damned from Fire to
Fire. And their Preachers make long and direful Harangues, on the same Subject:
When all the while, neither they nor we know, What or Where Hell is, or after
what Manner the Wicked shall be Chastis'd.

Only the Illuminated of God have this Standard of Truth; That both our Pains
and Pleasures after this Life, shall be Exactly proportioned to our Virtues and
Vices. There is no Malice or Injustice, in the Good Creator of All Things.

Cousin, once again, let thy Senses be awake, and suffer not thy Reason to
dream of Things, which have no Existence. For assuredly, God is the most
Impartial Judge of the Universe.

Paris, the 22d. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1651.
LETTER XX.
To Enden Al' Zadi Jaaf, Beglerbeg of Dierbekir.
I Have not the Honor to know thee in Person, but have heard of thy Fame. So
Mortals are unacquainted with the Secrets of the Fixed Stars; yet we observe
their Luster and Rank, and the Figure they make in those Remote Worlds.

Thy Exploits among the Curds and Georgians, are not unknown in these Parts.
The Franks that travel in the East, have transported hither such a Character of
thy Magnanimous Actions, as makes all Men of Honor in Love with thee: And I
have conceived a particular Veneration for thy Virtues. May God increase them
with thy Hours, and grant thee a Monopoly of Bliss.

Thou art placed in an Eminent Seat, and may with Reason be called Lord of
Lords, as thy Title imports; for thou art Possessor of the Terrestrial
Paradise, if we may give. Credit to the Tradition of the Ancients. They tell
us, that for a Time Adam dwelt there, with his Second Wife, and that the
particular Place of his Abode was an Island, encompassed with the Rivers
Euphrates, Tygris, Pison, and Gihon. From whence it was called Mesopotamia by
the Greeks; Which signifies, A Region environed with Rivers.

All the West of Asia, have a profound Respect for this Country. And the Jews
relate strange Stories of a Tree in Dierbekir, which grew Five Hundred Miles
high, in the Days of Adam; which they say, was cut down by an Angel, lest Man,
should climb to Heaven by it before his Time. For, it seems, Ambition was a
Vice, early as our Nature; and Adam was no sooner sensible that he was a Man,
but he aspired to be a God, or something like One: So great a Charm there is in
Honor and Authority.

They say also, that Abraham was born in this Region. However, it is certain, if
there be any Certainty in Records and Histories, that he resided there a
considerable Time. But thou know best, what Traditions thy Subjects have of
these Things.

The Chinese and Indians laugh at all this, as a Romance of Later Date, than
their Chronicles; which make those Extremities of the East, to be the Stage of
the first Mortals. Instead of Adam and Eve, or Alileth, they assert the Names
of the Original Parents of Mankind, to be Panzon and Panzona: Whose Offspring,
they say, continued Ten Millions of Years; but at length, were all destroyed
from the Earth, by a Tempest from Heaven. After whom, they tell us, God created
Lontizam, a Man with Two Horns, each as big and tall as a Tree in that Country,
which they call the Plant of God, being the Largest and First of all
Vegetables. This Man's Horns being Prolifick, according to their Tradition; out
of the Right, sprang a Thousand Men every Day for a Hundred Years; and as many
Women out of the Left, in the same Space. From whom descended all Mortals of
both Sexes to this Day; though we are much diminished in Bulk, through the
General Decay of Human Nature. For, these People affirm, That the First Race of
Men, were all Giants: But that through Intemperance and other Vices, their
Offspring shrunk by degrees into smaller Dimensions, till at Length they
arrived at the present Stature, and appeared like Pigmies in Comparison of the
Primitive Sons of Loutizam. In Confirmation of this the Indians show to
Travelers, some of their Temples hewn out of vast Rocks, with the Images of
those Gigantick Men, who they say, were employed in the Work. These they
honor, as Hero's or Demigods.

I do not relate this for Truth, but only to divert thee, in representing the
different Opinions of Men. God only knows, how to separate the Truth from
Falsehood in Histories.

But to return to Dierbekir: This Country is Famous for the Tower of Babel,
built by Nimrod and his Followers; at what Time, the Languages were confounded,
as Moses relates. It Is Remarkable also, for the Battle fought between the
Parthians and Romans at Harran, and for the Death of Caracalla, the Son of
Severus, Emperor of Rome, who was Murdered by Macrinus, the Roman General.
These Emperors were all called Caesar's, as the Kings of Egypt were called
Pharaoh's and Ptolomies* It seems, the Word Caesar, was first applied to Julius
the Roman Dictator, for that his Mother dying under the Pains which were to
give him Life, her Belly was ripped up, and he drawn forth from her Womb by the
Hands of a Surgeon. In Memory of which, he and all his Successors were called
Caesar's; that Word signifying [drawn forth by Violence] But, whatsoever the
Manner of his Birth was, this is Certain, that he and Forty of his Successors,
were hurried out of the World, by untimely Death: For, they either laid Violent
Hands on themselves, or were Murdered by Traitors.

If thou would have any News out of these Parts, the Chief Discourse at
Present is, of a great Victory obtained by the Polanders against the Cossacks
and Tartars. And I could wish this were all: But the Nazarenes are continually
made joyful, with the Success of the Venetians against the Arms of the
Invincible Empire. They beat us by Sea, and baffle all our Attempts by Land. We
have not got an Inch of Ground in Candia, during the last Campaigne, but lost
many Thousands of Men, and brought the Name of the Sublime Port and Victorious
Mussulmans, into Contempt and Scorn. Where the Fault lies, God knows. It Is too
Melancholy a Theme, to insist on Particulars.

Don Juan of Austria, has also besieged Barcelona by Sea and Land.

Several Arrests of Parliament, are here published against the Prince of Conde
and his Adherents; and, it is reported, the King will recall Cardinal Mazarini
from his Banishment.

Illustrious Prince, and Governor of a Happy Region, I beg thy favorable
Construction of this Address. And thus in Reverence I desist, full of Dutiful
and Affectionate Vows for thy Prosperity.

Paris, 19th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1651.
The End of the Second Book.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS. VOL. IV.
BOOK III.
LETTER I.
To Abdel Melech Muli Omar, President of the College of Sciences at Fez.
THou have formerly received a Letter from me, wherein I mentioned the Tenets
of a certain French Philosopher who maintains, That the Earth moves like the
Rest of the Planets, and the Sun stands still, being the Center of this our
World: For he asserts, that there are Many.

The Name of this Sage is Des Carts, Renowned throughout the World for his
Learning and Knowledge. H^ lays as a Basis of all his Philosophy, this short
Position and Inference, I THINK; THEREFORE I AM. In this alone he is
Dogmatical, allowing a Lawful Skepticism, in all the Uncertain Deductions which
may be drawn from it.

Pardon me, Oraculous Sage, if I expose before thee my Infirmities. I am
Naturally distrustful of all Things. This Temper puts me upon Perpetual
Thinking. And that very Act convinces me, of the Truth of my Being, according
to the Method of this Philosopher. But What I am, I know not. Sometimes I
Fancy my self, no more than a Dream or Idea of all those other Things, which
Men commonly believe do Really Exist: A mere Imagination of Possibilities. And,
that all which we call the World, is but One Grand Chimaera, or Nothing in
Masquerade.

At other Times, when these wild Thoughts are vanished, and my Spirits tired in
the Pursuit of such Abstracted Whimsies begin to flag, and that my Lower Sense
awaked by some present Pain or Pleasure, rouzes my sleeping Appetites: When I
am touched with Hunger, Thirst, or Cold, or Heat, and find experimentally, I am
Something that cannot be a mere Thought or Dream, but of a Composition which
stands in Need of Meat, Drink, Garments, and other Necessaries: Then, rather
than fret my self with Vain and Endless Scrutinies, I tamely conclude, I am
that which they call a Man, I lay the Sceptick aside, and without any farther
Scruples or Doubts, fall roundly to eating, drinking, or any other Refreshments
my Nature craves for.

But no sooner have I tasted these Delights, when my Old Distemper returns
again. I then consider my self as a Being, capable of Happiness or Misery in
some Degree, as I shall possess or Want those very Delights I just before
enjoyed. This is a sufficient Damp to a Thinking Man, when he knows, that he
stands in Need of any Thing out of himself. But it is far greater, when he will
take the Pains to number all the Train of his Particular Necessities, which he
is not sure he shall always be able to supply.

This makes me presently conclude, That as I am Indebted to Other Creatures for
my sensible Happiness, so I owe my very Being to Something beside my self. I
examine my Original, and find I am born of Men and Women, who were in the same
Indigent Circumstances as my self: And that it is not only so with my
Particular Family, but with all Mankind; our whole Human Race, being born
Natural Mendicants from the Womb. As soon as we breath the Vital Air, we Cry;
and with those Inarticulate Prayers, beg for Help and Protection from others,
without whose generous Aid we could not subsist a Moment: So poor and beggarly
a Thing is Man, from his Birth. This is the Condition of all: Neither is a King
any more exempt from this Common Character of Mortals than the Slave who sweeps
the Streets.

If I could have rested in this Thought, I should have been happy: For it would
have had this Influence on me, either to convince me, that I ought to be
content with the Condition to which I was born, or to rid my self out of so
despicable a State by Death.

But alas, one Thought produces another: And from the Contemplation of our
present Misery in this Life, I fall to thinking what will become of us after
Death. For, as we know not What, or Where we were before we came into this
World; so there is no Human Certainty, Whither we shall go, or in What
Condition we shall be, when we leave it: And therefore, it would be an
unpardonable Madness, to throw my self headlong into a State of which I have no
Account: And, to avoid the Little Miseries of this Life, which must have an End
one Time or other, cast my self down a Precipice (for ought I know) of
Intolerable Torments, which has no Bottom.

I hear the Philosophers talk of Immortality, the Poets of Elyzium, the
Christian Priests of Heaven, Hell, and Pargatory; the Indian Bramins of
Transmigration. But I know not what, or which I have Reason to believe, of all
these.

I speak after the Manner of Philosophers; for, if we come to Faith, the Case
is altered. Think not, I beseech thee, that I call in Question the Sacred
Oracles, the Revelations of the sent of God. But I only acquaint thee, how my
Natural Reason hatters me with Doubts.

I see Men every where professing some Religion or other; paying Divine Honors
to some Superior Being, or Beings, according as they have been Educated: Which
many Times tempts me to think, that Religion is Nothing but the Effect of
Education.

Then I wonder, how Men when they come to Years of Discretion, and their Reason
is able to Distinguish between Things probable, and mere Romances, can still
retain the Errors of their Infancy. It Is Natural for Children, to be wheadled
or awed into a Belief of what their Parents, Nurses, or Tutors teach them. But
when they come of Age, they soon rectify their misled Understandings, in all
Things, save the Affairs of Religion. In this they are Children still,
tenacious of the Sacred Fables of their Priests, and Obstinate in maintaining
them, sometimes even to Death.

It puzzles me to find out the Cause of so strange an Effect, That Men
otherwise endu'd with Mature Judgments, and an extraordinary Sagacity in all
Things else, should yet be Fools in Matters of Religion, and believe Things
Inconsistent with the Common Sense and Reason of Mankind.

I could never give Credit to the Histories of the Ancient Pagans, which
acquaint us with the devout Adoration they paid to the Creatures of the Painter
or Carver, did not I see the same practiced among the Christians: Or, that
those Wise Men of Old, could swallow the Forgeries of their Priests concerning
their Gods and Goddesses, were I not an Eyewitness, how bigoted the Modern
Nazarenes are to the Legends of their Saints, and the Jews to those more
Ridiculous Figments of the Talmud.

It perplexes me, to see Mankind generally laboring under so great a Darkness,
not so much the Effect of Ignorance, as of Superstition: To behold Men well
versed in Sciences, and all kinds of Humane Learning; yet Zealous Assertors of
manifest Contradictions in Matters of Divinity, rather than oppose, or so much
as examine the Traditions of their Fathers.

When I behold Mankind divided into so many innumerable Different Religions in
the World, all vigorously propagating their own Tenets, either by Subtilty or
Violence, yet few or none seeming by their Practice to believe what they with
so much Ardour profess; I could almost think, that these various Ways of
Worship, were first invented by Politicians; each accommodating his Model, to
the Inclinations of the People whom he designed to Circumvent.

But when on the other side I consider, there appears something so Natural and
Vndisguis'd, in the Furious Zeal, and Unconquerable Obstinacy of the Greatest
Part; I am as ready to Join with Cardan, and conclude, That all this Variety of
Religions, depends on the Different Influence of the Stars. This was a famous
Philosopher in Europe; and held, That the Religion of the Jews, owed its
Original to the Force of Saturn, that of the Christians to Jupiter, and Ours to
Mars. As for the Pagans, he assigns to them many Constellations and Aspects.

Thus there is so equal an Appearance of Truth and Falsehood in Every Religion,
that I should not know how, in Human Reason, to fix on any.

Superstition renders a Man a Fool, and Skepticism is enough to make him Mad.
To believe All Things, is above Reason; to give Credit to Nothing, is below it.
I will keep the Middle Path, and direct my Faith by my Reason.

That Faculty tells me, that if I were in inclined to Adore the Sun, Moon and
Stars for their Beauty and Influence, I might on the same Ground Worship my own
Eyes, without which I could not behold their tempting Splendors: Or, I might as
well pay Divine Honor to that more Intimate Sense, my Feeling, or any of my
other Senses, which only render me capable to know the Virtue of these
Luminaries. The fame may be said of the Elements, and of all Visible Beings.

What then shall I Adore, or to whom shall I return Thanks for all the
Blessings I enjoy (for, even in this Miserable Life, I taste some Happiness?)
To that Being, I say, shall I address my Vows and Supplications, for all the
Good that I possess and want? Is it to any Thing that I have seen or can see,
or that I can represent to my self under a Figure? Is it to any Part of the
Universe, or no? No: To the whole Complex together? No. I have a Thousand kind
Thoughts for the Sun, Moon and Stars, for the Elements, and many other Compound
Creatures. My Soul, and that of the World, are Unisons. But it is the Profound
Depth of Eternity, the Infinite and Immortal, who is the Diapason, and makes
perfect Harmony.

To that Being which has no Resemblance, neither is Divided into Parts, nor
Circumscribed with Limits; whose Center is every where, Circumference no where;
Who has neither Beginning nor End: To the only Omnipotent, from whom all other
Things flow, and to whom they all return; To him I owe all that I have, and
will pay what I can. And something by his Determination, I am Indebted, and
will discharge to thee, Orient Light of the Moresco Mussulmans; that is, the
Duty of an Humble Slave, in begging Pardon for this Presumption.

Paris, 14th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1652.
LETTER II.
To the Kaimacham.
'TWas the Contemplation of Isouf Eb'n Hadrilla, an Arabian Philosopher, That
all Men were at First Created in a State of War: For this Sage, gave no Credit
to the Writings of Moses, the Jewish Historian and Prophet; neither could any
Arguments persuade him to believe, That all Mortals descended from Adam. 'Twas
an Article of his Faith, That in the Infancy of the World, Men were Formed of
the Prolifick Slime of the Earth, Impregnated by the Vigorous Warmth of the
Sun, and that all other Animals had their Original in the same Manner: But that
in Process of Time, the Richness of the Seminal Soil being exhausted by a
continual Spontaneons Production of Living Creatures, there was no other Way to
perpetuate the Various Kinds of Beings, and multiply the Individuals, but by
the Ordinary Method of Generation. For which Reason, Nature seems to have
subdivided every Species into Two Sexes.

Hence, this Philosopher concludes, That at First there was no nearer Relation
between Man and Man, than there is now betwixt a Lion and a Sheep, or any other
different Kinds of Animals: Saving only, that as these are distinguished by
their Forms, into Four-Footed Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, and Creeping Things; so
Men assumed to themselves, the Character of Rational Creatures: And a Principle
of Self-Preservation, was the First Ground of a Tacit and Common League
between Men, against the Rest of their Fellow-Animals: Especially against
those, which made a more frightful Figure on Earth than we do, and seemed more
Rapacious and Inclined to Mischief; such as Dragons, Tigers, Bears, Lions, etc.

But notwithstanding this General Association of our Race, against the more
Salvage and Fierce Troops of Beasts; yet one Man still stood upon his Guard
against another. And all the Sons of the Earth, endeavored to maintain the
Posts, which Nature had allotted each Man; That is, the Place where he was first
Formed, and drew Breath. But Things could not last long in this State: For,
either by Instinct or Reason (call it which you will, says this Author) Men
being streightened for want of Fruits, or spurred on by some secret Desire of
Novelty, soon went out of their Bounds, and encountered each other, more by
Chance than Design: Whence arose, the First Occasions of Actual War. For, every
Stranger, appeared like an Invader: They Naturally startled and suspected each
other. Reciprocal Passions of Choler sprung in their Breasts; and every Man to
prevent the Effect of his own Fears and Apprehensions, rushed on his Neighbor,
who was on the same Ground as ready for an Assault as himself. Thus, an
Universal War Commenced in the World which by various Methods of Improvement,
was carried on by the Succeeding Generations, and continued to the Present
Times.

As for the Original of Governments, the Particular Time cannot be determined;
but it may be supposed, That Men Generally finding the Inconvenience of these
private Personal Combats, and by Degrees arriving to greater Maturity of
Experience, formed themselves at First into little Societies and Friendships,
or as they dwelt near one another, or as they agreed in some Common
Inclinations, Principles, and Interests. From which Small Associations, they
gradually spread into Larger Communities, living under certain Laws and
Obligations of Mutual Peace, Justice and Assistance toward each other, and of
Defense against their Common Enemies: Some living under the Form of a
Commonwealth, Others of a Monarchy; each Body of Men, setting up such a Model,
as best suited their own Interests and Necessities. From hence sprung the
Distinction of Nations, Kingdoms, and Empires. Thus far the Arabian Philosopher.

But without enquiring into the Truth of his Principles, one would think, that
some of these Western Nazarenes were his Disciples. And indeed, all Civil
Dissentions, seem to be grounded on the same Maxims: Whilst Men on the least
Discontent or Jealousy, lay aside the Obedience they owe to their Sovereigns,
claiming I know not what Natural Right, to defend themselves against the
Encroachments and Usurpations of others.

Thus, no sooner was it supposed here, that the King intended to recall
Cardinal Mazarini from his Exile; bu^ the Parliament of Paris, who are secret
Friends to the Prince of Conde, published an Arrest against the Cardinal,
whereby all Persons are forbid to contribute toward the Return of this
Minister; and Ordering, That his Library, with all his Movables, should be
sold to raise a Sum of a Hundred and Fifty Thousand Livres, which is promised
as a Reward to those who shall either take him Prisoner, or kill him. They also
Petitioned the Duke of Orleans, to make the utmost Use of his Authority against
the Cardinal. Who, thereupon raised Considerable Troops, and gave the Command
of them to the Duke of Beaufort.

In the mean Time, the Cardinal is not Idle; but with what Forces he has,
performs some Considerable Actions, in his own Defense. He has taken Prisoner,
an Eminent Councellor of Parliament. The Parliament sent a Trumpet to demand
his Release. This Messenger was rejected. Whereupon, the Parliament are taking
New Methods.

The Prince of Conde has sent a Letter and Request to the Parliament, desiring
them to suspend the Execution of the Arrest published against him; since the
Time given him to lay down his Arms, was not yet expired, and that the Cardinal
was returned into the Kingdom, contrary to a Prohibition, signed by the, King.

But, notwithstanding all these Traverses, Mazarini is come again to the Court,
which is now kept at P^^ctiers; Where he was received with Infinite Respect and
Caresses, by the King, the Queen, and all his Friends. Animosities daily
increase between the different Parties: Private Grudges are improved to Public
Factions: An Universal Peevishness, has possessed the Hearts of the French
Nation: They are alarmed and offended, at one another's Looks. If a Man smiles
too much or too little, in conversing with his Friend, it is enough to give him
the Character of an Enemy, or at least to render him suspected. So that he who
would live peaceably here at this Juncture, had need to be well skilled in all
the Secrets of Physiognomy, and make frequent Use of his Looking-Glass; lest
any Oblique Cast of his Eye, or Satirical writhing of his Nose, should be
Interpreted for Symptoms of Hidden Malice. For now they will spy Treason, in
every Feature of a Man's Face.

As for me, when I go abroad, I conform to all Companies; yet alter not my
Address. I neither play the Ape, nor counterfeit a Statue: But observing a
Medium, I pay a Civil Respect to all, without being Courtly or Rude: For this
Carriage, best Suits with my Circumstances. Hence it is, that no Body suspects
the plain, deformed, blunt, Crookback'd Titus of Moldavia, to be what I am
really, Mahmut the Slave of the Exalted Port.

Paris, 14th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1652.
LETTER III.
To the Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
THE Prince of Conde's taking up Arms, has more puzzled the Counsels of the
King of France, and more embarass'd his Affairs, than any Occurrence that has
happened since the Death of his Father.

I have already informed the Kaimacham and others, of all Passages hitherto,
relating to these Intestine Broils. Since which they seem to be improved into a
War, wherein Foreign Nations take a Part. After the Return of Cardinal Mazarini
to this Court, the Prince of Conde was driven to great Streights, being
compelled by the swift Marches of the King's Army, to retire to Bourdeaux.
Where, considering that it would not be so much his Interest to keep this
Place, as to increase his Forces, he sent Envoys to the King of Spain, and
Archduke Leopold in Flanders, to desire their Assistance.

The Former immediately dispatched away Orders for a considerable Body of Men
to approach the Confides of Gascoigne where the Prince had a great Interest;
And the Latter lent him Eight Thousand Men, to act on the side of Flanders and
toward Paris, as Occasion offered.

This is the particular Game of the Spaniards, to take Advantage of the Civil
Wars in this Kingdom, that so by assisting the weaker Party, they may balance
the Contesting Powers of the Nation, and keep 'em in a perpetual Quarrel:
Whilst in the Interim, they gain Ground; recover the Places which the French
took from 'em in Time of Domestic Peace, and so pave the Way to New Conquests.

In the mean Time, the Parliament sent Deputies to the King, beseeching him to
remember his Royal Word, by which he had for ever banished Cardinal Mazarini;
and representing to him the Fatal Consequences, which were like to proceed from
his Return. But the King, instead of complying with their Requests, caused an
Edict of Council to be Published, which justified his Conduct in this Matter.

He also writ a Letter to the Parliament, full of Complaints, that they had not
yet published any Order, to hinder the Entrance of a Foreign Army into the
Kingdom. But all signified Nothing, to Men passionately bent, to maintain the
Prince of Conde's Quarrel against their Sovereign. He has but few trusty Men in
that Senate, and they are overaw'd by the Rest. Besides, the Duke of Orleans
bears a strange Sway both in the Parliament and Country.

At the Instigation of the Prince, the Citizens of Orleans shut up their Gates,
when they heard the King was coming that Way in his return to Paris. Yet the
Country was open for the Prince of Conde, a Subject: He traveled up and down
the Provinces, to make New Interests, and confirm the Old; leaving the Command
of his Army in Gascoigne, to his Brother the Prince of Conti.

There have been many Skirmishes and Encounters, between the King's Forces, and
those of the Malcontents; and one fierce Combat, wherein the Prince of Conde
defeated the Vanguard of the King's Army, as he was marching to this City.
Whereby getting the Start of his Sovereign, he arrived here, and was received
in the Parliament, whilst the Monarch was forced to lie encamped in the Field.

The Prince found a different Reception, according to the various Humors of
People. The Greatest Part favored him, and he received infinite Caresses from
the Citizens of Paris: But met with some Opposition from Persons of Higher
Rank, and more steadfast Loyalty to the Crown. The Duke of Orleans is his
greatest Friend, and one for whom the Parliament have a great Deference: Not so
much in Contemplation of his Wit and Policy, as for the Sake of his near
Relation to the Crown; he being Uncle to the present King: Whereby he has a
Right to assume more Authority than others, in regulating the Disorders of the
Court; among which, the greatest is esteemed, that of Cardinal Mazarini's
Return.

In a Word, both Parties serve themselves of those who have the greatest
Interest, and are most likely to compose the Quarrel. The Exiled Queen of
England, and her Son, who have taken Sanctuary in this Kingdom from the
Persecutions of their Own Subjects, make it their Business, to mediate between
the Court-Party, and the Faction of the Princes.

The Prince of Conde also, sent Deputies to the King to represent to him, That
the only Means to give Quiet to the State, was to banish the Cardinal-Minister;
And as they were delivering their Address, Mazarini came in; at the Sight of
whom, they aggravated their Charge, and said to his Face, That he was the Cause
of all the EVILS, which the Kingdom suffered. The Cardinal Interrupting them,
turned to the King, and said, Sir, It will not be Just, that so Flourishing a
Kingdom, and, to whose Grandeur I have contributed all that lay in my Power,
should ruin it self for my Sake: Therefore I humbly entreat your Majesty to
grant, that I may return to my own Country, or whithersoever my Fortune shall
call me. No, no, replied the Queen (not without some Passion) This cannot be
granted; The King had never more need of your Counsels, than at this Juncture.
We cannot consent, that so Serviceable a Man should be Banished, only to humor
his Enemies. Therefore, let us hear no more of that.

The Deputies perceiving nothing of Hopes, returned to Paris. Then the
Parliament deputed others to go to the King, and Remonstrate the Deplorable
Crate of the Realm. This was done a few Days ago.

In the mean Time, we have been alarmed here in this City, with daily
Insurrections of the Multitude. The Occasion was, some private Orders which the
Duke of Orleans had given to the Provost of the Merchants, relating to his
Charge, and the Welfare of the City. This being misunderstood by the People,
who have not the Sense to distinguish the Good Offices of their Governors from
Injuries, put 'em all into a Tumult. They assaulted the Provost in his Coach,
as he was passing the Streets: And had he not escaped into an Apothecary's
Shop, they would perhaps in their Fury, have torn him in Pieces; For so they
served his Coach, as an after. Revenge.

I am weary of beholding the Malicious Quarrels of these Infidels. But when I
consider, that their Discords will be Instrumental to the Future Conquests of
the True Believers, I am Patient and Resigned.

However, it is one Comfort to me in this Thorny Station, that one Time or
other, instead of the perpetual jangling of Bells in Paris, I may again have
the Happiness, to hear the Muezins cry on the Minarets in Constantinople, There
is but One God, and Mahomet his Prophet. Or, if I shall not live to enjoy this
Wish; yet, in the Invisible State, I shall hear the same Cry, and shall be past
Doubt of those Things, whereof I have no Certainty in this Life.

Paris, 29th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1652.
LETTER IV.
To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior.
THE Christians seem to have too proud an Opinion of themselves, and set a
greater Value on Humane Nature than suits with Reason. They assert, That all
Things were made for Man, and style him Lord of his Fellow Creatures; as if God
had given him an Absolute Dominion over the Rest of his Works, especially over
the Animal-Generations; and that all the Birds of the Air, Beasts of the Earth,
and Fish of the Sea, were Created only to serve his Appetite and other
Necessities of Life. I remember a Letter I formerly sent to thee, wherein I
discoursed of the Cartesian Philosophers, and their Contempt of the Beasts, in
denying them Souls, or the Use of Reason.

Give me leave to entertain thee now, and divert my self with some farther
Remarks on this Subject. It Is a Refuge from Melancholy, when I can thus freely
discover my Thoughts to a Friend, who I know will not be Partial to the Truth.

I have been long an Advocate for the Brutes, and have endeavored both to
abstain from injuring them my self, and to inculcate this Fundamental Point of
Justice to others. This is owing to the Example and Philosophy of Mahummed, the
Eremite in Arabia, that Light and Glory of Religious Men. And were it not that
my Humor is to be doubtful in all Things, the Influence of his Conversation
would make me a professed Pythagorean, a Disciple of the Indian Brachmans, a
Champion for the Transmigration of Souls.

The last Letter save one I writ to that Solitary, was upon this Subject: Such
an one as would divert him in his Cave. It contained an Account of the
Primitive Manner of Life practiced by the Ancients, a Narrative of the Golden
Age, a History of Human Innocence, and the Steps which Men first took, to use
Violence and Cruelty to their Fellow Creatures. Now I will present thee with
some Additional Observations, some Remnants of Antiquated Truth, gleaned from
Philosophers and Historians, and winnow'd from the Chaff of Error and
Superstition.

Who would not believe the Beasts to be endu'd with Reason, when he beholds
them perform all the Actions of Rational Creatures, with more Caution, though
less Pride than Men? They are more Provident than We, and much more subtle in
avoiding any Affliction or Danger. Witness Thales the Philosopher's Mule, which
he often employed to carry Salt to a certain Market; but the Cunning Beast
finding herself over-loaded, when she was passing through a River lay down,
whereby the Water penetrating into the Sacks of Salt, melted it away and
lightened her Burden. And this was her Constant Practice; till the Philosopher
perceiving himself thus outwitted by his Beast, was resolved to circumvent her
another way. Wherefore, instead of Salt he loaded her with Wool, which he knew
would grow heavier by being Wet. But the wary Mule, sensible of the Difference
of her Burden, would couch no more in the Water; but seeing no other Remedy,
went forward on her Journey.

Who will not admire the Wisdom of the Fox in Cold Countries, which the
Inhabitants use as a Guide when they would pass over any Frozen Lake or River.
For this Creature going before them, lays her Ears close down to the Ice, and
listens to try if she can hear any Motion or Noise of the Water running
underneath: Which if she does, she will not venture on the Ice; but if all be
still, then by a Logical Deduction she concludes, The Ice is thick enough to
bear Passengers; and so she leads the Way, whilst the Men follow.

When a Dog is hunting in the thick Woods, and by chance comes to a Place where
Three Paths meet, he first Scents the One, then the Other: And perceiving that
the Game is not gone by any of those Two Ways; he throws himself swiftly
forward in the Third, without such a particular Application of his Nose. Which
is an evident Argument, that he makes use of the like Case we our Selves should
do.

And now I have mentioned this Creature, I cannot forbear celebrating their
Virtue and Fidelity: Whereof we have daily Experience; and there are many
pleasant Examples, recorded by grave Historians.

Such is that of Hircanus, a Dog belonging to Lysimachus, who would never
depart from the Body of his dead Master, but following it to the Funeral Pile,
leapt into the Fire, and was burned for Company.

But the Gratitude of a Lion to a certain Slave in Rome, is beyond all
Parallel. This Slave was one of those, who were appointed to combat with Wild
Beasts in the Amphitheatre, according to the Custom of the Ancient Romans, in
the Public Shows which were exhibited to the People. As soon as the Lion was
let loose in the Pavement, he ran furiously at the Slave, but coming nearer, he
stopped on a sudden, as one astonished: Then he came gently toward the Slave,
fawning upon him, and licking his Hand, which caused all the People to give a
Shout. The Emperor being present, and taking Notice of the seeming Friendship
and Acquaintance that was between the Slave and the Lion, sent for the Slave,
and enquired the Occasion of so strange an Accident. To whom the Slave made the
following Relation:

My Name, said he, is Andredus, and I am Slave to a certain Proconsul, who
having determined to Kill me, I made my Escape, and hid my self in a Cave:
Where I had not lain long, before this Lion, which you now see, came in, being
very lame of one Foot. As soon as he spied me, he came limping toward me, and
stretched forth the Paw that was Wounded, as though he begged of me to ease him.
Affrighted as I was, I took his Paw in my Hand, and pulled out a great ragged
Thorn, which stuck fast in it. Then I washed the Wound with my own Water,
whilst he lay very patiently till I thoroughly dressed it. The Ease he found by
my Application, made him fall asleep; and when he waked, he licked my Hands,
and showed other Signs of Affection and Gratitude. I lived with him thus, Three
Years in that Cave, and every Day he brought me a Share of his Prey, on which I
sustained my Self. But at Length Tired with this Manner of Life, I took my
Opportunity, when he was gone abroad, to make my Escape. I wandered up and down
Three days, when a Company of Soldiers meeting with me, and knowing to whom I
belonged, took me and brought me hither to my Old Master, who has Condemned me
to this Cruel Death. But it seems, Fortune so ordered it, that this Lion should
be taken about the same Time, and appointed to be my Executioner this Day. Yet
you see, he refuses to perform his Office, out of Gratitude to me for my former
Kindness.

The Emperor astonished and pleased at this Passage, gave the Slave his Life
and Freedom, bestowing also the Lion on him, which brought him in a Constant
Livelihood, by showing him to all People; who having heard of this Wonderful
Accident, were desirous to see both the Lion and his Tenant: For so they styled
the Slave; and some called him, the Lions Physician.

I should think I had said enough already to tire thy Patience, and make thee
forswear reading my Letters for the future, were I not well acquainted with thy
Genius, and know that thou delightest in Relations of this Nature, being no
Enemy to the harmless Brutes.

Whatever thy Sentiments are toward these, I dare be sure, thou art my Friend,
and wilt bear with my Importunity, when I strive to convince all Men, and
confirm my self in this Truth, That the Wild Beasts are not void of Reason and
Moral Virtue.

Paris, 20th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1652.
LETTER V.
To the Captain Bassa.
IN the Name of God, Superlatively Indulgent and Benign, Lord of Armies which
cannot be Numbered, Conservator of the Empire founded on his Own Unity; Praise
be to him, that has neither Beginning, nor End! What is the Reason, that we are
always Bassl'd by the Infidels? Every Year our August Emperor sends out mighty
Armies by Land, and our Fleets by Sea are termed INVINCIBLE, yet they are still
overcome by the Christians. Where the Fault lies, is best known to thee, and
the Generals to whom the Command of all is committed.

My Spirit is disquieted about these Things, and I am uneasy by Day, neither
does the Night accord me any Repose. This hot Weather, I go up to the Terrass
of my House at the Hour of Sleep, thinking that the Coolness of the Air would
incline me to Rest; but I can find none. I turn my self on the Leads to the
Right Hand and to the Left, yet all Postures are alike. Sleep has abandoned my
Eyes. My Zeal for the Empire of the Faithful will consume me.

One Night I made Solemn Preparations to welcome the First Appearance of the
Moon, after the Manner of my Countrymen. I sprinkled Water on the Floor of the
Terrass, and with a New Besom swept away all Uncleanness: I filled a Lamp with
the most precious Oil I could get in Paris, which having lighted at the going
down of the Sun, I placed directly on that Part which is nearest to Meccha.
Then I fell on my Face, and prayed the Eternal Source of Lights, That at the
Moment, when the Moon first Ascended our Horizen, an Intellectual Splendour
might shine in my Breast: That I might there, as in a Mirror, behold the Future
Fate of the Mussulmans, and the Events, which as yet, were hid in the Dark Womb
of Possibility.

My Petition was granted: The Night was in her Shady Course; the Stars on their
Watch; and Time, as from a Limbeck, destill'd the Silent Minutes, till the
Moment wherein the Neighbor- Planet, first peeped on the ^ops of Mountains. At
that Instant I saw, and heard Things (or at least I thought so) which I never
so much as dreamt of before, neither can I remember the Thousandth Part.

Believe me, Supreme Commander of the Marine, I do not boast, or Joy in this.
For, I think there can be no greater Affliction, than to be once made Partaker
of such a Bliss, and then to lose it, almost as soon as gained. Yet there are
some Footsteps of the Vision remaining on my Memory.

Methinks I beheld Armies of Mussulmans (for I thought 'em to be such by their
Turbants) making several Descents on the Shores of Italy: Methought I saw them
prostrate themselves on the Ground, and after a considerable Space of Silence,
the Air echoed with the Sound of Allah, Allah, much like the Noise of great
Cascades, or Falls of Water.

Then they seemed to disperse themselves all over the Country in diverse
Bodies. The Inhabitants of Rome, appeared all in a great Consternation. The
Chief Mufti of that Place, went forthwith into the Streets, followed by his
Cardinals, and Dervises, accompanied by an Innumerable Multitude of People.
They carried their Gods of Gold and Silver along with them; and being
apparelled with Garments of coarse Hair, they sprinkled Ashes on their
Foreheads, in Token of their Humility, and to pacify the Indignation that was
kindled against them.

But, Heaven was deaf to their Clamorous Vows, neither could all the Pomp of
their Superstitious Solemnity, dazzle the Eyes which are a Thousand Times
brighter than the Sun, penetrating into the darkest Corners of the Heart. In a
word, these Infidels seemed a while after to be in a great Confusion and Hurry,
running this Way and that Way to hide their Goods, and save themselves from the
Victorious Strangers. In fine, I saw the Crosses taken down from the Minarets
of the Mosques in Rome, and Crescents advanced in their place.

I do not relate this, as if I gave Credit to Visions and Trances: Perhaps all
this might be but a Waking Dream. Yet such Visionary Entertainments, happen of
Course to our Countrymen, when they observe the foresaid Ceremonies. But I tell
thee, I am not asleep at this Moment; and yet it appears to me a very Probable
Undertaking, for the Mussulmans to fit out a Mighty Fleet, which having a
sufficient Army of Land-Men aboard, might deliver them with little or no
Opposition, on some of the Wealthy Shores of Italy: And if it is not thought
worth the Labor to make New Conquests, which would be difficult to maintain;
yet at least our Soldiers by plundering only the Rich Temples and Convents of
the Nazarenes, might carry away Inestimable Treasures.

I wrote formerly to one of thy Predecessors about the same Matter, proposing
the Surprise of Loretto, as a very easy Attempt, and that the Booty would
infinitely surpass the Expense and Trouble: But Mahmut's Advices are never
regarded, till it is too late. We squander away Thousands of Men, and Millions
of Money to purchase little insignificant Islands, which are defended indeed
with seeming Vigor by the Christians; but it is rather to amuse us, than out of
any real Value they have for those Places.

It is only a Maxim of Western Policy, thus to give Diversion to the Arms which
are destined to subdue All Nations. They sport themselves, to see the Flower of
the Eastern Militia consumed in their Trenches, before the Impregnable Fortress
of Candia, which if won will not quit the Cost of so tedious a Siege. Whereas,
in half that Time, our Invincible Forces might have overrun all Italy.

Thou will not think this an Impracticable Enterprise, when thou shall consider
the Divisions of the Italian Princes, the Universal Security and Voluptuousness
of the Inhabitants, and yet the Oppressions and Tyranny they live under, being
fleeced and poll'd of all their Substance, to maintain the Grandeur of their
Governors, and the Pride of the Clergy; which renders 'em equally disgusted, at
their present Slavish Manner of Life, and desirous of a Change. It is not hard
to surmise after all this, that a Conquest would be easy to the Victorious
Mussulmans; or at least such Depredations, as would mightily enrich them.

The most proper News that I can send thee, is of a Combat lately fought at
Sea, between the English and the Dutch. The Generals on both Sides, are said to
be brave Men. He of Britain is called Blake, the Other's Name is Trump. Which
had the best on it, is not certainly known. Men speak as they are biased. Yet
the Dutch lost Two Ships in this Engagement, though their Fleet was far more
Numerous than that of the English.

If I were worthy to advise my Superiors, I would propose some Notable Exploit
by Land; for God has given the Earth to the True Believers, but the Sea to the
Christians.

Paris, 14th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1652.
LETTER VI.
To the Kiaya Bey, or Lieutenant General of the Janissaries.
I HAD once a great Intimacy with Cassim Hali, the brave Aga, who now is no
more on Earth. That Honest Old General, merited all Men's Love: Follow thou his
Example, and in Time his Post will fall to thy Lot. Thou art already in the
last Advance to it; let no Airy Vice make thee Giddy, and give thee a Fall.
It Is a Common Aphorism, That Health, long Life, and Honor descend from Above.
But if they do, I tell thee, it is like the Rain, which only then does good,
when it penetrates the Earth, and moistens to the Root. An Humble Heart, is
like a kindly Mold, receiving the Dews of Heaven with Advantage and Profit: but
Pride is a Rock, which spatters away the Blessings showered down on it.

Perhaps thou will be affronted at my blunt Way of Writing. Yet assure thy
self, I honor thee more than a Thousand Flatterers. I am not sent hither to
study Nice Expressions, but to serve ^he Grand Signior with Integrity. Besides,
I know thou have not been accustomed to the soft Entertainments of Ladies
Chambers, but the Rough Dialect of War. It is thy Honor to be unacquainted
with the Delicacies of Discourse, Diet, or Dressing; Things only fit to
enervate a Man's Courage, and change his Heart into that of a Woman. Thou
know how to handle the Curiass and Lance, the Sabre and Shield, the Bow and
Gun; and art perfectly versed, in all the Military Terms of Art. A Discourse of
Sieges and Campaigns, storming of Forts, and plundering of Camps, is more
agreeable to thee, than all Tully's Oratory, or the finest Strains of the
Persian Poets. I am therefore confident, thou will not take it ill, that I
address to thee in a Style void of Artifice, yet full of Real Respect and Love.

If I counsel thee, it is for thy Good; and I am commanded to express my
Sentiments with Freedom. Besides, I have a Personal Privilege to advise thee,
the Right of a Friend: Which thou will acknowledge, when I tell thee, that I
once had the Happiness to save thy Life, as we traveled together in Arabia.

Thou can not but remember that Passage, and how that in heat of Youthful
Blood, thou had provoked an Emir to kill thee in the Sight of the whole
Caravan, had not I fallen at his Feet, and told him, Thou were a Stranger to
the Customs of the Country.

Believe me, I do not reproach thee with this, but only make Use of it, as an
Argument to convince thee, That the same Motive which prompted me (...)
interpose my self at that Time, between thee and Certain Death, induces me now
to give thee Warning of a Precipice, of which thou art in Danger. Every one
gives thee the Character of a brave Man, and no Body dislikes thee the Worse,
for being of an Air as Fierce as a Tartar. All this becomes a Man of the Sword;
And they say, thou do every Thing with a Martial Grace.

But I am told likewise, that thou art Guilty of Avarice: and that for the
Lucre of Presents, thou enrollest Men in the List of the Janissaries, who are
not fit to serve in the Wars; such as are Housekeepers, Persons entangl'd with
Wives and Children, with Debts and other Encumbrances: That they only appear
on certain Days in the Military Habit, and then return to their Domestic
Business, without ever regarding the Discipline of the Royal Chambers, or
thinking themselves obliged to learn the Art of War: That thou in the mean Time
take their Pay, and many Additional Bribes, whilst they are only contented
with the Title and Privilege of a Janizary, to shelter themselves from Justice,
and protect them in their Rapine and Villainies.

I tell thee, should this be known and proved against thee, it would be to thy
Ruin. But I hope better Things, and that these are only the Surmizes of thy
Enemies. For, thou know, that none ought to be admitted into that Ancient
Order, but the Tributary Sons of the Nazarenes; who being in their Infancy
listed in ^he College, know neither Father nor Patron, save the Grand Signior,
who is the Common Parent and Protector of the Osman Empire. On his Service is
all their Zeal and Courage fixed, having no private Bias, no partial
Inclinations, to warp them from the Fidelity they owe their Great Master. They
are devoted to Indefatigable Toils and Hardship, during their whole Life.

This was the First Institution of the Janissaries, though through the
Corruption of the Times, they have much degenerated from their Primitive Rules.
But thou, who art honored with an High Command, wilt signalize thy Virtue and
Loyalty, in reforming these Abuses, and in not suffering the College of Men of
War, to become a Receptacle of Rogues and Drones.

Such Disorders as these, have promoted the Intestine Broils of this Kingdom. I
say not, that they are the Original Causes: Yet it is a great Diminution of
Sovereign Majesty, when a King shall find his Own Armies fighting against him,
as they do at present here in France. How many Mutinies and Rebellions have
been raised by the licentious Janissaries at Constantinople: When laying aside
all Respect and Duty, they have not spared to violate the Seraglio it self; but
entering within those Sacred Walls with Bands of Armed Men, have turned all
things Topsy-Turvey, seized on the Imperial Treasure, changed the Domestic
Officers of their Sovereign, and sometimes chased him from his O^^n Palace, to
the Hazard, if not to the Los^ of his Life?

If thou would know what they are doing here in France, the Men of Arms are
cutting one another Throats, whilst the Rabble are burning their Neighbors
out of their Houses.

Two Days ago, the Multitude assembled in the Streets, and having beset a
certain Palace in this City, they put Fire to it, resolving to kill all that
should attempt to make their Escape out of the Flames. A Person of Quality
coming out to pacify them, fell a Victim to their unbridl'd Rage: And had not
the Duke of Beaufort (of whom I have often made mention in my Letters)
interposed his Authority, they had murdered all that were within those
suspected Walls.

Sometime before this, the Marshall Turenne took a Place of Strength from the
Prince of Conde; who in Lieu of it took St. Denis, a Town not far from Paris,
wherein there is a Temple, which the French say, is the Richest in Europe. But
they are laughed at by the Italians, who boast of far Richer Mosques in Venice,
Milan, Naples, and Rome.

The Duke of Lorain plays fast and loose with the Prince of Conde. He entered
the Kingdom with an Army, pretending to espouse the Prince's Quarrel, but was
quickly bought off by the Queen, so that he is now gone to Flanders again; by
this Action leaving a Free Passage to the King's Army under Marshal Turenne, to
^ange whither they please, which were before blocked up by his Forces.

Four Days ago there was a Bloody Encounter, between the Troops of the Prince,
and those of Marshal Turenne, in one of the Suburbs of Paris. Neither could
boast of the Victory, though the Battle lasted Five Hours. But at length, the
Prince of Conde's Troops retired into the City, being frightened with the Main
Body of the King's Army, which appeared on the Neighboring Hills.

Illustrious Janizary, fortify thy Heart with all the Necessary Retrenchments
of Heroic Virtue: And rather than Surrender to Temptations of Vice on
dishonorable Terms, run the Hazard of a Storm.

Paris, 6th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1652.
LETTER VII.
To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
WE are all together by the Ears in this Kingdom; killing, burning and
destroying one another: Whilst you in Germany enjoy Abundance of Peace. The
Occasion of our Quarrels here, is, the Return of Cardinal Mazarini, against
whom the Duke of Orleans and Prince of Conde are Inveterate Enemies. The Former
is declared Lieutenant General of the Kingdom, by the Parliament of Paris; Who
give it out, That the King is Cardinal Mazarini's Prisoner. They have also
bestowed the Command of all the Forces, under the Authority of the said Duke,
on the Prince of Conde.

Their Principal and only Pretense is, the Removal of the Cardinal from the
King and his Councils. What will be the Issue, Time will demonstrate.

There has been a Duel lately fought, between the Dukes of Beaufort and
Nemours, Two Eminent Friends to the Prince of Conde.

The King going to a Town called Pontoise, some Leagues from Paris, drew a
great many Counselors and Presidents of Parliament thither, Men who are Loyal
and Steadfast to his Cause. This encouraged the King to put forth a Declaration,
commanding the Parliament to meet at Pontoise. They, on the other Side,
published a^ Arrest against this Declaration. Thus they continue pickeering one
at another.

But here is News arrived from Cologne, which surprises People very much. I
know not the true Ground of their Astonishment: but the Priests seem to be Mad
for Joy. All that I can hear about it is, The Restoration of the Roman
Catholic Religion in that Province, which is a Novelty unexpected; especially
the Ecclesiastic Grandeur, which it seems, has been laid aside above these
Hundred Years. I tell thee only as I am informed my self: It lies in thy Power
to certify me of the Truth of Matters.

They say also, That the famous General John de Werdt is dead: As likewise the
Archbishop of Treves. It is added, that Frankendal is surrendered to the
Elector of Heidelberg, according to the late Agreement at Munster; And that
there is a Diet begun at Ratisbon.

I desire thee to inform me of all these Things particularly, and of whatsoever
else occurs in the Court where thou residest.

As to Matters of Religion, be not over-sedulous: Piety is comprised in a Few
Rules. Yet, the Soul of Man is Naturally Inquisitive, and would fain be
acquainted with All Things. I advise thee to cast thy Eyes frequently on the
Earth that is under thy Feet; survey the Groves and Fields; the Mountains and
Valleys, Rocks and Rivers. Then look up to the Heavens, and take a steadfast
View of the Stars: C^nsider the Beauty and Order of All things And after this,
tell me, if thou can imagine, That the Great and Immense Creator of this
Wonderful Fabric, Formed all the Nations of the Earth, to Damn 'em Eternally,
save only those of Your Race.

Son of Israel, I wish thee heartily Adieu.

Paris, 11th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1652.
LETTER VIII.
To the Kaimacham.
THE Parisians seem to be all in a Dream or Trance. They know not what they say
or do, or at least they care not. Such is the Immense Joy, for the Return of
the King to this City. The Steps to this sudden Change, were the Retiring of
Cardinal Mazarini from the Court. Which was seconded with a Declaration of
Indemnity, or a General Pardon for all that had passed during these Troubles,
save some particular Reserves of Sacrilege, Fires, and such like. This worked
strangely on the Inhabitants of Paris. But the Prince of Conde not finding any
Satisfaction, as to his own Person, in his Amnesty, called in the Duke of
Lorrai^'s Army to his Assistance. These reduced the King's Forces to so great a
Straight and Extremity, that the Parliament being sensible of the Advantage,
made use of it, and sent Deputies to the King, beseeching him to continue in
the same good Resolution he had taken before this Misfortune.

The Monarch suffered himself to be overcome, by a Violence mixed with so much
Submission, and yielded to their Requests. Immediately, the Hearts of the
Prince of Conde's Friends grew cold, and began to change their Sentiments. In a
word, they were resolved to desert their New Master, and cast themselves at the
Feet of their Lawful Sovereign. The Grandees, who had most affected Conde's
Interest, laid down their Offices. The Foreign Armies of Spaniards and
Lorrainers, retired out of the Kingdom. The Citizens of Paris sent a Deputation
consisting of Sixty Six Persons of Honor, to invite the King to this City, and
assure him of their Future Allegiance. All the Officers of the Militia, did the
like. The King being satisfied with the timely Penitence of his Subjects, and
having commanded some Preparatory Alterations in Places of Trust, entered this
City on the Twenty First of the last Moon, with all the Joy and Acclamation
which could express the Love of his People. and the Regret they had abour'd
under, during his Absence^

Thou see, Illustrious Minister, that though by the Artifices of a Fac^^on, a
King may be rendered odious to his Subjects, be banished from his Palace, and
have the Gates of his Cities shut against him, as befell to this King: Yet the
Inconveniences they feel in taking up Arms against him, sooner or later bring
'em to Repentance; and they are glad to court his Return, whom but a while ago
they forced away by their Undutifulness, to gratify the Ambition of a bold
Young Prince of the Blood, who promised, and ventured all. Things in Hopes of a
Crown. For, it cannot be supposed, That the Prince of Conde had less Aims, when
he first began this War; though his Pretenses were specious, only to remove
Cardinal Mazarini, and other evil Ministers from the King, and to protect the
French, from the Machinations of Spanish and Italian Counsels: Whilst it is
evident, that all along he and his Party, have been supported by the King of
Spain in their Rebellion. One would wonder, how the French, a Sensible and
Witty Nation, could be thus imposed upon. But the Arabian Proverb says, There
are none so blind, as those that wilfully shut their Eyes.

Yet, whatever Stupidity reigns among the Franks, methinks Nothing but Light
and Reason ought to appear in the Actions of the Mussulmans. I am confounded,
to hear of the Rebellions in Syria and Egypt. Will they never give Rest to the
Banner of the Prophet? Must the Supreme Minister, be ever employed in
proclaiming the Nesiraum? What offense has been given to the Bassa of Damascus,
or (...) him of Caire?

Sage President of the Imperial City, I am abashed before the Infidels, when I
hear these Tragical Reports out of the East.

But what can be expected, when the Manners of the Faithful are quite estranged
from those of their Fathers. The Mussulmans almost outdo the Franks in Vice
and Debauchery.

When thou read this, draw thy Cymetar, and make a Scabbard of the next Man,
who mutters a Word against (...) Lawful Sovereign.

Paris, 2d. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1652.
LETTER IX.
To Dgnet Oglou.
I Tell thee, I am neither Melancholy nor Merry; but in a kind of a Mungrel
Humor between both. I am half Democritus, and the other half Heraclitus; being
Equally disposed to Laugh and Weep, at the Vanity of All Things here below.
That Thought touches me sensibly, yet not enough to carry me into Extremes. The
Misery and Happiness of the Whole Life of Mortals, are Themes ^carce worth a
Passion. Whatever we endure as an Evil, or possess as a Good, are both so
short, that as the one need not sink us to an Excess of Grief, so neither does
the other deserve a Paroxysm of Joy. A Sigh or a Tear, are enough for the
First; and a Smile is too much for the Last. My Mind at present is an
Equilibrium.

What signifies the Birth of the Greatest Monarch, or that he can boast of a
Long Descent of Kings, his Progenitors? He is born to Labor and Trouble, as
well as other Men; and all the Charming Pleasures that attend a Crown, are
scarce sufficient to recompense his Cares and Fatigues, his Hazards and Toils,
and the Perpetual Risques he runs both in Peace and War.

If from the Cradle he make an Early Step to a Throne, it is but a Mock-Honour,
to be Crowned with a Wreath of Briars, squeezed and pressed into h^^ tender
Temples, by the deceitful Hands of his Guardians and Ministers, who strive only
to lay the Foundation of their own Honor in his Ruin, by improving the Time
of his Minority, and making Oppression Chemical; that during their present
Authority, they may extract the Life and Elixir of his Subjects Wealth, and
hoard it in their own Coffers, leaving only the Lees to him, when he comes of
Age, and these generally compounded with the Ill Will of his People. I wish the
Case prove not the same in our Present Sovereign, Sultan Mahomet; who, thou
know, was lifted to his Father's Throne before his Time, and by Methods
which cannot be justified. It was the Mufti's Plot, who is the Oracle of the
Law; and so the Mussulmans acquiesc'd. But mark the End. Such Treasons seldom
escape unpunished. Though Sultan-Ibrahim was Deposed and Imprisoned, (not to
mention that which grates the Ears of any Loyal Ottoman:) Though his Eldest Son
be placed on his Throne, to serve the Ends of a Faction: Yet a Younger than he,
may live to revenge the Wrongs that were done to his Father, and restore the
Empire of the Faithful to its Pristine Grandeur. There are now above Three
Years elapsed, since the change of Affairs at the Seraglio. In the mean time,
do thou not observe the Discontents of the People? Is there not a General
Coldness and Neutrality to be discerned in the Conversation of those, who at
first were most forward to approve the Mufti's Proceedings? Men begin every
where to reflect o^ the Present Revolution, and its Fatal Consequences. The
Venetian-War, they say, has quite impoverished the Empire. Decay of Trade, Want
of Money, and a Thousand other Things, are the daily Complaints in
Constantinople: This I am told from very good Hands, Men of several Nations,
Merchants who Trade ir that City, Persons altogether unbiased. They, as
Strangers, have been Inquisitive, during their Residence there, into the
Humors of People, to find how the Mussulmans stand affected to the Present
State of the Ottoman Affairs. I, who approve not the Presumption of those
Infidels, yet make Use of it to inform my self of several Material Passages,
which I could not otherwise learn, at this Distance from the August Port.

They tell me, the Soldiers murmur that so many Thousands of Men have been
sacrificed in Candia, and Dalmatia; Whilst what they gain in the Island, they
lose on the Continent: For, it seems, the Venetians are still too hard for us
one Way or other. They grumble also for Want of their due Pay, and that they
have not Bread enough to keep 'em from starving. A certain Greek assured me, he
had heard several of the Spahi's swear solemnly, That it was agreed amongst
them, not to go into Dalmatia, the next Campaign. But this I took as a Strain
of the Grecian's Natural Faculty, who, thou know, are much given to
Romancing. However, I hear enough both from them and other Travelers, of East
and West, to ^onvince me, That some of the Grandees (...) the Imperial City are
in a tottering Condition.

All which serves but to confirm my first Discourse, That hardly any Thing on
Earth is worth a Thought, since all Things are of so short Duration.

In a Word, the World seems to be a Garden intermingled with Roses and Weeds.
The First are so close encompassed with Thorns, that a Man cannot gather 'em
without wounding himself: And if there be more Ease in cropping the Latter, yet
they are unwholesome and stink; putting a Man to as frequent Purifications, as
the Times he touches 'em.

Let thou and I, Dear Gnet, pass along the Alleys of this Garden, view her
Beauties and Deformities with an Even Mind; not putting our selves to the
Fatigue of gathering her Flowers, or suffering our selves to be tempted with
her softer Pleasures. But let every Thing we see and hear in this Enchanted
Ground, serve the Ends of our Contemplation, being steadfastly mindful of this
Truth, That all those Things which appear so Gay and full of Charms, are
Nothing but mere Empty Idea's and Fleeting Shadows, of that Substantial and
Permanent Pleasure, which has her Residence only in Paradise.

Thou may tell the Kaimacham, our Friend, that now the King of France begins
to play the Monar^h on the Bottom of his own Wit and Courage, without the
Assistance or Counsel of Tutors. He has brought the Parliament to an Absolute
Compliance with his Will, having purged that Senate of disaffected Members, and
banished from the Court the Duke of Orleans, who pretended a Right to Rule his
Sovereign. In the mean Time, the Prince of Conde has taken Rethel and St.
Menehoud, whilst Barcelona is surrendered to the Spaniards. Thus what is gained
in one Point, is lost in another. Doubtless, there is nothing stable on Earth.

Paris, 8th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1652.
LETTER X.
To Melec Amet.
THY Adventure and Miraculous Escape over the Danube, puts me in Mind of a
certain French Nobleman of the Prince of Conde's Party, who last Summer, being
closely pursued by some of the King's Horse, and himself excellently mounted,
leaped Hedges and Ditches to avoid Captivity. At length, they had chased him
into a Corner of the Land; from whence it was Impossible for him to escape, but
by swimming over a small Arm of the Sea. What Risques will not a Man run, for
the Love of Liberty? This Person, like an overheated Stagg, perceiving his
Hunters close at his Heels, boldly leaped on Horseback into the Sea; choosing
rather to perish in the Waters, than fall into his Enemies Hands.

None were so hardy, as to follow him through the Uncertain Waves. However, his
Horse being of matchless Strength, carried him safe over to the Opposite Shore.
As soon as he arrived at the next Town, where he had many Friends, he related
this Wonderful Passage. But instead of cherishing his Horse, for so Faithful
and Invaluable a Service, he drew his Sword, and immediately killed the Beast
that had saved his Life: Saying, he did it for the Sake of Fame, being
resolved, that his Horse should never p^^form the like Service to any other
Mortal.

This was an Ungrateful Caprice, and far from the Morality of Sultan Seli^^,
the Son of Bajazet, who when his Trusty Horse, Carabuluc, had once saved his
Life by his extraordinary Swiftness; he in Token of his Thankfulness, built a
Stable on Purpose for him in a Large Enclosure of Meadows, allowing a Pension
to a Groom to wait on the Meritorious Beast, and give him his free Delight in
all Things, as long as he lived; Commanding, that he should never more be
forced to labor or travel. And to complete the Happiness of the Beast, he
culled out some of the Beautifull'st Mares of Arabia to accompany him; charging
also, that the Doors of the Stable should be always open, for the Horse to go
in or out, and range when and where he pleased. This was a Generosity worthy of
an Eastern Monarch, whom, as thy Letter informs me, thou have in Part imitated.

But such is some Men's Ambition, and vain Desire to be talked of, that they
care not by what barbarous Methods, they accomplish their Aim: It was a Motive
of this Nature, which tempted Erostratus to set Fire to the Famous Temple of
Ephesus; which had been Two Hundred Years in Building, and was numbered among
the Seven Wonders of the World.

This happened on the very Night, that Alexander the Great was born. And the
Villain being asked, Why he committed so destructive a Sacrilege; answered,
That it was to acquire an Immort^l Fame by so stupendous a Wickedness, since he
^ou'd not hope to be Recorded for his Virtue.

Plutarch mentions a Jest, that was made on this Destruction of Diana's Temple.
For it was common in every Bodies Mouth, That the Goddess being called that
Night to the Labor of Olympias, the Mother of Alexander, could not be present
at Home to save her House from Burning. For the Gentiles believed, that Diana
(whom they also called Lucina) was Invisibly assistant at the Birth of Children.

However, the Priests made no Jest on it; but ran up and down howling and making
Gashes in their Flesh, presaging that Fate was that Day busied, in signing the
Decree of Asia's Ruin. This is certain, That that very Night, the Man was
born, who was destined to subdue all Asia, and on the Ruins of the Persian
Empire, raise the Monarchy of the Macedonians. However, the Villain who burnt
the Temple, had not his Desire. For it was Decreed throughout all Asia, That
his Name should never be mentioned in History, or any Public Writings.

It is Recorded of a certain Governor of a City in Italy, That being on the
Top of an high Tower with only the Pope, the German Emperor, and an Ambassador
from Venice in his Company, he was tempted to throw the Two former over the
Battlements, as they were taking a Survey of the City: Which he might have
easily done, for they were both Aged, and Incapable of re^^sting his Strength.
This Passage he confessed ^o his Ghostly Father: And being asked, What Induced
him to think of such a Horrid Treason? He answered, That it might be said, He
did a Thing which never was done before, nor in all Probability would ever be
done again: Since no Prince having heard such a Story, would ever venture
himself into the same Danger, without a sufficient Guard of his own. But
however, he had not Resolution enough to go through with his Project.

I hear thou art like to acquire Fame by other Methods than these, being in a
fair Way, to rise by thy Virtues, to some Considerable Employments in the
Empire. For which, I equally rejoice with thy self.

In the mean Time, 'twill perhaps be obliging, to tell thee some News out of
these Parts. Which will make thy Company welcome to the Grandees. They love to
converse with Men, who can furnish 'em with Intelligence of Foreign Affairs.

The freshest Discourse here is, of the Imprisonment of the Cardinal de Retz,
who was arrested by the King's Order on the Nineteenth of this Moon. What his
Crime is, I cannot inform thee, unless it be, that he is an Enemy to Cardinal
Mazarini. People generally give him the Character, of a very honest Man. But,
thou know, Honesty is counted a Vice in the Courts of these Western Princes.
The Crafty, are the only Men of Virtue and Merit among the Infidels.

Thou may also report for a Certainty, That the Spania^ds have taken Dunkirk
in Flanders, and C^zal in the Dukedom of Mantua. This Town, is said to be the
Key of all Italy. I cannot tell thee, which is the Lock it belongs to; nor, I
believe, they themselves. But, this I observe, That when the King of France
sits down before any Place with his Army, whoever has the Key, neither Locks
nor Bolts can keep him out long. And it is Ten to One, if he do not find an
Entrance into this Place again very speedily, when the Spanish King has pleased
himself for a while, with an Imaginary Possession of it.

I conclude my Letter, just at the Hour when the Old Year expires, according to
the Account of the Christians, Wishing thee a Scene of New Felicities.

Paris, 31st. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1652.
LETTER XI.
To the same.
HAving the Opportunity of a Day or two more, before the Post goes out of Town,
I make use of it to ask thee, Whether there be any Notice taken in your Parts,
of a Comet newly appearing above the Orb of the Sun? It has not been observed
here till within these few Nights. And the Astronomers, notwithstanding the
Coldness of the Season, (which I assure thee is sharp enough) are very busy
with their Telescopes, to pry into the Figure of this Meteor, and observe its
Motions. They take great Pains, and endure all the Rigor of the Frost and
Snow, in Hopes of making some new Discovery.

The Vulgarlook on it, as a great Prodigy: There are a Thousand Opinions among
them about its Consequences: Every Body sets up for a Judicial Astrologer. Nay,
the Learned themselves, and such as are esteemed Great Philophers, cannot agree
in their Judgment concerning it. Some assert, That the Matter of the Heavens is
subject to Corruption and Change, and that this Comet is generated after that
Manner: Whilst others hold a Contrary Opinion. They are all divided, and
dispute hotly in as Unintelligible Terms, as the Languages of America are to us
of this Continent. They amuse one another, and themselves, with far-fetched
Words: And all this while, for ought I know, the Wisest among 'em may be as
much under a Mistake, as those who never studied such Things. All the
Instruments of the Optics, are sought out to help their Sight; and yet they
may be as much in the Dark, as the Men in Plato's Cave. It is an Article of my
Faith, That we Mortals know very little of those far distant Beings. But, these
Franks are the most opinionated People in the World; no Man has the Modesty, to
allow another as much Right to Reason as himself. Every one sets up for a
Dogmatist, and requires the Intellects of all others to be resigned to his;
though perhaps, that be only formed by the Rules of his Parents, the Impressions
of his Early Years, the Force of Education, the Fashion of his Country, or by
some Notable Accident in his Life: All which, are equally liable to Falsehood
and Truth. How many Sects were there of the Ancient Philosophers, stiffly
defending their several Opinions? One says, the Heavens are made of Brass;
Another, of Iron; a Third, of Smoke. This will have 'em to be Solid, That
Fluid: There is no End of their Controversies.

In the mean Time, no Man knows What they are made of, or What is the Figure of
the World, Whether Round or Square, or beyond all Dimensions: Whether Matter be
Divisible, or Indivisible in the last Atome. Who can assure me, If there be
only One World, or Whether there may not as well be a Thousand Millions?
Whether the Stars be Opake Bodies as this Earth, and Inhabited, or no? I tell
thee again, there is ^o Certainty of these Things. Man's Senses are too weak,
his Imagination too frail, and all his Faculties far too short, to comprehend
the Works of the Omnipotent, who alone is Wise and Perfect in Science.

Will thou have my Opinion of this Comet? I am apt to think, It Is some such
Globe of Combustible Matter, as Our Earth appears to be, and perhaps burdened
with as many Sinners: That either by the Course of Nature, or Decree of
Destiny, the Enclosed Fire has broke its Bounds, and spread its Consuming
Flames over the Surface: Which embodying themselves in the Pyramid of Smoke,
arising from so vast a Conflagration, cause that Appearance which we call the
Tail of a Blazing-Star. And, for ought I know, after the same Manner shall our
Globe appear to the Inhabitants of those Remote Worlds, at our Day of Judgment.

I am not positive in these Matters, nor will I shut up my Soul from Future
Lights: but leaving Things, as I find 'em, full of Mystery, and double Faces, I
will expect no better Fate than that of Socrates, That as I have lived, so
shall I die in Doubt, only hoping for Plenary Satisfaction in the Next World.

Paris, the 2d. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1653.
LETTER XII.
To Pesteli-Hali, his Brother, Master of the Grand Signior 's Customs.
NOW thou beginnest to reap the Fruit of thy Travels. May thou live to have
a Full Harvest. I esteem my self infinitely obliged to the Illustrious Bassa,
our Countryman, for his particular Friendship in this Business. It Is true, thy
own Merits were a sufficient Recommendation: But what Light can a Candle give,
that is shut up close in a Dark-Lanthorn? So thick was the Veil, which thy own
Modesty had drawn over the Splendour of the most Accomplished Virtues.

Son of my Mother, let not what I have said, pass for the Words of a Flatterer.
Thou know, I am as free from that Vice, as I am from Envy. It Is Affection
only guides my Pen, when I tell thee, I heartily rejoice in my Brother's
Prosperity; and that the Grand Signior has a Faithful Servant. I hope, that
Sovereign of Sovereigns, will in Time find Reasons to acknowledge to the Noble
Kerker Hassan, the Good Office he has done him, in presenting such a Slave. Let
no Error of thine, baulk my Expectation.

'Twill be an Eternal Honor, to the House and Tribe from which we descend, if
by acquitting thy self fairly in this Post, our Great Master shall think thee
worthy of a more Sublime Station. Therefore esteem this only as a Trial of thy
Fidelity, and how far thou art Capable of serving the Sultan. Be Industrious,
but not Affected, in disclosing thy Abilities. Observe a Gradation: For the
slowest Steps to Greatness, are the most secure. Aim not to be Rich and Mighty
on a sudden. Swift Rises, are often attended with precipitate Falls. If, in
other Cases, it is commendable to be niggardly of Time, and squeeze every Minute
to an Improvement in Virtue; yet thou will find it expedient to follow other
Maxims, in the Way of growing Great: And that to be Liberal in Years of
Patience, will be no Unprofitable Frugality in the Main; since what is soonest
got, is generally short in the Possession: And he that monopolizes Honors or
Wealth, is most Times envied to his Ruin.

Nature it self shall convince thee of this, if thou will but contemplate her
most Obvious Works. Cast thy Eye on the Oak among the Plants; What Vegetable is
more Permanent, or of greater Service to Men? Yet the Tree, of so vast a Bulk,
in whose Aged, Hollow Trunk, I have seen Sixteen Men sitting round a Table;
under whose wide spread Branches, the House of Arom Eb'niel Eben Sherophaim,
the Chief Emir of Arabia is built, and stands at this Day; I say, this Tree in
its First Original, was not so big as the Thumb of thy Right Hand: And if
Naturalists speak Truth, 'twas a Hundred Years a growing to these Dimensions;
as many in a Fixed and Flouri^hing Condition; and that it will not take up a
less Time in decaying to its last Rottenness.

They say also, That an Elephant, the Biggest and Strongest of all the Beasts
on the Earth, lives Two Hundred Years, and continues increasing in its Stature,
the greatest Part of that Term. The like they relate of Crocodiles and Dragons.

But not to tire thee with Examples of this Nature, let us consider, that
whatsoever is great and durable among Men, whatsoever is Illustrious and
Excellent, is slow in the Production, and makes not hasty Leaps to Maturity.
View all the Monarchies that have made so much Noise on Earth, and thou will
find, that in Proportion to the Time of their Growing Greatness, was the Term
of their Duration. How swift was the Rise and Fall of the Persian Empire?
Equally precipitate was that of the Macedonians. None could ever boast of so
Permanent and Universal a Sway as the City of Rome, of which it is commonly
said, Rome was not built in a Day.

To come nearer Home; How Lasting and perpetually Victorious, is the Sacred
Empire of the Mussulmans? Yet it took its First Rise from very small
Beginnings, met with frequent Repulses, and has made a slow Progression to the
present Formidable Height of Sovereign Power it now possesses. For, thou
know, This is the Thousand'th, Sixtieth and Third Year, since the Holy
Flight of the Messenger of God.

What I have said, may be applied with Proportion, to Men's Personal Advances
in the Honors and Fortunes of this World. Be content therefore with the
Seasons wherein Destiny shall think fit to raise thee, and strive not to
outrun thy Fate.

All the News I can tell thee is, That Cardinal Mazarini returned, the 13th. of
the last Moon, from his Second Banishment: Which thou may report for a Truth,
to the Ministers of State.

We are all Exiles here on Earth. God restore us to a Region more Agreeable,
and admit us to the Caresses of our Friends in Paradise.

Paris, the 25th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1653.
LETTER XIII.
To Kerker Hassan, Bassa.
THE Blessings of God and his Prophet, descend upon thee from a Thousand
Sources. Thou art a true Friend, and our whole Family are obliged to thee for
Favors which have no Number: But none more than my Brother and I. Our
Engagements to thee are Equal; since what Kindness thou have showed to him, in
recommending him to the Sultan's Favor, and to a Place of Honor and Profit, I
take as done to my self; we being Naturally sharers in each others Prosperity
or Adverse Fortu^^. For such is the Method of strict Relations and Friendships.
And, I have a particular Reason to thank thee, because it was at my Instance
thou promoted'st him. Yet tho he is my Brother, I should not be so Partial as
to say these Things in his Behalf, did I not know him to be a Man of Merit. For
Places of Trust, ought not to be bestowed for Favor or Affection. We are bound
to sacrifice all Private Regards, to the Interest of the Grand Signior: And not
act like the French, who get Offices of the Greatest Importance, many Times, by
being of a Faction or Party, opposite to their King.

Since the Return of Cardinal Mazarini to this Court, which was in the
foregoing Moon, the King has reformed many Abuses of this Kind. He begins to
feel his own Strength and Authority, every Day more and more.

In the Moon of December, died Cardinal Richlieu's Brother, who was Bishop of
Lions, and Grand Almoner of France. The King has bestowed these Honors on
Cardinal Antonio Barberini, who took Sanctuary in this Court, from the
Persecutions of the Present Roman Pontiff, almost Ten Years ago. He has always
espoused the King of France's Interests in Rome. And the grateful Monarch,
received him with much Affection; and as an Additional Honor, has made him a
Knight of the Holy Spirit. This is the Chiefest Order of Knighthood in France.

It is freshly reported here, that the Duke of Newburgh, a Great Prince in
Germany, is dead. They talk also of certain Prodigies that have been lately
seen in England, Ireland, and other Parts of Europe; As Raining of warm Blood,
Tin and Copper. And it is affirmed for certain, That Three Suns were lately seen
at Dublin, the Chief City of Ireland.

There has been a Sea-Combat between the English and Hollanders on the Coasts
of Italy. Wherein, they say, the Dutch had the Victory, having sunk Two of
their Enemies Ships, and taken One, without any Considerable Loss on their own
Side.

Here is no other News stirring at present worth the Knowledge of a Mussulman
Grandee. The Eyes of all the Western Nazarenes are fixed on that Refuge of the
World, where thou residest, and on the Actions of our Invincible Vizir in
Candia.

They discourse of some Overtures of Peace, which that Great General has made
to the Venetians, if they will forthwith surrender the City of Candia to the
Victorious Osmans.

If this be true, one would think, so great Clemency must needs tempt the Proud
Infidels to Submission and Compliance. But, if Destiny has otherwise Decreed, I
wish they may feel the Force of our Arms, which appear more keen, than even the
Soythe of Time, that Devourer of all Things.

Paris, 27th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1653.
LETTER XIV.
To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
THY last Letter speaks thee at once willing to be Enlightened, yet Tenacious
of thy Old Prepossessions. I wonder not at the Difficulty thou find, in
shaking off the Precepts of thy Rabbi's, those Religious Triflers. The
Influence of Education, is forcible as that of our Birth: And the Habits that
are rooted in us in our Tender Years, are harder to be displanted, than the
Inhorent Affections of our Blood: This is signified by the Arabian Proverb,
which says, The Tutors of Youth, have an Ascendant over the Stars of their
Nativity.

I know it has been esteemed the peculiar Glory of thy Nation, that you have
been Rigid Observers of the Traditions of your Fathers: From which, rather than
deviate a Title, there have not been wanting such as freely exposed themselves,
and have bravely endured Racks, Scourgings, Burnings, and all Sorts of
Torments, even the most exquisitely cruel Deaths, that the Malice of Tyrants
could invent. But do not I know also, that in some of the most Weighty Points
of your Law, your Zeal has exceeded your Prudence? I speak not of the private
Bigotry of one Man, or a few; but of the Representative Body of your Whole
Nation. How foolishly Superstitious were your Armies in the Days of Mattathias,
when being assaulted by their Enemies on the Sabbath Day, they refused to draw
a Sword in their own Defense, and so were all cut off by the Army of Antiochus?
This is no Invidious Remark of your Adversaries in Religion, but the
Observation of Josephus, a Man of the same Faith, and sprung from the Stock of
Israel, as well as thy Self.

Now tell me thy Opinion, did your Fathers do well in thus Sacrificing
themselves, and the whole Interest of Israel to a Mistaken Punctilio of that
Obedience they owed the Law, or no? If thou allowest the Former, then
Mattathias did Wickedly in making a Decree, That from thenceforth, it should be
Lawful on the Sabbath Day to resist their Enemies; and all the Jews were guilty
of many Notorious Breaches of the Law, in obeying this Decree, and fighting on
the Sabbath Day: But if thou say, They did Ill in not fighting, though at a
prohibited Time, and prohibited under the Severest Curses; then it follows,
That there is no Point of your Law, which may not, nay which ought not to be
dispensed with, and give way to the Interests of State, and the Good of the
Commonwealth. So that at this Rate, the Religion for which you are all so
Zealous, will appear to be but a Form of Government, Divinely contrived for
Humane Regards. I do not call in Question, the Miraculous Delivery of your Law
on Mount Sinai. Suffer me to plead without Suspicion of Partiality: I do not go
about to invalidate the Testimony of Moses, and the Prophets. Doubtless, the
Most High came down through the Heavens, attended with Myriads of Angels, and
Thirty Two Thousand Chariots of Fire; and when he stood on the Top of the
Mountain, the Rear of his Train had not passed the Silver Gates of the Moon.
The Sun appeared in his Circuit, as one astonished; he blushed, and fled away
from the Eternal Brightness, not able to endure the Luster of a Glory so far
surpassing his own. The Stars were dazzled at the Immortal Splendour, and mistook
their Courses; they run against one another in their affrighted Careers. And as
a Lasting Memorial of that Glorious Descent, the Angels left the bright
Impression of their Footsteps in the Path: That Heavenly Road, is to this Day
distinguished from all the Rest of the Sky by its Whiteness, which makes the
Astronomers call it THE MILKY WAY.

The Nations of the Earth were amazed at the Tremendous Vision and Noise; for
the Mountain was all on Fire, whose Flames reached up to the Clouds, and its
Smoke to the Mid-heaven. The Globe Trembled and Quaked at the Dreadful
Thundrings, and the Lightnings penetrated the Abyss of Hell. The Infernal
Spirits were startled at the Uncouth Flashes; and asked one another, If the Day
of Judgment were come: The Waters hid themselves in their Fountains, and the
Ocean uttered a deep Murmur. Every Thing in Nature was surpised with Wonder
and Dread, and Moses himself when he came down from the Mountain, was all
Transformed into Light.

Thou see, Nathan, I am no Infidel, but believe, as thou do, That the Law
of Moses was brought down from Heaven. But does it therefore follow, That this
Law is Universal and Eternal? Can none be saved but the Sons of Israel, and
such as are Proselyted to their Religion? Doubtless this is an Error, as thou
thy self wilt acknowledge, when thou have well examined the Matter. Remove thy
Post a little, if it be only in Imagination: Rise from the Feet of thy Doctors,
who have instilled into thee Prejudices against all the Sons of Adam, except
those of your Own Race. Stand aloof for a while, and look round about thee to
the Four Winds: but fix thine Eyes on the East, for from thence Wisdom takes
her Origin. Did not the same God, who Greated the Jews, also Create all the
Nations of the Earth? And can thou be so blind and obdurate as to think, that
Sovereignty Merciful made so many Millions of Souls on Purpose to Damn them? Or
that it shall be Imputed to them for Sin, that they were not born of the Seed
of Jacob? Was it in their Power to choose the Father that should beget them, or
the Mother that should conceive them? How Absurd are the Consequences of this
Narrow Opinion? It is an unpardonable Pride and Malice, thus to contemn and
Judge those that are compounded of the same Ingredients as your selves.

Doubtless, God has sent Prophets into all Nations, to guide them into the
Right Way, and not into the Way of Infidels. Those who believe the Prophets and
obey their Precepts, shall be Saved: For they preach the Unity of the Divine
Essence, the Resurrection of the Dead, the Day of Judgment, the Joys of
Paradise, and the Torments of the Damned. They teach the Necessity of Justice,
Purity, and Good Works; exhorting all to practice the Golden Rule, without
entangling their Minds in endless Niceties, which are but the Superfetation of
Piety, the Excrementitious Burdens of a Religious Life. Such are most of the
Troublesome and Ridiculous Ceremonies observed by the Zealots of your Law, at
which I have known the Wiser Sort of Jews to laugh. These little Superstitions,
like Unprofitable Suckers, exhaust the Vitals of Religion, and leave it only a
Sapless Trunk, from which no Fruit can be expected. Were they commanded in the
Law of Moses, something might be pleaded in their Defense; but as they are only
the Dreams of your Rabbi's, a Wise Man would beware how he put on a Needless
Yoke, the Stratagem of your Crafty Guides, to keep you in Subjection, and a
servile Awe of their Authority, and a Religious Timerousness of you know not
what.

Thy Letter replies to this by Anticipation: For, supposing that I should argue
thus, and charge you with adding Traditions of your own, to the Positive
Injunctions of the Law; Thou tellest me, That those are greatly mistaken, who
think that all which was delivered to Moses in the Mount, was Written in the
Two Tables, or comprised even in the Pentateuch; as if the Prophet spent those
Forty Days and Nights only in keeping of Geese. For it is evident, say thou,
That if God had Nothing else to give him but the Written Law, he might have
dispatched him in an Hour or a Day at Most. Therefore thou addest, That by Day
he gave to him the Written Law, and by Night the Mysterious Explanation of it,
called, The Oral Law: Which Explanation, Moses taught by Word of Mouth to
Joshua his Successor, Joshua to the Seventy Two Seniors; and that they
transmitted this Oral Traditionary Comment down to their Posterity, even to the
Last of the Prophets, from whom the Great Sanhedrim received it. After this
every one delivered it to his Son, as he had received it from his Ancestors;
and so it continues to this Day, to be the Rule of your Lives, in those Cases
where the Written Law is Silent. I tell thee Nathan, there appears a great Show
of Reason in what thou say: And indeed it cannot be supposed, that Moses
spent all that Time, only in receiving the Written Law. But on the other side,
I cannot believe that the Eternal Mind was busied so many Days, in prescribing
those Ridiculous Rules and Ceremonies, which are found in the Talmud, and the
Writings of your Rabbi's. If thou can convince me of that, I will cease to
Persuade thee to a Change.

I have a great deal more to say, but the Hour of the Post calls on me to
conclude my Letter. In my next, I will fully answer all thy Arguments. In the
mean Time, let not Custom, and the Dictates of the Synagogue supplant thy
Reason, but remember thou art a Man.

Paris, 27th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1653.
LETTER XV.
To the Sublimely Wise, the Senior of Excellent Dignity, Abul-Recowawn', Grand
Almoner to the Sultan.
THou art placed on a High Seat, Eminent among the Faithful; and the Eyes of
the Distressed, are fixed on thee. Thou art the Patron of all the Miserable. To
thee, as to a Sanctuary, flies the Man, whose Misfortunes have bereaved him of
all other Hope: Whose drooping Spirits can find no Comfort from the Rest of
Mortals. His last and only Refuge is to thee, who art the Faithful Steward of
the Grand Signior's Liberalities. Let not too much Prudence supersede thy
Charity. The Wicked and the Innocent, have Equal Access to thee: And it ought
to be so; for, no Man, at first, can distinguish between the One and the Other
by their Outward Aspect. Yet a little Examination and Converse, will show the
Difference.

There are those, who get large Possessions under the Masque of Poverty. There
are Impudent Beggars, who make a Trade of imposing on Human Compassion, and
sport themselves in this humble Method of cheating People of their Money;
whilst, imagining they bestow it on Persons really Indigent, it is thrown away
on Counterfeits, Villains and Infidels.

On the other side, I have seen true Objects of Pity, Men reduced to the last
Extremities, who would rather perish, than expose their Condition to any, save
the Great and Noble. They esteem such to be Wise Men, Generous, and Considerate
of the Accidents which commonly befall Mortals. They think, to these they may
freely unbosom themselves, tell their Wants, and claim Relief, without the
Hazard of a Reproach, which wounds more deeply than a short Denial.

Thou may know them by the Modesty which appears in their Faces, (says our
Holy Prophet) and that they are soon repulsed. To such as these give plentiful
Alms, and do not repine. For it is as a Profitable Merchandise, sent to Remote
Countries; which though ventured on the Uncertain Waters, yet in Time by the
special Blessing of Heaven, shall return with Sevenfold Interest.

Nay, give to all that ask: For, it is better to misplace our Charity on Nine
Unworthy Persons, than to deny an Alms to One that is really in Need. Besides,
it is not for the Honor of a Sovereign Monarch, that any Person in Distress
should depart from his Court, sad or discontented, for Want of Relief.

I have in some of my Letters, glanced at the Vices of these Western Nazarenes;
and have not been altogether silent as to their Virtues. Among which, their
Charity is very Conspicuous.

The French relate a pretty Passage of a certain Cardinal, a very Good Man, and
one that by the Multitude of his Generous Actions, gave Occasion for the World
to call him, the Patron of the Poor.

This Ecclesiastic Prince, had a constant Custom, Once or Twice a Week, to
give Public Audience to all Indigent People in the Hall of his Palace, and to
relieve every one according to their various Necessities, or the Motions of his
own Bounty.

One Day, a poor Widow encouraged with the Fame of his Generosity, came into
the Hall of this Cardinal, with her only Daughter, a beautiful Maid, about
Fifteen Years of Age. When her Turn came to be heard, among the Crowd of
Petitioners; the Cardinal discerning the Marks of an extraordinary Modesty in
her Face and Carriage, as also in her Daughter, he encouraged her to tell her
Wants freely. She blushing, and not without Tears, thus addressed her self to
him; My Lord, I owe for the Rent of my House Five Crowns, and such is my
Misfortune, that I have no other Means to pay it, save what would break my
Heart, since my Landlord threatens to force me to it, that is, to Prostitute
this my only Daughter, whom I have hitherto with great Care Educated in Virtue,
and an Abhorrence of that Odious Crime. What I beg of your Eminence is, That
you would please to interpose your Sacred Authority, and protect us from the
Violence of this Cruel Man, till by our honest Industry, we can procure the
Money for him.

The Cardinal moved with Admiration of the Woman's Virtue and Innocent Modesty,
bid her be of good Courag^. Then he immediately wrote a Billet, and giving it
into the Widows Hands, Go, said he, to my Steward with this Paper, and he shall
deliver thee Five Crowns to pay thy Rent.

The poor Woman overjoyed, and returning the Cardinal a Thousand Thanks, went
directly to his Steward, and gave him the Note: Which when he had read, he told
her out Fifty Crowns. She astonished at the Meaning of it, and fearing this was
only the Steward's Trick to try her Honesty, refused to take above Five,
saying, She asked the Cardinal for no more, and she was sure 'twas some Mistake.

On the other side, the Steward insisted on his Master's Order, not daring to
call it in Question. But all the Arguments he could use, were insufficient to
prevail on her, to take any more than Five Crowns. Wherefore, to end the
Controversy, he offered to go back with her to the Cardinal, and refer it to
him. When they came before that Munificent Prince, and he was fully informed of
the Business. It Is true, said he, I mistook in writing Fifty Crowns. Give me
the Paper and I will rectify it. Thereupon he wrote again; Saying thus to the
Woman, So much Candor and Virtue, deserves a Recompense. Here I have ordered
you Five Hundred Crowns, What you can spare of it, lay up as a Dowry to give
with your Daughter in Marriage.

If I mistake not, this Cardinal was called Farnese. But, whatever his Name
was, this was an Action truly Heroic, and which has but few Parallels.

It will be much for the Glory and Interest of the Shining Port, if thou
sometimes by an extraordinary Largess, raisest the Fortune of deserving Men;
and put them in a Capacity to serve the Grand Signior. At least, such
Bounty will oblige 'em not to dis-serve him.

Among the Rest, permit me to recommend the Case of Ebnol Berwana Kayemas, thy
Countryman. He was once Possessor of a fair Timariot, but was turned out by
Sultan Ibrahim, to gratify a Creature of Shechir Para. Thou know the Life of
that Infamous Woman. I say no more.

Paris, 2d. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1653.
LETTER XVI.
To the Captain Bassa.
THou that art a Man of War, delightest, no Doubt, to hear of Combats and
Battles. And I tell thee, That since the Beginning of the World, there have
never been known such dreadful Sea Fights, as during the present War between
the English and Dutch. It seems, there is an Emulation sprung up in the Latter:
They grudge the Inhabitants of Britain the Character, which has been given 'em
from all Antiquity, Of being the most Victorious on that Element, of any Nation
on the Earth.

It Is possible there may be some more particular Grounds of their present
Quarrel, to which I am a Stranger. But assuredly, they have pursued their
Animosities very eagerly on both Sides. And, let the Occasion be what it will,
the Dutch are still Losers.

I sent thee an Account of a Combat between their Fleets last Year, since which
they have had many other Engagements. And it is said here, that during this War,
the English have taken from the Dutch, near Two Thousand Merchant Vessels; have
Sunk and Burnt many of their Ships of War, slain some of their Chief
Commanders, spoiled their Trade, and reduced 'em almost to as great Streights,
as when they first courted the Protection of the English against their
Sovereign, the King of Spain, from whom they had then newly Revolted.

But the most terrible Conflict was, on the Second of this Moon, wherein the
Dutch had Seven and Twenty of their Greatest Ships, either sunk or burnt, Two
Thousand of their Seamen and Soldiers killed, and a Thousand taken Prisoners,
with many Captains. That Great General Trump, whom I mentioned in my Last, was
slain in this Fight, after he had performed Prodigies of Valor.

The French say, that during the Heat of this Engagement, Trump being excessive
Thirsty, called for a Bowl of Wine; which his Servant had no sooner delivered
to him, but a Cannon-Bullet took his Hand off, just as he was retiring from his
Master. The brave General touched with a Noble Compassion, spilt the Wine on
the Deck, saying, It is not fit that I should quench my Thirst, with the Blood
of a Faithful Slave. And as soon as he had spoke these Words, another Bullet
took from him, the Power of ever drinking again.

If such an Accident should happen to thee, when thou fightest against the
Infidels, know for certain, that thou shall be immediately transported to the
Green and Shady Banks of the Rivers of Wine in Paradise, where thou may
drink thy Fill in Eternal Security. For he that dies fighting for the Faith, is
a Martyr.

Paris, 12th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1653.
LETTER XVII.
To Sale Tircheni Emin, Superintendent of the Royal Arsenal at Constantinople.
I Remember I promised in my Last, to give thee a farther account of Pachicour,
the famous Pyrate of the Black-Sea, 'Twere easy to perform it, but a Temptation
diverts my Pen another Way.

I remember when thou were Chiaus, I have heard thee speak of the Kingdom of
Tunis, whither thou wast sent by Sultan Amurat, to compose the Differences that
happened between the Dey and the Divan of that City. At the same Time, thou
made Mention of a certain Admirable Engine, contrived to draw up Ships or any
Thing else from the Bottom of the Sea: And, that the Divan of Tunis, gave to
the Artist who framed it, an Hundred Thousand Piasters, as a Reward of his
Ingenuity.

I have read in a certain French Author, of such another Device at Venice, made
on purpose to draw up the Famous Carrack, which they called the Castle of the
Sea. This Gallion was built of a Monstrous Bulk, more for State than Service;
and was overturned by her own Unweildiness, as she lay at Anchor, and sunk to
the Bottom: From whence, neither that forementioned Engine, nor all the Art of
Man could raise. Yet the Skill of the Enginier was highly commended, and the
Senate honored him with the Title of Clarissimo, and settled a Noble Pension
on him during Life.

It is questioned, whether the States of Holland will be so Liberal to a
certain French Enginier, who has made a Ship at Rotterdam, which they say, will
outdo all the Miracles of Noah's Ark.

This Ship is at present all the Talk at Paris. Our Merchants receive Letters
full of Wonders from the Low Countries, concerning this Whirligig of a Vessel,
which is to move by Clockwork, without Sails, Oars, Rudder, or any Common
Marine Tackle; Yet, shall cut her Way through the Sea, with a swifter Progress
than the Moon glides along the Sky, or a Bullet out of a Cannon. This is the
Discourse of those who love to advance all that they hear, to the Height of a
Miracle or Romance. Yet it is certain, the Artist has promised, it shall equal
the Motion of some Birds, and run Twelve Leagues an Hour. Neither Winds nor
Tides shall forward or hinder its Course, which depending on an Internal
Principle of Perpetual Motion, is to be directed only at the Pleasure of him
who manages the Springs and Wheels. So that the Master of this Vessel, shall be
able with a single touch of Hand, to turn it to any Point of the Compass, in
the most Boisterous Weather that blows.

This Enginier farther engages, that his Vessel shall make a Voyage to the
East-Inaies in the Revolution of a Moon, and to some Regions of America, in a
fourth Part of that Time. If he be as good at Performance, as he is at
Promising, he will Sail round the Globe, at this Rate, in Three Moons.

In farther Commendation of this wonderful Machine, it is said, That by a
New-Invented Art, it shall secretly under-Water disable any Ship, provided she
be within Cannon-Shot; and this with so sudden a force, that in the Space of
Six Hours, it will successively sink a Fleet of a Hundred Ships of War.

Moreover, this Artist, to appear not less subtle against the Efforts of
Heaven, than in surpassing all the Inventions on Earth, promises that his
Miraculous Vessel, shall at the Distance of a League, cut asunder any Spouts or
Cataracts of Waters, which usually threaten Mariners in the Mediterranean and
other Seas.

It Is possible thou art very well acquainted with the Nature of these Spouts,
and the Danger of Ships that Sail near them. Yet give me Leave to inform thee,
what I have heard from a certain Corsair, who has often met with 'em in the
Levant.

This Pyrate tells me, that a Spout is a kind of Aqueduct between the Clouds
and the Sea, by which those Pendulous Cysterns Above, are replenished with
Water from the Ocean, drawing it up, as through a Pipe; Which seems to be let
down for that End, at certain Seasons, and in some Particular Places, where the
Water boyls up first above the Surface of the Briny Plain, as a Signal to those
Thirsty Bladders, to make a Descent there and suck their fill.

If this be true, who knows but that all the Rain, to which the Earth is
indebted for its Fertility, comes thus Originally from the Sea? For, it may be
made fresh, either in its first Ascent through the Roscid Air, or after its
Reception into the Clouds, by some hidden Energy of that Element, or the
Natural Force of the Middle Region: Or at least by some Unknown Virtue, perhaps
not inferior to that by which the Waters of a Bitter Lake in the Desert,
became Sweet at the Intercession of our Holy Prophet, when the whole Army of
the Primitive Mussulmans, was like to have perished of Thirst.

And then how will the Western Philosophers dispose of all the Vapors, which
they say are Exhaled from this Globe, and afterward Condensed into Clouds? I
tell thee, that is but a Loose Notion of such Retentive Bodies, as the Clouds
seem to be. And 'twou'd tempt one to ask, What the Vessels are made of which
hold those Condensed Exhalations, so that they do not fall at once upon our
Heads and overwhelm us, but only destil in small successive Showers Drop by
Drop, to refresh the Barren Parts of the Earth, and serve the Necessities of
Men? And why the Rains fall in the Indies, and other Regions of the East, whole
Moons together without Intermission, the Rest of the Year being dry: Whereas,
in other Countries, the Periods of the Weather's Alteration are uncertain, and
in some Parts, it seldom or never rains at all?

Doubtless, the Works of the Omnipotent are Inscrutable: And though it may be an
Argument of a great Wit, to give Ingenious Reasons for many Wonderful
Appearances in Nature; yet it is an Evidence of small Piety or Judgment, to be
positive in any Thing, but the Acknowledgment of our own Ignorance.

Now I have made as Wide an Excursion from my first Discourse, as the Moulia
did, who began an Oration in Praise of Noah's Ark, and ended with telling a
Tale of an Armenian Wheel-Barrow.

But I will not forget, that I was speaking of the Promise which the Rotterdam
Enginier has made of his Machine, That it should Effectually break all the
Force of Spouts, which would render him very Serviceable to Merchants, as a
Convoy to defend them from those Terrible Bug bears to Sailers. For the Corsair
tells me, that these Spouts very often occasion Ship-wrecks; either by
entangling the Masts of a Ship, and so overturning it; or, by breaking in the
Encounter, overwhelm it with water, and so sink it.

He says likewise, that the Christian Pirates are accustomed to use a certain
Charm against these Spouts. They have a Knife, whose Haft is made of the Bone
of a Man's Right Arm: And every Vessel, is bound to provide One or Two of these
Knives, when they loose from the Shore. They buy 'em of certain Persons, who
have the Character of Magicians. And when they see a Spout at some Distance
from 'em at Sea, the Master of the Vessel or any Body else, takes this
Enchanted Knife in his Right Hand, and holding the Book of their Gospel in his
Left, reads some Part of it; And when he comes to a certain Versicle, which
mentions the Incarnation of their Messiah, he makes a Motion with his Knife
toward the Spout, as if he would cut it in Two. Whereupon, immediately the
Spout breaks in the Middle; and all the enclosed Water falls into the Sea.

But I tell thee, he who gives Credit to the Stories of Charms, or the Projects
of Men pretending to excel all the Rest of their Race; has more Faith, than is
requisite to him who reads Aesop's Fables, since in perusing that Ingenious
Figment, we are only desired to believe the MORAL.

It Is thought by some, That this Enginier will, by the Natural Clockwork of his
Heels, be much more nimble than his Vessel, in flying the Disgrace which will
attend him, if his Fantastic Project prove unsuccessful. In my next thou
shall hear of Pachicour.

Paris, 12th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1653.
LETTER XVIII.
To Murat Bassa.
THE English, at present, make the greatest Figure and Noise, of all the
Nations in the West. Spain, Portugal, and even France it self court the
Friendship of that Island, since the Inhabitants have formed themselves into a
Commonwealth. It appears, as if the English were but newly awakened to a Sense
of their own Strength, and by thus rouzing themselves had alarmed all their
Neighbors.

However it be, This King has sent an Ambassador to the English Court, to break
the Negotiation of the Spaniards there, and to establish a Peace between
England and France, if possible.

One cannot tell what to make of the Maxims of these Infidels. For, at the same
Time, the Banished Heir of the English Crown, takes his Sanctuary in this
Court. Where he is caressed, and made to believe, Great Things they will do
toward his Restoration. But Interest supersedes all Arguments of Affection and
Consanguinity. They are more sollicitous here for the Success of their Embassy,
than for the Right of the poor Exiled Prince. He is called the King of
Scotland, having been solemnly Crowned in that Kingdom, since the Death of his
Father; And entering into England with an Army of Scots, was routed; and having
narrowly escaped the Trains that were laid for his Liberty and Life, at length
landed in this Kingdom; where he has been entertained with much seeming
Affection. But the Dread they are under, of the Victorious New English
Commonwealth, makes 'em begin to talk of his Departure from hence.

The Prince of Conde has taken Rocroy: Which was the first Place where he
signalized his Arms, and the Infant-Reign of this King about Ten Years ago.
Which the Superstitious interpret, as an Omen of Ill Luck to the King. This
Sort of People are led by Maxims void of Reason: And so there is no Regard to
be given to their Observations. Yet, some of the Wiser Sort, think this will
prove a long War.

That which amuses People most, is the small Concern the Prince of Conti and
the Duchess of Longueville show for their Brother's Cause. For while the King
was on his March against the Prince of Conde, they came and submitted
themselves to him, and were received to Favor. Those who are apt to suspect an
Intrigue in every Thing, say, That this Reconciliation is only feigned on their
Part, it being a Means to serve their persecuted Brother with greater Security
and Success. Others are of Opinion, that it is Real, especially on the Prince
of Conti's Part: Since he and his Brother, had never any good Understanding.

There has been a Battle lately fought between the French and Spanish Forces in
Italy. Wherein, the Spa^iards lost Twelve Hundred Men, and the French above
Half that Number, of their best Soldiers. So that the King of France may say
with a Famous General, Victories attended with so little Advantage, will ruin,
rather than enlarge, an Empire.

Bassa, in the midst of thy Grandeur, I wish thee Health, which sweetens the
Worst Events. As for me, I Am like one hovering between Two Worlds.

Paris, 15th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1653.
LETTER XIX.
To Afis Bassa.
THE Gods of the Nazarenes, one would think, were studying how to perplex their
Adorers. These Western Parts, abound with Prodigies, and Surprising Events.
More especially, the Low Countries feel the Strokes of a Hand, which by making
'ern smart, seems to put 'em in Mind, They Are too high in their own Conceit.

For several Weeks we have been alarmed from thence, with the Tragical Stories
of Ship-wrecks, Inundations, Tempests of Thunder and Lightning, not usual at
this Time of Year; Monstrous Specter seen rising out of the Seas, Lakes and
Rivers; Armies in the Air, with Comets and other Wonderful Apparitions.

The States of the United Provinces, have lost by Wreck Sixteen Ships of War,
and Thirty Seven Merchant Vessels. It looks, as if Aeolus and Neptune, the
Chief Gods of the Hollanders, had entered into a League, to punish 'em for
struggling against their Fate; whilst they maintain a Fleet to brave and
plunder the English, under whose Shadow they first rose to the Power they so
Ungratefully now possess.

For, besides these Losses at Sea, the Winds and Waves have conspired to break
down their very Banks, the only Guards they have against that Encroaching
Element. All the Low Countries, are overwhelmed with Water: Insomuch, as Five
Miles within Land from Ostend, there has been found a Whale newly cast up,
Seven Times as long as a Man.

This the Infidels look on as a Great Prodigy, and the Forerunner of some
Strange Revolution; Though it is but a Natural Event, and frequently happens in
those Seas, where Whales are more plentiful. The Naturalists say, That this
King of the Scaly Nations, never makes his Progress through the Seas without
his Guide; which is a certain small Fish, that always swims before him, and
gives him Warning of Flats and Shallows, upon which he often strikes, and
sometimes on the main Shores, if his little Guide chance to be devoured by any
other Fish, or come to other Mishap. And this may be the Reason, why so many
Whales are found on the Sands when the Tide Ebbs. They say also, That when this
little Fish is inclined to Rest, it retires into the Whale's Belly, reposing it
self there for some Time; during which the Whale rests also, not daring to
venture forward, till his Guide comes forth and leads the Way. If this be true,
it seems as if there were a League or Friendship contracted between these Two,
they Mutually performing all the necessary Offices of Love and Gratitude. And
how this can be done without some Species of Reason, I cannot comprehend.

Let them at the Port call me Mynesih, or what they please, I cannot forbear
doing this Justice to the Fish of the Sea, as well as to the Animals on Earth,
to acknowledge, That either they are indu'd with a Kind of Reason; or, that
Faculty which we call so in Men, is no other than Sense. If the Brutes perform
many Things without any Deliberation or Counsel, so do most Men: And no Man can
demonstrate, That even those Dumb Beings, do not advise and project, before
they attempt any Thing of Moment toward their own Preservation, or the Service
of others. And if they seem to do many Things rashly, it may be attributed to
the Quickness and Vivacity of their Sense, which needs not the Slow and
Phlegmatic Methods of Human Counsel.

Suffer these Digressions, Courteous Bassa; and since I have led thee so far
out of the Road, take but another Step, and I Will show thee a Great Monarch, who
commands Millions of Men, carried away Captive by a Silly Beast.

The King of France, the other Day as he was a-hunting, discharged a
Fowling-Piece at a Partridge on the Wing. The Bird dropped, and the Monarch eager
to take up his Game, gave the Reins to his Horse, who ran away with him over a
great Plain, for the Space of half a League: And had not the King fallen off,
within Six Paces of a great Chasme or Hole in the Earth, he would have been
Carried, for ought I know, to keep Company with Horatius Curtius, the Venturous
Roman, of whose Exploit thou have heard: For, the furious Steed not being aware
of the Danger before him, as soon as he had cast the King, galloped full Speed
into the gaping Precipice, and was never more heard of.

This, the Priests cry up for a Miraculous Escape, and presage, That the King
is reserved by Providence for Great Things.

The King of Portugal has an Ambassador here, who in his Master's Name proposes
a Match between this King and the Infanta of Portugal, proffering Four Millions
of Crowns as her Dowry. But the Court entertains this Motion coldly; the
Cardinal being averse, for what Reason is not known: For the Infanta has an
Illustrious Character, and known to be a Princess of Incomparable Virtue.

This Minister is managing a Match of nearer Concern to himself, designing to
marry One of his Nieces to the Prince of Conti, Brother to the Prince of Conde.
And it is said, this Prince receives the Cardinal's Proposals with less Scorn,
than did the Count of Soissons those of Cardinal Richlieu, on the like Occasion.

Here is a Rumor, as if the Prince of Conde, would be condemned by a Process
of Parliament, and that he will be put to Death in Effigy.

This Indignity is Common among the Infidels, who esteem whatsoever Honor or
Disgrace is shown to Images, as done to the Persons whom they represent. They
have no other Excuse for their Worship of Things made by the Hands of Men like
themselves, but that it is purely Relative, and centers in the Prototype.

In the mean Time, the Prince of Conde's Friends and Well-Wishers, smile at his
Imaginary Death; knowing, that if no Effectual Stroke of Fate carry him out of
the World, he will be at the Head of a Potent Army in the Spring, to put many
to Death in Reality, and by the Edge of the Sword, who fight for his Enemies.

A while ago, a Man was Imprisoned here by his own Folly; having voluntarily
declared, That he was hired by this Prince to assassinate Cardinal Mazarini.

I have spoken formerly of the Count d' Harcourt, and the Disgrace he was in at
this Court, for not continuing the Siege of Londa, a Strong- Hold of the
Spaniards in Catalonia. This General is a brave Man, and has done Eminent
Services to the Crown of France. It is no Wonder therefore, that he laid to
Heart the Coldness and Contempt, with which he was received at his Return from
that Unfortunate Campaign. Great Souls, are to be Caressed with more than
ordinary Affection in their Adverse Fortunes; and Faithful Servants, ought not
to be reproached with every false Step, or ill Success in their Affairs. The
Count resenting ill the King's Carriage toward him, removed himself from the
Court, and then out of the Kingdom; designing, as is supposed, to serve the
Emperor of Germany.

Last Week, his Two Sons that were detained as Hostages in this City, made
their Escape, the Duke of Loraine having promised, to give the Eldest his
Daughter in Marriage.

That Duke roves up and down like a Free-Booter, with an Army of Banditti at
his Heels.

Renowned Afis, I make an Humble and Affectionate Obeisance; wishing thee as
many Years of Life, as thou can pass without languishing for Death.

Paris, the 17th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1653.
LETTER XX.
To Dgebe Nafir, Bassa.
THOU succeedest a Righteous Minister, Chiurgi Muhammet. I wish thee a
Surplusage of Happiness: Which thou will not fail to possess, if thou
inheritest the Virtues of that Bassa, as well as his Office. May his Soul now
taste the Reward of his Just Life. And I doubt not, but he has made an happy
Experience of my Wishes. He sits down in Quiet, under the Trees of Eden. His
Head encompassed with a Garland of Flowers, which never fade. Vested with the
Immarcescible Crimson and Purple of Paradise. He reposes on his Bed of
Delights, whilst Beautiful Pages serve him in Vessels of Gold, set round with
Sapphires and Emeralds: He drinks the delectable Wine which never Inebriates;
and eats of the Fruits, every Morsel of which, prolongs his Life for a Thousand
Ages. He hears Nothing but the Voices of such, as are full of Benediction and
Joy. The Virgins of Paradise, salute him with a Grace which cannot be
expressed. They chaunt to the Newcome Guest, Songs of Immortal Love. To the
Stranger from Earth, they tell their Passion in Strains, which ravish his
Heart. He is dissolved in a Thousand Ecstasies. This is the Reward of a Pious
Mussulman, a Wise Minister, a Just Judge of the Faithful. Follow his Example,
and thou shall be translated into his Company: For he is in a Goodly Place,
near the Springhead of Perfect Bliss.

Thou will expect some News from me, as a Testimony of my Respect. And I cannot
pretend there is none stirring, at a Juncture when all this Part of the World
is so full of Action, or at least of Counsels.

Here has been great Rejoicings lately for the taking of St. Menehoud, a Strong
Town in the Hands of the Prince of Conde. All the Officers of the French King's
Army, endeavored to dissuade him from the Siege of this Place; but Cardinal
Mazarini overruled their Arguments, and having reproved their groundless
Fears, caused it to be invested and attacqu'd the 22d. of the 10th. Moon. Some
say, he had a Party there. Yet it held out till the 27th. of the last Moon, at
which Time it was surrendered upon Articles to the King, who was there in
Person with his Brother, the young Duke of Anjou, the Queen, the Cardinal and
the whole Court. They returned to this City, the Ninth of this present Moon.

They were received with great Acclamations and seeming Joy, by those who would
have triumphed more heartily, had they been defeated, or forced to raise the
Siege. For the Citizens of Paris, wish well to the Prince of Conde's Arms: Not
so much out of Love to him, as in Hatred of his Enemy, the Cardinal-Minister.
And they are sensible, that this Successful Siege, will redound wholly to the
Cardinal's Honor, by whose sole Orders the Place was invested.

It is discoursed, as if this Minister has some new Design on Foot, to conquer
the Kingdom of Naples. This is certain, a Mighty Fleet is fitting out to Sea:
Whither bound, no Man knows, but those of the Cabinet, among whom the Cardinal
is Chief.

In the mean while, the Common People listen after certain Prodigies, that have
been seen in the Air. They say, a Flaming Sword appeared lately to rise in the
North, and take its Course South-Eastward: From whence People make various
Prognostics, as their Passions or Interests inspire 'em. Some are of Opinion,
it presages the Conquest of Naples by this King's Arms. Others apply it to the
New Commonwealth of England, and to the Victorious Sword of Oliver; who from
General of the English Army, is now in this very Moon exalted to the Height of
Sovereign Power, Governing the Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland, under
the Title of their Protector.

Here are diverse of his Subjects in this City; and other English, Scots, and
Irish, who embrace the Interest of Charles, the Son of their late Murdered
King, who has been since Crowned King of the Scots. They give a different
Character of Oliver; yet all agree, that he is a Wise Statesman, and a Great
General.

The Scotch King's Party, speak contemptibly of Oliver's Birth and Education:
Yet thou know, this hinders not, but he may be a Man of Courage and Virtue.
They relate many odd Passages of his Youth, which seem to me so many Evidences
of an extraordinary Genius, and that he is a Person of a deep Reach.

He tampered with several Religious Factions in England, counterfeiting an
Exquisite Piety; whereby he first raised himself a Name among the Zealots of
that Nation, who looked upon him there, as a very Holy Person, and one marked
out by Destiny for Great Undertakings.

He soon got a Considerable Command, in the Army of the Revolters: Where he
signalized himself by many brave Actions, which spoke him a Man of an
Invincible Courage, and Admirable Conduct. So that at Length, none was thought
more fit than he to be General. In fine, he acquitted himself so gallantly in
that High Office, and has so wrought himself into the Affections of the People,
that they now look upon him as a Prophet, or Savior; and the Divan or
Parliament of that Nation, have conferred on him the Sovereign Authority.

Those of the English which are Affected to his Interest, speak Great Things in
his Praise; They call him another Moses or Joshua: They prefer him to Hannibal,
Scipio, and even to the Great Alexander. It is difficult for them, to speak of
him without Hyperbole's. It Is said, the King of France will court his
Friendship. Indeed, all the Neighboring Countries, stand in Awe of this
successful Hero. And the Hollanders, who are the only People that durst engage
in a War with the English Commonwealth, now seek for Peace, since he is
invested with the Supreme Authority.

In the mean Time, the Poor Exiled King of the Scots, takes Sanctuary in this
Court, with his Mother the Late Queen of England, and his Brother, whom they
call the Duke of York. The French King allows them all very Considerable
Pensions. And the Latter has some Command in the Army in Flanders. There is
another Brother also; but, little talked of as yet, being the Youngest of the
Three.

They are Generously entertained here, it being the peculiar Honor of this
Court, to be a Hospitable Refuge to Princes in Distress. Yet Observing Men say,
The King will in Time grow Weary of his Royal Guests: It being very Chargeable
to maintain them, and their Burdensome Retinue. Besides, he will have some
Reason of State to discard them, if he enters into a League with Oliver, the
New English Sovereign, who is courted on all Hands.

Eliachim the Jew (of whom thou will hear in the Divan) is just come into my
Chamber, and brings me Word, that there is an Express newly arrived, who
informs the Queen of a Defeat given to the Spaniards near a City called Rozes,
which they had besieged in Catalonia. The French were going to the Relief of
this Place, and the Spaniards set upon them in their March, but were beaten
into their Trenches; from whence they fled by Night, leaving Three Hundred
Spaniards on the Spot, almost Two Thousand Prisoners, and all their Cannon and
Baggage.

This has put the Court into a Jolly Humor. Nothing but revelling and dancing,
employs their Time: The Young, King taking great Delight in Balls, Masks and
such Recreations; having left off Hunting, ever since his Horse ran away with
him in the Tenth Moon of this Year, after he had shot a Partridge. Whereof I
have spoken already in one of my Letters.

The Great God preserve thee from Precipices, Poison, the Glances of a Witch,
and from being Canonized a Martyr in a String: And, for other Deaths, thou have
Virtues enough to encounter 'em bravely.

Paris, 30th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1653.
The End of the Third Book.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS. VOL. IV.
BOOK IV.
LETTER I.
To Bedredin, Superior of the Convent of Derviches at Cogni in Natolia.
WHEN I first opened thy Venerable Letter, my Heart on a sudden became fresh as
a Garden of Roses, or a Field of Cinnamon and Myrrh, whose Odours are Exhaled
by the West-Wind. In my Breast there sprung up a Fountain of Joy, serene as
Crystal, and refreshing as the Waters of Euphrates.

I contemplate thee as a Cedar among the Trees of the Forest, or as the Durable
Oak of the Desert. May Heaven prolong thy Life, till the Sound of the Trumpet.

The Commands with which thou have honored me, came in an Acceptable Hour. I
have received them with a Complacency which I cannot express. My Eyes were so
fixed on the Lines of Great Purity, that I could not for a long Time take them
off. Thou have hit the Mark of my Affection, in employing me to write what the
most Impartial Historians say of Jesus, the Son of Mary, the Christians Messiah.

That Holy Prophet, was Honored by his very Enemies. Josephus a Learned Jew,
who lived in his Time, and wrote the History of that Nation, makes worthy
Mention of him.

So did many of the Gentile Philosophers, though they opposed his Disciples and
Followers. Porphyry, whom the Christians commonly repute as a bitter Enemy to
their Profession, yet calls Jesus, Wise, Blessed and Divine. That Sage, was
exasperated against a certain Sect of Nazarenes in his Time, whom they called
Gnostics. These corrupted the Doctrines of Plato, and the Theology of the
Ancients; wantonly mixing Humane Fables with Divine Truths. Against these,
Porphyry sharpened his Pen, and not making a Difference between them and other
Christians, drew upon himself the Ill Will of them all. Yet he retained a
Profound Attach for the Messiah.

Would thou know the Circumstances of this Holy Prophet's Birth? They were
Glorious, even in Obscurity. For, though his Father and Mother were then upon
the Road to Jerusalem, Strangers at Bethlehem, and forced for want of Room in
the Carvansera, to lodge in a Stable with an Ox and an Ass, where the Messiah
was born, and laid in a Manger; Yet in this Contemptible State, there came some
of the Magi out of Persia and Chaldaea, who brought Presents to the Holy
Infant; And having laid at his Feet Gold, Myrrh and Incense, they prostrated
themselves on the Ground, and praised God, the Most High King of All, in that
he had honored them with a Sight of the Messiah.

This was in the 43d Year of the Reign of Augustus Caesar, the Roman Emperor.
At which Time, one Herod was President of Judaea. This Man being informed, That
certain Noble Strangers were come out of the East to Jerusalem, he sent for
them, and enquiring the Occasion of so tedious a Journey, they gave him this
Answer.

Peace be to thee, O Sultan; There was of Old Time a Prophet of Great Fame in
our Nation, who, among other Predictions that have since come to pass, left
also this in Writing:

That in Palestine should be born a Child of Heavenly Race, who should Rule
over the Greatest Part of the World. And by this Sign, Ye shall know the Time
and Place of his Birth: A strange Star shall appear in the Firmament, which
shall direct you to the very House where you may find him. When therefore Ye
shall behold this Star, take Gold, Myrrh and Incenss; and following the Conduct
of the Star, go and offer these Gifts to the Young Child; Then return
immediately to your Own Country, lest some Grievous Calamity befall you.

Now this Star has appeared to us, We are come to perform what was commanded Us.

Herod said to them, Ye have done well. Go therefore and seek diligently for
the Infant; and when Ye have found him, come and tell me, that I may go and pay
him Homage also.

But they never returned to him again. Wherefore, Herod in his Anger and
Jealousy, commanded all the Infants in Bethlehem to be Strangled, that had not
been Born above Four and Twenty Moons. But the Father and the Mother of the
Holy Infant, fled away with him into the Land where it never Rains, the same
Night that the Magi came.

What I here relate to thee, Sage Bedredin, is taken out of approved
Historians: For, many among the Gentiles, wrote of these Things besides the
Christians.

There was a Roman Philosopher, much about the same Time; a Man in great Esteem
with Caesar. To whom he wrote a Letter, wherein he mentions the coming of the
Magi after this manner. Certain Oriental Persians, says he, have set Foot
within the Limits of thy Empire, bringing Presents fit only for Kings, to a
certain Child, newly born in the Country of the Jews. But who this Infant is,
or whose Son, We are yet Ignorant.

Thou see, O Pious Dervich, that the Messiah appeared with no small Luster,
even in his Cradle. And in his Early Years, he entered into the Temple, and
disputed with the Hebrew Rabbi's, convincing them of an Universal Defection
from the Primitive Law of Moses; declaring himself the Messiah, and yet in
Profound Humility acknowledging, That a Prophet should come after him, who
should be preferred before him, the Dust of whose Feet he was not worthy to
kiss. This Passage the Christians have perverted to another Sense; but the True
Faithful, know it was spoken only of Mahomet, the SEAL of the PROPHETS.

The Time would fail me, to recount all the Stupendous Actions of this Man's
Life: And in calling him MAN, I imitate his own Example; Since throughout the
Gospel, he never called himself God, or the Son of God, as the Christians do,
but most frequently gave himself the Title, of the Son of Man. He turned Water
into Wine, fed Five Thousand People with Five Cakes and Two small Tenches:
Healed all Diseases, restored Sight to them that were born Blind, Raised the
Dead, went Invisible through Crowds of his Enemies, and Finally, was taken up
into Paradise.

If thou would know more of this Holy Prophet; There are Historians who say,
he was Initiated in the Mysteries of the Essenes, a certain Sect among the Jews.

That Nation, it seems, was then divided into Seven Classes. Among which, this
of the Essenes was none of the least considerable, as being the most Religious
Observers of the Law. Their Conversation was full of Humanity, both among
themselves, and toward Strangers: Avoiding Pleasures, as Enemies to the Mind,
and esteeming Chastity the very Cement of all Virtues. Therefore they despised
Marriage, as an Entanglement to Men devoted to Contemplation. They had also an
Equal Contempt for Riches. No Man of this Sect called any Thing his Own, though
'twere his Lawful Inheritance: But their Possessions were in Common, and
Equally distributed.

It was among their Mysteries, to Anoint their Bodies frequently with Oil, and
as often to wash 'em with Running Water. They neither bought, nor sold; nor
frequented the Public Places: But every one communicated freely such Things as
he possessed, to him that stood in Need. Thus there was a Reciprocal Exchange
of Kindnesses and Assistance, according to every ones Faculty and Power. They
were very Assiduous in Watching, Fasting and Prayer: Curious in observing the
Various Names of the Angels, which they frequently repeated, Invocating those
Happy Beings, as the Ministers of the King Eternal. And those who were
exercised in this Kind of Religious Life, arrived to so great a Constancy of
Mind, that neither Racks, Fire, Sword, or any other Tortures could ever move
'em to Renounce their Law, or speak the least Word in Contempt of their
Institution. Nay, they would rather suffer Martyrdom, than be prevailed on to
taste of any Thing that had Life in it. For they were strict Observers of the
Law, which commands Perpetual Abstinence from the Flesh of Animals.

It was an Established Article of their Faith, That as soon as the Union of
Soul and Body was dissolved by Death, the Former by a Natural Inclination
ascends to the Skies; even as Sparks fly Upward, when freed from the Gross
Earthy Matter in which they lay Imprisoned.

I have here given thee a short and true Character of the Essenes. Of which
Sect, all Christians own the Messiah to be a Favourer, if not a Member; in
Regard he no where is Recorded to have upbraided them, as he often did the
Pharisees, Sadduces, Herodians and the Rest.

Time will not permit me to say more at Present, concerning that Venerable
Prophet. But if thou would have a Perfect Idea of all his Virtues and
Sanctity of Life turn thy Eyes Inward, and fix 'em on thy self. For thou art a
Lively Transcript of the Holy Jesus.

Paris, 1st. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER. II.
To the Venerable Mufti.
THOU have heard of the Jesuits, an Order of Nazarene Dervises. All Europe
abounds with them; and they have attempted to settle themselves at the Sublime
Port, and several Places of Asia: Besides their Actual Possessions in the
Indies, where they are very Numerous and Powerful. They are esteemed the
Richest Order of the Roman Church, though the Constitutions of their Founder,
oblige them to Perpetual Poverty. But what will not the Sacred Hunger of Gold
tempt Men to? For the sake of this Charming Metal, they can Dispense with
Antiquated Laws, and Dull Melancholy Vows.

These Religious Persons, have lately spread about a Letter in Print, which
they pretend comes from one of their Order in Armenia.

This Dispatch relates a Strange Accident, that has happened at the Sepulcher
of our Holy Prophet (upon whom rest the Favors of the Eternal.) For it
affirms, that in the Eighth Moon of the last Year, the Shrine which contains
the Body of the Heavenly Missioner, fell from the Roof of the Sacred Mosque (to
which, they say, it adhered by Virtue of a Magnet, fastened in the Cantrel of
the Arch;) And that at the same Time, the Pavement of the Temple opened, and
swallowed up that Venerable Ark, wh^^^in were Reposited the most Holy Relics
in the World. And that from the Chasme, there issued out a Flame, like that of
Sulphur, accompanied with such a Smoke and Intolerable Stench, as caused all
the Pilgrims that were present to swoon away. Whereupon, many of them are since
turned Christians.

This Forgery is believed here by those, who never examine any Thing their
Priests tell 'em, but take all on Trust. The Common People bless themselves, in
that they were born of Christian Parents, and not of the Disciples of that
Wicked Impostor: So they blaspheme the Man, in whom the Promises of their
Messiah are verified, when he said, He would Intercede with God to send a
Prophet, who should lead 'em into all Truth.

They would never be at the Pains or Cost to examine, whether the Foundation of
this Story be true or false. All the Mussulmans who have been at that Holy of
Holies, know, That the Body of our Divine Lawgiver reposes in a Sepulcher,
built after the same Manner as the Tombs of our August Emperors, and other
Dormitories of the Great: Only with this Difference, That it surpasses all the
Monuments of the World, in the Invaluable Richness of its Ornaments, the Gifts
of devout Mussulman Princes. There appears always, such an Insupportable Luster
of Gold and Precious Stones, in every Angle of that Mysterious Recess, as may
well dazzle the Eyes of Mortal Spectators; since the Angels themselves, are
forced to (...) Veiled within those Majestic Walls.

Hence it is not hard to suppose, That the Circular Refractions of such a
Glittering Orb of Jewels, might create the Resemblance of a Tomb suspended in
the Air, or cleaving to the Roof of that Glorious Edifice, deceiving the Eyes
of some Ignorant, but Devout Mussulmans, from whom this Magnetic Fable first
took its Origin. However it be, no Man of Common Faith, or but Ordinary Sense
will believe, That God, who has for so many Ages protected the Sepulcher of his
Apostle and Favorite, verifying therein the Prophecy of Mahomet himself, who
foretold, as did other Prophets before him, That the Place of his Rest should
be Glorious, and that the Greatest Monarchs of the Earth, should visit it: I
say, no Man will believe, that God would at Length suffer so vile a Disgrace,
to happen to the Tomb of his Messenger, the Resuge of Sinners.

But the Nazarenes will believe any Thing, save the Truth. They are given up to
a Spirit of Delusion and Error, Incapable of Light and Instruction.

Thus Heave 'em till the Day of Alarm, and the Hour of Scrutiny: When the
Angels of the Test, shall enter the Graves, and having made Experiment of every
Man's Works and Faith, shall give the Just a Register of their Virtues in their
Right Hand, but to the Wicked in their Left Hand, a Black Record of their Sins*

In the mean Time, I prostrate my self before thee; begging, That when thou
turnest thy Face to the House of Ibrahim, and the Tomb of the Prophet, thou will send up One Ejaculation for Mahmut, that he may persevere in shunning the
Errors of the Infidels.

Paris, 19th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER III.
To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior.
SINCE what I wrote last in behalf of the Brute Animals is so Acceptable to
thee, I will comply with thy Request, in continuing that Discourse.

It Is certain the Ancients had another Opinion of the Beasts, than these French
Philosophers, who deny 'em the Use of Reason. Socrates used to swear by the
Animal Generations, and so did Rhadamanthus before him. The Egyptians Formed
the Images of their Gods, in the Similitude of Beasts. or Birds, or Fishes. So
the Grecians fixed the Horns of a Ram on the Head of Jupiter's Statue, and
those of a Bull on the Image of Bacchus. They compounded the Image of Pan of a
Man and a Goat, and painted the Muses and Graces with Wings: And the Poet
Pindar makes all the Gods Winged, and disguises them in the Shapes of several
Beasts, when in his Hymns he introduces them chased by Tryphon. Thou know
also, That our Holy Doctors affirm the Angel Gabriel to have Wings, with One of
which he once gave a Mark to the Moon.

When the Poets bring in Jupiter courting Pasiphae, he appears in the Form of a
Bull. And in his other Amors, if we may believe them, he changed himself
sometimes into a Swan, then into an Eagle. They report also, That he was
suckl'd by a Goat.

For these and other Reasons, the Ancients not only forbore to injure their
Fellow-Animals, but entertained them with singular Affection and Friendship. A
Dove was the Darling of Semiramis. A Dog was the Joy of Cyrus. Philip, King of
Macedon, made a Swan his Companion. And our Holy Lawgiver, was often wont to
sport himself with a Cat. He loved this Creature, for its Cleanlyness and
Activity; and therefore we Mussulmans, generally have a Cat in great Esteem and
Veneration.

That Favorite of God, understood the Languages of Beasts, and conversed as
familiarly with them as with Men. So it is famed of Melampus and Tyresias of
Old, as also of Apollonius Tyanaeus, who affirmed to his Friend sitting by him,
that a Sparrow which he heard chirping to his Fellows, told them of an Ass
which he had seen fall down with his Load, a little Way off from that Place. It
is also recorded of a Boy, who understood all the Voices of Birds, and by that
Means could foretell Things to come, That his Mother, by pouring Urine into his
Ears when he was asleep, deprived him of this Incomparable Gift, for Fear he
should be taken from her, and presented to the King. There is no Question, but
several Nations have a certain Knowldge of the Speech of some Animals. My
Countrymen, by a Peculiar Gift bestowed on our Fathers and their Posterity for
ever, understand the Language of Crows and Eagles. And the Ancients were so
well versed in this Knowledge, that when they conversed with the Birds, or at
least when they heard them in their Language utter Presages of what should
shortly happen on Earth, they persuaded themselves, that those Birds were the
Messengers of the Gods. Therefore the Eagle was supposed to be the Messenger of
Jupiter, the Crow and Hawk of Apollo, the Stork of Juno, the Owl of Minerva,
and so of others.

It is evident, that our Common Huntsmen understand the Different Voices of
their Dogs, when at a Distance they signify by One Kind of Cry, that they are
questing after the Hare; by Another, that they have found her; by a Third, that
they have taken her, or that she is turned to the Right Hand or to the Left. So
those who look after Cattle, know by the Voice of the Bull, when he is Hungry,
Thirsty or Weary, or when he is stung with Lust. So by the Roaring of the Lion,
the Howling of, Wolves, the Baaing of Sheep, Men are made sensible of the
various Wants, Inclinations and Passions of those Creatures.

Nor are these Animals Ignorant of our Language, but by our Voice and Words
they know when we are angry or pleased, when we call them to us, or drive them
from us: And our Domestic Animals obey accordingly, with as much Promptness
and Alacrity, as a Man or Maidservant. All which could not be, if they were
not endu'd with Faculties conformable to ours. They also teach their Young
ones, to sing Artificially. In a Litter of Dogs, Huntsmen choose the Best by
this Experiment. They take all the Whelps from the Bitch, and carry them to
some Place a little distant; Then they observe, which she first carries back
again, and those always prove the Best Dogs. What is this Distinguishing
Faculty in the Bitch, but Reason, or something like it?

We see apparently, that every Living Creature knows its own Weakness or
Strength, and knows how to use most dexterously those Weapons with which Nature
has furnished it for its Own Defense. They are also sensible, what Places are
most Convenient for them to dwell in, and which not. Thus the Weakest
Creatures, as Dogs and Cats, live altogether in Houses and Cities with Men:
Whilst the Lions, Tigers and such Fierce Animals, dwell in the Desert. Thus
Sparrows and Swallows make themselves almost Domestics with Men, whilst
Eagles, Hawks, Vultures and other Birds of Prey, build their Nests in Woods or
Rocks, remote from Humane Society. Some Birds change their Habitations at
certain S^asons of the Year, as best suits with their Convenience: Others
always remain in the same Place. The same is observed in Fishes. And in all
Living Creatures, it is easy to trace the Footsteps of Prudence and Forecast,
in order to their Own Preservation. Let Men call this what they Please,
Instinct or Nature, or Sense; it is evident, that there is an Exact Conformity
and Resemblance between these Faculties in Brutes, and what we call Reason,
Wisdom or Prudence in Men. And we have no more Ground to conclude them void of
Reason, because they do not enjoy it in that Perfection as our selves; than we
have to conclude our selves blind or deaf, because we see not so clearly, and
hear not so readily as the Brutes: And, that we have no Legs, because we run
not so swiftly as some of them do.

Doubtless, the Brutes are endu'd with a Faculty of Reason as well as we; but
this Faculty in them, is Weak and Imperfect for want of Discipline and Art,
which polish all things. This is manifest, from those Creatures which are
Taught to dance, and play a Thousand Tricks; to tell Money, to shoot off Guns,
to find out hidden Things, and bring them some Miles to their Masters, as well
Educated Spaniels will do. What can be a greater Argument, of the Proficiency
they make in Reason and Knowledge? Are not Elephants taught all the Arts of
War, and placed in the very Front of the Battle? Do not the Indian Princes
repose as much Trust in their Carriage and Conduct, as in the Service of their
Stoutest and Wisest Commanders? This Creature is as tractable and prompt to
learn any Thing when Young, as a Boy at School; which cannot be done, without
the Use of Reason.

To conclude, I have omitted Five Hundred Arguments, which might be brought to
prove the Brute Animals to have Souls as well as We, to have Faculties and
Affections conform to Ours. And therefore, it is little less Injustice to Kill
and Eat them, because they cannot speak and converse with us, than it would be
for a Cannibal to murder and devour thee or me, because we understood not his
Language nor he ours.

God who Locketh up the Winds during the Time the Halcyon hatcheth her Young,
thereby showing, that this Bird is his Favorite; will assuredly grant us a
Perpetual Tranquillity, if we abstain from injuring our Fellow-Animals.

Paris, the 2d. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER IV.
To Mustapha, Berber Aga, at the Seraglio.
THOU have formerly heard me speak of the Duke of Lorrain, and his several
Losses: Which most People thought, would have ended with the Excommunication
pronounced against him by the Roman Mufti; whereof I gave thee Intelligence.
But Experience teaches us, That Misfortunes seldom set upon any Man singly; but
assault him in Troops, whom Fate has marked out for Ruin.

Yet this Prince owes his Sufferings chiefly to his own Inconstancy, whilst he
has all along played fast and loose with the Kings of France and Spain; taking
up Arms by successive Turns for One, and at the same Time underhand practicing
with the Other; always Unfaithful to Both; and only driving on an Independent
Interest of his Own.

This is his true Character. To which we may add, an Ungovernable Disposition,
and an Insatiable Thirst of Money; which has prompted him, by all the Methods
of Rapine and Violence, to heap up an Incredible Treasure of Gold and Jewels.
So that having procured the Enmity of several Monarchs, the Jealousy of his
last Master the King of Spain, the Ill Will of his own Brother, (whom they call
Duke Francis) and the Curses of all People wherever his Army has been
quartered; He is at Length seized and Imprisoned by Archduke Leopold, in the
Castle of Antwerp. For which Joyful News, the Inhabitants of the Spanish
Netherlands, every where made Bone-fires of Joy. He was Confined on the 25th of
the last Moon. And soon after, his Second Wife was Taken into Custody, that by
her Means, they may discover his Papers and Money: This latter being the Chief
Thing they aim at; he being reputed prodigiously Rich; and the Spanish Coffers
want a Supply. They connived at his Robberies, whilst there was any Thing left
for him to plunder, and that they saw he hoarded up. But now he has done his
Work, they punish him for the Crimes, which they themselves encouraged; that so
they may become Masters of his Wealth. It Is said, he brook'd his Restraint very
well at first: But a while ago, being denied the Liberty of the Castle-Walls,
he grew Raving Mad; flung a Candlestick (which was all the Weapons they allowed
him) at the Governor's Head, and broke the Windows of his Lodgings. So that
they have been forced to Confine him to a Hole without any Light, save a little
that finds Admittance through an Iron Grate at the Top of the Room.

His Brother Francis of Lorrain, is to command the Army in his Stead; who
pretends great Fidelity to the House of Austria, yet may in the Issue prove as
wavering as his Brother. For, the King of France has Baits would tempt the
Virtue of an Angel: Yet nothing shall ever corrupt the Integrity of Mahmut, the
Mussulman, on whose Forehead Fate has Engraven this Motto, Prepared to Suffer.

I blush, Serene Aga, when I think I am so barren of Virtues, that I have
Nothing else to boast of, but my Loyalty. Whilst Thousands of Illustrious
Souls, Crowned with a Circle of Merits, daily ascend to Paradise: And though they
made but an Obscure Figure on Earth, even as Contemptible as the Exiled Arabian
in his Hutch at Paris; yet now take their Seats, among the Hundred and Twenty
Four Thousand Prophets, Favorites of the Eternal.

May thou increase that Happy Number, but not till thou have had thy Fill of
Bliss on Earth; and that all thy Enjoyments here, seem like the Perfume of
Ointments, which though they please for a Time, yet at Length cloy the Sense.

Paris, 22d. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER V.
To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
DO not suspect me of Partiality, or that I am fond of making Proselytes,
because I take such Pains to restore thee to Reason, and make thee sensible
thou art a Man. I have no Design or Self-Interest, in doing thee this Good
Office: And it is remote from my Humor, to busy my self in gaining Converts.
Only the Love of Truth, sets my Pen at Work in this Manner; being ever of the
Mind, That a Free Disquisition in Matters either of Religion or Philosophy, is
the only way to get quit of Errors. Perhaps my Case may be the same as thine;
and, for ought thou know, I seek not more to undeceive thee, than to
satisfy my self, by thus frankly venting my Thoughts: Since Nothing is more
commonly observed, than that whilst a Man is teaching another, he improves
himself. Our Memories are frail and treacherous; and we Think many Excellent
Things, which for Want of making a deep Impression, we can never recover
afterward. In vain we hunt for the straggling Idea, and rummage all the
Solitudes and Retirements of our Soul for a lost Thought, which has left no
Track or Footsteps behind it. The swift Offspring of the Mind is gone; it is
dead as soon as born; nay, often proves Abortive, in the Moment it was
Conceived. The only Way therefore to retain our Thoughts, is to fasten them in
Words, and chain them in Writing. This is one Cause that I trouble thee with
Letters of this Nature, that whilst I am instructing thee, I may establish my
own Reason, and confirm my self in the Method I have taken, To live according
to my Nature; that is, by not suffering my Rational Faculties to fall asleep,
whilst my Passions are Active and Vigorous in working my Ruin. For I reckon no
greater Shame or Misfortune can befall a Man, than to be deprived of his
Humanity, that is, his Reason.

What I have said concerning the Perfidiousness of our Memories, may serve as
proper Introduction to the Objections I shall make against your Traditionary
Laws.

If one ask you, Why these Laws were not Written, as well as the other; You
answer, That God took Care in this, lest the Gentiles getting Copies of them,
should corrupt and pervert their Sense, even as they have done the Written
Laws. But how then came he to suffer any to be Written? Had he not equal Care
of One Part, as of the Other? Or, could the Gentiles do more harm, by altering
and corrupting the less Substantial Traditions, than the very Fundamental
Statutes? For, that these Unwritten Laws contained only Circumstantials, your
Doctors themselves confess. What Man of Common Sense then, can sit down
contented with so trivial an Answer? Or, will you say, That God took more Care
to preserve these Traditions Incorrupt from the Gentiles, than to retain them
in their Purity among the Jews? For, that committing them to Writing, had been
the surest Way to retain them in their Original Purity, is evident by the
Preservation of the Written Law; of which there was so great Care taken in
Transcribing it, that if but a Letter or a Point were added, diminished, or
misplaced, they took it for a Fatal Omen of some Calamity, and the Faulty
Scribes were severely punished; Nay, the whole Congregation, were bound to
expiate the Offense by Fasting, Prayers, and Alms. So that it was in a Manner
Impossible, that with all this Circumspection, the least Corruption or
Alteration should creep into the Written Law.

I appeal now to thy own Reason, Whether this was not a much securer Way of
preserving the Laws Incorrupt, than by trusting them to the fickle Memories of
Men?

Besides, I would fain know, What became of these Traditions during the Various
Captivities of the Jews, and Depopulations of the Holy Land? Who took Care to
deliver these Traditions Unaltered to Posterity, when they were without
Priests, Prophets or Synagogues? When they were dispersed over the Remote
Provinces of Media, Persia, Egypt and Babylon? In those Days, your Fathers were
Slaves to the Gentile Kings of Asia; There were then no Seniors sitting in
Sanhedrim, who might take Care of these Things. Neither do I find, that Esdras
the Scribe was any Ways concerned for these Traditions, when he with his
Brethren the Jews, returned from their Long Captivity in Persia and Babylon.
All his most strenuous Endeavors, were employed in recovering the Lost Books
of the Written Law, without so much as regarding or mentioning the Other. From
whence I gather, That either these Traditions were of no great Importance; or,
if they were, yet they were wholly, or for the most Part changed or lost, many
Hundreds of Years before the Talmud was first composed; which, thou say, is
the Grand Repository of these Sacred Instructions. And in saying so, thou
contradictest thy own Arguments: For, if these Traditions were appointed to be
transmitted by Word of Mouth from Father to Son to all Generations, as you
suppose; then what need was there of writing them in the Talmud, or any other
Book? And yet the Writings of your Rabbi's are full of them. Thus thou
confoundest thy self, and runnest blindfold round in a Circle of Absurdities.

Rowze up therefore thy Reason, and suffer not thy self to be hood winked by
the Fables of your Rabbi's, those Industrious Midwives of Old Women's Tales.
Doubtless these Traditions, about which you make such a Bustle, are no other
than the Whimsies of your Cabbalists, who pretend to spy more Mysteries in the
Order of Two or Three Hebrew Letters or Points, than they are able to unfold in
whole Volumes. They crack their Brains, in Conjuring up far-fetched
Interpretations, from the particular Fashion and Placing of one single Dash of
a Pen. They puzzle and amuse their Disciples, with teaching them more knotty
and Romantic Divinity out of the Four and Twenty Letters, than ever Pythagoras
did with all his Mystic Numbers. The Alphabet to them, is the Oracle of
Theology. They have turned the Law into a perfect Riddle.

Believe not therefore, these Religious Mountebanks, these Holy Jugglers, who
with their sanctified Legerdemain, would turn you into Apes, that they may
laugh in Secret at your Folly; while they behold, how precisely devout you are
in cringing, jumping, dancing, howling, braying, and all your other Antic
Postures and Actions in the Synagogue; in the Practice of which, you have
bestowed so much Care, and are so exact, that you quite neglect the Weighty
Points of the Law.

I hope what I have said, is sufficient to convince thee, that those
Traditions, which you are taught to believe were delivered to Moses in the
Mount of God, are no other, than the Impositions of your Blind Guides; who are
studious of Nothing more, than to entangle you in a perpetual Labyrinth of
Superstition and Error.

It will not be a greater Difficulty to demonstrate, That the Written Law it
self, though Divine in its Original, is not of Universal Obligation to all
People; but only calculated for your Particular Nation, and such as were
willing to enter into your Interests, among the Nations adjacent to the Holy
Land.

And because my Time hastens me, I will only suggest one Argument for all, and
leave it to thy Deliberation; Whether it was possible for all Mankind to repair
once a Year to Jerusalem, to sacrifice in Solomon's Temple, as is required in
your Law? For, that it was not lawful to sacrifice any where else, is evident,
both from the Law it self, which expressly forbids it; and from the Examples of
your Fathers in their several Captivities; and from your own Practice at this
Day, who have made no Sacrifice since the Days of Titus Vespatian, the Roman
Emperor, who laid waste your City, and burnt your Temple to Ashes.

And this also may serve to convince thee, that the Law of Moses was not of
Perpetual Obligation even to the Jews themselves; since it is evident from
Matters of Fact, that for these Sixteen Hundred Years, you have not been in a
Capacity to keep it: And doubtless, God would never require any Thing of Men,
which he foresaw, they would not be able to perform.

Cease then to think so highly of thy Nation, as if none but they were the
Elect of God, or Capable of his Favors: Cease to insult over the Rest of
Mankind, and to curse thy Brethren, the Sons of One Father, even Noah the Just
Man, and Prophet of God. Behold the Sun and Moon, with all the Constellations
in Heaven: Their Influences are equally dispersed to all of Humane Race. Behold
the Elements, they serve all the Sons of Adam alike; They are not Partial to
Mortals, neither does any Faction bias the Winds and Rain. These happen all at
their Appointed Time and Place. And the Four Seasons of the Year, return with
even Courses to the Inhabitants of the Four Quarters of the World. The Plants
know no Difference between the Circumcised and the Vncircumcis'd; but yield
their Increase with Equal Indifferency, to the One and the Other: And the Brute
Animals, equally acknowledge both for their Lords. The Birds of the Air, are as
soon caught by a Heathen, Christian, or Mohammedan Fowler, as by one that is a
Jew. And the Fish of the Sea when they swallow the Hook, or plung themselves
into the Net, regard not the Difference of Religion in those that catch them.
All Things happen to every Man according to their Nature, and the Pleasure of
Destiny: Only Man himself transgresses the Condition of his Being. But those
that obey the Internal Lawgiver, let them be of what Nation or Religion soever,
doubtless they live Happily, and die in Peace.

However, lest Men should err for Want of Knowledge, a Light is sprung forth in
the East, even the Book of Glory, which confirms the Written Law, and instructs
Men in the Truth. Doubtless, this Book was brought down from Heaven. It carries
its own Evidence, and a Testimony of its Divine Original, in the Majesty of the
Style: There is a Spirit and Energy in every Word, sublimating the Intellect of
the devout Reader, and purifying his Affections: It is written in Arabic, in a
Dialect so pure and perfect, that the most Accurate Critics can find no
Blemish from the Beginning to the End. One Part coheres exactly with the other;
it is void of Contradiction. All the Chapters in this Glorious Volume, are of a
Piece. Which Excellencies could not have thus met together without a Miracle,
in a Book divulged by a Man, who could neither Write nor Read.

The Success it has had in the World, speaks it of Celestial Descent. The
Greatest Part of Asia and Africa, with many Kingdoms in Europe, have obeyed the
Alcoran for above these Thousand Years: Could such a Thing come to pass,
without the Decree of Heaven? When the Prophet and Favorite of God first
received his Divine Commission, he was like a Pelican in the Wilderness,
Solitary, and without Companion. Nevertheless, he was not discouraged, but
obeyed the Orders of Heaven. He saw himself in the midst of Rocks and Sands,
encompassed on all Sides with Terrible Beasts. Yet he despaired not of
Assistance from Above, but comforted himself in the Promise of the Eternal. He
first preached to the Savage Lions and Tigers; who, as if they had heard
another Orpheus, grew tame and sociable at his Powerful Words. Those fierce
Inhabitants of the Woods, came and prostrated themselves before the Sent of
God; they licked his Feet in Token of Submission; they environed the Place of
his Repose, as his Guards, and brought him Food Morning and Evening. The
Prophet wondered that so great Grace was given to the Beasts of the Earth. He
praised the Creator of All Things, and his Mouth was full of Benedictions. He
blessed the Day and the Night, and the Obscurity that comes between them. He
blessed the Dews that fall at the Rising of the Odoriferous Star, and the
Refreshing Winds that stir the Leaves of the Trees at Midnight. And in the
Morning he prayed, That all Men might become True Believers. Doubtless, God had
granted his Petition, had not the Angel who carried up his Prayers to Heaven,
met with the Devil, a little on this Side the Orb of the Moon, who stole from
him some of Mahomet's Words, so that the Prayer ascended Imperfect to the
Throne of the Merciful. Nevertheless, a Great Part of Men became Believers: And
more shall be added to the Number.

In a little Time, the Solitary Prophet saw himself at the Head of a Numerous
Army, all Volunteers, who resorted to him in the Wilderness, as they were
Inspired from Above. The Mighty Men of Arabia, opposed the Sacred Hero: They
led the Flower of the East against him: But they accelerated their own Fate,
and Incensed their Angry Stars. The Elements took up Arms against them, and the
Meteors fought in Defense of the Messenger of God. Lightning and Hail, with
Stones of Fire, blasted the Troops of the Infidels: And terrible Storm^ of
Wind, buried whole Armies in the Sands. Thus the Host of the Mussulmans, became
Victorious, without drawing a Sword; and the Empires of the Wicked, fell to the
Possession of True Believers. Persia, Babylon, and Egypt, were subdued, and
embraced the Undefiled Truth. The Alcoran was received from India to the
Mauritanian Shore: From the Rising of the Sun, to the Going down thereof, this
Holy Profession is made with one Consent, There is but One God, and Mahomet his
Prophet.

Now Nathan, consider, whether ever the Law of Moses had such Footing in the
World, or the Children of Israel could boast of such Universal Conquests? Your
Little Kingdom, has had its Period long ago; and both that, and all the
Empires of Asia and Africa, are swallowed up in the All-conquering Monarchy of
the Osmans. Your Tabernacle, Temple, City, and Sacrifices, are quite Extinct.
Your Nation is Scattered over the whole World, without Lands or Possessions
that they can call their own. Neither is there Prince, Priest, or Prophet, to
whom you can have Recourse for Delivery from your Misfortunes.

Come out therefore from the Synagogue, which lies under the Scourge of Heaven:
Shake off the Malediction: And being Purified, join thy self to the True
Believers, who are Blessed in this World, and shall be Happy in Paradise. Or at
least stand by thy self, and follow thy Own Light. Adieu.

Paris, 22d. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER VI.
To Dicheu Hussein, Bassa.
THE Policies of Cardinal Mazarini, are no Secrets at the Imperial City. Now he
is about to play his Masterpiece. He has all along maintained Pensioners in
the Service of the French Grandees. No Man of Prime Quality, could be sure he
entertained not at his Table, some Creature of this Minister. Disguizes of all
Sorts, both for Body and Mind, were never Wanting to Men dextrous at Treachery,
and Officious to do Mischief.

But now he is setting Spies of another Character on the Princes of the Blood,
and the Chief Nobility of France. Women are to become his Private Agents;
Females of his Own Blood; true Italians; and brought up, under his particular
Care and Management. In a Word, his Sisters and Nieces.

Five of them are newly come to this City, having been Conducted hither by the
Cardinal's Secretary, accompanied with a Considerable Retinue of Courtiers, who
went to meet them some Leagues from Paris. It Is said, That one of those Ladies
is a great Beauty, and that the Young King, having seen her Picture, fell in
Love with her.

This is certain, the Prince of Conti has Married one of them: With whom the
Cardinal has given his Palace, and Two Hundred Thousand Crowns in Dowry.

They talk, as if Another of them was to be Married to the Duke of Candale; and
a Third, to the Son of General Harcourt. And, as if Mazarini were Emulous of
Joseph's Character and Authority in Pharaoh's Court, he has sent for his Father
also, with all his Family, to come and reside in France. He is resolved to
stock this Kingdom with Sicilian Blood, a Race of Mazarini's: Who by Instinct,
as well as by Rules, shall carry on the Design he has laid; and either raise
this tottering State to the Height of his Model, or absolutely ruin it. For,
that Active Spirit, cannot take up with Mediums.

It Is said, That the Duke of Orleans resents very Ill the Cardinal's Ambition,
in Marrying his Nieces into the Blood Royal. That Prince, will not be prevailed
on to come near the Court: But rather favors the Prince of Conde, and the
other Malcontents. Whence some People are apt to presage, another Turn of
Affairs, before-long: For, the Generality of the French, are Inclined to the
Prince's Party.

There is great Caballing all over the Kingdom: and the Cardinal strives to
push his Interest forward, by all the Methods of a Cunning Statesman. He knows
the Prince of Conde's Spirit too well, to dream of a Reconciliation. And he has
a double Interest, in the Ruin of that Unfortunate General; his own
Preservation, and the Aggrandizing his Niece, the Princess of Conti: Who by the
Fall of her Brother-in-Law, will be Mistress of his Estate.

He is endeavoring also, to make an Alliance with the Cardinal de Retz, his
professed Enemy, and one raised by the Pope to that Dignity, on Purpose to
counter-balance Mazarini's Power at this Court, where he is suspected to
animate the King against the Court of Rome.

That Cardinal de Retz, is now a Prisoner of State, and has been so a long
Time; being first Confined by Mazarini's Orders. But the Wise Minister, now
thinks it safer to compound with a Man, whom he cannot longer persecute,
without drawing on himself the Revenge of all the Ecclesiastics, and
especially the Thunder of the Roman Court.

Therefore, to reconcile Matters and fortify himself, he has proposed a Match
between his Nephew, and de Retz his Niece. The Court is wholly taken up, with
making Friendships of this Nature: Which is an evident Sign, they feel their
Power at an Ebb, and fear it will be much Lower, if the Prince of Conde, should
once take the Field in France.

It Is nothing to the Mussulman-Interest, which Side gets the Advantage. For,
they are all equally Enemies to the Sent of God.

If I can by any successful Artifice promote the Divisions of these Infidels, I
shall not disserve the Shining Port. However, I will still pray, That those
Swords may be turned against each Other; which United, would hazard the State
of the True Faithful.

Illustrious Friend, let thy Presence in the Divan, be as a strong Bastion,
under the Covert of which, Mahmut may be sheltered from the Artillery of Evil
Tongues, and Sycophants.

Paris, the 14th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER VII.
To Dgnet Oglou.
THOU art not Ignorant, that when I first heard of the Cruel Sentence executed
on our late Friend Egri Boinou (on whom be the Mercies of the Creator) I wrote
to his Successor, Ismael Mouta Faraca, a Letter of Condoleance: Wherein, to
keep a Medium between the Tenderness I owed to the Loss which my Friend had
sustained of his Eyes, and the distrust I had of a Stranger; I filled up my
Letter to Ismael, with Consolatory Expressions; such as I would have used to
Egri himself, had I been in his Company. Believing, that Ismael would read my
Letter, to his Blind Predecessor.

I played the Stoic, and encouraged the Doctrine of Apathy: Or at least, I
abounded in Philosophical Counsels, almost as Impracticable as the other.
Nothing but severe Morality dropped from my Pen. And, all this, to cover my real
Concern and Passion for Egri's Sufferings; who, thou Know, was beloved by
more than thee and me. I told thee in a former Letter, That I did not dare to
trust my Sentiments, though disguized, to a Man, who on the score of his new
Preferment might become more quick-sighted than before, and would soon
penetrate the thin Veil of Words, and Spy something, in that Dispatch to my
Disadvantage, should I have ventured to descant on the Sultan's Severity, or
Egri's Merits.

Therefore, I thought it best to pretend an Indifferency, to which I am as much
a Stranger as any Man, in Cases that too nearly touch our Sense. It Is easy to
give Counsel to another, which in the same Circumstances, we are far from
practicing our selves. Then we can be full of Wisdom and grave Morals; but,
when it once comes Home, all our Philosophy vanishes: There remains Nothing to
be seen, but a mere Sensitive Animal, without Virtue or Patience.

My own Experience, but two Days ago, forces this Confession from me, when by
an unlucky Blow, I lost the Sight of both my Eyes, for the Space of Eight and
Forty Hours. It Is true, I should not have used them much during a Third Part
of that Time, had they not been hurt: Unless thou will say, they are
serviceable in our Dreams, and help our Souls to spy the Dark Chimaera's of the
Night. However, I remember 'twas no small Grief, even in that Absence of the
Sun, to be only Sensible of the Privation by my Ears: For, whilst the Windows
of my Soul were shut, 'twas in vain for those of my Chamber to be open; which
before this Misfortune, would by letting in the Light of the Moon or Stars,
have convinced me, that it was Night, without being beholden to the Clocks and
Bells of the Convents for my Intelligence, as I was under this Affliction.

Then it was, that in my Heart I unsaid all that I had written to the Eunuch on
the Subject of Blindness, and cursed the Philosopher for a Fool or a Madman,
who put out his own Eyes, for the Sake of his Thoughts. I envyed those more
Happy Fools, who are without Thoughts, but enjoy their Sight, which helps to
form and regulate the Conceits of the most Wise and Thinking Men.

Nay, such was my Passion and Melancholy, during this short Eclipse of my Eyes,
that I preferred to mine, even the Life of those Dumb Animals, whom Men have
learned to call Irrational, because they express their Sentiments by
Inarticulate Sounds, a Dialect which we don't Understand. And, I could have
almost wished my self Metamorphos'd, though it were into a Dog, provided I
might but have that Sense, the Want of which renders our Humanity Imperfect and
a Burden to it self. Or, if thou will blame me for such a Wish, I cannot
forbear thinking that Dog happier than his Master, whom I have seen leading a
Blind Man in a String along the Streets of Paris. How prudently did that
Faithful Creature act the Guide, in crossing the Way, if any Danger threatened
his Charge, as a Cart, Coach, or Throng of People? And, all this Conduct was
oweing to his Eyes, which made him Wiser than his Master; who, had he enjoyed
this Sense, might not, for ought I know, have Surpassed his Kind Brute in the
Exercise of Reason.

And now I am fallen on this Subject, of the Wisdom of Brutes, I must not
forget a Story which I have read in Plutarch, as also in a certain French
Author, of a Dog in the Court of the Roman Emperor, Vespasian, which would act
to the Life, all the Agonies and Symptoms of Death at the Command of a
Mountebank, who had taught him many such Comical Tricks, to divert the Grandees
of Rome.

The same Frenchman mentions certain Oxen, which it seems had Learned
Arithmetic: For, being employed in turning the Wheel of a Well an Hundred
Times every Day, when they had finished that Task, would not stir a step more;
but having revolved that Number in their Minds, desisted of their own Accord;
nor could any Violence compel 'em to farther Labor. Who will deny now, that
these Oxen were Mathematicians; Or, That that Ship- Dog had any need to study
Euclid's Elements, who having a great Desire to taste of some Oil, that he saw
in a deep Earthen Vessel, and not being able to put his Head in far enough, by
Reason of the long straight Neck of the Pot, after some Study ran to the Hold
of the Ship, which was Balasted with Gravel-Stones. From thence he brought in
his Mouth, at several Times, as many of those little Stones, as half filling
the Pot, forced the Oil up to the Mouth, so that he could Lap his Belly full.
Of this, Plutarch says he was an Eye Witness. Was not this, think thou, an
Archimedes among the Dogs? Are not the Goats of Candy absolute Physicians, when
being wounded, they never cease ranging the Plains of that Fertile Island, till
they have four'd the Herb Dittany, with which they restore themselves to Health.

Should the French read these Lines, and those others I have writ on this
Subject to Cara Hali, and the Great Mahummed of the Desert, they would censure
me as a Heretic, a Fool, or a Madman: Or, at least, they would conclude, I am
too Importunate an Advocate for the Beasts. They would call me Brute my self,
and fix my Pedigree among some of the Dumb Generations.

But thou, who have been Educated in the serener Principles of the East, and
have had the Honor to pour Water on the Hands of the Abstemious Eremit, wilt
have another Opinion of what I say, in Defense of our Kindred Animals.

He that has given Wisdom and Language to the Pismires, and Instructed them to
converse together by Mute Signs, so that when the Signal was given, the Alarm
was taken throughout their humble Territories, and they all fled away with
their Bag and Baggage, when the Army of Solomon approached: Inspire us with
Grace, to understand the Language of the Beasts, or at least, not to think our
Selves Wiser than them who understand Ours.

Paris, 14th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER VIII.
To Afis, Bassa.
THIS Court is wholly taken up at present, with the Preparations that are
making to Crown the Young King. The Place designed for that Ceremony, is a City
called Rhemes. It Is said, the Duke of Orleans will not be there, though the
King has Summoned all the Princes and Nobility to attend at his Inauguration,
according to the Ancient Custom. But that Prince, stomachs the great Sway
Cardinal Mazarini bears at Court. Besides, his Daughter, who has no small Power
over him, is affected to the Party of Malcontents. It Is through her
Persuasions, the Duke her Father, absents himself from the King, his Nephew.
Yet there are that say, his Mind will change, before the Time appointed for the
Coronation: And, that he will rather dissemble his Grudge, that so he may more
advantageously ruin the Cardinal: Who keeps the King lulled in a Circle of
Pleasures, agreeable to his Youth; that so he may not have Time or Inclination,
to pry into his Management of Affairs.

The Court is at present at Fontainbleau, a House of Pleasure belonging to the
King. They pass their Time away in Delights, drowned in Security. Whilst the
Wakeful Princes of the Blood, are plotting new Methods to rowze 'em from their
Lethargy, and teach the Young Monarch, That the Sound of the Trumpet and Beat
of the Drum, will, in a short time, be a more, Necessary Music, than the soft
Airs of the Lute, and such Chamber-Melody.

In the mean Time, the Prince of Conde, being Condemned, the Princess, his Wife
has petitioned the Parliament, that her Dowry may be secured to her: But they
have referred the Matter to the King. Her Husband seems to be lost in all
Respects, save those of the People's Affections, who favor any that are
Enemies to Cardinal Mazarini.

Monsieur Broussel, one of the Counselors of Parliament, whose Imprisonment I
formerly mentioned to be the Cause of the First Sedition at Paris, is newly
dead: Yet the Cause whereof he was a Patriot, dies not with him; but rather
takes fresh Vigor, from daily Grounds of Discontent.

It was more particularly revived, upon the Death of the late Archbishop of
Paris: The Clergy choosing for his Successor, the Cardinal de Retz, a Prisoner
of State, and under the severe Displeasure of the King. This Election was
countermanded, by a Declaration from the Council-Royal. Nevertheless, the
Ecclesiastics persist in their First Choice; Whilst Cardinal Mazarini
threatens 'em, with the Punishments due to those who contemn the King's
Authority. But they slight his Menaces, trusting to the Arms of the Prince of
Conde; which, they hope, will deliver 'em, in Time, from the Oppressions of
that Great Minister.

The Men of Ability Cabal, whilst the Vulgar are easily drawn into Parties, as
their Affections byass'em. Here is Nothing but Murmuring and Whispering against
the Government. Every Man endeavors to purchase Arms, and lay 'em up privately
as against some Public Invasion. Nay, the Citizens walk not abroad without
Daggers hid under their Garments: As if they either intended a Massacre, or
were afraid of one. All things seem to portend some sudden Eruption of Popular
Fury. And the Wisest know not, what will be the Issue of so many Threatening
Occurrences.

Only Mahmut (surrounded with Infidels) is resigned to Destiny. Knowing, that
no Human Counsel can hasten or retard the Decrees Signed Above.

Paris, the 17th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER IX.
To Murat Bassa.
IT seems the Devils have been lately let loose in these Western Parts, if we
may give Credit to the Deposition of such, as have accused certain supposed
Witches.

In Bretagne, and Province of this Kingdom, above Forty Old Women have been
seized and Imprisoned, for holding Correspondence with Infernal Powers: And
above half of them, condemned to Death; God knows with what Justice.

Some of them are accused, of Enchanting the Persons of their Neighbors;
Others for Bewitching their Cattle; And a Third Sort, for dissolving the
Mischievous Charms of the First and Second: All of them for assembling in the
Nightime, and using certain Diabolical Ceremonies; which they say, begin and
end in kissing the Posteriors of a Goat, or the Devil in that Form.

I know not how far these poor superannuated Figures of Mortality may be
wronged. It Is a Question, whether their Judges are always in the Right. A
shrivelled meagre Face, a hollow Eye, joined with irrecoverable Poverty, are
many Times the Chief Grounds of Suspicion: Which improved by Superstition,
Mistakes and Malice, have often prevailed on those who ought to administer
Justice, to condemn poor Wretches more Innocent than themselves, as Guilty of
Witchcraft.

Yet it cannot be denied, but that there have been both Men and Women versed in
Magical Arts, as they are commonly called, which I take to be only the more
Mysterious Science of Nature. Such was Zoroaster, the Great Grandchild of
Noah, and King of that Part of Asia which was then called Bactria. Such was
Apollonius Tyaneus, Philistides Syracusanus, with many others of Ancient Date:
These understood the Hidden Force of the Elements, the Influence of the Stars,
the Specific Operation of Metals, Minerals, and other Subterranean Bodies,
with the Virtues of all Vegetables. They knew exactly how to frame Astral
Images and Talismans, by the Help of which they were able to effect Wonders.
And all this perhaps, without once dreaming of Infernal Spirits, or having the
least Society with Devils.

Yet I believe, Lucian, an Ancient Writer, who never spoke seriously of any
Thing, scarce believed himself, when he related the Story of Pancrates, a
Famous Magician of Egypt, who by these Talismans, was able to transform
Inanimate things into the Appearance at least of Living Creatures. Thus he
would turn a Stick or Piece of Wood into a seeming Man, who should walk,
discourse, and perform all the Actions of a Rational Being.

A certain Stranger traveling with him once to Memphis, and lying with him in
the same Carvansera, as soon as they were alighted from their Camels, Pancrates
took a Plank of Oak, and having touched it with his Talisman, and pronounced
Two or Three Syllables, incontinently the Stock moved, stood upright, walked,
and taking the Camels by the Bridle, led them to the Stables: After which, this
Wooden Man came in and prepared their Pillaw; went of whatsoever Errands
Pancrates sent him. And when they departed, the Magician using a certain
Private Ceremony, this Officious Servant returned to a Plank again. This was
his Practice all along the Road.

One Day his Fellow-Traveller being resolved to try the Experiment, took
Advantage of the Magician's Absence, who was gone to the Temple, and had left
his Talisman behind him. The Curious Travelle, having been often an Eye Witness
of this Trick, takes a Piece of Wood, and touches it with Pancrates's Talisman,
repeating the Syllables he had heard him utter. Immediately the Inanimate
Timber became a Man, asking his Pleasure. The Traveller astonished at the
Event, commanded his new Servant to bring him a Bucket of Water. The Enchanted
Spark obeys. The Traveller told him it was enough, and bid him return to a
Piece of Wood again; but instead of that, he continued drawing of Water, and
bringing it in till the House was full. The Traveller fearing the Anger of
Pancrates, thought to dissolve the Enchamment, by cleaving the Wooden Animal in
Two. But this augmented his Trouble: For, each Piece taking a Bucket, fell to
drawing of Water; so that of One Servant he had made Two. This continued till
the Magician came to his Rescue, who having sternly rebuked the Traveller's
Rashness, at a Word turned the Two busy Drudges, to their Primitive
Loggishness and Inactivity again.

I do not tell this Story, as if I would have thee believe it, or that I give
Credit to it my self. Let us imitate the Author of it, who laughs at all that
delight in such Fables. But the Christians, who believe a Piece of Bread is
Transformed to Flesh and Blood, and becomes an Immortal God, at the pronouncing
of Four Words by the Priest, may be excused, if they put Confidence in the
Figments of Poets and Orators.

I have in my Custody the Journal of Carcoa, who formerly resided at Vienna, a
Private Agent for the Ever Happy Port. Some of his Letters speak of the
Superstition and Credulity of the Germans, in this Kind. Yet in a Letter to the
Mufti, he acknowledges himself overcome by the Unquestionable Testimonies, of
such as had been Eyewitnesses of the Life and Death of one Faustus, a German
Magician, who played a Thousand Infernal Pranks (as he calls them) even before
the Emperor himself.

He tells also of another Magician called Zyto, who lived in the Days of the
Emperor Charles IV. And when the Emperor's Son to whom Zyto belonged, was to
Marry the Duke of Bavaria's Daughter; the Duke to oblige his Son-in-Law, who
was much taken with Magical Tricks, as were all the Germans, sent for a great
many Famous Sorcerers to the Wedding. Among the Rest, while One was performing
a rare Exploit, on a sudden Zyto the Prince's Conjurer, came up to him with a
Mouth seeming as Wide as that of an Old Crocodile, and swallows him up at a
Morsel. When he thus had done, he retires and voids him again in a Bash, and
brings him thus drenched, into the Company, challenging any of the other
Magicians, to do a Feat like that; but they were all silent.

I hear of no such Tricks done by those French Witches, who cause so much
Discourse at present. The worst they are accused of, is, Bewitching their
neighbors Hogs to Madness, which thou know may be only a Natural Malady.

I pray Heaven defend us from the Enchantments of a deluded Phansy, that
Domestic Incubus of every Mortal, and we need fear neither Witch nor Wizard.

Paris, 20th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER X.
To Cornezan Mustapha, Bassa.
THE Fame of Christina Queen of Sueden, has, no doubt, reached thy Ears: I have
made Mention of her in several of my Letters. That Royal Virgin, is now about
to surrender her Crown to her Cousin, whom they call Charles Prince Palatine.
This is a Voluntary Resignation: And her Motive is said to be, a strong
Inclination to Solitude and a Private Life; being esteemed, the most
Accomplished and Learned Princess of this Age. But those who pretend to know
more than others, say, That the True Ground of her abandoning the Kingdom, is a
Resolution she has taken to change her Religion, and embrace the Faith of the
Roman Mufti, which is forbidden by the Laws of Sueden.

Thou will smile at the Proposals, which this Queen sent to her designed
Successor; and his Answer to them.

In the first Place, She will keep the Greatest Part of the Kingdom and
Revenues in her own Hands.

Secondly, She will be no Subject; but altogether Independent and Free.

Thirdly, She will have Liberty to travelinto Foreign Countries, or into any
Part of that Dominion.

Lastly, She will not have the Offices of Trust, or any other Gifts that she
shall have disposed of to her Favorites, revoked by her Successor.

To these Articles, Prince Charles Answered,

First, That he will not be a mere Titular King, without Dominions, nor without
such a Revenue as is Necessary to defray the Royal Expenses, both in Peace and
War. Secondly, That he will suffer no Competitor, Equal, or Sovereign in his
Kingdom. Thirdly, That he will not run the Hazard of her Intrigues in Foreign
Courts. Lastly, That if he be King, he will dispose of Preferments as he thinks
fit. And, in Fine, That he will not be the Shadow of a King, without the
Substantial Prerogatives of Sovereignty.
It Is added, That when the Queen heard his Reply, she said aloud, I proposed
those Articles only to try his Spirit. Now I esteem him Worthy to Reign, who so
well understands the Incommunicable Rights of a Monarch.

This Intelligence comes by a Secretary to the Spanish Ambassador who is newly
come out of Sueden, to Negotiate at this Court a Ten Years Truce between France
and Spain.

Here is likewise an Ambassador from Portugal, who acquaints the Court, That
the Portugueze have Expelled the Hollanders out of the Places they held in the
East Indies. But, if our Merchants bring true Intelligence, the Tartars will
Exterminate all the Franks that are in China.

In the mean Time, the Young King of France, passes away his Hours in Dancing,
seeing of Plays, and other Recreations, provided with vast Expense by Cardinal
Mazarini, to divert him from meddling with Public Affairs, and from thinking
too seriously on the Sentence he has Pronounced in Parliament, against the
Prince of Conde.

One knows not well, how to blame the Prince of Conde's Proceedings; nor yet,
to accuse the King of Injustice. Neither is it proper for a Mussulman-Slave, to
decide the Controversy: Our Principles and Laws, are different from Theirs: And
he that is esteemed a Patriot here in the West, would be Condemned for a Rebel,
without Hesitation, in any Part of the East; where but One God in Heaven, and
One Sovereign on Earth, is acknowledged by the Subjects of every Kingdom and
Empire.

But in France, the Princes of the Royal Blood, are Invested with such a Power
as renders it difficult for those under their Command, to distinguish 'em from
Supreme Monarchs. Yet, not One of them possesses a Government, Equal to that of
the Bassa of Egypt; or Superior to his of Aleppo.

I have spoken of these Princes formerly, in some of my Letters to the Happy
Ministers of Him, who when he pleases, can make the Greatest Sovereigns, the
Squires of his Stirrup.

And therefore, 'twill be needless to say any more on that Subject, but only to
acquaint thee, That the French Court, though they cannot relent of the Rigor
they have used toward the Prince of Conde, yet seem willing to compound the
Business with his Son, the Young Duke of Enguien; and by a Subtle Artifice, to
strike Two strokes for the State at once. A Great Duke of this Realm, has been
lately dispatched to the Duke of Orleans, to propose a Match between his
Daughter and Conde's Heir. Whereby the Estate of the Prince of Conde, will fall
to the Duke of Orleans's Possession, during the Minority of the Young Couple.
This is a Wheedle to reconcile the King's Uncle to the Court, who has been a
long Time estranged. But it is thought, his Displeasure is of too deep a Dye, to
be washed off with Court-Holy-Water.

I have no more News to tell thee, save the Death of a certain Prince, whom
they call the Duke of Elboeuf. And it is of no Import to the Divan, whether a
Hundred of these Infidel Princes die every Day, or no, so long as the Grand
Signior lives, and is ever supplied with Faithful Ministers.

For His Health I pray, before the Sun peeps over the Tops of the Eastern
Mountains, and after he hides himself in the Valleys of the West. Neither do I
rise from my Knees at the Five appointed Hours, without an Oraison for
Chornesan, and the other Bassa's of the Port.

Paris, 10th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER XI.
To Sale Tircheni Emin, Superintendant of the Royal Arsenal at Constantinople.
THOU that have the Charge of the Ammunition designed for the Conquest of the
World, art fittest to receive the News of a Terrible Blow lately given to a
City of the Infidels in Flanders.

This Place is called Gravelines, whereof I have made Mention in some of my
former Letters. On the 29th of the last Moon, the Powder of the Magazine there
took Fire, whether by Accident or Design, is not certainly known. But the
Damage it has done, is very great. It is reported, That a Third Part of the
City is blown up, and the Chief Fortifications about it, with the Outworks of
the Citadel. Three Thousand Mortals, had their Breath exhausted by the Violent
Convulsion of the Air, and were sent into Another World, well seasoned with
Saltpeter: Besides a vast Multitude of all Sorts, that were buried in the
Ruins of the Houses.

Some say, a certain Person coming to buy some Powder of the Steward of the
Magazine; as they were knocking out the Head of a Powder-Barrel, the Hammer
struck Fire. Others report, That this Person who pretended to buy Powder, was a
Spy or Private Agent of Cardinal Mazarini in those Parts: And that by his
Master's Order, he had prepared a certain Artificial Fire, enclosed in a Shell
or Box; and that at a certain determined Period of Time, it would cause the Box
to fly in Pieces, and scatter Flames almost as subtle and penetrating as those
of Lightning.

Having therefore this little Instrument of Mischief ready, and being
instructed in all Things, he with the Steward entered the Vaults where the
Powder lay, under Pretense of buying some for the Governor of Brussels. And
when they had opened one of the Barrels, he thrust his Hand among the Powder,
as though he would take up some to look upon; at the same Time dexterously
conveying his little Shell or Box into the Barrel, knowing, that in an Hours
Time it would work its Effect. In the mean while, seeming to dislike that
Barrel, they opened another; which he bought, and so departed. Within an Hour
afterward, all the Countries round about, were astonished at the Dreadful Blow
which made the Earth to tremble: They say, it was heard beyond the Seas into
England.

Thus the Contrivance of this Tragedy, is fastened on Mazarini; and such is the
Hatred the People bear to this Minister, That if an Earthquake should happen in
these Parts, I believe they would accuse him as the Author of it.

But it seems, as if all the Elements were at War against the Netherland
Provinces. I have already acquainted the Ministers of the Ever Happy Por^, what
Disasters befell these People by Storms at Sea, and Inundations on Land. After
which, the Element of Fire took its turn to Chastise them. For, in the First
Moon of this Year, a certain Windmill in the Low Countries, whirling round
with extraordinary Violence, by Reason of a Furious Storm; the Stone at Length,
by its Rapid Motion, became so Intensely hot, as to fire the Mill; from whence
the Flames being dispersed by the High Winds to the Neighboring Houses, set a
whole Town on Fire.

And now the Wrath of Heaven has been kindled again, to destroy these Infidels:
Yet those that survive, will not be Converted. Perhaps they will be ruined
Piecemeal, even to a Final Extermination, like the People of Aad and Thamod,
of whom at this Day there remain no Footsteps.

I pray God guard the Imperial City and Arsenal, from all Casualties of Fire,
from Inundations of Water, and from Earthquakes: And thy own Watchful Care and
Prudence, will defend the Magazines in thy Custody, from the Sly Attempts of
Traitors and Villains.

Paris, 10th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER XII.
To Mehemet, an Eunuch in the Seraglio.
I Acquainted thee formerly with the first Necessity I had to drink Wine, that
I might the better conceal my being a Mussulman, when I was made a Prisoner by
Cardinal Mazarini's Order. I tell thee now, this Liquor is grown Habitual to
me; it being the Natural Beverage of the Country where I am. But the French
temper it with Water, the better to allay their Thirst, and prevent Fevers:
Which Custom agrees not with the Stomach of a Mohammedan, who when he drinks
either Water or Wine, loves to have them Pure without Mixture. I use it
moderately for my Health, and to create an Appetite. But this Evening, I drank
a Glass of Wine, which is like to make me abhor it for Ever. In all
Probability, I shall turn as strict and precise as an Hodgia. For, in the Midst
of my Draught, I had almost swallowed a Great Spider, which lay drowned in the
Wine. The little Beast, had passed my Lips; but I soon cleared my Mouth, of so
Ungrateful a Morsel. I wish I could as easily discharge my Imagination, of the
hated Idea's it has imbibed with this Fatal Potion. Not that I think I am
poisoned, or have received any Real Damage from the Spider: The worst Venom,
lies in my own Fancy. It will be Impossible for all the Water in France, to
wash away the Prejudices I have Conceived against this little Insect. I have a
perfect Antipathy against it. The Sight of a Spider, would always make me sweat
and tremble. Now, if ever I should taste of Wine again, I should imagine every
Mouthful I swallowed, had a Spider in it. My Reason tells me, there were no
Danger, if I had one in my Stomach; having seen a Physician, without the Use of
any Antidote, swallow Two or Three large Spiders in a Glass of Wine: And this
was his ordinary Practice every Morning. And most of that Profession maintain,
That Spiders so drank, can do no harm. Yet my Antipathy overcomes my Reason in
this Point. And if Galen or Hippocrates were alive, they would not be able with
all their Learned Demonstrations, to reconcile me to a Creature, for which I
have an Invincible Aversion and Abhorrence. I had rather encounter with a Lion
or a Tiger, in the Deserts of Arabia, provided I had but a Sword in my Hand,
than to have a Spider crawling about me in the Dark. And therefore, I have
often envied the Happiness of the Irish-Men; for, in that Island, they say no
Venomous Creature will live. The same is reported, of the Isle of Malta. Which
Wonderful Privilege, both these Islands ascribe, to the Prayers of certain
Saints.

There is no Reason to be given for these secret Antipathies, which are
discovered in many Men. Some will sweat and faint away, if there be a Cat in
the Room where they are, though they know Nothing of it, any otherwise than by
the Secret Intimations of this Unaccountable Sense, which Nature has added to
their other Five. I have seen a Gentleman drop down in a Swoon, as soon as he
entered a Chamber, where there was a Squirrel kept in a Cage. And those that
knew him, said, It was his constant Infirmity.

If there be any Truth in the Doctrine of the Soul's Transmigration, I should
think the best Reasons for these private Antipathies, might be drawn from some
Former State of the Soul. And according to that Supposition, I should conclude,
That I had been a Fly, before I came into this Body; and having been
frequently persecuted by Spiders in that State, do still retain the Dread of my
Old Enemy, which all the Circumstances of my present Metamorphosis, are not
able to efface. But if this be so, I wonder I should have no distinct
Remembrance of my former little Volatile Life; since Pythagoras, the Great
Patron of the Metempsychosis declares, That he could remember several Changes
he had undergone. And particularly recounts, how he led a Merrier Life when he
was a Frog, than since he became a Philosopher.

It affords me Matter of Thought and is no small Diversion, to behold the
Contrariety that is in Men's Dier. One Man never tastes of Fish all his days,
another abhorrs Flesh; this faints if his Bread be cut with a Knife that has
touched Cheese, that swoons at the Smell of Mutton. Men have as different
Appetites, as they have Faces. Some are squeamish, and almost nauseate every
Thing that others eat freely of. Again, there are others to whom nothing comes
amiss. For my Part, I have many Aversions in Point of Diet: And, above all
Things, I can never be reconciled to the eating of Insects, Serpents and other
Reptile Creatures. Yet here are Men in this Kingdom, who live upon Frogs,
Vipers, Grasshoppers, and such Kind of Loathsome Animals. And I have read of a
People in the Southern Parts of Africa, who had no other Diet but salted
Locusts, which they catch in the Spring: When certain Winds, bring Innumerable
swarms of them over the Land, so that all the Country is covered. These People
are very Lean, Active and Black. They run swift as Stags, and will climb Trees
and jump from one Bough and Tree to another as nimbly as Apes or Squirrels. But
they are short Lived, never exceeding Forty Years of Age. For, about that Time,
they feel a Violent Itching all over their Bodies: Which tempting them to
scratch themselves, they never cease till they make Holes in their Flesh, where
certain Winged Insects breed; which multiply so fast, that in a little Time
they devour the poor Wretches. This is thought to be the Result of their Ill
Diet.

Let not what I have said, create any Squeamishness in thee, but eat thy Pillaw
with a good Stomach: For, that Food, has the Benediction of God and his Prophet.

Paris, 23d. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER XIII.
To the Kaimacham.
THE King of France, has been solemnly Crowned at Rhemes: Where were present,
his Mother and Brother, Cardinal Mazarini, with diverse Princes and Nobles, and
Foreign Ministers. But Nothing could persuade the King's Uncle the Duke of
Orleans, to grace this Ceremony with his Presence. He has declared, He will
never come to the Court, so long as Cardinal Mazarini is there.

Marshal Turenne has received private Orders, to repair speedily to his Army in
Flanders. What the Design is, we are not certain. Some say, he is gone to
surprise Gravelines, a City in Flanders, which was lately so ruined by the
Blowing up of the Magazine, that it is not in a Condition to resist the French,
should they assault it.

Others say, the King has commanded his General to lay Siege to Stenay, a City
belonging to the Prince of Conde, a Place of Great Strength, and exquisitely
Fortified.

It Is reported, That Cardinal Mazarini holds a Correspondence with the
Governor of this Strong Hold: And that on this Ground it was, he promised the
King, on the Honor of his Purple, That if he would suffer his Army to lie down
before it, it should by such a Day be delivered into his Hands.

The Duke of Lorrain, of whose Imprisonment at Antwerp, I informed Mustapha
Berber Aga, is now removed from thence, and sent to Spain, from whence it is
believed he will never come back.

From the North the Post brings News, of the Resignation which Christina, Queen
of Sweden, has made of her Crown to her Cousin, Prince Charles. They add, That
she caused a Crown to be made, with this Inscription, FROM GOD, AND CHRISTINA:
And, that she placed this Crown on the Prince's Head with her own Hands, having
before Absolved all her Subjects from their Oaths of Fidelity to her.

The same Post also tells us, of a Mighty Army of Moscovites, which are entered
into Poland, destroying and laying desolate wherever they come. The pretended
Cause of this Invasion, is said to be, a Disgust the Czar has taken at a
certain Historian and Poet of Poland; Who in reciting the Wars between those
Nations, had made a Mistake in the Genealogy of the Moscovite Emperors, naming
the Father for the Son. The Czar being informed of this, demanded the Head of
the Writer, as an Atonement: Which being denied, he rushed into the Territories
of Poland, to revenge himself by Fire and Sword.

These are the Actions of such, as pretend to follow the Example of Jesus, the
Messiah; Who commanded Men, To forgive Injuries, even as did our Holy Prophet:
Yet they scruple not to accuse us, of what they themselves are only Guilty.
Thus, whilst they are Christians in Name, we show by our Practice, that we are
True Disciples of the Venerable Jesus.

Doubtless, all Men are Just or Wicked, by Nature. Every Man's Fate is Engraven
in his Forehead. And neither the Precepts or Examples of Jesus or Mahomet, can
alter the Inclinations of those, whose Stars have Signed 'em in their Nativity,
with the Indelible Characters of Vice.

Paris, 30th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER XIV.
To Dgnet Oglou.
HItherto I have been in a Wilderness, or at least I Will suppose it, wandering up
and down, lost and confounded in the Dark, without Sun, Star, Landmark, or any
Faithful Guide to direct me. What shall I do in this Case? I am tired with
Perpetual Rambling; and rest I dare not, neither can I, such is my Uneasiness,
even in the only Circumstance which gives to other Men Repose.

Thus I discourse with my self when I am alone, and consider my Prefent State
as a Mortal. The Miseries of this Life, are the Themes of my First
Contemplation: And it is but Reason it should be so, because we feel 'em every
Moment. They touch our Sense nearly, and afflict us with sharp Pains. Yet they
are but like the Sting of a Wasp, Violent for a Time, but last not long.

This Thought carries me farther, and puts me upon an Endless Meditation, what
will befall me after I Am Dead. When I have contemplated all that I can, run
over a Thousand Paths of Phaney, and track'd all the Footsteps of the Wise, or
of such as were esteemed so, still I find my self in a Desert, more entangl'd
than a Traveller lost in the Forest, of Hercynia, which extends from the most
Northerly Part of Moscovy, to some Provinces in the German Empire, and is
reputed Five Hundred Leagues in Length.

In this bewildered Condition, I meet with many pretending Guides, One telling
me this is the Way, Another that. But because they do not agree in their
Advice, I know not which to trust: And am inclined to suspect some for Cheats,
and the Rest for Fools, as much at a Loss, if not more than my self.

Permit me to discourse with Freedom, my Dear Gnet, and let us unmask like
Friends. What signifies all that the Imaum's and Mollahs can say of Paradise
and Hell, since none of 'em have been there to make an Experiment? Why should
we suffer our selves to be amused with Notions of Things, which, for ought we
know, have no other Existence, but in the Harangues of the Preachers, and the
Phansies of the Credulous?

Think not that I am going to persuade thee to the Heresy of the Muserin, who
deny the Being of a God. I tell thee, I am no Atheist. From Every Thing I
behold, my Thought soon flies up to a First Cause: And there it is dashed into a
Thousand Queries. This I lay as a Solid Foundation, All Things were not Always
in the same State as they are Now. (My Experience demonstrates to the
Contrary.) But how much longer they have been otherwise, than my own
Remembrance, I cannot be assured, but by the Confidence which I repose in
People that are Older than my self, and the Faith I give to Books. Both which
agree in this, That they are Guilty of Contradictions without Number.

Those that were born before me, and Lived in the Days of Sultan Mahomet III
tell me many Passages of his Reign, quite different from the Relations of
others, who also Lived in those Times, and remarked the Transactions of their
Age.

A like Disagreement I find among Authors, who have committed to Writing, the
Histories of Former Times. It Is difficult to encounter with Two Men of the same
Opinion, even as to Matters of Fact. Some take a Pride in disguizing the Truth;
Whilst others have not Skill to take off the Mask. There are a Sort of Persons
in the World, Men of Supine and Easy Judgments, Credulous, and not daring to
call in Question what has been transmitted to them from the Authority of Such
and Such a Writer. They Superstitiously revere as an Oracle, the Manuscripts of
a Mortal Man like themselves, and Subject to as many Frailties and Mistakes.
And all this, only because they have been taught to do so from their Infancy:
So Forcible is the Influence of Education. Thus the Hebrews believe the Records
of their Nation to be of Divine Original, though they want not Verbal
Contradictions, and abound with Logical and Philosophical Inconsistencies. But,
that which is of Greatest Moment is, that neither they, nor any other Nation,
no not even the Assyrian or Egyptian Records, come near the Immense
Chronologies of the Chinese and Indians. So that amidst such a Variety of
Accounts, a Man knows not where to fix his Belief. But, Whether the World be
only Five or Six Thousand Years Old, or of a more Indefinite Antiquity, this is
a sure Maxim, That Something is Eternal. Even the Jews and Christians, who deny
the Eternity of Matter, and assert the Creation of the World out of NOTHING, in
a Determined Period of Time, must of Necessity own, There was an Eternal, and
Infinite Emptyness or Vacuity, which is the same as Moses calls by the Name of
NOTHING. Which will sound as harsh in Philosophy, as the Eternity of Matter
does in their Divinity. Nay, if I mistake not, it is of a worse Consequence,
even in the Doctrines of Religion, to assert an Infinite Privation, or Want of
Existence, to be Coeternal with the Substantial God, who is Omnipotent, Living
and Strong; than to affirm Matter it self to be Coeternal with Him: Since This
is an Actual Substance, and may with Reason be supposed, as a Necessary
Emanation of his Power and Goodness; Whereas the Other, is a mere Naked
Potentiality, a Nonentity, as the Western Philosophers call it, and therefore
cannot be conceived to flow from the Divine Nature, which is Essential Life and
Being. Yet, in these Nice and Remote Speculations, I am Timorous, and dare not
be Positive; lest I should profane the Honor of that Sovereignly Good, who is
the Breath of our Nostrils. To speak the Truth, I am Wavering in All Things,
but this, That there is an Eternal Mind, Everywhere Present, the Root and
Basis of All Things Visible and Invisible, whom we call Alla, the Support of
Infinite Ages, the Rook and Stay of the Universe.

Let thou and I, Dear Friend, persevere in Adoring that Superlative, Essence of
Essences, with Internal and Profound Devotion. Let our Thoughts be Pure, our
Words Few, and those full of Innocent and Grateful Flames. For assuredly, God
delights not in the Babbling of the Tongue.

As for the Rest, let us live according to our Nature and Reason, as we are
Men. For we may believe, that the Indulgent Father of All Things, will accept
us, if we square our Actions according to this Rule, without aiming at the
Perfection of Angels.

In a Word, let us love all of Human Race, and show Justice and Mercy to the
Brutes. For in so doing, we shall not be Unkind to our selves.

Paris, 13th of the 7th Moon, of the Year 1654. according to the Christian
Style.
The End of the Fourth Volume.
ADVERTISEMENT.
PROPOSALS, having been lately made for Printing The Great Historical,
Geographical, and Poetical Dictionary: Being a Curious Miscellany of Sacred and
Profane History, etc. Collected from the best Historians, Chronologers and
Dictionaries, more especially out of Lewis Morery, D. D. The Sixth Edition
Corrected and Enlarged by Monsieur Le Clerk. Done into English by several
Learned Men. With Large Additions, by way of Suppliment (Intermixed throughout
the Alphabet) Relating to England, etc. Wherein great Encouragement has already
been given by several Noblemen, Gentlemen, etc. It is desired, that those who
will promote so useful a Work, will send in their First Payment with what speed
they can, To the Undertakers Henry Rhodes, Luke Meredith, John Harris, and
Thomas Newborough. Where are to be had Proposals and Specimens at Large, and of
most Booksellers in London and the Country.


