THE Sea-mans Dictionary: OR, AN EXPOSITION And Demonstration of all the Parts
and Things belonging to a SHIP: Together with an Explanation of all the
Terms and Phrases used in the Practique of NAVIGATION.

Composed by that able and experienced Seaman Sr Henry Manwayring, Knight: And
by him presented to the late Duke of Buckingham, the then Lord High Admiral of
England.

I Have perused this Book, and find it so universally necessary for all sorts
of men, that I conceive it very fit to be at this time imprinted for the Good
of the Republicke.

September. 20. 1644. JOHN BOOTER.



LONDON, Printed by G. M. for John Bellamy, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the three golden Lions in Cornehill near the Royal Exchange.
1644.

A Preface: Showing the Scope and Use of this Book.
MY Purpose is not to instruct those, whose Experience and Observation, have
made them as sufficient (or more) then my self: yet even they should lose
nothing by remembering: (for I have profited by mine own labor, in doing
this;) But my intent, and the use of this Book, is, to instruct one, whose
Quality, Attendance, Indisposition of body (or the like) cannot permit to
gain the knowledge of Terms, Names, Words, the Parts, Qualities and manner or
doing things with Ships, by long Experience: without which there has not any
one arrived (as yet) to the least judgment or knowledge of them: It being so,
that very few Gentlemen (though they be called Seamen) do fully and wholly
understand what belongs to their Profession; having only so me scrabling Terms
and Names belonging to some parts of a Ship. But he who will teach another must
understand things plainly, and distinctly himself, (that in stead of resolving
another man's doubts, he do not puzell him with more confusion of Terms of
Art) and so (to appear to know somewhat) will still expound Ignotum per
ignotius. And for professed Seamen, they either want ability, and dexterity
to express themselves, or (as they all do generally) will, to instruct any
Gentleman: If any will tell me why the vulgar sort of Seamen hate land-men so
much, either he or I may give the reason, why they are so unwilling to instruct
them in their Art: whence it is that so many Gentlemen go long Voyages, and
return (in a manner) as ignorant, and as unable to do their Country Service,
as when they went out. These Words, Terms, and Proper Names, which I set down
in this Book, are belonging either to a Ship, to show her parts, qualities, or
some things necessary to the managing and sailing of her; or to the Art of
Gunnerie (for so much as concerns the use of Ordnance at Sea,) and those which
are familiar words, I set them down; if they have any use, or meaning about a
Ship, other then the common sense: And in expounding them, I do show what Use,
Necessity, Commodity, discommoditie, wherefore, and how things are done,
which they import: And therewith the Proper Terms, and Phrases, with the
different uses, in any kind appertaining to that word; which for better and
easier finding-out, and to avoid confusion, I have brought into an Alphabet.

The Use and Benefit whereof is so apparent for any who has command at Sea, or
for any who may be called to censure and judge of Sea-affaires, that I need use
two reasons, to enforce it: Only thus much: This book shall make a man
understand what other men say, and speak properly himself; which how
convenient, comely, and necessary a thing it is, all men (of sense) do know.
Should not man be Leashed (being a hunting or hawking) if he should cry
Hey,-Ret, to the Hownds, and hook again to the Spaniels: Or were it not
ridiculous for a man (speaking of the wars) to call a trench a Ditch: Or (at
Sea) the Star-boord, and Lar-boord, the right and the left-side of a Ship, and
yet they do simply the same, and both dogs and men will understand them alike.

To understand the Art of Navigation is far easier learned then to know the
Practique of Mechanical working of Ships, with the Proper, Terms belonging to
them: In respect that there are helps for the first by many books (which give
easy and ordinary Rules for the obtaining to it,) but for the other, till
this, there was not so much as a means thought of, to inform any one in it:
if a man be a sufficient Seaman with whom I converse, and yet know not how to
instruct me, I grant he may be fit to save his Country, but not his friend:
But I will speak it with as much confidence as truth, that in six months,
he, who would but let me read this book over with him, and be content to look
sometimes at a Model of a Ship, and see things how they are done, shall
without any great study, but conversation, know more, be a better Seaman, and
speak more properly to any business of the Sea, then any other Gentleman, who
shall go (two or three years together) to Sea, without this: for by the
perusing of this Book, he shall not only know what to question, or doubt of,
but likewise be resolved.

H.M.

The State of a CHRISTIAN, lively set forth by an Allegory of a Ship under
Sail: Prove 31.14. Job 9.26. Isa. 22.1. Rev 8.9.
Taken out of the Victory of Patience.
MY Body is the Hull; the Keele my Back; my Neck the Stem; the Sides are my
Ribs; the Beams my Bones; my flesh the plankes; Gristles and ligaments are
the Pintells and kneetimbers; Arteries, veins and sinews the several seames
of the Ship; my blood is the ballast; my heart the principal hold; my stomach
the Cooke-roome; my Liver the Cesterne; my Bowels the sink; my Lungs the
Bellows; my teeth the Chopping-knives; except you divide them, and then they
are the 32. points of the Sea-card both agreeing in number; Concoction is the
Caldron; and hunger the Salt or sauce; my belly is the lower Deck; my kidneys
Close Cabbins or receptacles; my thighs are long Galleries for the grace of
the Ship; my arms and hands the Canhookes, my Midriffe is a large Partition or
bulk-head; within the circumference of my bead is placed the Steeridge-roome
and chief Cabbins, with the Round house where the Master lies, and these for
the more safety and decency are enclosed with a double fence, the one Dura
matter something hard and thick, the other Pia matter very thin and soft, which
serves in stead of hangings; The ears are two doors or Scuttles fitly placed
for entertainment; the two Eyes are Casements to let in light; under them is my
Mouth the Stowidge or Stewards room; my Lips are Hatches for receipt of goods;
my two Nostrils serve as Gratings to let in air; at the one end stands my chin
which is the Beakenead; my forehead is the upper deck; all which being trimmed
with my fat in stead of pitch, and hair in stead of Ockham, are colored with
my skin.

The fore-deck is humility; the stearne Charity; active obedience the sails;
which being hoysed up with the several Yards, Halliers and bowlings of holy
precepts and good purposes, are let down again by fickleness, faintings, and
inconstancy; Reason is my Rudder; experience the helm; hope of salvation my
Anchor; passive obedience the Capstaine; holy Revenge the Cat and Fish to hawle
the sheate Anchor or last hope; fear of offending is the Buoy; virtues are the
Cabels; Holy desires and sudden ejaculations the shroudes; the zeal of Gods
glory is my Maine-mast, premeditation the foremast; desire of my own salvation
the Missen-mast; saving knowledge the Boltesprit; Circumspection a sounding
line; my Light is illumination, Justice is the Card, Gods word the Compass;
the meditation of life's brevity a Foure-houre glass; Contemplation of the
creatures the Crosse-staffe or Jacobs staff; the Creed a Sea grammar; the life
of Christ my Load star; the Saints falls are Sea-markes; Good examples
Land-markes; Repentance Pumps out the sink of my sins; a good conscience keeps
me clean; imputative righteousness is my Flag, having this Motto (BEING CAST
DOWN WE PERISH NOT) The Flag-staffe is sincerity; the Ship is victualled
afresh by reading, hearing, receiving; Books are Long-boates, Letters are
little Sciffes to carry and recarry my spiritual merchandise; Perseverance is
my speed, and patience my name, my fire is lust, which will not be clean
extinguished; full feeding and strong drink is the fuel to maintain it,
whose flame (if it be not suppressed) is jealousy; whose sparks are evil
words; whose ashes is envy; whose smoke is infamy; Lascivious talk is as
flint and steel; Concupiscence as tinder, opportunity is the match to light
it; Sloth and idleness are the Servants to prepare it.

The Law of God is my Pilot; Faith my Captain; Fortitude the Master; Chastity
the Masters mate, my will the Coxen; Conscience the Preacher; Application of
Christ's death the Surgeon; Mortification the Cook, Vivification the Caulker;
Selfedeniall is an Apprentice of his; Temperance the Steward; Contentation his
Mate; truth the Purser; thankfulness the Pursers mate; Reformation the
Boatswain; The 4. humors, Sanguin, Cholar, etc. are the Quartermasters;
Christian vigilance undertakes to supply the office of Starboorde and Larboorde
watch; Memory is Clerk of the Check; Assurance the Corporal; the Armor
Innocence; the Mariners Angels; Schismatics are searchers sent abroad; my
understanding as Master Gunner culls out from those two Budgecaskes of the New
and old Testament certain threats and promises which is my only powder and
Shot; and with the assistance of the Gunners mate, holy anger against sin,
charge my tongue, which like to a piece of Ordnance shootes them to the shame
and overthrow of my spiritual Adversaries.

My Noble passengers are Joy in the Holy Ghost and the peace of Conscience,
whose retinue are divine graces; my ignoble or rather mutinous passengers, are
worldly cogitations and vain delights, which are more than a good many;
besides some that are arrant thieves and traitors, namely pride, envy,
prejudice; but all these i will bid farewell when I come to my journies end,
though I would but cannot before.

Heaven is my Country, where I am registered in the Book of life; my King is
Jehovah; my tribute Almesdeeds; they which gather it are the poor; Love is my
Countries badge; my language is holy conference; my fellow companions are the
Saints.

I am poor in performances, yet rich in Gods acceptance; The foundation of
all my good, is Gods free Election; I became bound into the Corporation of the
Church to serve him in my Baptism; I was enrolled at the time when he first
called me: my freedom is Justification, it was purchased with the blood of
Christ, my evidence is the earnest of his Spirit; my privileges are his
sanctifying Graces; my Crown (reserved for me on high) is glorification.

My Maker and Owner is God, who built me by his Word which is Christ, of earth
which was the material: he fraught it with the essence of my soul which is
the Treasure; and has set me to sail in the sea of this world, till I attain
to the port of death, which lets the terrestrial part into the harbor of
the grave, and the celestial into the kingdom of Heaven; in which voyage
conveniencie of estate is a sea-roome; good affections serve as a tide, and
prayer as a prosperous gale a wind to help forward.

But innumerable are the Impediments and perils; for here I meet with the
proffers of unlawful gain, and sensual delights as so many Sirens; the
baits of prosperity (as high banks) on the right hand or weathershore, and
there with evil suggestions, and crabbed adversity (as Rocks) on the left
hand or Lee-shore ready to split me; the fear of Hell like quickesands
threaten to swallow me; Original sin like weeds clog me, and actual
transgressions like so many Barnacles hang about me, yea every sin I commit
springs a new leake; my senses are as so many storms of rain, hail and snow
to sink me; lewd affections are roaring billows and waves; self confidence
or to rely upon any thing but divine assistance, is to lose the bolt-sprit;
Restitution is heaving goods over board to save the ship; Melancholy, is want
of freshwater, the scoffs of Atheists and contempt of Religion in all places,
is a notable becalming; the lewd lives and evil examples of the most a
contagious air; Idleness furs it, and is a shrewd decay both of Hull and
Tackling. "Moreover sailing along and keeping watch (for they that are
Christs-friends you know must look for all they meet to be their enemies) we
no sooner look up but presently we ken a man of War, and then we must be for
war too, and provide for a skirmish.

"Now the Gallyon that has our Pinnace in chase, and always watches for
advantages to surprise it, is the Piracy of Hell, the synagogue of Satan; her
freight is temptations and persecutions, with all the Engines of mischief; in
which the Devil is Master; malice the Masters mate; cruelty the Captain;
Murder the Cook; Flattery the Calker; profaneness a Quartermaster; riot the
Steward; never content his mate; pride the Cockeson; superstition the Preacher,
hypocrisy the Boatswain; covetousnes the Purser; lust the Swabber; fury the
Gunner; presumption the Corporal; sedition the Trumpeter; drunkenness the
Drummer; vices are the sails; custom the Maine-mast; Example of the multitude
the Foremast; Lusts and passions the Cables; blindness of mind the Rudder;
hardness of heart the helm; the wisdom of the flesh the Card; the mystery
of iniquity the Compass; the five Senses, or if you will scoffing Atheists,
profane foule-mouthed drunkards, and all the rabble of Hell are the Mariners;
lewd affections the Passengers; little conscience the Load-starre, she has two
Tire of great Ordnance planted in her, heresy and irreligion (being either for
a false God or none) Oaths, blasphemy and curses are the powder and shot,
which they spit against all that worship the Lamb, or fight under the ensign
of Faith; her armor is carnal security; the Flag in her top, is infidelity,
the motto (There is no God but gain) Her ballast which keeps her upright, is
ignorance, most of her tackling she has from Rome; Antichrist as Pilot, steares
her in such a course that she goes on swiftly, proudly, securely, scorning and
scoffing (Sennacharib like) to hear that any Lord should deliver this poor
Pinnace out of her hands; yet in the sequel this silly Pinke having the
insurance of Gods omnipresence, finds not only succor from the Stock of the
Churches prayers, which like another Merchant man comes into the rescue, but
likewise that Gods Almighty power and providence is near as hand as a strong
Castle of defense to free her, whereby she escapes even as a bird out of the
snare of the hunter, to praise the Lord, who has not given her as a pray unto
their teeth, that would have swallowed up all quick, but deliver her from such
swelling waters, floods of affliction, and streams of persecution, as else had
gone over her, and even drowned her soul, as it is Psalm. 124. while this
great Gallion (though, it seem like that Invincible Armado) flies, and (having
no Anchor) when the storms of Gods wrath arise, down she sinkes to
desperation, and perishes in the bottomless pit or burning lake of fire and
brimstone, where we will leave her to receive a just recompense of reward.

R. Y.

A BRIEF ABSTRACT, Exposition and demonstration of all Parts and things
belonging to a SHIP and the Practique of Navigation.
A
Aft, or Abast.
IS a Sea-terme properly used, a-boord a Ship, to distinguish betwixt things
done, and placed from-wards the Stem, toward the Stern of the Ship, as when
they say, come aft: go aft: or the like; that is, go toward the Stern: Hale
the sheate aft: The Mast hangs aft: that is, toward the Stern: A shot raked
the Ship fort and aft. that is, came in before, and went out a Stern.

Also, we use to say, Abast the foremast: So that this word is not
particularly limited to any part of the Ship; but from every part of the Ship
has relation to any thing done, or placed toward the Stern, in respect of
any that are toward the stem. As for for example,

When we hoyce over yards, we say stretch forwards the maine halliards, whose
place is abast the maine-mast; and contrariwise, stretch aft the fore
halliards, which are placed before the maine mast, but abast the foremast:
When Ships meet, or being in consort, desire to know how all the company does,
they use to demand how they do all fore and aft, the reason whereof is, for
that the whole Ships company is divided; both in respect of the labor and
command, into two parts, the Boate-swaine and all the common Saylors under his
command, to lie before the maine-mast; The Captain, Master,
Masters-Mates-Gunners, Quarter Masters, etc. to be abast the maine-mast.

Aloof.
Is a term used in conding the Ship, when she goes upon a Tack, and is
commonly spoken from the mouth of the Condoy, unto the Steeres-man, when he
suffers the Ship to fall-off from the wind, and does not keep her so near, by
a wind as she may well lie.

Amayne.
Is a term used by men of War, and not by Merchantmen: When they encounter
a Ship, for that implies as much to the other as to bid him yeald. Amayne is
used in this sense also: when any thing is to be let down by a Tackle into the
howlde or elsewhere, or that a yard is to be lowed, or the like, then when they
would have it come-downe as fast as they can: they call a main, which is to
let go that part of the rope which they held before, to let it down easily
and by degrees: This word also is an adjunct to the greatest and chiefest of
some parts of the Ship, viz. The maine-Mast, the maine-Sayle, the maine-Beame,
etc.

In men of War, we use waving a-mayne, which is either with a bright Sword,
or any other thing, to make a sign to them that they should strike their
top-sayles: (which commonly they do, either in the fore-top, or on the Poope)
to strike A-mayne, is to let fall their top-sayles.

Anchor.
The form and general use of an Anchor is commonly known: but the several
parts, proportions, distinctions and appellations, understood by very few, but
practiced and experienced Seamen: The Anchor does consist of these several
parts: The Ring, the Eye, the Head, the Nutt, the Beam or Arm, the Shanck,
the Flooke, to which belongs a stock by which it is made to take hold.

The proportion which it holds in it self is, The shancke is thrice as long as
one of the flookes, and half the beam. The proportion in respect of Shipping
is, To a Ship of 500 tun, we allow 2000 weight for a sheate Anchor, The higgest
Ship in Englands Anchor, is but 3500; The distinctions are made by their use,
according to the proportion they bear in the Ship in which they are employed;
for that, which in one Ship would be called but a Kedger, or Kedge Anchor, in a
lesser, would be a sheate Anchor.

The sorts of Anchors, which by occasion of their several uses receive
different names and appellations, are first a Kedge, which is the smallest,
which by reason of their lightness, is first to stop the Ship in kedging
down a River. The next a Stream Anchor, which we use in deep waters to stop a
tide withal in fair weather. The other they call by the name of the first,
second or third Anchor, (all these being such as the ship may ride by in any
reasonable weather, Sea-gate or tide. These are something bigget one then an
other: And usually when they sail in any straights or are near a Port, they
carry two of these at the Bow. In which respect, they are also called by the
name of the first, second or third Bows.) The other which is the biggest, and
that which the Seamen call their last-hope, and is never used but in great
extremity, is called the Sheate Anchor, this is the true Anchora Spei, for this
is their last refuge. The Anchor is a Peeke, that is, when heaving up the
Anchor, the Cabell is right perpendicular betwixt the Hawes and the Anchor. The
Anchor is a Cock-bell, which is, when the Anchor hangs right up and down by
the Ships side: and this appointed by the Masters, when they are ready to bring
the Ship to an: Anchor. Let fall the Anchor, that is, let in go down into the
Sea. The Anchor is foul, that is, when the Cabell by the turning of the Ship
is got about the flooke, which will not only cut the Cabell a-sunder, but make
the Anchor not in hold: And therefore when ever we come to an Anchor, where
there is tide, we layout two Anchors, so as that, upon the turning of the tide,
the Ship wind up eleere of either Anchor, clear the Anchor, that is, get the
Cabell off the flooke; or generally, when they let fall the Anchor, they use
this term, to see that the Buoy-Rope, nor in other ropes do hang about it,
fetch or bring home the Anchor, that is, to weigh it in the Boat, and bring it
a-boord the Ship. The Anchor comes home, that is, when the Ship drives away
with the tide or sea; This may happen, either because the Anchor is too small
for the burden of the ship, or for that the ground may be soft and one, In
such places, we use to shoe the Anchor, that is, to put boords to the stooke in
the form of the stooke, and make it much broader then before: In Porto Fareen
by Tunis, I saw the experience of Tallowing an Anchor, where the ground being
so soft, we shod our Anchors and yet they all came home, and the Ships drove
a-ground, only, one ship, which had an Anchor tallowed, too fast, the reason I
could never truly know, but suppose that it might be, because that the tallow
sunck deeper into oze, and finds some harder ground at the bottom, then the
other. Boat the Anchor, that is put it into the Boat.

Anchoring, or Anchorage.
Is when we let fall an Anchor, or more, into the Sea, with Cabells to them, so
that the Ship may ride-fast by them; we say, there is good Anchoring, where
there is showle water, for in deep waters, the Sea has more force against the
Ship, and the Anchors are very long a waying upon any occasion: Ground that is
not too soft or ozie, in which the Anchors can have no fast hold: nor too hard
or knotty, so that it may cut the Cabells: The best ground to ride in, is a
stiff clay, or hard sand: Also, where they may ride out of the way of the
tide: And lastly, where they may ride Land-locked, so as that the sea-gate, can
have no power against them: To which may be added, that the Lee-shore on every
side is so soft, that if a ship come a-ground, she can catch no hurt, or else
that they may have sea-roome to set sail, if their Cabells break, or their
Anchors come home. That place which has all these commodities, is good to ride
in, and here we say is good Anchoring, or good Anchorage; bad Anchoring, or bad
Anchorage, is in a place where all or many of the contrary conditions are to be
found.

Anchor stock,
This is a piece of Timber fitly wrought and fastened at the Nutts, crossing the
flookes; The use thereof is so to guide the Anchor upon the ground, that one of
the flookes may be sure to fasten in the ground, without which, the Anchor
would lie flat upon both the flookes, and take no hold: The proportion whereof
is usually taken from the length of the shancke.

Arm.
This is not used as a word of Allarum, at Sea, as it is on Land; for at Sea,
we use to say, make ready the Ship; which implies the fitting of all things
belonging to a fight. A Ship that is full of Munition, small and great, and her
fights and Ordnance well disposed and placed, is called a Ship well armed: To
arm a shot, is to bind some Ockham, Rope, Yarne or old cloutes, etc. about one
end, as in Crosse-bar shot, it is most commonly used, that that end which goes
first out of the piece, should not catch hold in any flawes of the piece,
whereby it be in danger to break it. The same we use to any kind of broken
Iron, of two or three foot long, which we use when we come Board and Board in
fight, out of our great Ordnance, we also use to Arm some small shot for
Muskets, like our crosse-bar.

An Awning.
Is a sail or any other thing, made of Cantas or the like, which is spread
over any part, or all of the Ship, above the Deck, to keep away the Sun, that
thereby in hot countries, men may take the air, and yet not be so subject to
the beams of the Sun; in all hot voyages, this is of insinite use, both to
keep men from the Sun by day, and the dewes by night, which in some places
are wonderful infectious.

Axeltree.
The Axeltree, is the same in carriage as in a Coach or Cart, and does support
the cheeks of the carriage whereon the piece does lie. As also, we call the
Iron which goes through the wheel of the chain pump, and bears the weight of
it: The Axeltres of the Pump.

B
To BAle.
Is to lade water out of the Ships hold, with Buckets, Cans or the like; This
because it is more labor, and tires men sooner, and does not deliver so much
as all the Pumps will; we never use, but in great extremities, when either a
leake does over-grow the delivering of the Pumps, or else that the Pumps do
fail us a which happens many times in extraordinary pumping, that the pumps
with overmuch wearing, draw wind or chance to be stoaked, or else the pump
boxes; Irons or the like do fail us.

Ballast.
Is that Gravel, Stones, Lead or any other goods, which is laid next the
keelson of the Ship to keep her stiff in the sea; of Ballast, that is best
which is heaviest, lies closest, and fastest, and dryest, both for the ship
bearing a sail, stowing of goods, health of the company, and saving of cask
and other goods; whereof if a ship have too much, she will draw too much water,
if too little, she will bear no sail. To trench the Ballast, that is, to
devide the Ballast in any part of the ships howld, which is commonly done, to
find a Leake in the bottom of the ship, or to undock the ship. The Ballast
shoots, that is, runs over from one side to the other, and therefore Come and
all kind of grain, is danger ous lading, for that will shoot, but only that
they make Ponches (as they are called,) that is Bulk heads of boords, to keep
it up fast, that it do not run from one side to the other, as the ship does
heel upon a Tacke.

Beak, or Beake-head.
Is that part which is fastened to the Stem of the Ship, and is supporred with a
knee, which is fastened into the Stem, and this is called the Maine-knee; to
this is fastened the Collar of the Maine-stay. In the Beake-head, the
fore-tackes are brought a-boord, and is the proper stand, where men do handle
most part of the sprit-sayle, and sprit-sayle, Top-sayle rigging. And it is
also placed for the fashion, to grace the ship. The Beaks-head steeves, or
stands steeving, that is, stands very much with the outward most end up,
toward the bolt spirit. The Beake-head of the Venetian Argozis, and Shoamsh
Galeons, do see very much: by which we know them afar off.

Beam.
The Beams are those great crosse-timbers which keep the ship sides afunder,
and do support the Daks, Odops; according to whose strength, a ship is much
the better, or worse able to carry Ordinance: All strong and great ships, have
a Tire of Beams in hold, that is, a row of Beams, whereon lies a Deck. The
main- Beam, is ever the next to the mayne-Mast, at which place we reckon the
breadth of the ship: And stom this we call the Beam, both fore-ward and
aft-Ward, by the name of the first, second and third, etc. beginning from this,
which we call the mid-ship Beam?

To Bean.
This word in some eases, is taken in the ordinary sense, as for clearing much,
as when we say, a Ship will bear much Ordnance; that is, carry much by reason
of her strength. Also the bearing, or stowing of much goods from whence, when
we describe the greatness of the ship, we say, she is a ship of such a
burden; but it is used in many senses, different, according to the diversity
of the phrases. To bear sail well, that is as much as to say, she is a stiff
guided ship, and will not couce down on a side, with a great deal of sail. A
ship to beare-out her Ordnance, that is meant, her Ordnance lie so high, and
she will go so upright, that in reasonable sighting weather, she will be able
to keep out her Low-Tire, and not be forced to snut in her pores: One ship
over- bears the other, that is, was able in a great gale of wind, to carry out
more sails then the other, viz. a Top-sayle more or the like. To bear with
the Land, or with a Harbor, or a Ship, is to sail toward it, when we bear
too wind-ward of it: To bear under the Lee of a ship, is when that ship which
is to weather comes under the other ships-sterne, and so gives the wind to her;
this is the greatest curresie that a ship can give an other at sea. The Piece
will bear more shot, or not so much, that is, she is overcharged, or will
endure a greater charge. The Piece does come to bear a term in the use of
Ordnance: by which is meant, that now she lies right with the mark.

Bear in.
When a ship sails before, or with a large wind, into a Harbor, or Channel,
or else sails large toward the Land, we say, she- heares-in with the
Channel, Harbor or Land, but if she sail close by a wind, we use not that
speech.

Beare-off.
When a Ship would not come near a Land, or an other ship, but goes more
Roomer then her course does lie, we say that she bears off from the Land.
Also, when we tell how one head-Land Iseland ship, or the like, does lie from
another, that is, upon what point of the Compass, we say, they bear right
East, or West, or otherwise, off one an other: In hoysing any thing into the
ship, if it has hold by any part of the ship, or Ordnance or the like, they
say bear it off from the ship-side: So if they would have the breetch or mouth
of a piece of Ordnance or the like, put from-ward one, they say, beare-off, or
beare-about the breetch; So that generally, Seamen use this word bear off (in
business belonging to shipping) instead of the word thrust off, which to the
like sense, is most commonly used amongst others.

Bear up.
This is a word we use in conding the ship, whenas we would have her go larger
or more before the wind then she did: Beare-up round, that is, to put her right
before the wind, or to bring her by the Lee: The manner of doing it, is no more,
but thrusting the helm up to wind-ward, as far as it will go toward the
ships side.

Bedds.
When the Decks lie too low from the Ports of that the Carriages of the pieces,
with the Trucks cannot mount the Ordnance fittingly, but that they will lie too
near the Port Less, or Gun-wale; then we make a false Deck, for so much as
the Piece will require for her Travesing, to raise it higher, this we call a
bed: Also in the carriage of the Piece, that planck which lies lower-most next
the Carriage under the breetch of the Piece, whereon the Quoynes do lie, is
called the Bed.

To Belage.
Is to make fast any running Rope when it is hailed, as much as you would, as
the Halliards, when you hoyce a-yard, or the sheates or Tacks, etc. so that it
cannot run forth again till it be loosed.

A Bend.
Is the outwardmost timber on the ships-side, and is also called a Wale: these
are the chief strength of the Ships-side, to which the Futtocks and knees of
the Beams are Boleed, and they are called by the name of the first, second,
etc. beginning with that next the water.

To Bend, or Bent.
Is taken in the common sense: as when the shancke of the Anchor is with
overmuch strayning crooked, we say, It is Bent: But it is otherwise used, as
when they say, Is the Cabell bent, that is, when it is seized and made-fast to
the Ring of the Anchor. Unbend the Cabell, that is, unbind it, which we do
commonly when we do make account to be long at Sea, before we come into
Harbor: To bend two Cabells or Roapes together, that is, to tie them together
with a knot, and so to make their own ends fast upon themselves: This is not so
sure as splising two Roapes together, but it is sooner done, and most commonly
used, when we mean to take them a sunder again, as when a Warp, or any Roape
is too short for the present use.

A Berth.
Is a convenient distance and room to Moore a ship in: Also when they would
go clear of a Point, or a Rock, they say, take a good berth, that is, go a
pretty distance off to sea-Boord of it.

Berthing.
They call the raising or bringing-up of Ship-sides, the Berthing of her: as
they say, A Clincher, has her sides Berthed-up, before any beam be put into
her.

A Bight.
By a Bight, is meant any part of a Roape, as it is taken compassing, as when
we cannot, or mean not to take the end in hand, because of a Cabell, or other
small Roape being Quoiled up: we say, give me the Bight, or hold by the Bight;
that is, by one of the fakes, which lies rolled up one over the other.

Bildge, or Buldge.
The Bildge of the Ship, is the breadth of the flooce, whereon the ship does
rest, when she is a-ground. A ship is Bilged, that is, when she strikes on a
Rock, or an Anchor, or the like, and breaks off her Timbers or planckes there,
and so springs a Leake.

Bildg-water.
Is the water by reason of the Ships breadth and depth, lies in the Bildge, and
cannot come to the well, and therefore the Flemmish ships have generally,
broader and longer floares then our ships have, besides the ordinary Pumps at
the Mayne-mast, two Bildge-Pumps.

A Bittakle.
Is a close Cubbard placed in the Steeridge before the Whip, or Tiller, whereon
the Compass does stand, which is not fastened together with iron nails, but
wooden pinnes, because that iron would draw the Compass, so that it would
never stand true.

These are to be so contrived, that they may carry candles or lamps in them, to
give light to the Compass so as it may disperse no light, and yet to let any
be seen about the Ship.

A Bitter.
Is no more, but a turn of the Cabell about the Bitts, which is used in this
kind, when we come to Anchor in any great Tide, or current, or wind, especially
in deep water, after the Cabell is run-out a convenient way. We take a turn
which is about the Bitts, that we may by little and little, veere it out at
ease: for otherwise, if a stopper should chance to fail, the Cabell would run
all-out, or as the phrase is, End for End, now this turn of the Cabell is
called a Bitter, and when the Ship is by this means stopped, we say the Ship
is brought up to a Bitter.

A Bitter-end.
Is that end of the Cabell, which is used to be within board, still at the
Bitts, when the Ship rides at an Anchor, so that upon occasion when they would
have that end bent to the Anchor, they say, Bend to the Bitter-end.

The Bitts.
Are the two maine square pieces of Timber which stand piller-wise, commonly
placed abast the Manger in the Loofe of the Ship: and for no other use, but to
make fast, or as it were, to Belage the Cabell unto, when we ride at an Anchor;
The lower part of them, is fastened, in hold to the Riders, but the middle part
does bear, for their better strength, and are bolted, in great Ships, to two
beams, which cross to the Bows of the Ship, and therefore sometimes, in
extraordinary storms, we are feign to make fast the Cabell to the Maine-mast,
for the better relieving the Bitts and safety of the Bows which have in great
Road-steads been violently torn from the after-part of the Ship.

Blocks.
Are these small wooden things, having Sheevers in them, wherein all the
running-Roapes do run. There are diverse kinds of blocks: as single Blocks,
double blocks; Blocks with 3,4, or 5, sheevers in them, and they are called by
the names of Roapes whereunto they serve. As the sheate Block, the tack-Block,
the fish-Block, etc. Note that double-Blocks, do purchase more then
single-blocks, and therefore in all places where we have occasion to use
strength with few hands, we have double-Blocks (as to the Tacks of our
Ordnance:) But you must note also, that though double-blocks purchase with more
ease, yet single-blocks do purchase faster: When we hale upon any Tackle,
Halliards or the like, to which two Blocks do belong, when they meet and
touch, we can hail no more, and this we call Block and Block.

Blow.
Every man knows when the wind blows: but there are some speeches used at
Sea, which are not generally understood, as the wind blowes-home, or blows
through; That is, when the wind does not cease, or grow less, till it comes
past that place: Also, blow through, is sometimes used, when they think the
wind will be so great, that it will blow asunder the sails, In some places,
(as I have seen at Santa Cray in Barbary,) the wind being right-off the Sea,
and a fresh gale, as much as we could bear out top-sayles, when we came within
less then a League of the Road, we had little or no wind at all, and it is
infallibly ever so. The natural cause whereof, I could never find out: for it
cannot be the height of the land, since all that Bay is low land, only the Cape
which is not very high; and we know that at the Peekes of Tenneriff and Fyall
(which are the highest Lands in all the world) it does the contrary. Nor can it
be the heat of the Land, which should duller the wind, for this happens there
in the winter also, and besides we see the contrary in hotter Countries, when a
wind increases so much that they cannot bear any top-sayles, then they use to
say, that they were blown into their courses, (that is,) could only have out
those sails. It blows hard, fresh, stiff, high; all words easily known when
they express an extraordinary wind, they say, it will blow the sail out of
the Bolt-roapes: If the touchhole of a Piece be gulld, much powder will flame
out, and that is also called blowing.

Bluff, or Bluff-headed.
The Boat belonging to a Ship, is either called the Ships-boate, or the
Long-boate, and this is ever intended to be able to carry-forth and weigh her
sheate Anchor; other small Boats, which they carry for lightness, to hoyse in
and out quickly, are called Skiffes and Shallops, according to their form. A
good long boat will live in any grown sea, if the water be sometimes freed,
unless the sea break very much: The Roape by which it is towed at the Ships
stern, is called the Boat roape, to which, to keep the boat from sheering,
we add an other, which we call a Gest-roape: we do also to save the Bows of
the boat, which would be torn out with the twitches which the Ship under
sail would give, use to swite her, that is, make fast a Roape round by the
gun-wale, and to that, make fast the Boat roape. Free the Boat, that is,
fling out the water: Man the Boat, that is, some men go to row the Boat:
The Boats Ging, that is, those that use to row in the boat, which are the
Cockson and his Ging, to whom the charge of the boat belongs: Fend the boat,
that is, save her from beating against the Ship-sides: Wind the Boat, that is,
bring her head the other way. A bold Boat, that is one that will endure a
rough Sea well. A ships Boat, is the very Model of a Ship, and is built in
parts in all things answerable to those which a Ship requires, both for sailing
and bearing a sail, and they bear the same names, as do all the parts of a
Ship under water, as, Rake, Run, Stem, Stern, Bow, Bildge, etc.

Bolt or Bolts.
Are iron pinnes belonging both to the building, and rigging of a Ship; of
which there are diverse kinds, as Ring-bolts, which are of infinite necessary
use, both for the bringing to of the planckes and wales to the ship, as also
the chief things whereunto we fasten the tackles and breetchings of the great
Ordnance. Drive-bolts, which is a long one to drive out an other bolt, or
Treenell by. Set-bolts, used in the building, for fireing the planckes, and
other works close together. Ragg-bolts, which are sharpened at one end and
jagged, that they may not be drawn-out. Clench-bolts, which are clinched with a
Riviting hammer, to prevent drawing out. Fore lock-bolts, which are made at the
end with an eye, whereunto a fore-lock of iron is driven over a Ring, to keep
it fast from starting-back. Fender-bolts, which are made with a long head and
beat into the outward most bend of the Ship, to save the ship sides, if an
other ship should lie a-boord her. Bolts are many times called according to the
places whereunto they are used, as chaine-bolts, bolts for Carriages and the
like: The use of them is so great, that without them a ship cannot be built
strong, for they bind together all the timbers knees and the like, which do
strengthen the Ship.

A Bolt-roape.
Is the Roape into which the Sail is soawed, or made fast: that is a
three-strained-roape made gentle and not twisted so hard as the others, of
purpose to be the more pliant to the sail, as also that they may soaw the
sail into it the better.

Bolt-sprit.
To this is fastened all the stages that belong to the Foremast, and
fore-top-Mast, and fore-top-gallant, etc. with their bowlings, tacks, besides
the rigging which belongs to its particular sails, which are only two: viz.
Sprits-Sailes, and sprit saile-top-saile, if a ship spend her bolt-sprit, or,
as the more proper speech is, if the bolt-sprit drop by the board, the
foremast will quickly follow, if it be a rough sea, especially if you go by a
wind, this bears the same proportion for length and bigness, as the foremast
does.

A Bonnet.
Is belonging to an other sail, but is commonly used with none but the Missen,
maine and fore-sailes, and the sprit-sailes I have seen, but it is very rate,
a top-saile bonnet, and hold it very useful in an easy gale, quarter winds or
before a wind, this is commonly as deep as the sail it belongs to, there is
no certain proportion for some will make the Maine-saile so deep that with a
showele bonnet, they will latch all the mast without a drabler: Others will
make the maine-saile-showler, that they may with foul weather bear it safer,
and then the bonnet will be the deeper. Lase on the bonnet, or bring to the
bonnet, that is, put it to the course: loosing is here very proper, because it
is made fast with latchetts, into the eylot-holes of the sail: Note that when
we do speak of the sail in any correspondence to the bonnet, we call it the
course, and not the sail: as we say when a ship has those sails out; course
and bonnet of each: not maine-saile and bonnet, and fore-saile and bonnet.
Shake off the bonnet: that is, take it off.

A Boome.
Is a long Pole, which we use commonly to spread out the clew of the
studding-sayle; yet sometimes also we Boome out the clewe of the Maine-saile,
and fore-saile, to spread them out so much the broader to receive more wind.
When we say a ship comes booming toward us, it is as much as to say, she comes
with all the sail she can make: Note that booming of sails, is never used but
quarter winds, or before a wind: For by a wind, Studding sails, and booming
the sails is not useful: In coming into harbors where the channel is
narrow and crooked, and the land about it overflowen, they use to set poles
with bushes, or baskets at the tops, to direct how men should steer along the
channel by them: and these are also in many places called Boomes, but in some
others, they are called Beacons.

Board, or a Board.
By this is not only meant deales-boords, or the like, but otherwise: for when
we use the word, A board, at sea, it is as much as to say, within the ship; To
go a board, that is to go into the ship. Bring the tack close a board, that
is, pull down the tack close to the Chestree or the gun-wale: Board and board,
that is, when two ships touch each other. The weather-boord, that is as much as
to say, to windward. To make a board, or as we use to say, to board it up to a
place, is to turn to wind-ward; which we do, by standing sometimes one way,
sometimes the other for the gaining a place to wind-ward: In which, note that
the farther you stand-off upon one point of the Compass, the better board you
shall make: and it is better making long boords, then short-boords, if you have
sea room. A long-boord is, when you stand a great way off before you tack or
turn. A short-boord, is when you stand-off but a little. A good board, is when
we have got up much to wind-ward, for sometimes we take a great deal of
pains, and get little, either by reason of a current or tide, that may take
her on the weather-bowe, or by reason of a head-sea, which may drive her to
Lee-ward, and hinder her way, or for that the ship may be a Lee-ward ship:
Sometimes again, when it is a smooth sea; a current under the Lee-bowe, and a
good ship by a wind, she will get a point or two more in the wind then we
expect. Here note that a crosse-saile ship in a sea, cannot make her wag nearer
then 6 points, unless there be tide or current which does set to wind-ward,
within board, with-out-boord-over-boord: by the board, all terms obvious to
common sense. To leave a land on back board, is to leave it asterne, or behind,
for the back board, is that which in boats or skiffes, we lean our backs
against. In fight, to board a ship, is to bring the ship to touch the other,
where you must note the advantages and disadvantages of every place in
boording: and know that when two ships sight, the defendant may choose whether
you shall board him or no, but only in the quarter, which is a bad place to
board: For men can worst enter there, in respect that it is the highest part of
the ships hull: and for that there is only the Missen-shrowdes to enter by; as
also, for that ships are hottest there, and men being entered there can do
little good, and are easily skowred off with Murderers from the close-sights:
the best boording for entering; is if you can, to board on the bow, for then
you may quickly bring all your broade-side to: but the greatest advantage for
use of Ordnance, is to board a-thwart her hawes, for then you may use all your
Ordnance on one side, and she can only use her Chase and her Prowe Pieces.

The Bow.
Is that part of the ship which is broadest before, and begins from the Loofe,
till it come compassing about toward the stem. The proportioning of this part,
is of great importance for the sayleing of the Ship: for this first breakes-off
the sea, and is that part which bears all the ship forward, on which is in a
manner all the bearing of the ship: If the bow be too broad the ship will not
pass easily through the sea, but carry a great deal of dead water before her:
if it be too lean or thin, she will pitch or beat mightily into a hollow sea,
for want of breadth to bear her up; so that there must be a discreet mean
betwixt both these: The shaping of this part, does much import the ships going
by a-wind; yet I have seen ships of both sorts go will by a-wind; but most
commonly those that have good bold bows, and yet it is certain, that a ships
way-after-on is of more importance for her sayleing by a wind. A bold bow, is
a broad round bow: a Lean bow, is a narrow thin bow: the bow Piece, is
that which lies in the bow.

Bowling.
Is a Roape which is fastened to the Leetch or middle part of the outside of the
sail, the use whereof is to make the sail stand sharper or closer, by a wind:
The Ancients, as it is reported, did ever sail before the wind, the reason
whereof, I conceive to be, because they had not the knowledge and use of this
Roape: It is fastened in 2, 3, 4, or more parts to the sail, which they call
the bowling bridle, only the Missen bowling is fastened to the lower end of the
yard: This Roape belongs to all sails, excepting sprit-saile and sprit-saile
top-saile, which have no place to hail a Bowleing forward by; and therefore
these sails cannot be used close by a wind. Sharp the maine-bowleing: Set
taught the bowleing, hale up the bowleing; all these are to make it puld-up
hard, or more properly be haled more forward on: East the bowleing, check or
conie up the bowling, that is, let it more slack.

A Bower.
Is any Anchor, which Ships do usually carry at the bow, and from thence,
has its name: for our greatest Anchor we carry in hold, and for better
stowage sometimes unstock them.

Bows, or to Bowse.
Is a word they use, when they would have men pull together, and is chiefly
used by the Gunners, when they hail upon their tackles, to thrust a Piece out
of a port: they will cry, bowse hoa; that is, pull more upon the tackle: and
then they know to pull altogether: And also, when there is occasion to pull
more upon tackle, then the other, they will say, Bowse upon the tackle.

Bracketts.
Are certain little pieces, in the nature of knees, which belong to the
supporting of galleries, or ship-heads.

Brases.
These Ropes do belong to all the yards, excepting the Missen-yard, they have
a pendant which is seized to the yard-armes; for to every yard, belongs two
Brases, and at the end of a pendant, a block is seized, through which the Roape
is reeved, which they call the Brase: The use whereof is, to square the yards
and travers the yards: Brase the yard to right, that is to make it to stand
just cross the ship: To make right Angles with the length of the ship, all the
brases do come afterward-on-as the maine brase-to the Poope, the
maine-top-saile Brase to the missen-top-and so to the main shrowds: The
fort-and-fore-top-sayle brases, down by the maine-and maine-top-sayle-stages;
and so of the rest. The Missen bowling does serve for a brase to the yard; but
the crosse-jack brases, are brought forwards to the maine-shrowdes when we go
close by a wind.

Brayles.
Are small-Roapes reeved through blocks, which are seized on either side the
ties, some small distance off, upon the yards, and so come-downe before the
sail, and are fastened to the Creengleyes, at the skirt of the sail: The use
whereof is to haile-up the bunt of the sail, when we do farthell our sails
a-crosse, which are in this, commodious for a man of war, that he may instantly
make up his sails, and let them fall, if in fight he should fall a stern: for
note, that in fight we desire to use as few sails as we can, both for the
trouble in trimming them, for saving our sails, for hiding our sight, and for
avoiding of fire which might light in them; and therefore when we say we will
ship our selves into our fighting sails, it is meant we have only the missen
maine-top-sayle, with which sails, a ship will work every way: These brailes
do only belong to the two courses and to the Missen: Hail up the brayses, and
braise up the sail, is all one; when Marchant-men will seem to brave a man of
war, if he chase them, they will brayle up their sails, which is as much as to
make a sign, they will fight with them.

Breetch, and Breetching.
The Breetch, is the after-most part of the Gunne, from the touchhole which is
in brass Ordnance, ever allowed, to be as thick as the diameter of the
Bullet; and those Roapes which are bigger then the tackles that do make, or
lash fast the Ordnance to the ship-sides, being brought about the breetch of
the Piece, are called, Breetchings, these we do not use in fight, but at sea,
and chiefly in foul weather.

A Breize.
Is a wind, which blows out of the sea, and does daily in all seasonable
weather, keep his course, beginning likely about nine in the morning, and
lasting til it be within little of night we do not commonly call al winds that
blow off the sea upon any coasts, Breizes, unless it be there where this
course is certain, or rarely misses but in storms and foul weather: As for
example; here on our coast, the winds are never extreme, but on the coast of
Barbery, and other places more southerly, they are certain to have the wind
off the land all night, and off the sea all day. This Breize is also called a
sea turn.

A Brest-fast.
Is a Roape which is fastened to some part of the ship fore-ward-on, and so does
hold fast the ships head to a wharffe or any thing else, and a stern fast is
the same for the stern.

Breast Roapes.
Are the Roapes which make fast the parcel to the yard.

Brooming.
Is, when a snip is brought a-ground, or on the careene, to be trimmed, that
is, to be made clean, they burn off the old weeds or stuff, which has
gathered filth; which they usually do, either with Reed, Broom, old Roapes,
or the like.

A Budge-Barrell.
Is a little barrel (not altogether so big as a barrel) which holds an
hundred weight of powder, and has a purse of leather, made at the head of it,
which is to shut over the powder, to keep it from firing: we use to lay
Ordnance with this in harbor for healthes and the like, but at sea in fight
not, if we can get cathrages, which is the safest way. There are also latten
budge-barrels, which are the best.

Bulk.
The Bulk of a ship, is her whole content in hold, as to say, she is a ship of
a great bulk, that is, will stowe much goods; sometimes it is taken for the
Merchants goods, as when they say, let our stock go in bulk together. To
break bulk, is as much as to say, to open the houlde, or sell, or part all
the goods in the houlde; As the Indies ships may sell any goods, which they
have betwixt the decks, but they must not break bulk, till they have order
from the Company, that is, they must not open the howld, to meddle with any
merchandise therein contained.

Bulk-head.
Is generally any division, which is made cross the ship, with boords, whereby
one room is divided from the other, as the Bulk-head of the cabin, the
bulke-head of the half deck, the bulke-head of the bread room, gun toome, or
the like.

Bunt.
The Bunt of a sail is, as it were in comparison to the wind, the cod of the
net, which receives all the fish; and may as well be called the bag of the
sail, and therefore we give a bunt to all sails, to the intent they may
receive much wind, (in which is the Anima sensitiva of a ship,) if a sail have
too much bunt, it will hang too much to Lee-ward-wind, and as they call it,
hold much lee-ward-wind, which will hinder the ships sailing especially by the
wind, if it have too little, then it will not hold wind enough, and so not give
the ship sufficient way; The difference is rather perceived in top-sailes then
the other, for courses are cut square, or at the least, with allowance of small
compass.

Bunt-lines.
Is a small line, which is made fast to the bottom of the sail, in the middle
part of the bolt roape, to a creengle, and so reeved through a small block,
seized to the yard, the use whereof is to trise up the bunt of the sail, for
the better fartheling and making up of the sail.

A Buoy.
Is that piece of wood, barrel, or the like, which floates right over the
Anchor, and is made fast by the buoy roape unto the flooke; The use whereof, is
not only to take knowledge where the Anchor, but also to weigh the Anchor with
the boat, which is sooner done then to weigh it with the ship: Stern the
Buoy, that is, before they let the Anchor fall, whilst the ship has way, they
put the Buoy into the water, so that the Buoy roape may be stretched out
strait, and then the Anchor will fall clear from entangling it self with the
buoy roape. Buoyant, is any thing that is floating or apt to floate: To buoy up
a cabell, that is to make fast a piece of floating wood, barrel or the like,
to the cabell, somewhat near to the Anchor, that the cabell may not touch the
ground; this we do in foul grounds, where we fear the cutting of our
cabells: There are Buoyes also which do belong to ships, and these are left at
an Anchor in the sea, to show where any danger is of sands or rocks: these are
especially most needful to be used, where the sands do use to alter, or where
we can have no fitting landmarke.

A Butt.
By this word taken indefinitely, is meant a vessel or cask, as a Butt of
wine, etc. but in sea language, thus, a Butt, is properly the end of a plancke,
joining to an other, of the outward side of the ship, under water. To spring a
Butt, that is, when a planke is loose at one end, and therefore they bolt (in
most great ships) all the Butt-head: by Butt-heads, is meant the end of the
plancks.

The Buttuck.
Is the breadth of the ship, right-a-sterne from the tucke upwards: and
therefore according as she is built, broad or narrow at the transom or laying
out of her stern, we say that the ship has a broad or a narrow Buttock.

C
A Cabell.
IS a three-strand Roape, intended to be sufficient for a ship, to tide by at
an Anchor, for otherwise it is counted but a hawser; for a great ships hawser,
will make a small ships cabell: Cabells have several appellations, as the
Anchors: and are called, the first, second or third, as they grow in
greatness; beginning with the last, till it come to the sheate-Anchor-cabell.
The best cabells, are those which are made of the whitest stuff, and therefore
Streights cabells are the best: The next, the Flemmish and Rowsie, the last,
ours: The making a cabell is termed the laying: as to say, this cabell was well
laid: Sarve the cabell, or plat the cabell, is to bind some old roapes,
cloutes or the like to save it from gawleing in the house: Splife a cabell, is
to fasten two cabells together with a splife: Quile a cabell, is to lay it up
in rowles one above another: Cabell, tire, is the cabell so laid up in rowles.
Pay more cabell, that is, when they carry out an Anchor and cabell in the
Boat, to turn over into the sea some cabell, that the boat may row the
easier, and the cabell be slack in the water: Pay cheap, that is, fling
it-over-a part: Veere more cabell, that is, let more go out: Shot of cabell,
vide Shot.

Caburne.
Is a small line made of spun-yarne to bind the cabells, or to make a bend of
two cabells, or to sease the winding-taks, and the like.

Calm, and be Calm-ing.
Is, when at sea we have not any wind, and then we add to it, these
Epithetons, flat, dead, or starke-calme: A calm, is more troublesome to a
seafaring man, then a storm. If he have a strong ship, and sea-room enough.
In some places, as in the Straights, when it is an extraordinary great storm,
with much wind, and a wrought sea, on a sudden there will be no wind, but a
flat-calme, yet an-extraordinary billow which is wondrous troublesome and
dangerous, for the having no use of sail to keep her steady on a side; the
great sea, will make a ship roll, so that unless she be a very fast ship in
the water, she will be in danger to roll her masts by the board, or her self
under water.

Be Calming.
Is when any thing takes away the wind from an other: As when one ship is close
under the Lee of an other, the windermost ship does be-calme the Let-ward most:
Also when we are near the land, which keeps the wind from us, we say, it does
be-calme us.

To Camber, or Cambering.
We say, is a deck lies cambering when it is higher in the middle, then at
either end, and so does not lie upon a right line: This word, is most commonly
applied to the ships keele and beams, and other rounding-peeces, in the ships
frame. Camber-keeled, is when the keele is bent in the middle upwards, which
happens many times by a ships over lying a-ground, when either her aftermost
part, or fore-most does not touch: but the most common cause, and the chief
reason of combering in great and long ships, is the sharpness of the Hull
before and abast, and the fowlenesse of their floare. A mid-ships, which having
more breadth to bear upon the water, is harder to sink then both ends before
and abast: which by reason of their sharpness, and great weight, over-head,
and in their rakes, which overhangs the groundwork, sink faster into the
water, and so their weight forces the keele and whole work in the mid-ships,
to give way upwards, which is the maine reason of the ships cambering.

The Cap.
Is the square piece of timber, which is put over the head of any mast, with a
round hole, to receive into it the topmast, or flag-staffe, by which the
topmast is kept steady; for if the head of the maine-mast, be too short, so
that the Cap-stand too near the heel, or bottom of the topmast, the topmast
will never stand steady, and besides the weight of the topmast, will strain
the head of the maine-mast so much that it will be in danger to spend it, or
bear it by the the board: Every mast has a Cap, if it carry an-other, or but
a flag-staffe at the top.

Cap Squares.
Are the broad pieces of iron, which belong to either side of the carriage of a
piece of Ordnance, to look over the Trunnions of the Piece, over which they are
made fast in an Iron pin, with a fore-locke, the use whereof, is to keep the
Piece, from flying or falling out of the carriage, when it is shot off, the
mouth of it lying very low, or as the phrase is, under-mettle.

The Capstaine.
There are two kind of Capstaines, the first called the capstaine, or the maine
capstaine: and is that piece of timber which is over-placed, right up and
down, next abast the maine-mast, the foot standing in a step, on the
lower-deck, and the head being, betwixt the two upper decks; The parts are
these, the foot, the spindle, the whelps, the barrel and the holds for the
bars, to which also belongs the darle of Iron; the use of it, is chiefly to
weigh our Anchors, and generally to hoyse our strike-downe top-masts, or to
have in any thing of weight, as Ordnance or the like, or indeed, to strain any
roape that requires great force. The second, is a Geere capsthine, which is
placed in the same manner, betwixt the maine, and fore-masts; the use whereof,
is chiefly to heave upon the Geere-roape, or else to hold off by, when we
weigh the Anchor: At the foot of this, there are whelps placed, in a lesser
proportion, which is to heave upon the viole for the help of the maine
capstaines, in weighing a great Anchor. Come you up-capstaine, that is, those
at the capstaine must go backward, and slacken the roape or cabell which they
did heave at. In the same sense, they also use these words, Launch at the
capstaine, that is, heave no more; roll the capstaine, that is, to stay it
with the iron paul, which bearing against the whelps, keep the capstaine from
turning back.

Capstaine Bars.
Are small pieces of timber put through the barrel of the capstaine, through
square holes of equal length of both sides, by which the men do heave and
turn about the capstaine.

A Card, or Sea Card.
Is a Geographicall description of Coasts, with the true distances, hights and
courses, or winds laid down in it, Not describing any Inland (which belongs
to Mapps) the differences and uses of them, will require a long discourse, and
they are set down in most books which write of Navigation, and therefore I
leave them to those books.

Careene.
Careening, is the best way of trimming a ship under water, both for that the
Carpenters may stand upon the scaffolds, most commodiously to caulke the
seames, or do any other thing that shall be requisite; Also for the saving of
the ground timbers, which, especially in ships of great burden and weight,
must needs be much wroong, though they be laid never so strong: besides, it is
a most necessary trimming for great ships, which are either old or weak built,
and also for any ships that have but small floate, and are built so sharp
under water, that they will be in danger of overthrowing when they shall be
brought a ground. This careening is to be done in harbor, where the slower the
tide runs the better: And it is most commonly used in such places, where there
are no decks to trim a ship in, nor no good places to grave a ship on, or else
that it does not ebb so much that a ship may shew-drie; For the manner of
careening, it will be too long and unnecessary to set down all the
particulars: In general, it is thus, they take out all, or leave but little of
the provision, Ballast, Ordnance (or the like) in the ship: and you must have a
lower ship by her, with which she must be haled-downe on a side, and righted
again with tackles (yet with the weight of ballast above, or below, they do
effect the chief force of the business, and so never strain the ships masts
much:) Note that all ships are not of a like condition to careene; for some
ships will be very hard to come down, though they have no ballast in them, and
those are flemmings, built with two standing streakes, these must have some
weight upon the deck to help them down, and yet these will right themselves
very easy, and therefore need not much in hold to help to right them; Some,
as our English built, and the like, will come down easy, and be hard to
right, and therefore we keep somewhat in all these (to right them) in hold,
and having nothing on the deck, some will come-downe easy and right themselves
well: Some will do neither, so that there is not one way for all, but as we
see the condition of the ship, we fit things, and work accordingly, any kind
of bringing the Ship over to lie on-one-side (she being on floate) is called
careening, though it be but a few streakes; as we say, she was careened three,
four or five strakes: If a ship lie down much with a sail, they will say,
she sails on the careene.

Carlings.
Are those timbers which lie along the ship, from one beam to another; which
do not only serve to help to strengthen the ship, but on them the ledges do
rest, whereunto the planckes of the deck are fastened.

Carling-knee.
Are those timbers which come thwart ships, from the ship-sides to the
Hatch-way, which is betwixt the two masts: These do bear upon them the deck,
on both sides the mast: and on the ends do lie the coaming of the hatches.

A Carriage.
Is that whereon we mount our Ordnance; The parts whereof, are the two cheeks,
the axeltrees, the bolts, the cap-squares, the hooks, the fore-locks, the
trucks, and the lins-pins, (vide) every one of these, in his proper place: The
fashion of these carriages we use at sea, are much better then those of the
land; yet the Ve^etians, and others use the other in their shipping. A Piece
cleeres a shot well, that is, shootes far, and right, which is a sign that
she is smooth and well metled.

A Carthrage.
Is a bag made of canvas, which is reasonable good, being made upon a former,
the Diameter whereof must be somewhat smaller then the Sillender of the piece,
and of such a length or depth, as that it shall contain just so much powder as
is the charge of the Piece: This is wondrous necessary for our great Ordnance
in fight, both for speedy lading our Ordnance, and also for saving the powder
which is in danger to be fired, if in fight we should use a Ladle: These
carthrages are many times made of paper, parchment, or the like, but are not so
good as the other: There are also other carthrages, or more properly, they are
to be called cases for carthrages, which are made of Lattin; in which we use to
put these other carthrages, to bring almongst the ship, so much the safer from
fire till we put them into the Pieces mouth, which is a dare, that in fight,
there cannot be too much diligence and order used.

Carnells.
Are Vessels which go with Missen sails instead of maine sails, these will
lie nearer the wind then crosse-sailes, but are not so commodious to handle, we
have here little use of them, and therefore I speak not much.

Carnell-worke.
The building of ships first, with their timbers, and beams, and after
bringing on their planckes, is called carnell-worke, to distinguish it from
clinch-worke.

Case,
Is commonly made round of wood hollowed, and fit for the bore of the Piece, by
which most conveniently we can put murdering shot into the Piece: We likewise
use baggs to the same purpose, but they are not so convenient as wooden cases,
because they are apt to catch hold by the way in the flawes of the Pieces: Also
some call the sheathing of a ship, the caseing of her.

Case-Shot.
Is any kind of old Iron, stones, Musket-bullets, or the like; which we put
into cases, to shoot out of our great Ordnance: These are of great use, and do
much execution amongst men, that ply their small-shot, when we come near, or
lie board and board.

Casketts.
Are small strings made of synnet, flat; they are made fast to the upper part
of the yards, in little rings which they call Grommets; Their use is to make
fast the sail to the yard when we farthell it up: The biggest and longest are
placed just in the middle of the yard, betwixt the ties; these do make up the
bunt of the sail, and are termed the breast casketts.

Catharpings.
Are small roapes, which run in little blocks (like a minnom) from one side of
the shrowdes, to the other, near the deck; The use whereof, is to force the
shrowdes taught for the better ease, and safety of the mast in the rowleing of
the ship; they are only used to the maine-shrowdes, and fore-shrowdes; Also at
the setting on of the Puttocks of the shrowdes, they are used; but here they
are ever made fast, and do not run in blocks.

Catt.
The cart, is a piece of timber, fastened aloft, right over the hawse, and has
at the end thereof, two sheevers, wherein is received a roape, with a block,
whereunto is fastened a great hook of iron, after the manner of a double
tackle: The use is to trise up the Anchor from the hawse, to the top of the
fore-castle, where it is fastened with a stopper. Catt the Anchor, is to hitch
the hook in the ring of the Anchor.

Catt-holes.
Are two little holes above the gun-roome ports asterne for this use, that when
we have occasion to heave the ship asterne, by a-sterne: Fast they bring in the
cabell, or hawser, by them to the capstaine, the stern Ports are not so good,
because they lie not so even with the capstaine.

Caulke.
Caulking, is the driving of ockham, spun hair, and the like, into all the
seames, rends and treenels throughout the ship, without the which, it is
impossible for a ship, to be made thite to swim, and keep out water.

Chafe.
Or chasing is, when any roape is gualed, or fretted, as we say, the cabell is
chafed in the hawse, or when a roape rubbs against any thing which is not
smooth and even, we say, it will chafe the roape.

Chains.
By naming the chains of a ship indefinitely, is meant those chains to which
the shrowdes are made fast, on the ship-sides; also those that belong to the
topmast shrowdes, are called chains: In fight we use to sling our yards in
chains, for fear least the ties should be cut, and so the yards fall down,
and these chains are called slings.

Chain Walls.
Is a broader timber, set on the outside of the ship, then the ordinary walls,
and is made of purpose to spread out the shrowdes wider, that they may the
better succor the mast.

A Chamber.
Is a charge made of brass or iron, which we use to put in at the breech at
any murderer, or fowley, and contains just so much powder, as is fit for to
deliver away the murdering shot, or case shot, contained in that Piece: Also
the chamber of a great piece of whole Ordnance is counted so far, or so much
of it, as does contain the whole charge it has.

Channel.
By channel, is meant the deepest part of any River, or Harbors mouth; as
when we say Steer in the channel, is meant the deepest part of the River; In
places where there are loose sands, the channels do alter much according to
extraordinary winds, which come and drive the sands with the sea, sometimes on
one side, sometimes on the other; As when I came into Mamora, the channel lay
hast-south-hast, and west-north-west, but in two Months after, by reason of a
fresh shot, it changed to lie in hast-north-hast, and west-south-west, which is
five points of the Compass; Sometimes we also call narrow seas, channels, as
the English channel betwixt France and England, and Saint Georges channel,
betwixt England and Ireland: but being in those Seas, if we say steer in the
channel, it is meant in the midst of the sea.

Charge.
We use to say, charge a Musket, but load or lade a piece of Ordnance; A ship
of great charge is commonly meant by a ship that draws much water; and
sometimes for an unweidie ship, that will not veere and steer, for then she is
dangerous, and chargeable upon a leeshore; Also every man's office in a ship, is
called his charge.

Chase.
When a man of War, does follow any ship out of his course: or else when any
other ship does alter her course, so as to use all the means they can to fetch
up and speak with the other ship; we call that chaseing: And the ship so
followed, we call the chase: (as meaning by her,) we say, the chase stands
thus, or the chase has taken in her top-sailes, or the chase is struck a
hull, etc. There is great experience and judgment to be used in chaseing; For
though two men be equally Mariners, and know how to sail and direct his ship,
yet if one be a practique man of war, and the other not, the man of war will
do much better: The pretense in any chasing, is to make the shortest way of it
that they can; which is by judging of the chases course so to shape yours, that
you may meet in the nearest angles: There is no certain rule for chasing; for
we must many times be ruled by the condition of our ship: As if the chase clap
close by a wind (it being a head-sea) and the man of wars ship, be a short
ship, that beats much into the sea, and a lee-ward-ship, then if he clap close
by a-wind, his ship will make no way, and therefore he must give a little more
large, though he chase under the lee of the other: In chasing, we always
connet to get to wind-ward, in respect that it is advantage in fight: And for
that we cannot board a ship, being too lee-ward, but sometimes (as if it be
toward night) to keep sight of the ship, or the like, we must be content to
come under his lee, and get as near as we can: The stern chase, that is, when
we follow her right a-sterne, and she and we go right upon one point of the
Compass: To lee with her fore-foot, is the nearest and shortest, that is (as
you would say) to lie just a cross her way, so that both keeping on their
courses, they shall meet all at a certain point. Chase pieces, are those,
which lie right forward one, when we say that a ship has a good chase,
indefinitely, it is meant of her chase for-ward, and that is, when she is so
contrived, that she can carry many Pieces, to shoot right forward, for to the
other, I use to add the word sterne-case; The pieces of Ordnance, which lie
right foreward-on, are called chase-Peeces.

Cheeks.
Are two pieces of timber, which are fitted on each side of the mast, from
beneath the hounds, to the upper end of the mast; and they are made of Oak, to
strengthen the mast thereabouts, both for the bearing of the topmast, and
hoysing of the yards. In these are the honnes made for the ties to run in: The
knees which fasten the beake-head to the bow of the ship, are called cheeks:
Also the sides of any blocks, are called the cheeks: Likewise the sides of the
carriages, where the turnions of the Pieces do lie, are called, the cheeks of
the carriages.

Cheteres.
Are the two small pieces of Timber with a hole in them, in which the
maine-tack does run, and to which the tack is haled-down, these are placed a
little abast the loofe of the ship, the one on the one side, the other on the
other.

Choke.
When a running roape sticks in the block either by slipping betwixt the
cheeks and the sheever or by any other occasion, that any thing be got about
it, or that it have a kinke, so that it cannot run and be haled through, we say
the block is choked.

Clamps.
Are those thick timbers which lie fore and aft, close under the beams of the
first orlep, and do bear them up at either end, and are the same that the
risings are to the other decks, vide risings.

A Cleate.
Is a small wedge of wood fastened on the yards, to keep any roapes from
slipping by where that is fastened: There are also diverse other uses of it: as
to keep the eating of the sail, from slipping of the yard.

Clewe.
The clewe of a sail, is the lower corner of the sail, which reaches down to
the place where the tacks and sheates are made fast to the sail, and it is
counted that part, which comes goaring out from the square of the sail,
toward the lower corner; when a sail is much goaring, then she has a great
clew; when a little goaring, then she has a little clew; when it is cut right
square and has no clew, and yet that lower corner of the sail, shall retain
the name of the clew of the sail: A ship spreads a great clew, that is, has
very broad yards, and so spreads much canvas; it is good to allow a good clew
to a maine sail; for by that means, the tack will come the better aboard, and
the sheate will come farther aft, whereby the sail will hold more wind.

Clew-garnet.
Is a roape which is made fast to the clew of the sail, and from thence runs
in a block, which is seized to the middle of the yard: The use whereof is, when
we farthell our maine-saile, or foresaile; for the name of clew-garnet does
only belong to the clew-lines of those two sails, then this roape does hale up
the clew of the sail, close to the middle part of the yard.

Clew-line
This is the same to top-failes, top-gallant-sailes, and sprit-sailes, that the
clew-garnet is to the maine sail, and has the very same use: Note in foul
weather, the gust, when we take in our top-sailes, we hale home the
lee-clew-line first, because the sail will be taken in so much the easier.

A Clincher.
Is a small Ship, Bark or Boat, whose planckes and boardes are larded over
one an other, and clinched or nailed one through another, with nails and
rooves: whose outside are berthed or wrought up without timber, framed as we
do in other ships, which work is called carvell work.

To Clinche.
Is to barter or rivet a bolts-end upon a ring, or turn back the end of any
nail, so as to make it fast at that end which is driven through; we also call
that part of the cabell, which is seized about the ring of the Anchor, the
clinch of the cabell.

Clinching.
Is as you would say, a slight caulking, and is most used when we are at sea,
and suspect foul weather, so that we may take in water at the ports: we use to
command the Carpenter to clinch the ports, that is to drive a little oacham
into the seames of the ports, which may be done (to serve turn) either within
board, or without board

Cloathe.
We say a sail does cloth the mast when it is so long, that it touches the
gratings or hatches, so as no wind can go betwixt the sail and the hatches
and gratings: A ship spreads much cloth, that is, when she has broad sails.

Cloyde.
When there is any thing got into the touchhole, or breech of the Peech, so
that the priming-powder cannot come to give fire to the rest, we say, the piece
is cloyd.

Coamings.
The coamings or coaming of the hatches, or the gratings, is that piece of
timber or plancke, which bears them up higher then the decks, so as that they
do not lie even with the deck. The uses whereof, are to keep the water from
running down at the hatches to give some ease for men to stand upright betwixt
the lower decks, if the decks be low, and near together; and also in the
coamings they may fit holes for to use Muskets, and so serve for a close fight.

Coats.
Those pieces of tard-canvas, which are put above the masts, at the partners,
and the lumps at the deck, that no water may run down by them, are called
coats. The same is used to the rudder-head.

Cocks.
Are little square things of brass with a hole in them, put into the middle of
some of the greatest wooden sheaves, to keep them from splitting and gulling by
the pin of the block whereon they turn.

The Collar.
Is that roape which is made fast about the beake-head, whereunto the
dead-man-eye is seized, unto which the maine stay is fastened. There is also a
roape about the maine-mast-head, which is called a collar, or a garland, and is
there placed, to save the shrowdes from galling.

The Comb.
Is a small piece of timber, set under the lower part of the beake-head near
the midst, with two holes in it, and is just in the nature, and has the same
use to the fore-tacks, that the chef-trees have to the main-tacks, which is, to
bring the tack a-boord.

Compass.
Is that moveable instrument with a fly, whereon are described the 32 points
or winds by which we direct the steer, our courses at sea. The fashion is
known to all, and for the uses, they are handled at large in many books which
write of Navigation. There are three kinds; First the plain Meridionall
compass (which is the ordinary one;) the second, a compass of Variation,
which shows the variation of the Compass from the true north and south. The
third, is a dark-compasse, which being but an ordinary compass in use, is only
so called, because the fly has the points described with no colors (as the
other are, but only black and white, being most convenient to be seen, when we
steer by night, without any light, but only skie-light.

To Cond, or Cun.
I think this word comes of conducere in Latin; so it imports as much as to
lead or direct the ship which way she shall go; it is commonly pronounced
thus: Cun the ship, which implies as much as to direct him at helm how to
steer. In long courses, when we are off at sea, there is not so much heed
taken of it, for then they direct their course upon a point of the Compass,
and so let him at the helm look to the steer right on that point; but in
chases and narrow channels (where the course lies not directly upon a point of
the compass) there the Master, Mate, or some other standing-aloft, does give
direction to him at the helm; and this we call conding or cuning: Sometimes
he who commands the ship will be speaking to him at helm, at every little
yawe, (which the seafaring love not, as being a kind of disgrace to their
Iteeridge) then in mockage they will say, sure the channel is narrow he conds
so thick; whereby you may gather, that in narrow channels, it is necessary and
useful to cond thick. Note that according as the ships sails are trimmed
either before or by a wind, so they use several terms in conding, and to use
other, were improper and ridiculous amongst them: If the ship go before a
wind, or as they term it, betwixt two sheates, then he who conds uses these
terms to him at the helm, starr-boord, lar-boord, the helm a mid-ships. Note
that when we say starr-board, the meaning is, that he must put the helm to the
starr-board side, and then the ship will go to larr-boord, for the ship does
ever go contrary to the helm, if the ship go by a wind, or quarter-winds,
they say a loofe, or keep your loof; or fall not off, veere no more, keep her
to: touch the wind; have a care of the lee-latch; all these do imply the same
in manner, and are to bid him at the helm, to keep her near the wind: East
the helm; no near; bear up; these words do appoint him to keep her from the
wind, and make her go more large or right before: Some speeches are common to
both, as steady, that is, keep the ship from going in and out, but just upon
the point that you are to steer, and as you go; and such like.

Cooke-Roome.
The Cooke-Roome, is the place, where they dress their victuals, and this room
is to be placed in diverse parts of the ship, according to the ships employment,
in Marchant-men (who must employ all their hold for the stowing of their goods,
and so stow their victuals betwixt their decks (it is best to have the
Cook-room in the fore-Castle) especially being contrived in the furvasses, for
the saving of wood, in long journies: as also for that in fight, they bring
their stern and not their Prowe to fight: and therefore it will be the less
discommodity to them: besides, they do not carry so much ordnance fore-ward
on, and therefore the weight of the Cook-room, is not so offensive: but in a
man of war, it is most inconvenient to have it in the fore-ship or
fore-castle: my reasons these. 1. It will (be it placed as well as can be)
hinder the use of the ordnance. 2. It will lie over the powder. 3. Being a man
of war pretends to fight most with his prowe; that part is likewise to receive
shot, which if any chance to come amongst the bricks in the Cooke-roome they
will spoil more men then the shot: And besides, the Cook-roome it self for
that voyage is spoiled, there being no means to repair it at sea, and then
they must needs use another; so that I think no man of discretion will commend
or use that for most sufficient, which is most subject to be destroyed, and
cannot be repaired. 4. A man of war, ever carries much ordnance there, and
therefore it is fit to avoid (as much as may be, any weight that may charge her
fore-ship. 5. It is dangerous for firing the ship: for being made-up to the
ship-sides, so that men cannot go round about it in long continuance, and much
heating they may fire the ship unawares. 6. It takes away the grace and
pleasure of the most important and pleasantest part of all the ship: for any
one who comes a board a man of war, will principally look at her chase, being
the place where the chief offensive force of the ship should lie. And to
conclude, I do not know any commodity it can give to a man of war: wherefore
in my opinion, the best placing the Cooke-roome, is in the hatch-way, upon the
first Orlop (not in the howld, as the Kings ships do, which must needs spoil
all the victuals with too much heating the howld, or at the least, force them
to stowe it so near the stern and stern, that it must needs wrong and wring
the ship much, and loose much stowage: and it being there placed, as it does
avoid all the former inconveniences, both of the hold and fore-castle, and yet
shall be as serviceable, so has it this benefit more: That it does wonderfully
well air the ship betwixt the decks, which is a great health unto the company.
But if I were to go to Sea, as a man of war, I would have no Cook room at
all; but such an one as I would have contrived to be removed, and strooken
down in howld if I list, and yet it should waste no more wood then these do,
and dress sufficient victuals for the company, and roaste or bake some
competent quantity for the Commander; or any persons of quality.

Cardage.
All kind of ropes belonging to the rigging of a ship, is by a general
Appellation called Cordage.

Cowneer,
Is the hollow arching-part in the ship stern, betwixt the Transom, and the
lower part of the Gallerie, which is called the lower Counter, the upper
Counter is from the Gallerie, to the lower part of the upright of the stern.

Cowrse.
Is taken for that point of the Compass, which the ship is to sail upon, as
to say, the place we must now go to lies East, we then direct our course East.
Al^ir the course, that is, sail upon another point of the Compass; Mistake
the course, that is, not to know how the land lies, or which way to go, also
Maine-course and fore-cowrse Missen-cowrse, are the fails without the bonners;
note all ships of great burden have double courses to hold more wind, and give
the ship more way in a fresh gale, but in an easy gale they hinder (as do all
things that are weighty over head.)

A Crabb.
Is an Engine of wood, with three claws placed on the ground, just in the
nature of a Capstaine being placed, and most commonly used where they build
ships, for the launching out, or heaving in of a ship into the docke, or off
the key.

A Cradle.
Is a frame of Timber, brought along the outside of the ship by the Bildge,
wherein they do launch ships for the greater safety. In Spain, and other
places, they use to trim all their great ships in them.

Craft.
Is any kind of Nets or lines, or hooks to catch fish, for at sea, they will
say, when they have lost their lines or Nets, that they have lost their craft,
we also call small vessels, as Ketches, Hoyes, Craes, and the like, small
Craft, and he that sails in them, we say he uses small craft.

Cranckc.
We say a ship is cranek-sided, when she will bear but small sail, and will
lie down very much, with little wind, the came thereof, is, that her breadth
being laid too low, she has nothing to bear her up, when once she begins to
heel, we also say she is cranckc, by the ground, when she cannot be brought a
ground, but in danger to overthrow: the reason whereof is; she has no bildge
to bear her, her floare being laid too narrow.

Creengles.
Are little Roapes spliced into the bolt-Roapes, of all fails belonging to the
maine and Foremast, unto which the Bowling bridles are made fast, and they are
also to hold by, when we shake off a bormet.

Cros-bar.
Is a round shot, with a bar of iron, (as it were) put through the middle,
coming out at both ends, some 6. or 8. Inches more or less, this will not
flee so far as a round shot, but further then a Langrell or chaine-snot; it
is very good to use in fight; for the cutting and spoiling of Roaps, sails,
yards and masts, as also to do execution amongst men, where they stand plying
their small shot, but it is not used under water, for that it will hardly go
through a good ship sides, unles it be used out of very great ordnance.

Cros-Jack.
Is a yard at the upper end of the Missen Mast, under the top, and there is
sloong, having no halliards, nor ties belonging to it: the use whereof is to
spread, and hale-on the missen top-saile Sheates.

Cros-peece.
Is the great piece of timber, which goes a cross the bit-Pipes, and is that
whereunto we be-lay the Cabell.

Cros-trees.
Are those cross pieces of timber, which are set on the head of the Mast,
being bolted and let into one another very strong. In a general Appellation,
all these fore-Peeces, being so made, and put together, are called the
crosse-trees, but in truth and more strictly, only those two pieces, which go
thwart ships, are called crosse-trees, and the other which go longst ships are
called Treissell Trees, the use whereof is to bear and keep the topmast up,
for the foot of the topmast is fastened in them, so that they bear all the
stresse. These also do bear upon them the tops, and do necessarily belong to
all Masts, which carry any other top or flag-staffe at the head.

Crow-feet.
Are those small lines or roapes, which stand in 6, 8, 10. or more parts, being
so divided and put through the holes of a dead-man-eye, they are of no
necessity, but only set up by the boat-swaines, to make the ship show full of
small rigging; and are placed to the bottom of the Back-stages of the
fore-top-mast, sprit-saile-top-mast-missen toppe-mast, and the
toppe-gallant-masts.

Cubbridg-head.
Is the same that is a bulk head: only that we use this word to the bulk
head of the fore-Castell and the half deck, which we call the cubbridge-head
a-fore or the cubbridge-head abast.

Culver-taile.
Is a manner of letting one timber into another, so as that by no means they
can slip out: All their Carlings have their ends so let into the beams.

Cut.
This word is used in this sense, cut the sail, that is, when men are aloft
upon the yard, the maine sail, ok forr-saile, being farthelled up, they must
let it fall down, when a sail is well fashioned, they say it is well cut: Cut
the Cabell in the lawse, that is most commonly used, when we ride in some
storms, and desire to set-saile, but cannot stay the waighing of the Anchor,
for fear of driving too much to lee ward, or the like: Generally when upon any
occasion, we cannot stay to weigh the Anchor, then we put the Cabell in the
hawse, to save so much as we can of it: In extraordinary occasion (either at an
Anchor, or at sea, we sometimes cut the Masts, by the board the cause) at an
Anchor, is when the storm increases, so that the power which the wind has
upon the rigging and the mast, does force her Anchors to come home, or else
endanger the breaking of the Cabel, then they cut down the mast: but if
therebe only a great sea gate, and little or no wind, there it is to no purpose
to cut the masts, for they do little or no hurt. This happens in many places,
where the wind does not blow home, as at Santa Cruz in Barbary, where some
have rid such a road, that the sea has broke over their fore-top, and yet not
a breath of wind. At sea, they cut the masts on these occasions, when an
extraordinary gust or storm has so laid the ship on-side, that there is no
hope that she can right again, and so would quickly be over-set, or filled
with water, then in cutting the Mast, first cut the lee-shrowdes, for else when
the mast is over board, it will be hard cutting them, and the end of the mast
may chance to beat out the ships side, next cut a little into the weather-side
of the mast, and then cutting the weather shrowdes, the mast will instantly and
without danger fall over board. Likewise at sea, in a great storm, where the
ship rowles much, if the partners give way, the mast will roll out the ships
sides. In this case also, if they cannot be mended, the mast must be cut by the
board.

Cut-Water.
The Cut-water is the sharpness of the ship before, which does as it were,
cut the water and divide it before it comes to the bow, so that it may come by
degrees, and not too suddenly to the breadth of the Ship, otherwise the ship
would beat so full against the water, that she would make but little way: And
therefore many times when a ship is to Bluffe, we put to a false stem, and as
it were lengthen her for-ward-on, and this we call a Cut-water, which will not
only make her sail better, but also make her keep a better wind and not to
beat so much against a head-sea.

D
The DAvitt.
Is a piece of timber, having a notch at one end, whereon they hang a block by
a strap: and this is only used for to hang that block on, which is called the
fish block, by which they hale up the flooke of the Anchor, to the ships bow
or loofe. It is shifted to either side as they have occasion, and is not made
fast to the ship, but laid by till it be used, it is put out betwixt the catt
and the loofe: Launch out, or launch in the Davitt, that is, put it out or in:
Also the boat has a Davitt, which is set out over the head of the boat with
a sheever, into which they bring the bouy roape to weigh the Anchor, and it
stands in the Carlings that are in the boats bow.

Dead men-eyes.
Are a kind of blocks, wherein there are many holes, but no sheevers, wherein
the Lanniers go that make fast the shrowdes to the chains; The maine stays
in some ships, are set taught by lanniers in Dead-men-eyes, but most great
ships use double-blocks; the Crowe-feete do reeve through dead-men-eyes.

Dead-water.
The water which is the Eddie water at the stern of the ship, is called
dead-water, and therefore we say, a ship holds much dead-water, that it has a
great Eddie follows her at the stern or rudder, and this may be called dead,
because it does not pass away with that life, and quicknes as the other does.

Deck.
The Deck is that floare of planck, whereon we place our Ordnance, it lies upon
the beams; they are called by the name of first, second or third deck,
beginning at the lowest: also there is the half deck, that is, the deck which
is from the Maine-mast to the stem, and quarter deck, which is from the
steeridge aloft to the Masters cabin: There is also the spar-deck, which is
the upper-most, betwixt the two Masts, and is made very slight, with a meting,
or slight boords, toward the sides of the ship, and a grateing in the midst;
also these decks are called by the name of Orlops, as they use to say, the
first or second Orlop; a flush Deck, or as they use to say, a Deck flush, fore
and aft, that is, when from stem to stem, it lies upon a right line without any
fall: Note that the best contriving of a man of war, is to have the decks
flush, and to have all her ports on that deck on an equal height, so as that
every Piece may serve any port, the reasons are, for that the decks benig
flush, men may pass fore and art with much more ease, for the delivering
powder and shot, or releeving one another; but chiefly for that if a Piece or
two be dismounted by shot in any place where there is a fall, another cannot be
brought to supply his place, besides the discommoditie that by disjoyning the
equal bearing part of the ship, the ship is much weakened, and also it looses
much stowage in the sterne-sheates, yet there may be some use of these falls to
a Merchant man for his defense, who may fit a close fight out of every fall,
and though he loose one part of the deck, yet he may still keep more to be
gained from him: The Deck cambers, that is, when it does not lie flat, but
compassing; To sinck a deck, or to let fall a deck, is to remove it and place
it lower: To raise a deck, is to put it higher above water; the making of a
deck is termed, the laying of a deck.

Deep-see-Lead.
Is the Lead which is hung at the deep-see line, to sinck it down; the weigh:
whereof is commonly 14. pounds; this has some hard white tallow laid upon the
lower end of it, which brings up the ground, and so by the differences of the
ground, we know where and upon what coast we are: But in Ozie ground, we use a
white woollen cloth upon the lead, with a little tallow, without which cloth,
the Ozie would not stick unto the tallow.

Deep-see-Line.
Is a small line, with which we sound in deep waters to find ground, and so
according to the depth and ground in many known places; as in the coming into
our channel, and many other places (when we can see no land, yet we know where
we are.

To Disembogue.
Is as much as to say, to come out of the mouth of any Gulf; which being large
within, may have some straight, or narrow coming out being used thus; When
they come out of the West Indies, betwixt Cube and Cape, Florida, which is the
straight whereout out the current does set, they say, they Disembogued out of
the gulf; but it is not used, for the going out of a Harbor, or the like.

To Dispert.
Disperting, is the finding out of the difference of the Diametres of the
Mettles, betwixt the breetch and the mouth of any piece of Ordnance, by which
we know what allowance to give to the mouth of the Piece (being ever less then
the breetch) that thereby we may make a just shot; there are diverse ways, but
the plainest is the surest and best, which is, by putting in of a straw, or
small stick at the touchhole, at the lower side of the concave or sillender of
the Piece, and then apply it in the same manner to the mouth, and it will
exactly show the difference of the thickness of the Mettle, at the breetch and
mouth of the Piece.

Dock.
There are two kinds of Docks, a dry dock, which is made with floodgates, to
keep out the Tide, in which we build ships, and repair them, wherein they sit
without danger and harm: the other is a wet Dock, which is any creeck or place
where we may cast in: a ship out of the Tides-way in the Oze, and there, when a
ship has made her self (as it were) a place to lie in, we say, the ship has
docked her self.

A Drabler, Vide Bonnett.
For this is in all respects the same to the Bonnett, that the Bonnett is to
the Cowrse; This is only used, when the Cowrse and Bonnett are to showle for to
cloth the Mast, some small ships which are Coasters, and therefore are, for
most convenience, to have short cowrses, do use two Drablers.

Draggs.
Any things that hang over the ship in sea, as Shirts, Gowns and the like, as
also the Boat in that respect, all which do hinder the ships way under sail,
are called Draggs.

Draught.
By Draught in water, is meant so many foot as the ship goes in water: A ship
draws much water, that is, goes deep in water: A ship of small draught, that
is, draws but little water. Note that ships of great draught are commonly
wholesome ships in the sea; and ships of little draught, commonly go best, but
roll most, the first is best for a long voyage, the last for a discovery.

To Dregg.
Or Dregging, is to take a little Crapnell, which being hung over the
Boats-sterne, we let down to dregge upon the ground, to find a Cabell which
has been let slip, unto whole Anchor there was no buoy, for this passing along
the ground as the Boat does row, will catch hold of it if it meet with it.

A Drift-saile.
Is a sail used under water, being veered out right ahead, having sheates to
it; the use whereof, is to keep a ships head right upon the sea in a storm;
also it is good, where a ship drives in fast with a current, to hinder her
driving in so fast; but it is most commonly used by Fishermen in the North
seas.

Drive.
We say a ship Drives, when we let fall the Anchor, and it will not hold the
ship fast, but that she falls away with the tide or wind; for which we have no
help, but to veere more cabell, for you must note, that the more Cabell is out,
the faster and surer the ship will ride, or else to let-fall more Anchors:
Also, when a ship is a-hall or a-trie, we say, she drives to Lee-ward, or
drives in with the shore, and the like, according to the way she makes.

Duck-up.
This term is used with the Clew-garnet and Clewlines of the maine-saile,
fore-saile and sprit-saile, whenas the maine-saile or fore-saile does hinder
his sight fore-ward, that steerers, or any the like occasion: And to the
sprit-saile, most commonly when we make a shot with a Chase piece, for the clew
of the sprit-saile, will hinder the sight, and being not ducked up will be shot
away, so then we say, Duck-up the Clew-lines.

E
EAring.
Is that piece or part of the Bolt-roape which at all the four corners of the
sail is left open, as it were a ring; The two uppermost are put over the ends
of the yards or yard arms, and so the sail is at those two ends made fast to
the yard, into the lowermost, the tacks and sheates are seized, or as the more
proper term is, they are bent unto the clew.

To Ease.
This word is used in the same sense at sea, as otherwise we use the word
stook, for generally, when we would have any roape slacker and not so hard
strained, we say Ease it, (as ease the bowlings, sheates, etc.) only when the
tack should be slackned; the proper term is, let rise the tack, which is a
very fit term, in respect that the tack beng loosed, it rises up from the
Chestrees unto which it was haled close.

An Eddy.
Is the running back of the water in some place, contrary to the Tide, and so
falling into the Tide again, which happens by reason of some head-land, or
great point, in a River coming out suddenly, and so hindering the full passage
of the water, which is had in the Channel before it came to the point.

An Eddy-wind.
Is that wind, which recoyles, or returns back from any sail, hawse, or the
like, going contrary to that wind where it proceeds, but is never so strong as
the other.

End for End.
That is a term used, when any roape does run all out of the block, so that it
is un-reeved; or as when a cabell or hawse, does run all out at the hawse,
which may happen, either of purpose, to save the Cabell, or by chance, when
coming to an Anchor, if they should miss laying on the stoppers, or that the
stoppers should break, then they say, the cabell at the hawse is run-out End
for End.

Enter.
To Enter, is to come into a ship, but in fight, they must be careful to
clear the Decks with Fire-pots, or the like, if it be possible from the
trains of powder, before men do enter; for it happens many times, that there
are more men lost in a minute, by entering, then in long fight board and board;
and therefore being so dangerous, it is fit, that men should be well advised
first, though many times if a ship be not well provided of close fights, it is
the speediest and safest way of taking them.

Entring-ladder.
Of this there are two, the one, which is used by the ships side, in Harbor,
and fair weather, with Entring-roapes to it: this is all made of wood, the
other is made of roapes, with small staves for stepps, which is hung over the
gallery, for entering out of the Boat in foul weather, when by reason of the
ships heaving and setting, they dare not bring the Boat to the ship-side, for
fear of staveing.

Entring-roape.
Is the roape which hangs by the side of the ship, in the waste, where men do
usually come a-boord the ship out of a boat, but it is taken generally for any
roape which is given a man to enter by.

Eyes.
The hole wherein the ring of the Anchor is put, is called the Eye of the
Anchor, also the compass, or ring, which is left of the strap whereunto a
block is seized, is called the Eye of the strap.

Eylot-holes.
Are those round holes along the bottom of those sails, unto which do
belong Bonnets, and the Bonnets have the same for the Drablers, they have a
little line sown about them, to make them strong; and serve for no other use
but to receive into them the Latchets of the Bonnets, or, Drablers, with which
the Bonnet is lased to the Cowrse, and the Drabler to the Bonner.

F
FAddom.
A faddom is six foot, which though every one know, is set down to give notice
that we measure the length of all our roapes, by Faddoms, and not by any other
measure, as we do the compass of the roapes by inches; for we say, a Cabell
or Hawfier is so many faddome long, or so many inches about; also we reckon in
sounding by Faddomes.

A Facke.
Is one circle of any roape, a cabell that is queiled up round; and so when
they veere out a cabell, they many times ask, to know how much is left behind
within-boord, how many Fakes are left.

Fall-off.
When a ship (under sail) does not keep so near the wind, as we appoint, we
say that the ship falls-off: This happens many times by the negligence of the
steenes-man, but many times the fault is in the ship, which happens, either
because she may be light ahead, or that her masts may be stayed too fore-ward
on, for these two things make a ship head fall from the wind.

Falls.
When we mention the Falls of a ship (as to say) a ship has a fall, or many
falls, it is meant by the raising or laying some part of the Deck higher, or
lower then the other, also the small roapes which we hale-by mall tackles, is
called the fall of the tackle; as to say, over-hale the Fall of your maine
tackle, or cleefe the fall of your tackle (only the wanding tackle has no fall.

To Farthell.
Or farchelling a sail, is when we wrap-up a sail close together, and so bind
it with the Casketts to the yard, but toward the yard-arme we use mape yarnes,
for the sail is not very weighty; this manner we use only to the maine-saile,
fore-saile and sprit-saile.

Farthelling-lines.
Are small lines which are made fast to all the top-sailes, top-gallant-sailes,
and also the missen yard-armes, the missen has but one, the other one, on
either side; by these we farthell those sails, but the top-sailes have not the
bunt bound up to the yard, as the maine and fore-sailes have, but is laid on
the top, and so bound fast to the head of the mast; this we call stowing the
top-saile.

The Fashion Pieces.
Are the two timbers, which do describe the breadth of the ship a-sterne, and
are the outwardmost timbers of the ships stern on either side (excepting aloft
where the Coconter is connted.

Fender-Bolts.
Vide Bolts.

Fenders.
Are many pieces of old cabels, roapes or billets of wood, which are hung over
the ships side to keep an other ship or boat from rubbing on the ships side,
that they may not break her bends, or rub off the stuff when she is new
trimmed; boats have the same, to save them from much beating against the ships
side; in the boat, the men have also little short staves, which they call
Fenders, hence we say, Fend the boat, that is, save her from beating against
the ships side.

Fidd.
Is as it were an Iron pin, made tape-ring and sharp at the lower end, which
is to open the strands of the roapes when we splise two roapes together; but
when we splise cabells we use fidders of wood, in the same form and nature but
much-bigger, which if they were made of Iron, would be too heavy to work
withal; The pin in the heel of the topmast which bears it upon the
Ches-trees, is a fidd.

Fidd-hammer.
Is a Fidd made sharp at one end, to splise a roape, and a Hammer at the other
end, with a head and a claw, to drive or draw a Nail.

Fightts.
The mast-cloathes which hang round about the ship to hinder men from being
seen in fight, are called the Fightts; also any bulke-head, before or abast,
out of which they may use Murderers, or small shot, or generally any place
wherein men may cover themselves, and yet use their Arms, are called close
fightts.

Fireworks.
Are any kind of artificial receipts, applied to any kind of Weapon, Engine or
Instrument, whereby we use to set-on-fire the Hulls, sails or Masts of a ship
in fight, whereof there are many sorts, but the most commonly used at sea are
these, fire-pots, fireballs, fire-Peekes, Truncks, Brasse-balls, Arrows with
fire-workes, and the like; to say, all that might concerning these, will
require too long a discourse for this that I here pretend

A Fish.
Is any piece of timber or plancke, which we make fast, either to Mast or Yard,
to succor and strengthen it, when it is in danger to break, then we command
the Carpenter to fish the Mast or yard, which is done, first hollowing it fit
for the place, and then nailing it with speaks, and woulding it about with
roapes, (This fish is very dry meat.

The Fish-block.
The block, is the block that belongs to the fish, and is called the fish-block.

The Fish-hooke.
Is the hook belonging to the Fish, and is called the Fish-hooke.

The Fish.
Is a Tackle hung at the end of the Davie, by the strap of the block, in which
block there is a runner with a hook at the end, which does hitch the flooke of
the Anchor, and so they hale by the fall that belongs to it, and so raise the
flock to the bow, or chainewale of the ship.

Flaggs.
These are not only used at sea for distinctions of Nations, or Officers of
Fleets (as that the Admiral should have his in the Maine-top, the
Vice Admiral in the fore, and the Reare-Admirall in the Missen-top,) but also
for distinctions and signs what ships must do, according as they have
directions from the chief Commander, as to chase, to give over, to come to
counsel, or the like; At sea, to lower, or strike ones Flagg in fight is a
token of yielding, but otherwise of great obedience and respect: And to be made
to take it in perforce, the greatest disgrace that can be; when they would have
the flag out, they say, heave out the Flagg, that is, to wrap it close about
the staff; To strike the Flagg, is to pull it down upon the Cap, and so let
it hang over loose.

Flaire.
When a ship is a little howled in near the water, and above that the work
does hang over again, and is laid out broader-aloft, they say, that the work
does Flaire over, this makes a ship more room within board, for a man of War,
but it is not so sightly, nor by the most common opinion hold to be wholesome
for a ship; yet I have seen the experience, and am of opinion, that it can
wrong a ship but little, if her bearing be laid high enough.

Floane.
When any of the Sheates be not haled home to the Blocks, then they say that
the sheate is floane; but when they say, let fly the sheate, that is to let it
go amain, or as far as it will: This is most commonly used in great Gusts,
for fear of spending the top-masts, or over-setting the ship; for the sheates
being floane, does hold no wind: I have seen in an extraordinary gust, that
when the ship has been down on the quick-side in the water, we have to make
her right again let fly the sheate, but the gust has fluttred all the sail
to pieces, leaving not any jot, or but some rags in the bole-roapes.

Flood,
It is flood when the water begins to rise, young-flood, quarter-flood,
halfe-flood, are all terms commonly known.

The Flooke.
This is the broad part of the Anchor, which takes hold in the ground; as also
those of the Crapnels, which have four flookes.

Flote.
We say, any thing does flote that swimmes above water, not touching ground, as
the ship is aflote, that is, when it is borne up clear from the ground by the
rising of the water; A floaty-ship, is a ship which draws but little water.

Flow.
When the water does rise or heighten, we say it does flow: But note, that ever
in all places (Seas or Rivers) where it flows, it flows by the shore, before
it flows in the offing or middle of the stream, and so it does ebb by the
shore, before it does in the stream; the reason is, for that the water is of
most force and weight where it is deepest, and so is hardlier returned, being
once bent away: When we say it flows at London Bridge, South-west, or at any
other place South or West, or as it happens: by this is meant, that when the
Moon is at the full, or else new Moon, then upon that day, the Sun being in
the South-west point, which is three of the clock in the afternoon, it is
high water at London Bridge.

The Floor.
The floor of a ship, is so much of the bottom of her, as she does rest upon
when she is a-ground; and therefore those which have long and broad floores,
lie fast and safest with the ground, and the others are crank and dangerous,
both to wring themselves, and to overthrow.

Flush.
When a Deck is laid from Stem to Stern without any falls or risings, we say
her Deck lies flush, fore and aft, and this word is not used in any other sense.

The Fly.
Is that part of the Compass whereon the 32. points of the winds are
described; to which underneath is the Needle made fast.

To Free.
When a ship has much water in her, we say, the Pump will free her, or will
not free her; Or when we bale out the water, that is called freeing the ship:
Also, when the boat has water in her, we command them to free the boat; so
that this word (Free) is not used in any other respect about a ship, but to get
out the water, nor there is not any other word used so properly, for the
getting-out of the water of ship, or boat, as this.

Fresh-shott.
When any extraordinary land-water comes down a River suddenly, or else when
any great River comes into a sea, so as that the water is fresh a mile or two
(as in many places it is) we say it is a great fresh-shott.

The Fore-foote.
There is no such place of a ship which is termed her fore-foote; but it is a
word used in this kind, when two ships sail, so that one does lie with her
stem so much a-weather the other, that keeping their courses, that ship which
does so lie, will goe-out a head with the other, then we say, that she does lie
with the fore-foote of the other, as she stands or comes with her fore-foote;
but being once so past out before her ahead, and by her, we do not say she is
past by her fore-foote, but thus, she is gone-out ahead; so that this word
fore-foote, implies no more, but one ships lying, or sayleing a-crosse an other
ships way.

Fore-locks.
Are little flat pieces of Iron, made like wedges, which are put into the holes
at the ends of bolts, to keep the bolts from drawing out or slipping back, all
these keep down, and fast the cap-squares of the Carriages.

Foremast,
Vide Mast.

A Former.
Is a piece of wood, turned round, somewhat less then the bore of the Piece
for which it is made; as a Saker Former, a Mimon Former, etc. The use whereof,
is to make upon it Paper Carthrages, or Linen Carthrages.

Fore-Reache.
When two ships sail together, or after one another, she which sails best
(that is fastest) does Fore-reach upon the other. If two ships sail both one
way by a wind, one may keep the better wind, the other may fore-reach, then he
that does fore-reach, if he would speak with the other, as suppose he be a Man
of War, the other a Merchant, he must cast about when he is so far fore-reached
upon her, that he may lie with her fore-foote.

Fore-Saile,
Vide Sail.

Fore-Top-Mast,
Vide Topmast.

Fore-Yard,
Vide Yard.

Foul.
When a ship has been long untrymmed, so that grass, or any filth be grown
or got about her, she is foul: Also when any roape which we should hale, is
hindered by an other, or tangled in it self (as Top-saile, Halliards, Tackle,
Falls and the like may be) or any thing else so that it cannot run, we say the
roape is foul, as the Sheates are foul of the Ordnance; the Halliards,
Clew-lines, or the like, are foul and so must be cleared before they can be
made to run.

Foule-Water.
When a ship (under sail) comes into shallow water, so that she raises the mud
or sand with her way, (which she may do, though she do not touch the ground,
but come very near it) we say she makes foule-water. Note that a ship in
Showle-water, when she sails with her Keele near the ground, cannot feel her
Helm, as well as in deep water: The reason is, for that near the ground, the
water has not that weight and force as it has when it is deep: and also by
reason of an Eddy, which is made betwixt the ground and the bottom of the ship,
being so near together, the water cannot come so swift to the Rudder, as it
does in deeper-waters: And note also, that the swifter the water comes to the
Rudder, the better the ship does steer, or feel her Helm.

Fownder.
When a ship by any extraordinary leake, or else by any great sea that has
broaken into her, is half full, or full of water, so that we cannot free the
water forth, we say, she is foundred. The word is significant, for just as a
foundred Horse cannot go, so a ship which is full, or near full of water,
will not feel her Helm, that it will neither veere nor steer, but drive away
with the sea, just like a log of wood.

Furr, or Furred
There are two kinds of furring, the one is after a ship is built, to lay on an
other planck upon the side of her (which is called planck,) The other, which is
more eminent, and more properly furring, is to ripp off the first plancks, and
to put other timbers upon the first, and so to put on the plancks upon these
timbers: The occasion of it is, to make a ship bear a better sail, for when a
ship is too narrow, and the bearing either not laid out enough, or too low,
then they must make her broader, and lay her bearing higher; They commonly Furr
some two or three strakes under water and as much above, according as the ship
requires, more or less: I think in all the world, there are not so many ships
Furd, as are in England: and it is pity that there is no order taken, either
for the punishing of those who build such ships; or the preventing of it; for
it is an infinite loss to the owners, and an utter spoiling and disgrace to
all ships that are so handled.

Futtocks.
This word is commonly pronounced, but I think more properly it should be
called Foote-hookes; for the Futtocks are those compassing timbers, which give
the breadth and bearing to the ship, which are scarfed to the ground-timbers:
and because no timbers that compass, can be found long enough, to go up
through all the side of the ship, these compassing-timbers are scarffed one
into the other, and those next the keele, are called the lower or ground
Futtocks, the other are called the upper Futtocks.

G
GAge.
We are to Gage our Cask, that we may see how great it is, or how much is
leaked out; which we do, by putting down a stick at the Boong, and that, by
the wetnesse, will show how much liquour is in it: Also, when we would know how
much water a ship draws when she is a-floate, we stick a nail into a pike or
pole, and so put it down by the Rudder, till this nail catch hold under the
Rudder, and this we call gageing a ship: Note that we cannot exactly by this,
tell how much water she draws, for we must allow for the Rake of the ship
aft-ward on: for the Lole does not go down in a Perpendicular Line, and so
many foot as she draws, is called the ships gage, when one ship is to-weather
of another, she has, as they term it, the weather-gage, but they never use to
say, the Lee-gage.

Gale.
When the wind does not blow too hard, but reasonably, so that a ship may bear
her top-sailes, a-tripp, we call it (according to the strength of it) either an
easy, or loome-gale, which is, when it is little wind: a fresh, stiff strong
gale when it is much wind: Sometimes at sea, two ships being not far asunder;
if it be fair, smooth, gentle weather, and but little wind, one ship will have
more wind then the other, and sometimes the one be flat, be calmed, the other
have a little breath of wind, then they say, the ship which has the wind, does
gale away from the other.

The Garboord.
Is the first plancke, that is brought on the outside of the ship, next to the
Keele.

Gar-boordstrake.
Is the first struck, or (as you may say) the first seame next to the Keele:
Here is the most dangerous place in all the ship to spring a leake; for it is
almost impossible to come to it within-boord.

The Garnett.
Is a tackle, wherewith we hoyce in all Cask and goods, if they be not too
heavy, as great Ordnance, etc. It has a pendant comes from the head of the
maine-mast, with a block which is strongly seized to the maine-stay, just over
the Hatch-way where we use to take in our goods and howld. In this block, they
do reele the runner, which has a hook at one end, within which we hitch the
slings, and at the other, a double block, in which we reeve the fall of the
runner, and so by that we hale, and hoyse in the goods; when it is not used, it
is made fast along by the stay, at the bottom of the stay.

A Girding,
Vide Trusses.

Girt.
When the Cabell is so taught, that upon the turning of the tide, the ship
cannot go over it with her sterne-post; then she will lie a-crosse the tide,
and then we say, she is Girt; which will instantly be under, if the cabell be
veered out slack.

Goaring.
A sail, is cut goaring, when it comes sloaping by degrees, and is broader at
the clew then at the eareing; all top-sailes, and top-gallant sails are so.

Goose-wing.
When we are going before a wind, or quarter winds, with a fair fresh gale, we
many times (to make more haste) unparrell the Missen-yard, and so launch-out
the yard and sail over the quarter, on the Lee-side, and so fitting Guyes at
the farther end, to keep the yard steady with a Boome: we Boome out the Sheate
of the missen-sayle, this does help to give the ship some way, which otherwise
the missen-saile willnot, especially before a wind; this sail so fitted, is
called a Goose-wing.

Grapnells.
Are in the nature of an Anchor, being used for Gallyes, or Boats to ride by,
only they differ in form: for Grapnells have four flookes, and never a stock,
for it needs none, being that which way soever it fall, two of the flookes do
ever hold by the ground: In Men of War, we use them that are light to fling
into a ship, to catch hold on some of the Grateings, Railes, Gun-wales, or the
like, and so having a chain made fast unto it; we lash fast the ships
together. There are also small Crapnels, with three hooks, but not broad like
flookes, with which we use to sweep for Hawsers or small Cabels.

Gratings.
Are small ledges laid over one cross another like a Portcullisse or a prison
gate, those which are called the gratings, are betwixt the maine and fore-masts
which do serve for a close fight, and also for the succor of men, either in
hot, or foul weather, with a Tarpawling upon them: There are also in many
places of the ship gratings made for air and light, but chiefly over the
Ordnance, for the vent of the smoke of the powder, which comes out of the
touchhole in fight.

To Grave.
Graveing a ship, is bringing her to lie dry aground, and then to burn off
the old filth and stuff, with reed, broom, or the like, and so to lay on new;
Some use only tallow, but that will quickly grow foul, others tallow and soape
(which will also quickly grow foul,) The most common and best, is with
traine-oyle, Rosen and Brimstone boiled together, for this will last longest
clean: The laying on of the stuff, is called Paying the ship.

A Gripe.
The Gripe of the Ship, is the compass and sharpness of the Stem under-water,
especially toward the lower part: The use whereof, is to make a Ship keep a
good wind; And therefore sometimes when a ship will not keep a wind well, they
put on an other false Stem to the true Stem to make her Gripe more,

To Gripe.
We say a Ship does Gripe, when she is apt (contrary to the Helm,) to run her
head or nose to the wind more then she should: There are commonly two causes of
this, the one, when a Ship may be too deep ahead, that her head is not apt,
by reason of the weight which presses her down, to fall away from the wind;
the other may be the staying of the Mast; for if she be a short Ship, and draw
much water, if her Masts be stayed too much aftward-on, it will cause her head
still to run into the wind: The Flemmings being generally long floatie Ships,
do stay all their Masts aftward-on very much, else their Ships would never
keep a wind, for it is apparent to sense, that all fails from the Maine-mast
aftward-on the farther aft they stand, the more they keep the Ship to the wind:
as the head-sailes, the more foreward on they stand, the more power they have
to flat the Ship about from the wind.

Grommets.
Are little rings, which are made fast to the upper-side of the yard, with
staples, which are driven into the yard; which have no other use but to tie and
make fast the Casketts into them.

Ground and grounding.
When a Ship is brought of purpose to be trimmed on the ground, or otherwise,
that is called grounding the ship: There are three manner of laying a ship
a-ground, that is, either laying her head upwards toward the bancke and her
stern toward the offwards, and is turned, laying her Pitch-long-to, this is
used to Ships that are crank with the ground; for this way, they take the best
advantage for the Ship to bear her self: The second is, to lay her all
along the shore, and to heel her to the shore-ward; this is used to ships
which have reasonable good floats, and will bear themselves sufficiently well:
The third, is laying her along the shore, heeling her to the offward; this we
use to Ships which have great broad Floarers (as Flemmings, which have standing
strakes;) the reason is, for that otherwise we should hardly come to her Keele:
Some sea-fareing-men, are very superstitious of going to sea at certain days,
and commonly those hold it good to begin the voyage on Sundaies; and therefore
to seem to have begun the voyage that day (though they be not ready to go)
they will weigh, or as the term is, tripp the Anchor, and go a little way,
and so come to the Anchor again, this they call breaking ground.

Ground-timbers.
Are those timbers which are fast laid over the Keele, and so bolted through
the Keelson into the Keele, and are those which make the floare of the Ship,
and are therefore called ground-timbers, because the Ship does rest upon these
when she lies a-ground.

Gudgins.
Are those Irons which are made fast to the Sterne-post, into which the
Pintells of the Rudders are hanged.

To Gull.
When the Pin of a Block, does eat or wear into the Sheever, it is called
Gulling: Also when a Yard does rubb against the Mast, we say, it will Gull the
Mast; and therefore, to avoid that, we put a Plat made of Synnet, to the
middle of the yard, to keep it from gulling the Mast.

The Gun-wale.
That piece of timber, which reaches on either side the Ship, from the
halfe-Deck, to the fore-Castell (being the uppermost bend as it were, which
finishes the upper walls of the Hull there; and wherein they put the Stanshions
which support the wast-trees) is called the Gun-wale, whether there be any guns
there or not: Also the lower part of any Port where any Ordnance does lie, is
called the Gun-wale.

A Guye.
Is any roape, which is used to keep a piece of Ordnance, or any thing else,
the Boat or the like, which is hoysed into the Ship from swinging into the
Ship too fast, when it is over the gun-wale, to be hoysed-in, then by this
roape we do ease it in greatly; and it is commonly made fast to the Stanshions
of the wast-trees, and that is called a Guy, which word I think comes from
Guide, for this does guide it in. Also there is a roape, which is fastened to
the foremast at one end, and is reeved through a single block, which is seized
to the Pendant of the winding-tackle, and so reeved again through an other,
which is seized to the foremast, somewhat lower then the first part, and this
is to hale foreward the Pendant of the winding Tackle, and this roape is called
Guye.

H
To HAle, or over-hale.
That which others commonly call pulling a roape, the sea-faring-men call ever
haleing (as hale taught the Bowleings; or hale in a roape that hangs without
board, or the like in any kind,) To over-hale, is when a roape is haled too
stiff, or taught; then to hale it the contrary way that it was haled before,
and so to make it slacker.

To Hall, or Halling.
Halling of a Ship, is calling to her to know whence she is, or whither she is
bound, or any other occasion, which is done commonly in these words, o the
Ship, or (at sea,) no more but Hoa, and the other then answers Hae: These words
are common to all Christian seamen, to hall each other in: Also sometimes we
seem to call to them, or salute them with whistles or trumpets, and this is
called Halling with Trumpets, or whistles.

Halliards.
Are the roapes by which we hoyse all the yards, only the crosse-Jack, nor the
sprit-saile-yard have none, because they are ever slung: yet in small-craft,
they have Halliards to the sprit-saile-yard.

Hand, or Handing.
When they would deliver away any thing, to be passed to another, or to have it
brought to them, they say, hand this away, or hand me that, or hand it along;
so when they want men to hoyse, or do any labor, they use to call for more
hands, not more men.

A Hands peeke.
Is but a wooden leaver, (which is used instead of a Croa of Iron) to traverse
the Ordnance; but most especially to the wind less in the boat, or Ships
which have wind lasses, to heave up the Anchor by.

The Harpings.
The Harpings of a Ship, is the breadth of her at the bow: Also some call the
ends of the bends, which are fastened into the Stem, the Harpings.

Hatches.
Are those loose parts, and as it were, doors of the Deck, which are in the
mid-ship before the maine-mast that we open to let down things in Hold;
having at each corner, a sheackle of Iron, to lift them by.

Hatch-way.
By the Hatch-way, Is meant the place Perpendicular, over the Hatches: when
they say, lay a thing in the Hatch-way, that is, on the Hatches.

The Hawses.
Are those great-round-holes, before, under the head, out of which the Cabels
do come, when the Ship is at an Anchor: A bold Hawse; Is when they lie high
from the water, and this is best, for when they lie low, if there be great sea,
the Hawse will still be in the water, and take in much water into the Ship:
Fresh the Hawse, that is when we suspect that the Cabell is fretted or chafed,
or is like, as many times it will, to burn in the Hawse (for there the Cabell
endures the greatest stresse) then we veere out a little, to let an other part
of the Cabell endure the stresse: Also, when we lay new Platts upon the Cabell;
In the Hawfe, it is called freshing the Hawse: Clear the Hawse, that is, when
two Cabels, which come out at two Hawses, and by the winding of the Ship, have
some turns one about the other, then undoing these turns, is clearing the
Hawse; which is necessary to be done, for else the Cabels will gall one another
very much: Any ship, or thing that is cross before the Hawse, or lies athwart
the Hawse; or when one Ship rides with her stern just before the others Hawse,
they say, she rides upon the Hawse.

A Hawser.
Is a three-strand roape, and may be called a little Cabell, for that which is
one Ships Hawser, will be an other Ships Cabell: These do serve for many uses,
as to warp the Ship over a bar: the maine and fore-shrowdes, are made of
Hawsers; only note the difference of the making or laying, is the cause of the
difference of the names, which to know, Vide Roapes.

The Head, Vide Beake-Head.
Yet sometimes it is not exactly taken only for the Brake-head; for sometimes
they say, ahead, that is, about the foremast, taking as it were, all the
forepart of the Ship, for the head.

Head-lines.
Are the roapes of all sails, which are upper most next the yard, by which the
sail is made fast unto the yards.

Head-sailes,
Are sails belonging to the foremast, sprit-saile, and sprit-saile topmast;
for these are the sails which govern the head of the Ship, to make it fall
off, and to keep out of the wind; these head-sailes (quarter-winds) are the
chief drawing sails.

Head-sea.
When it has been a great storm, the wind (it may be) will suddenly alter
6. points and more, but the sea will go the lame way it did, for some hours,
then if our course lie to go right against this sea (as we may, the wind being
altered) we shall meet this sea right ahead, and so we call it a head-sea:
Sometimes also when it has but a little wind, there will be a sea, which will
come contrary to the wind, but then, not long after, the wind will come that
way, and does show, that on that point of the Compass, when as that sea comes,
there has been much wind. Note, that generally, before any great storm, the
sea will come that way before any wind; which shows that the sea out-runnes
the wind; the reason I take to be, for that the sea being a continuate-body,
one part being moved, the wind does quickly infuse motion to the rest, as we
see by the circles which a stone does make, when it is thrown into the water.
Note in head-seas, all short Ships are bad sailers, for they beat much against
the sea, but long Ships do go more easily, for they will ride upon two waves
at once, and fall more geraly into the sea.

To Heave.
As we commonly use the word, fling a-way, so seamen they use the word, heave
away; for if it be but a roape, yard, or Ship, they will say, heave it a-way:
Heave over-bood, that roape, yard, or the like; Also the turning about of the
Capstaine, is called heaving at the Capstaine; Also when a Ship at Anchor does
rise, and fall with the waves, they say, she heaves and sets.

The Heel.
The Heel of the Maine-mast, Foremast, or Missen, is nothing but that part,
which is pared away a little, slaunting on the aftward-side of the foot of the
mast, like a heel, to give the mast leave to be stayed aftward on; as the
Flemmings do especially; But the heels of the top-masts are squares, and in
that they put the fid of the topmast.

To Heel.
Is for the Ship to lie down on a side, whether she be a floate or a-ground,
and so she heels much or little: She heels to Star-Boord, or to Port: Some
superstitious seamen, when they take in goods, or victuals for a voyage, if by
chance in stowing the provision she heel to star-boord, will say, it is a
sign of a long and bad voyage, for then they will say, she heels from
hand-ward, because they take in all their goods on the Lar-boord side; but if
she heel to Lar-boord, it is a sign of a good-voyage, and some goods to come
in: When she is a-ground, we say she heels to the shore-ward, or to the
offward, according as it is.

The Helm.
Is that piece of timber, which the helmes-man does hold in his hand, to steer
and govern the Rudder, and one end is made fast to the head of the Rudder, but
so as that it may be taken off: Though the Rudder be the cause of the Ships
working, yet the helm is the instrument which governes the Rudder, and
therefore we impute it all to the Helm; as when we say, the Ship feels the
Helm, or does not feel the Helm, that is, will work, and be governed by the
Helm, or not; for if a Ship be very foul, or out of her trym, or too deep,
or too light, many times she will not feel the Helm, but sail as if she had
none. Port the Helm: Star-boord the Helm: A mid-ship, or right the Helm,
terms of conding, to direct which way the Steeres-man should put the Helm: In
smaller Ships under the rate of 500. Tun, they use to put a whip to the other
end of the Helm, and so steer and govern the Helm by that.

To Hitch.
Is to catch-hold of any thing with a roape, to hold it fast, or with a hook;
and we say, Hitch the fish-hooke to the flooke of the Anchor: When we hoyse in
the boat, Hitch the Tackles in the rings of the boat, or the garnet, the
slings, that is, catching hold of it by the hook, to hoyse in the goods.

To Hold-off.
Is when we heave the Cabell at the Capstaine, if the Cabell be very stiff and
great, or else have layne in a slimie ozie-ground, it surges, and slips back,
unless that part, which is heaved in, be still haled away, hard from the
Capstaine, to keep the Cabell close, and hard to the Capstaine whelps, if it
be a small Cabell, men may do it in their hands, but if great, then either
they hold off with Nippers, or else (as in all great ships) they do bring it
to the jeere-capstaine, and this is called, Holding-off.

Honey Combd.
When a piece of Iron Ordnance (either by being Ill-east, or with over much
wearing, is rugged, and has little holes in the concave of the Piece, she is
said to be Honey-combd. This is very dangerous for a cross-bar-shot to catch
in, or any ragged shot, as also that some rag of the Carthrage, or piece of the
wad may stick in it, and so fire the powder, that shall instantly be put in; to
try whether a Piece be Honey-combed, we put in a Nail, or crooked piece of
wire at the end of a staff, and so where that catches, we know she is
honey-combed, or else light a candle on the end of a staff, and that will show
all the imperfections of the Piece.

The Hooks.
The Hooks of the Ship, are all those forked timbers which are placed upright
on the Keele, both in the Rake, and Run of the Ship: These do give the
Narrowing and bredthing of the Ship in those parts, according as they are
framed, and they are bolted into the Keele; The compassing timbers which are
before, and do help to strengthen the Stem and forepart of the Ship, are
called breast-hookes.

A Horse.
Is a roape which is made fast to one of the foremast shrowdes, with a
dead-man-eye at the end of it, through which is reeved the pendant of the
sprit-saile-sheates; and is for no other use, but to keep the
sprit-saile-sheates clear of the flookes of the Anchor: Also when a man heaves
the head of the shrowdes, there is a roape made fast to the shrowdes for him to
lean against for falling into the sea; Also they use a roape to set taught the
shrowdes, with wale-knots, one end made fast to the shrowdes, to the other, the
Lanniers are brought, and so with a hand-speeke turning it, they set taught the
Halliards, this is called a Horse: Also those little short roapes, which are
seized to the middle of the topmast, and top-gallant-stages, with a block,
wherein are reeved the top-saile and top-gallant bowlings are called Horses.

The Howld.
All the room betwixt the Keilson, and the first, or lower-decks, is called
the Howld; and it is where all our victuals, goods, and stores do lie; yet it
is divided into several rooms with bulk-heads, as the Stewards room, the
Powder room, the Boate-swaines store, and the like: Running the howld, stowe
the howld, clear the howld. Vide the proper names.

The Hownds.
Are the holes in the Checks which are fastened to the head of the Masts,
wherein the ties do run, to hoyse the yard; The top-masts have but one hole
aloft in the head of the mast, because they have but single ties, and this is
also called the Hownds.

Howlsom.
We say a Ship is a Howlsom Ship in the sea when she will hull, try and ride
well at an Anchor, without rowleing or tumbling and laboring much in the sea:
A long ship, which draws much water will hull well, try well, and ride well:
If she draw much water, and be short, she may hull well, but neither try nor
ride well at an Anchor: If she draw little water, and be long, she may ride
well, and try well, but not hull well; If she be short, and draw little water,
she will neither hull, try nor ride well, and therefore those are the most
unhowlsome Ships. Note also that the howseing-in, or laying of the upper works
of a ship, do much ease, or wrong her in all these manner of workings; but
howsoever the over-carveing of her, is bad for all, and makes her more
laboursome then otherwise she would be.

Howsing-in.
When a Ship after she is pass the breadth of her bearing, is brought in narrow
to her upper-works, they say that she is howsed-in: Most are of opinion, that
the howseing in of a Ship, makes her the more howlsome in the sea, because the
weight of the Ordnance, and her upper works, do not over-hang the Nail, which
as they suppose would make her roll the more, but I am sure it takes away a
great deal of room for a man of War, and the Tack will never come so well
a-boord, as when she is laid-out a loft: I have so much experience of both
sorts, that I am of opinion if two Ships be given, caeteris paribus, a ship
which is laid out a-loft, not flairing but proportionably finished to her other
works, shall be the howlsomer Ship; for that the counterpoise on either side
(the whole weight, not so much over hanging the perpendicular of the Keele)
shall keep her more steady, and make her the longer in fetching over a seele:
The reason is the same, and will hold proportion in a Ship to the wacking of a
Tun-Ambulus, who with equal weight will go much more sure, if his weight
wherewith with he does steady himself, be at the end of the Long-staffe, which
by reason of the greatness of the circle, must have a long time to come over
his perpendicular, then if the same were in a shorter staff, or in a lump
together in his hand, which once inclining either way, be has nothing by which
to succor and counterpoize the weight.

To Hoyse.
When they would hale up any thing into the Ship with a Tackle, or a
dead-roape, or get up a yard, they call it Hoiseing: as hoyse the water in
hoyse up the yards.

The Hull.
Is the very body or bulk of the Ship without Masts, Yards, Roapes or sails.

Hulling,
Is when a Ship is at sea, and has taken in all her sails, in calm weather:
It is done to save the sails from beating-out against the Masts, but in foul
weather when they are able to bear no sail, the manner is no more, but taking
in all the sails, and tying down the helm to the Lee-side of the Ship (and
so if she be a good conditioned Ship) she will lie easily under the sea, and
thus she makes her way one point before the beam, that is, if the wind be at
West, and the Ship look South, she will make way East, and by South, which is
one point before the beam: the beam will bear East and West. It is not yet
agreed amongst all Seamen, whether it be better for a Ship to hull with her
topmast up or down: the most received opinion is, to have her down, in
respect that generally they suppose the weight aloft will make her steel the
more dangerously in a storm. But besides (the experience which I have seen to
the contrary) I can give this reason, why it is best in a dangerous and
desperate storm, to hull with the top-masts up; all seamen will confess,
that the weather Seele is the most dangerous Seele, and therefore must grant,
that that is the safest hulling which does most prevent the danger of the
Seele: If her top-masts be down when she Seeles to Lee-ward, the less weight
over-bead she has to hinder her from coming, and rolling back over again to
wind-ward, the faster she will Seele-over, and the shorter: so that meeting the
wind-ward sea so short, and suddenly it may endanger to break in and founder
her, but if the Topmast be up, she must needs be the longer in comming-up to
wind-ward, and so meet the sea with more ease, that it may have more leisure
to break a way under her; yet it is true, she will make the greater Lee-Seele,
but in that there is no danger, though to an unexperienced man, there may seem
to be.

A Hullock.
Is a small part of a sail, which is loosed and left open in a great storm,
when we dare not have any more out; and is only used in the Missen-saile, when
we would keep the Ships head to the sea, with a little sail; making all up,
excepting a little at the Missen-yard arm: or else when a Ship will not
weather-coile, to lay her head the other way, we loose (for that is the term)
a hullock of our fore-saile, and so changing the helm to the weather-side, the
Ship will fall off, and lay her head, where her stern lay before.

I
The IEere.
Is a piece of a Hawser, which is made fast to the maine-yard and fore-yards,
close to the ties of great Ships (for small Ships do not use it,) and so is
reeved through a block, which is seized close to the top, and so comes down,
and is reeved through an other block at the bottom of the Mast close by the
Deck: Great ships have one on one side, an other on the other side of the ties;
the use of this roape, is to help to hoyse up the yard, but the chiefest is to
succor the ties, and to hold the yard from falling down if the ties should
break.

The Jeere-Capstaine.
This has its name from the Jeere; which is ever brought to this Capstaine to
be heaved at by; It stands in the wast in the hatch-way, and serves for many
other uses (as to heave upon the Violl, or hold off the Cabell from the
maine-Capstaine.

Iron-sick.
A Ship or boat is said to be Iron-sick, when the bolts, speeks or nails are
so eaten away with the rust or the salt water, that they stand hollow in the
planckes, and so the Ship does receive in water by them, and this is the reason
why they put lead over all the bolts heads under water.

A Junck.
Any piece of a Cabell that is cut off, most commonly any part of an old
Cabell, is called a Junck; such as this, they hang for fenders by the
Ships-sides, or else untwist it, and make plats for Cabels, roape-yarne or
sinnet, if it be not too old and rotten, if it be old, then they make Ockham of
it.

A Jury-mast.
When by occasion of storm, or fight, we have lost either the Foremast or
maine-Mast, we do reserve (if it be possible) the Maine or fore-yard; which we
put down into the step of the mast, and so fasten it in the partners, and so
take the Missen yard, or if we have any other, which serves for a yard, which
fitting with sails and roapes in form of the other, we make a shift with a
steer, and govern the Ship.

K
To KEckle, or Keckling.
We use this term only to the Cabell, and the Bolt-roape, when we fear the
galling of the Cabell in the Hawse, or the bolt-roape against the quarter of
the Ship, we turn a small roape round about it, but in manner it differs not
from serveing of other roapes, though to these, this serveing is Keckling.

A Kedger,
Vide Anchor.

To Kedge, or Kedging.
When in a narrow River, we would bring up or down a Ship, the wind being
contrary to the tide, and we are to go with the tide, then they use to set the
fore-saile, or fore-top-saile, and the millen, and so let her drive with the
tide; the reason of useing these sails, is to flat her about, if she come too
near the shore: also they use a small Anchor in the head of the boat, with a
hawser, that comes from the Ship; which Anchor they let fall in the middle of
the stream: If the ship come too near the shore, and so wind her head about
by that, and so lift up the Anchor again, when she is about; from this use the
Anchor is called a Kedger, or Kedge-Anchor.

The Keele.
Is the first timber which is laid of a Ship, and is the bases whereon all the
rest are fastened; and so much is to be accounted the Keele, as does lie in a
straight line, at the one end whereof, is scarffed in the Stem, and at the
other, is let in the stern-post; to this are all the ground timbers and hooks,
fore and aft, bolted; and on them all the upper-works are raised: A rank
Keele, is when a ship has a deep Keele; and this is good to keep a Ship from
rowleing; for if a floaty ship roll too much, that has but a showle-Keele, we
put to an other Keele under the first, to make it deeper, for that will take
some more hold in the water; and this we call a false Keele.

The Keele-roape.
Is a roape which runs along the Ship upon the Keele within the Limbers of
the ground-timbers, one end commingout out before, the other abast, some will
have this of a basse-roape, but the best is a hair roape for lasting: The use
of it is, to clear the Limber-holes when they are stocked with ballast, or any
thing else, so as the water which lies betwixt the timbers, cannot come to the
well of the Pump.

Keel-son.
Is the lowest piece of timber within the Ships howld, which lies all along
upon the ground-timbers right over the Keele, through which are driven the
bolts which do fasten the Keelson ground-timbers and the Keele together.

A Ketch.
Is a small-boate, such as uses to come to Belinsgate, with Mackrell, Oisters,
etc.

Kewells.
Are small pieces of Timber, nailed to the inside of the Ship, unto which we
be-lay the sheates and tacks.

Keenke.
When a roape which should run smooth in the block, has got a little turn, so
as it comes double (as it were) this we call a Keenke: also the same is in a
Cabell, if it run-out-doubling in like manner, which happens either by ill
quileing of the Cabell, or by letting it run out too fast; but if it be
perceived, it is remedied by over-setting the Cabell, else the Cabell very much
in that place.

A Knave-line.
Is a roape, the one end fastened to the Cres-trees under the maine or fore-top,
and so comes down by the ties, to the Ram-head; unto which there is seized, a
small piece of biller (some two foot long) with a hole in the end of it, in
which hole this line is reeved, and so brought to the ships-side, and haled
up-taught to the railes: The use whereof, is to keep the ties and halliards
from turning about one an other, which being new, they would ibe, were it not
for this line; but after the halliards and ties are stretched a while it is
taken away, and no more used, but on the like occasion.

Knees.
Are those crooked timbers, which are so called, in respect they represent a
man's knee bowing; these do bind the beams and the futtocks together, being
bolted into both of them; some do stand along ships, and some right up and
down; you may eafily know them in part where they are used, by the form of
them.

Kneetles.
Are two roape yarnes twisted together in a knot at each end, to sease a roape,
or block, or the like.

The Knights.
There is the maine-Knight, and the fore-Knight; one standing aft the maine,
the other abast the foremast, upon the second Deck, being fast bolted to the
beams: A Knight is a piece of timber wherein are four sheevers, three for the
halliards and one for the top-roape to run in, when they are hoysed; they are
commonly carved with the picture of some head upon them, by which they are
easily known.

Knittlidge,
Vide Ballast, for it is all one.

Knotts.
There are two sorts of Knotts, which are used at sea, the one is a Bowling
Knot (which is so made, that it will not slip norslide) with this knot the
bowling bridles are made-fast to the Creengles, but it is also used in any
other ways: The other is a wale Knot, which is a round knot or knobb, made
with three strands of a roape so that it cannot slip. The tacks,
top-saile-sheates and stoppers, have these waleknots, and many other roapes.

L
To Labor.
We say a Ship labors in the sea, when she rowles and tumbles very much,
either a Hull, or under sail, or at an Anchor: A ship rowles most a-hull, when
it has been a grown storm, and suddenly the wind ceases, but the seas
continue still, then she will roll, for want of wind: under-saile a ship
rowles most, right before a-wind, but bears most upon ahead sea; so that some
ships are most dangerous to put a-fore the fea in a great storm; and weak
Ships dangerous to beat against the head-sea at an Anchor; Ships roll and
labor most when they lie betwixt wind and tide, which is upon the turning of
the tide, when the wind and the tide are contrary; and neither has got power
to make her strain her Cabels, to ride with her head, either to the wind or
tide.

Ladder.
There are three usual Ladders belonging to a Ship, the entering Ladder in the
waste; a ladder of roapes, which hangs out of the gallery for foule-weather and
at sea, to come out of the boat, or go into it; and one at the beak-head,
which is made fast over the bolt-sprit to get up upon the bolt sprit by: The
Venetians, and most Leavent Ships, and also Spanish Gallioons have Ladders,
which go into the top, and come down abast the ties, for they seldo me go up
by the shrowdes.

To Lade.
Is to fill the Ship with goods or provision, for when the Howld is full, they
say, she has her ladeing; Also to charge a piece of Ordnance, is to Lade the
Ordnance; also some say, Lade the water out of the boat.

A Ladle.
Is that wherewith we put the powder into a piece of Ordnance, when we take the
powder out of a Budge-barrell; we never use that in fight, unless we have
spent all our Carthrages, for they are both troublesome, and not so speedy, and
dangerous for scattering of powder.

Land-fall.
Is as much as the falling with the Land, as thus, If we say we shall see Land,
such a day, and that it fall out so just according to our reconing, we say, we
have a good Land-fall; or if we be mistaken, then we made a bad Land-fall.

Land-locked.
When we are in any Road or Harbor, so that the Land lies round about us, and
the sea lies not any point open upon us, we say we ride Land-locked, these are
very good Roads and Harbors; for no sea can come in to wrong the Ship.

Land-to.
By this is meant, just so far off at sea as we can see the Land: as when we
direct one to lie off at fea in the hight of a Capeland-to, that is so near,
and so far off, as he may even just see and discern the land, and no nearer.

A Land-turne.
Is the same off the Land, that a Breize is off the sea, only differing that
the Land-turne comes by night, and by sea-turne, or Breize by day. Vide Breize.

A Langrell.
Is a loose-shot, which goes in with a shackle, to be shortened when it is put
into the Piece, and to fly out at length when it is discharged, with a half
bullet, either of Lead or Iron at the either end: This is good shot near hand,
to use out of our Ordnance, to cut down Masts, Yards, Roapes and Sails; and
also it will do much execution among the men aloft; but it is not used betwixt
wind and water, for it will not pierce a good Ships-sides.

Laniers.
Are the small roapes, which are reeved in the dead-men-eyes, of all the
shrowdes and chames; and the use of them, is either to slacken, or to
set-taught the shrowdes: also all the stays belonging to any Masts (whether
they have Blocks or Dead-men-eyes belonging to them) are set taught by a
Lannier; also the small roape, which makes fast the stopper of the halliards to
the halliards, is called a Lannier.

Large.
When a Ship goes neither by a-wind, nor before a wind, but as it were, betwixt
both (that is quartering) and such a wind that carries her so, we call a
large-wind.

To Lase, or Lasing.
Is the proper term, for putting-to the Bonnet to the Course, or the Drabler
to the Bonner, as Lase on the Bonnet: Also we say, Lase on the Netting to the
Roose-trees or the Wast-trees.

To Lash, or Lashers.
When we bind any thing up to the Ships sides or Masts (as Pikes, Muskers, or a
Butt to the Mast, or the like, as fishes and spare top-Masts without-boord) we
call it lashing to, but the Lashers chiefly are those roapes, which do
bind-fast together the rackles and breechings of the great Ordnance, when they
are haled within-boord: The reason is, because the breechings cannot be ha^edup
taught by hand, therefore this roape is brought about the breeching and tackles
a little before the carriage, right under the Piece, and so lashes them fast
together.

Lasking.
Note that when we say, a Ship goes Lasking, Veering, Quarter-winds, Large and
Roomer, it is in a manner all one, for then they neither go by a wind, nor
before.

Latchets.
Are small lines, which are sown into the Bonnets and Drabler like loopes,
wherewith they lase the Bonnet to the Cowrse, or the Drabler to the Bonnet,
putting them into the Eylot-holes, and so lafeing them one over an other.

Launch.
This word is used instead of put-out, as we say; Launch a Ship out of a Dock,
or out of the Key; Launch the boat, launch-out, or launch in the Davit;
Launch-out the Capstaine bars: Also in an other sense, when they have
hoysed-up a yard high enough, or the top. Mast, they cry Launch-hoa, that is,
hoyse no more: Also in stowing the howld, they will say, Launch aft, or launch
fore-ward, when they would have a Butt or the like brought fore-ward, or
aft-ward-on; also when they are pumping, if the Pump sucks, then they cry
Launch-hoa, that is pump no more.

To Lay a Land.
When we are sailed out of sight of a Land so that we cannot see it, we say,
that we have laid the line; but if it be so, that some other point of Land do
hinder us from seeing it, then we say, that we have shut in, or shut it into
the other point.

A Leake.
There is no Ship so tight, but that with her laboring in the sea, (nay though
she ride in Harbor) she will make some water, but we say a ship is Leake, when
she makes more water then is ordinary, which is some hundred strokes in 24. or
48. hours: The causes of Leakes are, either the starting some Treevells, the
opening of the Seames, the eating of the Worms, or else by receiving some shot
under water: The ways of stopping are but two, either within-boord, (which can
hardly be, if the Leake be low amongst the ground-timbers or the hooks; but
then the best remedy is, to drive down Tallow and Coals mingled together;
raw-Beefe, Oatmeale-baggs or the like) if it can be come at, then it is easily
stopped with Lead; if it be a shot, they drive-in a Plug, with some Canvas
about it; The other is without-boord; when it is easily stopped (if it be not
too low) by heeling the Ship over on the other side, and so nailing lead over
it; but if it be low, then to stirch a Bonnet, or a Netting which is better
with long roape-yarnes opened, and so sucking it under the Keele, to bring it
against the Leake: the in-drought of the water will suck in the Ockham, and so
stop her self; but this will not continue long; when a Ship is Leake, the
term is, she has sprung a Leake, or she makes much water.

Ledges.
Are those small pieces of timber, which come thwart ships, from the Wast-trees
to the Roofe-trees to bear up the Nettings: or so if there be a grating over
the halfe-Deck.

Lee.
This word is many ways used, but generally the Lee is understood for that
which is opposite to the wind: The Lee-shore, that is the shore against which
the wind blows; yet to be under the Lee of the shore, is to be close under the
weather-shore, that is, whence the wind does come: a-lee the helm, that is,
put the helm to the leefide of the ship: In conding they use to call him at
helm, to have a care of the Lee-latch, that is, to look that the ship go not
to lee-ward of her course (a Lee-ward ship, is one that is not fast by a-wind,
and does not make her way so good as she might: To come by the Lee, or to lay a
ship by the Lee; is to bring her so, that all her sails may lie against the
Masts and shrowds flat, and the wind to come right on her bread-side, so that
the ship will lie as it were stark still, or if she make any way, it will be
with her broadside right with the beam: The manner of bringing a ship by the
Lee (if she have all her sails a-boord) is to bear up the helm, hard to
wind-ward: Let rise the fore-rack and veere-out the maine-sheate, and take in
the Missen, or peake it up (which is called Spelling the Missen.

The Lee-fange.
Is a roape which is reeved into the Creengles of the Courses, when we would
hale-in the bottom of the sail, to lase on the Bonnet, in a strong gale they
serve also to help to take in the sail.

The Leetch.
The Leetch of a sail, is the outward side or skirt of the sail, from the
earing to the clew; the middle betwixt which is especially to be accounted the
Leetch.

Leetch-lines.
Are small lines which are fastened to the Leetch of the top-sailes (for they
belong to no other sails) and are reeved into a block at the yard, close by
the top-saile-ties: The use whereof is, when they take in the top-sailes, to
hale-in the Leetch of the sail; and note, they ever hale the Lee-leetch line
first, for then the rest will come in with more ease.

Legs.
They are called the Legs of the Martnets, and are small roapes, put through
the Blot-roapes of the maine and fore-saile, in the Leetch of the sail, near
a foot of length, and so at either end being splised into themselves, they
have a little eye, whereinto the Martnets are made, with two hitches, and the
end seized to the standing-part of the Martnets.

Let fall.
Is a phrase generally used for the putting-out any sails, when the yards are
aloft; but not if the Maine-yard and ford-yard be stricken down, so as that the
sails may be loosed before the yards be hoysed: but most properly, it is used
to the maine-saile, fore-sailes, and sprit sail (for to top-sailes the more
proper term is, heave-out your top-sailes) because they do lie in the top;
and to the Missen-saile, we say, set the Missen, and not let it fall.

Lifts.
Are roapes which belong to the yard-armes of all yards: and do only serve to
top the yard-armes, that is, to make the ends of the yards hang higher or
lower, or even, as we list. But the top-saile lifts, do serve for sheates to
the top-gallant-yards, as well as for lifts to the top-saile yards; the haleing
of them, is called topping the Lifts, as top-a star-boord, or top a port, that
is, hale upon the star-boord, or lar-boord-lift.

Limbers, or Limber-holes.
Are little square holes, cut in the bottom of all the ground-timbers and
hooks next to the Keele, right over the Keele (about 3. or 4. inches square)
the use whereof, is to let the water pass to the well of the Pump, which else
would lie betwixt the timbers; into these is put the Keele-roape.

Lins-pins.
Are only used about the Trucks of the Carriages, to keep on the Trucks upon
the Axeltree, being little Iron pins just the same that keep on Coach-wheeles.

Lockers.
Any little boxes, or as it were, Cubbords which are made by the Ships-sides,
to put in shot by the Pieces, or in any other places, are (by a common name)
called Lockers: we have them to every Piece, to have the shot lie ready, if on
the sudden we should have occasion; but in fight the shot lies not there, but
in a roape made like a ring, which lies flat upon the Deck; so that the shot
cannot do so much hurt, if that an other shot should light amongst it.

A Logg-line.
Some call this a Minut-line; it is a small line with a little piece of a board
at the end, with a little lead to it, to keep it edg-long in the water; the
use of it is, that by judging how many faddome this runs out in a Minut, to
give a judgment how many leagues the ship will run in a watch, for if in a
minut there run out 14. faddom of the line, then they conclude that the ship
does run a mile in an hour, (for 60. (the number of minutes in a hour) being
multiplied by 14. (the number of faddome) make just as many places as are in a
mile) so accordingly, as in a minut, there runs out more or less, they do by
judgment allow for the Ships way; but this is a way of no certainty, unless
the wind and seas, and the course would continue all one; besides the error of
turning the Glass, and stopping the line both at an instant, so that it is
rather to be esteemed as a trick for a conclusion, then any sollid way to
ground upon: the manner of doing it is, one stands by with a Minut-glasse,
whilst another out of the gallery lets fall the logg, just as the logg falls
into the water the other turns the glass, and just when the glass was even
out, he cries stop, then he stops, and reckons how many faddom are run-out, so
gives he judgment.

The Loofe.
The Loofe of the Ship is counted that part aloft of the Ship, which lies just
before the Ches-trees, as far as the Bulk-head of the Castle; and therefore we
call those pieces of Ordnanee which lie there, the loofe-peeces: Loofe-up, a
term in conding the Ship, to have him keep her near the wind: Loofe into a
Harbor, that is, to keep close to a wind, and so go into it: Keep your Loofe,
that is, to keep close to the wind: to spring-ones Loofe, that is, when a Ship
is going large, to clap-close by a wind.

A Loofe-hooke.
Is a Tackle, with two hooks; one to hitch into a Creengle of the Maine and
fore-saile, which Creengle is in the bolt-roape of the Leetch of the sail not
far above the clew; and the other to hitch into a strap which is plised into
the Ches-tree, and so to bowse down the sail; the use whereof, is to succor
the tackle in a great gale, that all the force and stresse may not bear up the
tack, and also it is used when we would sease the tack surer, or the like.

A Loome-gale.
Vide Gale.

To Loome.
The Looming of a Ship is (as you would say) the very perspective of a Ship;
for the word is used in this sense, a Ship loomes a great sail; that is, she
seems to be a great Ship: she loomes but small, that is, shows or seems to
be but a little ship.

A Lust.
When a Ship heels a little to Star-boord or port, we say, she has a Lust
that way, though this happen by stowing her Howld unequally: but most properly,
a Ship is said to have a Lust to one side or other, when out of her own mold
and making, she has a kind of inclination to one side more then to the other;
or it may be by the unequal weight of timbers; for it is a very hard matter,
to carry a ships works so even, but that there shall be some small difference;
I have seen the experience in many ships, that being equally ballasted, they
would carry a greater sail, stop less, and go better upon one tack then upon
the other.

Lie under the sea.
When in a storm we are a-hull, and make fast the Helm a-lee, so as the sea
does break upon the bow and broadside of the ship, we say she lies, or is
laid under the sea.

M
To MAn.
We say a Ship is well Manned, when she has men enough to use her Ordnance,
trym her sails, and plye a convenient number of small shot, besides the
Surgeons, Carpenters, and some to hand along powder, and other men that are
necessary, but not fighters; I mean so as that men being appointed to their
charge shall only intend that; though it be true that a man may step from a Gun
to a roape, or from a roape to use a small-shot, and the like, and therefore it
may be thought there should not need so many; yet I would have those things
done, as works of Supererogation, not as being forced to them, for if necessity
then require, whilst the sails are a trimming, the Ordnance or small-shot must
lie still: What inconvenience the want of sufficient manning is, in a man of
War, they can best tell, who have been best experienced in that loboursome
fight at sea, which many times does not only last for a day, but two or three:
for mine own part, though I might well be ashamed not to know, and dare to do
as much with a few men, as any other, yet to speak my conscience, and tell my
mind clearly, were I worthy to command the Kings ships in any service, I would
rather have twenty men too many, then ten too few: A Marchant-man, is counted
well manned when he has double so many men, as would else barely sail his
ship, yet commonly they loose their ships rather for want of men, then desire
to save themselves; for though for a while, he may defend himself, yet the man
of War will be sure of him, if he can have sea room, and time enough; When
they would have men to go heave at the Capstaine, they say, man the Capstaine;
also when Ships meet, and desire to show all their men, they are commanded to
come all up a-loft, and this they call manning the Ship: So when men are
commanded to go up into the top, to take in the Top-sailes, they say, man the
top well (that is) a sufficient number of men to go into the top, to take in
the sail; also man the boat.

Man of War.
I do not mean to describe what a Captain or man is, who is a man of War,
but a Ship of War (which is called a man of War among Seamen) making use of
the figure Metonimia, (continens pro contento) These qualities, commodities and
conditions, I require in a Ship, which I would say should be a right brave man
of War: first, she must sail well; secondly, be roomie betwixt the Decks;
thirdly, flush without any falls, (for hindering men to pass too and fro at
ease,) she must bear out her lower tire all reasonable fitting weather (which
if she do, the lower she carries them the better) her chase and bow must be
well contrived, to shoot as many Pieces right fore-ward, and bowing, as may be
(for those parts come to be most used in fight) the Ordnance not to lie right
over one an other, but so, as that upon the least yawe of the helm, one Piece
or other may ever come to bear: And lastly, she must bear a stowte-saile,
such a Ship well manned, with men convenient, to ply their Ordnance, handle the
sails, and use some small shot, were worthy to be called a man of War; That
Ship which wants any of these, is like a Soldier who should want either a
hand, a leg, or an Arm.

The Manger.
Is a place made with plancks, which are fastened upon the Deck, right under the
hawse (some foot and a half high) and sometimes is made like a Triangle,
meeting at the outward angle aft-ward, either a bast, or before the foremast;
the use whereof, is only to receive the water which comes in at the hawses,
when the Ship rides an Anchor in great stresses, that the water should not run
aft in the Decks, and so in howld (as it may) Some Ships, whose hawses lie
high, and that do ride easily in the sea, need them not; but other have much
use of them.

Marling.
Is a small line made of untwisted hemp to be more gentle and pliant then
other lines, and it is also tar'd, the use whereof is to sease the ends of
roapes from farsing out, also they use to sease the sides of the straps at the
arsse of the blocks together with this: Also if a sail be ripped out of the
bolt-roape, then (if they have have, or cold-weather, so as they cannot sow it
in) they take Marling, and with that (put through the eylot-holes) they make
fast the sail to the bolt-roape; this is called marling the sail.

Marling-speeke.
Is a small speak of iron, made of purpose for the splising together of small
roapes, and also to open the bolt roapes when they sow in the sail.

Martnetts.
Are small lines, which are fastened to the legs on the leetch of the sail,
and seem like Crow-feete, the fall being reeved through a block and the
top-mast-head, and so comes down by the mast to the Deck: The Martnetts of the
top-sailes are in the same manner, to the head of the top-gallant mast, but
their fall comes no farther then the top, where it is haled; when they are to
hale these Martnetts, the term is, top the Martnetts: the use of them are to
bring that part of the Leetch of the sail which is next to the yard-arme, up
close to the yard, when we farthell the sail; these most commonly belong to
the two courses; yet many great Ships have them to the top-sailes and
sprit-sailes.

Masts.
The Masting of a Ship, is of much importance to the sailing and conditions of
a Ship; for if she be over masted, either in length or bigness, it will
over-charge the Ship and make her lie-downe too much by a wind, and labor too
much a-hull; If she be under-masted, (that is too small, or too short) then she
looses the benefit and advantage of spreading so much more sail to give her
way: There are some differences, in the proportioning of Masts, according to
the use of the Ship, for those which are to go long voiages, are not to be
masted according to true proportion, but to be made shorter, and bigger then
ordinary, for fear of spending them in a long journey, where they cannot be
repaired: But the rule and way whereby we give the true proportion, for the
length of any Mast is, to take of the breadth of the Ship, and that multiplied
by 3. shall give the just number of feet, that the maine-mast shall be of in
length; the bigness to be one inch to a yard in length, but more, if it be a
made-mast; for example: Take a Ship, whose breadth is 30. foot, four fifties
of 30. are 24. foot; so I say, that this Ships maine-mast must be 24. yards
long, for every yard is 3. foot, and 24. inches through, allowing one inch to
every yard: The foremast is in length to be of the maine-mast, which will be
20. yards lacking one part of a yard, and 20. inches through: The bolt-sprit
ever the same in length and thickness, with the foremast, the missen mast to
be half the length of the maine-mast, which will be 12. yards long, and 12.
inches through: And so this is the true proportion for the Masts of a Ship,
which is 30. foot broad at the beam: for as we take the proportion of the
length of our yards from the keele, so do we take the proportion of her Masts
from the beam, or breadth of the Ship. A long-mast is termed a tawnt-mast; a
short mast is termed a lowe-mast.

Matts.
Are broad clowtes weaved of synnet and thrums together, (and some are made
without thrums;) the use whereof is to save things from galling, and are used
in these places: To the maine and fore-yards, at the ties, (to keep the yards
from galling against the mast) upon the Gun-wale of the Loofe, (to keep the
clew of the sail from galling there) upon the bolt-sprit and beake-head, to
save the clew of the fore-sailes.

Mettle.
By speaking of the mettle of a piece of Ordnance, is commonly meant, not the
quality, but the quantity of the mettle whereof it is made: (as to dispert the
mettle: Vide dispert: (When they say, the Piece is laid under-mettle, that is,
with her mouth lower then the breetch; or contrary, she lies over-mettle if the
mouth lie higher then the breetch: and if she lie point-blancke, then they say,
she lies right with her mettle: So that it is seems, because the breetch has
most mettle, they do more singularly attribute the word mettle to that, then
any other. If a Piece have much mettle in any part, they say, she is well
fortified, and so contrary.

The Missen.
When we say the Missen, it is meant, that we speak of the sail, not of the
mast, (as set the Missen, that is, fit the Missen-saile;) Change the Missen,
(that is, bring the yard to the other side of the mast; and so the tack to the
other board:) And so, speek the Missen, (that is, put the yard right up and
down by the mast:) Spell the Missen (that is, let go the Sheate and peeke it
up) the use of the Missen, is to keep the Ship close to a wind. Note, if a
Ship gripe too much, then we use no Missen, for then she will never keep out of
the wind; Sometimes also, we use the Missen when we are at an Anchor, to back
the Ship a-sterne, to keep her from fouling her Anchor upon the turning of the
tide: (sometimes also, we tie with the Missen: Some great long Ships require
two Missens, then they call that next the maine-mast, the maine-missen; that
next the Poope, the Bonaventure Missen.

The Missen-Mast.
Vide Mast.

The Missen-Saile.
Vide Sail.

The Missen-Top-mast.
Vide Topmast.

The Missen Yard.
Vide Yard.

To Moore, or Mooring.
To Moore a Ship, is to lay out her Anchors, as is most fit for the Ship to
ride by in that place where she is: for there are these kind of Mooreings:
first to moore a cross, or thwart, which is to lay one Anchor on one side a
river, and the other on the other, right against, so as both Cabels (either for
Ebb or Flood) may bear together: Next, to Moore along, that is to lay one
Anchor right in the middle of the stream on a head, and the other a-sterne,
and this is, where they fear driveing a Ship; for then both the Cabels will
bear together, if she Tallee in upon either shore: The third is Mooreing
water-shot, that is (as you would say) quartring betwixt both, for this is
neither a-crosse the tide, nor a-longst the tide; when they come into any
place, they perceive where, which way, and upon what point of the Compass, the
wind or sea is like to endanger them most, and so just there they lay-out an
Anchor, and this they call Mooreing for West, North-west, or is the Point is:
Note, that a Ship is not said to be Moore with lest then two Anchors a-ground,
yet if she have but one a-ground and a Hawser, a-short (which is called a
proviso) we say she is Moored, with her head to the shore.

To Mount.
Mounting a piece af Ordnance, is taken in two senses, that is, either to put
them upon, and in their Carriages, (as we say, the Ships Ordnance are not
mounted, that is, not on their Carriages) or else when they are in their
Carriages, and the mouth of her lies too low for the mark, we say, Mount the
Piece higher; But if she lie with her mouth too high for the mark, we say, Let
fall the Piece a little, and not dis-mount the Piece; for to dis-mount the
Piece, is to take it out of the Carriage, or that the Carriage is not
serviceable: as in fight, when a shot has taken, or broken a Carriage, we say,
the Piece is dis-mounted.

Munck-seame.
This is a kind of sowing the canvasses of the sails together, the edge of the
one is sown over the edge of the other, and so it is sown on both sides; this
is the strongest way of sowing the sails.

Murderers.
Are small Iron or Brass Pieces with Chambers: In Marchant-men they are most
used at the Bulk-heads of the fore-castle, half-deck, or steeridge; and they
have a Pintell, which is put into a stock, and so they stand and are traversed,
out of which they use Murdering-shot, to scower the Decks, when men enter, but
Iron Murderers are dangerous for them which discharge them, for they will scale
extremely, and endanger their eyes much with them, I have known diverse hurt
with shooting them often.

N
NEale-too.
That is, when it is deep water close to the shore, (as you would say, a
Banck,) that is right up and down without any showling.

Neapes, or Neape-Tide.
When the Moon is in the midst of the second and last quarter, then we have
Neape-Tides: the Etimologie of the word I know not; but the meaning of it is
this; The Neape is opposite to the spring, and there are as many days allowed
for the Neape or falling of the tides, as for the springer rising of the (...)
These do cause, that where it does not ever flow high enough, we are forced to
stay for the launching and grounding, and also for going over some Bar, till a
spring: Note in Neape-tides, the water is never so high nor so low, as in the
spring tides: Also the tides never run so swift in Neapes, as it does at
springs* Note, that as the highest of the spring, is three days after the
full, or change of the Moon, so the lowest of the Neape, is four days before
the full or change; and then we say it is dead-Neape, when a Ship lacks water,
so that it does not flow high enough to bring her off the ground, or out of a
dock, we say she is be-Neaped: So if a ship be within a Bard Harbor, that
there lack w^ter to carry her over till the spring, we say, she is be-Neaped.

The Needle,
Is that Iron-wire, which is made fast to the Plie of the Compass; and is that
which gives the motion to it, being touched with a Lodestone: The best for to
receive and retain the virtue of the stone, are made of steel, and the best
form is to make then round with two small points, directing to the North and
South: For in this form they do most equally prize the Fly. Who would
understand more of these, let him read Dr Barlowes Book of the Lord stone,
where all things belonging to the Needle are most exactly and compendiously set
down.

Nettings.
Are those small reapes, which are ceased together with roape-yarnes, in the
form of a Nett, with Mashes, and are for the most part only used in the wast
(yet I have seen Flemmings have Nettings over all, from the top of the
fore-castle over the Poope, and are ^ched upon the Ledges, which are placed
from the wast-trees to the roofe-trees:) In Merchant men it is chiefly used,
having a sail laid over it, for to shadow their men, and for a close fight:
but I think they are in an error, for it is most dangerous for fireing; of
small defense if men enter, being quickly cut down, and being once torne-downe
(as it may easily with small crapnels) cloy all the wast. In a man of War, it
is good to have them for the pleasure and succor of the company, but not to
use them in fight.

Netting-sailes.
Are the sails which they lay upon the Nettings.

Nippers.
Are small roapes (about a faddom and a half, or two faddom long) with a
little Truck at one end (or some have only a wale-knot) the use whereof is to
hold-off the Cabell from the maine-capstaine, or the geere capstaine, when the
Cabell is either so ^imy or so great, that they cannot strain it, to hold it
off with their hands only.

O
To OBserve.
Is to take the height of Sun, or Star, with any instrument, whereby we know in
what degree of latitude, the Ship is: I need not say much of this, for it would
require many lines, and is taught in every book of Navigation.

Ockham.
Is nothing but old-roapes, or others untwisted, and so pulled out as it were
into loose flax again, also, toe, or flax being so employed about a Ship, is
called white Ock-ham; The use of this is to drive into the seames, and to ^ll
parts where they suspect water may come in, as the heads of the treenells, etc.
White Ock-ham is best to drive first into the seame next the water, when it is
rowled-up, so as when the calker drives it, in it is rolled a thread of Ock-ham.

The Offing.
By this is means, as much as to say, out in the open sea, from the shore-ward;
as if I be at sea in a Ship, the shore on one side me, and on the other side to
sea board, an other ship, she is in the offing: So if a ship be faileing into
the sea-ward fore-ward the shore, we say she stands for the offing; So when a
ship (as in our Channel) keeps in the middle of the Channel and comes not
near the shore, we say she keeps in the offing.

Off-ward.
Is a term used, when a ship is ashore, and heels to the water-ward,
from-wards the shore, they say, she heels to the off-ward: Or if her stern
lie toward the sea, we say her stern lies to the off-ward, and her head to
the shore-ward.

Orlopp.
The Orlopp, is no other but the Deck (as we say) the lower Deck, the second
Deck; so you may as well say the lower Orlopp, or the second Orlopp: and indeed
it is commonly held the proper speech to call them the first Orlopp and the
second Orlopp: for this word Orlopp seems to be appropriated only to these two
Decks: for if a ship have three Decks, they never call the upper-most, which is
the third, by the name of Orlopp, but by the name of Deck, as to speak of them
they will say, she has a tire of Ordnance, on the first and second Orlopp, and
also the upper Deck.

Over-sett.
When a Ship at sea, with bearing too much sail is borne-over on a side and so
founded in the sea, we say she was oversett: Sometimes with an extraordinary
wind, the ship may be oversett, with nothing but the power which the wind may
have over her Hull (especially if the wind and current go contrary: I have
heard some say, that disemboa-guing out of the Indies, by Cape Florida (where
the current ever setts very strong to the Northward) that if they have met
with a gust at the North, the wind having power over the Hull of the ship
a-loft, and the current setting to wind-ward, h^ving power of the Hull alone,
they have been in great danger of f^dring: Also the turning over of the Cabell
or small roape which is quoiled-up, is called over-setting; as over-set the
Cabell, etc.

Over-throwe.
When a Ship, that is brought to be trimmed a-ground does fall-over on a side,
we call it over-throwne, and not overset; the reason whereof is, her want of
floor to bear her upon, and sometimes it may happen by the indiscretion of
those who bring the ship a-ground, heeling to the off-ward, if the ground be
too steepie, whenas they should heel her to the shore-ward, to prevent which,
we have no way but to shore her up with her topmast and yard.

The Out-licker.
Is a small piece of timber (some ^ or ^ yards long, as they have occasion to
use it) and it is made fast to the top of the Poope, and so stands right out
a-sterne, at the outward most end, there is a hole, into which the standing
part of the sheate is made fast, and so being reeved through the block of the
sheate; is neeved again through an other block, which is seized to this piece
of timber near the end, and so the use of this is to hale-downe the Missen
sheat to it. This is seldom used in great ships, but the cause why in any-ship
it is used, is for that the Missen-mast is placed so far aft, that there is not
room enough within-boord, to hale down the sheace flat, and so are forced to
use this without-boord. The small French Burtons and Allownes, do use this
most of any ships which I have seen; and generally all New Castle Carnels have
them.

Oze, or Ozie.
Is a soft slimy, muddy ground, this is no good ground to ride at Anchor in,
for the Anchors will not hold her in great stresses: but the best way to make
them hold, is to shoe them, and in some places that will not serve neither:
Besides this is very bad ground for rotting of Cabels; if a man would have a
ship lie long a-ground, it is best laying her in Oze, for there she will lie
very soft and easily; for she will quickly Duck her self there: It is very bad
also for rotting the Planekes, and the Ocham, which is in the seames.

P
A PAntch.
Those Matts made of Synnett, which are made fast to the Maine, and fore-yards
(to save them from Gallinge against the Matts) are called Fanches, by a proper
name.

A Parbunckle.
Is a Roape, which is used in the nature of a pair of Slinges: It is a Roape
seized together at both ends, and so put double about the Cask, to hoyse it in
by, and the hook of the Runner is hitched into it, to hoyse it in: this is the
quickest way of Slinging the Cask, but not so sure a way for Slipping as the
Slings.

To Parcel, or Parcelling.
Is to take a little Canvas (about the breadth of a hand) and so lay it over a
Seame, which is first Caulked: and it is most commonly used along the
Ships-sides, over the Cabin. Then heat a little Pitch, and Tar every hott,
and power upon this Canvas, and all this together is called Parcelling a Seame.

Parrells.
Are those things made of Trucks, and Ribbs, and Roaps, which go about the
Mast, and are at both ends made fast to the yard, and are so made with Truckes,
and Ribbs, that the yard may slide-up easily. These also with the breast Roape,
do hold the yard close to the Mast.

The Partners.
Are those Timbers, which are Bolted to the Beams, and do compass the shoot
in the Mast at the Deck: and are the strength that do keep up the Mast Steady
in the Stepp. And also that it should not Rowle-out the Ship-sides; There are
Partners at the second Deck, in the same nature, but the Missen has but one
pair of Partners: The Mast does use to be wedged fast in these, from stirring
or wagging; yet I have seen some Ships that would not sail well, unless the
Mast were loose) and as they term it, had leave to play in the Partners, but
in a Storm it is dangerous to let the Mast have any play, for fear of
wronging the Partners, which if they should give way, there is no remedy but
to cut the Mast by the Board.

A Passarido.
Or more properly, a Nepas-artua-Roape, is any Roape wherewith we hale-downe
the sheate-Blocks of the Maine, and fore-sailes when they are haled afft the
Clew of the Maine-saile to the Cubbridge head of the Maine-Mast; and the Clew
of the fore-saile to the Catt head, and this is done, when the Ship goes large.

The Pawle.
Is a little piece of Iron, bolted to one end of the Beams, or the Deck,
close to the Capstaine, but so easily that it has leave to turn about: This
is it, against which the wheels of the Capstaine do bear, when they would
have the Capstaine kept back from turning back a-gaine, and therefore they said
heave a Pawle: that is, heave a little more, that the Pawle may catch holdof
the whelps: this is very necessary sometimes, when they heave up the Anchor in
a great fea-gate, to hold fast, least the force of the Sea, yerking up the Ship
suddenly, should fling men from the Canstaine, That is called Pawling the
Capstaine; and when they would have the Capstaine go back they say, un-Pawle
the Capstaine.

To Pay.
Is the same that Parcelling is, only wanting the Canvas: for we call it,
Paying a Seame, when after it is Caulked, we heat Pitch to lay upon the Seame,
to keep is from being preised with the water: we also use no Tar to this: Also
when we grave a Ship, we call the laying on the stuff (what ere it be, Rozen
and Brimstone, and Oil, or the like: Paying her, for they say, Pay her up to
the Bends: Pay thick, or the like.) Also when a Ship is to Tack, and that all
her Sails are a-Back-Stayes (that is flat against the Shrowds and M^, so as we
are sure she will not fall back again) we say she is Pay^, and then we let
rise the Tack, and hale the sheates, and so come to lay the head the other way.

A Peeke.
To heave a Peeke, Is to heave the Hawse of the Ship-Right-over the Anchor, so
that the Cabell is then a right perpendicular betwixt them. To Ride a Peeke, is
to have the Maine-yard, and fore yard hoysed-up, and so one end brought up
close to the Shrowdes, the other being raised up, and so are they done to
contrary sides: the Starboord-yard-Arme of the Maine yard coming down to the
Starboord side, and the Lat-boord of the fore-yard, so the yards seem to
cross one another, like a St Andrew-crosse. The manner of doing it is from the
Maine yard letting go Star-boord-Top-saile sheates* and Topping up the
Lar-boord Lists; and so contrary-wise for the fore-yard. To Ride a Broud Peeke,
is to Ride in the same manner, but the yard must be but half mast high; they
never likely Ride in this manner with their yards, but in a River, the reason,
lest rideing with their yards a cross, some Ship might by chance come fowse of
them, and break their yards: Also that Room which is in a Ships-howld from
the bitts forward unto the Stem, is called the Peeke, or fore-Peeke of the
Ship: In the Kings Ships the Powder is placed there: Merchantmen place their
victuals there outward-bound: but other men of war (which are full of men,)
will use it for to ledge some of the Company.

Pendants.
A Pendant is a short Roape made fast at one end, either to the head of the
Mast, or to a Yard, or to the Clew of a sail, and are in bigness, according
to the places wherein they are used, having at the other end a Block with a
Sheever, to Reeve some Running-Roape into it, as the Pendames of the Tackle,
which are made fast to the head of the Mast, and so of the Pendants of the
Back-stayes which are there made fast, and hang a little way down on the
inside of the Shrowds: Generally, all the yard-armes (excepting the Missen)
have Pendants, into which the Braces are reeved, and by them they are easily
known. Also they (...) those Colors, which are hung-out on the yard arms, or
from the head of the Mast for a show, to beautify the ship, Pendants.

The Pillow.
That Timber whereon the Bolt-sprit does bear, and rest on, at the comming-out
of the Hull of the Ship aloft, by the stem, is called the Pillow of the
Bolt-spritt.

A Pintell.
Is a small iron Pin, which is fastened to murderers, as also to Harquabusses, a
Crook which is put into a Socket, or any hole, to keep the piece from
recoyling: Also those Iron-Pins, which are made fast to the Rudder, and do
hang the Rudder to the Sterne-Post (being put into Icon Stocks) and called the
Pintells of the Rudder.

Pitching.
Is not only laying Pitch upon any place (which yet is more properly called
Paying, but it is also taken for the placeing of the Step of a Mast, as they
say, the Maine Mast is Pitched a little too-farre aft (that is, stand and is
placed too fat toward the Stern of the Ship) but it is not meant by the head
hanging too-farte-aft: So the Foremast is pitched too far-forth (that is) the
Ship stands too far-fore-ward on. Also if a Ship fall moon into a Sea, they
say, she Pitches much into the Sea: or else she beats much against the Sea: so
as to endanger the Top-masts with the stroke, they say, she will. Pitch her
Mast by the Board.

Platts.
Are flatt-Roapes, made of Roape-yarne woven one over another, and are for to
save the Cabell in the Hawse foom galling. Also we use them in the flookes of
the Anchor to save the Pendant of the fore-sheate, from galling against the
Anchor.

A Plott.
And Sea-Card is all one, Vide Card.

To Prick a Plott, is to Vote down the Travers of the Ships way, and so
comparing it to your observation, finding where the Ship is, to make a small
Prick in the Plot in the Latitude and Longitude, where you suppose the Ship to
be, and so still keeping account of the days, you shall still see how near,
or far off you are from the place, which you sail to.

A Point.
The shatpnesse to any head-Land, is called the point of the Land: when they
say, that two points are one in another, that is, they are so just in a right
line from us, one betwixt the other, that we cannot see the one for the other;
Also the Compass is divided into 32. points (representing 32. winds) so that
we call sailing by the Compass, sailing upon a point: They use also to undo
the Stroud at the end of a Cabell (some 2. foot long) and so make Synnet: of
the Roape-Yarne, and lay them one over another again, making it less toward
the end, and so at the end, make them all fast with a piece of Marling, or the
like. This is called pointing the Gabell. The use where of is to keep the
Cabell from farsling, but chiefly to see that none of the end be stolen off,
and cut away.

The Poope.
The Poope of the Ship is the upper most part ^terne of the Ships-Hull, and is
the Deck over that, which is commonly the Masters Cabin.

A Port.
Is that place out of which the Ordnance are put through the Ships-sides, and
these are to be made so large that the Ordnance may have leave to Travers as
much Bowing and Quartering as may be, (about 30. Inches is the ordinary rate
for a Demi-Cuiverin.)

To Port.
Is a word used in Conding the Ship, when she is right before a wind, or if the
weather-sheate be aft as far as the Bulk head (which is more then Quarter
winds, but not right before) they will use the word steady a-Port, or Steady a
Star-boord, the Ship heels to Port: bring things near to port, or the like,
terms easily understood.

Pouches.
Are small Bulk-heads made in howlde, either Thwart-Ships, or longst Ships.
Those who carry Corn (or any such goods that will shoot over from one side to
the other) do make many bulke-heads, or several Rooms (as it were) to keep
it up, and these are called Pouches, also when we Careen Ships, there are small
bulk-heades, made some distance from the Keeleson, on either side in the hold,
which serve to keep up the Ballast when we shirte it, either for the righting
or bringing down of the Ship when she is on the Carreen; and these are also
called Pouches.

Powdor.
There are two sorts of Powder, the one serpentine Powder, which powder is dust
(as it were) without Corning, and this we never use at sea in Ordnance, not
small short, both because it is of small force, and also, for that it will,
with the air of the Sea, quickly dry, and loose its force: The other is Corn
Powder, whereof there are two sorts, Common powder (which is a great Corn, and
not very strong) the other Musket-Powder (which is the finest, strongest, and
best we can get:) The Ingredients, which make the powder, are, first,
Salt-peeter (wherein the force of the Powder consists) next Brimstone, which is
apt to flame, and once flamed, causes the Salt-peeter to flame; (last, Cole,
which is apt with any sparkle to kindle, but not to flame, yet does maintain
the flame of the other two.) The best Salt-peeter is that which has no fat,
the best brimstone without dross: and the best Cole, that which is made of the
lightest wood: I only touch some chief things of this, because there are
diverse books concerning maine Conclusions touching the effect of powders in
all kinds.

The Powder-roome.
Is that Room, in howld where we lay the Powder; the great (...) in placing
this Room, must be to have it farthest from the use of any fire, and freest
from the danger of short.

Proddy.
Is a word used amongst them, in the stead of Ready. As when we come to sight,
the Commander bids them make the Ship Preddy, make the Ordnance Preddy, that
is, make them ready for to use in sight. A Proddy Ship, that is, when her
Deckes are all clear, and the Ordnance and all things fitted for sight. Also
make the howld Preddy, is to lay any things out of the way, so as that they may
stowe the good in commodiously.

A Preventure Roape.
Vide Roape.

A Proviso.
Vide Mooreing.

The Prowe.
Is the fore-most part of the Ship considered aloft, and not below between the
Decks, (or in howld) to enter into the Prowe, is to enter into the Fore-Castle.
The Prowe pieces are those which lie aloft before: Go fore-ward into the
Prowe, that is, Go into the fore-Castle, before the Foremast, and it is most
truly understood for that part which is betwixt the Chase and the Loofe.

Priming.
Is so fitting, and filling the touch-holes, with fine-day Powder, and putting
in a Priming Iron to pierce the Carthrage, so that that powder being fired, the
powder in the Carthrage, may like-wise fire to: for if the powder in the
touchhole be fired, and the rest within the piece go not off, we say she was
not Primed, or not well primed: for this there is powder made very small, and
extraordinary dry, and the Gunner has it in a great home at his Girdle in
fight, which horn he calls his Priming-horne: Also the first ground, or Color
which is laid-on, for others to come over, it in painting the Ship is called
Priming.

Puddings.
Are Roates nailed round to the yard-armes of the Maine and fore-yards, close
to the end, and so (in ^. or 4. or more distance one from another) upon each
yard-Arme: The use of them, is to save the Robbins from Galling asunder upon
the yards, when we hale-home the Top-saile-sheats: Also the Sarving of the King
of the Anchor, which Roapes, to save the Clinth of the Cabell from galling
against the Iron, is called the Pudding of the Anchor.

Pullies.
Are small Blocks, with one or two sheevers in them (and may either be so
called, or by the name of small Bleckes) for great blocks are not usually
called by the name of Pullies, as the Pullies of the Top-^aile. Brases, Clew,
Lines, Manners, etc.

Pumps.
There are three sorts of Pumps used in ships: The first and most common, are
ordinary Pumps, such as are used a shore, and th^se do stand by the maine
Mast, the next is a But-Pump, which is not used in English Ships, but Flemmings
have them in the sides of their ships, and are called by the name of Bildge,
Pumps, because they have broad long floates that do hold much Bildge-water;
The manner of these is to have a staff, some 6. or 7. foot long, at the end
whereof is a Bur of wood, whereto the Leather is nailed, and this does serve in
stead of the box: and so two men standing right over the Pump, do thrust down
this staff, to the midst whereof is seized a Roape long enough for 6.8. or
10. or more to hale-by, and so they pull it up, and draw the water, this Pump
does deliver more water then the former, and is not so laborious to pump at:
The third and last sort, are Chaine-Pumps; these deliver most water, and with
most ease, for the Company, and are soonest mended if any thing fail, having
spare Esses, if any chance to give way: these have a Chain full of Bars and
a wheel, which makes it deliver so much, and go so easily. The term is for
Pumping, to Pump by Spell, and at ordinary, and Bur Pumps, they reckon by the
strokes: As to say, a Spell of ^00. Strokes: b^t a Chaine-Pump, the Spells go
by Glasses: the Pump suckes, that is, draws wind, and has no water that comes
to it: There are also Pumps made of a Cane, or else of Lattin, which we put
down into the Caske, to Pump up the drink: for at Sea, in howld, we use no
spicketts.

The Pump-brake.
Is the handle they Pump by in the ordinary sort of Pumps.

The Pump-can.
Is the Can which they draw water in to power into the Pumps (and this is a
great Can.)

The Pump-dale.
Is (as it were) the Trough, wherein the water does run along the Deck, out
at the Skupper-holes.

To Purchase.
We call the Caining, or coming in of a Roape by our haleing of it in with our
hands, or heaveing it in at the Capstaine, or otherwise, Purchasing; as the
Capstaine does purchase apace, that is, draws in the Cabell apace: Or, the
Tackles do purchase, and the contrary; when we cannot get in any thing, or
hale it away, we say, we cannot purchase, with the Roape, Tackle, or the like.
Note that the more parts that any Tackle, Halliard, or the like do go in, the
more easily a man may purchase upon them (as it is easier to purchase with a
Block which has three sheevers then a Block which has but two:) but then this
is longer a doing.

Puttockes.
Are the small Strowdes, which go from the Shrowdes of the Maine and
fore-Missen-Masts, and allo to the Top-masts shrowdes, if the Topmast have a
Top-gallant-Top; the use whereof is to go off the Shrowdes into the (...): for
when the Shrowdes come near up to the Mast they fall in so much that otherwise
they could not get into the top from them. The Puttockes are from the bottom
seized to a Staff; which is made fast there to the shrowdes, or some Roape
which is seized there, and above to a plate of Iron, or to a dead-man-eye, to
which the Lanniers of the fore-Mast-shrowdes do come.

Q
The QVarter,
That part of the Hull, of the Ship, which is from the Steeridge to the
Transom, or Fashion-peece, is called the Quarter, or the Ships-Quarter.

Quarter Deck
Is that Deck, which is over the Steeridge, till it come to the Masters Cabin.

Quartering.
Is when a piece of Ordnance, lies so, and may be so Traversed, that it will
shoot in the same line, or on the same point of the Compass as the Quarter
bears; Also when a Ship sails with Quarter-winds, we say, she goes Quartring;
then we let rise the weather-Tack, and hale aft the sheate, to the Foremast
Shrowdes, and Veere-out the Lee sheate a little; this way she goes fastest: for
now all sails draw together.

Quarter-winds.
Are when the wind comes in a bast the Maine Mast-Shrowdes just with the
Quarter.

A Quoyle.
Or a Quoyle of Roapes, is a Roape laid up-round, one Take over another, as a
Quoyle of Cabell, that is a Cabell quoyled up. But sometimes the word Quoyle is
taken for a whole Roape quoyled, so that if half the Roape be cut away, they
say, there is but half a Quoyle of that Roape.

To Quoyle.
Is to lay the Takes of the Roape round, over one another, so that when
occasion is, they may run out smooth without any kneekes, and also to lie
handsomely in the Ship, and many of the small running-Roapes, as the Brases,
Top-saile-Hilliards, or the like: we hang up at the Ship-sides, when they are
so quoyled: It is a manner at Sea, every night when they set the watch, or
Quoyle-up all the Roapes in order, that so they may have them all Leere to come
by in the night, if they have occasion to use any of them.

Quoynes.
There are three sorts of Quoynes used in a Ship, that is the Quoynes which the
Gunners use under their Ordnance, for to mount them higher or lower, they are
made broad, but thinner at one end then at the other, with a handle at the
broad end, to draw it out, or put it further in as you have occasion to mount
the Piece; pulling out the Quoynes, is termed to draw the Quoyne, Another sort
are called Cantick-quoines, these are short, the length of a hand, and are made
with three edges, the use whereof is to put betwixt the Cask, at the Bildge
hoopes of the Cask, to keep the (ask steady from rolling and laboring one
against an other. The third sort are standing Quoynes, and they are made of
Barrell-boords some four fingers broad, and a fit length to be driven a-crosse
betwixt the Butts, one end, two or three hoopes from the thin-hoopes of one
Butt, and the other in the same manner to an other, to keep the chine of the
Butt steady from jogging.

R
RAbbetting.
Is the letting-in of the Plancks to the Keele, which is a little hollowed
away, that the Planck may join in the better, and closer to the hooks and the
Keele, and this is only used in the Rake and Run of the Ship, and not in the
flat floor: And the hollowing-away is called the Rabbet of the Keele.

Rake.
The Rake of a Ship, is so much of her Hull, as does overhang both ends of the
Keele: So that let-fall a-perpendiculer upon the end of the Keele upon the
setting on of the Stem, so much as is without that foreward-on is her Rake
foreward-on. And so in the like manner at the setting in of her Sterne-post,
and that is her Rake aftward-on. Commonly the Rake foreward-on, is more then a
third; but less then an half of the length of her Keele, there is not any
more rule observed amongst all Nations; for some give long great Rakes, as
generally all French built, the Flemmnigs not so much: And for the Rake
aftward-on (it being of no use for the Ship, but only for to make her Ship
shapen, as they call it, they give as little as may be) which commonly is about
a fourth or fifth part of her Rake fore-ward-on: (A great Rake fore-ward-on,
gives a Ship good way, and makes her keep a good wind, but if she have not a
good full Bow, it will make her litch mightily into the head-sea, besides it
does mightily charge the ship, because it does over-hang the nail; And if a
ship have but a small Rake, she will commonly be too bluffe, and so meet the
sea too suddenly upon her bow, which will hinder her going through much: The
longer a ships Rake is, the fuller must be the bow: The best conditioned ships
have neither too much, nor too little.

Ram-head.
The Ram-head is a great block, with three Sheevers in it, into which are the
Hilliards, and at the head of it, into a ho^ are reeved the ties, this block
does only belong to the maine and fore-Hilliards.

A Rammer.
Is a staff, with a round piece of wood at the end of it, the outwardmost
being flat, somewhat less then the bore of the Ordnance to which it does
belong, and this is to drive home the Powder close to the breetch of the Piece,
and so the shot to the powder, and the wood to the shot, and that is called
ramming home the powder or shot.

Ranges.
There are two, one aloft upon the fore-castell a little abast the foremast,
the other in the beake-head, before the wouldings of the bolt-sprit, that in
the fore-castell, is a small piece of timber, which goes over from one side to
the other, and there is fastened to two timbers, and on the middle on either
side the Foremast, two knees which are fastened to the Deck and the timber, in
which run the top-saile-sheates in a Sheever; and has diverse wooden pins
through it, to be-laye Roapes unto (as the fore-Takes, fore-top-saile-sheates
and fore-bowlings; the fore-Loofe-hooke) and that in the Beake-head, is in the
same form, whereunto it be-layed the sprit-saile-lifts; the Garnet of the
prit-saile, and other Roapes, belonging to the sprit-saile, and sprit-saile
top-saile,

Rattling.
Is a Line wherewith they make the stepps by which we go up the shrowdes, and
the Puttocks, and so the Top-Mast-shrowdes in great ships, and these stepps
which make the shrowdes look like Ladders, are called the Ratlings of the
Shrowdes.

A Reach.
Is the distance of any two Points of Land, which bear in a right line to one
an other, which term is most commonly used in Rivers, as Lime-House-Reache,
Green-wich-Reach, long-Reach and the like, the Reach being counted so far, as
you can see the Reach to lie in a straight line; Also some call the distance,
and crossing betwixt Cape-verd, and the first Iselands, entering to the
West Indies, long-reach.

To Reeve.
This word is used just in the same sense (in respect of Roapes) that putting
in, or putting through; or passing through would be* but they ever use this
word Reeve; as when we would express that the Tack is put through the
Ches-trees, we say it is reeved through, or instead of putting a roape through
a block, we say, Reeve it in that block, (as the Halliards are reeved in the
Knights and Ram-heads,) and it is generally to be understood and applied to all
Roapes that pass through blocks, Dead-men-eyes, Ches-trees and the like; And
so when we would have that Roape pulled out of the block, etc. we say, unreeve
that Roape, or the Brases, Lifts, Sheets, etc. are unreeved.

Ribbs.
By a resemblance that the timbers (that is the Futtocks of the ships have when
the Plancks are off to the ribbs of a dead carkasle, we) do in that kind, call
all those timbers by a general appellation, the ribbs of the ship, though
otherwise they have particular names: As if two ships in a sea-gate, lie
a-boord one an other, and has broke with her weight some of the others futtock
timbers, they will say, she has broke some of her ribbs: Also those little
long wooden pieces which are made with holes like the Comb under the
beake-head, and do belong to the Parrells of the yards, are called the Ribbs
of the Patrells.

To Ride.
We say a ship Rides, whenas her Anchors do hold her fast, so as that she does
not drive away with the tide or wind: for though she sheere from one side to
the other, yet if her Anchors do hold fast, and come not home, we say she
Rides: To Ride a good Road, that is to Ride, where the sea, and wind had much
power over the ship, and strain her Cabels very hard: Note a ship rides
easiest, and with more security, having but two Cabels splised together (which
they call a shot) then she will by three single Cabels, for the length of the
shot will give her more scope, to play, and rise upon the sea with ease; for by
reason also of the weight, the ship can hardly strain it: For when a great sea
comes to yerk-up the ship, the shot is long before it comes to straining, that
the force of the sea will be past before it can come up to bear so much
stresse, as a shorter Cabell would do: The deeper the water is, the worser it
is to Ride, and requires much more Cabell in proportion then showler-water, the
sea will break more, yet it has not that power and weight which the deep
water has, when we Ride any extraordinary road, we strike down our
top-masts, and bring our yards along ships, in much wind especially: To ride
a cross, is to ride with our maine-yards and fore-yards hoysed up to the
hounds, and both yard-armes topped a-like: To ride a Peeke, is to ride with the
yards Peeked a-Peeke; and also when we ride with the Hawes just over the
Anchor, then we ride a-Peeke, that is, when we ride ready to set sail; when
they would express that they have rid a great Road and stresse, they say they
rid hawse-fall, that is, that the water brake into the Hawses: To ride thwart,
is to ride with her side to the tide, then she never strains her Cabels: To
Ride betwixt wind and tide, is when the wind and tide have equal power, one,
one way, the other, the other way, so that the ship lies rowleing with her
broadside in the Trough of the sea, and thus she will roll mightily, but not
strain her Cabels.

Riders.
Are great timbers (in howld, or else aloft) which are not properly belonging
to the Bult of the ship but only bolted on, upon the other timbers to
strengthen them where they find the ship to be weak, Marchant-men do spare
them as much as they can, because they hinder Stowage of Cask in Howld.

Rigging.
The Rigging of the ship, are all Roapes which belong either to mast or yards;
and more particularly, we say, the mast is rigged, the yards are rigged; that
is when they have all the roapes that belong unto them: (we say, a ship is well
rigged, when the roapes belonging to her, are of a fit size (not too big, nor
too little,) also when there are no unnecessary roapes put up (as to many
shrowdes, Tackles for the Mast, Crow-feet, or the like:) whenas we say, a ship
is overrigged, it is meant the roapes are too big for her, which is a great
wronging to the ships saileing; for a little weight aloft does hinder, more
then a great deal below, by making the ship apter to heel, and howlding
wind-taught; for note, that the uprighter any ship goes, the better she
dothsaile; for a cranck sided ship can never sail well by the wind. To tell the
particulars of rigging a ship, will require a small discourse by it self, and
would be too long for this, therefore I leave it to some other occasion.

Ring-bolts,
Vide Bolts.

The Riseings.
Are those thick Plancks, which go fore and aft on both sides, under the ends
of the beams and timbers of the second Deck, the third Deck, the half and
quarter Deck, where on the beams and timbers of these Decks, do bear at both
ends, by the ship-sides: but those thick plancks which in the like sort do
bear up the lower Deck, are called Lamps.

Rising-timbers.
Are the hooks placed on the Keele; which bear this vain in respect, that
according to the riseing by little and little of these hooks; so the Rake and
Run of the ship does rise by little and little from her flat-floare.

A Road.
Is any place where a ship may ride near the Land and yet cannot
ride-land-locked for all winds: A good Road is, where there is good ground for
Anchor-hold, showle-water, and so as how ere the wind-blow, there can no great
sea-gate come-in, being the Land may be in the wind, on one side, and some
sands, Rocks, or the like, to break of the sea on the other; (Also we say, if
it be a place, as in diverse places of Barbery and others) where the sea will
give a man warning, that is, the sea will come swelling-in before the wind, as
at Saint Saphe, of any foul weather, so that a man may have time, to set-saile
and go to some other Road, on the other side of the Bay-head-land, or the
like, this we call shifting of Roades; A wild Road, is a Road where there is
little Land on any side, but lies all open to the sea: as to ride upon a
head-land, or along a shore, where there is no Bay, nor any thing to break
off the sea, or wind if it come off the sea. A bad Road is the contrary to the
good.

A Roader.
We call any ship that Rides at an Anchor in a Road, a Roader.

Roapes.
Generally, all the cordage belonging to a ship, is called by the name of
Roape: as we say, a Cabell is a good or bad Roape (according as it is) and so a
Hawser or the like, but more particularly, only some, which besides their
particular appellations, have the general word Roape added to them: These are
an Entering Roape, a Top Roape, a Bolt Roape, a Buoy Roape, a Quest Roape, a
Keele Roape, a Bucket Roape, a Rudder Roape, a Preventure Roape, (which is a
little Roape seized cross over the Ties, close at the Ram-head, that if one
part of the Ties should break, the other should not run through the Ram-head
to endanger the yard) a breast roape, and is the Roape which latches the Parrell
to the Mast.

Roape-Yarnes.
Are the yarnes of any roapes untwisted; but most commonly, it is made of the
ends of Cabels, half worn, or so, they serve for many uses; to serve small
Roapes with, or to make Synnet Masts, or the like; also Kneetles, which is two
untwisted together and Caburnes: They serve also to wake-up the yard-aymes of
the sails; and therefore still, when we take in our sails, the boys of the
ship are to attend the Saylor with these Roape-yarnes, to furnish them as they
have occasion to use them.

Robins.
Are little lines reeved into the Eylot-holes of the sail, under the
Head-Roape, and sure to make fast the sail unto the yard: and the term is,
make fast the Robbins, and not tie them: and note that Sea faring men, use the
word make-fast, instead of tying, as Land-men use to say, tie a Roape.

Roofe-trees.
Are those timbers, which are made of light wood (as of mast sawen) that go
from the half Deck, to the fore-Castell, and are to beare-up the grateings and
the ledges wherein the Nettings lie, these are supported under the stamshions
which rest upon the Deck: Also if they have occasion to use any such piece over
the half-Deck, for Nettings or sails, it is called a Roof tree.

Rove and Clinch.
The Rove is that little iron plate, unto which the Clinch-nailes are clinched:
The Planckes of Clincher-boates, are thus fastened so together, which kind of
work is called Rove and Clinch.

The Round-house.
Is the uppermost Room of the stern of the ship, and that which commonly is
the Masters Cabin.

Rownd-in.
This is a term used to the maine and fore-saile, when the wind larges upon
them, they let rise the maine Tack, or fore-Tack, and hale aft the fore-sheate
to the Cat-head, and the maine sheare to the Cabridge head; this they call
Rounding aft, or rounding in the sail, the sheates being there, they hale them
down to keep them steady from flying up, with a Roape called a Passaredo.

The Roll.
Is that round piece of wood or iron, wherein the whip does go, and is made to
turn about, that it may carry over the whip from side to side with more ease.

Rowse-in.
Is a word they use particularly whenas a Cabell or Hawser does lie slack in
the water, and they would have it made taught; as when a ship rides but by one
Anchor, upon the turning of the tide, the Cabell will be slack, and so will be
in danger to flow above the Anchor, then to keep it stiff and taught, they
will hail in so much as lies slack, and this they call Rowseing in the Cabell,
or Rowse in the Hawser, but it is not used in the haleing in of any other
Roape, as boateroape, or the like.

The Rudder.
Is that piece of timber, which hangs at the sternepost of the ship, having
four, or five, or six irons, which are called Pintels, according to the
bigness of the ship fastened to them, which Pintels are fitted for the Gudgins
at the stern post, this is the bridle which governes the ship; the narrower
the Rudder is, the better, if the ship do feel it, for a broad Rudder does
hold much water, if the helm be put over to any side, but if the ship have a
fat-quarter, so that the water cannot come quick and strong to the Rudder, then
she will require a broad Rudder: The putting to of the Rudder, is termed the
hanging the Rudder; The part or edge of the Rudder, which is next the
sternepost, is called the inside of the Rudder, the after-most part, is called
the Rake of the Rudder.

The Rudder Roape.
Is a Roape or strap, which is reeved into one hole of the Rudder, near the
head, and so likewise through the sternepost, and then both ends are splised
together; this serves to save the Rudder, if it chance to be beaten off, when
the ship sticks a-ground.

Rudder-Irons.
Are the cheeks of that Iron, whereof the Pintell is part, and these are
fastened and nailed round about the Rake of the Rudder.

To Rumidge.
Is to remove any goods, or luggage out of a place (betwixt the Decks, or any
wheels) but most commonly we use this word to the removing and clearing of
things in the ships hold, so that goods or victuals may be well stowed and
placed, so when they would have this done, they say, they will go Ruming the
howld.

The Run.
Is that part of the ships hull under-water, which comes thinner, and lancker
away by degrees from the floare-timber all along to the sterne-post: That is
also called the ships way aft-ward-on, (for as she has either, a good or bad
Run, so the water does pass away swiftly, or slowly along her, and the ship
does make more way) we say, a ship has a good Run, when it is long, and comes
off handsomely by degrees, and that her tack, do not lie too low, which will
hinder the water from coming strongly and swiftly to the Rudder,: And a bad
Run, whenas it is short, and that the ship is too full below, so that the water
comes slowly and weakly to the Rudder, the force of it being broken off by the
breadth of the ship a-lowe, which will make as it were, an Eddy-water at the
Rudder, and that we call a dead water: The Run is of much importance for the
ships saileing; for if the water come not swiftly to the Rudder, she will never
steer well; and it is a general observation, that that ship which does not
steer well, cannot sail well, and then she cannot keep a good wind: for if a
ship have not a fresh way through the sea, she must needs fall to Lee-ward with
the sea, and therefore when ships will not steer well, they lengthen them
aftward-on, or put to a false sterne-post: Merchantmen do not give so much
Run, as a man of War may do, because the narrowing-in of the ships below, does
loose much stowage.

Rung heads.
Are the heads, or ends of the Rung, which are made a little compassing; and
do lead or direct (as it were the sweep and mould of the Futtocks; for in
these Rung-heads, the lines which give the compass and bearing of the ship do
begin: Also more generally, the outward ends of the Hooks, which are in the
same manner compassing, are called Rung heads; for the sleeper which is bolted
into the other Rung heads, is also bolted into these, and they say, it is
bolted fore and aft to the Rung heads.

The Rungs.
Are the ground-timbers, which do give the flower of the snip; and these are
bolted to the Keele, being straight, saving at the ends, where they begin to
compass a little.

The Runner.
Is a Roape, which is a part that does belong to the Garnet, and the two
Bolt-tackles, that before (that comes in the aftermost shrowds of the fore
mast) and that Tackle abast (which comes in the foremast shrowdes of the
maine-mast) it is reeved in a single-block, which is seized to the end of a
Pendant, and has at one end, a hook to hatch into any thing, and at the other
end a double-block, wherein is reeved the fall of the Tackle, or the Garnet,
which does purchase more then the Tackle or the Garnet would do without it;
and therefore, to heavy things they use this; but for light ones, they only
use the Tackle with the hook, which is seized to the standing part of the
fall: Over-hale the Runner, that is, pull down that end which has the hook
in it, to hitch it into the slings, or the like.

S
Sails.
To every Yard, in the ship, there belongs a sail, and they are called after
the name of those yards, whereunto they belong: All head-sailes (that is, those
that do belong to the foremast and bolt-sprit) do keep the ship from the
wind, and are used to flat the ship: All after-sailes, that is the mast and
missen-sailes, do keep her to the wind; and therefore few ships are so well
conditioned, as to Steere-quarter-winds with one sail; but must have one
after-saile, and an other head-saile (as it were to countermaund one an other)
yet some ships will steer with their maine-top-saile only: at sea, they call a
ship, a sail: as when they discry a ship, they say, A sail, A sail. The
sails are cut in proportion, as the Masts and yards are in length, and breadth,
one to another (excepting the Missen and sprit-saile) The Missen-saile, is cut
by the Leetch, twice as deep as the Mast is long from the Deck to the Hownds,
and the sprit-saile is as deep as the fore-sailes.

To Sarve.
To Sarve any Roape, is to lay synnet, spun-yarne, Roape-yarne: a piece of
canvas, or any the like upon a Roape, and so roll it fast about, to keep the
Roaps from galling; as we sarve the shrowdes, at the head of the Mast, the
Boate-roape, or any the like, which are in danger of fretting, against any part
of the ships Masts or Yards.

A Scarce.
Is when the end of one timber, is let into the end of an other, very close and
even, or as they term it, wood and wood, that is, so much wood taken away of
the one, as is of the other: In this manner the stem is fastened to the keele,
and that is called the scarffe of the keele: but yet when there is not a piece
of timber long enough to make the keele, then they make it of more, which are
scarffed one into the other, so when the stem or any other timber, (which ought
to be entire and all one,) is too short, it is peeced in this manner, and that
they call scarffing.

A Scuttle.
Is a square hole (so much as conveniently a man may go down at) cut through
any Hatch or any part of the Deck to go down by, into any room, most
commonly they are in these places, one close before the Maine-mast, at the
Maine-Hilliards before the Knight, in the fore-castell; in the hatch-way, for
the Stewards room; one in the Gun-roome, to go down into the stern sheates;
one in the Missen cabin, to go down into the Captains cabin, if they be
put from the fight aloft, and so in any place where they delight to go through
one Deck, down into an other: also for vent for the Ordnance, there are small
scuttles with grateings; they have all covers fitted for them, least men in the
night should fall into them: Also all the little windows and holes which are
cut-out aloft in the Captains, or Masters cabbins, are called Scuttles.

To Sease, or Seasing,
Is to make fast (or as you would say) to bind fast any roapes together, with
some small roape-yarne, marling or any line; Also the fastening of a block at
the end of a pendant; Tackle, fall, garnet, or the like, is called seizing, it
being bound to with some small line, or the like: So if any roape be too long
(as the shrowdes are ever) and the end be bound up unto the same roape with any
thing, we call it seasing. So that in general, the word seasing, implies as
much as binding any thing together, so as that they cannot slip out, as seasing
the Tacks into the clew and the like: The boats seasing, is a roape made fast
into a little chain or a ring, in fore-ship of the boat, and is the roape
which (in Harbors) they make fast the boat by, to the ships side.

A Seele.
There is no difference betwixt seeling and heeling, but that heeling is a
steddy-lying down of the ship-on a side, either when she is a-ground, at an
Anchor, or under sail, and saileing, is a sudden lying down, or tumbling to
one side or the other, when the sea does forsake her, that is, when the wave of
the sea is past from under, faster then she can drive away with it: then when
the ship lies down on a side, after it we say, she seeles; the Lee-seele, is
when she rowles to Leeward; there is no danger in this seele, though it be in a
great storm, because the sea will presently come under, and right her: but
then when she rowles back to wind-ward, the danger is, least she should come
over too short and suddenly, and so the water break right into her, and
founder her, or carry away some of her upper works, as it has fallen out with
many ships: So that seeling is but a sudden heeling, forced by the motion,
and fear of the sea or wind.

Send.
When a ship falls (whether under sail, or at Anchor) with her head, or with
her stern, deep into the trough of the sea, we say she sends much, either
a-sterne or ahead: The reason of sending with her head is, if she have a
little bow, not sufficient to bear her up, and a fat quarter to pitch her
fore-ward: And so for her sending a-sterne, it is contrary, when she has too
lanck a quarter, and too full, or fatt a-bowe.

To Set a-Land Sun. or, Ship by the Compass.
That is to observe by Compass, how the land bears upon any point of the
Compass, this they use most commonly to do, when they are going off to sea
from any land, to mark how it did bear off them, that thereby they may keep
the better account, and direct their course: Also they use to set the Sun by
the Compass, that is, to mark upon what point it is, to know thereby the
hea^e of the day: So when two ships sail in sight (especially, when a man of
War chases a ship) they will set her by the Compass, that is, mark upon what
point she bears, then if they stand both one way, as commonly they do, if the
chase strive to go away, by his we know, whether we reach-forth upon her, that
is, out-saile her, if we bring her forth, she out-sailes us, if we bring her
aft, we out-saile her, if we alter not, then we go both alike; as for example,
the wind being at North, we stand both a-way West, and the chase bears
North-west (that will be on any weather-bow) then if in saileing, I bring her
to bear North-west, and I by North, I have brought her a point aft, and if I
bring her North, I have brought her just with any mid-ship beam, and so I see
I fetch upon her, and it is called bringing aft; because, whereas before, she
bare upon my loofe, now she bares upon my quarter.

Setle a Deck.
When we have occasion to lay a Deck lower, it is termed, settling the Deck: As
if her her Ordnance lie too high, and we would have them lie nearer the water:
or that the Decks be close, and we desire rather to settle the lowermost, then
to raise the uppermost.

Sewing, or, to Sew.
When the water is gone from the ship, so that she lies dry, we say the ship is
sewed, or if it be but gone from any part (as her head) we say the ship is
sewed ahead, if it be a place where the water does ebb so much, that the ship
may lie dry-round, we say she cannot few there.

Shackles.
Are a kind of rings (but not round) made somewhat long-wise, larger at one end
then the other, in the middle of the ports, on the inside, they are used to
shut-fast the ports with a billet, which they use to bar-downe the ports with
(and that is called the bar of the port) also the fashion, but small ones are
made fast to the corners of the hatches, to lift the hatches up by them.

The Shanck.
The longest part of the Anchor, is called the shanck of the Anchor.

Shanck-painter.
Is a short chain, fastened under the fore-mast-shrowdes, with a bolt, to the
ship-side, and at the other end has a roape: upon the chain does rest the
whole waighth of the after-part of the Anchor, when it lies by the ships-side,
and the roape by which it is haled-up, is made fast about a timber-head, this
is seldom, or not at all used at sea, but in a Harbor, or a Road.

Shearing.
Is when the ship goes in and out under-saile, and heat the helm does not
stern her steady: Also where a tide-gate runs very swift, the ship will shere
in and out, and so much in some places, that they are feign to have one stand
at the helm, and to steer her upon the tide, for fear she should shere-home
her Anchors (that is, draw them home) or if it be near the shore, she may
sheare a-ground.

Sheates.
The Sheates are bent to the clew of all sails: In all sails, that are low
sails, they serve to hale-aft, or round-aft the clew of the sail, but in
top-sailes, they serve to hale-home (that is to hale close) the clew of the
sail to the yard-armes, when they hale-aft the sheate of the fore-saile, it is
to make her fall off from the wind, when the ship will not fall off from the
wind, they flat-in the fore-sheate, that is, pull the sail flat in by the
sheate, as near into the ships side as may be; Ease the Sheate of the sail,
that is, to veere-out, or let go a little of it. Let fly the Sheate, that is,
let it run-out as far as it will, and then the sail will hold no wind, but lie
floating loose (and then if it be an extraordinary stresse of wind) it will
split the gale to pieces; but this we do both with top-saile-sheates, and the
other sheates, when we suspect the wind will be so great that it will carry our
masts by the board, or over-set the ship: Also in great stiff gales, we use to
bind an other roape to the clew of the sail above the Sheate-block, to succor
and ease the Sheate, least it should break, and that roape we call a false
Sheate, and this is only used to the maine, and fore-sailes: Those plancks
under water, which come along the Run of the ship, and are closed to the
Sterne-post, are called Sheates, and that part within-boord, abast, in the Run
of the ship, is called the sterne-sheates.

Sheathing.
Is, as it were casing of a ship: It is done with thin boords, and hair, and
tar-laid betwixt the ship-sides and chose boords: this is done only under
water, or a very little above; the use whereof is to keep the worms from
eating through the plancks, as generally in all places to the Southward, they
do; the thinner the boords the better, for then, the worm will be presently
at the Tar (which he cannot abide) and so has no means, nor room to work in
and out of the planck, and so will eat away more when it is thick, then when
it is thin.

Sheep-shancks.
When two masts, or yards, or if it be but poles, are set up an end a pretty
distance off at the bottom, but seized a-crosse one an other aloft near the
top, we call them a pair of sheeres: To this seasing, is fastened a double
block with a strap, they are placed at the bottom upon the chain wales of the
Shrowdes, and there are lashed fast to the ship sides, to keep them steady
aloft: The use of them is either to set in a mast, or to take out a mast, or if
they have no mast, this serves to hoyse in and out goods.

Sheere-hookes.
Are great hooks of Iron (about the bigness of a small sickle, and more) they
are set into the yard arms of the maine and fore-yards: The use whereof is,
that if a ship under sail come to board her that has these hooks, she will
cut her shrowdes, or tear her sails down with these hooks; some do use
them, but they are most unusefull and unnecessary things, and dangerous for the
breaking of a yard, if the hook should catch in the other ships mast.

Sheevers.
There are two sorts of Sheevers used, either of brass or wood; the brass
sheevers are now little used but in the heels of the top-masts: the wooden
sheevers are either of one whole piece; and these they use for all small
pullies, and small blocks: but in the Knights and winding-tackles-blocks, they
use sheevers which are made of quarters of wood let-in to each other; for these
will hold when the whole Sheevers will split, and are called quarter-sheevers.

Shoares.
Are any pieces of timber, or any thing else, that is set to bear up an other
from sinking or falling, as when a ship is in danger of overthrowing a-ground,
we last fast masts or yards to their sides, they bearing on the ground, and
these we call shoares, shoaring her up; Also some timbers, that are set to
beare-up a Deck when it is weak, or overcharged with weight, are called
shoares,

The Shore.
Is counted the land near the sea, or the banck of the sea: The Lee-shore, is
that whereon the wind blows; Seamen avoid these by all means, for they are
dangerous if it over-blow: The weather shore is that from whence the wind comes.

Shot.
There are many kinds of Shot; that which flies farthest, and pierces most, is
round-shot, the next is crosse-bar, which is good for roapes, sails and masts:
The other langrell; which will not fly so far, but is very good for the
rigging, and the like, and for men; so is chaine-shot and case-shot, or
barrell-shot, which is good to plye amongst men, which stand naked, plying of
their small shot.

Shot of Cabell.
Two Cabels spliced together make a shot, and the use of them is great, in
deep-waters, and great roades, for a ship does ride much easier by one shot,
then by three short cabels ahead, Vide Ride.

Showle.
Showle and shallow are all one: When they say there is very good showleing, it
is meant that the water does grow shallower, by degrees, and not suddenly: nor
sometimes deep, and sometimes suddenly a-showle or bank: It is very safe and
commodious going-in with a shore, where there is good showleing; for by that we
have some certainty whereabouts we are, and how far distant from the land, if
the showling be first known, and commonly, where there is good showling, the
coast is not dangerous.

Shrowdes.
The Shrowdes are those Roapes which come from either side of all the masts,
the missen-maine-masts, and fore-mast-shrowdes, have at the lower end
dead-men-eyes seized into them; and are set up taught by Lanniers, to the
chains, which have also dead-men-eyes in them: At the other end they are
fastened over the head of the mast, the Pendants, fore-tackle and swifters being
first puton under them: at this uppermost part they are sarved, for galling
against the mast: The topmast shrowdes, are in the same manner fastened with
dead-men-eyes and Lanniers to the puttockes, and the plates of Iron which
belongs to them, and aloft over the head of the masts, the other ease the
shrowdes, slack the shrowdes: that is when they are too stiff set up: Set
taught the shrowdes; set up the shrowdes; that is, make them stiffer: Some
ships desire to have the shrowdes taught, some slack; The Lanniers are to set
up the shrowdes, Vide Lanniers: The bolt-sprit has no shrowdes.

The Sillinder.
The bore, or hollow concave of a Piece of Ordnance, is called the Sillinder.

Sinnet.
Is a line or a string made of roape yarne (commonly of 2, 6, or 9, which are
divided in three parts, and platted one over an other, as they plat Horses
maines) and so is beaten smooth and flat with a mallet; the use of it, is to
sarve roapes.

The Skegg.
Is that little part of the Keele, which is cut slaunting, and is left a little
without the sterne-post: The reason and use whereof, is only intended to be,
that it should save the Rudder from beating-off, if the ship should chance to
beat a-ground, but these Skegges are very unusefull and inconvenient: for
first they are apt to snap-off, and so endanger the sterne-post next in a
Harbor or River: Where ride many ships, they are apt to catch an other ships
cabels, betwixt that and the Rudder: And lastly, when the ship is under-saile,
they hold much dead-water betwixt them and the Rudder, therefore it is better
^ve no skegg, but to hang the Rudder down close to the sterne-post, with the
bottom ever to the bottom of the Keele, only pared away a little sloaping
toward the after-most side of it.

The Skiff.
Vide Boat;

Skuppers, or, Skupper-holes.
Are the holes close to all the Decks, through the ship-sides, whereat the
water does run forth of the ship, from the Decks, and many ships have them made
of lead.

Skupper-leathers.
Are the round leathers, which are nailed over the skupper-holes, that belong
to the lower-deck, which will keep-out the seawater from coming in, and yet
give leave to any water to run-out of the Deck; these are also over the
skuppers of the marger.

Skupper-nailes.
Are little short nails with broad-heads, made of purpose to nail on the
skupper-leathers, with these also they nail on the coats of the Masts and
Pumps.

A Slatch.
When any part of a cabell or roape (that is meant of the middle, not of the
end) does hang slack without the ship (as the cabell, when it is slack in the
water, or the Lee-tack, sheates, braces or the like, do hang in the water, or
loose by the ships sides) then they say, hale up the slatch of the roape or
cabell: Also when it has been a sect of foul weather, and that there comes an
interim, or small time of fair weather to serve their turns, they call it a
little slatch of fair weather, or the contrary.

Sleepers.
Are those timbers, which lie fore and aft the bottom of the ship, on either
side the Keelson, just as the rung-heads do go; the lowermost of these, is
bolted to the Rung-heads, and the uppermost to the futtocks; and so these
between them do strengthen and bind-fast the futtocks, and the Rungs which are
let down, one by an other, and have no other binding but the sleepers: These
do line-out (as it were, and describe the narrowing of the ships floor.

Slings.
There are first slings, to sling-casks in (when we hoyse it in, or any the
like) which are made of roape splised at either end into it self, making an
eye at either end, so large as they, think fit, to receive into it the cask:
and then the midle-part of the rope also, they sease together, and so make an
other eye for to hitch in the hook of the Tackle or Garnet: An other sort are
made long, with a small eye at either end, to put the one over the breetch of
the Piece, the other to come over ^end of the crow of Iron, which is put into
the mouth of the Piece, and so by these they hoyse it in: A third sort, is any
roape or chain, wherewith we bind fast the yards aloft to the crosse-trees,
and the head of the mast, to the end, that if the ties should break, the yard
may not come down: these are called slings, which are chiefly used when we
come to fight for fear of cutting the ties.

To sling.
Is to make fast any cask, Ordnance, yard or the like, in a pair of slings.

A Smitting-line.
Is a small Roape, which is made fast to the Missen-yard-arme, below next the
Deck; and when the Missen-saile is f^thelled-up, this is made up along with
it, to the upper end of the yard, the sail being made up with roape-yarnes,
and so comes down to the Poope: The use whereof is to loose the Missen-saile
without striking down the yard, for they pull the roape, and that breaks all
the roape-yarnes, and so the sail comes down; this line is called a smitting
line; so they smite the Missen, that is, pull that roape, that the sail may
come down.

A Snatch-block.
Is a great block, with a Sheever in it, and a notch cut through one of the
cheeks of it, by which notch they reeve any roape into it, and this is for
quickness, to reeve the roape in; for by this notch, one may reeve the middle
part of a roape into the block, without passing it in by the end, which would
be longer a doing; It is made fast commonly with a strap about the maine-mast,
close to the upper Deck, and is chiefly used for the fall of the winding-tackle
which is reeved in that block, and so brought to the Capstaine.

Sockets.
The holes into which the Pintels of the Murderers, forelers, or the like do
go, are called sockets: Also some call the Gudgins, wherein the Pintels of the
Rudder do hang, by the name of sockets.

A Sound.
Any great in-draught of the sea, betwixt two head-lands, where there is no
passage through, may be called a sound (as Plymouth sownd, etc.) But when they
name the sound, it is meant of that of the East countries, being the most
famous and greatest sea, that is known by the name of a sound.

To Sound.
Is to try with a line, a pole, or any thing else, the depth of the water: Also
when we would know what water is in the well of the Pump, we put down a small
line with some weight to it; and that is called sounding the Pump: Vide,
Deep-see-line: if you would know more of sownding, instead of biding one sound,
they say, heave the lead.

Sounding-lead.
Is as the deep-sea-lead; only it is commonly but seven pound weight, and about
12. inches long.

Sounding-line.
The differences betwixt the sounding line, and deep-see-line, are these: the
sounding line is bigger then the deep-see-line: A sounding-line is commonly cut
to twenty faddom, or little more, the other will be a hundred, or two hundred
faddom, the one is used in showle, the other in deep-water; the deep see-line,
is first marked at twenty faddom, and so to thirty, forty, etc. but the
sounding line is thus marked, at two faddom next to the lead, it is marked with
a piece of black leather put into it, betwixt the strands, and at three faddom,
the like at five, a piece of white woollen cloth, at seven faddom, a piece of
red cloth, at ten, a piece of leather, at fifteen faddom, either a white cloth
or a piece of leather, and so it is marked no farther; This may be used, when
the ship is under-saile, but the deep-see-line cannot with any certainty.

Speekes.
Are, as it were, great long iron nails, with sint heads, and are of diverse
lengths (as a foot or two long) some of them are ragged speekes, that they may
not draw out again: they are used in many places for fastening of timbers and
plancks, in foul weather, they use to speak up the Ordnance, that is, nail
down a quoyne and the like, to the Deck, close to the breech of the carriage
to help to keep the Ordnance strong up to the ship-sides, least they should
break loose, when the ship rowles; and for their further ease, they use to
take off the after tackles.

A Spell.
Is (as you would say) the doing any labor for a short time, and so ceasing
for others to take their turns; as when they pump an hundred strokes, or a
glass, they call it a spell: A fresh-spell, that is, others come to work, as
rowing in the boat, when one says to an other, he will give him a spell, that
is, row, or pump in his place, and this word is commonly used, only to pumping
and rowing.

To Spell.
When a sail has much wind in it, and that for any occasion (either to take
in, or for fear of wronging the Masts) we let the wind out of it, so that it
may have no force in it: we say, spell the sail, which is done by letting-goe
the sneates and bowlings, and braceing the weather-brace in the wind; then the
sail will lie all loose in the wind: but this word is most commonly used to
the Missen-saile, when they take in the missen, or speak it up, they say,
spell the Missen.

To spend.
When a mast or yard is broke, by foul weather, or any the like occasion; they
say, they have spent their masts, or yards: But if it come by fight, or so,
they do not use the word spent, but shot, by the board, or carried away by the
board, with a shot, or with an other ships-masts or yards, that may be bigger
and stronger.

A Spindle.
Is the smallest part of the Capstaine, which is betwixt the two Decks: To the
spindle of the jeere-capstaine, are whelps to heave the Violl.

To Splice.
Is to make fast the ends of roapes, one into the other, by opening the
strands, at the end of both the roapes, and then with a fid, laying every
strand orderly one into an other; also when we would make an eye, at the end of
a roape, we take the end of the roape and undo the strands, and so opening the
strands, where we would have the splice, with a tide, we draw in the ends of
the strands, and so weaving of them orderly, make the splise, and so sease the
ends down with some sinner, or the like: There are these sorts of splises; The
round splise, that is the splising of the ends of two roapes, one into an
other, as I have described; the count-splise, that is, when the ends of either
roapes are splised into the other roapes, some distance from the end, and not
one end in an other (as the first), then they will make a long slit (as it were
betwixt them) which is the reason of the name.

Split.
When the wind has blown a sail to pieces, we say the sail is split; Also
when sheevers break, we say they split, if a shot come and break a Carriage
of a Piece, we say, it has split the Carriage.

To Spoone.
Is to put a ship, right before the wind and the sea, without any sail (and
that is called spooneing before.) This is done most commonly, when in a great
storm, a ship is so weak with age or laboring, that we dare not lay her
under the sea: For though a ship when she spoones before, does roll more, yet
she strains not so much: but if she be a dangerous rolling ship, then
per-force she must be laid under the sea, for else she will roll her mast by
the board: And also it is dangerous; for if a sea should overtake her, when she
has a desperate seele, it may chance to break in and founder her; sometimes
then to make her go the steddier, they set the fore-saile, which is called
spooning with the fore-saile: When they do this, they are sure of sea room
enough.

To Spring.
When a mast is but cracked in any part (as at the Hownds, Partners, or else
where) we say, it is sprung, as they spring their masts with bearing a-saile,
etc. To spring ones Loofe, Vide Loofe.

The Spring, or, Spring-ride.
When after the dead-neapes, the tides begin to lift and grow higher, we say,
it is spring near upon three days before the full and change of the Moon,
the spring begins, and the top, or highest of the spring, is three days after;
then the water does high most with the flood, and low most with the ebb; which
is the reason, that at these times, we launch, and grave all of our great
ships, the tides also run much stronger and swifter, then in the neapes.

Sprit-saile,
Vide Sail.

Sprit-saile-top-saile.
Vide Sail.

Sprit-saile-top-mast.
Vide Topmast.

Sprit-saile-yard.
Vide Yard.

Sponge.
The sponge of a Piece of Ordnance, is that which makes it clean; they are
commonly Sheep-skinnes put at the end of a staff, which is made somewhat
bigger there according to the bore of the Piece, so as the spung may go in
full and close, but not too straight: but we have it also fitted to the ends of
a stiff roape, so is the rammer also, to sponge, and lade within-boord: we
ever sponge a Piece of Ordnance, before we put in Powder. In fight, when the
Ordnance is plied fast, to keep it from heating, we wet the spunges: Urine is
the best, but else with Vinegar, water, or what we have.

Spun-yarne.
Is Roape-yarne, the end scraped thin, and so spun one to the end of an other,
with a wrench, and make it as long as they list: This serves to sarve some
roapes with, but most commonly it is made to make caburne of.

Spurketts.
Are the holes, or spaces betwixt the Futtocks, or betwixt the Rungs, by the
ship-sides, fore and aft, above and below: To the spurketts below in hold
(which are below the sleepers) there are boords fitted, which they take up, to
clear the spurkets if any ballast get in betwixt the timbers; but for those
aloft, there is no use: only, it were good, they were in all ships, fitted-up
with light wood, or old Juncks, to keep the ship-sides aloft, Musket-free.

Standing-parts of Running roapes.
The standing parts, are those parts of running roapes (or rather that end of a
running roape) which is made fast to any part of the ship, to distinguish it
from the other part, whereon we use to hale: (as the standing part of the
sheate, is that part which is made fast, by a clinch into a ring of the
ships-quarter, and the like,) for when we say, hale the sheate, that is meant
by the running-part, but if they say, over-hale the sheate, then they hale upon
the standing part; the same is of all tackles, and running roapes.

Standing roapes.
Are counted all those roapes (as the shrowde stages, and back-stages) which
are not used to be removed, or to run in any blocks; but are only set taught,
and slacker as they have occasion.

To Stay, or, bring a Ship a-stay.
When we tack the ship, before the ship can be ready to be tacked; she must
come a-stages or a-back-stages, that is, when wind comes in at the bow which
was the lee-bowe before, and so drives all the sails backward, against the
shrowds and masts, so that the ship has no way, but drives with the
broadside: the manner of doing it is, at one time, and together, to bear up
the helm, let fly the sheate of the fore-saile, and let go the fore-bowleing,
and brase the weather brase of the fore-saile, the same to the top-saile, and
top-gallant sail, only they keep fast their sheates: If the sprit-saile be
out, then they let go the sprit-saile sheate with the fore-sheate, and brase
the weather brase; (the Tacks, Sheates, Brases, Bowlings of the maine-saile,
maine-top-saile and missen standing fast as they did) to be taken a-stages:
that is, when the wind comes contrary on the sudden; (which happens most upon
head-lands on calm weather) and so bring the ship a-stages: Sometimes by the
negligence of him at the helm, sometimes if it be little wind, and a head-sea,
on the weather-bowe: A ship may miss staying, that is to fall-back and fill
again: The best conditioned ships, are those which stay with least sails, as
with two top-sailes, or fore-top-saile, or missen, but no ship will stay with
less sail then those, and few with so little.

Stages, and Back-stages.
All the masts, top-masts, and flag-staves have stages, (excepting the
sprit-saile-top-mast) the maine-stay is made fast by a Lannier, to a collar,
which comes about the knee of the head: The maine topmast stay is made fast
into the head of the foremast by a strap, and a dead-man-eye there: The maine
top-gallant mast, is in like manner made fast to the head of the fore-top-mast:
The foremast and masts belonging to it, are in the same manner stayed at the
bolt-sprit, and sprit-saile-top-mast; and these stays do likewise help to
stay the bolt-sprit; The missen stay comes to the maine-mast by the half deck,
and the top-mast-stayes come to the shrowdes with crow-feet: The use of these
stays, are to keep the masts from falling aftward toward the Poope: There is
much difference, in staying of masts in respect of a ships saileing or working:
Generally the more aft the masts hang, the more a ship will keep in the wind,
and the forwarder the less: The Flemmings stay their masts much aft, because
else their ships being lofty ships would never keep a wind; but short and deep
ships rather cover upright masts: There are many differences of conditions in
ships for their saileing, according as they are stayed, for some will have the
stay-taught, some slack: The back-stayes of all masts (which have them) which
are only the maine-mast and foremast, and the masts belonging to them, go
down to either side of the ship, and are to keep the mast from pitching
for-ward-on overboord.

The Stern.
All the after-most part of the ship, is called the stern (by a general
appellation) but most exactly considered, only the very outwardmost part abast
is the stern; for the quarter is counted to be from the steeridge to the
transom and faskion-peece of the stern.

Sterne-sheates.
Vide Sheates.

To Steer.
Is to govern the ship with the helm: He steeres best, that keeps the ship
evennest from yawning in and out, and also that uses least motion in putting
the helm too far over: There are three kind of directions to steer by, the
one is, by the land, that is, to steer by any mark on the land, and so to
keep the ship even by that, this is easy: The next is, by the Compass (that
is to keep the ship upon a point of the Compass; this is harder, because the
ships head will come before the Compass:) The third is to steer, as they are
directed, and conded (and that is easiest of all;) If you would know the terms
belonging to Steering, Vide, Cond.

The Stieridge.
Is the place where they Steer, out of which they may see the leech of the
sails, to see if they be in the wind or not.

The Stem.
The Stem of the ship, is that great timber, which comes compassing from the
keele (wherein it is skarffed) up before the forecastell, this it may be, is
not all of one timber (as in great ships it cannot) And this does guide the
rake of the ship, when two ships stand, Stem for Stem, they come right with
their heads one against an other: To give a ship the Stem, that is to run right
upon her with the Stem: to go Stemming a-boord a ship; that is the same, as
giving the ship the Stem.

A Stepp.
They call that piece of timber, which is made fast to the Keelson, wherein the
maine-mast does stand, a Stepp: Also those places, and timber, wherein the
missen-mast, foremast, and the capstaine do stand, are called Stepps.

To Steve, or Steving.
We say the bold-sprit, or beake-head Steves, when it stands too upright, and
not straight foreward enough: Also the Merchants call the stowing of their
Cottons (which they force in with skrewes so much that the Decks will rise 6,
or 8, inches) Steveing of Cottons.

Stewards-Roome.
Is that part of the Howlde, wherein the Victuals are Stowed.

Stoaked.
When the water cannot come to the well, then we say, the ship is Stoake: and
that is, when the limber-holes, have some ballast, or any thing else got into
them, so that the water cannot pass, we say the limbers are Stoaked: Also when
any thing is gotten in or about the bottom of the Pump, so that it cannot draw
water, we say the Pump is Stoaked (Corn, and the like, is very bad for this.)

Stopp.
When they come to an Anchor, and have let run-out as much as a sufficient
quantity of Cabell, so much as will make the ship ride, or that the ship be in
a current, where it is best to stop her a little by degrees, then they say,
Stopp the ship; and so hold-fast the Cabell, and then veere-out a little more
and so stopp her fully, to let her ride: for stopping leakes, Vide leakes.

A Stopper.
Is a piece of a Roape, having a wale knot at one end and a lannier splised to
it: and the other end is made fast to some part, as the Stoppers for the
cabels, to the bottom of the bitts, by the Deck; the Stoppers for the maine
Halliards, to the Knight: The use of them, is chiefly for the cabels, to stopp
the cabels when they come to an Anchor, that it may goe-out by little and
little, the manner is, but binding the wale-knot about the cabell, with the
lanniers, and it will instantly catch-hold in it, so that it cannot slip-away,
as the Nippers do, which hold off the cabell, the term is, laying-on the
Stoppers; and casting off the Stoppers: Also we use them to the Halliards, when
the yard is hoysed aloft, to stopp it till the Halliards be so laid: A ship
rides by the Stoppers, when the cabell is not bitted, but only held fast by
them; but this is not safe rideing in a stresse.

To Stowe.
Is to put any goods in Howld (in order, for else we say it is not stowed, but
lies in howld) also we call it stowing between the Decks of any goods or
victuals be placed in order upon the Decks: but it is not used in this kind to
small things, as to a Chest or the like, Also the placing and laying of the
top-sailes in the top, is called Stowing the top-sailes.

A Struck.
Is the term for a seame betwixt two plancks (as the Gard-boord, a-Strake; or
the ship heels, a-Strake, that is one seame) some ships are built, with a
standing struck, or two, that is, when there is the whole breadth of a planck or
two, rising from the keele, before they come to the floare timbers; these ships
are naught to lie with the ground, for wringing their keeles; but this does
make them keep an excellent wind, this built is most used amongst the Flemmings.

A Strap.
A roape which is spliced about any block, that the block thereby may be made
fast, to any place where they have occasion to use it: by the eye which is made
in the Strap, at the arsse of the block.

A Streame-Anchor.
Is a small Anchor, which we use to the streame-cabell.

Streame-Cabell.
Is a small cabell, which we ride withal in streams, as rivers, or in
faire-weather, when we stop-a-tide, for ever we use the smallest ground-tackle
that we have if it will serve, both for lightness to weigh, and to save the
best from wetting.

A Stretch.
They use this word, not as it is commonly, to strain a roape, but thus, when
they go to hoyse a yard, or hale the sheate, they say, stretch fore-ward the
Hilliards, or the sheates: that is, deliver along that part (which they must
hale by) into the men's hands, that they may be ready to hoyse or hale.

To strike.
Is to pull down the sails, when one ship Strikes to an other, it is a sign
of respect, unless it be for occasion of staying for one: If a man of War come
up, with a Merchant, or any other, if he strike, it is intended that he yields
himself: Also when a ship beats upon the ground, they say she Strikes: So
when we take down the topmasts, they say, Strike them down: So when we lower
any thing into the howld with the tackles or any other roape, we call it
Striking-down into Howld.

Studding-sailes.
Vide Boome.

A Sturrop.
When a ship by any mischance, has lost a piece of her keele, and that we
cannot come well to mend it, but (as it were) patch a new piece unto it, they
bind it with an Iron, which comes under the keele, and so upon either side the
ship, where it is nailed very strong with speekes to strengthen it, this piece
so put to the keele, we call a Sturrop.

Suck.
When all the water is pumped cut, and that the Pump does draw-wind, we say,
she sucks: Also when a ship does draw down the helm, and does (as it were)
suck the whip-staffe out of his hand at the helm: A ship gripes, when she does
thus; the reason may be either too much fowlenesse, the standing of her masts
too much aft, or she may be out of her trim.

Surge.
We call a wave a Surge; but it is used in this sense, when they heave at the
cap-staine, and the cabell slips back again, they say the cabell surges; to
prevent which; Vide Nippers.

Swifters.
Do belong to the maine and foremast, and are to succor the shrowdes, and
keep stiff the mast, they have Pendants, which are made fast under the
shrowdes, at the head of the mast with a double block, through which is reeved
the swifter, which at the standing part has a-single block with a hook, which
is hitched in a ring by the chaine-wale, and so the fall being haled does help
to strengthen the mast: And this fall, is belayed about the timber-heads of the
lower railes aloft.

Swifting.
When we bring ships a-ground, or careene them, we use to swift the masts, to
ease them, and strengthen them, which is done in this manner, they last fast
all the Pendants of the swifters, and tackles with a Roape, close to the Mast,
as near the blocks as they can: Then they carry fore-wards the Tackles, and so
bowse them down as hard, and Taught as they can: and this eases the Masts: so
that all the weight of the Mast, does not hang by the head, as otherwise it
would, and also does help to keep it from rising out of the steps.

T
TAcks.
Are great Roapes, having a-wale-knott at one end, which is seized into the
Clew of the Sail, and so reeved first through the Chestree, and then comes in
at a hole of the Ship-side: The use of this is to carry forwards the Clew of
the Sail, and to make it stand close, by a wind: and then the Sails are thus,
Trimmed: The main Tackefore-saile, and Missen-Tacks, are close a-board, or
haled-as foreward on-as may be, so are the Bowlings of the weather-side: the
Lee-sheates, are haled close aft, but the Lee-sheates of the fore-saile; not so
much unless the Ship-Gripe: the Lee-brases of all the yards, are brased aft:
and the Top-sailes are governed, as the Sails whereunto they belong: And hence
they say, a Ship stands, or sails close upon a Tack (that is close by a-wind)
hale a-boord the Tack, that is to have it down close to the Chestrees: East
the Tack (that is, not so close a-boord:) Let rise the Tack (that is, let it
go all out) it is commonly belayed to the bitts, or else there is a Kevell
which belongs to them: These Tacks do only belong to the Maine-saile, and
Missen, and they are ever made Tapering.

To Tack-a-Ship.
To Tack the Ship, is to bring her head about, to lie the other way: as if her
head lay first West-North-west, now it will lie East-North-East: the wind being
at North. Then supposing the Ship has all her Sails out, which we use by
a-wind, thus they do: first, they make her stay (for which, vide to stays,)
when she is stayed, then they say, she is Paid, and so let rise, and hale,
that is, let the Lee-Tack rise and hale aft the sheates: and so Trim all the
Sails by a-wind as they were before: that is, Cast off that Bowling, which was
the weather-bowling and now set up-Taught thither, and so all Sheates, Brases,
and Tacks, as a Ship that is trimmed by a-wind must have.

Tackles.
Are small Roapes which run in Three parts, having either a Pandant with a
hook to it, or a Rammer, and at the other end, a block and hook, to
catch-hold, and heave in Goods into the Ship: there are these many sorts used,
that is, the boates-Tackles (which stand one on the Maine-Mast Shrowds, the
other on the Foremast shrowds, to hoyse in the boat, and do serve also for
other uses) the Tackles which belong to the Mast (which serve in the nature of
Shrowds, to keep the Mast from strayning) The Gunners Tackles (with which they
hale in and out the Ordnance) and lastly, a winding-Tackle (which vide.) The
Roape of a Tackle, is called the fall (that part which we hale-upon) but that
end whereunto the block is seized, is called the Standing part, to hale upon a
Tackle, is termed to Bowse upon the Tackle.

Tallee.
When they hale aft the Sheates of the Maine or Fore-saile, they say,
Tallee-aft the Sheates.

Tampkin.
Is a small piece of wood, turned fit for the mouth of any piece: which is put
in there: to keep out the Rain, or seawater from washing-in, when the pieces
lie without board.

Tapering.
Is when any Roape, or any thing else, is made bigger at, one end, then at the
other: (as the Tacks are made Tapering) which makes them purchase the better,
and saves a great deal of Stuff, because the Roape at one end bears little,
or no stresse; I have seen in Flemmings, the top-saile sheates Tapering.

Taper-Bore.
Is when a Peeces-bore is wider at the mouth, then toward the Breech: some are
of opinion, that these pieces do not recoyle so much, but they are not so
good: for sometimes if the Shot be too high, it may be it will not come-home
to the powder, which is dangerous for the piece.

Tar-pawling.
Is a piece of Canvas that is all Tard over to Lash upon a Deck, or Grating, to
keep the Rain from soaking through.

Taunt.
Is when a Mast is very high, for the proportion of the Ship, we say it is a
Taunt-Mast, the Flemmings have them so, for the most-part: for Taunt-Masts, and
Narrow-yards are best to sail by a-wind: for the Sails stand so much the
sharper: but yet they do wring aship-sides more then a short Mast, and a
broad-yard: which is the reason that our Ships use short-Masts and broad-yards.

Taught.
That is to set a Roape stiff and fast, as we say, Set Taught the Shrowds, the
Stays, or any other Roape, when it is too slack.

A Tempest
When it over-blowes so exceedingly, that it is not possible to bear any
sail, and that it is a-wind mixed with Rain, or Hail, they call it a Tempest,
which they account a degree above a storm.

The Thaughts,
Are the seats, whereon those that Row in the do sit.

Thight.
When a Ship is staunch, and makes but little water, she is thight; which is
quickly known by the smell of the water, for if the water stinck much, it is a
sign it has laid long in the ship, and if it be sweet, it is a sign it comes
in newly.

Thowles.
Are the small pins, which they bear against with their Oars, when they Row:
and stand in holes upon the upper-side of the Gun-wale of the boat, they are
commonly made of Ash for toughness.

Thwart-Ships.
That is any thing that is done, or lies a-crosse the Ship, from one side to
the other, we say it lies Thwart-Ships: and the contrary is Longst: that is,
a-long the Ship.

Tides.
This word Tide, is common both to Ebb, and flow, for it is called Tide of
Ebb, as well as Tide of Flood: A wind-ward-Tide, is when the Tide runs
against wind, then the Sea breaks most, and goes highest; but a Ship, or
Anchor strains the Cabels leaft a Lee-ward-Tide, that is, when the Tide and
wind goes both one way, then the Sea is smoother: A Tide-gate, that is, where
the Tide runs strong. To Tide it over, or up to a place, that is, to go with
the Tide of Flood, or Ebb, and so stop the contrary Tide at an Anchor, till
the same Tide come again: and this is used, when the wind is contrary, but
does not over-blowe: for then they cannot stop at an Anchor, and if they keep
under-saile, they will loose more in one Lee-ward-Tide, then they shall get in
two wind-ward-Tides: when they say, it flows Tide, and halfe-Tide in any
place, the meaning of it is thus: (for the speech is most improper to common
understanding, implying as much as if it did flow a Tide and a half in some
places together, and but half an Ebb.) that the Tide does run three hours
(which is four points, longer in the offing then it does by the shore: by
longer, is not meant more hours (for it does ever Ebb and Flow six hours) but
thus, if it be highwater, at the shore, at twelve a Clock it shall not be
high water in the offing till it be three a Clock, (which is the compass and
time for the running of half a Tide) so according as it Ebbs or Flows more,
they say it tons Tide, half, and half quarter (that is, five points) when
they come into a Harbor, or over a Stand, they say, they will bring their Tide
with them, that is, to come with the flood, which may carry them over: Note
that where it flows Tide, and halfe-Tide, that though the Tide of slood run
aloft, yet the Tide of Ebb runs under-foot, that is, close by the ground: And
so for the tide of Ebb, it will flow under-foot.

Ties.
Are four strand-Roapes, hawser-Laide, which is in respect, that this kind of
laying does not stretch so much as three-shrowd-Roapes, and besides, run
smoother in the hounds. These are the Roapes by which the yards do hang, and
do carry-up the yards when the Hilliards are strained to hoyse the yards: The
maine-yard and fore-yard-ties, are first reeved through the Ram-head, then
through the hounds at the head of the Mast, and so with a turn in the Eyes of
the sling which are made fast to the yard, they are seized fast, and close to
the yard: the Missen-yard, and top-Mast-yard, have but single ties: that is,
one does run in one part, the sprit-saile yard has none, for it is made fast
with a pair of slings to the bolt-spritt.

Tiller.
The Helm, and the tiller is all one, therefore ( Vide Helm) only the word
tiller is most properly used for that which we Steer the Boat by; as they
say, Give me the tiller of the Boat, not the Helm, yet it is all one in use.

Tire.
When a Deck has Ordnance fore and aft (though there want some) we call that a
tire of Ordnance, some Ships have two tire or three, the fore-Castle, and the
half Deck being furnished, make half a tire; the Cabell tire, that is, the
row which is in the middle of the Cabell when it is Quoyled up.

Top-Armors.
Are the Clothes, which are tied about the tops of the Masts for show: and
also for to hide men in fight, which lie there, to fling fire-pots use small
shot, or the like.

Top-Gallants.
Are the Masts above the top-Masts, these sails do draw very much
Quarter-winds, in a Loome or fresh-Gale, so it Blow not too-much.

Topmast.
The top-Masts are ever half so long as the Masts unto which they belong: but
there is no one absolute proportion in these and the like things: for if a man
will have his Mast short, he may the bolder make his Topmast long.

Top-Roapes.
Are those Roapes wherewith we set, or strike the top-Masts: they belong only
to the Maine and Fore-top-Mast: this Roape is reeved through a great block,
which is seized under the Cap on one side, and then it is reeved through the
heel of the Topmast, where is a brass sheaver, which is placed thwart ships,
and then is brought up and made fast, on either side of the Cap, with a Chuch
to a Ring, which is fastened into the Cap: the other part comes down by the
ties, and so is Reeved into the knight, and brought to the Captain when they
heave it.

To Towe.
Is to drag any thing a stern the ship in the water (as to towe the Boat, or
to towe a small Ship, or the like, with a Hawser out a-sterne. The nearer any
thing is to the Boat, or the like when it is towed the less it does hinder
the Ships way: but the farther off the easier it is, for that which is towed,
for then the Ship will not give it such twitches.

Transome.
That timber which lies a thwart the Stern of the Ship, betwixt the two
fashion-peeces, and does lay out her breadth at the Buttock, is called the
Transome: This is just under the Gun-Roome-port a stern: to lie with a
Ships-transome, that is to lie Just with the end of the planks where they are
fastened to the fashion-peeces a stern: to come in a Ships-transome: that is
just betwixt her Gun-Roome-port, and her Quarter-port: this is the safest
coming-up, for their Ships are most naked: and their Galleys do use to
come-up, but now they begin to cut out ports close by the transome.

Travers.
We call the way of the Ship (in respect of the points whereon we sail, and
the Angles which the Ship makes in going to, and again) the travers of the
Ship; as we say, A man does travers his ground, when he goes in and out: we use
to note how many hours the ship has gone upon a point, what sails she has
forth, how near a wind, and so judge what way she makes: this we set-downe
upon a paper besides the Plot, which we call a travers, and then drawing a line
from the place where we last were, to that place, where the last Prick or Mark
is, we set in the whole: what Course and how far we are gone: this we call a
dead reckoning, then if we can observe and find the observation and this meet,
we are sure we are right, otherwise, we trust more to the observation, and
reform our Reckoning by that: Also the laying and removing a piece of
Ordnance, till it come to lie with the mark, is called the traversing of the
Piece.

Travers-boord.
Is a board which they keep in the Steeridge, having the thirty two points of
the Compass marked in it, with little holes on every point, like a
Noddy-boord, that is for him at the helm, to keep (as it were) a skore, how
many Glasses they have gone upon of the Compass, and so strike a pin on that
point; This is to save the Master a labor, who cannot with so much curiosity,
watch every wind and course so exactly as he at helm, especially when we go
by a wind, and the wind veeres and hulls.

Tree-nells.
( Quasi nails made of tree) Are the long wooden pins made of the heart of
Oak, wherewith they fasten all the plancks unto the timbers, for though we
bolt the bulke-heads for the better assurance and strength, yet the tree-nells
are they which do most fasten the plancks (for we do use as little Iron under
water, as we may conveniently, least the ship should grow iron-sick.) These
tree-nels, must be well seasoned, and not sappy, for then the ship will be
continually leakie, and it will be hard to find: If a ship by any beating upon
the ground, do make a-give-back, and come a little out again, they term it
starting of a tree-nell.

Treenell-trees.
Are joined to the crosse-trees, and do lie cross each other, and serve to
the same use; they differ only, that the treenell-trees are those which go
long ships, and the other thwart-ships. Vide crosse-trees.

To Trise.
Is to hale up any thing with a dead-roape, that is, when we hale by a roape
that does not run in any block, or hale up by any device, but by hand, as if an
empty cask be made fast to a roape (that is no tackle) they say, trise-it-up,
or any chest, or like goods, which is fastened to a roape, and so haled up by
hand into the ship, we call it haleing by hand, when we have not the help of
any cap-staine, tackle or the like, which might purchase easier, but only do
it, by the immediate and only force of hands.

To Try.
Trieng, is to have no more sail forth, but maine-saile, the tacks a board,
the bowleing set-up, the sheate close-aft, and the helm tyed-down close
a-boord: some try with their missen only, but that is when it blows so much,
that they cannot mainetaine the maine-saile: A ship a-trie with her maine sail
(unless it be an extraordinary grown sea) will make her weigh four points
before the beam, but with a missen, not so much.

The Trim.
Though commonly by the trim of a ship, is understood the swimming of her,
either ahead, or a-sterne, or on an even keele: In whether of these, the ship
goes best, that they call her trim, but that is not only to be counted her
trim, for some ships will go well or ill according to the staying of the
masts: the slacknesse of the shrowds or the like: Therefore in my mind, the
order of the swimming considered with this fitting of her masts, and roapes,
wherein the ships sails best should be counted her trim, and not only the line
of her swimming in water: The ways of finding a ships-trym, must be with
saileing with an other ship, to bring her ahead so many glasses, then a-sterne
as many, then on even keele: That way which she goes best, is her trim, in
respect of her mould under-water, then to make her go better, ease the stays,
or set them up, also the shrowdes, then wedge the mast, or give it leave to
play, and so in time it is easy (with a little diligence) to find the trim of
a ship: Next to men of War (whose daily practice it is) the Scotch men are the
best in the world to find out the trym of a ship, for they will never be quiet,
but try her all ways, and if there be any goodness in her, they can make her
go.

The Trough of the Sea.
That is in the hollow betwixt two waves, when we lay a ship under the sea
(that is, when we lay her broade-side to the sea) we say, she lies in the
trough of the sea.

Trucks.
Are those little wooden wheels (being made without any spoakes) that the
carriages of the Ordnance do run-on: Also those little round things of wood,
which belong to the parcels are called trucks.

Trunnions,
Are those knobbes which come from the side of the Ordnance, and do bear them
up upon the cheeks of the carriages.

Trusses.
Are roapes which are made fast to the parcel of the yards, and are used to
two uses, one to bind-fast the yard to the mast, when she rowles either a hull,
or at an Anchor; the other is to hale-downe the yards in a storm or gust;
these belong only to the main-yard, and fore yard; and they are all brought
too, but upon occasion, and also to the missen which has ever a trusse.

The Tucks.
The word is significant (for it is as you would say) the very gathering-up of
the ships quarter under water, if it lie low, that makes the ship have a fat
quarter, and hinders the water from passing swiftly to the rudder: if it lie
high, the ship must be well laid out in the quarter, else she will want
bareing, for her after-works, which being so high and weighty, do charge a
ship much.

A Turn.
Vide Board.

V
VEere.
To veere-out a roape, is to put it out by hand, or to let it run-out when you
may stop it; (as veere more Cabell, that is, let more run-out:) veere, it is
generally used to the letting-out of more roape to those roapes which are used
without-boord, as to the boate-roape, log-line, or any roape whereby we towe
any thing: but it is not used to any running-roape but only to the sheates:
Veere more sheats (that is, put out) when the wind does go in and out, that
is, sometimes to one point, sometimes to an other, and that suddenly, as in the
storms it will very much, they say the wind does veere and hull.

Veering.
When a ship sails, and the sheate is veered-out, we say, she goes veering:
Vide Large, and quarter-winds, for it is all one.

A Violl.
When the Anchor is in such stiff ground that we cannot weigh it, or else that
the sea goes so high, that the maine cap-staine, cannot purchase in the cabell,
then (for more help) we take a hawser, and open one strand, and so put in it
Nippers (some 6, or 8, a faddom distant from each other) and with these Nippers
we bind fast the hawser to the cabell, and so bring this hawser to the
Jeere-cap-staine and heave upon it, and this will purchase more then the maine
cap-staine can; The Violl is fastened together at both ends with an eye and a
wall-knot, or else two eyes seized together.

W
WAft.
To waft, is to guard any ship, or fleet at sea, as we call men of War (which
attend Merchans to conduct them safe along) wafters: Also wafts are used for
signs to have the boat come a-boord (which is Coat, Gown or the like,
hung-up in the shrowdes) also it is a common sign of some extremity, when a
ship does hang a waft upon the maine-stay, either that it has sprung a-leake,
or is in some distress.

The Wake.
The Wake of a ship, is the smooth-water, which the ship does make
a-sterne-her, showing the way that the ship has gone in the sea; by this we
give a judgment what way the ship does make; for if the wake be right
a-sterne, then we know she makes her way good, as she looks, but if the wake
be a point, two or more to Lee-ward, then the ship goes to Lee-ward of her
course; when a ship does stay a-weather her wake, that is, when she does not
fall to Lee-ward at her staying but does it quickly, and then when she is
tacked the wake is to Lee-ward, it is a sign she feels her helm well, and is
a nimble ship: In chaseing they say, we have got her wake, that is, we are got
as far into the wind as she, and so go right after her as she goes.

Wale.
Vide Bend.

Wale-reared.
That is, when a ship is built right up, after she comes to her bearing, this
is unsightly, and (as they term it) not ship shapen: but it makes a ship
within-boord much the roomer, and not the less wholesome ship in the sea, if
her bearing be well laid-out.

Walt.
A ship is said to be walt, when she has not ballast enough, to keep her
stiff to bear a sail.

A Warpe.
Is any roape which is used to warpe a ship, which is most commonly a hawser.

To Warpe.
Is to have a hawser, or any other roape (sufficient to hale-up the ship) and
an Anchor bent to it; and so to lay that out over the bar, over which we are to
go, and so by that, to hale the ship forewards: It is used when we want a wind
to carry us out, or into a Harbor, and this is called warping.

To Wash a Ship.
That is used at sea, when we cannot come aground, or careene-her: we make her
heeled-over with her Ordnance and men, upon the yard-armes to aside, and so
wash that side, and scrape it, (so much as is out of the water, which is
commonly some 5, or 6, strakes) this is done in calmes, or in a smooth road.

To Wash off the Shore.
That is close by the Shore.

Wast.
Is that part of the ship, which is between the maine-mast and the fore-castell.

Waste-boords.
Are the boords which are set up in the waste of a ship, betwixt the gun-wale
and the wast-trees; but they are most used for boats, to be set up along the
sides to keep the sea from breaking into them.

Wast-clothes.
By a general term, all the clothes which are round about the cake-work of
the hull of the ship, are called wast-clothes, and are the same that we call
the fights of the ship.

Watch.
At the sea, the ships company is divided into two parts, the one called the
Star-boord-watch, the other the Lar-boord-watch: The Master, is the chief of
the Star-boord, and his right hand mate of the Lar-boord: these are in their
turns to watch, trim sails, pump, and do all duties for four hours, and
then the other watch is to releeve them: Four hours they call a whole watch:
In Harbor, and Rhodes, they watch but quarter watch, that is, when one quarter
of the company do watch together.

Water-borne.
That is, when a ship is even just of the ground that she floates, then she is
water-borne.

The Water-line.
Is that line, which the Ship-wrights do pretend should be the depth that the
ship should swin in, when she is laden both ahead and a-sterne; for you must
know, a ship never draws so much ahead, as she does a-sterne, for if she
should, she would never steer well.

Water-shot.
Is a kind of moreing, that is to lay the Anchors not cross the tide, nor
right up and down the tide, but (as you would say) betwixt both, that is
quartering.

The Water-Way.
That small piece, or ledge of timber, which lies fore and aft on the ships
deck, close by the sides (which is to keep the water from running-down there)
is called the water-way.

Waving.
Is making a sign for a ship, or boat, to come toward them, or else to go
from them; as the sign is made, either toward or from-wards the ship.

Way of a ship.
The Rake and Run of a ship, is called her way foreward-on, or aftward-on: Also
when she sails a-pace, they will say, the ship has good way, fresh way, or
the like; Likewise, in casting the dead-reckning, they allow her Lee-ward-way,
(that is so much as she drives to Lee-ward, from that she seems to go.)

To Weather.
That is, to go to wind-ward of a place or ship; sometimes we are embayed, so
that we cannot weather-a-head-land to get clear, and then we must do our best
to turn in and out, till we can have a fair wind, or claw it off.

Weather Bow.
That is the Bow next weather, and so of all parts of the ship, or any thing
that is to the wind-ward-most-side, we say, it is the weather-part, or
a-weather.

Weather-coile.
Is when a ship is a hull, to lay her head the other way, without looseing any
sail; which is only done, by bearing up the helm: It is an excellent
condition in a ship; for most ships will not weather-coile: The use of it is,
that when we desire to drive with her head, the other way a-hull, then we need
not open any sail, wherewith before the ship can come to veere, she will run a
great way to Lee-ward, when once she is before the wind and sea, under sail.

Wedges.
We use to make fast the mast in the partners with wedges; and also to put a
wedge into the heels of the top-masts to beare-up the topmast upon the
tressell-trees.

The Whelps.
Are like brackets, set to the body of the cap-staine, close under the bars,
down to the deck; and are they which give the sweep to the cap-staine; these
are made so in parts, that the cabell may not be so apt to surge as it would,
if it did run upon a whole round body.

The Whipp.
Is that staff, which the Steeres-man does hold in his hand, whereby he
governs the helm, and does port it over from one side to an other; it has a
ring at one end which is put over the end of the helm, and so comes through
the roll up into the steeridge: In great ships they are not used, for by
reason of the weight of the rudder and the water which lies upon it in
foule-weather, they are not able to govern the helm with a whipp, because
conveniently there can stand but one man at the whipp.

Whoodings.
The plancks which are joined and fastened along the ship-sides into the stem,
are called the whoodings.

To Wind.
To wind a ship, is to bring her head about, either with the boat, or with
some oars out at her hawse or sterne-portes (if she be a small ship^) The ship
winds-up, that is when she comes to ride by her Anchor: when they are under
sail, they use to ask, how winds the ship, that is, upon what point of the
Compass does she lie with her head.

Winding-tackle.
The winding-tackle is thus fitted: A great double block with three sheevers in
it, which is fast seized to the end of a small cabell, which is brought about
the head of the mast, and so serves for a pendant: this has a Guye brought to
it from the foremast, into the block there is reeved a hawser, which is also
reeved through an other double-block, having a strap at the end of it, which
strap being put through the eye of the slings is locked into it, with a fidd,
and so hoyse the goods: The fall is reeved into the snatch-block, and so
brought to the cap-stame, whereby they heave in the goods.

Windlasse.
Is a piece of timber (having some 6, or 8, squares) and is placed from one
side of the ship to the other, close abast the stem, aloft where the cabels
come in: These are never used in our great ships; but the Flemmings do use
them in good ships: the reason is, for that they go very slightly manned, and
the windlasse does purchase much more then a cap-staine, and with no danger to
the men: for the windlasse they heave about with hand-speekes put into holes
made at either end, and though they cannot heave foreward, or one should fail,
the wind-lasse will paul it self: But at the cap-staine if any fail, they
may be thrown from the cap-staine, and their brains beaten out against the
ship sides, if they weigh in a sea-gate, but the cap-staine does purchase
faster by much; and therefore we (having men enough to man it) do use that:
they have a windlasse also in the head of the boat, to weigh the Anchor by the
buoy-roape.

Wind-taugh.
Any thing that holds wind aloft, which may prejudice the ship-faileing or
riding, is said to be wind-taught (as too much rigging high roapes, and the
like;) Also when we ride in any great stresse, we bring our yards along
ships, strike down our top-masts and the like: because they hold wind taught,
that is, they hold wind stiffely, (for taught is as much as stiff in the sense
of sea language) as set taught the shrowdes, that is, set them stiff.

Wood and Wood.
That is, when two timbers are let into each other, so close, that the wood of
the one, does join close to the other.

A Worm.
Is an Iron on the end of a staff, wherewith they draw out the shot of a
Piece, if there be any occasion.

Worming.
Is the laying of a small-roape, or line along, betwixt the strands of a
cabell of hawser; The use whereof, is to help to strengthen the cabell, or
roape to which it is used; the Flemmings use this to new roapes, others to old
roapes, that are almost decayed.

To Would: or, Woulding.
Is to bind Roapes about any Mast, yard, or the like, to keep on a fish, or
somewhat to strengthen it: Sometimes when the whoodings give way by the
over-charging of the bolt-sprit, they are feign to Would to the Bows: which
they do, by passing a Cabell through both sides, and so bringing it in again,
and with hand speckes to twist it together as strong as may be: we never fish
any Mast, or yard, but we Would it also: And that is called the Woulding of the
Mast or Yards. Also those Roapes, which come from the beake-head, over the
bolt-spritt, and Lashes it fast down from rising off the pillow, are called
the Wouldings of the bolt-spritt.

Y
YArd.
As the length of the Masts are proportioned by the breadth of the Beam, so
contrary wise, the length of the yard is proportioned by the length of the
Keele: The proportion of this, is not absolute: for he who will have a
Taunt-Mast may have the Narrower-yards (and so contrary) but the best, and most
absolute agreed on, is this, the Main-yard of the Ship is to be parts of the
length of the Keele: The top-saile yard is to be 3/7 of the Maine-yard: and the
Maine-yard for bigness, is to be of an Inch for a yard in length: the length
of the fore-yard is to be of the main-yard: The Crosse-Jack-yard, and
sprit-saile-yard, is to be all of a length, but allow the Missen-yards, and
sprit-saile-yards an Inch thickness to a yard in length: Top the yards, (that
is, make them hang even:) the Clew-lines do properly top the Maine and
fore-yards: but when the Top-sailes are Stowed, then the Top-saile sheates will
top them: Brase the yard (that is, Travers aft that yard-arme, whose brase is
haled) and by the brases we square the yards, that is, make them hang
right-a-crosse, and one yard arm not Traversed more then the other: If the
Shrowdes be set too forward, they will hinder the traversing of the yard:
Traversing the yard, is to brase aft the yard.

A Yawe.
When the Ship is not steered steady, but she goes in and out with her head,
they say she Yawes, this does much hinder a shipsway; and therefore when a man
of war is in Chase, he does put such to the Helm, who can keep her
steddiest and evennest upon a point; which is done only by Care and Judgment;
to meet her with the Helm, before her head fall-off, or else come to.

A Yoke.
When the Sea is so rough, that men cannot govern the Helm with their hands,
then they sease two Blocks to the Helm, on each side, at the end, and Reeveing
two falls through them, like Gunners-Tackles, bring them to the Ship-sides, and
so having some at one Tackle, some at the other, they govern the Helm, as
they are directed: There is also another way, with taking a double turn about
the end of the Helm, with a single Roape: The ends being be-layed fast to the
Ship-sides: And by this they guide the Helm, but not with so much ease, as the
other way: Now either of these is called a Yoke to steer by.

FINIS.
An Index of the Names, and Terms expounded in this Book.
A
AFt, or, Abast. Page. 1 Aloof. 2 Amain. ibid. Anchor. ib. Anchoring, or
Anchorage. 4 Anchor-Stock. ibid. Arm. ibid. An Awning. 5 Axel-tree. ibid.
B
To Bals. 5 Ballast. ibid. The Beak, or Beake-head. 6 Beam. ibid. To Bear.
ib. Beare-in. 7 Beare-off. ib. Beare-up. ib. Bedds. ib. To Belage. ib. A Bend.
8 To Bend, or Bent. ibid. A Berth. ib. Berthing. ibid. A Bight. ibid. Bildge,
or Buldge. ib. Bildge-water. ibid. A Bittackle. ib. A Bitter. 9 A Bitter-end. 9
The Bitts. ibid. Blocks. ibid. Blow. 10 Bluff, or Bluff-head. ib. Boat. ib.
Bolt, or Bolts. 11 A Bolt-Roape. ib. Bolt-spritt. ibid. A Bonnett. 12 A Boome.
ib. Board, or, A-Boord. ib. The Bow. 13 Bowling. 14 A Bower. ib. Bows, or, To
Bowse. ib. Bracketts. ib. Brases. ib. Brayles. 15 Breech and Breeching. ibid. A
Breize. ib. A Brest-fast. 16 Brest-Roapes. ibid. Brooming. ibid. A
Budge-Barrell. ibid. Bulck. ib. Bulck-head. ib. Bunt. ib. Bunt-lines. 17 A
Buoy. p. 17 A Butt. ib. A Buttuck. ib.
C
A Cabell. 18 Caburne. ib. Calm and becalming. ib. To Camber, or Cambring. 19
The Cap. ib. Capsquares. ib. The Cap-staine. ib. Cap-staine-bars. 20 A Card,
or, Sea-Card. ib. Careene. ib. Carlings. 21 Carling-knees. ib. A Carriage. ib.
A Carthrage. 22 Carnells. ibid. Carnell-Work. ib. A Case. ib. Case-shott. ib.
Casketts. ib. Catharpings. 23 Catt. ib. Catt-holes. ib. Caulke. ib. Chafe. ib.
Chaine-Walls. ib. A Chamber. ib. Channel 24 Charge. ibid. Chase. ib. Cheeks.
25 Cheteres. ib. Choke. ib. Clamps. 25 A Cleate. ib. Clew. 26 Clew-garnet. ib.
Clew-line. ib. A Clincher. ib. To Clinch. ib. Clinching. ib. Cloathe. 27
Cloyde. ib. Coamings. ib. Coats. ib. Cocks. ib. The Collar. ib. The Comb. ib.
Compass. ib. To Cond, or Cun. 28 Cooke-Roome. ib. Cordage. 30 Connter. ib.
Course. ib. A Crabb. ib. A Cradle. ib. Craft. ib. Cranck. ib. Creengles. ib.
Cros-bar. 31 Cros-Jack. ib. Cros-peece. ib. Cros-trees. ib. Crow-feete. ibid.
Cubbridghead. 32 Culver-taile ibi. Cut. ib. Cutt-Water. ib.
D
The Davitt. 33 Dead men-eyes. p. 33 Dead-water. ib. Deck. ib. Deep-see-Leade.
34 Deep-see-Line. ibid. To Disembogue. ib. To Dispert. 35 Dock. ib. A Drabler.
ib. Draggs. ib. Draught. ib. To Dregg. ib. A Drift-Saile. 36 Drive. ibid.
Duck-up. ib.
E
Earing. 36 To Ease. ib. An Eddy. ib. An Eddy-wind. 37 End for End. ibid.
Enter. ibid. Entring-ladder. ib. Entring-Roape. ib. Eyes. ib. Eylot-holes. ib.
F
Faddom. 38 A Facke. ib. Fall-off. ibid. Falls. ib. To Farthell. ib.
Fartherling-Lines. ib. The Fashion Pieces. 39 Fender-bolts. ib. Fenders. ib.
Fidd. ib. Fidd-Hammer. 39 Fightts. ib. Fire-workes. ib. A Fish. ib. The
Fish-Block. 40 The Fish-hooke. ib. The Fish. ib. Flaggs. ib. Flaire. ib.
Floane. ib. Flood. 41 The Flooke. ibid. Flote. ibid. Flow. ib. The Flower. ib.
Flush. ibid. The Fly. ib. To Free. ib. Fresh-shott. 42 The Fore-foote. ib.
Fore-Locks. ib. Foremast. ib. A Former. ib. Fore-reache. ib. Fore-Saile. ib.
Fore-Top-Mast. ib. Fore-yard. ib. Foul. 43. Fowle-water. ib. Fownder. ib.
Furr, or Furred. ib. Futtocks. 44
G
Gage. 44 Gale. ib. The Garboord. 45 Gar-boordstrake. ib. The Garnett. p. 45 A
Girding. ibid. Girt. ib. Goaring. ib. Goose-wing. ib. Grapnells. ib. Gratings.
46 To Grave. ib. A Gripe. ib. To Gripe. ib. Grommetts. 47 Ground and Grounding.
ib. Ground-Timbers. ib. Gudgias. ib. To Gull. ib. The Gun-wale. ib. A Guye. 48
H
To Hale, or Over-Hale; 48 To Hall, or, Halling. ib. Halliardds. ib. Hand or
Handing. ib. A Handspeeke. 49 The Harpings, ib. Hatches. ib. Hatch-way. ib. The
Hawses. ib. A Hawser. ib. The Head. 50 Head-Lines. ib. Head-Sailes. ib.
Head-Sea. ib. To Heave. ib. The Heel. 51 To Heel. ib. The Helm. ib. To
Hitch. ib. To Hold-off. 51 Honey-combd. 52 The Hooks. ib. A Horse. ib. The
Howld. ib. The Hownds. 53 Howlsom. ib. Howsing-in. ib. To Hoyse. 54 The Hull.
ib. Hulling. ib. A Hullock. 55
I
The Jecre. 55 The Jeere-Capstaine. ib. Iron-Sicke. ib. A Junck ib. A
Jury-Mast. ib.
K.
To Keckle, or Keckling. 56 A Kedger. ib. To Kedge or, Kedging. ib. The Keele.
ib. The Keele-Roape. ib. Keeleson. 57 A Ketch. ib. Kevells. ib. Keenke. ib. The
Knave-Line. ib. Knees. ib. Kneetles. ib. The Knights. ib. Knittlidge. 58
Knotts. ib.
L
To Labor. 58 Ladder. ib. To Lade. p. 59 A Ladle. ib. Land-fall. ib.
Land-Locked. ib. Land-to. ib. A Land-turne. ib. A Langrell. ib. Lanniers. ib.
Lurge. 60 To Lase, or, Lasing. ib. To Lash, or, Lasbers. ib. Lasking ib.
Latce^tts. ib. Launch. ib. To Lay-a-Land. ib. A Leake. ib. Ledges. 61 Lee.
ibid. The Lee-fange. 62 The Leetch. ib. Leetch-Lines. ib. Legs. ib.
Lett-fall. ib. Lifts. ib. Limbers, or, Limber-holes. ib. Lines-Pins. 63
Lockers. ib. A Logg-Line. ib. The Loofe ib. A Loofe-hooke. 64 A Loome-Gale. ib.
To Loome. ib. A Lust. ib. Lie under the Sea. ib.
M
To Man. 64 A Man of War. 65 The Manger. 66 Marling. ib. Marling-speeke. ib.
Martuetts. ib. Masts. ib. Matts. 67 Mettle. ib. The Missen. 68 The Missen-Mast.
ib. The Missen-Saile. ib. The Missen-Top-Mast. ib. The Missen-Yard. ib. To
Moore, or, Mooring. ib. To Mount. 69 Munck-Seame. ib. Murderers. ib.
N
Neale-to. 69 Neapes, or, Neape-tide. ib. The Needle. 70 Nettings. ib.
Netting-sailes. ib. Nippers. ib.
O
To Observe. 71 Ockham. ib. The Offing. ib. Offward. ib. Orlopp. ib. Over-sett.
72 Over-throwe. ib. Out-Licker. ib. Oze, or, Ozie. ib.
P
A Pantch. 73 A Parbunckle. ib. To Parcel, or, Parclling. ib. Parrells. p. 73
The Partners. ib. a Passaredo. 74 The Paul. ib. To Pay. ib. a Peeke. ib.
Pendants. 75 The Pillow. ib. a Pintell. ib. Pitching ib. Platts 76 a Plott. ib.
a Point. ib. The Poope. ib. a Port. ib. To port. ib. Powches. 77 Powder. ib.
The Powder-Roome. ib. Preddy. ib. a Preventur-Roape. 78 a Proviso. ib. The
Prowe. ib. Priming. ib. Puddings. ib. Pullies. ib. Pumps. ib. The Pump-brake.
79 The Pump-Can. ib. Pump-Dale. ib. To Purchase. ib. Puttocks. ib.
Q
The Quarter. 80 Quarter Deck. ib. Quartering. ib. Quarter winds. ib. A Quoyle.
80 To Quoyle. ib. Quoynes. ib.
R
Rabbitting. 81 Rake. ib. Ram-head. 82 A Rammer. ib. Ranges. ib. Ratlinge. ib.
A Reach. ib. To Reeve. 83 Ribbs. ib. To Ride. ib. Riders. 84 Rigging. ib.
Ring-bolts. ib. The Riseings. ib. Rising-timbers. 85 A Road. ib. A Roader. ib.
Roapes. ib. Roape-yarnes. ib. Robbins. 86 Roofe-trees. ib. Rove and clinch. ib.
The Round-house. ib. Rownd in. ib. The Roll. ib. Rowse in. ib. The Rudder. 87
The Rudder-roape. ib. Rudder-irons. ib. To Rumidge. ib. The Run. ib.
Rung-heads. 88 The Rungs. ib. The Runner. p. 88
S
Sails. ib. To Sarve. 89 A Scarf. ib. A Scuttle. ib. To Sease, or, Seasing.
90 A Seele. ib. Send. ib. To Set a-land-Sun, or, Ship by the Compass. ib.
Settle a Deck. 91 Sewing, or, to Sew. ib. Shackles. ib. The Shanck. ib.
Shanck-painter. ib. Shearing. 92 Sheates. ib. Sheathing. ib. Sheep Shancks. 93.
Sheeres. ib. Sheere hooks. ib. Sheevers. ib. Shoares. ib. Shore. ib. Shot. ib.
Shot of Cabell. 94 Showle. ib. Shrowdes. ib. The Sillinder. ib. Sinnet. ib. The
Skegg. 95 The Skiffe. ib. Skupper, or, Skupper-boles. ib. Skupper-leathers. ib.
Skupper-nailes. ib. A Slatch. ib. Sleepers. 95 Slings. 96 To Sling. ib. A
Smitting-line. ib. A Snatch-block. ib. Sockets. ib. A Sound. 97 To Sound. ib.
Sounding-lead. ib. Sounding-line. ib. Speekes. ib. A. Spell. ib. To Spell. 98
To Spend. ib. A Spindle. ib. To Splise. ib. Split. ib. To Spoone. ib. To
Spring. 99 The Spring, or, Springtide. ib. Sprit-saile. ib.
Sprit-saile-top-saile. ib. Sprit-saile-top-mast. ib. Sprit-saile-yard. ib.
Sponge. ib. Spunge-yarne. ib. Spur ketts. 100 Standing-parts of Running-roapes.
ib. Standing-roapes. ib. To Stay, or, bring a ship a-stay. ib. Stays and Back
stayer. 101 The Stern. ib. Sterne-Sheats. ib. To Steer. ib. The Steeridge.
103 The Stem. ib. A Stepp. p. 103 To Steve, or, stoving. ib. Stewards-Roome.
ib. Stoaked. ib. Stopp. ib. A Stopper. ib. To Stowe. 102 A Struck. ib. A
Strapp. ib. A Streame-Anckor. ib. Streame-Cabell. ib. A Stret^h. ib. To Strike.
104 Studding-Sailes. ib. A Sturropp. ib. Suck. ib. Surge. ib. Swifters. ib.
Swifting. ib.
T
Tackes. 105 To Tack a Ship. ib. Tackles. ib. Tallee. 106 Tamkin. ib. Tapering.
ib. Taper-bore. ib. Tar-pawling. ib. Taunt. ib. Taught. ib. A Tempest. 107 The
Thoughts. ib. Thight. ib. Thowles. ib. Thwart-Ships. ib. Tides. ib. Ties. ib.
Tiller. 108 Tire. ib. Top-Armours ib. Top-Gallants. ib. Topmast. ib.
Top-Roapes. 109 To Towe. ib. Transome. ib. Travers. ib. Travers-boord. 110
Tree-nells. ib. Treenell-trees. ib. To Trise. ib. To Try. ib. The Trim. 111
The Trough of the Sea. ib. Trucks. ib. Trunnions. ib. Trusses. ib. The Tuck.
ib. To Turn. 112
V
Veere. ib. Veering. ib. A Violl. ib.
W
Waft. ib. The Wake. 113 Wale. ib. Wale reared. ib. Walt. ib. A Warpe. ib. To
Warpe. ib. To Wash a Ship. ib. To Wash off the shore. ib. Waste. ib.
Wast-boord. ib. Wast-clothes. 114 Watch. ib. Water-borne. ib. The Water-line.
ib. Water-shot. ib. The Water-way. ib. Waving. ib. Way of a Ship. ib. To
Weather. ib. Weather-bowe. ib. Weather-coyle. 115 Wedges. ib. The Whelps. ib.
The Whipp. ib. Whoodings. ib. To Wind. ib. Winding-Tackle. ib. Wind Less. 116
Wind-Taught. ib. Wood and Wood ib. a Worm. ib. Worming. ib. To Would or
Woulding. ib.
Y
Yard. 117 a Yawe. ib. A Yoke. 118
FINIS.

