SERMONS PREACHED BY The Late Reverend and Learned Divine, THOMAS MANTON, D. D.



LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Sign of the three Pigeons,
over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1678.

The PREFACE.
IT may seem a just discouragement from publishing more Sermons at this time,
when there are such numbers abroad in the hands of all: for the abundance of
things useful is fatal to their value, and the rareness exceedingly inhances
their price. If Men were truly wise, Spiritual Treasures should be excepted
from this Common Law, yet plenty even of them causes satiety. But the
following Sermons have that peculiar Excellence, that will make them very
valuable to all that have discerning Minds, and such a tincture of Religion as
makes them capable of tasting the goodness of Divine things.

I shall say nothing particularly here of the intellectual Endowments of the
Author, in which he appeared Eminent among the first, nor of his Graces to
adorn his Memory: for a Saint that is ascended into Heaven, and crowned with
Eternal Glory by the righteous Judge, needs not the weak fading testimony of
Praise from Men. Besides, that universal esteem he had from those who knew his
Ability, Diligence, and Fidelity in the Work of God, makes it unnecessary for
them who were his Admirers and Friends. And for those who are unacquainted with
his Worth, if they take a view of his Works formerly printed, or the present
Sermons that deserve equal approbation, they will have the same opinion with
others. I will give some account of the Sermons themselves.

The main design of them is to represent the inseparable connection between
Christian Duties and Privileges, wherein the Essence of our Religion consists.
The Gospel is not a naked unconditionate offer of Pardon and Eternal Life in
favor of Sinners, but upon most convenient terms, for the Glory of God and the
good of Men, and enforced by the strongest obligations upon them, to receive
humbly and thankfully those Benefits. The Promises are attended with Commands,
to Repent, Believe, and persevere in the uniform practice of Obedience. The Son
of God came into the World, not to make God less holy, but to make us holy,
that we might please and enjoy him: not to vacate our Duty, and free us from
the Law as the Rule of Obedience, for that is both impossible, and would be
most infamous and reproachful to our Savior. To challenge such an exemption in
point of right, is to make our selves Gods; to usurp it in point of fact, is to
make our selves Devils. But his end was to enable and induce us to return to
God, as our rightful Lord, and proper Felicity, from whom we rebelliously and
miserably fell by our disobedience, in seeking for Happiness out of him.
Accordingly the Gospel is called the Law of Faith, as it commands those Duties
upon the Motives of eternal Hopes and Fears, and as it will justify or condemn
Men with respect to their Obedience or Disobedience, which is the proper
Character of a Law. These things are managed in the following Sermons in that
convincing persuasive manner, as makes them very necessary for these times,
when some that aspired to an extraordinary height in Religion, and esteemed
themselves the Favorites of Heaven, yet woefully neglected the duties of the
lower Hemisphere, as Righteousness, Truth, and Honesty, and when carnal
Christians are so numerous, that despise serious Godliness, as solemn
Hypocrisy, and live in an open violation of Christ's Precepts, yet presume to
be saved by him. Though no Age has been more enlightened with the knowledge of
holy Truths, yet none was ever more averse from obeying them.

I shall only add further, that they commend to our ardent Affections and
Endeavors, true Holiness, as distinguished from the most refined, unregenerate
Morality. The Doctor saw the absolute necessity of this, and speaks with great
jealousy of those who seem in their discourses to make it their highest aim to
improve and cultivate some moral Virtues, as Justice, Temperance, Benignity,
etc. by Philosophic helps, representing them as becoming the dignity of the
Humane Nature, as agreeable to Reason, as beneficial to Societies, and but
transiently speak of the Supernatural Operation of the Holy Spirit, that is as
requisite to free the Soul from the Chains of Sin, as to release the Body at
the last Day from the Bands of Death, that seldom preach of Evangelical Graces,
Faith in the Redeemer, Love to God for his admirable Mercy in our Salvation,
Zeal for his Glory, Humility in ascribing all that we can return in grateful
Obedience, to the most free and powerful Grace of God in Christ, which are the
vital principles of good Works, and derive the noblest forms to all Virtues.
Indeed Men may be composed and considerate in their Words and Actions, may
abstain from gross Enormities, and do many praiseworthy Actions by the rules
of moral Prudence, yet without the infusion of divine Grace to cleanse their
stained Natures, to renew them according to the Image of God shining in the
Gospel, to act them from Motives superior to all that Moral Wisdom propounds,
all their Virtues of what elevation soever, though in an heroic degree, cannot
make them real Saints. As the Plant Animal has a faint resemblance of the
sensitive Life, but remains in the lower rank of Vegitables: so these have a
shadow, an appearance of the Life of God, but continue in the corrupt state of
Nature. And the difference is greater between sanctifying saving Graces wrought
by the special Power of the Spirit, with the holy Operations flowing from them,
and the virtuous Habits and Actions that are the effects of Moral Counsel and
Constancy, then between true Pearls produced by the Celestial Beams of the Sun,
and counterfeit ones formed by the smoaky heat of the Fire. In short, the Lord
Jesus our Savior and Judge, who purchased the Heavenly Glory, and has sole
power to give the actual possession of it, assures us, that unless a Man be
born of the Spirit, he can never enter into the kingdom of God. The
Supernatural Birth entitles to the Supernatural Inheritance. Without this, how
fair and specious soever the Conversation of Men appears, they must expect no
other privilege at last, but a cooler place in Hell; and the coolest there is
intolerable.

W. BATES.

The Contents.
Sermon 1, and 2d. Page 1. ON Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Blessed is he whose Transgression
is forgiven, whose Sin is covered. Blessed is the Man unto whom the Lord
imputes not Iniquity, and in whose Spirit there is no Guile. Sermon 3. Page
44. On Acts 3. 26. Unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him
to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his Iniquities. Sermon. 4th.
Page 66. On 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
Promises, that by these you might be Partakers of the Divine Nature, having
escaped the Corruption that is in the World through Lust. Sermon. 5. page 81. On
Mark 9. 49. For every one shall be salted with Fire, and every Sacrifice shall
be salted with Salt. Sermon. 6, and 7. page 104. On 2 Thessalonians. 3. 5. And the Lord
direct your Hearts into the Love of God, and into the patient waiting for
Christ. Sermon. 8. page 142. On Ephesians. 1. 8. Wherein he has abounded toward us
in all Wisdom and Prudence. Sermon. 9. page 157. On Mat. 27. 46. And about the
ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabacthani,
that is to say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Sermon. 10. page 175.
On Romans 1. Part of the 29 and 30 Verses. Whisperers, Backbiters. Sermon. 11. page
192. On Gal. 5. 16. This I say then, walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not
fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh. Sermon. 12. page 207. On Job 19. 25. For I know
that my Redeemer lives. Sermon. 13. page 231. On 1 Timothy 6. 8. And having Food
and Raiment, let us be therewith content. Sermon. 14. page 247. On Eccles. 9. 11.
I returned, and saw under the Sun, that the Race is not to the Swift; nor the
Battle to the Strong, neither yet Bread to the Wise, nor yet Riches to Men of
Understanding, nor yet Favor to Men of Skill; but Time and Chance happens to
them all. Sermon. 15. page 269. On Acts 21. 14. And when he would not be
persuaded, we ceased, saying, The Will of the Lord be done. Sermon. 16. page 262.
On John 3. 16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son; that
whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting Life. Sermon.
17. page 323. On Deuteronomy. 30. 15. See, I have set before thee this Day, Life and
Good, Death and Evil. Sermon. 18. page 345. On Mat. 7. 12. Therefore all things,
whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye even so to them; for
this is the Law and the Prophets. Sermon. 19, and 20. page 371. On Ephesians. 2. 10.
For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God
has before ordained, that we should walk them.
SERMON I.
PSALM. 32. 1, 2. Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven, whose Sin is
covered. Blessed is the Man unto whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity, and in
whose Spirit there is no Guile.
THE Title of this Psalm is A Psalm of Instruction; and so called, because
David was willing to show them the way to Happiness from his own Experience.
Surely no Lesson is so needful to be learned as this, We all would be happy.
The Good and Bad, that do so seldom agree in any thing, yet agree in this, A
desire to be happy. Now happy we cannot be but in God, who is the Only,
Immutable, Eternal, and Alsufficient Good, which satisfies and fills up all the
capacities and desires of our Souls. And we are debarred from access to him by
Sin, which has made a breach and separation between him and us; and till that
be taken away, there can be no converse; and Sin can only be taken away by
God's Pardon upon Christ's Satisfaction. God's Pardon is clearly asserted in my
Text, but Christ's Satisfaction and Righteousness must be supplied out of other
Scriptures: as that 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the World to
Himself, not imputing their Trespasses to them. Where the Apostle clearly
shows, that not-imputing Transgressions is the effect of God's Grace in Christ.
And we do no wrong to this Text to take it in here; for, the Apostle citing
this Scripture, Romans 4. 6, 7. tells us, that David describes the blessedness
of the Man unto whom the Lord imputes Righteousness without works, when he
says, Blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven, whose Sin is covered:
blessed is the Man to whom the Lord will not impute Sin.

In the words you have,

1. An Emphatical setting forth of a great and blessed Privilege, that is,
Pardon of Sin.

2. A Description of the Persons, who shall enjoy it, In whose spirit there is
no Guile.

The Privilege is that I shall confine my thoughts to, It is set forth in three
Expressions; Forgiving Transgression, Covering of Sin, and not imputing
Iniquity. The manner of speech is warm and vehement, and it is repeated over
again, Blessed is the Man.

I shall show what these three Expressions import, and why the Prophet does use
such vehemence, and emphatical inculcation in setting forth this Privilege.

1. Whose Transgression is forgiven; or, who is eased of his Transgression.
Where Sin is compared to a burden too heavy for us to bear; as also it is in
other Scriptures, Mat. 11. 28. Come to me all ye that are weary, and heavy
laden.

2. Whose Sin is covered; alluding to the covering of filth, or the removing of
that which is offensive out of sight. As the Israelites were to march with a
paddle tied to their arms, that when they went to ease themselves, they might
dig, and cover that which came from them, Deuteronomy. 23. you have the Law there, and
the reason of it, ver. 14. -- For the Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy
Camp: therefore shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee,
and turn away from thee.

And then the third expression is, To whom the Lord imputes no Sin; that is,
does not put Sin to their account. Where Sin is compared to a Debt; as it is
also in the Lord's Prayer, Mat. 6. 12. Forgive us our Debts, as we also forgive
our Debtors. Thus is the Act set forth.

The Object of Pardon, about which it is conversant, is set forth under diverse
Expressions, Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin. As in Law, many words of like
import and signification are heaped up and put together, to make the Deed and
Legal Instrument more comprehensive, and effectual. I observe it the rather,
because when God proclaims his Name, the same words are used, Exodus 34. 7. --
Taking away Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin. Well, we have seen the meaning of
the Expression. Why does the holy Man of God use such vigor, and vehemence of
inculcation, Blessed is the Man! and again, blessed is the Man; partly with
respect to his own case. David knew how sweet it was to have Sin pardoned; he
had felt the bitterness of Sin in his own Soul, to the drying up of his Blood,
and therefore he does express his sense of Pardon in the most lively terms,
Blessed is the Man whose Iniquity is forgiven, etc. And then partly too with
respect to those for whose use this Instruction was written, that they might
not look upon it as a light and trivial thing, but be thoroughly apprehensive of
the worth of so great a Privilege, Blessed, happy, thrice happy they who have
obtained Pardon of their Sins, and Justification by Jesus Christ.

The Doctrine then which I shall insist upon is this, That it is a great Degree
and Step toward, yea a considerable Part of our Blessedness, to obtain the
Pardon of our Sins by Christ Jesus. I shall evidence it to you by these three
Considerations.

1. I shall show what Necessity lies upon us to seek after this Pardon. 2. Our
Misery without it. 3. I shall speak of the annexed Benefits, and our Happiness,
if once we attain it.
1. The Necessity that lies upon us, being all guilty before God, to seek after
our Justification, and the Pardon of our Sins by Christ. That it may sink the
deeper into your minds, I shall do it in this Scheme or Method: First, a
reasonable Nature implies a Conscience, a Conscience implies a Law; a Law
implies a Sanction; a Sanction implies a Judge, and a Judgment-day, (when all
shall be called to account for breaking the Law) and this Judgment-day infers a
Condemnation upon all Mankind unavoidably, unless the Lord will comprimize the
matter, and find out some way in the Chancery of the Gospel, wherein we may be
relieved. This way God has found out in Christ, and being brought about by
such a mysterious Contrivance, we ought to be deeply and thankfully
apprehensive of it, and humbly and broken-heartedly to quit the one Covenant,
and accept of the Grace provided for us in the other.

1. A Reasonable Nature implies a Conscience: for Man can reflect upon his own
Actions, and has that in him to acquit or condemn him, accordingly as he does
good or evil, 1 John 3. 20, 21. Conscience is nothing but the Judgment a Man
makes upon his Actions morally considered, the good, or the evil, the Rectitude
or Obliquity that is in them, with respect to Rewards or Punishment. As a Man
acts, so he is a Party; but as he reviews and censures his Actions, so he is a
Judge. Let us take notice only of the condemning part, for that is proper to
our Case: After the Fact, the Force of Conscience is usually felt more than
before or in the Fact, because before, through the Treachery of the Senses, and
the Revolt of the Passions, the Judgment of Reason is not so clear. I say, our
Passions and Affections raise Clouds and Mists, which darken the Mind, and do
incline the Will by a pleasing Violence; but after the evil Action is done,
when the Affection cease, then Guilt flasheth in the face of Conscience. As
Judas, whose Heart lay asleep all the while he was going on in his villainy, but
afterward it fell upon him, Thou have sinned in betraying innocent Blood. When
the Affections are satisfied, and give place to Reason that was before
condemned, and Reason takes the Throne again, it has the more force to affect
us with Grief and Fear, whilst it strikes through the Heart of a Man with a
sharp sentence of Reproof for obeying Appetite before Reason. Now this
Conscience of Sin may be choked and smothered for a while, but the Flame will
break forth; and our hidden Fears are easily revived and awakened, except we
get our Pardon and Discharge. A Reasonable Nature implies a Conscience.

2. A Conscience implies a Law, by which Good and Evil are distinguished; for
if we make Conscience of any thing, it must be by virtue of some Law or
Obligation from God, who is our Maker and Governor, and unto whom we are
accountable, and whose Authority gives a force and warrant to the Warnings and
Checks of Conscience, without which they would be weak and ineffectual, and all
the Hopes and Fears they stir up in us would be vain Fancies and fond Surmises.
I need not insist upon this, a Conscience implies a Law. The Heathens had a
Law, because they had a Conscience; Romans 2. 15. Which show the Work of the Law
written in their Hearts, their Conscience also bearing witness, and their
Thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another. They have a
Conscience does accuse or excuse, does require according to the tenor of the
Law. So when the Apostle speaks of those Stings of Conscience that are revived
in us by the approach of Death, he says, 1 Cor. 15. 56. The sting of Death is
Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law. Those Stings which Men feel in a
death-threatning Sickness, are not the Fruits of their Disease, but justified
by the highest Reason, they come from a Sense of Sin, and this Sense is
strengthened and increased in us by the Law of God, from whence Conscience
receives all its force.

3. A Law implies a Sanction, or a Confirmation by Penalties and Rewards: for
otherwise it is but an arbitrary Rule or Direction, which we might slight or
disregard without any great loss or danger. No, the Law is armed with a
dreadful Curse against all those that disobey it. There is no dallying with
God, he has set Life and Death before us; Life and Good, Death and Evil, Deuteronomy.
30. 15. Now the Precept that is the Rule of our Duty, and the Sanction is the
Rule of God's Process, what God will do, or might do, and what we have deserved
should be done to us. The one shows what is due from us to God, and the other
what may justly be expected at God's hands; therefore before the Penalty be
executed, it concerns us to get a Pardon. The Scripture represents God as angry
with the Wicked every day, standing continually with his Bow ready, with his
Arrow upon the String, as ready to let fly, with his Sword not only drawn but
whetted, as if he were just about to strike, if we turn not. Psalm. 7. 11, 12,
13.

4. A Sanction implies a Judge, who will take cognizance of the keeping or
breaking of this Law: for otherwise the sanction or penalty were but a vain
scarecrow, if there were no person to look after it. God that is our Maker and
Governor, is our Judge. Would he appoint penalties for the breach of his Law,
and never reckon with us for our offenses, is a thought so unreasonable, so
much against the sense of Conscience, against God's daily Providence, against
Scripture, which everywhere (in order to this, to quicken us to seek
forgiveness of Sins) represents God as a Judge. Conscience is afraid of an
invisible Judge, who will call us to account for what we have done. The Apostle
tells us, (Romans 1. ult.) the Heathen knew the Judgment of God, and that they
that have done such things as they have done are worthy of death. And
Providence shows us there is such a Judge, that looks after the keeping and
breaking of his Law, has owned every part of it from Heaven by the Judgments
he executes. Romans 1. 18. The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all
Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men; has owned either Table, by punishing
sometimes the Ungodliness, and sometimes the Unrighteousness of the World; nay
every notable breach by way of Omission or Commission; the Apostle says, every
Transgression, and every Disobedience: these two words signify Sins of
Omission or Commission, it has been punished, and God has owned his Law, that
it is a firm authentic Rule. And the Scripture also usually makes use of this
Notion, or Argument of a Judge, to quicken us to look after the pardon of our
Sins; Act. 10. 42, 43. And he has commanded us to preach, and testify to the
People, that it is he that was ordained of God to be the Judge of the quick and
dead. To Him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of Sins. So Acts 3. 19, 20, 21. Surely
we that are to appear before the Bar of an Impartial Judge, being so obnoxious
to him for the breach of his holy Law, what have we to do but to make
supplication to our Judge, and prevent Execution by a submissive asking of a
Pardon, and accepting the Grace God has provided.

5. A Judge implies a Iudgment-day, or some Time when his Justice must have a
solemn Trial, when he will reckon with the lapsed World. He reckons sometimes
with Nations now, for Ungodliness and Unrighteousness, by Wars, and Pestilence,
and Famine. He reckons with particular Persons at their Death, and when their
Work is done he pays them their Wages. Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed for all Men
once to dye, and after that the Judgment. But there is a more general and final
Judgment, when his Justice must have a solemn Trial, which is in part evident
in Nature: for the Apostles did slide in the Christian Doctrine mostly by this
means into the Hearts of those to whom they preached; Acts 24. 25. He reasoned
of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come. The particularity of it
belongs to the Gospel-Revelation; but Nature has some kind of Sense of it in
it self, and they are urged to repent; because God has appointed a Day wherein
he will judge the World in Righteousness, by the Man whom he has ordained;
whereof he has given assurance unto all Men, in that he has raised him from
the dead, Acts 17. 31. God judges the World in Patience now, but then in
Righteousness, when all things shall be reviewed, and every thing restored;
Virtue to its public Honor, and Vice to its due Shame.

6. If there be a Solemn Iudgment-day, when every one must receive his final
Doom, this Judgment certainly infers a Condemnation to a fallen Creature,
unless God set up another Court for his Relief; for now Man is utterly
disinabled by Sin to fulfill the Law, and can by no means avoid the Punishment
that is due to his Transgression. I shall prove this by three Reasons; The Law
to fallen Man is Impossible, the Penalty is Intolerable, and the Punishment,
for ought yet appears, if God do not take another Course, is Unavoidable.

1. The Duty of the Law is impossible. The Apostle tells us, what the Law could
not do, in that it was weak through the weakness of our flesh; It could not
justify us before God, it could not furnish us with any Answer to his Demands,
when he shall call us to an Account. Man is mightily addicted to the Legal
Covenant, therefore it is one part of a Gospel-Minister's work to represent the
Impossibility of ever obtaining Grace or Life by that Covenant. Man would stick
to the Law as long as he can, and will patch up a sorry Righteousness of his
own, some few superficial things. He makes a short Exposition of the Law, that
he may cherish a large Opinion of his own Righteousness; and curtails the Law
of God, that the Ell may be no longer than the Cloth, and brings it down to a
poor contemptible thing, requiring a few external superficial Duties of Men. We
read often of being dead to Sin, and to the World, it is as certainly true we
must be dead to the Law. Now how are we dead to the Law, the Scripture tells us
in one place, that through the Law we are dead to the Law; and in another
place, that we are dead to the Law through the Body of Christ: The first place
is Gal. 2. 19. Through the Law I am dead to the Law. Men are apt to stand to
the Legal Covenant, and have their Confidence in the Flesh, to place their
Hopes of acceptance with God in some few external things, which they make their
false Righteousness. For the carnal World as it cries up a false Happiness as
its God, so Men have a false Righteousness which is their Christ. Now through
the Law they are dead to it: How? The Law supposes us as innocent, and
requires us to continue so, Cursed is every one that continues not in every
thing, etc. Suppose a Man should exactly fulfill it afterward, yet the paying
of new Debts will not quit old Scores. And then we are dead to the Law by the
Body of Christ, Romans 7. 4. By the crucified Body of Christ, by which he has
merited and purchased a better Hope and Grace for us. -- Well, the Duty is
impossible.

2. The Penalty is intolerable, for who can stand when God is angry? Ezekiel. 22.
14. Can thine Heart endure, or can thine Hands be strong, in the Day that I
shall deal with thee? We that cannot endure the pain of the Gout or Stone, how
shall we endure the eternal Wrath of God? It is surely a very dreadful thing to
fall into the Hands of that living God, that lives for every to punish the
Transgressors of his Law.

3. The Punishment is unavoidable, unless Sin be pardoned, and you submit to
God's way: for I would ask you, what Hope can you have in God, whose Nature
ingageth him to hate Sin, and whose Justice obliges him to punish it?

(1.) Whose Nature ingageth him to hate Sin and Sinners. Hab. 1. 13. He is of
purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity. I urge this for a doubleReason, partly
because I have observed, that all the Security of Sinners, and their Neglect of
seeking after Pardon by Jesus Christ, it comes from their lessening thoughts of
God's holiness; and if their Hearts were sufficiently possessed with an awe of
God's unspotted Purity and Holiness, they would more look after the Terms of
Grace God has provided. Psalm 50. 21. Thou thoughtest I was altogether such an
one as thy self. Why do Men live securely in their Sins, and do not break off
their evil Course? They think God is not so severe and harsh, and so all their
Confidence is grounded upon a Mistake of God's Nature, and such a dreadful
Mistake as amounts to a Blasphemy; Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such
an one as thy self. The other Reason is this, partly because I observe the
bottom Reason of all the Fear that is in the Hearts of Men is God's Holiness. 1 Samuel 6. 20. Who is able to stand before this holy God? And, Who would not fear
thee, for thou art holy? Rev. 15. 4. We fear his Power; why? because it is set
on work by his Wrath. We fear his Wrath; why? because it is kindled by his
Justice and Righteousness. We fear his Righteousness, because it is bottomed
and grounded upon his Holiness, and upon the Purity of his Nature.

(2.) His Justice obliges him to punish Sin, that the Law might not seem to be
made in vain. It concerns the Universal Judge to maintain the Reputation of his
Justice in reference to Men, and to appear to them still as a Righteous God:
Genesis 18. 25. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? And Romans 3. 5, 6.
Is God unrighteous to take Vengeance? how then shall he judge the World? These
Scriptures imply, that if there were the least Blemish, if you could suppose he
should fail in point of Righteousness, this were to be denied, that God should
be the Judge of the World. Therefore God's Righteousness and Justice, which
gives to every one their due, must shine in its proper place, he will give
Vengeance to whom Vengeance is due, and Blessing to whom Blessing belongs. In
our Case Punishment belongs to us, and what can we expect from this God but
Wrath and eternal Destruction? Therefore if all this be so, if a Conscience
suppose a Law, a Law a Sanction, a Sanction a Judge, a Judge some time when his
Justice must have a Solemn Trial, and this will necessarily infer Condemnation
to a fallen Creature; What then shall we do?

7. From this Condemnation there is no Escape, unless God set up another Court
and Chancery of the Gospel, where condemned Sinners may be taken to Mercy, and
their Sins forgiven, and they justified and accepted unto Grace and Life, upon
Terms that may salve God's Honor and Government over Mankind. There is a great
deal of Difference between the forgiving private Wrongs and Injuries, and the
pardoning of public Offenses; between the Pardon of a Magistrate, and the
Pardon of a private Person. When Equals fall out among themselves, they may end
their Differences in Charity, and in such ways as best please themselves, by a
mere forgiving, by acquitting the sense of the Wrong done, or a bare Submission
of the Party offending. But the Case is different here, God is not reconciled
to us, merely as the Party offended, but as the Governor of the World; the
Case lies between the Judge of the World, and sinning Mankind, therefore it
must not be ended by mere Comprimise and Agreement, but by Satisfaction, that
his Law may be satisfied, and the Honor of his Justice secured. Therefore to
make the Pardon of Man a thing convenient to the Righteous and Holy Judge to
bestow, without any Impeachment to the Honor of his Justice, and Authority of
his Law, the Lord finds out this great Mystery, God manifested in our Flesh;
Jesus Christ is made under the Law to redeem them that were under the Law, Gal.
4. 5. And is become a Propitiation to satisfy God's Justice, Romans 3. 25, 26.
And so God shows Mercy to his Creatures, and yet the Awe of his Government is
kept up, and a full Demonstration of his Righteousness is given to the World.

8. This being done conveniently to God's Honor, we must sue out our Pardon
with respect to both the Covenants, both that which we have broken, the Law of
Nature, and that which is made in Christ, and is to be accepted by us as our
Sanctuary and sure Refuge.

(1.) We must have a brokenhearted Sense of Sin, and of the Curse due to the
first Covenant; for it is the Disease brings us to the Physician; the Curse
drives us to the Promise, and the Tribunal of Justice to the Throne of Grace;
and the Avenger of Blood at our Heels, that causes us to fly to our proper
City of Refuge, and to take Sanctuary at the Lord's Grace, Heb. 6. 18. So that
if you mince and extenuate Sin, you seem to hold to the first Covenant, and had
rather plead innocent than guilty; no, if you would have this favor, you must
confess your Sins, 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just
to forgive us our Sins, and vo cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. You must
confess your Sins, and with that remorse that will become Offenses done to so
great a God. And there must not only be a Sense of Sin, but of the Curse and
Merit of Sin also: for we must not only accuse, but judge our selves, that God
may not judge and condemn us, 1 Cor. 11. 31. Self-accusing respects Sin, and is
acted in Confession; Self-judging respects the Curse or Punishment, that is due
to us for Sin, and it is a Persons pronouncing upon himself according to the
tenor of the Law what is his due, acknowledging his Guilt, and this with much
brokenness of Heart before God, when he has involved himself in God's eternal
Wrath and Displeasure. I observe, that the Law-Covenant is in the Scripture
compared to a Prison, wherein God has shut up guilty Souls, Romans 11. 32. He
has concluded or shut them up, that he may have Mercy upon them. Gal. 3. 22.
He has shut them up under Sin. The Law is God's Prison; and no Offenders can
get out of it till they have God's leave; and from him they have none, till
they are sensible of the Justice and Righteousness of that first Dispensation,
confess their Sins with brokenness of heart, and that it may be just with God
to condemn them for ever.

(2.) We must thankfully accept the Lord's Grace, that offers Pardon to us. For
since God is pleased to try us a second time, and set us up with a new stock of
Grace, and that brought about in such a wonderful way, that he may recover the
lost Creation to himself; surely if we shall despise our Remedy, after we have
rendered our selves incapable of our Duty, no Condemnation is bad enough for us,
Ioh. 3. 18, 19. Therefore we should admire the Mercy of God in Christ, and have
such a deep sense of it, that it may check our sinful self-love, which has
been our bane and ruin. And since God showed himself willing to be reconciled,
we must enter into his Peace, not look upon our selves in a hopeless and
desperate condition, but depend upon the Merit, Sacrifice, and Intercession of
Christ, and be encouraged by his gracious Promise and Covenant, to come with
boldness, that we may find Grace and Mercy to help in a time of need, Heb. 4.
16. Thus you see the Need we have to look after this Pardon of Sin.

2dly. I must show our Misery without this. And this will be best done by
considering the Notions here in the Text. Here is Filth to be covered; a Burden
of which we must be eased: and here is a Debt that must be cancelled, and
unless this be, what a miserable Condition are we in?

1. What a heavy Burden is Sin, where it is not pardoned? Carnal Men feel it
not for the present, Elements are not burdensome in their own place; but how
soon may they feel it? Two sorts of Consciences feel the burden of Sin, a
tender Conscience, and a wounded Conscience. It is grievous to a tender Heart,
that values the Love of God, to lie under the Guilt of Sin, and to be obnoxious
to his Wrath and Displeasure. Psalm. 38. 4. Mine Iniquities are gone over mine
Head, as a Burden too heavy for me. Broken Bones are sensible of the least
Weight; certainly a broken Heart cannot make light of Sin. What kind of Hearts
are those that sin securely, and without Remorse, and are never troubled? Go to
wounded Consciences, and ask of them what Sin is, Genesis 4. 13. Mine Iniquity is
greater than I can bear. Prove. 18. 14. A wounded Spirit who can bear? As long
as the Evil lies without us, it is tolerable, the natural Courage of a Man may
bear up under it; but when the Spirit it self is wounded with the sense of Sin,
who can bear it? If a Spark of God's Wrath light upon the Conscience, how soon
do Men become a Burden to themselves, and some have chosen Strangling rather
than Life. Ask Cain, ask Judas, what it is to feel the burden of Sin. Sinners
are all their life time subject to this Bondage; it is not always felt, but
soon awakened; it may be done by a pressing Exhortation at a Sermon; it may be
done by some notable Misery that befalls us in the World; it may be done by a
scandalous Sin; it may be done by a grievous Sickness, or worldly
Disappointment. All these things and many more may easily revive it in us.
There needs not much ado to put a Sinner in the Stocks of Conscience: Therefore
do but consider to be eased of this Burden; O the Blessedness of it!

2. It is Filth to be covered, which renders us odious in the sight of God. It
is said, Prove. 13. 5. That a Sinner is loathsome: To whom? to God: certainly he
is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity. To good Men: the wicked is an
Abomination to the Righteous, the new Nature has an aversation to it. Lot's
righteous Soul was vexed from day to day with the Conversation of the Wicked. A
wicked Man hates a godly Man with an hatred of Enmity and Abomination; but a
godly Man does not hate a wicked Man with a Hatred of Enmity, that is opposite
to good Will, but with that of Abomination, which is opposite to Complacence.
It is loathsome to an indifferent Man: for Holiness darts an Awe and Reverence
into the Conscience. The Righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor, and a
wicked Person is a vile Person in the common esteem of the World; horrible
Profaneness will not easily down; nay it is loathsome to other wicked Men. I do
not know whether I expound that Scripture rightly, but it looks somewhat so,
hateful and hating one another. We hate Sin in another, though we will not take
notice of it in our selves. The Sensuality and Pride and Vanity of one wicked
Man is hated by another. Nay, he is loathsome to himself; why? because he cannot
endure to look into himself. We cannot endure our selves when we are serious.
They will not come to the Light, lest their Deeds should be reproved. And we
are shy of God's Presence, we are sensible we have something makes us offensive
to him, and we hang off from him when we have sinned against him. As it was
David's experience, Psalm. 32. 3. That was the Cause of his Silence, he kept off
from God, having sinned against him, and had not a Heart to go home and sue out
his Pardon. O what a Mercy is it then to have this Filth covered, that we may
be freed from this bashful Inconfidence, and not be ashamed to look God in the
Face, and may come with a holy Boldness into the Presence of the blessed God. O
the Blessedness of the Man, whose Sin is covered!

3. It is a Debt that binds the Soul to everlasting Punishment; and if it be
not pardoned, the Judge will give us over to the Jailer, and the Jailer cast us
into Prison, till we have paid the uttermost farthing, Luke 12. 59. To have so
vast a Debt lying upon us, what a Misery is that? Augustus bought that Man's Bed
who could sleep soundly when he was in debt so many hundred of Sesterties.
Certainly it is a strange Security that possesses the Hearts of Men, when we
are obliged to suffer the Vengeance of the Wrath of the Eternal God by our many
Sins, and yet can sleep quietly. Body and Soul will be taken away in Execution,
the Day of Payment is set, and may come much sooner than you think for; you
must get a Discharge, or else you are undone for ever. Our Debt comes to
Millions of Millions; Well, if the Lord will forgive so great a Debt, O the
Blessedness of that Man! etc. Put altogether now; certainly if you have ever
been in Bondage, if you have felt the Sting of Death, and Curse of the Law, or
been scorched by the Wrath of God, or knew the horror of those upon whom God
has exacted this Debt in Hell; certainly you would be more and more affected
with this wonderful Grace. O the Blessedness of the Man, to whom the Lord
imputes not his Transgressions!

3dly. The Consequent Benefits. I will name three.

1. It restores the Creature to God, and puts us in Joint again, in a capacity
to serve, and please, and glorify God. Psalm. 130. 4. There is Forgiveness with
thee, that thou may be feaared. Forgiveness invites us to return to God,
obliges us to return to God, and take it as God dispenses it; it inclines us
to return to God, and encourages us to live in a state of Amity and holy
Friendship with God, pleasing and serving him in Righteousness and Holiness all
our days. Certainly it invites us to return to God. Man stands aloof from a
condemning God, but may be induced to submit to a pardoning God. And it
obliges us to return to God, to serve, and love, and please him who will
forgive so great a Debt, and discharge us from all our Sins; for she loved
much, to whom much was forgiven. It inclines us to serve and please God: for
where God pardons, he renews, he puts a new Life into us, that inclines us to
God. Col. 2. 13. He has quickened you together with Christ, having forgiven all
your Trespasses. And it encourages us to serve and please God; Heb. 9. 14. How
much more shall the Blood of Christ cleanse your Consciences from dead Works,
that ye may serve the Living God? and that in a suitable manner, that you may
serve God in a lively cheerful manner. A poor Creature bound to his Law, and
conscious of his own Disobedience, and obnoxious to Wrath and Punishment, is
mightily clogged, and drives on heavily: but when the Conscience is purged from
dead Works, we serve the living God in a lively manner, and this begets a holy
Cheerfulness in the Soul, and we are freed from that Bondage, that otherwise
would clogg us in our Duty to God.

2. It lays the Foundation for solid Comfort and Peace in our own Souls. For
till Sin be pardoned, you have no true Comfort; because the Justice of the
Supreme Governor of the World will still be dreadful to us, whose Laws we have
broken, whose Wrath we have justly deserved, and whom we still apprehend as
offended with us, and provoked by us. We may lull the Soul asleep with carnal
Delights, but the virtue of that Opium will be soon spent. All those Joys are
but stolen Waters, and Bread eaten in secret; a poor sorry Peace, that dares
not come to the Light and endure the Trial; a sorry Peace that is soon
disturbed by a few serious and sober thoughts of God, and the World to come:
but when once Sin is pardoned, then you have true Joy indeed. Be of good Cheer,
thy Sins be forgiven thee, Mat. 9. 2. Then Misery is plucked up by the Roots.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my People; Why? Her Iniquity is forgiven, Isa. 40. 1, 2.
And we joy in God, (Romans 5. 11.) as those that have received the Atonement. The
Lord Jesus has made the Atonement; but when we have received the Atonement,
then we joy in God, then there is matter for abundant Delight, when the Love of
God is shed abroad in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost given unto us.

3. When we are pardoned, then we are capable of Eternal Happiness. Pardon of
Sin is Gratia removens prohibens, that Grace that removes the Impediment, that
takes the Makebate out of the way, removes that that hinders our Entrance into
Heaven. Sanctification is the beginning, but till we are pardoned, there can be
no Entrance into Heaven: now this removes the Incapacity. I observe Remission
of Sins is put for all the Priviledge-Part, as Repentance for the Duties: Acts
5. 31. Him has God exalted to give Repentance and Remission of Sins. There are
two Initial Benefits: Repentance, as the Foundation of the new Life; and
Remission of Sins, as the Foundation of all our future Mercies. There are two
chief Blessings offered in the New Covenant, Pardon and Life; Reconciliation
with God, and the everlasting Fruition of Him in Glory; and the one makes way
for the other. Acts 26. 28. To open their Eyes, and to turn them from Satan to
God, that they may receive Remission of Sins, and an Inheritance among the
Saints. When we are pardoned, then we are capable to look for the blessed
Inheritance; the Impediment is taken out of the way that excludes from it.

And thus you see the Blessedness of the Man, whose Transgression is forgiven,
whose Filth is covered, and unto whom the Lord will not impute his Sin.

A Word of Application.
1. Let us bless God for the Christian Religion; Where this Privilege is
discovered to us in all its Glory, and that upon very commodious terms, fit to
gain the Heart of Man, and to reduce him to God. Mic. 7. 18. Who is a God like
unto thee among all the Gods, pardoning the Transgressions of thine Heritage?
The Business of Religion is to provide sufficiently for two things, which have
much troubled the considering Part of the World, a suitable Happiness for
Mankind, and suitable means for the expiation of Sin. Happiness is our great
desire; and Sin is our great burden and trouble. Now these are fully made known
and discovered to us by the Christian Faith. The last is that we are upon, The
Way how the grand Scruple of the World may be satisfied, and their guilty Fears
appeased. And that we may see the Excellency of the Christian Religion above
all Religions in the World, it offers Pardon upon such terms as are most
commodious to the Honor of God, and most satisfactory to our Souls; that is
upon the account of Christ's Satisfaction, and our own Repentance, without
which our Case is not compassionable. The first I will chiefly insist on. The
Heathens were mightily perplexed about the way, how God could dispense with the
Honor of his Justice in the Pardon of Sin. That Man is God's Creature, and
therefore his Subject, that he has exceedingly failed and faulted in his Duty
and Subjection to him, and is therefore obnoxious to God's just Wrath and
Vengeance, are Truths evident in the light of Nature, and common Experience.
And therefore the Heathens had some Convictions of this, and saw a need that
God should be atoned and propitiated by some Sacrifices of Expiation; and the
nearer they lived to the Original of this Tradition and Institution, the more
burdened and pressing were their Conceits and Apprehensions thereof. But in all
their cruel Superstitions there was no rest of Soul, they knew not the true
God, nor the proper Ransom, nor had any sure way to convey Pardon to them, but
were still left to the Puzzle and Distraction of their own Thoughts, and could
not make God merciful without some diminution of his Holiness and Justice, nor
make him just without some diminution of his Mercy. Somewhat they conceived of
the Goodness of God by his continuing forfeited Benefits so long, God left them
not without a Witness; But yet they could not reconcile it to his Justice, or
Will to punish Sinners. And all their Apprehensions of the Pardon of Sin were
but Probabilities, and what was wrought to procure Merit was ridiculous, or
else barbarous and unnatural, giving their Firstborn for the Sin of their
Soul, Mic. 6. 7. And all those Notions they had about this apprehended
Expiation were too weak to change the Heart or Life of Man, or to reduce him to
God. Come we now to the Jews. The Jews had many Sacrifices of God's own
Institution, but such as did not make the Comers thereunto perfect, as
pertaining to the Conscience, Heb. 9. 9. And the Ransom that was to be given to
provoked Justice was known but to a few. They saw much of the Patience and
Forbearance of God, but little of the Righteousness of God, and which was the
great Propitiation. Till God set forth Jesus Christ to be a Propitiation,
through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of
Sins that are past, through the Forbearance of God; to declare, I say, at this
time, his Righteousness, that he might be just, and the Iustifier of him that
believes in Jesus, Romans 3. 25, 26. Their Ordinances and Sacrifices were rather
a Bond acknowledging the Debt, or presignifying the Ransom that was to be paid;
and their Sacrifices did rather breed Bondage; and their Ordinances were called
an Handwriting of Ordinances, that were against them. The Redemption of Souls
was then-spoken of, as a great Mystery, but sparingly revealed. Psalm. 49. 3, 7.
My Mouth shall speak of Wisdom, and the Meditation of my Heart shall be of
Understanding. I will incline mine Ear to a Parable, I will open my dark
Sayings upon the Harp. What was that Wisdom? What was that dark Saying? The
Redemption of Souls is precious, it cease for ever. As it lies upon mere
Man's hand, none can give a Ransom for his Brother. Eternal Redemption by
Christ was a dark Saying in those days, only they knew no mere Man could do it.
And in more early times, in Job's time, he was an Interpreter, One of a
Thousand, that could bring this Message to a distressed Sinner, that God had
found out a Ransom. This Atonement then, that lies at the bottom of Pardon of
Sin, was a rare thing in those days. Let us bless God for the clear and open
Discovery of this Truth, and free Offer of Grace by Jesus Christ.

The 2d Use is, to quicken us to put in for a Share in this blessed Privilege.
I have spent my time in presenting to you, what a blessed thing it is to have
our Sins pardoned. Christians, A Man that flows in Wealth and Honor, till he
be pardoned is not a happy Man. A Man that lives afflicted, contemned, not
taken notice of in the World, if he be a pardoned Sinner; O the Blessedness of
that Man! They are not happy that have least Trouble, but they that have least
Cause; not they that have a benumbed Conscience, but they that have a
Conscience sound, established and settled in the Grace of God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, and bottomed upon his holy Covenant, and that Peace and Grace
he offers to us, this is the happy Man. By these and such like Arguments I
would have you put in for a Share of this Privilege. But what must be
required? I would fain send you away with some Directions.

Let me entreat you, if this be such a blessed thing, to make it your daily,
your earnest, your hearty Prayer to God, that your Sins may be pardoned; Mat.
6. 12. Our Lord has taught us to pray, (for we make but too much work for
pardoning Mercy every day) Every day forgive us our Trespasses. To day in one
of the Petitions, is common to all that follow; as we beg daily Bread, we must
beg daily Pardon, daily Grace against Temptations. Under the Law they had a
Lamb every Morning and every Evening offered to God for a daily Sacrifice,
Numb. 28. 4, 5, 6. We are all invited to look to the Lamb of God, that takes
away the Sins of the World. Surely we have as much need as they, more Cause
than they, because now all is clear, and openly made known unto us. God came to
Adam in the cool of the Day, he would not let him sleep in his Sins; before
Night came, he comes and rouseth his Conscience, and then gives out the Promise
of the Seed of the Woman that should break the Serpent's Head. In
Reconciliation with God let not the Sun go down upon God's Wrath, Ephesians. 4. 26. A
Man should not sleep in his Anger, nor out of Charity with Man: surely we
should make our Peace with God every day. If a Man under the Law had contracted
any Uncleanness, he was to wash his Clothes before Evening, that he might notly
a Night in his Uncleanness. We should daily earnestly come to God with this
Request, Lord, pardon our Sins. But what! must those that are already adopted
into God's Family, and taken into his Grace and Favor, daily pray for Pardon
of Sin? Though upon our first Faith our State be changed, and we are indeed
made Children of God, and Heirs of Eternal Life by Faith in Christ Jesus, yet
he that is clean, need wash his Feet. We contract a great deal of sinful
defilement and pollution by walking up and down here in a dirty World, and we
must every day be cleansing our Consciences before God, and begging that we may
be made Partakers of this Benefit. The Lord may for our unthankfulness, our
negligence, our stupid security, revive the memory of old Sins, and make us
look into the Debt-book (that has been cancelled) with horror, and make us
possess the Sins of our Youth. An old Bruise is felt upon every Change of
Weather. When we prove unthankful, and careless, and stupid, and negligent, and
do not keep our watch, the Lord may suffer these things to return upon our
Consciences with great amazement. Guilt raked out of its Grave is more
frightful than a Ghost, or one risen from the dead. Few Believers have upon
right terms the Assurance of their own Sincerity; and though God may blot Sins
out of the Book of his Remembrance, yet he will not blot them out of our
Consciences. The Worm of Conscience is killed still by the Application of the
Blood of Christ, and the Spirit. This short Exhortation I would give you, the
other would take up too much time.

SERMON II.
PSALM. 32. 1, 2. Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven, whose Sin is
covered. Blessed is the Man unto whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity, and in
whose Spirit there is no Guile.
IN this Text I observed, That it is a great degree and step toward, yea a
considerable part of our Blessedness, to obtain pardon of our Sins upon the
account of Christ's Righteousness. I showed the necessity which lies upon Men,
who are all become guilty before God, to look after this Pardon: And thereupon
took occasion to represent the Excellency of the Christian Religion, that has
provided a Salve for the great Sore that runs upon all Mankind, above that of
the Pagans, and also that of the Jews, to whom this Mystery was but darkly
revealed. To proceed to another use. To exhort you to put in for a share in
this Blessedness. To persuade you to it, let me use a few Motives.

1. Till you are pardoned, you are never blessed; there is an obstacle and
impediment in the way hinders your Blessedness. What though you flow in Wealth,
Ease and Plenty; yet as long as this black Storm hangs over your head, and you
know not how soon it will drop upon you, you cannot be accounted happy Men. Do
you account him an happy Man who is condemned to die, because he has a
plentiful allowance till his Execution? Or, him an happy Man that makes a fair
show abroad, and puts a good face upon his ruinous and breaking Condition, but
at home is pinched with want and misery, which is ready to come upon him like
an Armed-Man? Or him an happy Man that revels it out in all manner of pleasure,
but is to die at night? Then those that remain in the guilt of their Sins may
be happy. But now on the other side, a pardoned Sinner is blessed whatever
befalls him. If he be afflicted, the sting of his Affliction is gone, that is
Sin: If he be prosperous, the curse of his Blessings is taken away, the Wrath
of God is appeased, and so every Condition is made tolerable or comfortable to
him.

2. Nothing less than a Pardon will serve the turn. Not Forbearance on God's
side, nor Forgetfulness on ours.

1. It is not a Forbearance of the Punishment on God's part, but a dissolving
the Obligation to the Punishment. God may be angry with us, when he does not
actually strike us: As the Psalmist says, Psalm. 7. 11, 12, 13. God is angry
with the Wicked every day. If he turn not, he will whet his Sword; he has bent
his Bow, and made it ready. He has also prepared for him the Instruments of
Death, he ordains his Arrows against the Persecutors. In the day of his
Patience he does for a while spare, but God is ready to deal with them hand to
hand, for he is sharpning his Sword at a distance; he is bending his Bow: the
Arrow is upon the string, and how soon God may let it fly we cannot tell:
Therefore we are never safe till we turn to God, and enter into his Peace.
Wherever there is Sin, there is Guilt; and wherever there is Guilt, there
will be Punishment. If we dance about the brink of Hell, and go merrily to
Execution, it argues not our Sin, but Stupidity and Folly.

2. On our part our senseless Forgetfulness will do us no good. Carnal Men mind
not the Happiness of an immortal Soul, and they are not troubled because they
consider not their condition: But they are not happy that feel least trouble,
but those that have least cause. A benumbed Conscience cannot challenge this
Blessedness; they only put off that, which they cannot put away, which God has
neither forgiven nor covered. They do but skin the Wound, till it fester and
rankle into a dangerous Sore. God is the wronged Party, and Supreme Judge, to
whose Sentence we must stand or fall. If he justifies, then who will condemn?
We may lay our selves asleep, and sing peace to our selves; but it is not what
we say, but what God says, There is no Peace, says my God, to the Wicked.

3. A Pardon is surely a great Blessing, if we consider first the Evils we are
freed from; and secondly, the Good depending upon it.

(1.) The Evils we are freed from. Guilt is the Obligation to Punishment, and
Pardon is the dissolving or loosing that Obligation. Now the Punishment is
exceeding great, no less than Hell and Damnation; and Hell is no vain
Scarecrow, nor is Heaven a May Game. Eternity makes every thing truly great.
Look the Loss; An Eternal Separation from the comfortable Presence of God. Mat.
25. 41. Go ye Cursed, etc. And Luke 13. 27. Depart ye Workers of Iniquity. When
God turned Adam out of Paradise, his Case was very sad, but God took care of
him, made him Coats of Skins to cloth him, gave him a day of Patience,
afterward promised the Seed of the Woman, who should recover the lapsed State
of Mankind, and so intimated Hopes of a better Paradise. That Exile therefore
is nothing comparable to this: for now Man is stripped of all his Comfort, sent
into an endless State of Misery, where there shall be no Hope of ever changing
his Condition. Now to be delivered from this that is so great an Evil, what a
Blessedness is it? For the Paena Sensus, the Pain as well as the Loss, our Lord
sets it forth by two Notions, Mark 9. 44. The Worm that never dies, and the
Fire that shall never be quenched. The Scripture speaks of the Soul with
allusion to the state of the Body after Death. In the Body Worms breed usually,
and many times they were burnt with Fire. Accordingly our State in the World to
come is set forth by a Worm, and a Fire. The Worm implies the Worm of
Conscience, a Reflection upon our past Folly and Disobedience to God, and the
Remembrance of all the Affronts we have put upon Christ. Here Men may run from
the Rebukes of Conscience by many Shifts, Sports, distracting their Minds with
a Clatter of Business; but then there is not a thought free, but the damned are
always thinking of slighted Means, abused Comforts, wasted Time, the Offenses
done to a merciful God, and the Curse wherein they have involved themselves by
their own Folly. The Fire that shall never be quenched, notes the Wrath of God,
or those unknown Pains that shall be inflicted upon the Body and Soul; which
must needs be great, because God himself will take the sinful Creature into his
own hands to punish him, and will show forth the Glory of his Wrath and Power
upon him. When God punishes us by a Creature, the Creature is not a Vessel
capacious enough to convey the Power of his Wrath; as when a Giant strikes with
a Straw, that cannot convey his Strength. But when God falls upon us himself,
It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the living God, how dreadful is
that? Is it not a Blessedness to be freed from so great an Evil? then a little
Mitigation, a Drop to cool your Tongue would be accounted a great Mercy.

(2.) If we consider the Good depending on it. You are not capable of enjoying
God, and being happy for evermore, till his Wrath be appeased, and your Sins
forgiven; but when that is once done, then you may have sure Hope of being
admitted into his Presence. Romans 5. 10. If when we were Enemies, we were
reconciled by his Death; much more being now reconciled, shall we be saved by
his Life; That is to say, It is far more credible that a reconciled Man should
be glorified, than that a Sinner and Rebel should be reconciled. If you can
pass over this Difficulty, and once get into God's Peace, then what may you not
expect from God? The first Favor to such as have been Rebels against him,
facilitates the belief of all Acts of Grace.

Now what must we do, that we may be capable of this blessed Privilege, that
our Sins may be pardoned, and our Filth covered, and our Debt may be forgiven?
I shall give my Answer in three Branches.

I. I will show you what is to be done, as to your first Entrance into the
Evangelick State. II. What is to be done as to your Continuance therein, and
that you may still enjoy this Privilege. And, III. What is to be done as to
your Recovery out of grievous Lapses, and Falls, and Wounds, as are more
troublesome to the Conscience, for which a particular and express Repentance is
required.
I. As to our first Entrance into the Evangelick State; that is, by Faith and
Repentance: Both are necessary to Pardon, Acts 10. 43. To him give all the
Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever believes in him shall
receive Remission of Sins. There Remission of Sins is granted to a Believer.
Now Repentance is full out as necessary, Acts 2. 38. Repent, and be baptized
every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of Sins. Luke
24. 47. And that Repentance and Remission of Sins should be preached in his
Name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. What is in another Evangelist,
to preach the Gospel to every Creature, in this is, that Repentance and
Remission of Sins should be preached in his Name. And this is preaching the
Gospel; for the Gospel is nothing else but a Doctrine of Repentance and
Remission of Sins. So if we will not hearken to the vain Fancies of Men who
have perverted the Scripture, but stand to the plain Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ; these two Duties are necessary to pardon. Christ's Satisfaction is not
imputed to us, but upon Terms agreed on in the Covenant of Redemption. As to
the Impetration, there is required the intervention of Christ's Merit, so to
the Application Faith and Repentance, without which we are not pardoned. These
two Graces have a distinct Reference, and it is intimated by that Passage of
Paul, for he gives this account of his Ministry, Acts 20. 21. Testifying both
to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, Repentance toward God, and Faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ. Here in short, Repentance respects God, to whom we
return, and Faith Jesus Christ, by whom we return. From God we fell, to God we
must return; we fell from him, as we withdrew our Allegiance, and sought our
Happiness elsewhere; and we return to him as our rightful Lord, and our proper
Happiness. And then Faith in Christ is necessary, because the Lord Jesus is the
only Remedy for our Misery, who opened the way to God by his Merit and
Satisfaction, and does also bring us to walk in his Ways by his renewing first,
and then reconciling Grace; and Faith is that that respects him. Who will take
Physic of a Physician, whose Art he does not trust; or go to Sea with a Pilot,
whose Skill he questions? Who will venture his Eternal Interest in Christ's
Hands, if he be not persuaded of his Ability and Fidelity, as one that is able
to make our Peace with God, and bring us to the Enjoyment of him? But I would
not lightly mention it, but bring it to a distinct Issue.

1. I will show you, It is for the Glory of God, and Comfort of the Creature,
that there should be a stated Course of entering into God's Peace, or applying
the Gospel: for we must not so look to the Impetration, or Merit and
Righteousness of Christ, as not to consider the Application, and how we come to
have a Title to these things.

2. I will show, that these two Graces and Duties are Faith and Repentance,
which do in many things agree, and in other respects differ.

3. I will show you, that they differing in their Use, are required for
distinct Reasons and Ends.

4. The Use of these Graces will plainly discover their Nature to you, so that
a poor Christian, that would settle his Soul upon Christ's Terms, and this
blessed Gospel made known to us, need not any longer debate what is Repentance
toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

1. It is for the Glory of God, and the Comfort of the Creature, that there
should be a stated Course of applying the Privileges of the Gospel, or of
entering into God's Peace.

(1) It is certainly for the Glory of God. It is not meet that Pardon and Life
should be prostituted to every one that will hastily challenge these
Privileges. Pardon we are upon; our Case is not compassionable, till we relent
and submit to God's terms. I would appeal to your own Consciences, surely it is
more suitable to the Wisdom of God, that a penitent Sinner should have Pardon,
rather than an impenitent, or one that securely continues in his Sins, and
despises both the Curse of the Law, and the Grace of the Gospel. It is not
agreeable to the Honor of God, and the Wisdom of his Transactions with Man,
that such should have benefit by him. Again for Faith, it is not meet we should
have benefit by one we know not and trust not. What ever be God's Mercy to
Infants who are not in a Capacity to know and trust him, yet in adult and grown
Persons, it is necessary we should not have such great Privileges settled upon
us without our knowledge, or besides and against our Wills. God will have our
Consent in an humble and solemn way, that we may come and thankfully accept
what he has provided for us. So this is very much for the Glory of God.

(2.) And then for our Comfort, that we may make our Claim, that we may state
our Interest with the greater Certainty and Assurance: for when great
Privileges are conditionally propounded, as they are in the new Covenant, our
Right is suspended till the Conditions be performed, and certainly our Comfort
is suspended till we know they be performed, till we know our selves to be such
as have an Interest in the Promises of the Gospel. I have told you, Blessed are
they whose Sins are pardoned; but says the Soul, If I knew my Sins were
pardoned, I should think my self a blessed Creature indeed. What would you
reply to this anxious and serious Soul? God has made a Promise, an Offer of
Pardon by Christ; the Offer of Pardon is the Invitation to use the means that
we may be possessed of it. But then the serious anxious Soul replies still, To
whom is this Promise made? How shall I come to know, that I am thus blessed and
accepted by God, and that my Sins are pardoned? What is to be replied here?
Look to whom the Promise is made. Certainly it is made to some, or to all; if
you say, the Promise is to all, you deceive the most; if to some, you must say
from Scripture, to them that repent and believe, to the penitent Believer. Here
is the shortest way to bring the Debate to an Issue, wherein our Comfort is so
much concerned, to see we be penitent Believers. For thus the Application is
stated, and the fixing these Conditions is more for the Glory of God, and the
Comfort of the Creature. 2. The two Graces or Duties upon which it is fixed,
Faith and Repentance, do in many things agree, in other respects differ.

(1.) They both agree in this, that they are both necessary to the fallen
Creature, and do concern our Recovery to God, and so are proper to the Gospel,
which is provided for the restoration of lapsed Mankind. The Gospel is an
healing Remedy, and therefore is Christ so often set forth by the term of a
Physician. The Law was a Stranger to both these Duties, it knew no such thing
as Repentance and Faith in Christ; for according to the tenor of it, once a
Sinner, and for ever miserable. But the Gospel is a Plank cast out after
Shipwreck, whereby we may escape, and come safe to Shore.

Again, they both agree in this, that they concern our Entrance and first
Recovery out of the Defection and Apostasy of Mankind, for afterward there are
other things required; but as to our first Entrance into the Evangelick State,
both these Graces are required, and the Acts of them so interwoven, that we can
hardly distinguish them.

Again, They both agree in this, that they have a continual Influence upon our
whole new Obedience: For the secondary Conditions of the Covenant do grow out
of the first, and these two Graces run throughout our whole Life. Repentance,
mortifying Sin is not a Work of a Day, but of our whole Lives, and the like is
Faith.

Again, They agree in that both are effected and wrought in us by the holy
Spirit, that God, who requires these things, gives them.

Lastly, They agree in this, that the one cannot be without the other, neither
Repentance without Faith, nor Faith without Repentance; partly, because there
is no Use of Faith without Repentance. Christ as Mediator is the means; now
the means are of no use without respect to the end. Now Christ and the whole
Gospel Grace is the means to come to God. Besides, these things cannot be
Graces but in a Concomitancy. Repentance without Faith, what would it be? When
we see our Sins, and bewail them, Despair would make us sit down and die, If
there were not a Savior to heal our Natures, and convert our Souls. Neither
can Faith be without Repentance; for unless there be a Confession of past Sins,
with a resolution of future Obedience, we continue in our Obstinacy and
Stubbornness, and so we are incapable of Mercy, our Case is not compassionable.

In short, Repentance without Faith would degenerate into the horror of the
Damned; and our Sorrow for Sin would be tormenting rather than curing to us.
And then Faith would be a licentious and presumptuous Confidence without
Repentance: unless it be accompanied with this hearty Consent of living in the
Love, Obedience, and Service of God, with a detestation of our Former ways, it
would be a turning the Grace of God into wantonness. Therefore these two always
go together. Which is the first, I will not enter upon; but the one cannot be
without the other.

2. Let me show you wherein they differ. The one respects God, the other Christ.

(1.) Repentance toward God. While we live in Sin, we are not only out of our
Way, but out of our Wits. We were sometimes foolish and disobedient, serving
diverse Lusts and Pleasures, Tit. 3. 3. We live in Rebellion against him,
against whom we cannot make our party good; and withal contenting our selves
with a false transitory Happiness instead of a solid and eternal one, we never
come to our Wits again, till we think of returning to God. As the Prodigal,
when he came to himself, he thought of returning to his Father. And Psalm. 22.
28. They shall remember, and turn to the Lord. So long as we lie in our Sins,
we are like Men in a dream, we consider not from whence we are, nor whither we
are going, nor what shall become of us to all Eternity; but go on against all
Reason and Conscience, provoking God, and destroying our own Souls. Man is
never in his true posture again, till he returns to God as his Sovereign Lord,
and chief Happiness: as our Sovereign Lord, that we may perform our duty to
him; and our Felicity and chief Good, that we may seek all our Happiness in
him. And none do repent, but those that give up themselves to obey God, and to
do his Will, as he is the Sovereign Lord, (1 Pet. 4. 2. That he no longer
should live the rest of his time in the Flesh, to the Lusts of Men, but to the
Will of God) and look upon him as their chief Happiness, and prefer his Favor
above all the sensual Pleasures of the World, that they may be able in truth to
say, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth I desire
besides thee, Psalm. 73. 25. This is Repentance toward God.

(2.) There is Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. This Grace is necessary, that we
may own our Redeemer, and be thankful to him, as the Author of our Deliverance.
Romans 7. 25. O wretched Man that I am! But thanks be to God through Jesus Christ
our Lord. And also Faith is necessary, that we may trust our selves in his
hands. We are to take Christ as our Prophet, Priest, and King; to hear him as
our Prophet; Mat. 17. 5. This is my beloved Son, hear him. We are to receive
him as our Lord and King, Col. 2. 6. As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord,
so walk ye in him. We are to consider him, as the great High Priest of our
Confession; Heb. 3. 1. Let us consider the Lord Jesus, the great Apostle, and
High Priest of our Confession. Hear him we must as a Prophet, that we may form
our Hopes by his Covenant, and frame our Lives by his holy and pure Doctrine.
Receive him we must as a King, that we may obey him in all things. Consider him
as a Priest, that we may depend upon the Merit and Value of his Sacrifice and
Intercession, and may the more confidently plead his Covenant and Promises to
God. Now without this there can be no Commerce between us and Christ. Who will
learn of him as a Prophet, whom he takes to be a Deceiver? obey him as a King,
who does not believe his Power? or depend upon him with any confidence or hopes
of Mercy, if he does not believe the value of his Merit and Sacrifice? Herein
these things differ, Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ; the one respects the End, God; the other the Means, Christ. Repentance
more especially respects our Duty, Faith our Comfort. Repentance, newness of
Life for the future, and returning to the Primitive Duty, the Love of God, and
obeying his Will: Faith, Pardon of what is past, and Hope of Mercy to come. In
short, to God we give up our selves as our Supreme Lord; to Christ as
Mediator, who alone can bring us to God: To God, as taking his Will for the
Rule of our Lives and Actions, and preferring his Love above all that is dear
in the World; To Christ, as our Lord and Savior, who makes our Peace with God,
and gives the Holy Spirit to change our Hearts, that we may for ever live upon
him as our Life, Hope and Strength. Thus I have briefly showed you, how
Repentance respects God, and Faith our Lord Jesus Christ.

(3.) That these Graces, having their peculiar Reference, are required in order
to Pardon for distinct Reasons and Ends.

First, Repentance is required for these Reasons.

(1.) Because otherwise God cannot have his End in Pardon, which is to recover
the lost Creation, that we may again live in his Love and Obedience. Surely
Christ came to seek and save that which was lost. Now to be lost in the first
and primitive Sense was to be lost to God. Take the lost Sheep or Groat, it was
lost to the Owner, the Son to the Father: and so if Christ came to save that
which was lost, he came to recover us to God, therefore said to redeem us to
God.

(2.) Neither can the Redeemer do his Work, for which God has appointed him. 1
Pet. 3. 18. He dyed, the Just for the Unjust, that he might bring us to God. We
accept him in all his Offices for this end; I am the Way, Truth, and Life, no
Man comes to the Father but by me. Therefore whole Christianity from the
beginning to the end, a short Description of it, is this, A Coming to God by
Christ. Heb. 7. 25. He is able to save to the uttermost, (whom?) all those that
come to God by him.

(3.) Without it we should not have our Happiness. It is our Happiness to
please and enjoy God; we are not in a capacity to please and enjoy God till we
are returned to him. They that are in the Flesh cannot please the Lord. Nor to
enjoy him here, for here we see his Face in Righteousness; Nor hereafter, for
without Holiness no Man shall see God.

Secondly, But why is Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ required, and so much
spoken of in Scripture? I will content my self but with two Reasons at this
time.

(1.) Faith in Christ is most fitted for the acceptance of God's free Gift.
Faith and Grace do always go together, and are put as opposite to Law and
Works. Romans 4. 16. It is of Faith, that it may be of Grace. Ephesians. 2. 8. For by
Grace ye are saved through Faith, and not of your selves, it is the Gift of
God; not of Works, left any Man should boast. Faith establishes and keeps up
the Interest and Honor of Grace; for it is the free Grace and Favor of God to
condescend to the Rebel World, so far as he has done in the new Covenant. We
present our selves before him as those that stand wholly to his Mercy, have
nothing to plead for our selves but the Righteousness and Merit of our
Redeemer, by virtue of which we humbly beg Pardon and Life to be begun in us by
his Spirit, and perfected in Glory.

(2.) Why Faith in Christ? Because the way of our Recovery is so strange and
wonderful. It can only be received by Faith; Sense cannot convey it to us,
Reason will not, and nothing is reserved for the entertainment of this glorious
Mystery, Pardon and Salvation by our Redeemer, but Faith alone. If I should
deduce this Argument at large, I would show you nothing but Faith, or the
Belief of God's Testimony concerning his Son, can support us in these
Transactions with God. The Comfort of the Promise is so rich and glorious,
Sense and Reason cannot inform us of it; Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor
can it enter into the Heart of Man to conceive (1 Cor. 2. 9.) the things God
has prepared for them that love him. It is not meant only of Heaven, but of
the whole Preparations and rich Provisions God has made for us in the Gospel.
It is not a thing can come to us by Eye or Ear, or the conceiving of Man's
heart; we only believe and entertain it by Faith. And then the Persons upon
whom it is bestowed are so unworthy, that certainly it cannot enter into the
Heart of Man, that God will be so good, and do so much good to such? Adam, when
he had sinned, grew shy of God, and ran away from him. Besides, the way God
has taken for our deliverance is so supernatural, God so loved the World, that
he sent his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him, should not
perish, but have everlasting Life. That God should become Man, that he should
submit to such an accursed Death for our Sakes, is so high and glorious, it can
only be entertained by Faith. Besides, our chief Blessedness lies in another
World, He that lacks Faith, is blind, and cannot see afar off. Here in this
lower World, where our God is unseen, and our great Hopes are to come, where
the Flesh is so importunate to be pleased, where our Temptations and Trials are
so many, and Difficulties so great, we are apt to question all, and we can
never keep waiting upon God, were it not for Faith, and a steady Belief in the
Lord Jesus Christ. For these Reasons, (if you look into the Scriptures) it is,
why Faith is so much insisted upon, that we may keep up the honor of God's
Grace, and because this Grace of the Redeemer is so mysterious and wonderful.

4. The Use of these two Graces discover their Nature. What is Faith and
Repeatance? Repentance toward God, is a Turning from Sin to God. The Terminus
a quo of Repentance is our begun Recovery from Sin, and therefore called,
Repentance from dead Works, Heb. 6. 1. The Terminus ad quem, to which we
return, is God, and our being devoted to God in Obedience and Love. God never
has our Hearts till he has our Love and Delight, till we return to a Love of
his blessed Majesty, and delight in his Ways. This is called in Scripture
sometimes a turning to God, in many other places a seeking after God, a giving
up our selves to God, 2 Cor. 8. 5. They gave up themselves to the Lord. This is
the Repentance by which we enter into the Gospel-State. Now what is Faith?
Besides an Assent to the Gospel, which is at the bottom of it, It is a serious,
thankful, brokenhearted Acceptance of the Lord Jesus Christ, that he may be to
every one of us what God has appointed him to be, and do forevery one of us
what God has appointed him to do for poor Sinners; It is serious and
brokenhearted, done by a Creature in misery, and thankful for such a wonderful
Benefit, a trusting to this Redeemer, that he may do the Work of a Redeemer in
our Hearts, to save us from the evil of, and after Sin.

And thus I have briefly opened this necessary Doctrine, as clearly laid down
in the Scripture. And this is your Entrance in the Evangelick State.

II. For our Continuance therein. For we must not only mind our Entrance, but
our Continuance. Our Lord Jesus tells us of a Gate and a Way, the Gate
signifies the Entrance, and the Way our Continuance. And we read of making and
keeping Covenant with God; we read of Union with Christ, that is our first
Entrance: for this Faith is the closing Act, and expressed sometimes by a being
married to Christ. But there is not only an Union with Christ, but an Abiding
in him; Abide in me, and I will abide in you. Now as for our Continuance, I
would show you, that the first Works are gone over and over again, Faith and
Repentance are still necessary; For the Righteousness of God is revealed frm
Faith to Faith. And Repentance is still necessary. But I shall only press two
things; First, New Obedience; Secondly, Daily Prayer.

1. New Obedience is required. 1 Ioh. 1. 7. If we walk in the Light, as he is
in the Light, we have fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus
Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin. Holy Walking is necessary to the
continuance of our being cleansed from Sin, and therefore Mercy is promised to
the forsaking of our Sins. Prove. 18. 13. He that confesses and forsakes his
Sins, shall find Mercy. Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous Man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have Mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Our Hearts
were not sound with God in the first Covenanting, if we undo what was done. If
we build again the things we have destroyed, then we are found Transgressors,
Gal. 1. 18. Well then, a Man that seeks after Pardon, seeks after it with the
ruin and destruction of Sin. Sin was the greatest Burden that lay upon his
Conscience, the Greivance from whence he sought ease, the Wound pained him at
Heart, the Disease his Soul was sick of; And was all this Anguish real? and
shall a Man come to delight in his Sores again, and take up the Burden he
groaned under, and tear open the Wound that was in a fair way of healing, and
willingly relapse into the Sickness he was almost recovered from with so much
ado? Sure this shows our first Consent was not real and sincere. And then
Christ will be no Advocate for them that continue in their Sins. Our God is a
God of Salvation, we cannot enough speak of his saving Mercy: But he will wound
the Head of his Enemies, and the hairy Scalp of such an one, as goes on still
in his Trespasses, Psalm. 68. 20, 21.

2. Daily Prayer. [This was spoken unto at the Close of the first Sermon.] Mat.
6. 12. Our Lord has taught us to pray, (for we make but too much work for
pardoning Mercy every day) Every day forgive us our Trespasses. To day in one
of the Petitions, is common to all that follow; as we beg daily Bread, we must
beg daily Pardon, daily Grace against Temptations. Under the Law they had a
Lamb every Morning and every Evening offered to God for a daily Sacrifice,
Numb. 28. 4, 5, 6. We are all invited to look to the Lamb of God, that takes
away the Sins of the World. Surely we have as much need as they, more Cause
than they, because now all is clear, and openly made known unto us. God came to
Adam in the cool of the Day, he would not let him sleep in his Sins; before
Night came, he comes and rouseth his Conscience, and then gives out the Promise
of the Seed of the Woman that should break the Serpent's Head. In
Reconciliation with God let not the Sun go down upon God's Wrath, Ephesians. 4. 26. A
Man should not sleep in his Anger, nor out of Charity with Man: surely we
should make our Peace with God every day. If a Man under the Law had contracted
any Uncleanness, he was to wash his Clothes before Evening, that he might notly
a Night in his Uncleanness. We should daily earnestly come to God with this
Request, Lord, pardon our Sins. But what must those that are already adopted
into God's Family, and taken into his Grace and Favor, daily pray for Pardon
of Sin? Though upon our first Faith our State be changed, and we are indeed
made Children of God, and Heirs of Eternal Life by Faith in Christ Jesus, yet
he that is clean, need wash his Feet. We contract a great deal of sinful
defilement and pollution by walking up and down here in a dirty World, and we
must every day be cleansing our Consciences before God, and begging that we may
be made Partakers of this Benefit.

III. The third thing is our Recovery out of grievous Lapses and Falls. In them
there is required a particular and express Repentance; And Repentance and Faith
must be carried with respect to those four things are in Sin, Culpa the Fault,
Reatus the Guilt, Macula the Stain and Blot, and Poena the Punishment. You know
the Law supposes a righteous Nature that God gives to Man, therefore in Sin
there is a Stain or Blot, defacing God's Image. The Precepts of the Law require
Duty, so it is Culpa, a criminal Act; the Sanction of the Law as threatened
makes way for Guilt, as executed calls for Punishment, you see how it arises.

(1.) For the Fault in the Transgression of the Law, or the criminal Action.
See that the Fault be not continued, Relapses are very dangerous. A Bone often
broken in the same place is hardly set again. God's Children are in danger of
this before the Breach be well made up, or the Orifice of the Wound be soundly
closed; as Lot doubled his Incest, and Samson goes in again and again to
Dalilah. But in wicked Men frequently, as that King sent Fifty after Fifty, and
nothing would stop him. There is an express forsaking of Sin required of us,
otherwise it would abolish all the Difference between the Renewed and the
Carnal.

(2.) The Guilt continues till serious and solemn Repentance, and Humiliation
before God, and suing out our Pardon in Christ's Name. 1 John 1. 9. He speaks
of Believers, If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
Sins, and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. There must be a solemn
humbling for the Sin, and then God will forgive us. Suppose a Man forbear the
Act, and never commit it more, (as Judah forbore the Act, after he had committed
Incest with Tamar, but it seems he repented not till she showed him the
Bracelets and the Staff,) yet with serious remorse we must beg our Peace humbly
upon the account of our Mediator. Therefore something must be done to take
away the Guilt.

(3.) There is the Blot or evil Inclination to sin again. The Blot of Sin in
general is the defacing of God's Image, but in particular Sins it is some
weakening of the Reverence of God. A Man cannot venture to act a grievous wilful
Sin, but there is a violent Obstruction of the Love of God. A Brand that has
been in the Fire is more apt to take Fire again; the evil Influences of the Sin
continue. Now the Root of Sin must be mortified, it is not enough to forbear or
confess a Sin, but we must pull out the Core of the Distemper before all will
be well. As Jonah, he repented of his Tergiversation, and forsaking his Call.
The fault was not repeated, he goes to Nineveh and does his duty; yet the core
of the Distemper was not taken away, for you read of him, Ion. 4. 2. Was not
this my saying, when I was yet in my Country? therefore I fled before unto
Tarshish: for I knew thou were a gracious God, and repentest thee of the
evil....... On the contrary, Peter fell into a grievous Sin, denying his Lord
and Master with Oaths and Execrations, but afterward, John 21. 15. Christ trys
him, Jesus says to Simon Peter, Love thou me more than these? pointing to
the rest of his Disciples. Peter had been bragging, Matthew. 26. 33. Though all
Men forsake thee, yet I will not forsake thee. Now when he was foiled, tho he
had wept bitterly for his Fault, Christ tries if the Cause be removed; Lord,
says he, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. But he does
not say now, more than these. The Root of the Distemper was gone; Peter is
grown more modest now than to make Comparisons.

(4.) There is the Punishment. Now we must deprecate Eternal Punishment, and
bless God for Jesus Christ, who has delivered us from Wrath to come. But as to
temporal Evils, God has reserved a Liberty in the Covenant to his Wisdom and
fatherly Justice, to inflict temporal Punishments as he shall see good. If they
break his Statutes, and keep not his Commandments; then will he visit their
Transgression with the Rod, and their Iniquity with Stripes. (Psalm. 89. 32,
33.) Nevertheless my loving kindness I will not utterly take from them, nor
suffer my Faithfulness to fail. If Judgment begin at the House of God, what
shall become of the Sinner and Ungodly? The Righteous are recompensed upon
Earth, partly to increase their Repentance, that when they smart under the
Fruit of Sin, they may best judge of the Evil of it. God does in effect say,
Now know it is an evil and bitter thing to sin against me. God does not do it
to complete their Justification, but to promote their Sanctification, and to
make us Warnings to others, that they may not displease God as we do. Now for
these Reasons the Lord, though he does forgive the Sin and release the Eternal
Punishment, yet he reserves a Liberty to chastise us in our Persons, Families,
and Relations. Therefore what is our business? humbly deprecate this temporal
Judgment; Lord, correct me not in thine Anger, nor chasten me in thy hot
Displeasure. We should be instant with God to get it stopped or mitigated; but if
the Lord see it fit it shall come, patiently submit to him, and say as the
Church, I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against
him. These afflictive Evils, some of them belong to God's External Government,
and some to his Internal. Some to his External Government, as when many are
sick, and weak, and fallen asleep. When we are judged, we are chastened of the
Lord, that we may not be condemned with the World. A Rod dipped in Guilt may
smart sore upon the Back of God's Children, if they will play the Wantons and
Rebels with God. Eli broke his Neck, his Sons were killed in Battle, the Ark
taken. But then there are some other things belong to his Internal Government,
as the withdrawing the Comforts of his Spirit, or the lively Influences of his
Grace; for this was the Evil David feared, when he had gone into wilful Sins;
Psalm. 51. 11, 12. Cast me not away from thy Presence, and take not away thy
holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the Joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me
with thy free Spirit. When God's Children fall into Sin, though the Lord does
not utterly take away his Loving Kindness from them, he may abate the
Influences of his Grace so far, as they may never recover the like Measure
again as long as they live.

SERMON III.
ACTS 3. 26. Unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to
bless you, in turning away every one of you from his Iniquities.
THese Words are the Conclusion of the Second Sermon, that was preached after
the pouring out of the Spirit; And in them you may observe three Things.

I. The Parties concerned; Unto you first. II. The Benefit offered; God having
raised up his Son Jesus, has sent him to bless you. III. The Blessing
interpreted, or what kind of Blessing it is we shall have by the Mediator; He
has sent him to bless you, in turning every one of you from your Iniquities.
Let me a little open these, before I come to observe any thing.

I. For the Parties concerned; Unto you first. Why was the first Offer of
Christ made unto the People of the Jews? For sundry Reasons. Partly,

1. Because they were the only Church of God for that time, and the People that
were in visible Communion with him. And God has so much respect for the
Church, that they shall have the Refusal, and the Morning-Market of the Gospel.
And whatsoever Dispensations of Grace are set on foot shall be first brought to
them: He has showed his Statutes unto Jacob; (Psalm. 147. 19.) He has not
dealt so with other Nations.

2. They were the Children of the Covenant; Ye are the Children of the
Covenant, therefore unto you first. God was in Covenant with their Fathers,
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and God follows a Vovenant People with more Offers of
Grace, than he does vouchsafe unto others, and bears with Sin after Sin, till
he can bear no longer. And when the Branches of the Covenant-Stock run quite
wild, then they are cut off, Romans 11. 20.

3. Christ came of them after the Flesh, and was of their Seed, (Romans 9. 5.) to
teach us first to seek the Salvation of our Kindred, and Countrymen, and near
Relations; those that are nearer to us, lie next our Work and Service.
Therefore to you first.

4. That he might magnify his Grace and Faithfulness, not only in the Matter of
the Gospel, but even in the first Offer of it. He does magnify his Faithfulness
herein, for it is said, Christ is the Minister of the Circumcision to confirm
the Truth to their Fathers, Romans 15. 8. God had promised their Fathers, that he
would raise up a Savior, therefore he must be first discovered here; and he
magnifies his Grace, for there was Christ preached, where he was crucified.
They had the first Handsel of this good News, and Wrath came not upon them to
the uttermost, till they had despised the Gospel, as well as killed the Lord of
Glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14, 15.

5. This was necessary too for the Confirmation of the Gospel, To you first.
Christ did not sneak nor steal into the World clancularly and privately; but he
would have his Law set up where it was likely to be most questioned: they were
most concerned to enquire into the Truth of Matters of Fact, upon which the
Credit of the Gospel had depended. If he had first gone to the Gentiles, the
Jews might have objected their condemning Christ as a Malefactor, and that his
Messengers and Apostles durst not set on foot the Report of his Miracles, Life,
and Death in their Confines. But Christ would have the Gospel preached there,
where if there were any Falsehood in it, it might easily be disproved: and
because the Main of the Jewish Doctrine was adopted into the Christian, and was
confirmed by the Prophecies of the Old Testament, they were the only competent
Judges to whose Cognizance these things should be first offered. Therefore he
says, Unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless
you.

6. That the Ruin of that Nation might be a fit Document and Proof of God's
Severity against the Contemners of the new Gospel. Acts 13. 45, 46, 47. There
it is showed, that they were the first People to whom it was offered, and they
contemned it, and therefore Wrath came upon them to the uttermost. Therefore
this did authorize and confirm this Doctrine, wherever it should be preached
and offered.

7. That the first Ministers might be a Pattern of Obedience, to preach where
God would have them, to preach in the very Face and Teeth of Opposition. Christ
appoints their Station. The Jews were like to be the most virulent Enemies
against the Gospel, because the Rulers put Christ to Death; Go, preach the
Gospel to all Nations, but begin at Jerusalem, though there you meet with a
great deal of Spite and Opposition. Now because of these Reasons, Unto you
first, the Lord having raised up his Son, etc.

II. The second Thing to be explained, is the Benefit offered: wherein is set
forth the great Love of God unto the People to whom the Gospel comes.

1. In designing such a glorious Person as Jesus Christ, Having raised up his
Son Jesus.

2. In that he gave notice, and did especially direct and send him to them,
Has sent his Son.

3. Why he came among them in his Word, It was to bless them.

1. In designing the Person who should do them good, God has raised up his Son
Jesus. It may seem to be meant of his Resurrection from the dead; but I think
rather to raise up, is to exalt, to call, to authorize, to appoint to some
notable Work; and it is used for installing, consecrating, as in this very
Chapter, v. 22. He shall raise up a Prophet from among you. Acts 13. 23. Of
this Man's Seed has God raised up to Israel a Savior, that is, has put
Authority upon him, given him Commission to save Sinners, raised up, designed
him to this Work. But then,

2. The special Direction of his Providenc; God having raised up his Son JESUS,
has sent him to bless you. Sometimes the Word is said to be sent to us; Acts
13. 26. To you is this Word of Salvation sent. He does not say, we have brought
this Salvation to you, but to you it is sent. God has a great Hand in
directing the Course of the Gospel. And sometimes Christ is said to be sent, as
here in the Text; for where the Gospel is preached to a People, Christ is sent
to them, as a Token from Heaven; if he be neglected, you despise the Riches and
Bounty of God, and the best and choicest Gift that ever could be bestowed upon
the Sons of Men. Therefore he says, God having raised his Son, has sent him.
Where the Gospel goes, there Christ is sent, there he comes, that he may have
work to do.

3. Here is the End and Purport of his Coming, not to take vengeance of the
Affronts and Contumelies they had put upon him; but he comes to bless. For the
opening of this Word, you must look to the preceding Verse. He speaks of the
Covenant made with Abraham, In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed. Now Jesus was sent unto them to assure this Blessing. The Blessing is
any Good that accrues and results to us from the Covenant of Grace, but chiefly
those special Blessings we have by Christ, Reconciliation with God, and Life
Eternal, those things which he minded to purchase for us, and has dispensed to
us by his gracious Covenant. This is the Blessing intended, All Nations are to
be blessed in the Seed of Abraham; now God having raised Christ of this Man's
Seed, has sent him to bless you.

III. Here is the Blessing interpreted and restrained, and that is Conversion
from Sin, In turning every one of you from his Sins. They expected a pompous
Messiah, that should make them an opulent and potent Nation. But Christ came
upon another Errand, to convert Souls unto God. Only mark, when the Apostle
speaks this, he speaks it not of the Intention of God, but the Offer of his
Grace; otherwise every particular Jew must be converted, or God missed his End.
God may send him to bless, and yet some may contemn the Offer; others God
prevents by the special efficacy of his Grace, or else all would contemn it.
They that do contemn it are justly passed by; and they that receive it, own it
to his Grace, and not to themselves. It was the secret Purpose of his Grace to
bring in many, and this brought in three thousand Men: there were others
refused this Blessing offered from the Mediator, and they justly perish for
their Unbelief.

The Point (though there be many) that I shall insist on, is,

Doct. That a main Blessing we have by Christ, is, to be turned from our
Iniquities.
1. Here I shall enquire, What it is to be turned from Sin.

2. I shall show you, That certainly this is a very blessed thing.

3. That this is the great Blessing of the Mediator, that we have by Christ in
the Gospel.

4. In what manner Christ turns us from our Iniquities.

I. What it is to be turned from Sin. Take these Considerations.

1. Man fallen, lay under the power and guilt of Sin: He was dead in Trespasses
and Sins, and liable to the Wrath of God. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. So Man was both
unholy and guilty.

2. Christ came to free us from both these. The Guilt, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we
have Redemption through his Blood, the Remission of Sins: And the Power, Tit.
3. 5. He has saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost. To be freed from Guilt, and delivered from Hell and Wrath to come,
is a Blessing for which we can never be sufficiently thankful: But to be freed
from Sin, that is the greater Mercy, and therefore he has sent his Son to
bless you, in turning every one of you from your Sins.

3. To be turned from Sin, implies our whole Conversion. Though one part only
be mentioned, the term from which, yet the term to which is implied; that we
are turned to God, as well as turned from Sin: To God, as our Happiness, and
our Supreme Lord, that we may love him, and be happy in being beloved by him,
Act. 26. 18.

4. That Remission of Sins is included in our Conversion to God: the meaning
is, that he may turn you from your unbelief and impenitency, and so make you
capable of his Pardon and Mercy: for so it is explained v. 19. Repent, and be
converted, that your Sins may be blotted out, etc. Without sound Repentance the
Mediatour's Blessing will not be had, and when Christ came to save us from
Wrath, his way was to turn us from Sin. These two must not be severed, God has
exalted him to be a Prince and Savior, to give Repentance and Remission of
Sins, Acts 5. 31. You see then what is meant by the Blessing the Mediator
offers, To be turned from our Sins.

II. It is a blessed thing to be made Partakers of this Benefit. Blessedness
imports two things; Negatively, a Removal of Evil; and Positively, a Fruition
or Enjoyment of some great Good. When we are turned from our Sins there is both.

1. An Immunity from, or a Removal of the great Evil, and that is Sin.

(1.) The great Cause of Offense between God and us is taken out of the way,
Isa. 59. 2. Your Iniquities have separated between you and your God, and have
hidden his Face from you. Sin makes the Distance between you and God, that you
cannot delight in God, nor God in you. You cannot delight in God, for your
Hearts are alienated from him, You are become Enemies in your Mind by wicked
Works. Where Sin reigns, Man is an Enemy to God; Partly, through Carnal
Prepossession, there is something takes up his Heart, and diverts it from God.
1 John 2. 15. If any Man love the World, how dwells the Love of the Father in
him? His Heart is taken up with another Love. And partly, through Carnal
Liberty, we cannot enjoy our Lusts with that freedom and security by reason of
the Restraints of his Law, that would curb us, and cut us short of our Desires;
And partly, through Slavish Fear. We hate those whom we fear. A condemning God
can never be loved by a guilty Creature. We look upon him as one that will call
us to an account for our Sins. Now all these Reasons concur to show us, that
till Sin be taken away we cannot love nor delight in God, neither can God love
us, and delight in us. God will not have Communion with us while we are in our
Sins. Christ, when he came to bring us to God, he came not to make any Change
in God, to make God less holy, but to make us holy and amiable in his sight.
The reasonable Nature cannot digest this Conceit, that the holy God should take
Sinners into his Bosom without any change. Would it become the Governor of the
World to be indifferent to good and bad, the holy God to be a Friend to
Sinners? The new Nature in us shows the contrary, for that causes an
abomination and abhorrence both of Impurity and the Impure. As Lot's righteous
Soul was vexed with the Sodomites. And we are told, (Prove. 29. 27.) An unjust
Man is an Abomination to the Just; and he that is upright in the Way, is
Abomination to the Wicked. If a Man be sanctified but in part, he cannot
delight in the wicked freely to converse with them. He has a Hatred, not of
Enimity so as to seek their Destruction, not a Hatred opposite to good Will,
that is contrary to the Nature of Grace which is made up of Love; but an Hatred
of Abomination, which is contrary to the Love of Complacency, he cannot take
any delight in him. Now then without a manifest reproach to the Holy God, we
cannot imagine he should admit Sinners into an intimate Communion with him.
Thou hate all the Workers of Iniquity, Psalm. 5. 5. God said to the Prophet,
(Ier. 15. 19.) Let them return unto thee, but return not thou to them. God will
not return to us in our Sins, but we must come off from our Sins to him.

(2.) We are freed from the great Blemish of our Natures. Sin defaced the Image
of God in us; Romans 3. 23. All have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God.
We lost not only the Favor of God, but the Image of God; the great Excellency
of our Nature was eclipsed and defaced. Now the Plaster will not be as broad
as the Sore, nor our Reparation by Christ correspondent to our Loss by Adam, if
our Nature be not healed, and the Image of God restored in us. If Adam had only
left us guilty, the Pardon of Sin had been enough; but he conveyed an evil
Nature, and therefore we must be turned from our Sins, as well as pardoned,
otherwise Christ would not restore all that Adam took away, Psalm. 69. 4. Is he
a good Physician that takes away the Pain, and leaves the great Disease
uncured? But Christ has procured the Favor of God for us, and repaired the
Image of God in us, and therefore certainly put us into a way of Blessedness
again. Holiness was our Primitive Excellency and Amiableness.

(3.) We are freed from that that is the great Burden of the Creature, as well
as his Blemish. Whatever it be to the common Sinner, that is no matter, he has
no right thoughts of things, and is besotted with his carnal choice; for Sin is
an Evil, whether it be felt or no: but the awakened Sinner is sensible not only
of the Guilt of Sin, but it is his greatest Burden that he should have a Nature
inclines him to grieve and dishonor God. Pharaoh could say, Take away this
Plague. But a penitent brokenhearted Sinner cries, Take away all Iniquity.
They desire a Change of this State by Regeneration. Therefore the Promises of
the Gospel considering a penitent Soul under such a Distress, are suited to the
Case, 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
us our Sins, and cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. If you know what Sin is,
and penitently bemoan your selves to God, you will be troubled with the Power
and Pollution of it, as well as the Guilt, Mic. 7. 18, 19. Who is a God like
unto thee, that pardons Iniquity, and passes by the Transgression of the
Remnant of his Heritage. He will turn again, he will have compassion, hewill
subdue our Iniquities. A Heart truly affected, does not only desire Pardon and
Ease, but Power against Sin. A Man that has his Leg broken, would not only
desire Ease of his pain, but to have his Leg set right again. A Leprous
Condemned Malefactor, desires not only to be freed from the Sentence of
Condemnation, but to be cured, or his Pardon will do him no good. Now surely it
is a great Blessing to be turned from our Sins, to be freed from that a
penitent Soul finds to be so great a Burden, and the Mediator gives us a
notable proof of his Love in it.

(4.) Being turned from our Sins, we are freed from the great bane of our
Persons, and all our happiness. Sin is a Cursed Inmate, it fires the Lodging
where it is entertained and harbored, unless speedily cast out of doors: it
involves us in the curse of the Law, The wages of Sin is Death; therefore
Christ, that he might free us from Misery, does first free us from Sin. If
pardon of Sin be a blessing, certainly to be turned from Sin is a blessing (for
the one cannot be had without the other); till you are turned from Sin you
cannot be pardoned, not justified till you are sanctified. Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
Blessed is the Man whose Sin is forgiven, and whose Iniquity is covered, and
unto whom the Lord will not impute his Sin, in whose spirit there is no guile.
When God has given us an holy sincere heart, and turned us from our Sins, then
we have the Blessedness of Pardon. There is no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ, (Romans 8. 1.) who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. We are
freed from the condemning power of the Law, when freed from Sin, and all that
Woe and Wrath that belongs to every Soul that does evil.

By all these Considerations it appears how great a Blessing the turning us
from Sin is in the privative notion, that is the removal of so great an evil.

2. Take Blessedness in the Positive Notion, that is, to enjoy a great Good:
and it will appear it is a blessed thing to be turned from our Sins.

(1.) Because this is the matter of our Serenity, Comfort, and Peace here, and
the pledge and beginning of our eternal Felicity hereafter. The Soul can never
be settled in an holy Peace, till it be turned from its Sins; we can never find
rest, till we get out of Satan's yoke, and get into Christ's blessed Liberty.
The fruit of Righteousness is Peace, Isa. 32. 17. We are freed from those
unquiet and troublesome thoughts wherewith others are haunted. A wicked Man's
Soul is in a mutiny, one Affection wars against another, and all against the
Conscience, and the Conscience against all: But where the Heart is framed to
the obedience of God's Will, there is Peace, Pax est tranquillitas ordinis,
when all things keep their place, as in an accurate orderly Life they do. Gal.
6. As many as walk according to this Rule, Peace and Mercy be upon them, and
the whole Israel of God. There is Peace, for there is an harmonious Accord
between God and them, and between them and themselves. Psalm. 119. 165. Great
Peace have they that love thy Law; not only Peace, but great Peace, a Peace
that passes all understanding. Whilst we are in our Sins, there is ever a fear
of the War which is between God and us, and there is a War in our selves,
Conscience disallowing our practices, and our practices disliking the conduct
of Conscience, so that there is no peace to the Wicked. But when the Lord Jesus
has taken us in hand, and begun to cure us, and frame us aright, and show us
his wonderful Grace in turning us from our Sins: here is matter provided for
Serenity and Peace.

(2.) It is the pledge of our eternal Felicity hereafter. For Heaven is the
perfection of Holiness, or the full fruition of God in glory. Now when the
Mediator begins to take away Sin, he blesses you; for the Life is then begun,
which shall be perfected in Heaven. Unless it be begun here, it will never be
perfected there; For without Holiness no Man shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. But if
it be begun, it will surely be perfected there: for, blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God. The vision and fruition of God is begun here,
the Spirit of Holiness is the earnest of our Inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. O
what Blessedness is it then to have the new heart planted into us by Christ,
and to live the new Life! It is the Beast about you, that delights in the
momentany, base, dreggy Pleasures of Sin. But when Christ has turned you from
your Sins, you are blessed indeed, you are in the way to Blessedness, and you
shall be blessed for ever; he gives Peace as a Pledge of Happiness and Eternal
Glory.

III. I shall prove that this is the Mediator's Blessing.

1. Let me lay down this, that those Blessings that are most proper to the
Mediator are spiritual Blessings. We forfeited all by Sin, but especially the
Grace of the Spirit, whereby we might be made serviceable to God. Other Mercies
run in the Channel of common Providence, but spiritual Blessings are the
discriminating Graces and Favors that are given us by the Mediator. Ephesians. 1. 3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual Blessings in heavenly Places. Christ came not to distribute
Honors, and Greatness, and worldly Riches to his Followers, but to turn away
every one of us from our Sins, to reduce us to God, that we may love him, and
be beloved of him. He came as a spiritual Savior, to give us Grace rather than
temporal Happiness. Most Men have a Carnal Jewish Notion of Christ, they would
have a temporal Safety and Happiness, they would have Deliverance from
Affliction, rather than Deliverance from Sin. To be delivered from every evil
Work is more than to be delivered from the Mouth of the Lion. This is most
proper to the Mediator, 2 Timothy 4. 18. A sanctified Use of Troubles is more than
an Exemption from them; a carnal Man may have Exemption from them, but not a
sanctified Use of them. Poverty, Lameness, Blindness, are not as bad as
Ignorance, unruly Lusts, and Want of Grace. Moral Evils are worse than Natural.
Daniel was cast into a Lion's Den, you would think that was a Misery; but it
was a greater Misery when Nebuchadnezzar was thrust out among the Beasts, being
given up to a brutish Heart. Exemption from Trouble may be hurtful to us, but
Deliverance from Sin is never hurtful to us.

Among the spiritual Blessings we have by the Mediator, Conversion from Sin to
God is the chiefest we have on this side Heaven. That it was the main Part of
Christ's Undertaking, I shall prove by Scripture and Reason. For Scripture, the
Text is clear for it; for thus the Apostle interprets the Covenant-Blessing, In
thy Seed shall all Nations of the Earth be blessed, viz. God has sent him to
bless you, (wherein?) in turning every one of you from your Sins. He shall be
called Jesus, (Mat. 1. 21.) for he shall save his People from their sins; not
only from the Guilt, but the Power of Sin; not only from the Evil after Sin,
but the Evil of Sin it self. Denominatio est a majori, the Name is taken from
what is chiefest. And so when he is promised to the Jews, The Redcemer shall
come out of Sion, and he shall turn away Ungodliness from Jacob. There is his
principal Work. 1 John 3. 5. Christ came to take away Sin, and in him is no
Sin. He means not only the condemning Power, but the Power of it in the Heart:
for he is pleading Arguments for Holiness, why Believers should not run into
Sin, which is a Transgression of the Law. One is from the Undertaking of
Christ, he came to take away Sin; and from the Example of Christ, In him is no
Sin; he plainly means the Power of Sin.

2. Now to give you some Reasons, why this is the chief Benefit most eyed by
Christ, and should be most regarded by us.

1. Christ's Undertaking was principally for the Glory of God, All the Promises
are in him Yea and Amen to the Glory of God. And it should not be a Question
which should have the precedence, the Glory of God, or our Good. Christ came to
promote God's Glory, and that must have the precedence of our Benefit. Now then
the abolishing the Guilt of Sin does more directly respect our Interest and
Good; but the abolishing the Power of Sin, or the turning and cleansing the
Heart from it, does more immediately respect the Glory of God, and our
Subjection to God. Therefore Christ would not only pacify the Wrath of God, but
his chief Work, that does mostly concern the Glory of God, was, to heal our
evil Natures, and prevent Sin for the time to come.

2. To be turned from Sin is to be freed from the greatest Evil. For Pardon
gives us an Exemption from Punishment, which is a natural Evil, but Conversion
gives us freedom from our naughty Hearts, which is a moral Evil; and certainly
Vice is worse than Pain, and Sin than Misery. Besides, Sin is the Cause of all
Evil, and the taking away the Cause is more than ceasing the Effect.

3. This has nearer Connection with the Life of Glory. Pardon only removes the
Impediment, but the sanctifying and healing of our Natures is the beginning of
the Life of Glory, and Introduction into it. Pardon removes our Guilt, which
hinders our Happiness; therefore Divines say, Justification is Gratia removens
prohibens, that that removes the Impediment; but the sanctifying the Heart is
an Introduction into our glorious State, and the more sanctified, the more meet
to be Partakers thereof, Col. 1. 12. Now that which does positively make us
capable of Glory and Happiness, is a greater Privilege than that which only
removes the Impediment.

4. That is the greatest Benefit, which makes us more amiable in the Sight of
God, and is the Object of his Delight; now he delights in us as sanctified,
rather than pardoned. We love him indeed for pardoning and forgiving so great a
Debt; she loved much, because much was forgiven her. But God delights in
Holiness, and the Reflection and Impress of his own Image upon us; Prove. 11.
20. The Upright in the Way are his Delight. When the Spirit has renewed us
according to the Image and Nature of God, that makes us amiable in his Sight,
and an Object of Divine Complacency. Therefore surely this is the great
Privilege and Blessing we have by the Mediator here in this World. I come to
the fourth Thing.

IV. In what way does Christ turn us from our Iniquities?

1. He does purchase this Grace for us. And 2. He works it in us.
1. He purchases this Grace for us, that we may be turned. 1 Pet. 1. 24. He
bore our Sins in his own Body upon the Tree, that we being dead unto Sin should
live unto Righteousness. That was his end, not only to lay the Obligation upon
us, but to procure the Grace whereby we may be enabled to do so. This Sacrifice
was a truly propitiatory Sacrifice, whereby God was appeased, and forfeited
Blessings restored. The Loss of God's Image was a great part of our Punishment,
and it is a part of our Deliverance that Christ has purchased this Grace as
well as Pardon. He has given himself for us, that he might cleanse us, and
sanctify us, and make us a pure and holy People unto God, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26.

2. As he has purchased it for us, so he works it in us; partly by the power
of his Internal Grace, and partly by blessing and sanctifying External Means
and Helps for such an End and Purpose.

First, I say, by the Power of his Internal Grace, changing our Hearts and
Minds. Tit. 3. 9. He saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of
the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our
Savior. And he acts in us as Christ's Spirit, and as we are Members of
Christ. It is the Spirit enlightens the Mind, so that we begin to see the Evil
that is in Sin, the Necessity to get rid of it; After I was instructed, I smote
upon the Thigh; and also to overcome the obstinate Heart of Man, and turn it to
God, and to fix the Inclination of the Soul against Sin. In short, by his
preventing Grace he does convert us, by his exciting Grace sanctify us, by his
assisting Grace he makes us persevere in turning us more and more from Sin to
Holiness.

Secondly, He sanctifies and blesses External Helps and Means. I shall instance
in two, Ordinances, and Providence.

(1.) Ordinances, such as the Word and Sacraments, Ioh. 17. 19. I sanctified my
self, that they might be sanctified by the Truth, that is the preaching of the
Word. He gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it by
the washing of Water through the Word. Mark these and other places of
Scripture, and you will find the Merit of Christ does reach the Ordinances,
that by them Grace may be conveyed, and Sin might be mortified and subdued in
us. The Word calls us to excite our Resolutions against Sin, and strengthen
them, to avoid Occasions, to cut off the Provisions of the Flesh, to make it
our daily Task to war and strive against it. And none conscienciously wait upon
the Word, but something by every attendance is given out for the weakening of
Sin, and setting them afresh against it. And then the Sacrament, that
represents the Death of Christ as the Price of our dying to Sin; and it
represents him as the Pattern, according to which we must be conformed, that we
may know that our old Man is crucified, and that we may renew our Covenant with
God, and our Resolutions, and bind our selves to more serious Endeavors
against Sin. The Lord Jesus, after he had procured the Spirit, and this
wonderful Grace to turn us from our Sins, has appointed congruous and and fit
Ordinances, whereby he may dispense this Grace to us more and more. And as he
sanctifies Ordinances, so

(2.) Providence: for we are thresh'd, that our Husks may fly off. Wherefore
does he chasten us sometimes, and very sorely, but to make us out of love with
Sin? The Fruit of all shall be to take away Sin, Isa. 27. 9. And he chastens us
verily for our Profit, that we may be made Partakers of his Holiness, Heb. 12.
10. By all these means we are sanctified, by Ordinances and Providence, and by
the all-powerful Grace of his holy Spirit.

Thus I have opened the fourth Thing, how the Lord Jesus does turn us from our
Sins.

The Uses we may make of this Point, are

1. Of Information. It informs us,

1. Of the vain Hopes of the Carnal, and such as yet live in their Sins; for at
present they have no Interest in him, and so living and dying will find him
rather a Judge than a Savior, for the greatest part of their Work is undone.
We must be saved from the Guilt and Power of Sin, and the latter is the proper
Sign of our Recovery. We are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and
sanctified also in the Spirit of our God. Christ did not purchase our Salvation
by piecemeal, nor can we receive it by piecemeal, a whole Savior we must
have, or no Savior. She was the true Mother, that pleaded against the dividing
of the Infant. They are true Christians, I am sure, who would have Christ
undivided, who would have him Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification,
and Redemption; for if you take him in one respect, and neglect him in another,
especially the chief thing you should make use of him for, you do not take him
at all. Therefore the Carnal, that live in their Sins, are at present excluded
from all Claim to Christ.

2. It shows us what we should mainly seek in our Prayers. Leave not the
Redeemer, till he has blessed you with his principal Blessing. Our Prayers for
temporal Happiness are not so welcome to Christ, as our Prayers for sanctifying
Grace, and Power against Sin. Natural Sense will put us upon asking Corn and
Wine and Oil; but the new Creature says, Lord, take away Iniquity. Every Man
has a sense of outward Evils, and would fain be at ease; but every Man has
not a sense of Sin, and an hunger and thirst after Righteousness. Self-love
will prompt us to beg exemption from Trouble, but Sin is the worst Burden to a
tender Heart. When your Children ask you for Apples and Plums, and such things
as are pleasing to their childish Appetite, they do not please you so much, as
when they desire you to teach them, and instruct them in their Duty, that they
may not offend God and you. When you ask temporal Things of God, you do not
sin, for God has given a Liberty to ask daily Bread; but when you ask Grace,
that you may be free from Sin, that you may not offend God, or be a Scandal to
the Gospel, this is most pleasing to God. When Solomon had asked Wisdom, and
not Riches and Honors, the thing pleased the Lord. These Prayers are most
acceptable to God, they will bring their Answers with them, then you set your
Redeemer about his proper work, for God sent him to bless you, in turning every
one of you from your Sins. Nay, if you beg only for Pardon, and do not mind the
Destruction of Sin, you are no more willing to be saved than the Devils are.
Certainly the Devils are willing to be saved from the Wrath of God. Every
Creature seeks its own ease, and they would be eased of their Torments. Every
one would have Eternal Life, Evermore give us this Bread. But you are unwilling
to be saved upon Christ's Terms, if you will not let him mortify your Lusts,
and submit to his Healing.

3. If this be the Mediator's great Blessing to turn you from your Sins: then
it follows, that those who have their Corruptions most mortified, are the best
Christians; the Redeemer has been at work in their Hearts, and they have most
of the Mediator's Blessing. He is not the best Christian, that has the most
plausible Gifts, that can with Art and Parts best perform outward Duties, that
has the strongest Memory, clearest Apprehension, readiest Elocution; but he
that has an humble, mortified, holy, pure, and self-denying Spirit: for this
is a more weighty Point of Christ's undertaking to make you Holy, Humble and
Meek, than to furnish you with Gifts, and make you free in speech. Again, he is
not the best Christian, that has most fanatical Raptures of Joy, or pretended
Admirations of Grace; but he that is crucified to the World, and has felt the
Power of Christ's Death. Many who are not careful, watchful, and exact in their
Conversations, yet will pretend to live upon Christ, and think they need not be
so scrupulous to be troubled about their Sins. These neglect the main End of
Christ's coming, which was, to turn every one of us from our Iniquities.

4. It shows the Necessity and Excellency of Holiness. The Necessity of it will
appear thus, it is not only an Evidence of our Interest in the relative
Privileges, such as Pardon, Adoption, and the like; nor only necessary by way
of Gratitude for Salvation received: but it is necessary as a part of Salvation
it self. This is the Salvation, the Blessing of the Redeemer, this is the thing
wherein he has showed his free Grace, in that he has purchased the Spirit to
heal our Natures, and restore the Image of God to us, which was defaced by Sin.
Herein is Christ a Savior, in saving his People from their Sins; and he has
saved us by washing us in the Laver of Regeneration. And once more, It is not
only a main Part of our Salvation, but a necessary Means to obtain the rest. No
obtaining Pardon without Conversion, nor Heaven till Sin be quite done away.
2dly, The Excellency of Holiness appears: For this End we are redeemed by
Christ, Luke 1. 74, 75. And renewed by the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 4. 24. Yea, our
everlasting Blessedness consists in the Perfection of Holiness, Ephesians. 5. 27.

5. It informs us, how much Christians are to blame, that they improve their
Christianity no more, to get Power and Strength against Sin. Christ, consider
him as a Prophet, Priest, or King, does still discover himself to be one that
came to take away Sin. As a Prophet, he has given us such a Doctrine as is fit
for such an use. Ioh. 17. 17. His Word is the best Glass wherein to see
Corruption. The highest Motives in the World are propounded to purge it out.
His Calls, Promises, and Threats are all to take away Sin. And as a Priest, he
has paid the Price that was necessary to preserve the Honor of God's Justice,
that there might be no stop in the way of that abundant Grace, and that we may
have the Gift of the Spirit, 1 Ioh. 1. 7. Because his Blood was that
meritorious Price, that was shed that we might be turned from Sin; and this
Blood is pleaded before God, He lives for ever to make Intercession for you,
that in all your Conflicts and Temptations you may have necessary strength
against Sin. As a King, he does powerfully by his Spirit maintain his Interest
against the Devil, World, and Flesh, and helps you to overcome Sin. He is the
Captain of your Salvation. Yet lamentable it is to see what a poor cowardly
Spirit is in most Christians, how soon captivated with every slender Assault,
and petty Temptation, and their Resolutions so soon shaken, not so much for
want of Strength, as Sluggishness and Cowardice, and want of Care. Men spare
their pains, and then cry out they are impotent, when there is such Grace
provided in the Redeemer. Like lazy Beggars, that personate and act Diseases
because they would not work; they are not able to stand before the slightest
Motions of Sin, because they do not stir up themselves and improve the Grace
they have, or might have by Christ. Certainly idle Complaints of Sin will not
become those that profess an Interest in Christ, for his main great
Undertaking, which is by all Methods carried on still, is the taking away Sin.
So much for the Information.

II. Take home with you this Truth in your Hearts, That Christ's work is to
turn you from Sin, and it is the great Blessing we have from him in the New
Covenant; Then do not neglect this Work, nor contemn this Blessing. You know
the Fault of those, they made light of these things. Especially do not resist
this Work, nor grieve the holy Spirit of Christ, which would work it in you,
and quench not his sanctifying Motions, rather deliver up your selves to all
his healing Methods; and be so far from resisting, that you should improve the
Power of his Grace every day. He turns us indeed by way of Efficiency, but we
turn our selves by Submission to his blessed Motions. He draws, and we run
after him. Therefore every time Christ offers this saving Help, thou art put to
thy choice, whether thou will have Christ or Sin to reign over thee. Christ
that does it for thee, must do it in thee. Christ is the Author that turns, but
the Sinner is the Subject; and he first works upon you, and afterward he works
by you. He converts you to God by the victorious Impressions of his Grace, and
afterward ye through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Body. We cannot do
it, Christ must do it; but he will do it in his own way. He has sanctified
Ordinances to convey this to you. Now will thou wait diligently till it be
accomplished? The Physician cures the Disease, but the Patient must take the
appointed Medicine; you must not expect he should cure it, and thou feel it
not, as it were by Spells and Charms without thee, without putting thee to the
Trouble of Physic. Take up a Resolution to look after the Cure of thy Soul,
and observe the whole Progress of the Work, and what a Wound is given to Sin in
every Ordinance; what in the Word; what in the Lord's Supper; how thy
Resolution is strengthened against it; how the carnal Nature wears off every
day; the Work is not perfect in an instant, but he is still turning; therefore
when thou beginnest to be dead to Sin, die more. Ye are dead, therefore
mortify. Christ has perfectly bought off all Sin in every kind and degree:
should not we strive to have all that he has purchased? At least, do not
strengthen thy Bonds, the Sin thou can not avoid, hate it, and keep up the
lively resistance still; hear diligently, pray earnestly, watch narrowly, and
keep thy self from thy Sin: do not only pare the Nails of it, but cut off thy
very right Hand, and mortify and subdue it yet more and more, that Christ may
have his Conquest in thy Soul.

SERMON IV.
2 PET. 1. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises,
that by these you might be Partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the
Corruption that is in the World through Lust.
IN these Words the Apostle extolleth the Grace of God toward us in the
Gospel. In them take notice of,

First, The Means.

2dly, The End and Use of them.

3dly, The Method and Order in which this Effect is wrought in us.

First, The Means whereby God conveys his Grace to us, viz. The Promises of the
Gospel, which are set forth,

1. By their Excellency; Exceeding great and precious Promises.

2. Their Freeness; Are given to us.

1. Their Excellency is set forth by two Adjuncts; They are exceeding great and
precious; (...). The one notes their* Intrinsic Worth and Value, they are
exceeding great. The other our Esteem of them, they deserve to be precious to
us.

(1.) (...), so called from the Matter of them, which are great and precious
Gifts; such as Pardon, and Life begun in Sanctification, and perfected in Glory.

(2.) (...), precious, deserving and challenging our Esteem, being so suitable
to our Necessities and Desires. Our Necessity arises from the fears of Misery
so justly deserved. Our Desires are after a proper Happiness, which is only
offered to us in the Promises of God, not only as probable, but as certain to
be ours, if duly qualified. Now these Promises, being so great and precious,
should attract us to all Purity and Holiness; for what is greater, and
deserves to be more esteemed by us, than Remission of Sins, and an Inheritance
among the Sanctified.

2. Their Freeness (given) made freely, made good freely.

2dly, The End and Use of them; That by these ye might be Partakers of the
Divine Nature.

By the Divine Nature is not meant here the Essence of God, but his
communicable Excellencies, or such Divine Properties as can be imparted to the
Creature; and these not considered in their absolute Perfection, but as as they
are agreeable to our present State and Capacity. These are sometimes called the
Image of God; Col. 3. 10. The new Man, which is renewed in Holiness after the
Image of him that created him; because they imply a Likeness to him. And
sometimes the Life of God; Ephesians. 4. 18. Being alienated from the Life of God;
because it is a vital Principle. And here, the Divine Nature, and that for two
Reasons:

1. Because these are communicated to us by God, they are created in us by his
Divine Power; and therefore the Word [Created] is so often used on this
Occcasion. Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus. 2 Cor.
5. 17. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature. Creation is proper to
God. We have them by virtue of our Communion with him. They flow from God, as
the Light does from the Sun.

2. Because by these Perfections we somewhat resemble God. Therefore it is
said, 1 Pet. 2. 9. We show forth his Praises; (...), his Virtues, or Divine
Attributes, his Wisdom, Goodness, Bounty, Holiness; for in these we most
resemble him. If you take in his Power, there is some resemblance of that too,
as to the moral Exercise in taming our own Flesh, mastering our Inordinate
Lusts and Passions, and vanquishing all Temptations. This is a Spiritual Power,
and so spoken of, Prove. 16. 32. He that is slow to Anger, is better than the
mighty; and he that rules his Spirit, than he that takes a City. And (...), I
can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13. To live
above the Hopes and Fears of the World, is a great Ability and Power. And
vanquishing the World is made the Fruit of the new Birth; 1 Ioh. 5. 4. That
which is born of God overcomes the World. And in that place where the Spirit
of a Christian is described, it is said to be a Spirit (2 Timothy 1. 7.) of Love,
Power, and of a sound Mind. We conceive God to be a Spiritual Being, of
infinite Wisdom, Goodness and Power. To his Wisdom answers the Spirit of a
sound Mind; to his Goodness, a Spirit of Love; and what is the Original and
Pattern of the Spirit of Power, the very Name discovers, namely, God's own
Power. So all his Attributes leave their Impress upon us.

3dly, The Way, Method and Order, how we receive this Benefit of the Divine
Nature. Having first escaped the Corruption that is in the World through Lust.
As we dye to Sin, the Divine Nature increases in us. There is a putting off,
before there can be a putting on; Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. We put off the old Man,
which is corrupt by its deceitful Lusts. We begin the Work of Sanctification
with Mortification in the first place, and then proceed to the positive Duties
of a new Life; for the Plants of Righteousness will not thrive in an impenitent
and unmortified Heart. As the Corruption of Sin is driven out and expelled, so
the Divine Nature succeeds. Intus existens prohibet alienum, these things are
not consistent, cannot be joined together. The Corruption that is in the World,
and the Divine Nature, can no more agree than Darkness and Light, Romans 13. 12.
But let us see how this Mortification is expressed.

1. What is to be avoided.

2. The Manner of shunning it.

1. What is to be avoided. The Corruption that is in the World through Lust.
Observe, Sin is called Corruption, as often in Scripture, because it is a
blasting of our primitive Excellency and Purity. Genesis 6. 12. All Flesh had
corrupted his Way upon the Earth. Psalm. 14. 1. They are all corrupt and
abominable; that is, degenerated, fallen from their pristine or former Purity.
Observe, the Seat of this Corruption is said to be in the World, where Lust and
all Uncleanness reigns; therefore called (...), the Pollutions of the World,
2 Pet. 2. 20. The Generality of Men are defiled with, corrupted in their Faith,
Worship and Manners; therefore Conversion is called for under these Terms: Acts
2. 40. Save your selves from this untoward Generation. Conversion to God
implies a renouncing or an escaping the evil Fashions and Corruptions of the
World, or having no fellowship with them, with their Sins, but reproving them
rather. So that the Question is, whether we will conform our selves to God, or
the World; whether we will have fellowship with the Corruptions of the World,
or be Partakers of the Divine Nature. We must avoid the one to obtain the
other. Lastly, observe, that this Corruption is said to reign in the World
through Lust. Besides the Bait there is the Appetite, it is our naughty
Affections that make our Abode in the World unsafe and dangerous. If it were
not for Lust, neither the Baits nor the Examples of the World would pervert or
hurt. Mortify the Lust, and you have pulled up the Temptations by the Roots.

2. The Manner of shunning, in the word [escaping.] There is a flying away
required, and that quickly, as in the Plague, cito, long; or from a Fire which
has almost burned us, or a Flood that breaks in upon us. We cannot soon
enough escape from Sin. Mat. 3. 7. Who has warned you to flee from the Wrath
to come? Heb. 6. 18. Who have fled for Refuge, etc. No Motion but Flight
becomes us in this Case.

Doct. That the great End and Effect of the Promises of the Gospel, is, to make
us Partakers of the Divine Nature.

1. Let us consider the Effect or End. 2. The Means appointed to attain it. 3.
The Influence of the one on the other.
1. For the Effect or End. There observe,

1. That it is a natural, not a transient Effect. There may be such a Sense of
the Goodness, Wisdom, and Power of God, as may produce a sudden Passion, as
suppose of Fear or Love, it may only affect us for the present, but infers
no Change of Heart and Life. There is an Impression we cannot deny, and an
Impression suitable to those Apprehensions that we have of God; but it is not a
constant Principle of holy spiritual Operation. But the Promises of the Gospel
are to breed in us such a temper of Heart, as may be a second Nature to us, an
Habit or Constitution of Soul, that may incline us to live to God. A Habit
serves for this use, ut quis facile, jucunde and constanter agat, that a Man
may act easily, pleasantly and constantly. (1.) To act easily. There is an
Inclination and Propensity to Holiness. God created all things with an
Inclination to their proper Operations; as Air to ascend, and Water to descend.
So the new Creature has a tendency to those Actions that are proper to it.
Their Hearts are bent to please God, and serve him, and do whatever they do
with a kind of Naturalness, because of this Bent and Inclination. They act not
only or barely as enjoined, but as inclined. The Law of God is in their Hearts,
Heb. 8. 10. So act not by Constraint, but with a ready Mind. (2.) To act
pleasantly. They have not only a new Bent, Biass and Tendency, but it is a
Delight to do what is holy, Psalm. 40. 8. as being in their Element when they
are thus employed. What is against Nature is ingrate and harsh, but what is
with Nature is sweet and pleasant. It is hard, a kind of Force to bring them to
do the contrary. 1 Ioh. 3. 9. There needs some kind of Violence, to bring a
good Man to sin, as also a naughty Man to do good. (3.) It is a constant
Principle of holy Operations, so that a Man does not only obey God easily, but
evenly, and without such frequent Interruptions of the holy Life. Many do that
which is good, or forbear evil uneasily, because of the Restraints of
Providence, or Dictates of Conscience; and unevenly, by Fits and Starts. Psalm.
106. 3. Blessed is he that keeps Judgment, and does Righteousness at all
times. They are continually exercising of all Duties of Godliness,
Righteousness and Mercy; for the Operations of Nature are constant, however
impeded, obstructed, or diverted at certain times. This we are to look after,
that the sanctifying Grace we have received become a new Nature; that the Soul
have a tendency and delight as to Spiritual Objects, and be constantly and
easily carried to them, and this should be the whole Frame and Drift of our
Lives.

2. It is a Divine Nature; that is, not only such as flows from God, but may
carry some Resemblance with him or to him. It flows from God, for we are
Partakers; it is but a Ray from his Excellency, and it carries a Likeness to
him, or comes nearer to the Nature of God Himself, than any thing that a Man
is capable of. Now this is said for two Reasons.

(1.) To show the Dignity of it. Nothing known to Man is so like God, as a
sanctified Soul. The Saints have their Maker's express Image; therefore if God
be excellent and holy, they are so. The Image and Picture of God and Christ is
in them, not made by a Painter or Carver, but by the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
This is not a forbidden Image, which may pollute and stain our Minds, or form
in us ill Thoughts and Conceptions of God, but raise our Hearts to him. Natural
Conscience does Homage to the Image of God shining in the Saints. Mark. 6. 20.
Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just Man, and an holy. So of Moses it
is said, Exodus 11. 3. Moses was a great Man in the Land of Egypt, and in the
sight of Pharaoh's Servants, and in the sight of all People. His Person and
Presence was awful to them, as having something rare in it. There is a secret
Sentiment of the Excellency of Holiness, that draws Eyes after it, and makes
wicked and carnal Men wonder at it, stand in awe of those in whom it is
eminent, and extorteth a Reverence from them. But especially when they come to
dye, they have a sense of this Excellency, all then approve a sober, righteous
and godly Life, and disallow that which is dissolute and carnal. Then all
things appear in their own Colors, and the Fumes of Lust being dissipated,
they begin more clearly to discern the Happiness of those who are made like
God. Then those that would live with the carnal, would fain dye with the
righteous. Numb. 23. 10. Let my last End be like his. When entering on the
Confines of Eternity, they grow wiser.

(2.) To show the Quality and Condition of it. You must have a new Nature, and
such a Nature as may be a Divine Nature. If you have nothing above natural Men,
or corrupt Nature, you are Strangers to the Promises of the Gospel. It is a
Thought that possesses many when they are pressed to Christian Duties, they
will say, We are not Saints, or Angels, and therefore cannot abstain from such
Sins, or attain unto an heavenly Life. But do you mark what is said here,
Christians must be Partakers of a Divine Nature. And not only they are cut off
from any Privilege by Christ, who corrupt themselves as brute Beasts, made to
be taken and destroyed, (Jud. 10.) that is, against the Light of Nature ingulf
themselves in all manner of Dissoluteness and Sensuality: But also they that
walk as Men, only according to the Rule of Men, who mind nothing beyond the
present World. 1 Cor. 3. 3. Are not ye Carnal, and walk as Men? That is, they
are not raised above the Pitch of mere Men, and have nothing of the Spirit of
God in them.

3. This Divine Nature may be considered three ways. Either,

(1.) As begun. When we are first renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, and
regenerated according to the Image of God, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. There is a
wonderful Change wrought in Sinners by reason of the Divine Qualities impressed
on them. So that the Creature begins to look like GOD Himself; their Nature
is altered; their Course of Life is altered; and their Designs and Actions have
something Divine in them.

(2.) As increased; when more like God in a conspicuous degree. At first the
impression is but weak, and this Glory is darkened by remaining Imperfections;
and we show forth much of Adam upon all occasions, as well as somewhat of
Christ. But where any are sincere and diligent, the old Nature is more
suppressed and curbed, and the Divine Nature does more eminently appear. 2 Cor.
3. 18. We are changed from Glory to Glory. It is a work capable of Spiritual
progress. We should grow more like God, and come nearer to the Nature of God
every day. And it is a shame we are not, having been so long acquainted with
the Word.

(3.) As it is perfected in Heaven: for there we have the nearest communion
with God, and so the highest conformity to him that we are capable of. 1 John
3. 2. We shall see God as he is, and be like him. Perfectly like him: for the
being of Sin is then utterly abolished; there is not the least stain or blemish
upon a glorified Soul. Besides, then we are like him, not only in point of
Holiness, but in point of Happiness and Felicity. For God is an holy and happy
Being. Here we resemble God more in Holiness and Purity: for many times the
most eminent and exemplary Holiness may be accompanied with remarkable
Afflictions; at least sanctifying Grace does not exempt us from them. But there
as our Holiness is exact, our Felicity is complete also. First we are made
Holy, and then Immortal, and in both like God. Well then, this is the effect,
Partakers of a Divine Nature. So that when you come among the People of God,
and you be asked, What kind of Men do you find them to be? as Gideon, in
another case, asked Zeba and Zalmunnah concerning his Brethren, who answered,
Each one resembled the Children of a King, Judge. 8. 18. They were Godly, and
Majestical Persons. So it will be said concerning the Saints, who are really
and eminently partakers of the Grace of the Gospel, they are all Children of
the most high God; as like God as mortal men can be, bear his Image and express
Resemblance of the Grace of the Gospel.

II. Let us now see the Means by which God does accomplish this effect. To us
are given great and precious Promises.

1. It is an instance of God's Love, that he will deal with us in the way of
Promises. The World is depraved by Sin, and sunk into fears and despair of any
Good from God, whom we have so highly provoked: Therefore God invites and
allures us to himself by Promises. For Promises and Declarations of God's Will
in the Gospel, whereby he signifies what Good he will freely bestow upon us, if
we will look after it. These Advantages we have by them. 1. A Promise is more
than a Purpose: for the Purpose and intention of a Man is secret and hidden in
his own bosom; but a Promise is open and manifest: Thereby we get the knowledge
of the Good intended to us. If God had only purposed to bestow all this Grace
upon us, we could not have known his Intention and Purpose till it were
manifested in the effect; it would have been as an hidden Treasure, or sealed
Fountain, of no Comfort and encouragement to us, till we had found it. But now
the Word is gone out of his Lips, we may know how we shall speed if we will
hearken to his Counsel. God's Promises are on his part the eruption or overflow
of his Love: his Heart is so big with thoughts of Good to us, that his Love
cannot stay till the accomplishment of things, but he must tell us aforehand.
Isa. 42. 9. Before they spring forth, I tell you of them. He might have done us
Good, and given us no notice; but that would not satisfy him. It is an
obligation God takes upon himself, Promittendo, se Debitorem fecit. God's
Purposes are unchangeable, but Promises are a Security put into our hands; not
only give us notice, but Assurance that thus it shall be. We have the greater
hold-fast upon him, and may put his Bond in suit. Psalm. 119. 49. Remember the
Word unto thy Servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope. 2. It is more
than a Doctrinal Declaration. It is one thing to reveal a Doctrine, another to
promise a Benefit: that makes a thing known, this makes a thing sure, and
upon certain terms: That gives us notice, but this gives us interest. If Life
and Immortality had been only brought to light in the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10.
which was only obscurely known to the Heathens, it were a great mercy that we
were not left to blind Guesses and dark Conjectures. That Eternal Life is set
before us, a thing real and excellent, is a great matter. But God has put it
into a Covenant-form and Promise, 1 Ioh. 2. 25. that we may make our Title and
Claim: Surely that is matter of great Comfort to us. Psalm. 119. 111. Thy
Testimonies have I taken as an Heritage for ever; for they are the rejoicing of
my heart. 3. It is more than a Prophecy, or simple Prediction.
Scripture-Prophecies will be fulfilled, because of God's Veracity; but
Scripture-Promises will be fulfilled, not only because of God's Veracity, but
also his Fidelity and Justice. For by God's Promise Man comes to have a right
to the thing promised: it was his Mercy and Goodness to make the Promise, but
his Justice and Fidelity binds him to make it good. 1 Ioh. 1. 9. If we
confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Divines say, Of all Lies, a
Promissory Lie is the worst; for this is not only against Truth, but Right,
even though that Right entirely accrueth from your own free Promise.

2. The Promises of the New Covenant are of a most glorious and valuable
Nature. They are not about small things, or things of little moment, but about
worthy and dear-bought Blessings. They contain Spiritual and Eternal Riches,
such as the healing of our Nature, the pardon of our Sins, a safe conduct unto
Eternal Happiness. The glorifying of our Souls, the resurrection of our Bodies,
and then Life everlasting, or an unchangeable state of happiness. These are the
greatest things indeed, in comparison of which all the things of the World are
but as a Maygame, vain and empty, or the smallest Matters, as the Apostle
calls them, 1 Cor. 6. 2. Reconciliation with God is our Privilege here. And
is it a light thing to be at peace with the Living God? to enjoy his Amity and
Love? to study and fit our selves to do his Will? to live in constant Communion
with him now? to have access to him at all times? to obtain from him whatever
in Reason and Righteousness we can ask? A Christian is never upbraided with the
perpetuity of Addresses, never denied Audience, never has cause to doubt of
Success, has more familiarity with God, and a surer Interest in his Love, than
the greatest Favorites have in any Prince or Potentate upon Earth. But then
the Eternal Enjoyment of God hereafter; Phil. 3. 14. I press toward the Mark,
for the Price of the High Calling in God in Christ Jesus. It is an high Price
that is set before us, then we shall have a larger Capacity to know God, and
enjoy him, and receive his Benefits. Psalm. 17. 15. As for me, I will behold thy
Face in Righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy Likeness. Oh!
cry out, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered
into the Heart of Man the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

3. They are precious Promises, worthy of our Esteem. For they are not about
things that we have nothing to do with; but such wherein we are deeply and
intimately concerned. In God's Promises there is due Provision made for the
Desires, Necessities and Wants of Mankind. Let me instance in Pardon and Life,
the first inviting Benefits, Acts 26. 18. Pardon answers the Fears, and Life
those Desires of Happiness which are so natural to us.

(1.) The Consciousness of Sin, and the Fear of God's Wrath and Displeasure,
should make Offers of Pardon acceptable to us. The great Scruple of the guilty
Creature is, how Sin shall be expiated, and God appeased. Mic. 6. 6, 7. We fear
Punishment from an holy and just God, and cannot get rid of Bondage till Sin be
forgiven. The Justice of the Supreme Governor of the World will be ever
dreadful to us. The Gospel serves for this use, to give us the knowledge of
Salvation by the Remission of Sins. Luke 1. 77.

(2.) The other great Privilege is Eternal Life. Corrupt Nature is not against
the Offers of Felicity. There was never a Creature heard of, that would not be
happy, for there was never a Creature but loved himself. Therefore what more
powerful Inducement to bring us into the way of Holiness, than this blessed
Hope set before us, that we may see God, and live for ever? Tit. 2. 12, 13. It
is true, we are greatly enchanted with false Happiness, but shall not such an
Offer be precious to us? Ioh. 6. 34. Then said they unto him; Lord, evermore
give us this Bread.

4. All this is given to us wretched Men without any desert of ours, nay we had
deserved the contrary. Without our asking or thinking, the Covenant was framed
and modelled to our Hands, and in the Frame and Contexture of it we may see a
constant Strain of Covenant-Grace; in the Richness of the Benefits, the
Graciousness of the Donor, the Seasonableness of the Offer, the Readiness of
the Help, when once we set our selves to seek after God, and please and serve
him; and lastly, in the Sureness of the Reward, notwithstanding Frailties and
Imperfections.

III. The Influence of the one upon the other, or, How do these Promises
promote the Divine Nature?

1. From their Drift, which is, to draw us from the Creature to God, and the
World to Heaven; to mortify the Esteem of the false Happiness which tainteth
and corrupts our Natures, and to raise us to those noble Objects and Ends,
which dignify and adorn the Soul, and make it in a sort Divine. It breeds an
excellent Spirit in us, which is carried above the World, and the Hopes and
Fears of it. 1 Cor. 2. 12. Alas! what a mean Spirit have they, that drive no
higher Trade than providing for the Flesh, or accommodating a Life which must
shortly expire? Like foolish Birds, who with great art and contrivance feather
a Nest, which within a little while they leave. But how Divine and God-like are
they, who look to higher things, to please God, enjoy Communion with him, and
live with him for ever?

2. The Matter of the Promises. Many of which concern the Change of our Hearts,
the Cleansing or Healing of our Natures. Heb. 8. 10. I will put my Laws in
their Minds, and write them in their Hearts, and I will be to them a God, and
they shall be to me a People. Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26. Then will I sprinkle clean
Water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your Filthiness, and from all
your Idols will I cleanse you. A new Heart also will I give you, and a new
Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony Heart out of your
Flesh, and I will give you a Heart of Flesh. Jer. 33. 8. And I will cleanse
them from all their Iniquity. All which are Encouragements of Prayer to God for
this Benefit. If God does not exclude us, we should not exclude our selves.

3. The Conditions or Terms on which our Right is suspended. Not Pardon without
Repentance. Acts 3. 19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your Sins
might be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the Presence
of the Lord. Acts 2. 38, 39. Repent, and be baptized, every one of you in the
Name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the Gift
of the Holy Ghost, etc. Not Heaven or Eternal Life without Holiness. Heb. 12.
14. Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without which no Man shall see the
Lord. Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they shall see God, Mat. 5. 8.

4. The Power with which it is accompanied. 2 Pet. 1. 3. According as his
Divine Power has given us all things that pertain unto Life and Godliness,
through the knowledge of him that has called us to Glory and Virtue. He gives
us Life temporal and spiritual, and that immutable Life of Felicity hereafter.
The Divine Nature is communicated to us by virtue of the Promises; for the
Spirit is our Sanctifier, and he works by congruous means.

USES.
1. Believe the Promises, for they are most sure and certain. God's Testimony
of the good things he will bestow upon us cannot deceive us, or beget a vain
and uncertain Hope. His Promise is a Testimony of his Will, and against his
Power nothing can stand. There shall be a Performance of those things spoken of
by the Lord, Luke 1. 45.

2. Esteem them. Heb. 11. 13. These all dyed in Faith, not having received the
Promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and
embraced them. We can never embrace them, till we are persuaded of their Truth.
But then consider their Worth. Great is the Stupidity of those who are nothing
taken with these things. If a great Man ingages himself any way, we make great
reckoning of his Word, and shall we not make great matter of the Word of God?
and esteem his Promises? Esteem them so, as to get them at any price. Mat. 13.
46. Sell all for the Pearl of Price. Esteem them so as to be contented with a
mean Condition in the World. Though God keeps us low, it is enough to be made
Partakers of his Holiness. Heb. 12. 10. For they verily for a few days
chastened us after their own Pleasure; but he for our Profit, that we might be
Partakers of his Holiness. Esteem them so as to perform the Duties required,
Psalm. 119. 14. Esteem them so as to keep up your Rejoicing in Christ, Phil. 3.
8, 9, 10. I count all things but Loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord. And, ver. 3. We are the Circumcision which worship God in
the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no Confidence in the Flesh.

3. Labor to improve the Belief of every Promise for the Increase of Holiness,
that we may be like God, pure and holy as he is. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore
these Promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God.

SERMON V.
MARK 9. 49. For every one shall be salted with Fire, and every Sacrifice shall
be salted with Salt.
IN the Context you have a Caution, which our Lord gives against Scandals and
Offenses given to others, either by Defection from the Truth, or by a sinful
Conversation. And,

1. He intimates the Cause of these Scandals, which is some beloved Lust; and
that is better mortified than satisfied. There is something precious,
profitable, and pleasant in our Opinion, Estimation, and Affection, that calls
us from God, and the Duties we owe to him, and apprehended by us as so
necessary for us, that we can no more spare it than a right Eye, a right Hand,
or a right Foot.

2. Our Lord compares the Loss of Satisfaction in such Lusts, with the Danger
of perishing for ever; and shows, that (all things considered) it were better
to be deprived of this Profit, Pleasure or Honor, than to lose Eternal Life,
and run the hazard of Eternal Death. Either that Pleasure or Lust must be
denied, or we perish for ever. The right Hand must be cut off, or else we shall
be cast into Hellfire.

3. Our Lord shows the Danger of perishing for ever, amplified by a notable
Description, Their Worm never dies, and their Fire shall never be quenched. The
Scripture lisps to us in our own Dialect, and speaks in such Notions we can
best understand, and therefore represents the State of the Damned by what is
terrible to Sense. By the Worm is meant the Anguish of Conscience, by Fire the
Wrath of God. Memoria praeteritorum, Sensus presentium, Metus futurorum. The
Torment of the wicked arises partly from their own Consciences. There is a
vexing Remembrance of what is past, their Folly in the neglect of Grace; and
there is a bitter Sense of that doleful State into which they have now plunged
themselves, and a Fear of what is yet to come. Now beside this Remorse for
their Folly, there is also a Fire that shall never be quenched, or the sharp
Torments that are prepared for the wicked.

4. Here is a Collation or Comparison of Opposites; the Pains of Hell, with the
Trouble of Mortification. First or last we must endure Troubles and
Difficulties. Now it is much more eligible to take Pains in the mortifying of
Sin, than to bear Eternal Pains in the punishment of it. This is that which is
expressed in the Text, For every one shall be salted with Fire, and every
Sacrifice shall be salted with Salt. In the Words,

1. Observe a double Salting, either with Fire, or with Salt; the one referring
to one sort of People, and the other to the other. They agree in the common
Nature: for Salt is of a fiery Nature, and apt to consume; but they differ in
the matter to be consumed. Salt consumes the superfluous Moisture, which is apt
to cause putrefaction; but the Fire consumes the Substance it self. So that to
be salted with Fire, is to be given up to everlasting Destruction. Fire
consumes all things; and God is called a Consuming Fire to the wicked, Heb.
12. 29.

2. Here is also an Allusion to Sacrifices; for every Man that lives in the
World must be a Sacrifice to God. The Wicked are a Sacrifice to God's Justice;
but the Godly are a Sacrifice dedicated and offered to him, that they may be
capable of his Mercy. The first are a Sacrifice against their Wills; but the
Godly are a free-will-Offering, a Sacrifice not taken, but offered. Now the Law
of all Sacrifices was, that they were to be salted with Salt, Levit. 2. 13. And
every Oblation of thy Meat Offering shall thou season with Salt; neither shall
thou suffer the Salt of the Covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy
Meat Offering: with all thine Offerings thou shall offer Salt. Three times it
is repeated there, to show that every Sacrifice must be salted. That the
Wicked, the Objects of God's vindictive Justice, are accounted Sacrifices, is
evident by Scripture. When the Destruction of Moab is spoken of, Isa. 34. 6.
The Sword of the Lord is filled with Blood, it is made fat with Fatness, and
with the Blood of Lambs and Goats, and with the fat of the kidneys of Rams; for
the Lord has a Sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great Slaughter in the Land of
Idumea. So Ier. 46. 10. God threatens there, that the Sword shall devour, and
be made drunk with their Blood. For the Lord God of Hosts has a Sacrifice in
the North Country, by the River Euphrates. What is in these places called a
Slaughter, is also called a Sacrifice. So when God intended a great Carnage of
his Enemies, he calls upon the Fowls of Heaven, Ezekiel. 39. 17. Assemble your
selves, and come to my Sacrifice; with an allusion to the Beasts offered in
Sacrifice. This may be gathered from the Signification of the Sacrifices, the
Burnt-Offerings especially, which signified the Guilt of the Sinner; the Death
of Christ, which is the Propitiation for Sin; and the Obedience of the
Sacrificer, as devoted to God. Now the first Signification took place, and had
its effect upon them, if they neglected the other two Meanings of the
Sacrifices, and therefore they were to be looked on as salted with Fire;
whereas the other, who were accepted, were salted with Salt. The

3d Observation for the opening of this is the two References of these
Saltings, or the distinct and proper Application of them.

(1.) To the wicked. For every one shall be salted with Fire, that is, every
one of them spoken of before, who indulged their corrupt Affections, who did
not entirely and heartily keep the Covenant of God, and renounce their beloved
Lusts.

(2.) Here is the Application to the Godly. Every Sacrifice shall be salted
with Salt; that is, Every one that is not a Sacrifice by constraint, but
voluntarily surrenders and gives up himself to God, to be ordered and disposed
of according to his Will, he is salted, not with Fire, but with Salt, which
every one that is devoted to God is bound to have within himself. So while some
are destinated to the Wrath of God, and salted with Fire to be consumed and
destroyed; others are salted with Salt, preserved and kept savoury in the
Profession and Practice of Godliness. The Doctrine is this,

Doct. The Grace of Mortification is very necessary for all those, who are
devoted to God.
I shall prove three things.

I. That the true Notion of a Christian is, that he is a Sacrifice, or a
Thank-offering to God. II. That the Grace of Mortification is the true Salt,
whereby this Offering and Sacrifice should be seasoned. III. I shall show you
the Necessity of this Salt, that we may keep right with God in the Duties of
the Covenant.
I. The true Notion of a Christian is, that he is a Sacrifice to God. This is
evident by Romans 12. 1. I beseech you, Brethren, by the Mercies of God; that you
present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable Service; that is the reasonable part which was figured by the
Sacrifices and Oblations of the Law. And so Isa. 66. 20. They shall bring your
Brethren for an offering unto the Lord. Under the Law, Beasts were offered to
God; but in the Gospel Men are offered to him; not as Beasts were to be
destroyed, slain, and burnt in the Fire, but to be preserved for God's use and
service. In offering any thing to God, two things were of consideration; there
was a Separation from a common, and a Dedication to an holy use, and they both
take place in the present matter.

1. There is a separation of our selves from a common use. The Beast was
separated from the Flock or Herd, for this special purpose, to be given to God.
Thus we are separated and set apart from the rest of the World, that we may be
a People to God. We are no more our own, 1 Cor. 6. 19. And we are no more to
live to our selves, but to him that dyed for us. 2 Cor. 5. 15. We are not to
live to the World, to the Flesh, or to such things as the natural Heart craves:
we have no right in our selves, to dispose of our selves, of our time, of our
interest, of our strength, but must wholly give up our selves to God, to be
disposed, ordered, governed by him at his own will and pleasure.

2. There is a dedication of our selves to God, to serve, please, honor and
glorify him.

(1.) The manner of dedicating our selves to God, is to be considered. It Is
usually done with grief, shame and indignation at our selves, that God has
been so long kept out of his right, with a full purpose to restore it to him
with advantage. 1 Pet. 4. 3. The time past may suffice to have wrought the will
of the flesh, and of Man, it is high time to give up our selves to the Will of
God, we have been long enough, too long dishonouring God, destroying our Souls,
pleasing the Flesh, living according to the Flesh, and the course of the World,
therefore they desire to make restitution. Romans 6. 19. For as ye have yielded
your Members Servants to Uncleanness and to Iniquity, unto iniquity: even so
now yield your Members Servants to Righteousness, unto Holiness. Their forepast
neglects of God and duty to him fill their Hearts with shame, therefore they
resolve to double their diligence, and to be as eminent in Holiness, as before
they were in Vanity and Sin.

(2.) It is with a deep sense of the Lord's love in Christ: for we give up our
selves to God not as a Sin-offering, but as a Thank-offering. Romans 12. 1. I
beseech you by the mercies of the Lord. And 2 Cor. 5. 14. For the love of
Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then
were all dead; and that he died for all, that they which live should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them, and rose
again: they are ravished with an admiration of God's goodness in Christ, and so
give up themselves to him.

(3.) They do entirely give up themselves to God, not to be his in a few
things, but in all, to serve him with all their faculties; You are not your
own, but are bought with a price. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Therefore glorify God both with
your Bodies and Souls, which are Gods. And to serve him in all conditions. Romans
14. 8. Whether we live, we live unto God, or whether we die, we die unto God;
for living or dying we are the Lord's. They are willing to be used for his
Glory, not only as active Instruments, but as passive Objects, they give up
themselves to obey his governing will, and to submit to his disposing will, to
be what he would have them to be, as well as to do what he would have them to
do. Phil. 1. 20. According to my earnest expectation and my hope, that in
nothing I shall be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so now also
Christ shall be magnified in my Body, whether it be by Life or by Death. Thus
with all their faculties in every condition of Life, are they to be devoted to
God, in all actions. It is said Zach. 14. 20, 21. That Holiness to the Lord
shall be written not only upon the Bowls of the Altar and the Pots of the
Lord's House, butalso upon all the Pots of Jerusalem; not only upon the Vessels
of the Temple, but upon common utensils; that is, translate it into a Gospel
Phrase, that not only in our sacred, but even in our common and civil actions,
etc. we should live as a people, that are offered up to God.

(4.) The end why we give up our selves to God, is to serve, please and glorify
him. Act. 27. 23. His I am, and him I serve; to please him by the obedience of
his will, Romans 12. 1, 2. -- Ye present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable Service. And be not conformed to
this World, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may
prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God. Col. 1. 10.
That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in
every good work. And also to glorify him, is their end and use. Phil. 1. 21. 1
Cor. 10. 31. This is the Dedication by which a Christian becomes a spiritual
and an holy Sacrifice unto God. Now we must be sincere and real in this, partly

1. Because the Truth of our dedication will be known by our use: many give up
themselves to God, but in the use of themselves there is no such matter, they
carry it, as though their Tongues were their own, and had no Lord over them.
Psalm. 12. 4. They speak what they please; they use their Hearts as their own to
think and covet what they please; their Hands as their own, to do what they
please; their Bodies as their own, to prostitute them to all excess and
filthiness; and their Wealth, and Strength, and Time as their own, either to
spare it, or lavish it according as their lusts guide and incline them. No, no;
a sincere Christian makes Conscience of his dedication to God, the reality and
sincerity of it is seen in the use of themselves, and if he be tempted to do
any thing contrary to this vow and dedication, his Heart rises against the
Temptation. 1 Cor. 6. 15. Shall I take the Members of Christ, and make them the
Members of an Harlot? God forbid. In point of fidelity to God as we are in
Covenant with him, we must be careful, that we employ and use what is God's for
the Glory of God, we must make conscience of alienating that that is sacred,
that that is the Lord's: your thoughts, your affections, your time, your
strength do all belong to him.

2. Because God will one day call us to an account, Luke 19. 23. He will demand
his own with Usury. We shall be called to a reckoning, what we have done for
God, what part and portion he has had in our time, our strength, our parts our
interest: therefore every prudent and wise Christian should himself keep a
faithful and constant reckoning, how he lays out himself for God, for he must
have a share in all things that we have or do.

3. We must be very sincere in this, because we are under the Eye and
inspection of God, who considers whose business we do, his, or our own. Luke 1.
75. That we should serve him in holiness and righteousness before him all the
days of our Life. We are ever before him, and though he does not presently call
us to an account, yet many times now he punishes us for our neglect and
mindlessness of his Interest. Ezekiel. 16. 8. Ye entered into a Covenant with me,
and became mine. That was the reason of his Judgments against them. When those
that are his do not carry themselves as his, when that that is Sacred is
profaned by a common use, then a Judgment is coming upon a Nation if dedicated
to God, and it warps from him; or upon a Person, if his ways be not upright
with him.

II. The next thing I am to do is to prove, that the grace of Mortification is
the true Salt, wherewith this Offering and Sacrifice should be seasoned. There
is some dispute, what is meant by the Salt, which Christ recommends to his
Disciples, and what was figured by the Salt in the Sacrifice, whether Wisdom,
or Zeal; in general it is the grace of the Holy Spirit by which Sin is subdued
and prevented, and the meaning suits exactly with the Emblem, and
representation: For,

1. Salt preserves Flesh from putrefaction by consuming that superfluous and
excrementitious moisture, which otherwise would soon corrupt: and so the Salt
of the Covenant does prevent, and subdue those Lusts, which would cause us to
deal unfaithfully with God. Alas! Meat is not so apt to be tainted as we are to
be corrupted, and weakened in our resolutions to God, without the mortifying
grace of the Spirit. That which is lame is soon turned out of the way, unless
it be healed. Heb. 10. 13. And nothing is so unstable and mutable as an
unmortified Soul; therefore we can never behave our selves as a Sacrifice, and
an offering to God, unless we mortify our Members, which are upon Earth,
inordinate Affections, Covetousness, and the like. Col. 3. 5. In short, the
Flesh is that which is apt to be corrupted, and therefore the grace that does
preserve us must be something that does wean us from the interests of the
Flesh, and what is that but the mortifying Grace of the Holy Spirit? The
Apostle says, Ephesians. 6. 24. Grace be with all them that love the Lord Jesus in
Sincerity, or in Incorruption. There are many crooked Lusts which are apt to
corrupt us, and withdraw our love to other things, but when these are mortified
and subdued, that we may have a greater amplitude of affection toward God and
Christ, then we are said to love him in sincerity and in incorruption.

2. Salt has an acrimony, and does macerate things and pierce into them; and
so the grace of Mortification is painful and troublefome to the carnal nature:
how healthful and useful soever it be to the Soul, no Question it is
distasteful to curb our Affections, and govern our Hearts in the fear of God,
and to row against the stream of Flesh, and Blood; but, yet it is wholesome, it
is a crucifying of the Flesh, to handle it, as Christ suffered on the Cross, to
give it Vinegar and Gall, but yet this is necessary, this is the Gal. 5. 24.
thing which our Lord intends here in the Context, that the Sacrifice must be
consumed or macerated; we either must suffer the pains of Hell, or the pains of
Mortification; we must be salted with Fire, or salted with Salt. It Is better to
pass to Heaven with difficulty and austerity, than to avoid these difficulties,
and run into Sin, and so be in danger of eternal Fire. The strictness of
Christianity is nothing so grievous as the punishment of Sin. The Philosophers
when they speak of the nature of Man, observe, that in the concupiscible part
(...), something like moisture inclines to pleasure, in the irrascible (...),
something like Cold inclines to fear; this Salt is to fetch out both, by
checking our sensual inclination, and also our worldly fears. We must crucify
the Flesh with the Fassions and Lusts thereof: they that are Christ's have done
so. We should rather displease our selves, and displease all the World, than
displease God, or be unfaithful in our duty to Christ. No profit, no pleasure,
or secular concernment is so necessary, so comfortable, so useful to us as
Salvation.

3. Salt makes things savoury, so Grace makes us Savoury; which may be
interpreted with respect either to God or Man.

1. Acceptable to God, when seasoned with this Salt; for God would accept of no
Sacrifice without it. Not that he tasted of their Meat Offerings, or did eat
the Fat or Flesh of Bulls and Goats, and drink their Blood, and so would have
it seasoned for his Palate and Appetite, it is not so to be understood; but in
Types as well as in Similitudes there is a condescension to our sense and
apprehension of things. That that is salted is savoury, therefore God would
note his acceptance of our persons and services this way. By nature we are all
odious, unsavory, and distasteful to God by reason of Sin. Psalm. 14. 3. They
are all become filthy, there is none that does good, no not one: in the Hebrew,
it is putrified, stinking like corrupt and rotten Flesh. We must be salted and
seasoned by the Grace of Christ, and so we become amiable and acceptable in the
sight of God. The more upright we are, the more he delights in us.

2. To Men; the more we are thus salted and mortified, the more shall we do
good to others. Our Lord tells his Disciples, Mat. 5. 13. Ye are the Salt of
the Earth: but if the Salt lose its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? it is
thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out and trodden under foot of Men.
This is spoken to the Disciples as Disciples, not as Apostles, and public
Persons. It is a mistake to think that only Ministers are the Light of the
World, and the Salt of the World. No, all Christians must shine as lights in
the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation, all Christians must be as the
Salt of the Earth. Christ's whole Sermon contains general Duties, and the
Disciples were not yet sent abroad as Apostles, nor ever heard of such a
Commission, or that their Master would send them abroad for the proselyting the
World to the Kingdom of God; that was done afterward Chap. 10. and therefore
here he speaks to Christians as Christians. Now they are said to be Salt, even
as they season all those among whom they live. A Christian is never savoury in
his Conversation with others, till he has Salt in himself, then all his
actions are seasoned with Grace, and beget a remembrance of God; then his words
are seasoned with Grace, and do good to others. The Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. 29.
Let no corrupt Communication come out of your Mouths; that rotten and corrupt
Communication, which vents it self in slandering, railing, ribaldry, foolish
jesting at holy things, lies, cursing, and the like: all these come from a
corrupt Heart, as a stinking Breath argues rotten Lungs. These want the Grace
of Mortification; so are all sapless Spirits, that cannot speak any thing of
God seriously, but in their most serious discourse are as fresh as Water. But
go among the mortified, and you receive the savor of good things from them,
you have not only savoury Prayers, and savoury Sermons, but savoury Conferences
and Discourses. Col. 4. 6. Let your speech be always poudered with Salt; that
is, do not speak idely, much less profanely, but in an edifying manner. Now
Christians ought to take heed they do not lose their savouriness, for then they
do not please God, nor profit Man, and are fit for nothing but the Dunghill.
Thus I have proved the second thing, that the Grace of Mortification is the
true Salt, that seasons Christians.

III. There is a Necessity of this Salt in all those, that have entered into
Covenant with God, and have dedicated and devoted themselves to him.

1. By our Covenant Vow we are bound to the strictest Duties, and that upon the
highest Penalties. The Duty to which we are bound is very strict. We have
answered God in all the demands of his Covenant, 1 Pet. 3. 21. For Baptism
saves as the answer of a good Conscience toward God. The Lord demands and
puts in effect this Question, Will you die unto Sin, and live unto
Righteousness? this is the tenor of the Baptismal Covenant that is so often,
so solemnly renewed at the Lord's Supper; and you are to reckon your selves
Romans 6. 11. to be dead unto Sin, and alive unto Righteousness through Christ
Jesus our Lord; reckon your selves, that is in Vow and Obligation. And the
Penalty is very high; Heb. 10. 26. that we sin wilfully: so that our admission
into Christ's Family will be in vain, yea to our further ruin. If you do not
stand to the Covenant, if you keep Sin still alive, and add Fuel to the Flames.

2. The Abundance of Sin that yet remains in us, and the mavelous activity of
it in our Souls; we cannot get rid of this cursed Inmate, till our Tabernacle
be dissolved, and this House of Clay tumbled into the Dust. Paul groaned sorely
under it, Oh wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this
Death? Romans 7. 24. And it is called Sin, that does easily beset us, Heb. 12.
10. Well then, since Sin is not nullified, it must be mortified. It works, it
wars, there is a marvellovs activity in it, it is very active and restless:
Romans 7. 8. Sin wrought in me all manner of concupiscence, he means sinful
nature. And the Apostle James tells us (Iam. 4. 5.) The Spirit that dwells in
us, lusts to envy: there is not a sleepy, but a stirring Principle always
inclining us to evil, and hindering that which is good. Sin does not only make
us a little flexible and yielding to Temptations, but does hurry us, and impel
us thereunto; It is a Law warring in our Members, that brings us into Captivity
to Sin. Romans 7. 23. Corrupt Nature is not a tame thing, that works not, till it
be irritated by the suggestions of Satan, or temptations of the World, but is
like a living Spring, that pours out Water of its own accord; it will not let
us alone, the Heart of Man is evil continually, and so it always hinders us
from that that is good. Romans 7. 21. When I would do good, evil is present with
me; it blunts the edge of our Affections, it seeks to weaken our purposes by
unbelieving thoughts, or drawing us away from God by the lure of some sensitive
delight, in stealing our Hearts from him, in the very duties, and solemn
addresses we make to him, distracting our minds with thoughts of the World, and
the Pomp and Glory thereof, and so turns our very Duties into Sin, and makes us
lose the comfort and sweetness of them: it blasts and perverts our most sincere
endeavors. Well then, without this Salt of the Covenant, if this be so, what
shall we do? have we not need to keep humble and watchful? if Sin be stirring,
we must be stirring against it, and improve the grace of the Holy Spirit upon
the account of Christ's Death, and use all good means that it may be subdued in
us.

3. Consider the sad consequences of letting Sin alone both either as to
further Sin or Punishment.

(1.) As to further Sin. For Christ speaks here of Scandals. If Lust be not
mortified, it grows outrageous; it has foiled us before God, Men and Angels,
and exposed us to an open Shame, or hardens us in a dead careless Course. Lusts
let alone, end in gross Sins, and gross Sins in final Apostasy. Love of
Pleasure will end in Drunkenness, or Adultery, or the rage of unclean Desires,
or else in such a vain light frothy Spirit, which is no way fit for Religion.
Envy will end in Mischief and Violence, if not in Murder. Judas by his
Covetousness was brought to betray his Master. Gehazi was first surpised with
Covetousness, then blasted with Leprosy, and then became a Shame and Burden to
himself. The Devil tries by Lust to bring us to Sin, and by Sin to Shame, and
by Shame to Horror and Despair. But do the Children of God run into such
notable Excesses and Disorders? Yes; when they let Sin alone, discontinue the
exercise of Mortification, when they do not remember the Sacrifice must be
salted with Salt. Witness David, who ran into Lust and Blood. Witness Peter,
who ran into denying Christ with Oaths and Execrations. Witness Solomon, who
ran into Sensuality and Idolatry. And in all of us old Sins, long since laid
asleep, may awake again and hurry us into spiritual Mischiefs and
Inconveniences, if we make not use of this holy Salt.

(2.) As to Punishment. Sins prove mortal, if they be not mortified. Either Sin
must dye or the Sinner. There is an Evil in Sin, and there is an Evil after
Sin. The Evil in Sin is the Violation of God's righteous Law; the Evil after
Sin, is the just Punishment of it, Eternal Death and Damnation. Now those that
are not sensible, or will not be sensible of the Evil that is in Sin, they
shall be made sensible of the Evil that comes after Sin. The unmortified Person
spares the Sin, and destroys his own Soul; the Sin lives, but he dies. In the
Prophets Parable to the King of Israel, when he had let go the Syrian, says
he, Thy Life shall go for his Life. So our Lives shall go for the Life of our
Sins. The End of these things is Death, Romans 6. 21. And, The Wages of Sin is
Death, v. 23.

But you will say, What is this to a justified Person? There is no Condemnation
to them that are in Christ.

I answer, You must take in all. Those who are in Christ, that walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit, they have the Salt of the Covenant. But if you
can suppose a justified Person to live after the Flesh, you may suppose also a
justified Person shall be condemned. Eternal Death may be considered two ways,
either as to the Merit, or as to the Event. As to the Merit, as an Evil which
God has appointed to be the Fruit of Sin; or as to the Event, an Evil that
will certainly befall us. A justified Person, one that is really so, may, must
fear it in the first Sense. There is such a Connection between living in Sin,
and Eternal Punishment, that he ought to represent the Danger to his Soul of
living willingly and allowedly in his Sins, that he may eschew it. For this is
nothing but a holy making use of the Threatenings, or considering the Merit of
Sin. But as to the actual Event, and perplexing Trouble, that arises from the
apprehension of it; if his Sincerity be clear and unquestionable, he must not
fear it.

Now to make Application.

I. For the Reproof of those that cannot abide to hear of Mortification. The
Unwillingness and Impatience of this Doctrine may arise from several Causes.

1. From sottish Atheism and Unbelief. They despise all sober spiritual
Counsel, they make no Conscience of yiedling obedience to God. Solomon tells
us, Prove. 19. 16 He that keeps the Commandments, keeps his own Soul; but he
that despises his Way shall dye. There are the different Issues of a strict
Obedience, and a slight vain Conversation. And mark the Opposition of the two
Tempers, he that keeps the Commandments, and he that despises his own Ways,
that is, takes no heed to his Life and Actions, to order them according to the
Will of God; He cares not whether he please or displease, whether he honor or
dishonor God; but leaves the Boat to the Stream, lives as his brutish Lusts
incline him, come of it what will come. He despises his own Ways, and so runs
into Vanity, Luxury, Riot, Fraud, Injustice, and all manner of Licentiousness.
Now no Man thus despises his own Ways, but he despises other things, which
should be very sacred, and of great regard and esteem with him. He despises
God, and the Word of God, and his own Soul. Prove. 14. 2. He that walks in his
Uprightness, fears God; but he that is perverse in his Ways, despises him. He
that makes Conscience of his Duty, has a high esteem of God, he looks on his
Authority as supreme, his Power as infinite, his Knowledge of all things exact,
his Truth in Promises and Threatenings as unquestionable, his Holiness as
immaculate, his Justice as impartial, and his Goodness exercised to us in
sundry Benefits, as rich and every way glorious. Therefore he dare not but
please God; he has such a deep reverence for him, that he is always saying
within himself, What will the Holy and All-seeing God have done? Or, How can I
do this Wickedness, and Sin against God? But now the careless and slight
Person, that takes no care to govern his Actions according to the Will of God,
has contemptuous and slight thoughts of God, as if he were a senslels Idol,
that took no notice of humane Affairs, that sees not, or would not punish the
breaches of his Laws. They also despise the Word of God, Prove. 13. 13. He that
despises the Word, shall be destroyed; but he that fears the Commandment,
shall be rewarded. There are some gracious Hearts, that stand in awe of the
Word; and though their Minds be never so much set upon a thing, yet if a
Commandment stand in the way, it is more than if an Angel with a drawn Sword
stood in the way to keep them back; they dare not break through God's Hedge.
But now a carnal, careless and unbelieving Wretch sets at naught all the
Precepts, Promises, and Threatenings of God, and can break with him for a
trifle, for a little vain delight and profit. Nay further, he despises his own
Soul; Prove. 15. 32. He that refuses Instruction, despises his own Soul. He
only cares for the Body, but neglects his Soul, scarce ever considers whether
he has a Soul to save, or a Soul to lose, as if he counted all fabulous, which
is spoken of God, and Immortality, of the Day of Judgment, or of Heaven and
Hell. Now it is in vain to speak to these to renounce and mortify their
pleasing Lusts, till their Atheism and Carelessness be cured. And their Case is
the more desperate, because the Disease does not lie in their Minds, but in
their Hearts, and comes not so much from Opinion as Inclination. A settled
Opinion must be vanquished by Reason, but a brutish Inclination must be weakened
by Almighty Grace.

2. It may come from Libertinism. And these harden their Hearts in sinning by a
mistaking the Gospel.

(1.) Some vainly imagine, as if God by Jesus Christ were made more
reconcilable to Sin, that it needs not so much to be stood upon, nor need we to
be so exact, to keep such ado to mortify and subdue the Inclinations that lead
to it: They altogether run to the Comforts of the Gospel, and neglect the
Duties thereof. Christ died for Sinners, therefore we need not to be troubled
about it. Some actually speak out these things, as if all the Mortification
required were but to quell the Sense of Sin in the Conscience, not to destroy
the Power of Sin in their Hearts, and if they can but believe strongly they are
pardoned, all is well. If this were true, then in the hardest Heart would be
the best Faith, for they have the least trouble about Sin, and least Conscience
of Sin. This is to cry up the Merit of Christ, to exclude the Work and
Discipline of this Spirit, yea to set the Merit of his Death against the End of
it, and so to set Christ against Christ. He bore our Sins: He bore our Sins in
his Body upon the Tree, that we might be dead to Sin, and alive to
Righteousness, to promote this Mortification, that we speak of.

(2.) Another Sort think such Discourses may be well spared among a Company of
Believers; and they need not this Watchfulness and holy Care, especially
against grievous Sins: that they have such good Command of themselves, that
they can keep within Compass well enough. It Is well if you be come to this
height of Christian Perfection, that Temptations make none, or no considerable
Impression upon you. But we must warn you, and that of the most gross Sins.
Christ thought fit to warn his Disciples; Luke 21. 34. Take heed lest your
Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and the Cares of this
Life. And the Apostle every where warns Christians of Malice, of Hypocrisy, of
Envy, of Lying, of Evil-speaking; 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. Take heed that you do not
overreach and defraud one another, for God is the Avenger of all such. But
these Men would be fed with refined Strains of Contemplative Divinity, and have
no Sins reproved, but such kind of Sins as would seem a Credit rather than a
Disgrace: like those Diseases that are incident only to the best Complections
and Constitutions. If you speak against something that may rather argue their
Excellency, than shame them of their Sin, you shall be welcome. This
over-spiritual Preaching ends in an aerie Religion. Is Sin grown less dangerous,
or Men more skilful to avoid it, than heretofore? Certainly, he that considers
how many scandalous Professors there are, that would be accounted the People of
God, has no cause to think so. If Paul saw need of Mortification, 1 Cor. 9.
27. We are not more strong, but more foolhardy.

(3.) A third Sort are such as think Believers are not to be scared with
Threatenings, but only oiled with Grace. But then consider, the words of Christ
were to his Disciples. And to whom did the Apostle Paul write? to Believers
questionless, If you live after the Flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live, Romans 8. 13. No part of
the Spirit's Discipline must be omitted. If one end of Christ's coming was to
verify God's Threatenings, and that the Curse of the Law should not fall to the
Ground, surely there is use of Threatenings still.

3. It may arise from another Cause, that is, the Passionateness of carnal
Affections. Men are so wedded to their Lusts, they cannot leave them, and so
strangely besotted, they are even ready to sit down, and say, they will venture
their Souls rather than live a strict Life. Is the pleasing of the Flesh so
sweet to you? or Hell so slight a Matter? And will the Day of Judgment be so
slubber'd over? There is a raging Despair, and there is a sottish Despair. The
raging Despair of a Cain, Genesis 4. 13. My Evil is greater than can be born! when
we are ready to sink under the Burden of our Sins. And a sottish Despair, when
we are not sound with God, and loath to improve the Grace of the Redeemer, but
say, There is no hope; we will go on in the Imaginations of our own Heart, Jer.
2. 25. There is no Hope; it is an Evil, and I must bear it. If I be damned, I
cannot help it, I must bear it as well as I can. What! will you bear the Loss
of Heaven, the Wrath of the Almighty and Eternal God? Surely you know not what
Eternity means, what Hell and Heaven means. You will know, when the Eyes that
are now blinded by the delusions of the Flesh, shall be opened, when you shall
see others sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God, and
you shall be shut out. Can thou bear this? If Rachel could not endure the
want of Children, and Jacob the supposed Loss of Joseph, when all his Sons and
Daughters rose up to comfort him: If Ahitophel could not endure the loss of his
Credit in Counsel: How will thou endure the Loss of thy Soul, and the Glory of
the Blessed to all Eternity? When thou have nothing to beguile thy Mind, and
thou art divested of all other Comforts, and thou must feed upon this for ever.
So for the Pains of Hell. Thou that can not endure to be scorched a day or
two in feverish Flames, or the Pain of the Stone, or Gout, when God arms the
Humors of thine own Body against thee, and can not endure the Torment of an
aching Tooth; how can thou endure the Wrath of an Eternal God? Can your Hearts
endure, or your Hands be made strong in the Day that I will deal with you,
says the Lord?

2d Use is, To persuade you not to neglect the Salt of the Covenant. It may be
fretting, but it is healthful; as the most salutary Medicines are usually most
troublesome. To help you to improve this kind of Argument, which our Lord here
uses,

1. Consider, There are but two Sorts of Men in the World, and you are one of
them. There is no Neutral, no middle State; there are but two Principles that
Men are influenced by, the Flesh and the Spirit; and there are but two Ends Men
propound to themselves, either the pleasing of the Flesh upon Earth, or the
enjoyment of God in Heaven. And two Places they issue into, Heaven or Hell. The
Scripture is peremptory, and tells you who shall go to Heaven, and who shall go
to Hell. Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die; but if ye
through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live. Gal. 6. 8.
He that sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption; but he that
sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life everlasting. Or consider
that, Prove. 14. 14. The Back-slider in Heart shall be filled with his own Ways,
and a good Man shall be satisfied from himself. There are two different Persons
commencing and setting forth in the pursuit of Happiness, the Backslider in
Heart, and the Good Man. The Backslider in Heart is one that continues in the
Apostasy and Defection of Mankind, that indulgeth his Lusts and vain Pleasures,
and for a seeming Good leaves God, who is the chief Good. But the good Men are
those who make it their business to keep their. Hearts chaste and loyal to God.
They both desire to be filled and to be satisfied; the one takes his own Way,
and the other God's Counsel: and in the event both are filled. The Backslider
in Heart has enough of his own Ways, when they have brought him to Hell; and
the good Man has enough, when he comes to the Enjoyment of the Blessed God.
And there is one Truth more there, they are both filled from themselves, their
own Ways. The Backslider shall have the Fruit of his own Choice, and a good Man
is satisfied with that Course of Godliness that he has chosen. Prove. 1. 31.
Those that turn away from God, it is said, They shall eat of their own Ways,
and be filled with the Fruit of their own Devices. And, Isa. 3. 10. Say unto
the Righteous, It shall be well with him, for he shall eat of the Fruit of his
own Doings.

2. Consider the doleful Condition of those that indulge their carnal
Affections; and that either threatened by God, or executed upon the wicked.

(1.) Consider it, as it is threatened by God. If God threaten so great a
Misery, it is for our Profit, that we may take heed and escape it. There is
Mercy in the severest Threatenings, that we may avoid the Bait when we see the
Hook, that we may digest the Strictness of an holy Life, rather than venture
upon such dreadful Evils. Why did our Lord repeat it three times, Where the
Worm never dies, and the Fire is never quenched? but that we may have it often
in our Thoughts, that we may not buy the Pleasures of Sin at so dear a rate, so
hard a Price as the Loss of our precious Souls.

(2.) Consider the Punishment, as executed upon the Wicked. How many are now
burning in Hell for those Sins which you are ready to commit? The serious
Consideration of it will check the Fervor of your Lusts, that you may not
easily venture upon an everlasting Hell.

3. Consider which Trouble is most intolerable; to be salted with Salt, or to
be salted with Fire; with unpleasing Mortification, or the Pains of Hell; the
Trouble of Physic, or the Danger of a mortal Disease. Surely to preserve the
Life of the Body, Men will endure the bitterest Pill, take the most loathsome
Potion; why? their Lives ly on it: And shall we be unwilling to such a
necessary Strictness, to these wholesome Severities, which conduce to save you
with an everlasting Salvation? There is no Remedy, Trouble must be undergone.
Surely a strict Diet is better than a speedy Death; and the pricking of a Vein
by a Surgeon, is not so bad as a Stab at the Heart by an Enemy. Better be
macerated by Repentance, than broken in Hell by Torments. Which is worse,
Discipline, or Execution? Here the Question is put: you must be troubled first
or last. Would you have a Sorrow mixed with Love and Hope, or else mixed with
Desperation? Would you have a Drop, or an Ocean? Would you have your Souls
cured, or tormented? Would you have Trouble in the short Moment of this Life,
or have it Eternal in the World to come?

4. Be sure you be a Sacrifice dedicated to God, really entered into Covenant
with God, and set apart for his Use; that this may be your End, your Business,
your Scope, to please, glorify, and enjoy him, 2 Cor. 1. 9. We can the better
speak to you, when you are under a Covenant-Engagement. Christ bound you to
this when he died for you. He sanctified himself, that you might be sanctified
through the Truth, that is, dedicated to God. John 17. 19. And by one Offering
he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, that is, them that are
consecrated to God, or entered into a holy Covenant with God. Christ bound you
to it, and your own Gratitude will suggest it to you. I beseech you by the
Mercies of the Lord, present your selves, etc. Nay, the new Nature will incline
you to it; Romans 6. 13. Yield your selves unto God, as those that are alive from
the dead, and your Members as Instruments of Righteousness unto God. The new
Life will presently discover it self by its Tendency and End; if this be indeed
your End and Work to be faithful to God's Covenant.

5. You will see a need of denying worldly and fleshly Lusts, you will see
nothing can be done in the spiritual Life without Mortification, that being
dead to all things here below, you may be alive to God. That this must be your
daily Work, your Necessity will sufficiently show. Are there no rebellious
Desires to be subdued? No corrupt Inclinations to be broken? Do not you feel
the Bias of Corruption drawing you off from God? David did, therefore he says,
Incline my Heart to thy Testimonies, and not to Covetousness. Do not you find
the sensitive Lure prevail upon you, enticing your Minds, and drawing you from
the purity of your Hopes, and strictness of Conversation? Every Man is drawn
away, when he is enticed by his own Lusts, Jam. 1.

6. Consider the sad Condition of a Believer, that is under the corrective
Discipline of God, though he do not vacate his Justified State. A sinning
Believer, that has made bold with forbidden Fruit, how does he smart for Sin?
What a Wound in the Conscience will wilful heinous Sins make? Witness David,
Psalm. 32. And Psalm. 51. He gives an account, how uneasy his Heart did sit
within him, he was afraid of God who before was his Joy and Delight, and speaks
as one ready to be cast out of his Presence.

SERMON VI.
2 THESSALONIANS. 3. 5. And the Lord direct your Hearts into the Love of God, and into
the patient waiting for Christ.
THere are two things keep Religion alive in the Soul, a Love to God, and a
hearty intent upon the coming of Christ. These are the two necessary Graces,
which the Apostle prays for in the Text: Here is the love of God, that is the
first Grace, and the earnest or patient waiting for Christ. Love respects God,
because he is the chief Object of it, primum amabile, as being the first and
chiefest good, but hope or patient expectation respects Christ, who at his
glorious coming will give us our full reward. Love is the Life and Soul of our
present Duties, and by patient expectation we wait for our future hope. The
Love of God urges us to the Duties of Religion, and Hope strengthens us
against Temptations, whether they arise from the allurernents of Sense, or the
troubles of the World. Love is our Breastplate that guards the vitals of
Christianity, and Hope is our Helmet that covers our Head, that we may hold up
our Head in the midst of all the troubles and sorrows of the present Life, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. Both Graces are necessary, therefore it will not be unprofitable
to insist upon them. I begin now with the former, The Lord direct your Hearts
to the love of God. Where note,

1. The Grace prayed for, the Love of God.

2. The Efficiency, which is necessary to produce it, the Lord direct your
Hearts. The word direct notes sometimes conduct and guidance, and sometimes
bending, or setting straight the thing that is crooked: Conduct and Guidance,
as we guide Men that they may not go wrong. Psalm. 119. 5. Oh that my ways were
directed to keep thy Statutes. Ships that are best rigged, need a Pilot; and
they that love God most, need to have their love ordered and directed to the
best advantage of his Glory and Service. This for the first signification,
guidance and direction. But at other times it signifies the bending, inclining,
or making straight what is crooked, and what bends and tends another way: in
this Sense I take it here. Our Hearts are distorted and writhed, and averse
from God and all good naturally; yea, and after Grace received, are apt to
wander, and return to their old bent and byas again: therefore the Apostle
prays, that God would form and set their Hearts straight, that they may be more
indeclinably fixed toward God. And this Prayer he makes for the Thessalonions,
whose work of Faith, and labor of Love, and patience of Hope he had so much
commended before; and of whose sincerity he had such great confidence, for
those he prays, that their Love might be directed, and their Hearts more
fixedly set toward God. The Note then will be plain and easy.

Doct. That we cannot have or keep up any true Love to God, unless the Lord set
our Hearts straight, and keep them bent toward himself. I shall inquire here,
1. What is Love to God. Love is the complacency of the Soul in what is good.
Love to God is the complacency and well-pleasedness of the Soul in God as our
all-sufficient Portion. To open it to you, I shall describe it, I. By its
Radical and Internal Acts. II. By its External Effects. III. A little touch
upon the Properties of it, and then you will see what the Love of God is.


1. The Radical and Internal Acts are two, Desire, and Delight. Desire after
him, and Delight in him.

1. Desire after him. Love affects union with the thing Beloved; and so love to
God implies an earnest seeking after him, in the highest way of enjoyment that
we are capable of in this World. This appears partly by the kind of Mercies
that we affect, and partly by the fervency of our endeavors after him.

(1.) By the kind of Mercies that we affect. There are some Mercies vouchsafed
to the Creature that lie nearer to God than others do, and do least detain us
from him: as his Image and Favor, or his renewing and reconciling Grace. When
we love God, these are sought in the first place: As you shall see how the
temper of the Saints is described, and distinguished from the temper of the
brutish Multitude, Psalm. 4. 6, 7. The Many say, Who will show us any good? but,
Lord, lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us, and this will put
gladness into our Hearts. The Many, the brutish Multitude seek an uncertain
good, and they seek it from an uncertain Author; Who will show us? They do not
acknowledge God in these common Mercies: but the Children of God must have his
Favor; Lord, lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us: As the Beams
of the Sun do cheer and refresh the Earth, this is that that does revive their
Souls. So Mat. 5. 6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
Righteousness. Well then, they that desire to be like God in Purity and
Holiness, and to recover his Favor lost by Sin, do certainly more love him
than those, that only seek temporal Mercies from him. God's sanctifying Spirit
witnessing his love to us, is the greatest gift can be bestowed in this Life,
and will more witness his love, than any thing else can be given us. This the
Saints seek after, that they may be like God, that they may be accepted, and
wellpleasing unto God, this is all their Ambition; 2 Cor. 5. 9. Wherefore we
labor, that whether present, or absent, we may be accepted of the Lord. Other
things may please the Flesh, but that is not their design, those things that
bring them nearer to God, take up their Mind and Heart. Now as it appears by
the Mercies we affect, so it appears,

(2.) By the fervency of our endeavors after these things. For if the Image of
God, and Favor of God be sought superficially, or as things that we may be
well without, and the Wealth, Honors and Pleasures of the World be most
earnestly sought after, surely we do not love God. Psalm. 63. 8. My Soul
follows hard after thee. The whole Spiritual Life is but a pursuit of the
Soul toward God; and the more constantly and earnestly we seek him, to enjoy
more of his saving Graces and Benefits, the more we have of the love of God in
us. Therefore David expresses this desire, as exceeding all other desires,
Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that
I might dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of my Life, to behold the
beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. He sought not the glory of
the Kingdom, Success in battle, Victory over his Enemies in the first place, or
not so much as Converse with God, and Attendance on his Worship in the
Tabernacle, all was nothing to this, that he might have Communion with God.
Therefore this is the radical Act of Love, this fervent burning desire that
carries the Soul through all Duties, Ordinances, Services, they are still making
their way to a nearer access to God, and larger participation of his Grace,
till they come eternally to enjoy him in Glory.

2. There is another Internal Radical Act of Love, that is a Delight in him.
Our full joy is reserved for the other World, but delighting our selves in God
is a great Duty now; for Love being the complacence of the Soul in God, as a
apprehended to be good, or a delightful adhesion to God as our allsufficient
Portion and Happiness, it cannot be imagined Love can be without any delight in
God even now. Now in this Valley of Tears, the hope of enjoying him hereafter
is our Comfort and Solace in the midst of our Weaknesses and Afflictions, that
there is a time coming, when we shall more perfectly see kim as he is, and be
like him. 1 Ioh. 3. 2. the Apostle tells us, We rejoice now in the hope of the
Glory of God; that we have this in expectation, that we shall have an Estate of
complete Felicity, and excellent Holiness; that we shall behold our Nature
united to the Godhead in the glorified Redeemer, and our Persons admitted into
the nearest intuition and fruition of God we are capable of, and live in the
exercise of a constant uninterrupted Love, and be perfectly capable of
receiving his highest Benefits. Surely this Joy we have in our Pilgrimage. But
there is not only our hope, but our partial enjoyment of it is matter of
Happiness to us; his Favor is as Life, and his Frown as Death, to the Soul
that loves him. The Saints look on God reconciled as the best Friend, God
displeased as the most dreadful Adversary; therefore if they have any taste of
his Love, their Souls are filled as with Marrow and Fatness, Psalm. 63. 3, 4, 5.
Because thy loving kindness is letter than Life, my Lips shall praise thee. I
will bless thee while I live, my Soul shall be satisfied as with Marrow and
Fatness, and my Mouth shall praise thee with joyful Lips. But if God hide his
Face; if God be altogether a stranger, then they are troubled indeed. Psalm. 30.
7. But yet we are not gone to the bottom of the matter of delighting in God.
Those whose Souls are possessed with the Love of God, are so well pleased with
him, that every thing is sweet to them by the relation it has to God. It is a
delight to them to think of God. Psalm. 104. 34. I will be glad and rejoice in
him, my meditation of him shall be sweet. It is a delight to them to speak of
God, Ephesians. 5. 4. Not foolish jesting, but giving of Thanks. The Delight of God's
Children, or that which serves instead of jesting to Christians is the grateful
remembrance of the Lord's Mercies, especially of our Redemption by Christ. To
draw nigh to him in Ordinances, there this delight is exercised again. There is
Prayer: A gracious Soul cannot be a Stranger to it, because it cannot have a
greater refreshing, than to be alone with God, and unbosome himself with God.
The Hypocrite is rejected from being capable of this Character, Job 27. 10.
Will he delight himself in the Almighty, will he always call upon God?
Sometimes he will call upon God, he is frighted into a little Religiousness, it
may be, when Death is at his Back, in great Afflictions, or time of great
Judgments, but he has no constant delight in God. The constant delight in God,
is that that brings the Saints into his presence. So for all other Christian
duties, Psalm. 122. 1. I was glad, when they said unto me, Come, let us go into
the House of the Lord; there they entertained Traffic and Commerce with God
about matters of the highest concernment to their precious and immortal Souls;
nay all their work, the whole course of their Obedience is sweetened to them,
because it is commanded by God, and tends to the enjoyment of God: as Psalm.
112. 1, Blessed is the Man that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in
his Commandments; they not only keep the Commandments, but delight, (and that
greatly,) to keep the Commandments. And Psalm. 119. 14. I have rejoiced in the
way of thy Testimonies, as much as in all riches. Delight in God is a great act
of Love, to which we should not be Strangers, even in the house of our
Pilgrimage; though we have no assurance, or sensible enjoyment of his Favor.
For it is a Duty of the first Commandment, that results from the owning of God,
as our God.

II. For the External Effects of Love, they are Doing and Suffering his Will:
when we are contented to do what God will have us do, and be what God will have
us be.

1. For Doing. If we love God, we shall be loath to offend him, we shall be
desirous to please him. Faith, I do confess, is a mavelous Grace, it can
apprehend things strange to Nature, but it can do no worthy thing for God, till
it be accompanied with Love: Gal. 5. 6. When the Apostle tells us of that
Faith, that carries away the prize of Justification, he describes it to be a
Faith working by Love. Faith itself serves as the Bellows to blow up this Flame
in our Hearts, as the next and immediate principle of Action. In short, Love is
the overruling bent of our Souls, the weight and poize upon us, that inclines
us to God. And look as all noble Qualities when restrained cannot produce their
consummate Act, so Love suffers a kind of imperfection, till it can thus break
forth into some Act of Thankfulness to God, but then it is perfected. 1 John 2.
5. Whosoever keeps his Word, in him the Love of God is perfect, that is, has
attained its consummate Act that which it aims at. No Man certainly can be
owned as a perfect sincere lover of God, but he that makes conscience of doing
what he commands: none but they have a deep sense of his Majesty, none but they
have an esteem of his Favor; therefore they dare not hazard it by a breach or
neglect of their Duty.

2. For Suffering his Will. For when the Apostle prays here, God would direct
their Hearts to love him, he means that they should endure any thing, rather
than deny the Faith, and confess Christ, whatever it cost them. As Obedience is
virtually contained in Love, so also Courage and Resolution. Solomon represents
Love as a powerful thing, as an Affection that will not be bribed nor quenched;
Cant. 8. 7. Many Waters cannot quench Love, nor can the Floods drown it: if a
Man would give the whole substance of his House for it, it would be utterly
contemned. It is true of Love in general, much more of Love to God. In carnal
matters, Love is a venomous Poison, when it has invaded the Heart; nothing
will reclaim us: but in Divine matters, it is a sovereign Antidote against
Temptations, both on the right hand, and on the left. For right hand
Temptations, all the Riches, Pleasures, Honors are contemned, they cannot
bribe them over from Christ, that really love him. All the Floods of
Persecution cannot quench this holy Desire. This is the Genius and Disposition
of Love, when once the bent of the Heart is set toward God and Heaven, they
are vehemently set against any thing that would turn them out of the way, and
divert them from their purpose.

III. To speak of the Properties, if it be sincere.

1. It is not a speculative, but Practical Love, not consisting in lofty airy
strains of devotion too high for the common rate of us poor Mortals; no it is
put upon a surer and infallible Test, our Obedience to God. Again, it consists
not in a bold familiarity, but in an humble subjection and compliance with his
Will. He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me;
God's love is a love of Bounty, but ours a love of Duty; therefore we are
properly said to love God, when we are careful to please him, and fearful to
offend him. The Scripture declares both: the first, This is love, to keep his
Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous. The second, Psalm. 97 10.
Ye that love the Lord, hate evil. When we are fearful of committing or omitting
any thing may be a violation of his Law, a grief to his Spirit, or a dishonor
to his Name, then we are said to love God. What ever lofty and luscious strains
of devotion, we may otherwise please our selves with, here will our Trial rest.
He does not love God, that can most accurately discourse of his Attributes, or
soar aloft in the nice speculations of contemplative Divinity, or pretenses of
Secrecy with God, but he that is most awful, serious and conscientious in his
Duty.

2. It is a Transcendental Love we owe to God, we must love him above all other
things. For he must be loved as our Felicity and End. He must have the chiefest
place in our Hearts, and our principal design must be to please, serve, and
glorify him. If we seek God in order to other things, we do not love him, but
our own Lusts, nay if all other things be not sought after in order to God, we
do not set him up as our chief good, or last end. He that loves Father and
Mother more than me, is not worthy of me. Luke 14. 26. If any Man come to me,
and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and
Sisters, yea and his own Life also, he cannot be my Disciple. Many have a
partial half-love to God, but a greater love to other things; then God's
interest will be least minded. For there is something nearer and dearer to us
than God, which will be soon preferred before the Conscience of our Duty to
him. No, all must be subordinated to our supreme Happiness, and last end, or
else God is not loved as God.

But now the second thing propounded is the nature of that influence upon Love,
which is expressed here by the Apostle in the word direct. The Lord direct your
Hearts in the Love of God. What does this Imply?

1. It implies that God works upon us as Rational Creatures; He changes the
Heart indeed, but he does it by Direction: he draws us to himself, but it is
with the Cords of a Man; he teaches while he draws. Joh. 6. 44, 45. None can
come unto me but those whom the Father draws; and he proves it by this, because
they shall be all taught of God. God's drawing is teaching, it is both by the
attractive force of the Object, and the internal Efficacy of his Grace; the
Spirits conduct is sweet, yet powerful, accomplisheth the Effect, but without
offering violence to the liberty of Man. We are not forced, but directed. There
is not a violent compulsion, but an inclination sweetly raised in us by
victorious Grace, or the overpouring sweetness of his Love. For we love him,
because he loved us first. 1 John 4. 19. And this love is shed abroad in our
Hearts by the Holy Ghost, who by giving us an esteem and serious remembrance of
his Benefits, blows up this holy flame in our Hearts. We do not love God, we
know not why or wherefore; An account can be given of all the Spirits
operations. Look as in an impression, there must be a Seal, and Wax to the
Seal, and the hand that stamps it: so all concur here. The Word does its part,
that is the Seal, and the Heart of Man receives the Impression, but to make it
effectual and durable, the hand of God concurs, or the power of his Spirit. The
Object is the Gospel, wherein God commends his Love to us by the Incarnation,
Death, and Intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ; as also by the new Covenant,
because he will work upon Man after the nature of Man, by Love he will work
upon Love. Beside all this, there is an internal powerful Agent, the holy
Spirit. The external objective means cannot do it without the inward cause.
Though God's Love does so gloriously and resplendently shine forth in the
Gospel, yet the Heart of Man is not affected with it, till it be shed abroad by
the illuminating sanctifying Spirit. The Heart of Man is dark and dead to these
things, till changed by Grace, and when that is once done, that Impression is
according to the Stamp.

2. The Inclination to God as our Felicity and End, which is the Fruit of this
Grace, is the inclination of a reasonable Creature: so the Inclination is
necessary, but the Acts are voluntary, therefore you must keep them up still.
There is an Inclination put by God into inanimate things, as in light and airy
Bodies to move upwards, and in heavy Bodies to move downwards; as a Stone falls
to the Earth, but Fire and Smoke ascend, they cannot do otherwise, because they
have no choice. But now in Man there is an Inclination to God and Heaven, which
is the Fruit of Grace. The Inclination is necessary, why? because all those
whom the Spirit sanctifies, he sanctifies them not in vain, he certainly begets
this Tendency in them toward God; therefore so often they are said in
Scripture to be converted or turned to God. Their Hearts were averse before,
but then they tend and bend toward him: but the Acts are voluntary. There is a
Duty lying upon us to stir up the Gift of Grace that is in us; the Word is
(...), 2 Timothy 1. 6. When this holy Fire is kindled in our Bosoms, we must blow
it up, and keep it burning. We must not be negligent and secure, for we cannot
reasonably imagine the idle and diligent should fare alike; that the Holy Ghost
will direct our Hearts into the Love of God, whether we will or not; therefore
not only as we are rational Agents, but as we are new Creatures, we are obliged
to use the Means, and then expect his Help and Blessing. What is a Prayer in
the Text, the Lord direct your Hearts into the Love of God, to the patient
waiting for Christ; is an Exhortation, Iud. 21. Keep your selves in the Love of
God, looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto everlasting life.
There is both again: you must look to your Love, that your Hearts be kept
straight and bent toward God, and not distracted with worldly Vanities. The
Blessing is from God, but you must use the Means; this Direction is not to
encourage Slothfulness, but Industry. We must charge it upon our selves, as our
main Work and Duty; the Spirit stirs and quickens, we must rouse up our selves.

3. It implies, there are many things would writhe and crook and turn our
Hearts another way; the Devil, the World, and the Flesh. The Devil seeks to
draw us off from God, to abate the Fervor of our Love toward him; therefore we
are bidden to flee youthful Lusts, (2 Timothy 2. 22.) that we may not be taken
captive by him at his will and pleasure. Some tamely yield to his Temptations,
and he does unto them as he lists: but there is more tugging and drawing to
get a serious Christian into his Snare. Therefore we are bidden to be sober and
watchful, for your Adversary the Devil, like a roaring Lion, goes about,
seeking whom he may devour. Sobriety is a sparing Use of worldly Delights; and
Vigilance is a serious Diligence in the use of all those holy Means whereby
Temptations may be vanquished. And as the Devil, so the Flesh; Iam. 1. 14. A
Man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his Lusts, being enticed, that is, by
seeking to please his fleshly Mind and Appetite. And then the World would
pervert us, and offers many Baits to that End and Purpose. 1 John 2. 15, 16.
Love not the World, nor the things of the World; for if any Man love the World,
the Love of the Father is not in him. For whatsoever is in the World, is either
the Lust of the Eyes, the Lust of the Flesh, or the Pride of Life; that is,
Pleasures, Riches, and Honors. These seem sweet Baits, but there is a
dangerous Hook in them, and your Love to God may soon be lessened. Well then,
this Directing is opposed to Wavering by reason of any of these Temptations, on
the one or the other side; that the Holiest may keep in us that ardent Love of
God, which of duty we owe to him.

4. Directing notes the Orderliness of the new Creature. There is not a more
beautiful thing in the World, when the Motions thereof are directed by the
Spirit; for then we are in a due posture both to God, our Neighbor, and our
selves. To God; for then the Creature is kept in a due subjection to Him, and
all our Motions and Actions are subordinated to his Glory. When we sin, we are
in rebellion against God, and set up the Creature against Him; as if it were
more amiable and fitter to content and delight the Soul than God, and so
disturb the Order and Harmony of the World, abusing both our selves, and all
things within our grasp, to a wrong End. Look as in the Motions of a Watch,
there is such a Proportion in every part, that if one Wheel be wrong, the whole
is put out of Frame: So the World, that was made for us, and we for God, is all
disordered, when we use the World for our selves, and not for God. So as to our
Neighbor. Self-lovers and Self-pleasers will never heartily do good to others.
The most sincere Commerce in the World is among those that love God. So for our
selves. Till the Love of God rule in our Hearts all is out of order. Look as in
the Body, if the Feet were there where the Head should be, the Disorder and
Deformity would be great: so it is in the Soul, when the Beast rides the Man,
and Conscience and Reason are made Slaves to Lust and Appetite. But when once a
Man is gained to love God, every thing is in frame again; Self-government is
restored, due Obedience to God is well provided for.

3. To give you some Reasons to show you the Necessity of this, both as to
Persons Regenerate, and Unregenerate.

1. The Necessity of God's Direction to Persons unregenerate. They cannot love
God, till the Lord direct and set their Hearts straight. It is a hard thing to
say (but we must not mince the matter) that in the carnal State we were all
Haters of God, Romans 1. 13. And it were well if this Enmity and Hatred were
thoroughly got out of our Hearts. How can this be? Nature tells us, that he from
whom we have received Being, and Life, and all Things, deserves our Love. I
answer; Though Men may see some Reason of Love to God, as he is our Creator and
Preserver; but as he is a Lawgiver and a Judge, so we all hate him. Three
Reasons there are of that natural Enmity that is in the Hearts of Men against
God. I would have you consider them seriously, that we may feelingly bewail our
own Aversion from God.

(1.) Our Inclination to carnal things, which prepossesseth our Hearts, and
then there is no Room for any Inclination to God. Naturally Men are addicted to
vain and sensual Delights; for that which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh, 2 John 16. Having no Principle to incline them to God, they wholly seek to please
the Flesh. When Men once lost Original Righteousness, they took up with what
came next to hand, and so became Lovers of Pleasures, more than Lovers of God,
2 Timothy 3. 4. And this Inclination: we cannot divest our selves of, till it be
cured by Grace. Therefore the Lord promises this Cure; Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The Lord
thy God will circumcise thine Heart, and the Heart of thy Seed, to love the
Lord thy God with all thine Heart, and with all thy Soul. The Heart must be
circumcised before it can love God. Till God pare away the Foreskin, and till
this carnal Love be mortified, there is no place for Divine Love to be raised
and quickened in our Hearts. We are entangled in the Love of worldly things, and
shall so remain till God bend the crooked Stick the other way, and God set our
Hearts right to himself.

(2.) The second Reason is Carnal Liberty; and so we hate God as a Lawgiver,
who would bridle our Lusts. There is in the Law the Precept and the Sanction.
The Precept is to our purpose; the Sanction will come to be considered in the
next. Because of God's Restraint, we cannot enjoy our Lusts with that freedom
and security we desire: his Law is in the way; therefore the Heart rises up
against God, because he has made a Law to forbid those things that we affect.
Romans 8. 7. The natural Mind is Enmity to God, for it is not subject to the Law
of God, neither can be. Col. 1. 21. Enemies in your Mind by evil Works. We love
Sin, therefore we hate God, who forbids it, and makes it so penal and damnable
to us.

(3.) Slavish Fear is the Cause of this Enmity. This relates to the Sanction
and Penalty of the Law; Thus we hate God, because we fear he will call us to
account for our Sins, and punish us. For a condemning God, barely apprehended
under that Notion, can never be loved by a guilty Creature. Thus Adam, when he
had sinned, ran away from God, and hid himself in the Bushes. Genesis 3. 7, 10.
Now it is in vain to come and tell them of the Goodness of God, and his
Perfections, till he change their Hearts. As you do in vain induce a guilty
Prisoner to love his Judge, to tell him he is a discreet Person, a Man of solid
Judgment, one well skilled and verst in the Law; this sticks, he is one that
will condemn him. Therefore the Gospel, as a Means to induce us to love God,
sets him forth, as a Sinpardoning God; There is Forgiveness with thee, that
thou may be feared.

2. Come we to the Regenerate. The Thessalonians did excel in all Graces, and
yet the Apostle prays, that the Lord would direct their Hearts to the Love of
God. Why?

(1.) Because there are many Defects of Love in the best. To give some
Instances.

First, Love signifies a strong Inclination, or an earnest Bent of Heart
toward God, as our chief Good, and last End. Well then, our End is our Measure
by which we judge of all Means, of the Aptness and Fitness of what is to be
avoided and embraced. The Seasonableness of all Means must be determined by the
End, that all Means that are inconsistent with, and impertinent to our great
End, may be cut off. Now all Sins are inconsistent with making God our great
End, and all vain and foolish Actions are impertinent thereunto. Judge you by
this, if we have such a perfect Love to God, if this be love, as questionless
it is. But now with how many impertinent and extravagant Actions do we fill up
our Lives? How many Purposes, Desires, Words, and Actions have we, that have no
respect to our great End at all? How much do we live to our selves, and how
little to God? How great a Passion have we for earthly things, so that they can
occupy and intercept the far greatest part of our Lives? and then judge, whether
we had not need have the bent kept up, and the tendency toward God, as our End
and Happiness. Psalm. 86. 11. Unite my Heart to the fear of thy Name. It is the
natural disease of Man's Heart to be loosed from God, and to be distracted in
variety of worldly Objects, which obtrude themselves upon our Senses, offer
themselves to us daily; therefore it is not enough for a Man once to resign
over his Heart to God, as we do in Conversion when this Love was first wrought
in us, but we need often to beg that God would reclaim us from this ranging
after carnal Vanities, that he would direct, and keep us straight, and true to
our end, that we may love him more, and at a better rate. So if you consider
the nature of Love; the thing is obvious and plain, unless the Lord maintain
this Love in us, and keep it up, what will become of us? The

2d Evidence is those slavish fears which do oppress us, and hinder our delight
in God, and comfortable Communion with him in the means of Grace. Certainly the
more we are under slavish fear, the less love we have to God, and thankfulness
for his Grace. The Apostle tells you, 1 John 4. 18. There is no fear in Love;
but perfect Love casts out fear: because fear has Torment: he that fears,
is not made perfect in Love. Surely we should seek after such a Spirit of Love,
that all we do for God may be done with great delight; that we may not serve
him by compulsion, but by inclination; not as injoined only, but as inclined;
not as putting a force upon our selves, but as delighting in our work. And then,

3dly. Another Instance is our frequent preferring the Profits and Pleasures of
the World, before the Service of God; and if it does not go so far as to
forfeit our right, yet how often do we expose and put our spiritual Comforts to
hazard for every trifle? As Esau, that sold his Birthright for a Morsel of
Meat, Heb. 12. 15, 16. The best of us show too much lothness to cut off the
right Hand, and to pluck out the right Eye, or to do that which is signified by
it. This shows a weakness of Love: for where Love is strong, there is a through
inclination to God; we dare Love nothing above him, or against him, or without
him.

4thly. Our backwardness to Obedience, and the tediousness we find in it, shows
a great Imperfection in our Love. All goes on easily, sweetly, acceptably,
where Love is at the bottom. Genesis 29. 20. Seven years to Jacob seemed as a few
days, for the Love that he had to Rachel: and so Love sweetens our Obedience;
His Commandments are not grievous. But when we are wedded to worldly things,
and will not be reclaimed from them, then every heavenly business is an
interruption to what we would be at, what we delight in.

5thly. The many conflicts we have with Carnal Self-Love, or our own foolish
and hurtful Lusts, show our Love is not perfect; as the weakness of Faith is
seen and felt by the remainders of unbelief, and our frequent conflicts with
doubts and fears; Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief, Mark 9. 24. So the
weakness of our Love is known by the opposition of carnal and inordinate
Self-love. The Flesh will say sometimes, Favor thy self, or, what a weariness
is it? Mal. 1. 13. and grudg every thing that is done for God. It does excuse
us in our straglings and deviations from our great End, and applaud us in our
negligent course of living; as the sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, than
seven Men that can render a reason, Prove. 26. 16. Nay sometimes it will urge us
to please our selves to the grief of the Spirit, and to take our fill of carnal
delights. All this belongs to the first Reason.

2. There needs much to be done about our Love, after it is planted in the
Soul; we need to get it rooted, to get it increased, to get it continually
excited, and kept in act and exercise.

(1.) We need to get it rooted. Our first Affection to God and Heavenly things
may hastily put forth it self; as the early Blossoms of the Spring do, but they
are soon nipt; and those high Tides of Affections, which we find in our first
acquaintance with Religion, afterward sink low enough. Love is more
passionately expressed at first, partly by reason of the novelty of the things
represented to us, and partly because of our great necessity; as Men that are
in a violent thirst take large draughts with pleasure: and because our Love is
not as yet dispersed into the several Channels of Obedience, but wholly taken
up with admirations of Grace, but yet this may vanish and decay. Our business
is to be rooted and grounded in Love, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 3. 7. to get a
more solid durable affection to God.

(2.) After it is Planted, it needs to be more Increased, Phil. 1. 9. I pray
God your Love may abound yet more and more. At first Love is but weak; there is
Fire, but it is not blown up into a Flame; afterward God gets a greater
interest in our Hearts, and then the constitutions of our Souls become more
Holy and Heavenly. Love being the Heart of the new Creature, he that has most
Love, has most Grace, and is the best and strongest Christian.

(3.) After it is planted in the Soul, it needs to be excited, and kept in Act
and Exercise. This is mainly intended here. For

1. All Religion is in Effect but Love. Faith is a thankful acceptance of
Christ, and thankfulness is an expression of Love. Repentance is but Mourning
Love; as she wept much, to whom much was forgiven, Luke 7. 47. Diligence in the
Holy Life, is but seeking Love. Obedience is pleasing Love. Self-denial is the
Mortification of inordinate Self-Love. Sobriety is a retrenching of our carnal
Love.

2. If Love be not acted and kept at work, carnal Love will prevail. The Soul
of Man cannot lie idle, especially our Affections cannot: either they are
carried out to God, or they will leak out to Worldly things. When our Love
cease, yet concupiscence cease not, and the Love of the World will soon
grow Superior, in the Soul; for the neglected Principle languisheth, whilst
the other Principle gets strength, and secures its Interest to God. The

3d. Is, The Benefit we have by keeping Love in Act. This makes us more
sincere, and to act purely for God, 2 Cor. 5. 14. The love of Christ constrains
us: for we thus judge, that they that live should no more live to themselves,
but to him that died for them, and rose again. The constraining Influence of
Love is that that keeps us from living to our selves. And this makes us more
diligent. Labor and Love are often coupled in the Scripture; Knowing your
labor of love, the work of Faith and Patience of Hope. And God is not
unrightoeus to forget your labor of Love. The Church of Ephesus lost her first
Love, she left her first work. Rev. 2. 4, 5.

Use. Oh then let us seek this Benefit from God: that our Hearts may be
directed into his Love.

1. The sanctifying Spirit is given us for this end, to stir up love to God,
Joh. 41. 4. The Water I will give him shall be a Well of Water always springing
up unto eternal Life. It Is not in the Heart a dead Pool, but a living Spring.
And the same is intimated Joh. 7. 38. He that believes in me, out of his Belly
shall flow Rivers of living Water, this he spoke of the Spirit.

2. The Ordinances were appointed for this End. The Word to represent God
amiable to us, both for the goodness in him, and the goodness proceeding from
him; especially in our Redemption by Christ, and also for those rich
preparations of Grace he has made for us in another World, to blow up this
holy Fire: And this is the end of the Sacrament. All the Dainties that are set
before us in the Lord's Supper do all taste and savor of Love. Our Meat is
seasoned with Love, and our Drink flows into our Cup out of the Wine Press of
Love. Why do we eat of the Crucified Body of Christ? but that we may remember
Jesus who loved us, and gave himself for us, Gal. 2. 20. And also the Drink
that is provided for us at this Feast, is the Blood of Christ. Rev. 1. 5. Who
loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood.

3. All the Providence of God tend to this End, that we may love God. All
God's Mercies are as new Fuel to keep in this Fire. I will love the Lord,
because he has heard the Voice of my Supplication, Psalm. 116. 1. And thou shall
love the Lord, who is the strength of thy Life, and the length of thy Days,
Deuteronomy. 30. 20. All the Mercy we have from God is to refresh and revive our Love
that it may not languish and die: nay all the sharp corrections God sends, are
to recover our Love to God. Isa. 26. 9. My Soul has desired thee in the Night,
says the Prophet, and early have I sought thee, and when was that? when thy
Judgments were abroad in the World, when great and sharp afflictions were upon
them.

SERMON VII.
2 THESSALONIANS. 3. 5. -- And into the patient waiting for Christ.
THe Words are a Prayer: and the Apostle prays here for those things, which are
most necessary to Christians; Love to God, and patient waiting for Christ. I
come now to handle the second Branch.

The Point is this:

Doct. That when the Heart is bent by love to God, we need also the direction
of his Grace to keep it intent upon the coming of Christ.
Four things I must speak to.

I. What this patient waiting for Christ is. II. The Connection between it, and
the Love of God. III. That it has a great influence upon the spiritual Life,
or keeps Religion alive in the Soul. IV. The Necessity of God's concurrence
hereto, the Lord direct your Hearts into the patient waiting for Christ.
I. What is this patient waiting for Christ? I answer, it is the Grace of Hope,
fortifying our resolutions for God, and the World to come, that we may continue
in our Duty, till our work be finished, and our warfare ended. The Act of Hope
is three ways expressed. Sometimes by Looking, which notes a certain expectation.
Tit. 2. 13. Looking for the blessed Hope, and the glorious appearing of the
great God, and our Savior. Sometimes by Loving or Longing, which notes a
desirous and earnest expectation: 2 Timothy 4. 8. Not to me only, but to all that
love his appearing. Sometimes by Waiting, which notes a patient Expectation; 1 Thessalonians. 10. He makes it there the Fruit of our Conversion, He says, we are
turned to God, that we may wait for his Son from Heaven. This last Notion is
expressly mentioned in the Text, the other are implied: as looking; there can be
no waiting for that we do not look for: and longing, for delay is only
troublesome to them, that earnestly desire his coming, and build their Hopes
upon it. Faith adds certainty, and Love earnestness, and both give strength to
Patience. Let us open all these things. As

1. Looking for the coming of Christ. Phil. 3. 20. Our Conversation is in
Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. It is
not a matter of conjecture, but of Faith. Reason says, he may come, but Faith
says he will come. Nature will teach us it is very likely, for a guilty
Conscience fears the Judge: and the course of things is so disordered in the
World, that there needs a review. But Scripture tells us, it is very certain,
that he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. Heb. 10. 37. Therefore
in the Eye of Faith it is sure and near. As Rebecca spied Isaac at a distance:
so Faith looks upon Christ, as if he had begun his Journey, and were now upon
the way, and makes the Believer stand ready to meet him, and welcome him.
Though it come not to pass presently, the thing is promised, and the time
certainly determined in God's external purpose, which is enough for Faith.

2. There is a Longing or a desirous Expectation. 2 Pet. 3. 12. Looking for,
and hasting unto the coming of the day of God. It is good to observe how
differently this Coming of Christ is entertained in the World; It is questioned
by the Atheist, it is dreaded by the Wicked and Impenitent, but it is longingly
expected by the Godly.

(1.) For the first sort. 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. There shall come in the last days
Scoffers, walking after their own Lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of
his coming? They would eternally enjoy the Pleasures of the present World, and
therefore labor to dash all thoughts of this great Day out of their Hearts,
and take up all obvious prejudices to smother the belief of it: they would be
glad in their Hearts to hear such news, that Christ would never come. Now their
wishes do easily commence into opinion. Christ's coming is the burden and
torment they would willingly get rid of. And Men readily believe, what they
earnestly desire.

(2.) The second sort. It is dreaded by the Wicked and Impenitent. And
therefore hated and abhorred by them. At the mention of it Felix trembled, Acts
24. 2. There is reason for it; for Christ comes to them as a terrible Judge. In
Scripture his coming is set forth by Light, and sometimes by Fire. Light is
comfortable, but Fire dreadful. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. He shall come in flames of Fire,
to render vengeance to them that obey not the Gospel. But

(3.) To the Godly, it is not matter of Terror, but Delight; not like the
handwriting on the Wall to Belshazzer, but like comfortable tidings to one
that expects news from far; they long for it, and would hasten it, if they
might have their desire. Cant. 8. 14. Make haste, my Beloved, and be like a
young Heart, or Row, upon the Mountains of Spices. Christ is not slack, but the
Churches Affections are strong; therefore she says, Make haste. So Rev. 22.
20. Christ says, I come; and the Church like a quick echo takes the words out
of his Mouth, even so, come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. Christ's Voice, and the
Churches Voice are Unisons. You will say this is the desire of the Church in
general; but does every particular Believer so desire it? I answer, the part
follows the reason of the whole, the same Spirit is in all the Faithful; the
Spirit in the Bride says, come; the Holy Ghost in necessary things works
uniformly in all the Saints, therefore he breeds this desire in them. The
meanest, the weakest, even those that tremble at their own unpreparedness, have
some inclination that way. There may be a drowziness and indisposition, but no
total extinction of the desire of meeting with Christ.

3. There is Waiting; and here it is expressed by its adjunct, patient waiting,
for patient waiting is an act of Hope, as well as longing expectation. 1 Thessalonians.
1. 3. Knowing, says he, your work of Faith, and labor of Love, and patience
of Hope. Faith, or a sound belief of things, will break out into practice;
therefore the work of Faith, Love, will put us upon Labor, and Hope produces
Patience. There is a threefold Patience spoken of in Scripture, all the
branches are near akin, for they are all begotten by Hope.

1. The bearing Patience; which is a constancy in Adversity, or a perseverance
in our Duty notwithstanding the difficulties and trials that we meet with in
our passage to Heaven. Heb. 6. 12. Be ye Believers of them, who through Faith
and Patience have inherited the Promises. As we cannot inherit the Promises
without Faith, so not without Patience: for our Obedience and Fidelity to
Christ requires not only labor and great pains, but courage and constancy to
suffer as well as to do. Heb. 10. 36. Ye have need of Patience, that after ye
have done the will of God, you might inherit the Promise. A Child of God cannot
be without Patience, because he must reckon for troubles and molestations. We
have indeed our calms as well as our storms; many intermissions, but at other
times God will exercise us, and show us our Fidelity is not sufficiently tried
in doing good; but before we go to Heaven, we must sometimes suffer evil. God
has something to do by us, and something to do with us: We must be prepared
for both, to endure all things, and readily and willingly suffer the greatest
evil, rather than commit the least Sin, that so at length we may be accepted in
the Judgment.

2. There is a waiting Patience, to wait God's leisure. The evil is present,
the good is absent; now we long for the good as well as bear the evil. Romans 8.
25. But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it.
This is the work of Patience, to wait; to refer it to the good pleasure of God
when our Warfare shall be accomplished, and our Troubles at an end, and our
final Deliverance come about. The time cannot belong: for what are a few years
to Eternity? This waiting Patience is delivered to us under the Similitude of
an Husbandman, Jam. 5. 7. who waits for the precious Fruits of the Earth, and
has long Patience for it, till he receive the early and the latter rain. The
Husbandman, that has laid out all his Substance in Seed-Corn, cannot hope for
a present Harvest, or that he should receive the Crop as soon as the Seed is
cast into the Ground; no, it must lie a while there, it must endure all
Weathers, before it can spring up in the Blade and Ear, and ripen, and be fit
to be reaped. So though we venture all upon our everlasting hopes, yet we must
expect our Season, till we see the fruit and recompense of it. This is the
waiting Patience.

3. There is the working Patience; which is a going on with our self-denying
Obedience, how tedious soever it be to the Flesh. Thus we are told, the good
Ground brings forth fruit with Patience. They were hasty to have present
satisfaction, or else grew weary of Religion, and turned aside to worldly
things. So the Heirs of the promises are described, Romans 2. 7. To be those that
continued with Patience in well-doing. And to the Church of Ephesus, God says,
Rev. 2. 2. I know thy works, thy labor, and thy Patience. Religion is not an
idle and sluggish profession, the work of it is carried on by diligence and
faithfulness. Lusts are not easily mortified; neither do Graces produce their
perfect work with a little perfunctory care. Much labor, and serious diligence
is required of us; we have many things to conflict withal, there is the burden
of a wearisom Body, the seducing Flesh, unruly Passions, disordered Thoughts, a
dark Mind, dead Affections, and sometimes the misery of a troubled Conscience
that we conflict withal: and therefore we need much Patience, that we may not
faint, but be accepted of the Lord at his coming. Well then, to live in this
constant and patient expectation of Christ is the perpetual necessary duty of
all those that love him.

II. The Connection and Affinity between it and the Love of God. For if a Man
love God, he will wait for the coming of Christ. The one is inferred out of the
other, The Lord direct your Hearts to the love of God, and the patient waiting
for Christ.

1. They that love God, level all their thoughts and desires to this, that God
may be enjoyed, that God may be glorified.

(1.) That he may be enjoyed, in the fullest manner and measure they are
capable of. Now this full enjoyment is the fruit of Christ's coming; then we
shall be ever with the Lord. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. When Christ shall appear, we shall
see him as he is, and be like him; that is, like him in Holiness, and like him
in Happiness. Our Vision will make a Transformation. The desire of Union, which
is so intrinsic to Love, is never satisfied till then. Here we have a little
of God in the midst of Sin and Misery, Sin straitens our capacity from
receiving more; and God sees fit to exercise us with Misery, only affording us
an intermixture of heavenly Comfort. But our full Joy is reserved to the Day of
Christ's appearing.

(2.) They that love God, desire also that God may be glorified, that his Truth
may be vindicated, his Love and Justice demonstrated. His Truth is vindicated,
because his Threatenings and Promises are all accomplished: Sin will no more be
had in Honor, nor Pride and Sensuality bear sway. Love to the Saints will be
seen in their full reward, and his Justice demonstrated on the wicked in their
full Punishment. All matters of Faith shall then become matters of Sense; and
what is now propounded to be believed, shall be felt, and God shall be
glorified in all.

2. The Saints love Christ as Mediator, we love him now though we see him not.
1 Pet. 1. 8. Whom having not seen, we love; and believing in him, rejoice with
Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory. But desire to see him, as our surest and
best Friend. We have heard much of him, felt much of him, and tasted much of
him, but we desire to see him, especially when he shall appear in all his
Glory. Mat. 25. 31. The Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and all his Angels
with him. All Clouds about his Person shall vanish, he shall appear to be, what
he is, the Savior and Judge of the World.

3. They have a love for the Church; for the Church in general shall at that
day be adorned as a Bride for her Husband, and fully freed from all Sin and
trouble. It Is no more eclipsed by its lamentable Imperfections, corruption of
Worship, division of Sects, or the persecutions of the World, nor polluted by
the Distempers of its diseased Members: all is then Holy and Glorious. Christ
will present it as a Glorious Church without spot or wrinkle. Ephesians. 2. 7.

4. They love themselves in God; and their own Happiness is then fully to be
perfected. All the desires and hopes of Believers are then satisfied. They that
are now scorned and persecuted, shall have the reward of their love to God, be
perfectly loved by him. A gladsom day it will be with God's people. 2 Thessalonians. 1.
10. It is said, Christ shall be admired in the Saints, and glorified in all
them that believe. Glorified not actively, but objectively. Poor Creatures,
that are newly crept out of the Dust and Rottenness shall have so much Glory
put upon them, that the Angels themselves shall stand wondering, what Christ
means to do for them. And then for all their labor they shall have rest, they
shall rest from their labors; that is, all their troublesome work shall be
over, for their pain and sorrow they shall have delight. 1 Pet. 4. 12. For
their shame they shall have Glory put upon them both in Body and Soul. Our Lord
Christ despised the Shame for the Glory set before him, Heb. 12. 2.

III. It has a great Influence upon the Spiritual Life, and keeps Religion
alive in our Souls. That will appear if you take either word in the Text,
Waiting or Patience.

1. If you take the first Notion, Waiting or Looking, as it draws off the Mind
from things present to things to come.

1. Looking to the end of things gives Wisdom, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Oh that they were
wise, that they would consider their latter end. It is not so much to be stood
upon, who is happy now, but who shall be happy at last. If Men would frequently
consider this, it would much rectify all the mistakes in the World. If we would
inure our Minds not to look to things as they seem at present, or relish to the
Flesh, or appear now to such shortsighted Creatures as we are, but as they will
be judged of at the last day, at Christ's appearing: How soon would this vain
show be over, and the Face of things changed, and what is Rich, and Pleasant,
and Honorable now, appear base and contemptible at the latter end? Then shall
we see, that there is an excellency in oppressed Godliness, that exalted
Wickedness and Folly is but shame and ruin. Do but translate the Scene from
the World's Judgment to Christ's Tribunal, and you will soon alter your
opinions concerning Wisdom and Folly, Misery and Happiness, Liberty and
Bondage, Shame and Glory; the mistaking of which Notions pervert all mankind,
and there is no rectifying the mistake, but by carrying of our Mind seriously
to the last. review of all things: For then we shall judge things not by what
they seem now, but by what they will be hereafter. Solomon tells us Prove. 19.
20. Hear Counsel, and receive Instruction, that thou may be wise in thy
latter end. That is true Wisdom to be found wise at last. Time will come, when
we shall wish and say in vain; Oh that we had laid up treasure in Heaven, that
we had labored for the Meat that perishes not, that we had esteemed despised
Holiness, that we had set less by all the vanities of the World, that we had
imitated the strictest and most mortified Believer, for those are only esteemed
and have honor in that Day. More particularly,

(1.) It would much quicken us to Repentance. Acts 3. 19. Repent and be
converted, that your Sins may be blotted out, when the day of refreshing shall
come from the presence of the Lord. All things shall be reviewed at Christ's
coming, and some Men's Sins remain, and others are blotted out: None but those
that are converted and turned to God can expect that Benefit. Unless we be
recovered from the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and brought back again in
Heart and Life to God, there will be no escape. Now those that wait for this
day, should prepare for it, that they may stand in the Judgment with comfort.
The wicked shall have Judgment without Mercy, but the Believer shall be
accepted upon terms of Grace. Days of torment shall come to the one from the
presence of the Lord, and days of refreshing shall come to the other. The state
in the World of believing Penitents is a time of Conflict, Labor and Sorrow,
but this trouble and toil is then over, and they shall enjoy their rest.
Consider these things, Where would you have your refreshment, and in what? Many
seek their refreshing now either in brutish pleasures, and sit down under the
shadow of some earthly Gourd, which soon withers; but those that seek their
refreshment in the enjoyment of God, shall then be satisfied. Nothing certainly
makes us so sollicitous about a serious Reconciliation with God, as the
Consideration of this Day.

(2.) It engages us to Holiness, and puts Life into our Obedience. We that
look for such things, what manner of Persons ought we to be in all holy
Conversation and Godliness? 2 Pet. 3. 11. Men are secure and careless, either
because they do not believe this Day, or do not seriously think of it. Could we
bring ourselves to this, to think and speak and do, as having Judgment and
Eternity in our Eye, we would be other manner of Persons than ever we have
been. What! believe this Day, and be so careless! it cannot be. We would not
beat down the Price of Religion to so low a rate, nor serve God so loosly, if
we did wait for the Coming of Christ, who will bring every thing into the
Judgment, whether it be good or evil; we could not then satisfy our selves in
such a negligent Profession and Practice of Godliness.

(3.) It would produce a more heavenly Temper and Conversation. That is evident
from the Apostle's words, Phil. 3. 20. Our Conversation is in Heaven, from
whence we look for a Savior. Looking for this Salvation, and this Savior, it
breeds in us the Heavenly Mind. He comes from Heaven to bring us thither, for
he comes to receive us to himself; Io. 14. 3. therefore if we be not heavenly,
our Practice will be a Contradiction to our Faith. You believe that there is a
God, and a Christ, and a Life to come; that this Christ came from God, to bring
us to God, that we may enjoy him in the Life to come; and thereupon you
renounce the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and give up your selves to God,
believing that this Christ will come again to lead all his sincere Disciples
and penitent Believers into the Glory and Happiness of the Heavenly State. If
you believe this, what follows? That your Conversation must be Heavenly, either
you must live for Heaven, as seeking it with all diligence, that you may at
length certainly obtain it, and not be excluded with the wicked; or live upon
Heaven, solacing your selves in the foresight and hopes of it: otherwise to
profess this Faith, and yet to live as though your Happiness were altogether in
this World, were to go about to reconcile Contradictions; to pretend you place
your Blessedness in Heaven, and yet fly from it as a Misery; you profess to
look and long for that you have no mind to. The second Notion is Patience.

2. Patience, that also has a great Influence upon Religion; for that which
destroys all Religion and Godliness is making haste: therefore it is said,
Isa. 28. 16. He that believes, shall not make haste. God's Promises are not
presently effected; and if we cannot tarry, but run to our own Shifts, because
they are next at hand, presently you run into a Snare. On the other side it is
said, Lament. 3. 26. It is good to hope, and quietly to wait for the Salvation
of God. When we can hope and wait, it mightily secures our Obedience. Sense is
all for present Satisfaction, but Faith and Hope can tarry God's leisure, till
those better things which he has promised do come in hand. Whatever our
Condition be, afflicted or prosperous, we are in the place and station where
God has set us, and there we must abide till he bring us to his Kingdom.
Impatience and Precipitation is the Cause of all Mischief. What moved the
Israelites to make a Golden Calf, but Impatience, not waiting for Moses, who
according to their Mind and Fancy remained too long with God in the Mount? What
made Saul force himself to offer Sacrifice, but because he could not tarry an
hour longer for Samuel, and so lost the Kingdom? 1 Samuel 13. 12, 13, 14. What
made the bad Servant, or Church Officer, to smite his Fellow Servants, and eat
and drink with the drunken, that is, to abuse Church Censures, countenance the
Profane, and smite and curb the Godly, but only this, Mat. 24. 48. My Lord
delays his Coming? He sees the strictest are hated in the World, and the others
befriended, and Honor and Interest runs that way, and Christ comes not to
rectify these Disorders: My Lord delays his Coming. Hasty Men are loath to be
kept in Suspense, and long Expectation, and so miscarry. Look to all Sorts of
Sinners: The Carnal and Sensual, they cannot wait for the Time when they shall
have Pleasures for evermore at God's right Hand, therefore take up with present
Delights; like those cannot tarry till the Grapes be ripe, therefore eat them
sour and green: solid and everlasting Pleasures they cannot wait for,
therefore choose the Pleasures of Sin, that are but for a season. A covetous
Man will wax rich in a day, and cannot tarry the fair Leisure of Providence;
therefore we are told, He that makes haste to be rich, cannot be innocent,
Prove. 20. 21. An ambitious Man will not stay till God gives true Crowns and
Honors in his Kingdom, and therefore he must have Honor and Greatness here,
though his Climbing and Affecting to be built one Story higher in the World
cost him the Ruin and Loss of his Soul. All Revolt and Apostasy from God
proceeds from hence, because they cannot wait for God's Help, and tarry his
fulfilling the Promise; but finding themselves pressed and destitute, the Flesh
that is tender and delicate grows impatient. It is tedious to suffer for a
while, but they do not consider it is more tedious to suffer for evermore.
Thence comes also our murmuring and distrustful Repining, Psalm. 31. 22. I said
in my haste, I am cut off; nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my
Supplication: Just at that time when God was about to hear him. So, I said in
my haste, all Men are liars. And thence also our unlawful Attempts, and
stepping out of God's way. Men fly to unwarrantable Means, because they cannot
depend upon God, and wait with patience. Look as an impetuous River is always
troubled and thick; so is a precipitate impatient Spirit out of order, full of
distemper, a ready Prey to Satan.

IV. The Necessity of Divine Concurrence. The Apostle prays here, The Lord
direct your Hearts into the Love of God, and the patient Waiting for Christ. It
concerns this Clause as well as the former.

1. As to the Carnal and Unregenerate. Till their Hearts be changed, they can
never attain to this patient waiting for Christ, for two Reasons.

(1.) In the wicked there is no sound Belief of these things, for they live by
Sense, and not by Faith. The Apostle tells us, He that lacks Grace, is blind,
and cannot see afar of, 2 Pet. 1. 9. Things of another World are too uncertain,
and too far off for them to apprehend, so as to be much moved by them. They
hear of the Coming of Christ, and speak by rote of it after others, but they do
not believe it, therefore till God enlighten them, how shall they be affected
with this matter?

(2.) There is an utter Unsuitableness of Heart to them. Things present, that
suit their Fancies, and please their Senses, carry away their Hearts. Psalm. 49.
18. Whilst he lived, he blessed his Soul: and Men will praise thee, when thou
do well to thy self. Men bless themselves, and the carnal World applauds
them in a sensual Course and Way of Living. They measure all Happiness by their
outward Condition in the World, and please themselves with golden Dreams of
Contentment; and this being seconded with the flattery and applauses of the
deceived World, they are fast asleep in the midst of the greatest Soul-Dangers,
and so go down into Hell before they think of it.

2. Come we now to the Regenerate. Such the Apostle looks upon the
Thessalonians to be. They need to have their Hearts directed to the patient
waiting for Christ, for these Reasons.

(1.) Because we have too dim and doubtful a foresight of these things. How
dark a Prospect have even the best of God's Children of the World to come? We
may speak of others as Unbelievers, but God knows how doubtful our own Thoughts
are about Eternity and Christ's Coming; how little we can shut the Eye of
Sense, and open that of Faith, and say truly with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4. 18. We
look not at the Things that are seen, that are temporal; but to the Things
unseen, that are Eternal. Alas! we have no through Sight into another World.
The best Christians have need to have their Eyes anointed with spiritual
Eye Salve, that their Sight may be more sharp and piercing; to beg the Spirit
of Wisdom and Revelation, to open the Eyes of their Mind, that they may see
what is the Hope of Christ's calling, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. There are too many
intervening Clouds between us and Eternity, that darken our Sight, and obscure
our Faith.

(2.) Our Thoughts of these things are strange and dull, and too rare and
unfrequent. How seldom have we any serious thoughts of his Coming, and how
unwelcom are they to our Hearts? It was a Complaint against Israel, that they
did put far away the evil Day; but the Complaint against us may be taken up
thus, that we put far away the good Day, when all our Desires and Hopes shall
be accomplished and satisfied. The Atheistical World deny it, and we forget it.
Solomon says to the sensual young Man, Remember, that for all these things God
shall bring thee to Judgment. Young Men forget or put off these Thoughts, lest,
like cold Water cast into a boiling Pot, they should check the Fervor of their
Lusts. But alas! grave Men, good Men, forget these things. When Christ had
spoken of his Coming to Judgment, he says, Mark 13. last v. What I say unto
you, I say unto all, Watch. Watching is keeping up this Attentiveness to his
second Coming with all Christian Vigilance and Endeavor. But few regard the
Charge; therefore the Lord direct your Hearts, etc.

(3.) Because our Affections are so cold, and we are no more affected with it,
but as if we were senseless of the weight of these things. Some dead and drousy
Desires we have, but not that lively Motion which will become Hope and Love. If
Nature say, Come not to torment us before the time; Grace should say, Come,
Lord Jesus, O come quickly. We are not only to look for his Appearing, but to
love his Appearing. Where are these Desires, that Christ would either come down
to us, or take us up to himself, that we may live with him for ever?

(4.) This Prayer need to be made for the Renewed too, because Christians think
of it with too much perplexity and fear. Is the Sight of a Savior unwelcom to
you? Or, should the drawing nigh of your Redemption be a Comfort, or a Terror?
Why do you then believe in Christ, and choose his Favor for your Happiness? We
thought that this had been all your Hope, and your Desire, and your great
Comfort; and shall your Hope be your Torment, and beget Horror rather than Joy?
O beg the Lord to direct your Hearts, that you may hope to the end for the
Grace that shall be brought unto you at the Revelation of the Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 13. We do not only wait for Glory, but for Grace: and shall
not this be a Comfort to you?

(5.) We need to pray this Prayer, because our Preparations are too slender for
so great a Day. Serious Preparation is necessary. It Is described, 1 Pet. 3. 14.
Wherefore, Beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent, that ye
may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless; that is, In a State
of Reconciliation with God. But we live too securely and quietly in an
unprepared State. If we have the habitual Preparation, we do not keep up the
actual Preparation, by clarifying and refining our Souls from the Dregs of
Sense, by honoring God in the World with greater earnestness, that when our
Lord comes, he may find us so doing. We do not stand with our Loins girt, and
our Lamps burning, that when the Lord knocks, we may open to him immediately.
We do not keep up the Heavenly Desire, the actual Readiness. The Return of a
Husband after long Absence is more welcome to the Wife, than to a Harlot; but
she would have all things ready for his Reception and Entertainment.

(6.) Because our Motions are too inconstant. We interrupt the Course of our
Obedience frequently, faint in our Afflictions, do not keep up the Fervor of
our Affections, and follow after Salvation with that industrious diligence. We
need often the Christian Watchword, The Lord is at hand. We lose much of our
first Love, intermit of our first Works. Therefore, the Lord direct your Hearts
to the patient waiting for Christ.

The Exhortation is, To quicken you to take care of this Grace, that you may be
constantly exercised in it. While we are upon Earth, we should continually be
expecting Christ's Coming from Heaven. The Motives may be these;

1. Before Christ's Coming in the Flesh, the Saints waited for him. I have
waited for thy Salvation, O Lord, says Jacob, Genesis 49. 18. And Simeon for
Christ, the Savior of the World; for so it is explained, Mine Eyes have seen
thy Salvation. And our Lord tells us, Abraham rejoiced to see my Day, Joh. 8.
56. And it is said of Anna, and others, That they waited for the Consolation of
Israel, Luke 2. 25, 38. And after Christ was come, the Disciples were commanded
to wait for the Promise of the Spirit, Acts 1. 4. So by parity of Reason we
must wait for the Coming of Christ, for that is the next great Promife to be
accomplished, and the great Thing to put Life into our Religion.

2. The People of God are described by this, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. Who wait for his
Son from Heaven, whom he raised from the Dead, even Jesus, which delivered us
from the Wrath to come. A Man would have thought in those early Days, they
should have heen described by their respect to what was past, rather than to
what was to come, which was at so great a distance: they should have been
described by believing Christ was already come in the Flesh, rather than
waiting for his Coming in Glory. No; this is proposed as an Evidence of their
Sincerity and Christianity, waiting for the Coming of Christ. And so it is
said, Heb. 9. 28. That Christ would appear unto the Salvation of them that look
for him. That is the Property of true Believers. But they that look not for his
Coming, love not and look not for his Coming, cannot expect his Salvation. It
is an Allusion to the People, who, upon the Day of Expiation, when the
High Priest went into the Holiest before the Mercy-Seat, were waiting for his
coming out, that he might solemnly bless them. So must we look for Christ's
Return, now he is gone within the Vail of the Heavenly Sanctuary, that he may
come out, and bless us with everlasting Blessings.

3. This should move us to it, the Benefits that will come to us hereby. For
this waiting for Christ breeds in us Contempt of the World, Mortification of
the Flesh, Tolerance, and enduring of the Cross.

(1.) It breeds in us Contempt of the World; Because we look for higher and
better things to be dispensed to us when Christ comes. Set not your Affections
on things on Earth, but on things in Heaven: Why? For your Life is hid with
Christ in God. And when Christ, who is our Life, shall appear, then shall you
also appear with him in Glory, Col. 3. 2, 3, 4. The more the Heart is given to
one, the other gets the less. Earthly things be little regarded in comparison
of that glorious State, both of Soul and Body, which we shall have at Christ's
Appearance.

(2.) This conduces to the Mortification of the Flesh; therefore we deny our
selves present Satisfactions, that we may not be Cast-aways, disallowed in the
Judgment. Be sober, and hope to the end, for the Grace that is to be brought
to you at the Coming of Christ, 1. Pet. 1. 13.

(3.) The Tolerance and Enduring of the Cross. This gives a quiet Temper in all
Troubles. We may suffer now, but when Christ shall appear, we shall rejoice
with exceeding Joy, 1 Pet. 4. 13. And then our Reward will very much exceed the
Proportion of our Sufferings; they are no more to be set against them, than a
Feather against a Talent of Lead. I reckon they are not worthy to be compared,
says the Apostle, Romans 8. 18. It would be a Disgrace to a Man's Reason, that
these things should bear any Competition with our great Hopes; these light
Afflictions, that are but for a Moment, with that exceeding Weight of Glory,
Christ shall bestow upon us.

For Means, All I shall say is this; If you wait for Christ's Coming, look upon
it as sure, and as near. Rev. 22. 12. Behold, I come quickly, and bring my
Reward with me. We have the Promise of the Eternal God for it, so attested, and
made out to us with such Evidence, that we have no reason to doubt of the
Recompenses of Religion. But Things at a distance, though never so great, will
not leave a due Impression upon us: therefore we must look upon this Promise
with a certainty of Persuasion, that it will not be long before its
Accomplishment. Thus Faith lessens the distance between Hope and Enjoyment, and
enables us comfortably, to wait.

SERMON VIII.
EPHESIANS. 1. 8. Wherein he has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence.
IN the context the Apostle speaks of the Spiritual Blessings we have by
Christ: he considers them under a threefold reference. 1. As they were
appointed and prepared for Believers in God's Decree of Election. There was the
first Stone laid toward this Building. 2. As they were purchased by Christ in
the great and wonderful work of Redemption. 3. As conveyed and applied to us in
effectual calling, and so brought home to our Souls. In all these God gave
evident proofs of the riches of his free Grace. For (1.) If he choose us to be
holy before the Foundations of the World; nothing anteceded his Love: not in
us, for there was nothing in being then, we were not, and so could do nothing
to deserve it: nor in that prospect and foresight which God had of Things; for
he could foresee nothing, but what was the effect of his free Grace: not
because Holy, but that we might be Holy and without blame before him in Love.
(2.) Consider his purpose to bring about all this by Christ, still he showed
his free Grace. For when there was nothing to move him, much to hinder the
design of his Grace, yet he found out a way to bring this about by Christ. (3.)
In the effectual application to us who were ignorant, obstinate, unbelieving,
his Grace does more shine forth, that he would do all this for Creatures so
much unworthy. Now in the Application God discovers two things. 1. His abundant
Favor or the Riches of his Grace, verse. 7. That his Love, so long hid in his
Decree, did afterward overflow in the effects, to persons so averse and
unworthy. 2. His excellent Wisdom in the Text. Wherein he has abounded to us
in all Wisdom and Prudence.

The only difficulty in the Words is, What is this Wisdom and Prudence spoken
of? Whether it imply the Wisdom of God, or the Wisdom wrought in us by the
Spirit in Conversion? Many Interpreters go for the last. The former, I suppose,
is here meant, which is eminently discovered in the Mysteries of the Gospel.
Romans 11. 33. Oh the Depths of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of
God! Surely it is not meant of Wisdom in us; for how little a portion have we
of true and Heavenly Wisdom? Now the two words used; Wisdom notes the
sublimity of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and Prudence the usefulness of it. As
Prove. 8. 12. I Wisdom dwell with Prudence, which shows there is some
distinction between those words. It was Wisdom to find out a way of recovering
lapsed Mankind, and it was Prudence to dispose it into so good and convenient
order that it might be commodious for our acceptance. If any think it relates
to the effects wrought in us, I am not against it. Christ is Wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.
24. and made Wisdom to us, 1. Cor. 1. 30. These Asiaticks, to whom the Apostle
wrote, gloried in their secular Wisdom and curious Arts: now the true Wisdom
was found in the Mysteries of the Gospel.

Doct. That in the dispensation of Grace by Christ. God has showed great
Wisdom and Prudence.
When his Grace overflowed to us, he showed therein not only his Goodness but
his Wisdom. Now though we can easily yield to this Assertion, yet to make it
out needs more skill. The manifold Wisdom of God is better seen to Angels
than to us, Ephesians. 3. 10. They have more orderly understandings; whereas we are
confused and dark. Yet to discover it to you in a few particulars, the Grace of
the Redeemer may be considered three ways.

I. As to the purchase and impetration of it, by the Incarnation and Death of
the Son of God. II. The publication of it in the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace.
III. The Application of it to particular Believers. In all these God has
showed great Wisdom.
I. As to the purchase and impetration of Grace by the Death and Incarnation of
the Son of God.

1. There is Wisdom in this, that in our fallen estate we should not come
immediately to God without a Mediator and Reconciler. God is out of the reach
of our commerse, being at such a distance from us, and variance with us. The
wise Men of the World pitched on such a way, 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6. The Heathens saw
so far that it was an uncomfortable thing to make their immediate approaches to
their Supreme God. But here is the true God, and the true Mediator. But to us
there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. One God the Father,
from whom we derive all Graces, to whom we direct all Services: one Lord Jesus
Christ, who conveyeth the Graces and Benefits to us, and returns our Prayers
and Acts of Obedience to God. This is a mighty relief to our thoughts: for the
apprehensions of the pure Godhead do amaze us and confound us, when we come to
consider of that glorious and infinite Being. As heretofore, before they found
out the use of the Compass, they only coasted, as loath to venture themselves in
the great Ocean: So by Christ we come to God. He is the true Jacob's Ladder,
Joh. 11. 50.

2. That this Mediator is God in our Nature. Therein the Wisdom of God appeared
in crossing and counter-working Satan's design. Satan's great design was
double; to dishonor God, and depress the Nature of Man. 1. To dishonor God to
Man, by a false representation, as if he were envious of Man's Happiness. Genesis
3. 5. God does know in the day that ye eat thereof, your Eyes shall be opened,
and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. His first Battery was against
the Goodness of God, to weaken the esteem thereof. Now by the Incarnation of
Christ, the Lord's Grace is wonderfully manifested: he is represented as lovely
and amiable in our Eyes, not envying our Holiness and Happiness, but promoting
it, and that at the most costly rate, and showing love to Man above all his
other Creatures. God is Love, 1 John 4. 8. It Is eminently demonstrated to us in
the Son of God assuming our Nature, and dying for us. Romans 5. 8. When Christ
was incarnate, Love was incarnate, Love walked up and down and healed all
Sicknesses and Diseases, Love died, and Love hung on a Cross, Love was buried
in the Grave. When that ill representation was suggested to us, it was
necessary there should be some eminent demonstration of the Love of God to Man.
Especially after we had made our selves liable to his Wrath, and were conscious
to our selves that we had incurred his displeasure: and so it was necessary
that we should have some notable discovery of his Philanthropy, or Love to
Mankind. Many Believers are harrast with doubts and fears, and cannot come to
be persuaded that God loves them. Herein is Love, and God commended his Love to
us in that his Son died for us. 2. The next design of Satan was to depress the
nature of Man, which in its innocence stood so near to God. Now that the humane
nature so depressed and debased, by the malicious suggestion of the Tempter,
should be so elevated and advanced, and set up so far above the Angelical
Nature, and admitted to dwell with God in a personal Union, it is a mighty
counter-working of Satan, and shows the great Wisdom of God. When he labored
to put God and us asunder; the Lord sent his, Son, who took the unity of our
Nature into his own Person.

3. That being in our Nature he would set us a Pattern of Obedience by his Holy
Life: for he lived by the same Laws that we are bound to live by. He imposed no
Duty upon us but what he underwent himself, that he might be an Example of
Holiness unto us; we learn of him Obedience to God at the dearest rates:
contempt of the World, and contentation with a low and mean Estate, and to be
lowly and meek in Heart, Mat. 11. 29. Now Man being so prone to imitation, it
is the greatest effect of the Wisdom of God thus to oblige us: unless we would
be utterly unlike him whom we own as our Lord, and from whom we have all our
Hopes and Expectations.

4. That he should die the Death of the Cross to expiate our Sins, Gal. 3. 13.
Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us,
etc. Phil. 2 8. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the
death of the Cross. That the Justice of God might be eminently demonstrated,
the Lawgiver vindicated, and the breach that was made in the frame of
Government repaired, and God might keep up his just Honor without prejudice to
his Peoples Happiness; that he might be manifested to be Holy and an hater of
Sin, and yet the Sinner saved from Destruction, Romans 3. 25, 26. An absolute
Pardon without satisfaction might have exposed God's Laws to contempt, as if
the violation of them were not much to be stood upon: therefore God dispensed
his Grace with all Wisdom and Prudence; would show eminent Mercy, but withal a
demonstration of his Justice and Holiness, that the World might still be kept
in awe, and there might be a full Concord and Harmony between his Mercy and
Justice.

5. That after his Death he should rise from the Dead and ascend into Heaven,
to prove the reality of the Life to come, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Guilty Man is fallen
under the power and fear of Death, strangely haunted with doubts about the
other World: therefore did Christ in our Nature arise from the Dead and ascend
into Heaven, that he might give a visible demonstration of the Resurrection,
and Life to come, which he had promised to us; and so encourage us, by a Life
of Holiness and Patience in Sufferings, to follow after him into those Blessed
Mansions. So that from first to last you see the Wisdom of God.

II. The Publication of it in the Gospel or Covenant of Grace. It Is ordered in
all things, and sure, 2 Samuel 23. 5. The Messengers by whom it is published are
not extraordinary ones, but Men of like Passion with our selves. The great
thing in a Minister is love to Souls, Christ says, he came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister. In the Covenant of Grace, you see the Wisdom of God in
two things. 1. The Privileges offered. 2. The terms or Duties required.

1. In the Privileges offered to us, which are Pardon and Life. In these
Benefits Pardon and Life, there is due Provision made for the desires,
necessities and wants of mankind. Pardon answers the fears of the Guilty
Creature; and Life, those desires of Happiness which are so natural to us, and
therefore are the most powerful and inviting Motives to draw our Hearts to God.

(1.) The consciousness of God's displeasure, and the fear of his Wrath, should
make offers of Pardon acceptable to us. When Sin entered into the World, Fear
entered with Sin. The grand scruple which haunteth the guilty Creature, is how
God shall be appeased, and the Controversy taken up between us and his Justice:
Micah. 6. 6, 7. Wherewith shall he be appeased, and what shall I give for the
Sin of my Soul? We fear Death and Punishment from a Holy and Just God, and this
is the bottom cause of all our Troubles. Therefore till the forgiveness of Sin
be procured for us, and represented to us upon commodious Terms, we know not
how to get rid of this Bondage, the Justice of the Supreme Governor of the
World will be ever dreadful to us. These fears may be for a while stifled in
Men, but they will ever and anon return upon us. Now let us admire the Wisdom
of God, who has provided such a suitable remedy to our Disease, as
reconciliation and remission of Sins by Jesus Christ. And that God showed
himself so ready to pardon us, who are so obnoxious to his Wrath and vindictive
Justice.

(2.) The other great Privilege offered in the Covenant, is Eternal Life, which
suiteth with those desires of Happiness which are so natural to us. Corrupt
Nature is not against the offers of Felicity. We would have Immunity, Peace,
Comfort, Glory; none would be against his own Benefit, but every one would be
willing to be freed from the curse of the Law, and the Flames of Hell, and
enjoy Happiness for evermore. Though we be unwilling to deny the Flesh, and
renounce the Credit, Pleasure and Profit of Sin, and grow dead to the World and
worldly things, yet never was there a Creature heard of that would not be
happy; for there was never a Creature but loved himself. Now the Lord in his
Covenant has brought Life and Immortality to light; settled our Happiness, and
the way to it: he promises that which we desire, to induce us to that which we
are against. As we sweeten Pills to Children, that they may swallow them down
the better; they love the Sugar, though they loath the Aloes. God would invite
us to our duty by our Interest. He has told us of an Happiness full sure and
near, that he may draw us off from the false Happiness wherewith we are
enchanted, and bring us into the way of Holiness, that we may look after this
blessed Hope.

2dly. The Terms he has required of us. The Terms are either for Entrance, or
making Covenant with God; or Continuance, or keeping Covenant with God. For
Entrance, Faith, and Repentance are required.

1. Faith in Christ. The World thinks Faith quits Reason, and introduces fond
Credulity. No; there is much of the Wisdom of God to be seen in it. For Faith
has a special aptitude and fitness for this Work: (1.) Partly in respect of
God. For He having designed to glorify his Mercy and free Grace, and to make
our Salvation from first to last a mere Gift, and the Fruit of his Love to us;
has appointed Faith for the acceptance of this Gift. Romans 4. 16. It is of
Faith, that it might be by Grace. Faith and Grace go always together, and it is
put in opposition to the Merit of Works, or the Strictness of the old Covenant.
(2.) As it is fittest to own Christ the Redeemer, the Fountain of Life and
Happiness, and our Head and Husband, whom we receive, and to whom we are united
and married by Faith. (3.) With respect to the Promises of the Gospel, which
offer to us an Happiness and Blessedness, spiritual, and for the most part
future. Unseen things are properly Objects of Faith. Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the
Substance of things hoped for, the Evidence of things not seen. (4.) It is
fittest as to our future Obedience, that it may be comfortable and willing. Now
we owning Christ in a way of Subjection and Dependence, and consenting to
become his Disciples and Subjects, other Duties come on the more easily, 2 Cor.
8. 5.

2. For Repentance. This is the most lively and powerful Means of bringing Men
to new Life and Blessedness. (1.) It is most for the Honor of God, that we
should not be pardoned without submission, without confession of past Sin, and
Resolution of future Obedience. Common Reason will tell us, that our Case is
not compassionable while we are impenitent, and hold it out against God. Who
will pity those in Misery, who are unwilling to come out of it? Besides, it
would infringe the Honor of God's Law and Government, that one continuing in
his Sins, and despising both the Curse of the Law, and the Grace of the Gospel,
should be pardoned and saved. Repentance is often called a giving Glory to God,
Mal. 2. 2. Ye will not lay it to Heart, and give Glory to my Name. Josh. 7. 19.
My Son, give Glory to God, and make Confession to him. Rev. 16. 9. They
repented not to give Glory to God. Repentance restores God's Honor to Him, as
it acknowledges the Justice of his Laws. The self-condemning Sinner
acknowledges that God may destroy him, and if he save him it is mere Mercy.
(2.) The Duty of the Creature is best secured, and the penitent Person more
bound to future Obedience; partly by the Vow it self, or the Bond of the holy
Oath into which he is entered, and the Circumstances accompanying it, which
surely induce a Hatred of Sin, and a Love of Holiness. There will be a hearty
Consent to live in the Love, Obedience, and Service of our Creator, with a
detestation of our former Ways. When we feel the smart of Sin, such a Sense of
it will ever stick by us; and when we are in the deepest and freshest Sense of
his pardoning Mercy; when we see at how dear rates he is pleased to have us,
and upon what free terms to pardon all our Wrongs; we shall love much, Luke 7.
47. Surely they that are brought back from the Gibbet, and the very Gates of
Hell, by such an Act of pardoning Mercy, are most likely to remember the Vows
of their Distress, and are more engaged to love God, and please Him, than
others are. (3.) It is most for the Comfort of the Creature, that a stated
Course of recovering our selves into the Peace and Hope of the Gospel should be
appointed to us, which may leave the greatest Sense upon our Consciences. Now
what is likely to do so much as this apparent Change, whereby we renounce and
utterly bewail our former Folly, and solemnly devote and give up our selves to
God by Christ. Those things that are serious and advised leave a Notice and
Impression upon the Soul. This is the most important Action of our Lives, the
Settling of our Pardon and Eternal Interest. The Heart is hardly brought to
this, to renounce what we dearly love; therefore it is usually rewarded with
some notable Tastes of God's Love. Isa. 57. 15. God delights to revive the
Hearts of his contrite Ones.

2. For Continuance in the new Covenant, and delightful Obedience unto God. The
Remedy is not only suited to the Disease, but the Duty to the Reward. Our Duty
is to know God, and to love Him; and our Reward is to see Him, and be like Him,
1 Ioh. 3. 2. There is a mavelous Sutableness between the End and Means,
Holiness and Happiness, Conformity to God, and our Communion with Him; the
Holiness required of us now, and the Happiness we expect hereafter; perfect
Conformity, and uninterrupted Communion. And they differ only but as the Bud,
and the Flower; the River, and the Ocean: Here it is begun, hereafter perfected.

III. In the Application of his Grace to particular Believers, he has abounded
toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence.

(1.) In the Way God takes to convert Souls to Himself, there is a sweet
Contemperation and Mixture of Wisdom and Power. There is a Proposal of Truth
and Good to the Understanding and the Will: and by the secret Power of his
Grace it is made effectual. We are taught and drawn, Ioh. 6. 44, 45. No Man can
come unto me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him. In the 45th verse.
And they shall be all taught of God. Every Man therefore that has heard and
learned of the Father, comes unto me. There is opening of blind Eyes, and the
turning of an hard Heart; Acts 26. 18. To open their Eyes, and to turn them
from Darkness to Light, etc. Ephesians. 1. 18. The Eyes of the Understanding being
opened, etc. Col. 3. 10. Renewed in Knowledge. Turning the Heart: Acts 16. 29.
God opened the Heart of Lydia. Acts 11. 21. The Hand of the Lord was with him;
and a great Number believed, and turned to the Lord. His Hand implies his
Power. Thus God works strongly, like Himself; sweetly, with respect to us,
that he may not oppress the Liberty of our Faculties. Christ comes into the
Heart, not by Force, but by Consent. We are transformed, but so as we prove
what the Will of God is, Romans 12. 2. He draws, we run, Cant. 1. 4. The Power
of God, and Liberty of Man, do sweetly consist together. As God is said to
create in us a new Heart, he is also said to give us a free Spirit, Psalm. 51.
10, 12. Ephesians. 2. 10. We are said to be his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus
unto good Works, which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them.
So he puts a new Heart, and we are said, to walk in his Ways. Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27.
A new Heart will I also give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you; and I
will take away the stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I will give you an Heart
of Flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes; and ye shall keep my Judgments, and do them. Thus God shows forth
the powerful Efficacy of his Grace, and does also win the Consent and good
Liking of the Sinner: he obtains his Effect, and yet does preserve the
Liberty of Man's Nature, and the Principles thereof. It is not only Voluntas
mota, but mutata; the Nature is changed and renewed. 2 Cor. 3. 18. But we all
with open Face, beholding, as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

(2.) In the persuasive and moral Way, the Wisdom of God is seen, as taking the
most likely Course to gain the Heart of Man, discovering Himself to us, as a
God of Love, Kindness, and Mercy. Guilty Creatures stand aloof from a
condemning God; our Fear of his Justice makes us run from him. Genesis 3. 7, 10.
Adam hid himself from the presence of the Lord. So all his Posterity forsake
God, and hate him. But God, though the Superior, though the wronged Party,
makes Offers of Peace, and shows how willing he is to be reconciled to us.
Having first laid the Foundation in the highest Demonstration of Goodness, that
ever could come to the Ears of Man to hear of, or enter into the Heart of Man
to conceive; namely, in giving his Son to die for a sinful World, 2 Cor. 5. 19,
20. What more apt to make Man relent? And then because Man had fallen from the
Love of God to the Creature, Ier. 2. 3. What Wisdom does God show, not only in
the Offers of Pardon, but Eternal Life, and Blessedness, infinitely beyond the
false Happiness which carnal Self-Love inclines us to? that it is a Shame and
Disgrace to our Reason, to think these things are worthy to be compared
together. What are all the Pleasures, Profits, and Honors we dote upon, to the
Pleasures at God's Right Hand? the Riches of the Inheritance of the Saints, and
the Glory which comes from God. And therefore what more powerful Motive can be
produced, than this Blessed Immortality? Indeed God is invisible, and the Glory
is to come; and sensual Pleasures are at hand, ready to be enjoyed. But Faith
checketh Sense; Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the Evidence of Things not seen. O the
Wisdom of God in the Frame of the Gospel!

2. In the Effect it self, the new Creature, which is the wisest Creature on
this side Heaven. To evidence this to you, I shall show you, that all Wisdom
and Prudence consists in three things. (1.) In fixing a right End. (2.) In
the choice of apt and proper Means. (3.) In a dextrous effectual Prosecution of
the End by those Means.

(1.) In fixing and propounding to ourselves a right End. A wise Man does not
mind Trifles, but is conversant about Things of the greatest Reality,
Necessity, and Excellency: such are God and Heaven. All other Wisdom will prove
but Folly in the end. Others disquiet themselves about a vain Show, Psalm. 59.
6. Poor silly Creatures! cark, and labor, and turmoil, to get together a few
poor transitory Enjoyments, where there is neither durable possession, nor
solid Satisfaction. The Honors, Pleasures, and Riches of the World, are but
Pictures and Shadows of the true Honors, the true Riches, and Fullness of Joy
at God's right Hand. Surely he is a wise Man, that chooses God for his
Portion, and Heaven for his Home. Prove. 15. 24. The Way of Life is above to the
Wise, to avoid Hell beneath. He is wise, and has chosen the true Sort of
living, which minds the Salvation of his Soul, and looks after Eternal
Life. Surely this is above and beyond any Wisdom Man can pretend unto, to be
happy, not for a while, but for ever.

(2.) In the Choice of apt and proper Means. A Man is wise enough, if he knows
his Duty, and the Way to Happiness. God has appointed us the Way wherein to
walk, to fear him, and love him, and keep his Commandments; Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Keep
these Statutes, for this is your Wisdom. Job 28. 28. The Fear of God, that is
Wisdom; and to depart from Evil, that is Understanding. There is an Excellency
in this sort of Life, Prove. 12. 26. Those applaud it that do not choose it. All
are of this Mind at last, and dying are sensible of the Excellency of it.

(3.) A dextrous effectual Prosecution of the End. This Prosecution imports,
First, Diligence. He is a Fool, that has a Price in his Hand, and has not a
Heart to lay it out on a good Purchase, Prove. 17. 16. But he is a wise Man,
that improveth his Time and Labor to a good Purpose. A wise Man's Heart is at
his right Hand, Eccles. 10. 2. Secondly, This Prosecution lies in Caution and
Circumspection, to keep himself from Sin. Ephesians. 5. 15. See then that ye walk
circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise. Lastly, It consists in Self-denial.
The wise Merchant sold all that he had for the Pearl of Price, Mat. 13. 46, 47.
A wise Man does not dally with Religion, but thoroughly sets himself to it.

USE. 1. Be persuaded, That serious Christianity is the true Wisdom; and the
Wisdom of the World, which is only conversant about worldly Things, from a
worldly Principle, to a worldly End, is Foolishness with God. This is Wisdom,
which acquainteth us more with God, and leads us into everlasting Happiness.

2. Admire the Wisdom of God, in dispensing Salvation by Christ; who could
bring Light out of Darkness; and so great a Demonstration of his Glory out of
Man's Sin; and vanquish Satan by the Way, whereby he seemed most to prevail;
and still attain his End by Means seemingly contrary. There is more of Divine
Power and Wisdom showed in Christ crucified, than in any thing Men could think
of. It was a more glorious Act of Power to raise Christ from the Dead, than in
not permitting him to die. He prevails more by laying down his Life, than by
being prosperous in the World, and taking the Lives of his Enemies.

3. If God has abounded to us in all Wisdom, Let us not disturb the Order of
this Grace, by asking Privileges without Duties, or minding Duties without the
Help of the Spirit; or placing all in Duties, so as to exclude the Merit and
Satisfaction of the Redeemer; or to eye the Ransom, so as to exclude the
Example of Christ. All things are well ordered in God's Covenant; the Confusion
arises from our Darkness and Misapprehensions.

4. There should be Wisdom and Prudence in us; for the Impression must be
according to the Seal and Stamp. Wisdom is a saving Knowledge of Divine
Mysteries; and Prudence, to regulate and order our Actions and Practices, to
perform our respective Duties to God and Man. The Apostle prays for the
Colossians; (Col. 1. 9.) That they might be filled with the Knowledge of his
Will, in all Wisdom, and spiritual Understanding. All have not the same Measure
of Saving-Knowledge and Prudence, yet the least Saint has what is necessary to
Salvation. You must every Day grow in those Graces, for by degrees they are
carried on toward Perfection.

SERMON IX.
MAT. 27. 46. And about the ninth Hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying,
Eli, Eli, lama sabacthani; that is to say, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me?
IN the History of the Passion you will find, that our Lord Jesus was exercised
with all kind of Temptations, affronted by Men, assaulted by the Powers of
Darkness, deserted by his own Disciples, one of them denied him, another
betrayed him, but all fled. And thus he was not only rejected of Men, but was
stricken, and smitten, and forsaken of God. This was as Gall and Vinegar to his
Wounds, the Passion of his Passion. The World's Cruelty, and Satan's Rage had
been nothing, if the Brightness of the Divine Presence had not been eclipsed.
When the People were set against him, (his Blood be upon us, and our Children)
he complained not of that: When Friend and Lover were afar off, he does not
complain of that: Judas, why have thou betrayed me? Peter, why have thou denied
me? Disciples, why have ye forsaken me? But when God was withdrawn; My God, my
God, why have Thou forsaken me? This is his bitter Complaint now.

The Words then are Christ's Complaint, not of God, but to God. In them observe,

1. The Circumstance of Time, when this Complaint was made, About the ninth
Hour.

2. The Matter of it, God had forsaken him.

3. The Manner of it, with Vehemence, and yet with Faith. There was Faith in
it, for he says, My God. The Vehemence is seen in the extention of his Voice,
He cried with a loud Voice; and by the Ingemination of the Name of God, My God,
my God.

1. The Circumstance of Time, About the ninth Hour. We read in the former
Verse, That from the sixth Hour, there was Darkness over all the Earth until
the ninth Hour. At the Passion of Christ the Earth trembled, the Sun seemed to
be struck blind with Astonishment, and the Frame of Nature to put it self into
a Funeral Garb and Habit, as if the Creatures durst not show their Glory, while
God was manifesting his Anger for Sin, and Christ was suffering. After three
hours darkness, he complains not of that, but of the sad Eclipse that was
upon his own Spirit.

2. The Matter complained of, Why have thou forsaken me? It is not an
Expostulation, so much as a Representation of the heavy Burden that was upon
him. Questions among the Hebrews imply earnest Assertions: As, Psalm. 10. 1. Why
stand thou afar off? Why hidest thou thy self in the time of Trouble? That
is, Lord! thou hidest thy self from me. So Psalm. 43. 2. Why go I mourning,
because of the Oppression of the Enemy? That is, I do go mourning. The Case is
represented in such Forms of Speech.

3. The Vehemence.

(1.) In the Extension of his Voice. Great Griefs express themselves by strong
Cries; for burdened Nature would fain have vent and utterance. And the Apostle
takes notice of this Circumstance, (...), Heb. 5. 7. He offered Prayers and
Tears with strong Crying.

(2.) In the Ingemination of the Name of God, My God, my God. These possessive
Particles are words of Faith, striving against the Temptation. He had great
trouble of Spirit, but to that he opposes his Interest; My God, my God. In the
bitterest Agonies Christ despaired not, but still had a most firm persuasion of
God's Love to him, and necessary Support from him. But all shows the Trouble
was not light, but heavy and grievous.

Doct. That Christ, as suffering for our Sins, was really deserted for a time,
in regard of all sensible Consolation.
I. What was Christ's Desertion? II. Why it befell him? III. What use may we
make of it?
I. What was Christ's Desertion? I shall for more distinctness, handle it
negatively, and affirmatively.

First, Negatively.

1. It was not a Desertion in Appearance or Conceit only, but real. We often
mistake God's Dispensations. God may be out of Sight, and yet we not out of
Mind. When the Dam is abroad for Meat, the young Brood in the Nest is not
forsaken. The Children cry, as if the Mother were totally gone, when she is
employed about necessary. Business for their welfare. Sion said, the Lord has
forsaken me, my God has forgotten me, Isa. 49. 14, 15. In the misgivings of
our Hearts God seems to have cast off all Care and Thoughts of us. God's
affectionate Answer shows, that all this was but a fond Surmise. Can a Woman
forget her sucking Child, that she should not have Compassion on the Son of her
Womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. So we think that we are
cut off, when God is about to help and deliver us, Psalm. 31. 22. Many times we
think he has quite cast us off, when we are never more in his Heart. Surely,
when our Affections toward God are seen by mourning for his Absence, he is not
wholly gone, his Room is kept warm for him till he come again. We mistake God's
Dispensations, when we judge that a forsaking, which is but an emptying us of
all carnal Dependence. Psalm. 49. 18, 19. When I said, my Foot slipped; thy
Mercy, O Lord, held me up. In the multitude of my Thoughts within me, thy
Comforts delight my Soul. He is near many times, when we think him afar off; as
Christ was to his Disciples, when their Eyes were withheld, that they knew him
not, but thought him yet lying in the Grave, Luke 24. 16. But this cannot be
imagined of Christ, who could not be mistaken. If he complained of a Desertion,
surely he felt it. It was a real Desertion, he could not mis-interpret the
Dispensation of God he was now under: for such Misapprehensions are below the
Perfection of his Nature.

2. Though it were real, the Desertion must be understood so, as may stand with
the dignity of his Person and Offices. Therefore,

(1.) There was no Separation of the Father from the Son, this would make a
Change in the Unity of the Divine Essence. Ioh. 10. 30. I and my Father are
one. Joh. 12. 20. (...). This Eternal Union of the Person of the Father with
the Person of the Son always remained; for the Divine Nature, though it may be
distinguished into Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, yet it cannot be divided.

(2.) There was no Dissolution of the Union of the two Natures in the Person of
Christ; for the Humane Nature which was once assumed was never after dismissed
or laid aside. (...), Christ ever remained Immanuel, God with us, or God in our
Nature. He was the Lord of Glory, even then when he was crucified. 1 Cor. 2. 8.
It was the Son of God that was delivered up for us all. Not a mere Man suffered
for our Redemption, but (Acts 20. 28.) God purchased the Church with his Blood.
Death that dissolved the Bond and Tie between Soul and Body, did not dissolve
the Union of the two Natures. They resemble it by a Man drawing a Sword, and
holding the Sword in one Hand, and the Scabbard in another; the same Person
holds both, though separated the one from the other.

3. The Love of God to him ceased not. We read, The Father loved the Son, and
put all things into his hand, Joh. 3. 35. Now, he was his dear Son, or the Son
of his Love, Col. 1. 13. In whom his Soul delighted. Isa. 42. 1. Ephesians. 1. 6. He
has made us accepted in the Beloved. Primum amabile; He was the Brightness of
his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, Heb. 1. 3. Therefore he could
not but love him in every State. Yea, he never more loved him, as Mediator,
than when on the Cross, that being the most eminent Act of his Self-denial and
Obedience, (Phil. 2. 7.) and so a new Ground of Love. Ioh. 10. 17. Therefore
does my Father love me, because I lay down my Life to take it up again. The
Father was well pleased with the Reconciliation of lost Sinners, he loves
Christ for undertaking and performing it; therefore it is unreasonable to
imagine that now he was about the highest Act of Obedience, there was any
Decrease of his Love to him. No; his Dispensation might be changed, but not his
Love. As the Sun shining through a clear Glass, or through a red Glass, casts a
different Reflection, a bloody, or a bright; but the Light is the same.

4. His personal Holiness was not abated or lessened. The Lord Jesus was full
of Grace and Truth, Joh. 1. 14. He had the Spirit not by measure, Joh. 3. 34.
He had in perfection all Divine Gifts and Graces, to accomplish him for this
Office, Col. 1. 19. Ioh. 1. 16. He was anointed by the Holy Ghost, and the Oil
that was poured on him never failed. Therefore he was always most holy and
pure, one that never knew, nor did Sin. Neither his Nature, nor his Office
could permit an Abatement of Holiness. Heb. 7. 26. Such an High Priest became
us, as was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners. The Son of God
might fall into Misery, which is a natural Evil, and so become the Object of
Pity, not of Blame; but not into Sin, which is a moral Evil, a Blot, and a
Blemish. When he died, He died, the Just for the Unjust, 1 Pet. 3. 18. The
Death of Christ had profited us nothing, if he had been a Sinner for a moment.
Therefore this Desertion was not a Diminishing of his Holiness, but a
Suspension of his Comfort.

5. God's Assistance and sustaining Grace was not wholly withdrawn; for the
Lord says of him, Isa. 42. 1. This is my elect Servant, whom I uphold. And
every where the Lord is said to be with him in this work: Psalm. 101. 5. The
Lord is at thy right hand. And, Psalm. 16. 8. I have set the Lord always before
me, he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved. Which Passage is by Peter
applied to Christ, Acts 2. 25. For David speaks concerning him, I foresaw the
Lord always before my Face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be
moved. The Power, Presence, and Providence of God was ever with him, to sustain
him in his difficult Enterprise. When his Agonies began, he told his Disciples,
Ioh 18. 32. Ye shall leave me alone; yet I am not alone, but the Father is with
me. The Father was with him, when his Disciples forsook him, and fled every one
to his own, to carry him through and that his Arm might work Salvation for him,
and that he might not sink under the Burden.

Secondly, Positively.

1. God's desertion of us, or any Creature, may be understood with a respect to
his communicating Himself to us. We have a twofold Apprehension of God, as an
Holy and Happy Being: And when he does communicate Himself to any reasonable
Creature, it is either in a way of Holiness, or in a way of Happiness. He does
now in the Kingdom of Grace communicate Himself more in a way of Holiness; but
in the Kingdom of Glory fully in a way of Happiness, both as to the Body and
the Soul. These two have such a respect to one another, that he never gives
Felicity and Glory without Holiness, Heb. 12. 14. And an holy Creature can
never be utterly and finally miserable. He may sometimes give Holiness without
Happiness, as when for a while he leaves the Sanctified, whom he will try and
exercise, under the Cross, or in a state of Sorrow and Affliction; therefore
Holiness is the more necessary. In his internal Government God does all by his
Spirit; now the Spirit is more necessarily a Sanctifier than a Comforter. It
was by the Spirit that Christ was with God, and God with Christ; therefore his
Desertion of Christ, or any Creature, must be mainly understood with respect to
the Spirit working in any, either as to Holiness, or Comfort. When God
withdraws either Holiness or Happiness, one of them, or both, or any degree
of them, from any Creature, he is said to desert them. Now apply this to
Christ. It is Blasphemy to say, that Christ lost any degree of his Holiness,
for he was always pure and holy, and that most exactly and perfectly: Therefore
he was deserted only as to his Felicity, and that but for a short time.

2. The Felicity of Christ may be considered, either as to his outward and
bodily Estate, or else to his inward Man, or the Estate of his Soul.

1. Some say his Desertion was nothing else but his being left to the Will and
Power of his Enemies, to crucify him; and that he was then deserted, when his
Divine Nature suspended the exercise of its Omnipotency so far, as to deliver
up his Body to a reproachful Death, so to make way for this Oblation and
Sacrifice for the Redemption of Mankind. God could many ways have protected
Christ, and hindered his Passion. Mat. 26. 52, 53. Think thou, that I cannot
pray to my Father, and he shall give me more than twelve Legions of Angels? But
how then could the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? If the Lord
had seen it fit to glorify Himself by the Deliverance, rather than the
Sufferings of Christ, he could have found ways and means enough to save him;
but how then could our Redemption be accomplished? Christ himself by his Divine
Power could have protected his bodily Life; for he tells us, Ioh. 10. 18. No
Man takes my Life from me, but I lay it down of my self. I have Power to lay
it down, and I have Power to take it up again. But it pleased God to appoint,
and Christ to submit to another Course, and therefore was he so far deserted,
and left in the hand of his Enemies. He tells them, Luke 22. 53. This is your
Hour, and the Power of Darkness. This, some say, was all Christ's Desertion;
and that he cried out with a loud voice, in the hearing of all, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? to give notice of the Price that was to be paid for
our Ransom. He complained not of the Jews that had accused him, nor of Pilate
that condemned him, nor of Judas that betrayed him; but of God, that had
forsaken him, and left him in the hands of his Enemies, as if this were the
most grievous thing to the Son of God. But certainly, this was not all; the
Desertion was not only in his outward Estate, and with respect to bodily Death,
for these Reasons.

(1.) Why should Christ complain of that so bitterly, which he did so readily
and willingly undergo, and might so easily have prevented, and which was most
obvious, and so clearly foreseen in his Sufferings? He foretold it again and
again to his Disciples, and spoke it to his Enemies; and should he now
represent it as a strange thing? Surely these strong Cries were not extorted
from him by the mere Fear and Horror of bodily Death. I confess, he died not
insensibly, but showed the reality of all human Passions; yet there was no
reason why he should so bitterly and lamentably complain, if nothing else but
bodily Death had been in the Case, and that brought upon him by his Enemies.

(2.) If we look merely to bodily Pains and Sufferings, certainly others have
endured as much, if not more; as the Thieves that were crucified with him,
lived longer in their Torments, and the good Thief did not complain that he was
forsaken of God. Peter was crucified, and that with his Head downwards, as
Ecclesiastical History tells us, which, as it was greater Cruelty in the
Adversaries, so also greater Pain to him: and yet he trusted that God would
sustain him and support him under it. Therefore certainly there was something
greater and more grievous to the Soul of Christ, than these bodily Pains, which
drew this lamentable and loud Cry from him.

(3.) It would follow, that every holy Man, that is persecuted and left to the
will of his Enemies, might be said to be forsaken of God; which is contrary to
Paul's holy Boasting, 2 Cor. 4. 9. Persecuted, but not forsaken. Therefore
there was something more than to be left to the will of his Enemies.

(4.) This Desertion was a Punishment, one part or degree of the Abasement of
the Son of God, and so belongs to the whole Nature that was to be abased, not
only to his Body, but his Soul. We read often of his Soul-sufferings, Isa. 53.
10. He was to make his Soul an Offering for Sin. And to see the Travail of his
Soul, v. 11. His Soul was deprived of Consolation, and some Effects of the
Spirit, as to Joy and Comfort.

2. As to the Felicity of his inward Estate, the State of his Soul. Christ
carried about his Heaven with him, and never wanted sensible Consolation,
spiritual Suavity, the comfortable Effects of the Divine Presence, till now
they were withdrawn, that he might be capable of suffering the whole Punishment
of Sins, and fell not only Pains and Torments of Body, but Troubles of Soul,
such as we have when God hides his Face from us, but without Sin. The Divinity
kept back those Irradiations of heavenly Light and Comfort, or for a while
suspended that Joy and Comfort which otherwise he felt in himself, though it
gave out that Virtue and Strength which was necessary to support and sustain
him under so great Sufferings. As when the Sun is eclipsed, the Light of it
cease not, but is only hidden from the Earth by the Interposition of a dark
Body. So here, Christ had not the participation of that heavenly Joy, which
before his Soul felt by dwelling with God in a personal Union, though there
were no Separation of the Human Nature from the Divine; the Ground of it was
not taken away, but only the Sense suspended; no dissolution of the Union, but
a ceasing of the Comfort of it.

In short, I will show how this Sort of Desertion is,

1. Possible. 2. Grievous.
1. Possible, the Union between the two Natures remaining. For as the Divine
Nature gave up the Body to Death, so the Soul to Desertion. Christ, as God, is
the Fountain of Life, Psalm. 36. 9. And yet Christ could die. So the Godhead is
the Fountain of all Joy and Comfort, for he is called the God of all Comfort, 2
Cor. 1. 3. And yet Christ's Soul was troubled and heavy unto Death. The Godhead
suspending its Virtue and Operation, both might well consist; for though the
Presence of the Divinity be necessary with the Humanity of Christ, yet the
Effects are voluntary. God works not out of necessity, no not in the Human
Nature of Christ; all kind of Communications are given out according to his own
pleasure. The Divinity remained united to the Flesh, and yet the Flesh might
die; so it remained united to the Soul, and yet the Soul might want Comfort.
The Bond by which the two Natures were united in one Person remained firm and
indissoluble, but the Influx of Sweetness and Comfort was suspended. Some
Effect there is of the Union, but not that which affords Comfort and Felicity;
and this was suspended but for a time. There is a Desertion indeed, which
agrees not with the dignity of Christ. There is a total and Eternal Desertion,
by which God so deserteth a Man both as to Grace and Glory, that he is wholly
cast out of God's Presence, and adjudged to Eternal Torments, which is the Case
of the Reprobate in the last Judgment: this is not compatible to Christ, nor
agreeing with the dignity of his Person. There is a partial temporal Desertion,
when God for a moment hides his Face from his People, Isa. 54. 7. This is so
far from being contrary to the dignity of Christ's Nature, that it is necessary
to his Office for many Reasons.

2. That it is very grievous. This was an incomparable Loss to Christ.

(1.) Partly, because it was more natural to him to enjoy that Comfort and
Solace, than it can be to any Creature. To put out a Candle is no great matter,
but to have the Sun eclipsed, which is the Fountain of Light, that sets the
World a wondering. For poor Creatures to lose their Comforts, is no great
wonder, who though they live in God, are so many degrees distant from him; but
for Christ, who was God-Man in one Person, that is a difficulty to our
Thoughts, and a wonder indeed; for by this means he was so far deprived of some
part of Himself.

(2.) Partly, because he had more to lose than we have. The greater the
Enjoyment, the greater is the Loss or Want. It was more for David to be driven
from his Palace, than a poor Israelite to be driven from his Cottage. We lose
Drops, he an Ocean. A poor Christian that has some Heaven upon Earth in the
fore-enjoyment of God, and the first fruits and earnest of the Spirit, has
more to lose than another that has had only some vanishing Taste in the Offer
of Eternal Life, and receiving the Word with Joy. Proportionably judge of
Christ, who was Comprehensor, while he was Viator, had the beatifical Vision
whiles on Earth.

(3.) Partly, because he knew how to value the Comfort of the Union, having a
pure Understanding, and heavenly Affections. God's Children count one Day in
his Presence better than a thousand, Psalm. 84. 10. One Glimpse of his Love more
than all the World, Psalm. 4. 7. If they have any thing of the Love of God shed
abroad in their Hearts, they would not part with it for all the sensual
Enjoyments, which others prize and value so much; and if they lose it, they are
touched to the quick, they lose that which is the Life of their Lives, which
they account their chief Happiness. Now Christ was best able to apprehend the
Worth and Value of Communion with God, having such a clear Understanding, and
tender Affections, and therefore it must needs be grievous to him to have his
wonted Conversations suspended.

(4.) Partly, because he had so near an Interest and Relation to God. Prove. 8.
30. One bred up with him, and daily his Delight. Col. 1. 13. (...). Look among
the Children of God, if they have any Interest in him, how mournfully do they
brook his Absence? Mary Magdalen, Woman, why weepest thou? They have taken away
my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him, Luke 24. 14. She sought a
Christ, and found a Grave. Christ's words [my God] do not only express his
Confidence, but Affection, when his God and Father hides his Face from him.

(5.) Partly, from the Nature of Christ's Desertion. It was Penal. All
Desertions may be reduced to these three Sorts, for Trial, for Correction, or
Punishment. For Trial; so God left Hezekiah, to prove what was in his Heart, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. For fatherly Correction; so God leaves his People for a while,
to teach them Repentance, Humility, Hatred of Sin, more entire Dependence on
Himself. Isa. 54. 7. I have left thee for a small moment, but with everlasting
Mercies will I love thee. For Punishment, so he left Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 6. When
he answered him, neither by Dreams, nor by Urim, nor by Prophets. So he leaves
the wicked to a reprobate Mind. Now Christ's Desertion was not for a Trial.
Fallible Creatures may be put upon Trial, but the Son of God needs it not. It
would not agree with the Goodness and Wisdom of God, to put his beloved Son on
such a Trial. He was neither unknown to his Father, nor did he vainly presume
of his own Strength, as to need to be confuted by Trial. Nor can it properly be
called Fatherly Correction; for there was no Sin in Christ that needed to be
corrected. Indeed the Chastisement of our Peace was upon his Shoulders, Isa.
53. 5. Therefore it remains, that this Desertion was penal and satisfactory,
such as came from the vindictive and revenging hand of God. Our Sins met in
him, and he was forsaken in our stead. There was no Cause in Christ himself,
wherefore he deserved to be forsaken of God; but we had done the wrong, and he
makes the amends. There was nothing in Christ's Person to occasion a
Desertion, but much in his Office; so he was to give Body for Body, and Soul
for Soul. And this was a part of the Satisfaction. He was beloved as a Son,
forsaken as our Mediator and Surety.

II. Why was Christ forsaken?

Answ. With respect to the Office which he had taken upon him, to expiate our
Sins, and to recover us from the deserved Wrath and Punishment, into the Love
and Favor of God. This Desertion of Christ carries a suitableness and respect
to our Sin, our Punishment, and our Blessedness.

1. Our Sin. Christ is forsaken to satisfy and make amends for our wilful
desertion of God. When Adam sinned, we all turned the back upon God who made
us. Yea, all actual Sins are nothing but a forsaking of God for very trifles,
an Aversion from God, and a Conversion to the Creature. Ier. 2. 13. They have
forsaken me, the Fountain of living Waters, and have hewn out unto themselves
broken Cisterns, that will hold no Water. Now we that forsook God, deserved to
be forsaken by God; therefore what we had merited by our Sin, Christ endured as
our Mediator: He himself submitted to Desertion. It is strange to consider what
small things draw us off from God. For handfuls of Barley, and pieces of Bread,
will that Man transgress, Ezekiel. 13. 19. For a pair of Shoes, Amos 2. 6. For one
morsel of Meat, Heb. 12. 16. Isa. 52. 3. This is the great Degeneracy and
Disease of Mankind, that a Trifle will prompt us to forsake God, as a little
thing will make a Stone run down-hill, it is its natural Motion. There is
nothing that is so easily exposed and put to hazard, as the Favor of God. Now
this being the great Sin of Man, and the Cause of other Sins, it was needful
that the Odiousness of this Sin should be set forth by the bitterness of
Christ's Sorrow under the want of the Love of God. Christ's Complaints show how
God's Favor is to be valued, and that it is a dangerous thing to part with it
for carnal Satisfactions. The Consolations of God are cheap and small things in
the eyes of most Men in the World, What is more slighted than God, and Christ,
and our own Salvation, and neglected for very Trifles. And then what more
perfect Cure, and better Way to instruct the World, than that these Sins could
not be expiated, but by the desertion of the Son of God, and his bitter
Complaints for the Suspension of the Effects of the Love of God to him.

2. It carries a full respect to the Punishment appointed for Sin. Certain we
are, that he bore the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. Now the Curse of the Law,
actively taken, is nothing but the Sentence of the Law, or rather of God the
Judge, condemning the Transgressors of it to such Punishment as the Law
appointed; passively taken, it is the Punishment it self. And the final and
great Curse is that described, Mat. 25. 21. To be banished from the presence of
the Lord, and cast into extreme Torment. There is a double Punishment, Poena
dumni and sensus, the Loss, and the Pain. The Loss consists in our Separation
from God, from the comfortable happy Fruition of Him in Glory. Depart ye
Cursed. The Pain in Eternal Torments is set forth by the Worm, and by the Fire,
Mark 9. 44. Now Christ being our Surety, Heb. 7. 22. and giving himself a
Ransom for all, 2 Timothy 2. 6. (...), the word implies a Substitution or
Surrogation of one Person in the room of another; he was to suffer what we were
to suffer; if not the Idem, every way the same, yet the Tantundem, that which
was sufficient to Christ's ends, that which was to carry a full resemblance
with our Punishment. It is one part of the Punishment of Sin to be forsaken of
God; and many say the Punishment of Loss is greatest, he was therefore to
suffer so much of it as his holy Person was capable of; something that
answers to the Poena Damni in his Desertion, and to the Poena Sensus in his
Agonies and Pains. Isa. 53. 4. Surely he has born our Griefs, and carried our
Sorrows.

It is true, the Accidentals of Punishment Christ suffered not. As,

(1.) To the Place, he was not in Hell. It was not necessary that Christ should
descend into the Hell of the damned. One that is bound as a Surety for another,
needs not go into Prison, provided that he pay the Debt. All that Justice
requires is, that he satisfy the Debt. Indeed if he does not, nor cannot
satisfy the Debt, he must to Prison. So here, the Justice of God must be
satisfied, the Holiness of God and Hatred to Sin sufficiently demonstrated, but
Christ need not to go into the place of Torments.

(2.) For the Time of Continuance. The Damned must bear the Wrath of God to all
Eternity, because they can never satisfy the Justice of God, therefore they
must lie by it World without end. As one that pays a thousand Pounds by a penny
a Week, is a long time in paying; a rich Man lays it down in cumulo, in an heap
of Gold all at once. Christ has made an infinite Satisfaction in a finite
Time; he bore the Wrath of God in a few Hours, which would overwhelm the
Creature. Christ did not suffer the Eternity of Wrath, but only the Extremity
of it, intensive, not extensive. The Eternity of the Punishment arises from
the weakness of the Creature, who cannot overcome this Evil, and get out of it.

(3.) There is another Thing unavoidably attending the Pains of the second
Death in Reprobates, and that is Desperation, an utter Hopelesness of any Good,
yea a certain Expectation of continual Torment, Heb. 10. 27. The Gates of Hell
are made fast on them by an irresistible Decree: and the Gulf is fixed between
the place of the Damned, and the place of the Blessed, so that there is no
coming from the one to the other, Luke 16. 26. Now this Despair is not an
essential Part of the Law's Curse, but only a Consequent, occasioned by the
Sinner's view of his remediless and woeful Condition. But this neither did nor
could possibly befall the Lord Jesus, who was able by his Divine Power, both to
suffer and satisfy, to undergo and overcome, and therefore expected a good
Issue in his Conflict. Psalm. 16. 9, 10. My Flesh shall rest in Hope, for thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thine Holy One to see Corruption;
was spoken as from Christ, Acts 2. 27. A shallow Stream would drown a little
Child, whereas a grown Man may hope to escape out of a far deeper Place, yea a
skilful Swimmer out of the Ocean. Christ passed through that Sea of Wrath which
would have drowned all the World, and came safe to Shore.

3. With respect to our Blessedness, which is to live with God for ever in
Heaven. Christ was forsaken, that there might be no longer any Separation
between us and God. He was forsaken for a while, that we might be received for
ever. Our Separation from God by Sin was the meritorious Cause, but the final
Cause was our Eternal Conjunction with God; so that this Desertion which was so
bitter to Christ, is the Cause of sweet Consolation to us; as it has procured
for all them that obey the Gospel, that they should be happy for ever in the
Eternal Vision and Fruition of God. I observe this, because of the constant use
of the Scripture, which expresses our Benefits in a direct opposition to
Christ's Sufferings; as, He was made Sin for us, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He was made a Curse for us, that the
Blessing of Abraham might come upon us. He was made of a Woman, that we might
receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4. 4, 5. He was made poor, that we through
his Poverty might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9. And by his Wounds and Stripes we
are healed, 1 Pet. 2. 24. By his Death we have Life, by his Shame we have
Glory; and so by consequence, by his Desertion we obtain Communion with God,
and the everlasting Fruition of Him. By a wonderful Exchange he takes our evil
things upon Himself, that he might bestow his good things upon us; and took
from us Misery, that he might convey to us Felicity.

Application.
First, by way of Information.

1. How different are they from the Spirit of Christ, that can brook God's
Absence without any remorse or complaint? Christ cried with a loud voice, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? These go on securely, never observe
God's Accesses and Recesses; when the Comforts of his Spirit, and the
Communications of his Grace are wholly suspended, and withheld from them,
they never lay it t Heart. Stupid and insensible Creatures! It is all one to
them, whether God go or come, whether He manifest Himself propitious to them,
or his Face be hidden from them. They take up with the vain delights of the
present World. Micah showed more respect to his Idols, than they do to God;
Judge. 18. 24. Ye have taken away my Gods, and what have I more? And do you ask,
What aileth thee? When God is gone, they are not troubled. The Christians wept
when Paul said, Ye shall see my Face no more, Acts 20. 25. And will ye not
mourn and lament your Loss, when God hides his Face, and shuts up Himself
in a Vail and Cloud of Displeasure? Much of serious Christianity lies in an
Observation of God's coming and going, and a suitable Carriage, Mat. 9. 15. A
serious Christian will be affected with the Loss of comfort and quickening, and
lament after a withdrawn God.

2. It informs us of the Grievousness of Sin. It is no easy matter to
reconcile Sinners to God. It cost Christ a Life of Sorrows, and afterward a
painful and an accursed Death; and in that Death, Loss of actual Comfort, and
an amazing Sense of the Wrath of God. We make a Mock of Sin, jest and sport
away our Souls; but Christ found it hard Work to save them, and recover them to
God. When you make Sin a light matter, you slight the Sufferings, of Christ. O
therefore take heed you do not break with God for every Trifle!

3. The Greatness of our Obligation to Christ, who omitted no kind of
Sufferings which might conduce to the Expiation of Sin. He exchanged his Heaven
for a kind of Hell, to do you good; the Fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him
bodily, and therefore he had a Heaven upon Earth. If one could say, Anima iusti
Coelum est, because Heaven is begun there in Peace of Conscience, and Joy in
the Holy Ghost. How was it with Christ? This Heaven he wanted for a while, felt
no Comfort, yea he was amazed at the sense of God's Wrath due to Sinners,
therefore it was said in the Type of him, The pains of Hell got hold upon me,
Psalm. 116. 3. Oh let this excite us to love Christ, that you may count nothing
too dear for him.

4. The Infiniteness of God's Mercy, who appointed such a degree of Christ's
Sufferings, as in it he gives us the greatest ground of Hopes, to invite us the
more to submit to his Terms. There is nothing stands in the way but our own
impenitence and unbelief. Now God is so amply satisfied, shall we deprive our
selves of Eternal Blessedness? This is the worst Cruelty and Hatred to our own
Souls.

SERMON X.
ROMANS 1. part of the 29th and 30th Verses. -- Whisperers, Backbiters.
THe Context shows how corrupt and miserable Man's Nature is without Christ,
his Heart was first withdrawn from God, and then became a Sink of loathsome Sins
and Vices. Therefore the Apostle tells us, how after Men were false to God,
how little they were true to themselves; whether considered singly and apart,
or as to Commerce and Society: singly and apart defiling themselves with
uncleanness of all sorts: as to Commerce and Humane Society, full of Malice and
Contention; which sometimes goes as far as Blood; at other times shows it
self in falseness and baseness of Disposition, generally in Self-Love and
Detraction from others.

Of all Judgments, Spiritual Judgments are the sorest. When God leaves Mankind
to its own degeneracy and corruption, and one great Branch of this corruption
is Detraction, which venteth it self either by Whispering or Backbiting. So it
is in the Text, Whisperers, Backbiters. These two words agree, that they both
wound the Fame of our Neighbor, and they both do it behind his Back or in his
absence. But they differ, 1. In that whispering does it secretly and closely,
but backbiting, openly. The one being privy, the other open Defamation, and are
like Theft and Rapine: what Theft and Robbing are to our Goods, the same are
Whispering and Backbiting to our good Names. 2. Whispering tends to breed
strife among our Friends, or to disgrace us to some who are well conceited of
us; but backbiting to our general disgrace before all the World, or amongst
whomsoever. The one seeks to deprive us of the good will of our Friends, the
other to destroy our Service. But however they agree and differ, they are often
conjoined in Scripture. 2 Cor. 12. 20. I fear lest when I come among you, I
shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found unto you such as
ye would not: lest there be Debates, Envyings, Wraths, Strifes, Backbitings,
Whisperings, Swellings, Tumults. The Apostle foresaw it as too probable that
neither of them would be much pleased with their meeting together, nor he with
the Corinthians, when he should find them corrupted with Partialities and
Divisions: nor the Corinthians with him, when he should be forced to inflict
censures upon them for their Factions and Emulations, too much bewrayed by
their backbitings and whisperings against each other. So here in the Text they
are conjoined, Whisperers, Backbiters, when the Apostle speaks of the
reigning Sins among the Gentiles.

Doct. One great Sin, wherein the corruption of Humane Nature bewrays it
self, is Detraction, or depriving others of a good Repute.
Here I shall show, I. What is Detraction. II. The Hainousness of the Sin.


I. What it is. 1. The Nature of it. 2. The Kinds of it.

First, The Nature of it in general. It is an unjust violation of an others
Fame, Reputation, or that good Report which is due to him. God that has bidden
me to love my Neighbor as my self, does therein bid me to be tender not only
of his Person and Goods, but of his good Name. And indeed one Precept is a
Guard and Fence to another. I cannot be tender of his Person and Goods, unless
I be tender of his Fame. For every Man lives by his Credit: and therefore
certainly this is, 1. A Sin against God. 2. A wrong to Men. 3. It proceeds
from evil Causes.

1. It is a Sin against God, who has forbidden us to bear false Witness
against our Neighbor, and to speak evil of others without a cause. Ephesians. 4. 31.
Let all evil speaking be far from you; by evil speaking is meant there,
disgraceful and contumelious Speeches, whereby we seek to stain the Reputation
of others.

2. It is a wrong to Man, because it robs him of his good Name, which is so
deservedly esteemed by all that would do any thing for God in the World. Prove.
22. 1. A good Name is rather to be chosen than great Riches, and loving Favor
rather than Silver and Gold. The meaning is in order to Service, and as it more
nearly respects both Life and Livelihood. So Eccles. 7. 1. A good Name is
better than precious Ointment. Their Ointments were reckoned by those Oriental
People amongst their most precious Riches, and Treasures, yet a good name is
preferred before them; which infers this Conclusion, that the Man himself
should prize it so: for he that is lavish of his Fame is not usually
over-tender of his Conscience. Therefore as he himself should not prostitute
his good Name, so others should not blast it and blemish it; for it is a
greater Sin, than to steal the best Goods which he has, and it is such an evil
as scarce admits any sound Restitution; for the imputation even of unjust
Crimes leaves a Scar, though the Wound be healed.

3. The causes it proceeds from. They are these.

(1.) Malice and Ill Will which prompteth us to speak falsely of others, so to
make them odious, or do them wrong or hurt. Now to hate our Brother in our
Heart, is no way consistent with that Goodness and Charity which the impression
of the Love of Christ should beget in us. The Apostle says, 1 Pet. 4. 8. Above
all things have fervent Charity among your selves, for Charity shall cover a
multitude of Sins. If nothing but Love and servent Love will restrain us,
surely where hatred is allowed, Men care not what they think or speak, or do
against others. Now as there is a Brotherly Love due to our Fellow Saints, so
there is a Love due to all Men. 2 Pet. 1. 7. I am to hate no Man but to seek
their good. There is a twofold Hatred, the Hatred of Offense and Abomination,
and the Hatred of Enmity. The Hatred of Offense which is opposite to the Love
of Complacency, may be justified as to the Wicked. Prove. 29. 27. An unjust Man
is an Abomination to the Just, and he that is upright in the way, is an
Abomination to the Wicked. But then we should first and most abominate our
selves for Sin, this very hatred and abhorrence should begin at Home, and we
should be most odious to our selves for Sin, for we know more Sin by our
selves, than we can do by an other. But for the other Hatred, the Hatred of
Enmity, which is opposite to the Love of Benevolences, that should be quite
banished out of the Heart of a Christian. And it is not enough for God's People
to keep themselves free from Hatred and Malice against one another, but against
all Men. Tit. 3. 2. Put them in mind to speak evil of no Man, to be no
Brawlers, but gentle, showing all Meekness to all Men: For we our selves were
sometimes disobedient, etc. If this old Hatred were gone, a multitude of
Offenses would be covered.

(2.) It comes from uncharitable Credulity, whereby Men easily believe a false
report, and so propagate and convey it to others. Jer. 26. 10. I have heard the
defaming of many; report say they, and we will report it. All my Familiars
watched for my halting, etc. The Prophet complains, Many, and those no mean
ones, have I heard reproaching and taunting me, so that he was a Terror to
himself, and to all his-Friends. Many had combined by false suggestions and
malicious informations against him to work his ruin. If any will raise a
report tending to the discredit of another, some will foster it, and it loses
nothing in the carriage, till by additions and misconstructions it grows to a
downright and dangerous Infamy.

(3.) It comes through rashness and unruliness of Tongue: some Men never
learned to bridle their Tongues, and the Apostle James tells us that
therefore their Religion is vain. Jam. 1. 26. Till we make Conscience of these
evils, as well as others, we content our selves with a partial Obedience, and
therefore cannot be Sincere. But many never set themselves to learn this part
of their Duty, and therefore divulge a Report before they try it, or receive
any just proof of it. Possibly it may not come from downright Malice, but their
Tongues hang too loose, without the coercion and just restraint of Grace, and
so they either report false things, or speak Truth to an evil end. Prove. 11.
13. A Talebearer reveals secrets: but he that is of a faithful Spirit
concealeth the matter. Whisperers must be talking, and be it true or false, out
it comes. Certainly it is a Sin as long as you knew it not to be true, or if
you do, when you have no warrantable call, to mention it. To reveal Secrets
which you may conceal without wrong to God, or your own Consciences, or the
common Good, or the Good of your Neighbor, is Loquacity, or the Sin of Idle
and impertitent Talkativeness, the Disease of a Whisperer and Talebearer.

(4.) It comes from carnal Zeal, which is nothing else but Passion for our
different Interests and Opinions. The bitter Envying which the Apostle speaks
off, Iam. 3. 14. has made mad work in the World, as to Strifes and Confusions,
and Quarrels, and Bloodsheds, and Persecutions. But usually it venteth it self
in evil speaking: for the Apostle makes Backbitings and Whisperings the fruits
of Swellings and Tumults, 2 Cor. 12. 20. Oh what false and lying Tales are
there carried to and fro, that a Man knows not what, or whom to belive? So
many Lies walk under the disguise of Religion, that not to credit them, or
countenance the Report, seems a decay of Affection, but surely not to
Religion, but only the Interest of a Faction.

But a Question arises, Is all speaking evil of another unlawful?

Answ. I cannot say so, but yet it is hard to keep it from Sin.

1. He that does it without just cause is plainly a Detractor, and so a
grievous Sinner before God. You may impose and impute false Crimes upon others,
which is properly called Slander, and God thereby convinces the Professor of
the true Religion to be an Hypocrite. Psalm. 50. 20. Thou fittest, and speak
against thy Brother, and slanderest thy own Mothers Son. God does not only
reject the Liars for Hypocrites, but also the Backbiters and Slanderers. Those
that allow themselves in the frequent practice of this Sin, what hopes can they
have of acceptance with God, since he has entered his plea against them? For
the Act to be sure is sinful, there can be no other end in it but the wronging
of our Brothers Fame and Reputation to his loss and hurt. The Nature of the
thing shows it.

2. He that does but speak what he has heard, from others, without any
Assertion or Asseveration of his own, as not knowing the Truth of the report,
can hardly be excused from Sin. For if without just cause he speaks those
things that may wound the Reputation of others, he is in part accessory: for he
reports those things which may induce the Hearers to think ill of an other,
or at least beget a suspicion in their Minds concerning him, and so is a
concurring cause to wrong another Name and good Report. Now we should be so
jealous of Sin, that we should not countenance it in others without a just and
weighty cause.

3. He that does speak that which is true, but tends to the Infamy of
another, may be guilty of Sin, if he have not a sufficient Call and Warrant. As
for Instance, 1. If it be a matter we have nothing to do with, but only speak
of their faults for talk sake; This is to be Busybodies and Tatlers, Tim. 1.
5, 18. As we all love to speak of other Men's faults, when we look little at
Home. This is a Sin, when it is not matter of cognizance. Or 2. If we aggravate
things beyond their just Size and Proportion; for then we do not exercise
Christian Lenity and Meekness toward those that are fallen, Gal. 6. 1. Or 3. If
we urge their Crimes, and deny their Graces: This is like Flies to pitch on the
sore place. Is there no good amongst all this evil? But it may be done, when
Crimes are public, and Men themselves have forfeited all good repute, and God
does as it were hang them up in Chains, for a warning to the rest of the World;
or when their Reputation may injure the Truth, and seduce the Souls of others,
or be an injury to the Just who are slandered by them. In short, when the Glory
of God, or love to the Public Good, or the avoiding some great danger that may
be befall others by their esteem, then a lesser good is to be neglected to
procure a greater, and a growing evil prevented, when Men by dissembling their
Wickedness seek a Fame, to the manifest hurt of others Souls.

2dly. The kinds of it are twoin the Text; Whispering, and Backbiting.

First, Whispering, which is privy defamation of our Brother, to bring him into
disfavour and disrespect with those that formerly had a better opinion of him.
Herein Whispering differs from Backbiting, because the Whisperer stingeth
secretly, but the other does more openly attack our credit. Now this Whispering
is a great Sin:

1. Because it is here reckoned among the Sins which reigned among the Heathen,
and God has expressly forbidden to his People. Levit. 19. 16. Thou shall not go
up and down as a Talebearer among thy People. You see Tale-bearing and
Crimination is expressly against God's Word; and if your Hearts stand in awe of
the Word of God, how dare you indulge it and allow it in your selves? It is
observed that the Hebrew Word Rokel properly signifies a Merchant or a
Traffiquer up and down with Spices and other things; whereupon Rakil, the word
there used, is a Talebearer, that Accuser that makes Merchandise of Words, and
like a Pedlar goes from place to place to open his Pack, and utter his Wares,
to hear and spread abroad Criminations of other Men. This is made the property
of very wicked Men. Jer. 9. 4. Every Neighbor will walk with Slanders.

2. It is against natural Equity: because they do that to others, which they
would not have done to themselves, Mat. 7. 2. And therefore storm and take
great Offense, when God by a righteous Providence permits others to
retaliate with them, and pay them home in their own Coin; as usually he does:
for they who are not tender of the Credit and Reputation of others, their Names
are cast out of God's Protection, and permitted to the Strife of Tongues.

3. They are a Cause of much Mischief in the World. As,

(1.) Grief to the Party wronged. Prove. 18. 8. The Words of a Talebearer (we
read in the Margin, of a Whisperer) are as Wounds, and they go down into the
innermost parts of the Belly; that is, They equally hurt as a sharp Sword, that
is thrust into us, and causes Pain and Anguish. By the Chambers of the Belly,
is understood the Heart. Now whether the Heart of the Hearer, or the Heart of
the Party injured? Why not both? The Hearer, the words pierce into his Heart,
and breed Hatred, or at least Suspicion of his Friend. The Party injured, when
he comes to the knowledge of it, they breed his Grief and Vexation.

(2.) They are a Cause of much Debate and Strife. Prove. 26. 20. Where no Wood
is, there the Fire goes out; so where there is no Talebearer, (or Whisperer,)
Strife cease. Where Strife is compared to Fire, and the Whisperer's
Informations or Criminations, to the Wood or Matter that feeds the Fire; the
Extinction, or putting out of the Fire, to the ceasing of Strife and
Contention, which is caused by the absence of the Whisperer, that is, when he
is not admitted by either Party. Prove. 16. 28. A froward Man sows Strife, and
a Whisperer separateth choice Friends; Husband and Wife, Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants, Princes and Subjects, intimate Friends. Now, He that
sows Discord between Friends or Brethren, is an Abomination to the Lord,
Prove. 6. 19. Therefore how can one that fears God, allow himself in speaking
evil privily against his Neighbor?

(3.) There is a greater Mischief than this, and that is, It many times tends
to the destruction of another Life. Ezekiel. 22. 9. In thee are Men that carry
Tales to shed Blood. Usually the Vapors of Slander descend in the Showers of
Persecution; and the Devil was first a Liar, and then a Murderer. By Whispers
Men are stirred up to hate others, and then pursue them with all manner of
Hostility and Displeasures. As Doeg the Edomite, first accused, and then by the
Command of Saul slew Abimelech the High Priest, and all his Family, destroying
the whole City of the Priests called Nob, as you may see, 1 Samuel 22. 9. David,
when he professes the Uprightness of his Government, would allow no such in
his Court, but would severely punish them. Psalm. 101. 5. Whosoever privily
slandereth his Neighbor, him will I cut off. These Ways of Whispering and
Detraction, by which Men are wont to gain Confidence, Favor and Employment
from Princes, should not only miss of their Aims with him, but be severely
punished when he met with them.

But here arises a Question, Whether all private Complaints, and Informations
against others, come under the Name of Whispering?

I answer, No, with these Cautions.

1. If the Party be duly admonished: for before we go any further, the Rule is,
Mat. 18. 15. First tell him his Fault between him and thee alone. Private
Admonition must always precede Crimination to others; therefore if you forbear
privately to admonish the Offender in Love, and seek not to reclaim him from
his sinful Course, you cannot be excused from Sin.

2. If it be made to such as have power to redress the Fault by the most
discreet and gentle means, before it break out any further. So it is said, Genesis
37. 2. Joseph brought unto his Father their evil Report; that is, their
infamous Carriage, which caused evil Report of them; which is set down, not to
note his ill Will, but his good Affection and Godliness.

3. If the Complainer seeks nothing but the Amendment of the Party:
otherwise, to vent and divulge the Fault to make the Party less respected, or
to his Hurt, is not Love, but closer Malice; for true Zeal is not for
Destruction, but for Edification.

4. If he grieve that he has cause to complain, and pray for his Conversion;
for then it is more likely that all is done in Love. Many times the Grief is
personated, and when Whisperers have a mind to wound to the quick, they will
say, I am sorry to hear such a thing, loath to speak of it. But this is like the
Archer, that draws back his Hand, that the Arrow may fly with the more force.
But when we pray to God, there is the greater Presumption of Sincerity, because
we explicitly make him a Party, and do what we do, as in his Sight and Presence.

2dly. Backbiting is a more public speaking evil of our absent Brother, to the
impairing of his Credit. Now this may be done two ways.

1. With respect to the good things found in him.

2. With respect to the Evil supposed to be committed by him.

1. With respect to the good things found in him. There are four Degrees in
this.

(1.) The first and highest is; when we deny those good things, which we know
to be in another. This is not only to wrong our Neighbor, but to rob God of
his own Praise; for he expects to be glorified for all those Gifts and
Graces, which he has scattered among the Sons of Men, not only actively by
Persons themselves, but objectively by the Beholders. As for Instance: If God
has made any a new Creature, he is to be to the praise of his glorious Grace,
not only actively, but objectively, Ephesians. 1. 12. Though the Man in whom this
Work was wrought be silent, yet the Work should speak for it self, that is,
give occasion to Beholders to praise God. Now to deny this Work, is not only to
wrong the Party, but wrong God. Thus Job's Friends counted him an Hypocrite,
when upright. And the People of God are often traduced as Dissemblers, when yet
true, 2 Cor. 8. 6. Jesus Christ himself was counted a Wine-bibber, because of
his free and social Course of Life, for he affected not a Monkish Austerity.
This is the highest Degree, when Men plainly deny those Gifts and Graces which
are conspicuous in others.

(2.) When they do not deny, but lessen the Gifts and Graces of others. To
extenuate and clip another due Praise, is Envy; but in honor to prefer them
above our selves, is Charity and Humility. Phil. 2. 3. In lowliness of Mind let
each esteem others better than himself. Humility is content to sit in the
lowest place. Romans 13. 10. In Honor preferring one another. Some say, this is
not to be understood of that Opinion we have of others, but the Respect we put
upon them. We are to honor others, non sententia Mentis, sed Actionibus and
Officiis; that is meant of Offices of Love and outward Respect, but not of the
Sentiments of the Mind. Certainly it is just, that we should contemn no Man,
but give every one all agreeable Honor and Respect. But that a rich Man should
judge a poor Man to be in Place and Estate before him; a learned Man, an
ignorant Man more knowing; a godly Man, a wicked more holy; is impossible, and
sometimes inconvenient. Therefore they understand it of condescending to mutual
Offices of Love and Respect, or rather detracting from our selves than others.
But though this Exposition might fit the latter Place, yet not the former,
Esteeming others better than our selves, must relate to the Opinions and
Sentiments of our Minds: therefore the Meaning is, We should carry all things
with that quietness and humility, as if every one had a better opinion of
others Wisdom and Godliness than his own. And this is reasonable enough for
every one that is acquainted with himself. Humility will teach him to think
meanly of himself, or any thing that is his. And his Charity will prompt him to
give others all that possibly can belong to them, without any Retrenchment or
Defalcation.

(3.) When we own the Good done by them, but deprave it by supposing a sinister
Intention. Thus Satan could not deny, but that Job served God, but (Job 1. 9.)
Does Job serve God for naught? It is usual to count the Servants of God
Hypocrites and Self-seekers, and accordingly to persecute them. If one be poor,
it is Discontent, Melancholy, or some fleshly Ends set him on work. If mean and
simple, it is their Folly and Ignorance makes them so scrupulous and precise,
Ioh. 7. 9. If Ministers be zealous for God, they must do something for their
Calling; if great Men, they only mind their own Interest and Advantage. Where
the Action is fair, we are not competent Judges of the Intention of the Heart.

(4.) When neither denying, nor lessening, nor depraving: but when we have just
occasion to speak of a Man's due Commendation, we enviously suppress it. Envy is
a natural Sin, James 4. 6. The Spirit that dwells in us lusts to Envy. And
it bewrays it self by a dislike of other Men's just Praise. This is a Sin of
Omission at least, therefore it is said, 1 Cor. 13. 4. Charity envieth not.
Nothing is more contrary to the Goodness commended to us in the Gospel, than
such a Spirit, which cannot bear the Good of another, whether seen or spoken
of. Thus Ioseph's Virtue was an Eyesore to his Brethren, therefore they
endeavored his Destruction. Charity rejoices in the Gifts and Graces of
others, as in our own; but where this has no place, their Praises are our
Disgrace. And few there be that can say with John the Baptist, He must
increase, but I must decrease, Joh. 3. 21. That is, in Splendour and Fame, and
so confirmed the Testimony given to Christ.

2. As to Evil supposed to be committed by them.

(1.) When we publish their secret Slips, which in Charity we ought to conceal.
Prove. 11. 13. A Talebearer reveals Secrets. Certain things should have a
Vail drawn over them, and not be manifested without sufficient Cause. But when
a Man intrudeth himself into the mention of things faulty, which he might with
better manners and more honesty conceal, it is the Effect of a base Heart.

(2.) When in relating any evil Action of another, we use harder Terms than the
quality of the Fact requires; and make Evils worse than they are, Beams of
Motes, and Mountains of Mole-hills. We should lessen Sins all that we can, I
mean the Sins and Faults of others, Acts 3. 17. And now, Brethren, I wot, that
through Ignorance ye did it, as did also your Fathers. Certainly we should not
aggravate things to the height, nor from a simple Act determine the State of
the Person, nor from the failings of a single Person conclude the whole Party.

(3.) By imposing false Crimes. Prove. 10. 18. He that utters a Slander, is a
Fool, that is, a wicked Person. As Mephibosheth says of Ziba, 2 Samuel 19. 27.
He has slandered thy Servant unto my Lord the King. The most godly and
innocent Persons cannot escape the Scourge of the Tongue, and unjust Calumnies.

II. The Hainousness of the Sin.

1. In General, that is evident from what is said already; I shall urge two
Arguments more.

(1.) That Men shall be called to an account for these Sins as well as others,
they are not passed by in the Judgment. Jud. 15. God will execute Judgment upon
all ungodly Sinners, not only for their ungodly Deeds, but for all their hard
Speeches. Now if injurious and contumelious Language come into the Judgment,
how should all beware of the least accession to this Guilt? So, 1 Pet. 4. 4, 5.
They speak evil of you, who shall give an account to him that is ready to judge
the Quick and the Dead. The Mockers, as well as Persecutors, were to give a
strict and sad Account. It is no slight and light Sin to divulge and spread
false Calumnies, to hurt the Credit of our Brethren. God takes notice of a
Thought in our Heart against them, a Word in our Mouths, and will exact a
strict Account thereof.

(2.) It is the Property of a Citizen of Zion, one that shall be not only
accepted with God now, but dwell with God for ever, not to be given to
Backbiting. Psalm. 15. 3. He that backbiteth not with his Tongue, nor does evil
to his Neighbor. That is, that makes strict Conscience of Backbiting or
Calumniating, and abstaineth from doing any kind of Wrong or Reproach to his
Neighbor.

2. More particularly. It is the more heinous,

(1.) Partly, from the Person against whom it is committed. As suppose the
Godly and Irreprovable for the main, who by their Life and Conversation have
the best right to Honor and Esteem; to do it against them is most unjust.
Psalm. 64. 3. They whet their Tongues as a Sword; they shoot their Arrows, even
bitter Words, that they may shoot in secret at the perfect; suddenly do they
shoot at him, and fear not. That is, their Slanders and Calumnies are shot like
poisoned Darts and Arrows secretly or clancularly, without any desert or notice
of the Party against whom they are intended. Or else against Persons publicly
employed, and in the special Service of God; as Magistrates, Numb. 12. 8. Were
ye not afraid to speak against my Servant, against Moses? So in the Ministry; 1 Timothy 3. 1. He must have a good Report from them without, lest he fall into
Reproach, and the Snare of the Devil. Against these it is not only unjust, but
noxious and hurtful to God's Service.

(2.) From the Persons before whom the Slander is brought, as suppose Kings and
Princes; so that they are deprived, not only of private Friendships, but the
Favor and Countenance of these under whose Protection they have their Life and
Service. Thus Haman whispered against the Jews, Esth. 3. 8. It is not for the
King's profit to suffer them to live. Doeg against the Priests, Psalm. 52. 1.
Why boastest thou in Mischief, O mighty Man? The Goodness of God continues for
ever. It is a strange matter of Pleasure and Joy to some Persons in Power, to
be able to mischief those that deserve it least. God is eminently great and
good. This Sort of Pride is diametrically opposite to his Nature. Alas! To
trouble a few Persons, how irrational is it! But such are our depraved Natures.
Some are never pleased with those things that alone veeld durable Pleasure; but
to be able with their Counsel, as with one poisonous Vapor, to blast a
Multitude of innocent Persons.

(3.) From the End of it. If it be done with a direct Intention of hurting
another Fame, it is worse than if out of a rash Levity and Loquacity. Some Men
have no direct Intention of Mischief, but are given to Tatling. It is a great
Sin in them, and an unprofitable Mispence of Time; but it is a greater in those
that make it their Business to disgrace others, or sow Discord: These are the
Bane of Human Society.

(4.) From the Effect or great Hurt that follows; be it it Loss of Estate, as
in the Case of Mephibosheth; or a general Trouble and Persecution on the People
of God. When their good Names are buried, their Persons cannot long subsist
afterward, with any degree of Service: And all this may be the Fruit of a
deceitful Tongue.

The Use is, To show how good-natured Christianity is, and befriendeth human
Societies; it condemns not only Sins against God, but Sins against our
Neighbor. It binds its Professors to the Practice of the Apostle, Acts 24.
16. Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void of Offense
toward God, and toward Men. Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever things are honest, just,
good and true; if there be any Virtue, or any Praise, think of these things.
The World has taken up this Prejudice, that Religion makes us ill-natured. Of
it self there is nothing more benign; it only condemns those that are
good-natured to others, but not to God.

Use 2d. Let us not speak Evil of others behind their Backs, but tell them
their Faults plainly in Love and Wisdom, nor encourage others in this Sin.
Prove. 25. 23. As the North Wind drives away the Rain; so does an angry
Countenance a backbiting Tongue. They that receive Tales, and delight to hear
other Men's faults, encourage others in their Sin, and are accessory to, or
Partakers of the Guilt. It brings an evil Habit and Custom in our own Souls. In
short, Let us keep up an humble Sense of our own Faults; and looking at home,
it will not only divert us from slandering of others, but make us compassionate
toward them, and breed Comfort in our own Souls.

SERMON XI.
GAL. 5. 16. This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
Lust of the Flesh.
IN these Words, Observe, 1. A Duty enforced. 2. The Consequent and Fruit of it.

1. The Duty is, to walk in the Spirit, which is the sum of all Christian Piety.

2. The Motive is taken from the consequent and fruit of it, and ye shall not
fulfill the Lust of the Flesh. Let us fix the Sense.

1. For the Duty, to walk in the Spirit. Walking implies the tenor and course
of our Actions, in all which we should follow the direction and inclination of
the Spirit. But what is meant by the Spirit? That it may be known, both the
contrary Principles must be explained together.

(1.) Flesh, is sometimes taken for the Body; as Ephesians. 4. 29. For no Man yet
ever hated his own Flesh, it is brought as a reason why Husbands ought to love
their Wives as their own Bodies, ver. 28. and Spirit is taken for the Soul,
Eccl. 12. 7. But this is not the Sense here, for every Man has Soul and Body,
not the regenerate only: and a Man is not only to look after the welfare of the
Soul; But his Body also, it being the Instrument which it uses in its
operations.

(2.) The Spirit is sometimes put for Reason, and the Flesh for sensual
Appetite: as Ephesians. 4. 23. And be renewed in the Spirit of your Mind. And 1 John
2. 16. The Lusts of the Flesh: But this will not take in the whole Sense of
this place, for other faculties are corrupted besides the sensual Appetite, and
other Faculties must be renewed as well as the Understanding.

(3.) There is another acceptance of Flesh and Spirit: that is, that Spirit
signifies the uncreated Spirit, who is the Author of Grace: As Joh. 3. 5.
Except a Man be born again of Water, and the Spirit. Where Spirit is put for
the Holy Ghost, who immediately works Grace in us, called therefore the
Spirit of Sanctification, as that Saving Grace which is the effect of his work
is called the Sanctification of the Spirit. And the opposite Principle, Flesh,
signifies the corrupt Nature of Man, as Joh. 3. 6. That which is born of the
Flesh, is Flesh; Corrupt, Sinful, inclined to earthly things. Now though this
would bear a good sense to interpret Flesh and Spirit of the Holy Ghost, and
Concupisence or natural Corruption, (for no question he concurreth to the
mortifying of the old Man, till Sin be wholly expelled, Romans 8. 23. and still
does quicken and excite the new Man to Action, Gal. 4. 25.) yet here the
Apostle speaks of two inherent Principles.

(4.) Therefore by Flesh and Spirit is meant the old Man and the new, and so by
Spirit is meant the renewed part, or the new Man of Grace in the Heart. Joh. 3.
6. That which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. That is, there is a work of
Saving Grace wrought in our Hearts by the Spirit of God, which new Nature has
its Motions and Inclinations which must be obeyed and followed by us. And by
Flesh, is meant inbred Corruption, or the old Man, which is corrupt, with his
deceivable Lusts, Ephesians. 4. 22. Now then you see what it is to walk after the
Spirit, to direct and order our Actions according to the Inclinations of the
new Nature.

2. For the consequent and fruit of it, and ye shall not fulfill the Lust of the
Flesh.

Here two things must be explained. 1. The Lust of the Flesh. 2. Fulfill.


1. For the Lust of the Flesh. By it is meant the inordinate Motions of corrupt
Nature. The Flesh does not consider what is right and good, but what is
pleasing to the Senses, and craveth their satisfaction with much importunity
and earnestness, to the wrong of God and our own Souls; especially in Youth,
when the Senses are in Vigor, and Lust and Appetite in their Strength and
Fury. And generally all carnal Men are governed by the Lusts of the Flesh,
called by the Apostle, The Wills of the Flesh and the Mind, Ephesians. 2. 3. By which
the Heart is drawn from God to things Earthly and Carnal. Well then, by the
Lusts of the Flesh are meant the Motions of inbred Corruptions.

2. Ye shall not fulfill: that is, accomplish and bring into complete act,
especially with deliberation and consent. Mark, he does not say that the
lusting of corrupt Nature shall be totally suppressed, but it shall not be
fulfilled. The best of God's Children feel the Motions of the Flesh, but they
do not cherish and obey them. The Lusts of the Flesh may be said to be
fulfilled two ways: 1. When the outward act is accomplished, or when Lust has
conceived and brought forth actual Sin, Iam. 1. 15. Which may sometimes come to
pass in the Children of God, when they walk not in the Spirit, or obey not the
Motions and Directions of the renewed part. This again may be done two ways,
either upon Surprise, or Deliberation. By way of Surprise, Gal. 6. 1. (...),
upon deliberation, when Men plot, and make provision to fulfill their Lusts,
contrary to the Apostles advice, Romans 13. 14. Make not provision for the Flesh,
to fulfill the Lusts thereof. Thus it was with David in his great Sin; and this
does mightily aggravate the offense, and provoke the Lord against us. 2. When
for a continuance we obey the Flesh, usually accomplish its Motions without Let
and Restraint, and with Love, Pleasure, and full consent of Will, this is
proper to the Unregenerate. The Flesh does reign over them as its Slaves; this
is spoken of, Romans 6. 12. Let not Sin reign in your mortal Body, that ye should
obey it in the Lusts thereof. Let is not have a Power over you as Slaves. Well
then, the meaning is, you will not abuse your Christian Liberty as an occasion
to the Flesh, or give up your selves to do that, or seek that which the Flesh
lusts after.

Doct. The more Christians set themselves to obey the new Nature, the more is
the power of inbred Corruption mortified and kept under.
To understand this Point, let me lay down these Propositions.

I. That there is a diversity of Principles in a Christian, Flesh and Spirit.

1. There is a good Principle, called Spirit, because the Spirit is the Author
of it. Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new Heart, and a new Spirit will I put into you. It is
called also the Divine Nature, 2. Pet. 1. 4. because it is made up of those
gracious Qualities wherein we resemble God. The Seed remaining, 1 John 3. 9.
because it is not a transient operation, but a permanent habit, disposing and
inclining the Soul to God and Heaven. The new Man, Ephesians. 4. 24. because we have
it not by Nature, but by Grace, we are new formed to the Image of God. Now the
use of this Principle may be known, partly by the manner how it is wrought in
us, and partly by the uses and ends for which it serves.

1. For the manner how it is wrought in us by the Spirit, that is set forth,
Heb. 8. 10. I will put my Laws in their Mind, and write them in their Hearts.
The directive and imperial Power of the Soul is sanctified and seasoned by
Grace, the Mind enlightened, the Heart inclined. The Mind is enlightened by the
Knowledge of God's Will, and the Heart inclined that we may delight to do his
Will, it is suited thereunto. Therefore the New Creature does both serve to
direct us, and so performs the Office of a Guide and Leader to the Godly in
all their Actions, so far in Religion as God's Glory is concerned, and also to
move and excite us to that which is Good. For the Spirit is willing, though the
Flesh is Weak. Mat. 26. 41.

2. By its Uses and Ends. None of God's Gifts are given in vain. The new Nature
is the choicest Talent that the Sons of Men are entrusted withal. Therefore it
has its Use and End, which is to fit us for God and Heaven.

(1.) It disposes the Soul to a sincere Obedience to God, as an inherent
Principle. Ephesians. 4. 24. It is created after God in Righteousness and true
Holiness, as suiting us to these things. So the Spirit is promised to enable us
to walk in God's ways. Ezekiel. 36. 27. And I will put my Spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them.
It helps us to avoid Sin. 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit
Sin, for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of
God. They that give back, cannot yield to those Sins with which others are
surprised and captivated.

(2.) It prepares us for Heaven. Thither is the tendency of the new Nature, 2
Pet. 1. 4. 1 John 5. 4. Whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the World: it
moves us to mind, love and seek after Heavenly things. This Grace came from
Heaven and there it is perfected.

2. There is an other Principle of corrupted Nature remaining in us, which is
sometimes called Flesh, as before; sometimes the old Man, Ephesians. 4. 22. Sin that
dwells in us, Romans 8. 17. The Body of Sin, Romans 6. 6. The Law of the Members
warring against the Law of the Mind, Romans 7. 23.

By this Principle they are inclined to that which is evil. This Principle also
may be known, 1. By the manner how it was derived to us. 2. By its Tendency and
Operations.


(1.) The manner how it was derived to us, from Adam in his Apostasy, and as
fallen from his chief Good and last End. Ioh. 3. 6. When Man fell from God, he
fell to himself. The Temptation was, Ye shall be as Gods, Genesis 3. 5. He would
set up Self as a God. And what was that Self which Man sought to idolize, but
himself rather considered as a Body than as a Soul? And therefore when God
sought to reduce Man, where lay the difficulty? that Text will inform you, Genesis
6. 3. My Spirit shall not always strive with Man, for that he is also Flesh;
that is, sunk or lost in Flesh, altogether wedded to the Interests of the
bodily Life.

(2.) By its Tendency and Influence, it prompts us to do those things which are
most acceptable to Sense, or agreeable to our worldly and carnal Ends. The
Flesh operateth several ways, according to Men's callings, occasions or
constitutions, Isa. 53. 6. 1 Ioh. 2. 16. As every Soil bears such Weeds as
are most suitable to the Nature and Quality of the Ground: so some are enslaved
by this, some by that particular Sin, yet all of them alike opposite to God.
Differences there are as to the choice of their way wherein they please the
Flesh, some in a more gross, some in a more cleanly manner, yet they all walk
in the Lust of the Flesh, following inbred Corruption as their Guide, or obey
it either in a way of Worldliness, Ambition or Sensuality. Some ways are more
blameless before the World, because they less deserve a Worldly Interest; some
are so prodigiously wicked, that they cause a Horror, even in Mankind though
degenerated. Now after Conversion, some of our former Sins cripple us, and we
halt of the old Maim still; and it is not enough to stop one gap, while
corruption runs out at many more, but we must make Conscience of not
fulfilling the Lusts of the Flesh in any kind. Well now, I have showed you the
two Principles which are in a Christian, That we may have a Sense of our
imbecility, and that we are but regenerated in part.

II. I will prove to you that there is a Liberty in a Christian of walking
according to each Principle, either the Spirit or Flesh.

1. That the Christian has Liberty of walking according to the Spirit, is out
of question: for where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty, 2 Cor. 3.
17. Surely the Spirit of Christ can free us, and does free us from the bondage
of Corruption. Romans 8. 2. The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ has freed me
from the Law of Sin and Death; otherwise there would be no distinction between
Nature and Grace. If we should be still shackled and manacled by our Lusts, and
be as unable to pursue our last End as we were before; if there were no
inclination to God and Heavenly things, what have they gotten by Grace? and
therefore though we are still weak, yet we have the gift of the Spirit to free
us from Sin. The Force and Efficacy of the new Nature appears in three
things, Scire, Velle, Posse; in knowing our Duty, and willing and purposing,
and doing our Duty: suitable to the three Faculties of Man, his Understanding,
Will, and vital Power. So the Spirit received from Christ, 2 Timothy 1. 7. is a
Spirit of Power, Love, and a sound Mind.

(1.) For Scire. The new Nature partly consists in the internal Light of the
Mind, by which we understand the things of God revealed in the Scriptures
concerning our Duties and Privileges: and so the Unction is said to teach us
all things. 1 John 2. 20. That is, all things which belong to our necessary
Duty and Happiness. God's Children in necessary things have a good
Understanding; or, as it is said, Isa. 11. 3. They are quick of Understanding
in the fear of the Lord. By this it does warn us of our danger, mind us of
ourduty upon all occasions.

(2.) For Velle, To be willing. The force of the new Creature lies in the love
of God: for we are never converted to God till he has our Hearts, till we love
him with all our Soul, with all our Might and Strength, and hate what is
contrary to him. Psalm. 17. 10. Ye that love the Lord, hate evil. Now surely
they that love God and hate evil, are at liberty more than others to serve and
please God, and avoid Sin. Hate Sin once, and it has little Power over you.

(3.) For Posse, or the active Power. The wonder is rather how he can sin
deliberately, voluntarily, than how he cannot sin. 1 Ioh. 3. 9. and for doing
good, (...), Phil. 2. 13. I can do all things. Ephesians. 2. 10. A Spiritual Man is
prepared for every good work.

2. The Assistant Power which accompanies the new Creature in all his Actions,
does certainly give him a great advantage of Liberty to know, will; and do
things pleasing unto God. As he does first convert us unto God, and quicken us
when we are dead in Trespasses and Sins; so after Conversion, when the
Principles of a new Life are put into us, he still helps us: and as all
Creatures depend upon God in esse conservari and operari, Acts 17. 28. So does
the new Creature depend on the Spirit, he leads and guides all the Children
of God, to their Everlasting Estate. Romans 8. 14. He assists the Will, and the
vital Power, Phil. 2. 13. Otherwise we may complain with Paul. Romans 7. 18. For
to Will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not.
There may be a Will or an Inclination, but it can be brought into no Effect. He
clears the Mind, which otherwise would be blinded by Temptations, excites the
Will, which otherwise would be blunted with oppositions, assists the vital
Power, which else would be obstructed and impeded from producing its Effects.

2dly. That a Christian has a Liberty or Power of walking according to the
Flesh. The opposite Principle, though it be broken so far that it is not in
habitual predominancy, yet does too often prevail over us; otherwise it were
impossible to sin, or to be unjust, unmerciful, unmindful of God and heavenly
things, unchaste, intemperate or licentious in our Actions; and all the
Admonitions and Exhortations of the Word to keep the Regenerate from yiedling
to the Enticements of the Flesh, would be in vain, if they could not possibly
yield to them. In Heaven indeed there need no Disswasions from Sin, because the
glorified Saints are above all possibility of sinning, there is no Devil to
tempt, nor World to entice, nor Flesh to incline them to be seduced by those
Temptations: but Earth is not Heaven. Here mortified Lusts may awaken, and
recover Strength by a Temptation: But more distinctly these Arguments show it.

1. That though the Inclination be to God and Heaven, which is the Fruit of
Saving-Grace, yet the Acts of it are voluntary. Grace is a real active working
Thing; but it does not work necessarily, as Fire burns; it must be excited
and stirred up, both by the Spirit of God, who works in us both to will and
to do, Phil. 2. 13. and by our selves. We must (...), 2 Timothy 1. 6. We must
still be blowing up this holy Fire, as the Priest did the Fire of the Altar to
keep it burning; and its Motions must be hearkened to, cherished, and complied
withal, if we would keep the carnal Part under, and prevent it from breaking
out into shameful Acts. But as we grow remiss or careless in our Duty, Sin
acquireth and prevails over us.

2. The Flesh which remains in us is importunate to be pleased; and though it
be not superior in the Soul, yet it has a great deal of Strength, that still
we need, even to the very last, to keep watching and striving, and must resolve
to be deaf to its Entreaties and Solicitations. 1 Pet. 1. 14. Not fashioning
your selves to the former Lusts of your Ignorance, or accommodating your selves
to please the Flesh; that is, they must not cast their Conversations into a
carnal Mould, nor suffer their Choice and Actions to be directed and governed
by the Influence of the Flesh, or give up themselves to the Satisfaction of
their sinful Desires. In short, former Lusts are but in part subdued, our old
Love to them may be soon kindled, and the Bias of Corruption gather Strength
again, and the Gates of the Senses are always open to let in such Objects as
take part with the Flesh, and stir it up. Therefore we must not imagine that
there is no need of Diligence, or Striving and Watching. Holy Paul saw a need
of beating down his Body; lest, after he had preached to others, he himself
should be a Castaway, 1 Cor. 9. 26. After so many years Service in the Cause
of Christ, this great Champion was not secure of the Adversary he carried about
with him. There is need of Caution to the last, that we do not revert into our
old Slavery. The contrary Principle in us still retains some Life and Vigor,
though much abated; there is not such a Con-naturality and Agreement between
the Heart and Sin, as there was before; but yet Sin still dwells and works
in us, and we are often foiled by it.

3. That since there is a Liberty, we must be careful to live according to the
Operation and Influence of the better Principle; for it lies upon us as our
Duty, though we have the Power from above. There is a double Argument implied
in the Text: The one is, A Beneficio; the other, A Periculo: the Profit, the
Danger.

1. A Beneficio, from the Benefit accruing to us, We shall not fulfill the Lusts
of the Flesh. If they yield to the Motions and Inclinations of the Regenerate
Part, they cannot (...) the Evil which the Carnal Part would have them; the
(...) they have will hold them in as a Bridle, and turn their Minds another
way. Surely Sin is no such lovely thing, that we should be enamored of it;
yea, it is such an hateful thing, that we should shun and avoid it by all means
possible. Now when you have an Help at hand, not only near you but within you,
such as the new Nature, which rises up in Rebukes and Dislikes against Sin;
you should take this Advantage, otherwise you offer violence not only to the
Law of God, but that new Nature which he has put into you. There are three
Reasons which may be urged here.

(1.) The better Principle, the more it is obeyed, the more it is strengthened;
for the Way of the Lord is Strength to the Upright, Prove. 10. 29. The Habits of
Grace increase by Exercise; and the more Godly and Heavenly we are, the more we
shall be so; and the more constantly we act Grace, the more easily and readily
we act it, and with greater pleasure and delight. This is a sure Rule, that God
rewards Grace with Grace; one Duty is an Help to another, and the Sweetness
and Pleasure grows upon us every day. It is at first yoking, that the Bullock
is most unruly; and Beginners are burdened with the toil of Obedience more
than grown Christians. Christ's Yoke grows more easy every day by the
bearing; for the Opposition is more broken, and the Experience of the sweetness
and goodness of this way is more increased, Prove. 4. 18, 19.

(2.) The Power of inbred Corruption is subdued, and the Lusts of the Flesh
weakened: for as the better Principle grows, the other loses Strength.
Mortification and Vivification mutually help one another; the more we are dead
unto Sin, the more we are alive unto Righteousness: so on the other side, the
more we live unto Righteousness, the more we are dead to Sin; for the carnal
Life is swallowed up of the spiritual. And therefore to grown Christians
Temptations either make none, or no considerable Impression; they are alive to
God, and therefore dead unto the Flesh, and dead unto the World. It cannot be
imagined, that the Flesh should bear sway where there is a strong opposite
Principle to check it; and when we suffer it not to be idle and unfruitful, it
will obtain its Effect. Sin cannot be our Trade, Custom and Delight: No; it is
complained of as our heaviest Burden, Romans 7. 29. resisted as the greatest
Evil, and most opposite, not only to our Duty, but to our very Nature and
Temper.

(3.) This walking in the Spirit gives us an Evidence of our Interest in the
Grace of Justification. Gal. 5. 18. And if ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not
under the Law. Not to be under the teaching of the Law, as a Rule of Obedience,
is impossible for a Creature, To challenge such an Exemption in point of Right,
is to make our selves Gods. To usurp it in point of Fact, is to make our selves
Devils. It must be meant therefore, either of the irritating, or condemning
Power of the Law. If of the former, as the Law by the rigid exacting of
Obedience does increase Sin rather than subdue it, and makes corrupt Nature
spurn and rebel against it, so it is the same with the former Motives: but that
is a more limited Sense. Not under the Law, may be expounded to be not under
the condemning Power of it; and so to be under the Law, is opposed to be under
Grace. Romans 8. 1. There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.
There is a great Privilege; but what is the Qualification? Who walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit: That is, obey the new Nature.

2. A Periculo, the Danger of not obeying the new Nature, or walking after the
Spirit.

(1.) They lose their Advantage, and receive one of God's Gifts in vain. To
receive objective Grace in vain, aggravateth our Guilt, Ioh. 3. 19. But to
receive subjective Grace in vain, does more provoke God. Objective Grace is
that which is discovered in the Gospel; subjective Grace is that which is found
in the Heart of a Believer, the internal Grace of the holy Spirit renewing the
Heart. Now to sin away this Advantage after we are made Partakers of it, does
increase our Guilt; surely therefore if we live in the Spirit, we should walk
in the Spirit, Gal 5. 25. We should improve God's best Gifts, or else the work
of his Spirit is lost. He loses nothing but Corn, Wine, and Oil bestowed upon
others, but he has bestowed the Sanctification of the Spirit upon you, shall
he lose the Glory of that also?

(2.) The new Nature is exceedingly weakened, and suffers loss, if it be not
cherished and obeyed. The Church of Sardis is warned to prevent the dying of
gracious Habits. David speaks as if the Work were to begin anew, and his
Restoring were a second Conversion. Psalm. 51. 10. Create in me a clean Heart, O
Lord, and renew a right Spirit within me. The Principle of Grace, being not
adhered to, loses much of Vigor and Power.

(3.) When these Motions are not obeyed, and this Power is not exercised, God
is provoked to withdraw the quickening Grace. Though the Spirit here spoken of
is the new Nature, yet the Holy Ghost is the Super-intendent of it, and does
move, guide, direct, and quicken by it. The new Nature inclines, but he gives
Strength to its Motions. Now the Spirit withdraws when this Work is slighted,
and we wilfully run into Sin. Psalm. 51. 11. Take not thy holy Spirit from me.

(4.) There is another Mischief; his sanctifying Work is not only obstructed,
but his certifying and sealing Work is obscured, and so our Day is turned into
Night. Ephesians. 4. 30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed to
the Day of Redemption.

Use 1. It shows what Necessity there is, that we should look after
Conversion to God, or a Work of Grace wrought in us by the holy Spirit; for the
Apostle supposes they had the Spirit. There is no walking without living, for
otherwise our Motions are but the Motions of Puppets, not proceeding from
internal Life, but acted from Springs and Engines; no subduing the Flesh,
without setting up an opposite Principle. Therefore we must give up our selves
to the Holy Spirit, first to be sanctified, then governed by him; first
renewed, then guided, ordered and directed by him in all our Actions, and the
Flesh dies away insensibly.

2dly. Being renewed by the Holy Ghost, that is, having our Minds enlightened,
and Hearts inclined, we must obey this Inclination; for Life is not given us
that we may have it, but that we may act by it, and do things suitable to that
Life which we have. Grace is not a sluggish idle Quality, but is always working
and warring on the opposite Principle.

3dly. Though at first we are pestered and encountered with the Lusts of the
Flesh, which divert us from God, and Heavenly Things; yet we should not be
discouraged by every difficulty: For Difficulties do but inflame a resolved
Spirit, as Stirring does the Fire. And besides, though we do not wholly subdue
the Lusts of the Flesh, yet we shall not accomplish them, and live in
subjection to them, but by degrees get power against them.

4thly. The carnal Life is not of one Sort. Some wallow in sensual Pleasures,
others have Head and Heart altogether taken up with the World and worldly
things. Now if God has put a new Biass upon our Wills and Affections, we must
show it forth by an Heavenly Conversation. For they that mind earthly Things
are carnal; and the great Inclination of the new Nature is, to carry us unto
God, and the Things of another World; 2 Cor. 5. 5.

5thly. They are much to blame, that complain of Sin, and will not take the
Course to get rid of it by obeying the Instincts of the Holy Ghost, or the
Motions of the new Nature. The Lord's Spirit is a free Spirit, Psalm. 51. 12.
And his Truth makes us free, John 8. 32. And we are interessed in this
Liberty, when born of the Spirit. Let us be true to our Duty, and we shall
bless God for our Liberty, rather than complain of our Bondage. It is Laziness
and Cowardice not to improve Grace which was given us for this use.

6thly. How much we are concerned in all Conflicts, especially in those which
allow Deliberation to take part with the Spirit, and obey his Motions, rather
than to fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh: otherwise, by Consent and upon
Deliberation, you are unfaithful to Christ, and your own Souls. Your Business
is not to gratify the Flesh, but to crucify it, to overruled Sense and
Appetite, and cherish the Life of Grace, Galat. 5. 24. And surely when
Conscience has help to deliberate, it is a greater Evil to resist it, than
when hurried by our own Passions.

7thly. It is of great Use and Profit to us, to observe which Principle
decays, the Flesh, or the Spirit; for thereby we judge of our Condition, both
in order to Mortification and Comfort.

The Increase of the Flesh may be known,

(1.) By your Backwardness to God. Grace is clogged, when you cannot serve Him
with Sweetness and Delight, Romans 7. 18.

(2.) When the Heart grows careless of Heaven, and your Life and Love is more
taken up about things present than to come, Phil. 3. 18, 19. The contrary is
found when Grace is in vigor, 2 Cor. 4. 18. Col. 3. 1, 2.

Secondly, The Prevalency and Increase of the Spirit is known,

(1.) By an humble Contentedness, and Indifferency to Plenty, Pleasures, and
Honors. Phil. 4. 12. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound;
every where and in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to be
hungry; both to abound, and suffer need, Heb. 13. 5. Let your Conversation be
without Covetousness, and be ye content with such things as ye have: for he
has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.

(2.) When your Delight in God, Heaven, and Holiness, is still kept up. Romans 8.
5. For they that are after the Flesh, do mind the things of the Flesh: but they
that are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit.

(3.) When the Heart is kept in a preparation for the Duties of your heavenly
Calling.

SERMON XII.
JOB 19. 25. For I know that my Redeemer lives.
THese words were spoken by Job, a Man for the present miserable, and suspected
by his Friends as one that neither feared God, nor trusted in him: Therefore to
comfort himself in his Misery, and to vindicate his Innocence, he makes
Confession of his Faith.

In this Confession you have the grand and most important Articles reckoned up.

1. He does solemnly declare and believe the promised Messiah to be his
Savior: I know that my Redeemer lives.

2. His coming to Judgment; and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the
Earth.

3. The Resurrection of the dead, with application to himself, for he says
ver. 26. And though after my Skin, Worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh
shall I see God.

4. And Lastly, the beatifical Vision, ver. 27. Whom I shall see for my self,
and mine Eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within
me.

We have to do with the first Article, his belief of Salvation by the promised
Messiah; For I know that my Redeemer lives.

I am not ignorant that this whole Context is carried to another sense, not
only by the Jewish Doctors, but by some Christian Interpreters of good account:
whose Reasons consisting wholly in Grammatications, I list not now to examine.
The common and received Sense seems to be better;

1. Because these Words are ushered in with a solemn Preface containing in them
some notable Truth: Oh that my Words were now written! Oh that they were
printed in a Book! Oh that they were graven with an Iron Pen and Lead, in the
Rock for ever! For I know, etc. Surely such a passionate Preface will become no
other matter so well, as the great Mystical Truths of the Christian Faith.

2. The Word (Goel, or Kinsman) Redeemer, will suit with no Person so well as
Christ.

3. The rest of the Passages do not run smoothly, unless they be accommodated
to this Sense, and that I take to be the most obvious Sense which the Words
will best bear.

4. Job, as it is clear by many Passages in this Book, had often disdained all
Hopes of being restored to any Temporal Happiness in this Life, affirming that
all his hope was gone, that he was worse than a Tree cut down. This is the
drift and current of all his former Discourses.

5. When he says that he should see God in his Flesh, and with the same Eyes
he now had, I cannot imagine why these Passages should be so emphatically
spoken, if he only intended in this Paragraph an hope of being restored to his
Temporal Happiness.

Having premised this: In the words, observe, 1. The causal Particle, for,
giving thereby a reason why he would have his words so marked, because of the
excellency of the matter. 2. The Article of Faith, my Redeemer lives. 3. The
manner how this Article is asserted, and professed by Job.


1. With certainty of persuasion, I know. 2. With Application and
Appropriation, My Redeemer: For I know my Redeemer lives. All put together
will yield this point.

Doct. That it is a great comfort to the Saints in all their Afflictions, to
know that they have a Redeemer living in Heaven.
This is the first thing whereby Job comfort himself. I. I shall consider
the matter of the Comfort. II. Show you how it is applicable to all Afflictions.


I. The matter of the Comfort consists in four things. 1. That there is a
Redeemer. 2. That he is their Redeemer. 3. That he lives. 4. That they know
this upon certain and infallible Grounds.


1. That there is a Redeemer: for he does not say, I know that my Creaton
lives, but my Redeemer.

The Word is Goel; The Septuagint render it (...): He that will deliver me.
Theodotion better, (...), My near Kinsman lives. The Word properly signifies
such an one as in regard of propinquity or neatness of Kindred, had right to
redeem a Mortgage, or the like Engagement of Land, or Livelihood. Lev. 25. 25,
26. If thy Brother be waxen poor, and has sold away some of his Possession,
and if any of his Kin come to redeem it, then shall he redeem that which his
Brother sold. Or else to prosecute the Law against the Murderer of his Friend,
or Kinsman, Numb. 35. 19. 24.

It is taken sometimes more largely for any Deliverer out of Thraldom, or
Avenger of wrong in general. And so is in the old Testament applied to God or
Christ, to whom the term chiefly belongs. To God, because of his powerful
Providence and rescuing his People out of their Calamities. Psalm. 25. 22.
Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his Troubles. To Christ, to whom it is most
proper. Isa. 59. 20. And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and to them that
shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob; which the Apostle applies to Christ,
Romans 11. 26. He then is the Redeemer, and it implies, 1. That he is our
Kinsman after the Flesh, or by Incarnation. 2. That he paid a price to God for
us in his Passion. 3. That he pursues the Law against Satan, and rescues us by
his Power. All which are notable grounds of Comfort. For under the Law the
Redemption of the Inheritance, or the Person of the poor Brother sold, was to
be made by the next of Blood, and that by the Male side, not by the Mothers,
but by the Fathers side; and he also was to be the Avenger of Blood.

1. There is much comfort in this, that Christ is our Kinsman, Bone of our
Bone, and Flesh of our Flesh, and therefore certainly will not be strange to
his own Flesh. He did redeem us not only jure proprietatis, by virtue of his
Interest in us as our Creator, but jure propinquitatis, by virtue of his
Kindred, one of us, of our Stock and Lineage; the Son of Adam, as well as the
Son of God. The Apostle tells us, Heb. 2. 11. For he that sanctifies, and they
that are sanctified, are all of one. For which cause he is not ashamed to call
them Brethren. As the first Fruits offered to God were taken out of the same
heap; so he was of the same Mass with us. Christ is not only Man, but the Son
of Man: he might have been Man if God had created him out of nothing, or he had
brought his substance from Heaven. But he is the Son of Man, one descended of
the Loins of Adam, as we are; even thus, He that sanctifies, and they that are
sanctified, are all of one. He is of the same Stock with all Mankind, but the
Kindred is reckoned to the Sanctified, because there it holds of both sides.
Christ is born of a Woman, and they are born of God, and so he is a Kinsman
doubly, ratione incarnationis fuae, and regenerationis nostrae; In regard of
his own Incarnation, and our Regeneration. He partaketh of the humane Nature,
and we partake of the Divine Nature. And it follows, therefore he is not
ashamed to call us Brethren. We are said to be ashamed when we do any thing
that is filthy, dishonest or base, or misbecoming our Dignity and Rank, which
we sustain in the World. The former Consideration is of no place here. For the
latter, those that bear any Port and Rank in the World, are ashamed to show too
much familiarity toward their Inferiors: but such is the love of Jesus Christ
toward his People, that though he be infinitely greater, and more worthy than
these, yet he is not ashamed to call us Brethren. Well then, here is the first
step of our Comfort and Hope, to see God in our Natures. The Eternal Son of God
became our Kinsman, that he might have the Right of Redemption, and recover the
Inheritance which we had forfeited. We could not have such familiar and
confident recourse to an Angel, and one who was of another Stock, and different
Nature from ours, nor put our selves into his hands with such trust and
assurance. Now he and we are of one Nature, we my be the more confident. It Is a
motive to Man, Lev. 8. 7. Thou shall not hide thy self from thine own Flesh. In
Christ all the perfections of Man were at the highest. This made Laban, though
otherwise a churlish Man, kind to Jacob, Genesis 29. 14. Surely thou art my Bone
and my Flesh. One of our Stock and Lineage will pity us more than a Stranger.

2. This Kinsman was to pay the Price and Ransom of his captivated Brother;
that also is implied in the Notion of a Redeemer, Lev. 25. 48, 49. After that
he is sold, his Uncle, or his Uncles Son may redeem him, or any that is nigh of
Kin to him, of his Family, may redeem him. So when we had sold our selves,
Jesus Christ, who only of the Kindred was free and able to do it, paid a price
for us. 1 Cor. 6. 20. We are bought with a Price. And this Price was no less
than his own precious Blood, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. A Price was necessary: for God
was not an Enemy that could be overcome, but must be satisfied, and Amends made
for the Wrong done to his Majesty; that the Notions which are ingrafted in Man's
Heart concerning God might be kept inviolate. The Lord knows how apt we are to
please our selves with the thoughts of Impunity, as if it were nothing to sin
against God, and a small matter to break his Laws. Now to prevent this thought
in us, before his Justice would let go the Sinner, he demands Satisfaction,
and equivalent Satisfaction to the Wrong done, to expiate the Offense done to
an infinite Majesty. Therefore no less could be a sufficient Ransom for lost
Sinners, than the Blood of Christ. This is the Price which our Kinsman has
paid down for us. In short, the Wrong was done to an infinite Majesty, the
Favor to be purchased was the Eternal Enjoyment of the Ever-blessed; the
Sentence to be reversed, was the Sentence of everlasting Death: And therefore
Christ alone could serve the turn. Here is another Ground of Comfort. Cyril
calls it, (...).

3. This Kinsman was to revenge the Quarrel of his slain Kinsman upon the
Murderer. So he is a Redeemer, and that not only by Merit, but by Power, not
only as a Lamb, but as a Lion. There needed no Price to be paid to Satan; we
are redeemed from him, not by Satisfaction, but by Rescue. The Apostle tells
us, Col. 2. 15. He spoiled Principalities and Powers. Luke 11. 21. He binds
the strong Man, and takes away his Goods. Heb. 2. 14, 15. That through Death
he might destroy him that had the Power of Death, that is, the Devil: And
deliver them, who through Fear of Death were all their Life time subject to
Bondage. The Devil had partly an usurped Power over Man, as the God of this
World, or at least as the Enemy of Mankind; so Christ rescues us by force:
partly a ministerial and permitted Power, as the Executioner of God's Curse and
Vengeance; so he over-aweth him, and puts him out of Office by the Merit of his
Passion. Satan had no Power over Death, as Dominus Mortis, as the Supreme Lord,
that has power to save and to destroy; but as Minister Mortis, as an Hangman
and Executioner has power from the Law to put the Malefactor to death. So
Christ destroyed him not in regard of Essence, as if there were no more a Devil
to tempt and hurry us to Destruction; nor in regard of Malice, as if he did no
longer seek to devour: but in regard of Office and Ministry; he is put out of
office, and has no more Law-power to destroy those that have fled to Christ
for Refuge; and so has freed us from all the fears of Death and Hell, which
our Guilt, and Satan's Temptations, subjected us to.

2. That he is their Redeemer, is the next Ground of Comfort. Job does not
profess Faith only in a Redeemer, but in his Redeemer; I know, that [my]
Redeemer lives; not by an uncharitable Exclusion, shutting out others, and
engrossing the Redeemer to himself; But

(1.) By a fiducial Application, making out his own Title and Interest. Some
things in Nature are common Benefits, not lessened to any because others enjoy
them. As a Speech heard, and the Sun shining, etc. The Saints do not exclude
others. 1 Ioh. 2. 2. And he is the Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours
only, but for the Sins of the [whole] World. 2 Timothy 4. 8. Henceforth there is
laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, not for me only, but for [all] them
also that love his Appearing. This does not lessen the Benefit to us, and our
Obligations to him. Plato thought himself obliged in kindness to one that paid
his Fare for his Passage over a River, and reckoned it, positum apud Platonem
Officium, a Courtesy that obliged Plato; but when he saw others Partakers of
the same Benefit, he disclaimed the Debt, and only took part of it on himself.
Upon which Seneca groundeth this Aphorism, That it is not enough for him that
will oblige me to him, to do me a good Turn, unless he do it to my self
directly, non tantum mihi, sed tanquam mihi; otherwise, quod debeo cum multis,
solvam cum multis, I will only pay my Portion and Share of Thanks and Respect.
But this cannot be applied to this extraordinary Kindness of Christ; for every
Man is indebted for the whole, not every Man for a part of Redemption. God's
Love to every one is infinite, and he has paid an infinite Price for thee,
purchased an infinite Happiness to thee. His Love to thee was without measure
and bounds, so must thy Thankfulness be to him without stint and limit. Though
he died for others as well as thee, yet thou art bound to love him no less than
for thee alone; he shed his whole Blood for thee, and every Drop was poured out
for thy sake.

(2.) By a fiducial Owning and Appropriation, challenging his Right in him. So
does Thomas, Joh. 20. 28. My Lord, and my God. Faith appropriates God to our
own Use and Comfort. The Devils know that there is a God, and a Christ; for
they confessed, Thou art Jesus, the Son of the Living God: But they can never
say with Comfort, My God, and my Christ. This Application is the Ground of our
Love to Christ, and our Comfort in Christ.

Our Love to Christ. Things that concern us, affect us. This is the quickening
Motive to the spiritual Life, Who loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.
20. And, 1 Ioh. 4. 19. We love him, because he loved us first. A particular
Sense and Experience of God's Love to our own Souls, does most quicken and
awaken our Love to him again. When we see that he has thought of us, and taken
Care of our Salvation, that our Names are written in the Lamb's Book of Life.

So for our Comfort in Christ. It is the Propriety a Man has to any good
thing, that does increase the Comfort of it. It is a Misery to a Man, to see
others enjoy a Benefit, which he has as much need of as others, and he can
enjoy no part of it. I may allude to that, Prove. 5. 15. Drink Waters out of
thine own Cistern, and running Waters out of thine own Well. The greater we
know the Benefit, the greater will be our Trouble to want it. A poor Man that
sees a large Dole given, and Multitudes relieved, and he can get nothing, is
the more troubled. So here, to see Christ ready to save Sinners, and we have no
Comfort by him, is very afflicting. Ephesians. 1. 13. After ye heard the Word of
Truth, the Gospel of your Salvation. It is not sufficient to know, that the
Gospel is a Doctrine of Salvation to others; but every one should labor, by a
due Application of the Promises to their own Hearts, to find it to be a
Doctrine of Salvation to themselves in particular. The seeing of Meat, though
never so wholesome, does not nourish; but the eating of it. The beholding of
Christ revealed in the Word as a Savior in general, is not sufficient to give
full Comfort, without applying him to be my Christ, my Savior, my Redeemer. We
must make sure of our Share in this universal Good. We read of Blood shed, and
Blood sprinkled, Atonement made, and Atonement received: But no Man has
satisfying Comfort by the Blood of Christ, till it be sprinkled upon his Heart,
and applied to him by the Spirit of God, and thereby assured that it was shed
for him.

3. The next Ground of Comfort is, That our Redeemer lives. This is true of
Christ, whether you consider him as God, or as Man. (1.) As God. So he is
Coeternal with the Father, the First and the Last, the Beginning of all
things, and the End of them. So he says not, he has, or shall live, but he
lives. In my Flesh shall I see God. He speaks of the Redeemer's Life without
any distinction of Time, past, present, or to come. So that he is altogether
with the Father and the Spirit, from everlasting to everlasting one living God.
(2.) As Man after his Resurrection. Rev. 1. 18. I am he that lives, and was
dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen. And have the Keys of Hell, and
of Death. Now in this Sense I take it for his Life in Heaven after his
Resurrection from the Dead; and that is of great Comfort to us. For the Apostle
tells us, that, If we were reconciled by the Death of Christ, much more shall
we be saved by his Life. The Comfort is great that arises from the Life of the
Redeemer.

(1.) It is a visible Demonstration of the Truth of the Gospel in general, and
in particular of the Article of Eternal Life. The Truth of the Gospel in
general, Acts 17. 31. Has given Assurance, that is, a sufficient Evidence to
induce a Belief of the Gospel, in that he has raised him from the Dead. Christ
came from Heaven as a faithful Witness, to beget Faith, as well as to give us
Knowledge; sealing his Testimony with unquestionable Proofs, to make it the
more sure and credible to us; for he has confirmed it by a Life of Miracles,
and chiefly by raising from the dead Himself, and ascending visibly to Heaven.
His Resurrection from the dead is Proof enough to justify his Doctrine, and to
evidence the Certainty of his Testimony; for God by his Divine Power would not
countenance a Deceiver, and raise him from the Dead, and receive him into Glory
with Himself. Particularly it proves the State of unseen Glory, Life and
Immortality are more fully brought to light in the Gospel, than by any other
Means, 2 Timothy 1. 10. By the Resurrection of Jesus Christ there is not only a
clear Revelation of it, but a full Confirmation, because Christ is entered into
the Glory that he spoke of, and promised to his Disciples. He is gone before us
into the other World, that he may receive us unto himself, and that we might
with a more steady confidence wait for it in the midst of Fears and
Uncertainties of the present Life.

(2.) His Living after Death. It was the solemn Acquittance of our Surety from
the Sins imputed to him, and a Token of the Acceptance of his Purchase; when
Christ rose again from the Dead, our Surety was let out of Prison, Isa. 53. 8.
And it is a Ground of Confidence to us: for when the Debtor sees the Surety
walk abroad, he may be sure the Debt is satisfied. Therefore it is said, Romans
4. 25. Who was delivered for our Offenses, and raised again for our
Justification. Christ is sometimes said to rise from the Dead, and sometimes to
be raised from the Dead. His taking up his Life again argued his Divine Power;
but as Man, he was raised. So it is said, Heb. 13. 20. The God of Peace, who
brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus Christ. God the Father brought him
again from the Dead, as an Evidence of full Satisfaction. Our Surety did not
break Prison, but was solemnly brought forth. The Disciples said, Acts 16. 37,
38, 39. Let them come themselves, and fetch us. An Angel was sent from Heaven,
to roll away the Stone, to show that Christ had a solemn Release and Discharge.

(3.) His Living, implies his Capacity to intercede for us, and to relieve us
in all our Necessities. Heb. 7, 24, 25. But this Man, because he continues
ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood. Therefore he is able to save to the
uttermost, all that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
Intercession for them. Christ is there compared with the Levitical Priesthood:
They were many that succeeded one after another, and being hindered by Death,
could never bring their Work to perfection; but this Priest ever lives to
plead the Churches Cause with God, presenting his Human Nature in his Sight,
and appearing continually before his Fathers Throne, and this for all that come
to God by him. They are his Clients, and he is their Advocate; it is against
the Rules of that Court to plead for others that continue in their Unbelief and
Impenitency. After the Beast was slain without the Camp, the Levitical
High Priest did enter into the Sanctuary with Blood: So Christ after his
Sacrifice did enter into the Heavenly Sanctuary, with the Names of the twelve
Tribes, of all the Saints on his Breast and Shoulders, there to appear, before
God for us, Heb. 9. 14. He ever lives to accomplish the Fruits of his Purchase
for those that are reconciled to God by him as an High Priest; to answer the
Accusations of Satan, as our Advocate; to stop the breaking out of Wrath. As
Jonathan in Readiness Court did mitigate his Father's Anger against David, so
Christ does interpose Night and Day to prevent Breaches, and to preserve a
mutual Correspondence between God and us, as our Lieger-Agent; to sue out Grace
suitable to our Conflicts, Difficulties, and Temptations, as our Friend in
Court; to procure the Acceptance of our Prayers, as our Mediator and
Intercessor, Heb. 8. 2.

(4.) His Living is the Root and Cause of our Life. For he having purchased
Eternal Life, not only for himself, but for all his Members, ever lives to
convey it to them, and maintain it in them. Ioh. 14. 19. Because I live, ye
shall live also. Joh. 6. 57. As I live by the Father; so he that believes in
me, shall live by me. By reason of the Mystical Union that is between Christ
and Believers, they may rest upon it, that as long as the Head has Life, the
Members shall not be utterly without Life; for Christ is a Pledge and a Pattern
of that Power, that shall work in us in order to Life Spiritual and Eternal.

4. The next Ground of Comfort is the Certainty of Persuasion; I know that my
Redeemer lives. As if he had said, I do not doubt of it, nor suspect it in the
least. I know, implies,

(1.) A clear Understanding of this Mystery. The more fully we understand the
Grounds of Faith, the more Efficacy they have upon us, to beget Confidence and
Joy of Faith in us. The Fears that haunt us are the Fruits of Darkness and
Ignorance, accompanied with a sense of Guilt; but as Gospel-Knowledge
increases, they vanish as Mists do before the Sun. Psalm. 9. 10. They that know
thy Name will put their Trust in thee. If God were better known, he would be
better trusted.

(2.) I know, implies Certainty of Persuasion. This is either, Certainty of
Faith, or of Spiritual Sense.

First, Of Faith, which depends on the Certainty of God's Revelation; that was
either the general Promise in Paradise, Genesis 3. 15. God had said, The Seed of
the Woman shall break the Serpents Head. Now upon this Promise Job is as
confident of a Redeemer, as if he had seen him with his bodily Eyes. Thus
Abraham is said to have seen Christ's Day, John 8. 56. And, Heb. 11. 13. These
all died in Faith, not having received the Promises, but having seen them afar
off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them. Or his Faith was built upon
some particular Revelation; Heb. 1. 1. God, who at sundry times, and by diverse
manners, spoke unto the Fathers by the Prophets. They had a sufficient
Discovery of the Redeemer to be a Ground of Faith. Certain it is, the Eyes of
Believers were then upon him. We are told, that Christ was the Lamb slain from
the Foundation of the World, Rev. 13. 8. He is set forth in Prophecies and
Types. Now Faith is the Evidence of Things not seen; not seen by Sense, but
clearly seen in the Promise. He was the Joy of all Ages, even of those that
lived before he came in the Flesh. The same is true after the Coming of Christ,
as well as before; for we believe in him whom we have not seen, 1 Pet. 1. 3. We
should as heartily love him, and rejoice in him, as if we had conversed with
him bodily. Only we have an Advantage, History is not so dark as Prophecy; and
it is more easy to believe what is past, where we have the Suffrage and
Experience of so many Ages to confirm us, than to expect what is to come, where
we have only God's bare Word to support us. The Mystery is now more clearly
revealed to us, than before the Exhibition of our Savior. Therefore according
to our Advantage, so should the Increase of our Faith be. We should be able to
say, 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is
able to keep that which I have committed to him. We should rest upon Christ
with more confidence.

Secondly, The Certainty of Spiritual Sense. We know that he is a Redeemer by
the discovery of the Word; that he is our Redeemer by the Application of the
Spirit, as he manifests himself to us, and in us. This Knowledge of Spiritual
Sense is often spoken of, Job 13. 18. I know that I shall be justified. Heb.
10. 34. Knowing in your selves, that ye have in Heaven a better and an enduring
Substance. Romans 6. 6. Knowing this, that your old Man is crucified, that is,
feeling. Now both these are of great Comfort, the Certainty of Faith, and the
Sweetness of Sense; for without the Certainty of Faith the Soul is only left to
blind Ghesses, and loose Conjectures, and so can never have solid Comfort.
Without the Knowledge of Sense, that is, of our Interest in Salvation, the Soul
loses much of its Joy and Peace. As Novices, and Men that have never before
been at Sea, are troubled at the swelling of every Wave and Billow, though they
are safe; yet because they do not know they are safe, their Voyage is a Torment
to them. So those that take the Assurance of the Word of God for the Truth of
Redemption by Christ, and tremblingly build upon it; yet because they know not
their own Interest, have not the Comfort of the Spirit, their Journey to Heaven
is the more troublesome. Therefore it concerns us to build upon a sure
Foundation, so to get a clear Interest.

II. How this is applicable in all Afflictions. That easily appears from these
Premises.

1. In public Troubles and Difficulties. We are amazed and perplexed many
times at the Events that fall out in the World, and know not whereunto these
things will grow. Yet this is some Comfort and Support to all that are
concerned in Sion's Affairs, that Christ is alive at his Fathers Right Hand,
and will pursue all things that make for the Glory of God, and the Advancement
of his own Kingdom. I say, the Glory of God, Romans 6. 10. In that he lives, he
lives unto God. His own Kingdom. Psalm. 110. 1. Sit thou at my right Hand, till
I make thine Enemies thy Footstool. He is at the right hand of God, and there
shall abide, till he return to judge the World. In the mean time he has the
Inspection of all Affairs, All Judgment is put into his Hands, Joh. 5. 22.
Things are not left to the Will of Man, nor to their own Contingency, but are
guided and ordered by him with good Advice. However Matters go, Christ is
Governor, who is not, cannot be deposed from his Regal Office, nor justled out
of the Throne. As Luther said, upon some Loss that befell the Friends of the
Gospel, Etiamnum vivit and regnat Christus. When the Floods lifted up their
Voice, and all things seemed to threaten Ruin, and to over-whelm; then follows,
The Lord reigns. The Lord on high is mightier than the Noise of many Waters,
Psalm. 93. 1, 4. It is spoken of the Kingdom of Christ, for the advancing and
preserving of which he gives forth signal Testimonies of his Regal Power.

2. In spiritual Distresses; when we want Life and Quickening, are opposed with
troubled thoughts about our sinful Infirmities. Your Redeemer has Life in
himself, but not for himself alone; he came into the World, that we might have
a fuller Communication of his Grace, Ioh. 10. 10. Now he is gone back again to
God, and filled with the Spirit, to communicate it to the Members of his
Mystical Body. Ephesians. 4. 10. He is ascended up to fill all things. When we are
dead, our Redeemer lives, as a Fountain of Life to God's People.

3. In outward Calamities. He lives, when other Comforts fail, or are taken
away from us; he will prove the nearest and best Friend, when all others
forsake us; he will not only sympathize with us, but help us, and knows how
to to give a comfortable Issue out of the sorest Troubles. 2 Cor. 4. 14, 16.
Knowing, that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by
Jesus, and shall present us with you. For which cause we faint not.

4. It is a great Comfort in Calumnies and Slanders, when our Names are taken
up in the Lips of the Taunters, and cast forth as evil. Job here, when his
Friends suspected him as fallen from the Grace of God, puts his Cause into the
Hands of the great Mediator, who was now with God in Heaven, making
Intercession for him, and will one Day stand on the Earth judging the World. We
need not fear any partial Judge here below, nor be troubled at their Prejudices
and Misconstructions. Christ is the true Judge, who will bring to light the
hidden things of the Heart; and then shall every Man have praise of God, 1 Cor.
4. 15. That is, every one that has done well. Though we have Failings, yet
those that flee to a Redeemer for Pardon, and Reconciliation with God, and
Grace to walk uprightly, shall then be acquitted.

5. Chiefly it is a Comfort against the Fears of Death, that you may yield up
yourselves into Christ's Hands. Thoughts of dwelling with God in Eternal Life
are less comfortable, because Death and the Grave interpose; we must pass
through them before we can enjoy him. But though we die, Christ lives, who is
the Resurrection, and those that believe in him shall live though they die,
Ioh. 11. 25. For our Souls, he stands ready to receive them. Acts 7. 54. Lord
Jesus, receive my Spirit. And our Bodies at the last day shall be raised again
to immortal Life. When Christ, who is our Life, shall appear, we shall appear
with him in Glory, Col. 3. 4. We need not fear Death; for by his dying and
rising again, the Powers of the Grave are shaken, and Death it self is become
mortal. The Grave is not a Prison, but a Place of Repose, Isa. 57. 2. And Death
not a final Extinction, but a Passage into Glory. It is ours, 1 Cor. 3. 22. All
things are yours, Life, Death, Things present, Things to come; all are yours.
And it is Gain. Phil. 1. 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is Gain.
Therefore we may go to the Grave with Comfort and Hope. Christ died, and yet is
alive; so shall we. He is risen as the First Fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor.
15. 20. The whole Harvest was blessed and sanctified by an handful of the
First Fruits dedicated to God. When Christ arose, he virtually drew all the
Elect out of the Grave with him; being renewed and reconciled by his Grace,
they may be confident of a joyful Resurrection., for Christ is their
fore-fruits. The First Fruits did not bless the Tares, Darnel, and Cockle, that
grew amongst the Corn; no Man that ever offered the First Fruits desired a
Blessing upon the Weeds; no, Bind the Tares in Bundles, and gather the Wheat
into my Barn. But if he indeed be your Redeemer, and has redeemed you from all
Iniquity, that is, from the Guilt and Power of Sin; it is a Comfort to you to
know that he lives gloriously with God, and will draw all his own after him;
that they may live gloriously with him. He is our Forerunner, Heb. 6. 20. Who
is gone to Heaven, and has taken Possession for himself, and in our Behalf, to
make the Way more passable for us. When we die, we do but go thither whither he
is gone before us, he stands upon the Shore ready to receive us into Glory.

Use of Exhortation.
I. Believe it, and be persuaded of this Truth, that you have a Redeemer living
with God in the Heavens.

1. This is a matter of mere Faith, and therefore it must be soundly believed,
before it can have any efficacy upon us. Some points of Faith are mixed, partly
evident by Natural Reason, partly by Divine Revelation; as that there is a God,
it is matter of sensible Experience, Romans 1. 20. and a matter of Faith also;
whosoever comes to God must believe that God is. Nature helps forward the
entertainment of these things: but Redemption by Christ is a matter of pure and
mere Faith; and is received by believing Gods Testimony, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. there
is no improving these points till we soundly believe them.

2. Because we often think we believe these general Truths, when indeed we do
not believe them at all, or not with such a degree of assent, as we imagine.
Our Lord when he speaks of these Truths, Joh. 11. 26. He that believes in me,
shall live though he die. Believe thou this? Joh. 16. 31. Do ye now believe?
We conceit our Faith to be much stronger than indeed it is, about the main
Articles of Faith.

3. Because among them that profess themselves Christians, there are monstrous
defects in their Faith. Naturally we look upon the Gospel as a well devised
Fable, 2 Pet. 1. 16. and many that dare not speak it out, yet do but speak of
Christ in Jest, and for fashion sake. I am sure most live as if there were no
such matter, and the many Impostures and Cheats of Christendom, and the
divisions and scandals amongst us, have weakened the Faith of many, that were it
not for shame they would turn professed Infidels. There could not be such
Boldness in sinning, such Coldness in spiritual and heavenly things, such
Neglect of Christ and Heaven, if Men were true and sound Believers. Others
content themselves with a negative Sense, they do not question or contradict
these Articles of Faith, because they do not consider them, but take up the
common Opinion, Hand over Head, and were never assaulted with Temptations to
the contrary; they do not doubt of it, say they; but are they rooted and
grounded in the Faith? Col. 7. 23. Their not doubting comes from their
nonattention. Others have a speculative Assent; there is a Certainty of
Evidence, and a Certainty of Adherence. The former consists in the Conviction
of the Mind, the latter in the Bent of the Will and Affections. An Object
rightly propounded extorteth the former from the Understanding, not expecting
the Consent of the Will; the latter follows Imperium and Consensum
Voluntatis. The former arises from the Evidence of the Thing; the latter from
the Consideration of the Worth, Weight, and Greatness of it. 1 Timothy 1. 15. This
is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came
into the World to save Sinners. They must not only be apprehended by us as
true, but seriously considered as the highest and most important Things, so as
that we may adhere to them with all our Hearts. It is such a Belief of the
Gospel as produces a firm and cordial Adherence, otherwise it will not serve
the End and Purpose of the Gospel, which requires us to crucify our Lusts,
sacrifice our Interests, and perform those things which are unpleasing to
Nature upon the Hopes it offers to us, and with confidence and joyfulness to
wait upon God for his Salvation, in the midst of all Pressures and Afflictions.
If your Adherence were more firm, you would find your Comfort more lively,
fresh and constant, your Obedience more uniform, you would not be so shaken
with Temptations and Assaults, and the Incursion of worldly Cares and Sorrows.
In great Temptations the Children of God see the need of a firm and cordial
Assent to the main Gospel Truths, Heb. 6. 1, 2. Nay in ordinary Practices, in
every Prayer you make to God, Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw nigh to God with a true
Heart, in full Assurance of Faith. 1 Timothy 2. 8. I will therefore, that Men pray
every where, lifting up holy Hands, without Wrath and Doubting.

4. Endeavor to arrive at the highest Degree of Assent. Faith is or should be
strongly persuaded of what it believes. It is an Evidence, not a Conjecture,
not a Surmise, but a firm Assurance. We should certainly know what we believe.
We know thou art a Teacher sent from God, Joh. 3. 2. We know, and are sure,
that thou art Christ, the Son of the Living God, Joh. 6. 69. 2 Cor. 5. 1. We
know, that we have a Building of God. 1 John 5. 2. We know, that we shall see
him as he is. 1 Cor. 15. 58. Be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the Work of the Lord, knowing that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord.
Invisible things revealed by God should be certainly known, because God has
told us such clear firm Apprehensions become us. Faith is not a bare
Conjecture, but a certain Knowledge: not we think, we hope well, but we know,
is the Language of Faith. It is not a bare Possibility we go upon, nor a
probable Opinion, but a certain infallible Truth. I put you upon this, partly,
because we have a great Argument in the Text, If Job could see it so long
before it came to pass, should we not now see it? Believers of old make us
ashamed, who live in the clear Sunshine of the Gospel. Job lived long before
the Gospel was revealed; the Redemption of Souls was at that time a great
Mystery, being sparingly revealed to a few. But one of a thousand could bring
this Message to a condemned Sinner, that God had found a Ransom, Job 33. 23.
Partly, to put you upon earnest Prayer to God, and other holy Means. The Spirit
opens our Eyes, and inclines our Hearts. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. I cease not to give
thanks for you, making mention of you in my Prayers; that the God of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation, in the knowledge of Him: The Eyes of your Understanding being
enlightened; that ye may know what is the Hope of his Calling, and what the
Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints.

II. I exhort you to apply and improve it to your particular Comfort. I shall
speak 1. To the Careless. 2. To the Sensible.


1. To the Careless, who do not give diligence to make their Interest clear,
that they may be able to say, I know that my Redeemer lives. Some are
contented, so they may be well in the World, and live in Peace, Credit, and
Mirth here, but never look after an Interest in the Redeemer, or to get a sure
Hope of a Sentence of Absolution from him at the last Day. They content
themselves with a general Belief that Christ died for Sinners, and only make
use of it for the Increase of their carnal Security, and Boldness in sinning.
We must not only consider what Christ has done, but what we are to do, that we
may be Partakers of the Benefits. The general Work of Redemption Christ has
performed for us, without any Consent on our part; he took our Nature,
fulfilled the Law, satisfied the Justice of God, merited Grace; but we must
thankfully receive him, live in him and to him, before this is applied to us,
or we can have the Comfort of it, 2 Cor. 5. 17. 2 Cor. 13. 5. They content
themselves to think and hope well, but do not make it sure upon good Grounds.
And when Questions and Scruples are raised in their Hearts, there is not a full
hearing of the Matter, the Court is broken up ere things are well determined;
and so they run the Hazard of Uncertainty, and live and die, venturing their
Souls upon the bare possibility of being saved, never put it out of doubt, nor
assure their Hearts before God. 1. Ioh. 3. 19.

2. To the Sensible. To live upon this Truth in the midst of their Calamities,
especially that they may enjoy the Comfort of it in a dying Hour.

Obj. You will say, we could take comfort in this, if we knew we had a Redemer
at God's right hand; but alas! after all our Profession of the Name of Christ,
and long waiting upon God, I cannot make this close Application, to say, My
Redeemer lives; or, My Spirit rejoices in God my Savior, Joh. 1. 47.

Answ. But cannot you bless God for the Gospel, and the Offers of Pardon and
Life by him? The main Foundation of Comfort lies in the general Truths; your
Hopes are not built chiefly upon the Sense of your own Interest, but the Ransom
which Christ has paid for you. Is it nothing to you, that God should become
Man, and your Judge your Kinsman? Ioh. 1. 14. Surely Goodness and Mercy is
nearer to us in our own Nature, than it was in the Divine Nature. We have an
apparent Demonstration of it to us, that Christ would come among us to bring
home Souls to God, Heb. 16. 17. 18. Again, Is it nothing, that in this Nature
of ours he would pay our Ransom, that none should perish for want of a
sufficient Satisfaction to God's Justice, but for want of a willing Heart to
accept and own his Redeemer? Ioh. 3. 16, 17. Rev. 3. 24, 25, 26. We are so far
onward in our way. Again, Is it nothing to us, that our Redeemer will rescue us
out of the hand of the Destroyer? 1 Ioh. 3. 8. It is his Office. This should
prevail with us, not to tie the Cord the faster, but to wait upon him with the
more Hope, if you desire his Aid to this end and purpose; for it is his Office.
Again, Is it nothing to you, that this Redeemer lives, that Christ in your
Nature rose again, and is now at God's right hand, to manage the Causes of poor
Sinners? Romans 8. 34. St. Paul's Triumph hence arises. Lastly, Is it nothing to
you to know this, that God has sent the Gospel to you, and given you Faith of
these things? 1 Ioh. 5. 20. We know the Son of God is come, and has given us
an Understanding, that we may know him that is true. Is this Favor nothing?
These are the Truths you must live upon.

2dly. To those that question, whether Christ be our Redeeemer? whether they
may look upon themselves, as having an actual Interest in the Benefits of his
Death and Intercession?

I answer, This is evident, 1. By their own Act. 2. By God's Act.

1. Their own Act. General Grace must some way be made particular, else it
cannot profit us. All are not justified, nor adopted, nor saved. There is the
same merciful God, the same all-sufficient Savior, the same gracious Covenant.
Some apply this Grace, others do not. Christ does not save us at a distance,
but as received into our Hearts; as a Plaster does not heal at a distance, but
applied to the Sore. Ioh. 1. 13. To as many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the Sons of God. If you heartily consent and accept of the
Redeemer's Grace to heal your wounded Souls, you shall partake of Salvation.

2. There is an Act on God's part. What have you to show that God is reconciled
to you? This is not evident, till we have the Pledge of our Reconciliation with
God, the Gift of the holy Spirit. This affords infallible Assurance of God's
Favor. Other things may be given in Wrath, but the Spirit is the Earnest of
his Eternal Love. God loved Christ, and gave him the Spirit without measure,
Joh. 3. 34. By the Spirit his Love is applied to us, Romans 5. 5. This is the
Evidence from whence we may conclude our actual Communion with God. It holds
good, Exclusively, Romans 8. 9. Inclusively, 1 Ioh. 4. 13. The Spirit first
works, and then witnesses; he is first a Guide and Sanctifier, then a
Comforter. As a Guide, he leads us to all Truth, Ioh. 16. 13. When the Spirit
of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth. Romans 8. 14. As many as are
led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. As a Sanctifier, he
breaks the power of fleshly Lusts, Romans 8. 13. conformeth us to the Image of
Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Then as a Comforter, he witnesses our present Interest,
and our future Hopes. Romans 8. 16. The Spirit bears witness to our Spirits,
that we are the Children of God. 2 Cor. 1. 22. Who has also sealed us, and
given us the Earnest of the Spirit in our Hearts. Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom also,
after ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise.

SERMON XIII.
1 TIMOTHY 6. 8. And having Food and Raiment, let us be therewith content.
THe Apostle has mentioned some in the 5th verse that counted Gain was
Godliness; that is, suited their Godliness with their wordly Ends, or made a
trade of it to live by. Their Religion must bear all their charges, they would
be at no cost about it at all. The Apostle takes occasion to show, that their
notion may be right if well interpreted, though extreme wrong in the Sense they
mean it. It was impious in them to make Christianity a means to Secular
advantages; but interpret it aright, Godliness with Contentment is great Gain,
much better than all the Wealth in the World. By Godliness he means the
Christian Religion, because it prescribes and delivers the true way of
worshipping and serving God, and they gain fairly that gain Christ. A Man that
is acquainted with God in Christ, is the true rich Man, this with Contentment
is great Gain. Our worldly desires make us poor. You have enough if you be
contented with the Condition wherein God places you. Paul retorts their own
Notion upon them, He is a rich Man that does not possess much, and has need of
little. Any thing above a competency is needless to us, who must shortly pass
out of this Life into another. Nature is contented with a little, and Grace
with less; because it is manifest that as we brought nothing into this World,
so we can carry nothing out, and all that we have above what we spend or use is
lost to us. In the Text he infers his Inference, Having Food and Raiment,
let us be therewith content. The words are plain, and afford this Observation.

Doct. That one great Point of Godliness, is to be content with what we have,
though it be but Food and Raiment.
In handling this Point, I shall enquire, I. What Contentment is. II. What
Considerations are most apt to breed it. III. That it is a high Point of
Christianity.


I. What Contentment is. It is a quiet temper of Mind about outward things; and
so it is opposite to three things, Murmurings, distracting Cares, and covetous
Desires.

1. Murmurings, Jude ver. 16. Murmurers, Complainers: the word signifies
Blamers of their Portion, they are always picking quarrels at God's
Dispensation, and entertain Crosses with anger, and Blessings with disdain. But
now when our Minds are satisfied with the fitness and sufficiency of our
present Condition, there is no repining against God, no fretting and tearing
our selves, the Mind is framed to the estate be it never so mean.

2. Distrustful and distracting Cares. Men are full of troubles, especially
when they are in a hazardous, strait, and low Condition: therefore God forbids
this, Mat. 6. 25. Take no thought for your Life, what you shall eat, or what
you shall drink; or yet for the Body, what you shall put on: Is not the Life
more than Meat? and the Body than Raiment? Men are fearful and anxious for the
future, and doubt whether God will allow them the necessaries of Life, Food and
Raiment, therefore it is said, Luke 12. 29. Be not ye of a doubtful Mind. They
distract themselves with these anxious thoughts. The word properly signifies to
be carried in the Air, as Clouds, by an uncertain Motion, and so it is applied
to them who are tossed about, without consistency or fixedness of Mind, by an
impatient suspense or anxious Solicitude about God's Providence.

3. Covetous Desires. Heb. 13. 5. Let your Conversation be without
Covetousness, and be content with such things as you have. The Apostle speaks
there of times of Persecution; and no temper of Mind is so fit for us in such
times, as Contentation with whatever God at present allows us. They that are
greedy of more, forget or dislike what they have already. There is no reason
for it: for what use is there of more than what may nourish us within and cover
us without? but we punish ourselves with our own wild desires. Well then,
Contentation is opposite to all these, it is such a quiet of Mind as suiteth
our Hearts to our Condition, and relieth upon God's merciful Providence, and
gracious Promises for support and necessaries, during our service in the World,
without being troubled about other things.

II. What Considerations are offered and implied in the Text as most apt to
breed it.

1. That God is a Sovereign Lord, and dispenses these outward things at his
Pleasure. We are not Proprietaries, we must only content our selves with the
use, or a transitory fruition. Luke 16. 12. If you have not been faithful in
another, who will give you that which is your own? That others, is God, who is
the dispenser, and disposer of these things. The whole drift of the Parable is
to show that we are but Stewards, God reserves the Sovereign right to himself,
gives us only the use or trust for our own and others Good. No Man esteems
himself to be an owner of that which another, besides himself, has Power to
dispose of, as God has of us and of all that belongs to us. Our Possession
of any thing is but limited and respective. We are but Tenants at the Will of
the Lord, he can take us from our Service, or our Service from us at his own
Pleasure. Job. 9. 12. Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him? who will say
to him, What do thou? God has an absolute Power, his Right is
uncontrollable; so is not ours. Now this has a great influence upon
contentedness with our Condition: For if we and all that we have be God's own,
he may do with his own as it pleases him. Mat. 20. 15. If he takes any thing
from us he does but require his own, and nothing more reasonable but that every
one should have liberty to dispose of what is his own according to his Will.
Every one of you must say, I am God's Creature, he may use me for his Glory in
what manner, and in what rank, and degree he pleases.

2. It is the Wisdom and Will of God, not to give to all alike, that some
should have more and some should have less. He puts ten Talents into the hands
of some of his Servants, and but one into another, Mat. 25. Therefore if your
Portion be straiter than others, it is what God has allotted. 1 Samuel 2. 7, 8.
The Lord makes poor, and the Lord makes rich: he brings low and he lifts
up: he sets some among the Princes, and to inherit the Throne of Glory,
whilst others sit on the Dunghill, or roll in the Dust. The World is not
governed by Chance, nor is it the blind Idol Fortune that dispenses Honors and
Estates, but every Man's Portion and the bounds of his Habitation are set forth
by God. It comes not from second causes, or an uncertain rouling about the
Sphere of humane Mutability, but God's Ordinance and Appointment, who as he
has cast the World into Hills and Valleys, has made the Estate of one Man
differ from another. No Estate in this World is universally good for all, as no
gale of Wind can serve for all Passengers on the deep Waters. Nor does the same
Weather fit every Soil: that drought which burns up the hotter Grounds,
comfort those which are more chill and cold. If one Man had another
Blessings he would soon run wild, as another would grow desperate if he had
their Crosses. Therefore the infinite Wisdom of the great Governor of the
World allots every one his Portion. God knows the reasons of this unequal
distribution, though they be hidden from us. Now this also has an influence
upon Contentment, for we ought to submit to the good pleasure of God, and can
no more quarrel with his Providence for keeping us low and bare, than his
Creation, that he made us Men and not Angels, or that he will furnish the World
with all kind of Creatures, Worms and Beasts as well as Men. Shall the Clay say
to the Potter, Why have thou made me thus? Isa. 45. 9.

3. These Earthly Things which are thus variously dispensed, are only useful to
us during the present Life in the mortal Body. In Heaven we have no need of
these things, and we must leave them all on this side the Grave. 1 Cor. 6. 13.
Meats for the Belly, and the Belly for Meats, but God shall destroy both it and
them. Meats are appointed by God and Nature for the use of Men, and the Body of
Man in this Life has absolute necessity of them; but in the next Life, which
is a Spiritual Life, this eating and desiring of Meat shall be taken away. It
is a Mercy to have Meat when we are Hungry, and Garments to cover our Nakedness
when Cold, but it is a greater Mercy to be above these Necessities. Well now,
this Life is but short and uncertain, it is but a coming into the World, and a
going out again. Job 1. 21. 1 Timothy 6. 7. We brought nothing into this World,
and it is certain that we can carry nothing out. Now we that are ready to step
into another World, and are certain within a short time to be stripped for ever
of all these things, what great matter is it if God keep us low and bare? All
will shortly be as poor as you, and a little time should make but a little
difference. That is not our true Wealth and Riches which we cannot carry away
with us; what is left behind is not ours, but other Men's: and therefore whilst
you are alive you should not be much troubled about that which you cannot enjoy
when you are dead. If we have what will serve for our Passage, what should we
do with more? We cannot carry away our Riches along with us, but the Sting and
Guilt of misenjoying them and misemploying them, will be sure to stick by us
both in Death and Judgment. It is not the Possession, but the Use that will
comfort us. Though we cannot carry our Estates into the other World, yet the
comfort of a good Conscience we may carry with us. Their Works follow them,
Rev. 14. 13. Then they go to enjoy the Eternal reward of Bliss and Peace, for
their hard and painful Service here in the World.

4. The Comfort, Safety and Happiness of this Life lies not in abundance. Luke
12. 15. Take heed and beware of Covetousness; for a Man's Life lies not in the
abundance of things which he possesses. This Consideration is added, because
some might think though we can carry nothing out of the World, yet whilst we
live we should seek larger Supplies. Our Lord answers this Surmise, though
outward things are very useful to sustain Life, yet no Man is able to prolong
his Life, or to make it more Happy and Comfortable to him by possessing more
than he needs or uses: what good will the superfluity of Wealth do him? These
things are extrinsical to our Being and Happiness. When you have the World at
Will, you can get no more from it than bodily Food and bodily Clothing. The
poorest may attain to that. It is no great matter whether our Dung or
Excrements be of siner matter or courser; whether a gay show we make in our
Apparel, so we have for warmth and decency; whether few or more Dishes at our
Table. Too much Oil puts out the Lamp, and superfluity afflicts and oppresses
that part which it feems to gratify: When Men have troubled themselves and the
World to make themselves great, what a sorry Happiness have they? their Net and
their Drag by which they catch Men as a Fisherman does Fishes in the Sea, it
all tends to this, that their Portion may be Fat and Plenteous. A poor
Felicity, that they have a little good Cheer, and a merry Life here. They that
want such abundance live as well as they, and have as much Health and
Contentment. Psalm. 19. 14. They have their Portion in this Life, and their
Bellies are filled with hid Treasures, and they leave the rest to their Babes.
They ransack the Storehouses of Nature, to satisfy their Gluttony and Excess,
but yet all this while they are not the nearer to Contentment, nor farther off
from the Grave. So that it is best to be content with Necessaries.

5. Nothing besides Food and Raiment is absolutely necessary. By Food is meant
something to nourish us, and by Raiment something to cover us. If you indulge
wanton Appetites, if you make Provision for the Flesh, or ask Meat for your
Lusts, God will not hear, nor regard your Desires. Jacob desires but Food and
Raiment of God, Genesis 28. 20. If God be with me and keep me in the way that I
go, and will give me Bread to eat and Raiment to put on, then God shall be his
God. But how could he put his owning and acknowledging of God upon these terms?
the meaning is, this shall be a new engagement, esteeming it as a great Favor.
All our desires should be suited not to our Luxury, but the necessity of
Nature. Raiment, not Ornament; necessary Supports, not Delicacies. Therefore we
should not make Lust a Wanton, but be content if God will any way enable us to
serve and glorify him. We should be content with his allowance; it is enough
for the Service and Honor which he expects from us, and to carry us through
that little time which we have to spend in the World. It is not abundance that
we need, but a contented Heart. Let a little suffice, if God gives no more.
Diseased Persons need more attendance than the Healthy, the Distempers of our
Souls multiply our Necessities, and as we indulge them, they gain upon us:
therefore every one of us should bring himself to be content with Necessaries.
Superfluities are an impediment rather than a help; as a Shoe too big for the
Foot, hinders our going. Or, as David could not go on with Readiness Armor,
because it was too great for him, 1 Samuel 17. 31. We are freest from Temptations
when we have least, though enough for Health, Strength and Cheerfulness.

6. Food and Raiment are not hard to be obtained. I do not mean with respect to
our endeavors, but God's Blessing: for in these things God will not forsake
us. We have a Heavenly Father, who knows what we stand in need of, Mat. 6. 32.
They that have least from God, have ordinarily Food and Raiment vouchsafed to
them. He will not leave his People to unsupportable Difficulties. Our Condition
is tolerable, if not comfortable. 1 Cor. 10. 13. He has wonderful means to
help, when all their Supplies are removed out of the veiw of Sense. It is
notable to observe, the Israelies were not plagued when they murmured out of
Want, but when they murmured out of Wantonness. Real wants we may rationally
presume will be supplied, not Fancies and Carnal Appetites. As for Instance,
Psalm. 78. 2. Therefore the Lord heard this, and was wrath, and a Fire was
kindled against Jacob, and Anger came up against Israel. Therefore: why? when
he had taken care to supply their wants by giving them plenty of Water out of
the Rock of Horeb, and by sending Manna in the Morning, and Quails in the
Evening; yet they fell a murmuring and complaining, preferring their Condition
in Egypt before that which God had brought them into. They must have a Table
better furnished with Bread and Flesh, they were clogged with this Manna, not
contented with a Provision for their wants, but required a satisfaction to
their Appetites. This highly displeased and provoked God, and brought very
sharp punishments upon them. So again Psalm. 106. 14, 15. They lusted
exceedingly in the Wilderness, and tempted God in the Desert, and he gave them
their request, but sent leanness into their Souls. Their Minds ever and anon
ran upon the Fleshpots of Egypt, and because they had not that festival plenty
in the Wilderness, they murmured as if Moses had brought them out of Egypt to
die there, and God must show more Miracles, not to supply their Wants, but to
pamper their Lusts.

7. This Life was given us to seek a better, and therefore the Felicity of it
must not be measured by a more ample Portion of Food and Raiment, but as we are
fitted and prepared for the better Life, which is the end and scope of Life it
self. All these things are but your Provision in the way to Heaven, therefore
not principally to be sought after: your business is to serve God and seek the
Salvation of your Souls. Mat. 6. 33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you; that is, there
will be enough to sustain us in our Journey to Heaven, whilst we are preparing
for Eternity, and therefore we should be content.

8. Many times the less we have in this Life, the more fervently is the Life to
come sought after. A moderate Estate is freest from Temptations. Abundance of
all things without any want inclines us to a forgetfulness of God; as on the
other side, perpetual want without any cheerful taste of God's Goodness,
disposes Men to Atheism. In the two extremes, Religion is either Starved, or
Choked. We see it in Countries and Persons: in Countries, Sodom and Gomorrah
which was as the Garden of God, Genesis 13. 10. was the first instance of
unnatural Sin, and an example of supernatural Judgment. Some in great
Prosperity have no thoughts of God and the World to come; others that live in
sordid Poverty, never consider the goodness of God, and so live and die
miserable Creatures. The middle estate is freest from danger, and Religion is
most secured in it. Prove. 30. 8, 9. Give me neither Poverty nor Riches; feed me
with Food convenient for me, lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the
Lord? or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the Name of God in vain. Pride and
Insolency are incident to the one, and any base dealing to the other. A great
Estate, like a rank Soil, is more apt to breed Weeds; and bitter Necessity
betrays us to any base shift for our Sustenance: therefore if God gives us any
thing to live upon, we should be content.

9. That God best knows what will do us good or hurt, and therefore we should
refer it to him to dispose of us according to his own Pleasure. Certainly we
should not want, if God saw it better for us to abound: for he is no niggard of
his Blessings, but is good, and does good. But it is not meet that Man should
have the disposal of himself, or his own Condition and Affairs, or that God
should accommodate his Providence to our carnal Interest, and Will. No, God's
Will must always precede, and ours follow. We have a corrupt Will guided by a
dark Understanding; and if the Blind lead the Lame, what can be expected but
disorder and ruin? therefore our Wills must not lead and make the first
choice, but God's. We must bring our Hearts thoroughly to yield to what God
appoints, and that our present Estate is best for us. How unmeet Judges are
Flesh and Blood of what Condition is fit for us? We would be fed only with the
Delicacies of Prosperity and Pleasure, but it is for our profit that we should
be chastened, that we should be partakers of his Holiness. Heb. 12. 10, 11.
What a strange Creature would Man be, if he were what he would wish himself to
be? Vainly Proud, stupidly Careless, and neglectful of God and Heavenly things:
therefore our best way is to be what God will have us to be. Not my Will, but
thine be done. Mat. 26. 36.

10. We must be contented with a competency, but yet we ought to be fitted and
prepared for Eternity. If God please to give us convenience, it is his great
Mercy, but our resolutions must be to be contented with any Condition God will
put us into: we except not Life it self out of our Resignation. The People of
God are wont to suppose not only some Necessity, but an Extremity. Hab. 3. 18.
Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation. He says
not if I have only Food and Raiment and hard Fare, it shall suffice me: No, But
if the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Field shall yield no Meat, and
the Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in the
Stalls. In many cases Poverty may come upon us like an armed Man, and spoil us
of all; but when we seem to be starved in the Creature, yet then we may feast
in God. God's Children do not capitulate with him how much they will suffer and
no more, but resolve to bear the heaviest Burden, to submit to the sharpest
Affliction. So again, Psalm. 44. 19, 20. Though thou have sore broken us in the
place of Dragons, and covered us with the Shadow of Death; yet we have not
forgotten the Name of our God, or proved unfaithful to him.

III. The Reasons why it is a high Point of Christianity to get Contentation
with any Estate God shall put us into, Are,

1. In the general; it is a Mystery only learned in Christ's School. Phil. 4.
11, 12. I have learned in whatsoever state I am, to be therewith content: and I
know how to be abased and to abound, I am instructed both to be full, and to be
hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need; I can do all things through Christ
which strengthens me. This Art is not soon learned. What is there in
Christianity above other Disciplines to teach us this Contentation? The
Doctrine of God's particular Providence, Fatherly Care and Eternal Life, these
seconded by the sanctifying Operation of the Holy Ghost, cause this resolution
in us, to encounter all the difficulties of this present Life in an humble and
quiet Mind.

2. More particularly, let us consider, 1. What is necessary to this
Contentment. 2. What Effect it produces.

1. What is necessary to this Contentment.

(1.) Faith, or a sound belief of God's Being, and gracious Promises and
Eternal Recompenses. That there is a God, that he has a particular care of
Humane Affairs, and that he will not leave his People to unsupportable
Difficulties, but will guide them to Eternal Life. It is in vain to press
People to contentedness till they be thus persuaded. For the first Truth that
there is a God, He that comes to God, must believe that God is. For the second
Truth, that he has a particular care of Humane Affairs, 1 Pet. 5. 7. Cast all
your Care upon the Lord, for he cares for you. The third Truth, that he will
not leave his People to unsupportable Difficulties, Heb. 13. 5, 6. Let your
Conversation be without Covetousness, and be content with such things as you
have, for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; so that we
may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, I will not fear what Man shall do unto
me. For the fourth Truth, a Prospect of Eternal Life, Luke 12. 32. Fear not
little Flock, for it is your Fathers good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Now
if God be, and be thus engaged to his People, why should we be discontented if
he take his own Methods to bring us to Everlasting Glory. We cannot suffer any
thing that God is not aware of, every Dram of our Affliction is weighed out to
us by that All-Wise All-Merciful Providence; and there is nothing which we
suffer, that he knows not how to turn to our good, looking for nothing from
us, but our Trust and Thankfulness.

(2.) It comes from Humility, when we are content to be at God's finding,
knowing that we have deserved nothing from him. Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy of
the least of all thy Mercies, and of all thy Truth which thou have showed unto
thy Servant, for with my Staff passed I over this Jordan, and now I am become
two Bands. The Humble Man is content to be dealt with as the Lord pleases.
Prescribing to God, always comes from Ascribing to our selves. We think we have
deserved more than he gives us: we that are worthy of the heaviest Judgment,
surely should be thankful for the smallest Mercy. Eccl. 7. 8. The patient in
Spirit, is better than the proud in Spirit. Patience is rooted in Humility, but
Discontent in Pride.

(3.) It comes from weanedness from the World. They that do not seek great
things for themselves, will stand to God's allowance. It may be God may bestow
great things upon them, as he did upon Abraham and David, but they do not seek
them; especially in times when it is a Mercy they have Life and Liberty. That
is forbidden, Ier. 44. 5. In short, Grace does all, both as to Poverty and
Riches, and makes Rich and Poor stand on the same Level. Now this is a high
point in Religion, to grow dead to the World, to beha^^ our selves in a manner
as unconcerned in Poverty or Riches: for the World is the great impediment to
the Heavenly Life, as being the bait of the Flesh, the snare of Satan, by which
he detaineth Souls from God. If once we grow indifferent to these things, we
would not feel any great power in Temptations to Pleasure, Wealth, and Honor,
and would soon be through Christians; the Spiritual Life would be more easy and
even: easy, for where Men seek no great things for themselves in the World, and
a little matter contenteth their Desires, and checketh their Murmurings, the
resistance of the carnal Nature to the Empire of Grace is without much
difficulty overcome; they can enjoy plenty or want, renounce their aspiring
thoughts, meddle sparingly with fleshly Delights, they are seeking a better
Estate. More evenly, there is no notable blemish on them who are Crucified to
the World, they do not stain their Profession, wound their Consciences, their
choices are governed by Religion, not by Carnal Interest, They are kept
unspotted from the World, Jam. 1. 27.

2. The Fruits it produces. I shall name but two of many.

(1.) They are not distracted with great worldly Business: they esteem that to
be the best way that brings them nearest to their great End, which is not to
enjoy Happiness in this Life, but in the World to come. Those whose Hearts are
all for the present, they must have the World to the full, or they are not
contented, they never think of laying up Treasure in Heaven, Mat. 6. 19, 20.
that is not their End and Scope, but to live commodiously here, that they and
their Posterity may flourish in the World. Psalm. 17. 14. They which have their
Portion in this Life, and whose Belly thou fillest with thy hid Treasures, they
are full of Children, and leave the rest of their Substance to their Babes. But
a good Man that eyes another Happiness, is not much troubled how it is with him
here, so he and his may be accepted with God hereafter. Therefore their
Business is not to lay up Treasure to themselves on Earth, but to be rich
toward God, Luke 12. 21.

(2.) They that can be contented with a little, are most likely to be true to
God, and Conscience: They can better suffer Hunger, Thirst, Nakedness, and
other troubles for the Gospel. Acts 20. 24. None of these things move me; that
is, made no great opposition and perturbation in his Mind. It is no strange
thing to them when Trials come. They can part with all things under the Sun,
rather than quit their Duty to Christ: for Temptations have lost their force,
when worldly Desires and Lusts are mortified. They withered in Persecution that
received the good Seed for a time, Mar. 4. 17. When Religion carries one way,
and the World another, then farewell Religion for the Worlds sake. When Christ
had spoken so much of the Cross, then Judas turns Apostate. When Demas saw
the World went on otherways, he forsook Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 10. When Christ told
the young Man of parting with all, he went away sad, Mar. 10. 22. If Heaven
cost so dear, it is no Pennyworth for him. So Men will come into no danger or
trouble for Christ, because they are not contented with a little.

Use. 1. If the Godly ought to be content with Food and Raiment, it shows the
vanity of Men's vast desires; they have much above Food and Raiment, yet they
are not satisfied. A true Christian is contented with Necessaries, but Worldy
Men enlarge their desires as Hell, Hab. 2. 5. They are so far from acquieseing
in their Portion assigned to them by God, though it be competent, and enough to
satisfy their wants, yea and far beyond, (so that many are glad of their
leavings;) yet they are always hunting after more, like Death and the Grave,
which are never satisfied. They are restless, still adding, if they be Princes,
Kingdom to Kingdom; if they be Churchmen, Preferment upon Preferment; and if
ordinary Men, Estate upon Estate, House to House, Field to Field. These desires
are pettishly solicited, eagerly followed, and many times finally disappointed.

2. It checks our impatiency under disappointment. If we have not our will in
worldly things, we are troubled, our desires are too ardent. We must needs have
them, cannot be without them, trouble our selves about them, and so murmur and
repine against God: and this breeds fearful Tempests in the Soul. As Jonah
bitterly contended with God about his Gourd, Jonah 4. and Rachel, Give me
Children, or else I die, Genesis 30. 1. If we cannot have what we would, all is
nothing. Ahab is sick for one poor Vineyard: Haman counts his Honor nothing,
as long as Mordecai sits at the King's Gate. As in a Carriage, if one Pin be
wanting, all is at a stop.

3. It shows the evil of our distrust, notwithstanding we have God's Fatherly
Providence and Promises to rely upon, and so large a Covenant Interest. 1 Cor.
3. 21, 22, 23. All things are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's:
All things are yours, Ordinances, Providence, this World, the next, Life,
Death. Would you have more? All are instrumental for our good, if we resolve to
be faithful to Christ.

SERMON XIV.
ECCL. 9. 11. I returned, and saw under the Sun, that the Race is not to the
Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong, neither yet Bread to the Wise, nor yet
Riches to Men of Understanding, nor yet Favor to Men of Skill; but Time and
Chance happens to them all.
THe whole Book is a search after true Happiness. The particular Paragraph,
whereof the Text is a Branch, proves that it cannot be obtained in this World,
because of the various Events of God's powerful and unsearchable Providence.
The Discourse begins, Chap. 8. 16, 17. When I applied my Heart to know
Wisdom, and to see the business which is done upon the Earth, then I beheld all
the works of God, that a Man cannot find out the work which is done under the
Sun; because though a Man labor to seek it out, yet he shall not find it; yea
further, though a Wise Man think to know it, yet shall he not be able to find
it. God's Providence in the Government of the World is secret. When a wise Man
has applied his Mind to reconcile all the seeming incongruities of it, he
cannot get a clear and satisfying account of all the proceedings thereof, but
must at last acquiesce in the Sovereignty and Dominion of God. The Footsteps of
Providence are not easily traced, his Judgments are a great depth, Romans 11. 33.
Psalm. 36. 6. Psalm. 92. 5. they may be adored, but not searched into.

Now two things in our Reflection upon Providence perplex us.

1. One is, That things are promiscuously dispensed to good and bad Men; yea
many times the good are Afflicted, and the bad are Advanced. To this he
speaks in the beginning of the Chapter, where he shows that all outward
things are dispensed without any great difference. Josiah died in the War, and
so did Ahab. Is Abraham rich? so is Nabal. Is Solomon wise? so is Aihitophel.
Is Joseph honored by Pharooh? so is Doeg by Saul. Had Isaac long life? Genesis
36. 20. so had Ishmael, Genesis 25. 17.

2. The other perplexity is, that Events and Successes do fall out otherwise,
than the Preparation and Ability of second causes do seem to promise; as
Holiness, and Unholiness, do not make the difference: so the natural Ability
and Inability of Man, the Wisdom and Folly, the Strength and Weakness make no
difference as to their Worldly Condition. Men of greatest Abilities are
disappointed of their Hopes and Ends, which weak and insufficient Men do many
times obtain. Now this is asserted in the Text, I returned and saw, etc.

In which Words observe the Preface, and Observation. Or

I. The accurate Inspection of the wise Man, I returned and saw under the Sun.

II. The result of this Inspection and Observation, propounded Negatively and
Positively.

First, Negatively in five Particulars. 1. The Race is not to the Swift. 2. Nor
the Battle to the Strong. 3. Nor yet Bread to the Wise. 4. Nor Riches to Men of
Understanding. 5. Nor Favor to Men of Skill.
Second, Positively, but Time and Chance happens to them all.

I. His accurate Inspection. I returned and saw under the Sun; that is, besides
all the former Vanities of the present Life. The same Phrase is used, Chap. 4.
1. I returned, and considered all the Oppressions that are done under the Sun.
So v. 7. of that Chapter, Then I returned and saw Vanity under the Sun. This
Phrase is used to show the great certainty and evidence of his Observation, it
is a thing I have narrowly observed. The Instruments of Knowledge are Seeing,
Hearing, Observing, and Deducing Inferences from thence, [Under the Sun] that
is, here in this lower World; I considered all Humane Actions, the things which
are done in this Life among Men; he looked about and turned himself every way.

II. The Observation thence resulting.

First, Negatively propounded in five Instances, which comprehend all the
business of the common Life, neither Swiftness, nor Strength, nor Wisdom, etc.

1. The Race is not to the Swift. This may be understood either of the ordinary
Race, wherein the Swift may sometimes fail, or straining themselves beyond
their Strength, be mischieved in their Bodies, or maimed by some accident; and
so when he speaks of the Race he means it of the successful Race, as in the
next clause; nor the Battle to the Strong, he means the successful Battle,
whereby they get the Victory. Success is not always on the side of the Swift
and the Strong. Or Secondly, Of any Course whereby a Man endeavors to outrun
danger. So Asahel, who was swift of foot as a wild Roe, was slain by Abner, 1 Samuel 2. 18, 23, and Ier. 46. 6. The Swift shall not flee away, nor tke Mighty
Man escape, they shall stumble and fall. The Swift cannot always flee from
danger. Isa. 30. 16. They that pursue you shall be swift.

2. Nor the Battle to the Strong. Rabshekeh tells us, That Counsel and
Strength are for the War, Isa. 36. 5. But many times great Strength is foiled,
and a small Army overcomes a greater. The Strength of the Mighty does not
always avail them to fight and conquer. Thus was Goliath foiled by David, 1 Samuel
17. 50. And Gideons three hundred overthrew the mighty Host of Midian, Judge. 7.
7. And we are told, Psalm. 33. 16. There is no King saved by the multitude of
his Host, and a mighty Man is not delivered by much Strength. And 1 Samuel 14. 6.
There is no restraint to the Lord, to save by many, or by few.

3. Now yet Bread to the Wise. Bread is put for all means of Subsistence, and
many wise Men have been hard put to it. Certainly Wisdom does much to get a
Livelihood in the World, Prove. 21. 20. There is a Treasure to de desired, and
Oil in the House of the Wise. Yet many times it falls out that Men of great
Wisdom scarce get a Subsistence in the World. As David was put to desire
Supplies from Nabal a Fool. And we are told by Solomon, that, Folly is set in
great Dignity, when the Wise sit in low Place, Eccl. 10. 6. Paul was in
Hungrings often, and Fastings often, not voluntary but enforced, 2 Cor. 11. 27.
Yea it is said of our Lord Jesus Christ, that certain Women ministered to him of
their Substance for his Support, Luke 8. 3.

4. Nor Riches to Men of Understanding. Experience often verifieth this, that
the Learned are very Poor; when lesser Wits, mean People get great Substance.
We read in Scripture of a rich Fool, Luke 12. 20. and a poor wise Man, Eccl. 9.
15. And in the general, That it is the Blessing of the Lord makes rich, Prove.
10. 22. He is behind-hand with none of his Creatures, he gives to some Wit, to
others Riches.

5. Nor Favor to Men of Skill. To attain Favor with Men it avails not to be
skilful, that is, able and well experienced, unless God add the Blessing
thereunto. Suppose Favor in the Eyes of Princes, or the People. Alas, Men of
no Desert are promoted, as Doeg by Saul. And the Populacy are carried away with
slight Persons, rather than those of the greatest Wisdom and Parts.

2. Positively. But Time and Chance happens to them all. Hence are two things
mentioned, which do much befriend Worldly Matters. 1. Time. 2. Chance.


1. Time, Whereby is meant Occasion and Opportunity. There is a certain Time
which God has allotted to every Purpose and Action, which if Men had the
Wisdom to take hold of, their Business would better succeed: but because Man
knows not his Time, great is his Misery upon Earth; therefore he effects
not the things he goes about.

2. The next Word is Chance, or Occurrence; so is the Word translated, 1 King.
5. 4. The Lord has given me Rest, so that there is neither Adversary nor evil
Occurrent; it is the same Word. The Success is such as the Counsel of God has
foreordained, yet to us it chances to be a mere Chance and Adventure. In
short, that which God has from all Eternity ordained, shall and must come to
pass, at such a time as God has ordained it should be; and likewise in such a
manner and by such ways and means as he has ordained, it shall be done. Things
Casual to us are Counsels to him. What was Chance to others, is the Lord to
Job, Chap. 1. 21. Therefore not uncertain Chance is intended, but such as is
ruled and governed by God, who disposes of all Occasions and Events according
to his own good Pleasure, either in escaping out of Danger, or obtaining
Victory, or being supplied with Necessaries, or growing Rich, or received into
Favor, it is all as God will order it. The Swift, the Wise, the Strong, though
they are best prepared, disposed, and do most intend their Business, yet the
Event is in God's Hand, who disposes it according to his own Will.

Before we draw the Doctrine from hence, we shall remove the false Inferences
and Deductions that some make.

1. Some think these words to be spoken in the Person of the Epicure or
Atheist, whom Solomon introduces as reasoning against Divine Providence, but
it agrees not with the Preface [I returned and saw under the Sun] which is
usually prefixed before his Observations about the Vanity and Vexation that
arises from mere Worldly Things.

2. This Text must be vindicated from them who set up an Idol of the Heathens
blind Fortune, as if all things were carried by uncertain Chance. No, it is
Occurrence (as before;) and though it be Chance to Men, it is Providence to
God, the Universal and first Agent, who works all things according to the
Counsel of his Will. It is not Chance to them, for he never misseth of his End:
for his Knowledge is infallible, and his Power insuperable.

3. From those who reject the use of Means, and all Operations, Dispositions,
and Preparations of second Causes, as if they moved not, and God did not act or
move by them. No, this is a false Deduction and Inference both in Naturals and
Spirituals.

(1.) In Naturals, for God works by Means, and by Means prepared. Hos. 2. 21,
22. I will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth, etc. There is a
Train of Causes governed and influenced by God. The second Causes have their
Operation, but they are under the Government of the first, who works by them,
and also suspendeth their Operations at his Pleasure. There are two extremes;
one of Durandus, that God gives second Causes only power to work of
themselves, and does only continue this Power to them, but not work with them.
But this is false: for all things depend on God, not only for our Being, but
Working. Acts 17. 28. In him we live, move, and have our being. The other is,
That the Creature has no Operation at all, that the first Cause does only work
ad presentiam, Creaturae, by the Presence of the second. But this is also
against the Wisdom of God; for if the second Causes did no way concur to the
producing of their Effects, then they are made in vain, and used for such an
End in vain.

(2.) Nor in Spirituals. Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work out your Salvation with Fear and
Trembling: For it is God that works in you both to will and to do of his own
good Pleasure. God's working is an Engagement to us to wait upon him in the use
of Means, that we may meet with God in his way, and God may meet with us in our
way. In his way: for God has appointed certain Duties to convey and apply his
Grace to us. We are to lie at the Pool till the Waters be stirred, to continue
our Attendance till God gives his Grace, Mark 4. 24. In our way: for God
influenceth all things according to their natural Inclination. God that
enlightneth with and by the Sun, burns with and by the Fire, reasons with
and by Man, acts necessarily with necessary Causes, and freely with free
Causes. He does not oppress the Liberty of the Creature, but preserves the
Nature and Interest of his own Workmanship. Hos. 11. 4. I drew them with Cords
of a Man, with Bands of Love. He draws by propounding Reasons, which we
consider, and so betake our selves to a godly Life. In short, we must do what
we can, otherwise we are wanting to our selves; but we must not depend upon our
own Counsel, Wisdom and Strength, for the Event is not always to the Swift,
Strong and Wise.

The true Observation contained in these Words is this,

That many Endeavors of the Creature are often frustrated of their End, when
there is greatest Probability of Success.

Here Solomon represents Men, 1. Under several Accomplishments of Swift,
Wise, Strong. 2. As addressing themselves to some Effect to obtain Success. 3.
As in the Issue disappointed. None of these Accomplishments alone do give the
Event intended, and hoped for, nor does it depend absolutely and infallibly
upon them. 4. That all things intended, desired, expected by us, depend upon
Time and Chance, namely, as they depend upon God's Providence, as and when God
will order and determine the Time and Opportunity, the Success and Event.


Therefore from the Whole it appears, That Instruments most fitted and
furnished, and most diligent in their way, are frustrated of the Event which
they so earnestly intended and hoped for.

REASONS.
I. The best Instruments fail out of their Ignorance. Oblivion, and
Inadvertency, from which Man cannot altogether free himself in this Life, not
only in Matters Spiritual, but Secular: whether Occonomical; in the disposing
of our selves and Relations, or Family-Interests and Concernments. Wise Men
have their Errors. Iam. 3. 2. In many things we offend all of us. This
Ignorance shows it self sometimes in a Mistake of Instruments whose Hearts we
know not; or if we know them for the present, we are not sure of Futurity, how
they may change, or be alienated and drawn off from us. Sometimes about Time
and Opportunity, for the beginning, setting on foot, or carrying on any good
Works. Man knows not his Time. Sometimes in the manner of doing there is some
Error; for some things we know speculatively, we do not know practically; and
what we know in the general is to be done, we do not always know in particular
Cases, but are blinded by our Affections; what we know habitually we do not
know actually, we do not consider of it for the Time. In short, no Man knows
all the Secrets and Circuits of Human Affairs. God only is Omnipotent and
Omniscient, has all Creatures in his Power, and can foresee all Events. But it
is much for us to understand our Duty, we cannot know Events; for things are
carried strangely beyond Men's expectation, and their likeliest Projects crossed.

II. Because if we have sufficient Knowledge, yet God can easily put some
Impediment, from within, or without, to hinder the Use of our Wisdom, Power,
and Knowledge.

1. Within. He can blast our Excellencies in an instant, or obstruct the Use of
it for the time. As, though he did not destroy the property of the Fire, yet he
suspended the burning, when the three Children were in the Furnace. So of a
sudden can he blast our Strength. Psalm. 26. 5, 6. The Stouthearted are spoiled,
they have slept their Sleep; none of the Men of Might have found their Hands;
at thy Rebuke the Chariot and Horses are cast into a dead Sleep. Whatsoever
Strength, Courage, Wit, or any other Point of Perfection, any Man has; God,
who gave it, can take it away when he pleases, or suspend the Use of it. All
this God can do with a Rebuke, with a Word of his Mouth. Now as the Strong
cannot find their Hands, so the Wise cannot find their Hearts. Job 5. 14. They
meet with Darkness in the Daytime, and grope in the Noonday as in the Night.
Who were these? The Wise, and the Crafty, whom he speaks of in the foregoing
Verses. In the clearest Cases they are to seek, and so their well contrived
Plots come to nothing. There is a Blast and Plague upon their Judgments, so
that they do involve and confound themselves; and what by self-conceit and
froward self-will, they drive on their Designs so precipitantly and furiously,
that they must needs miscarry. They do not seem to have the Judgment of
ordinary Men. Thus though Men be endowed with good Gifts and Qualities, both of
Wisdom and Strength, God can easily take away their Power and Will to use them.

2. From without. By casting in some casual Event, which we foresaw not, and
could not think of. Man cannot foresee all the Wheels which move in a Business;
if he did, he is not able to turn them: So that, besides taking away his
Wisdom, Courage and Strength, when the Work is to be done, God puts some
Impediment in his way which was unexpected. There are certain sudden Accidents
which none can foresee and prevent, any of them able to turn the Enterprise
another way. The most casual, fortuitous things are ordered by God, for the
great Ends of his Providence. As for Instance, Haman travailed with a Design to
cut off all the People of the Jews, but his chief Spite was against Mordecai.
Now by chance the King could not sleep that Night, and calls for the Book of
Memorials, Esth. 6. 1. and found the Discovery of a Treason by Mordecai there
recorded, which spoiled all the deep Plots of Haman against the Jews. Ahab
intended to avenge himself upon Micaiah; and to escape in the Battle, changed
his Robes and Royal Apparel, and counseled Iehoshaphat to put on his. And a
Man drew a Bow at a Venture, 1 Kin. 22. 34. God directed the Arrow to the Heart
of the King of Israel. Iehoshaphat escapes, and he is slain. So that notable
Instance, the Sunshine upon the Water, 2 Kin. 3. 22, 23, 24. When the Moabites
came to distress Iehoshaphat, when they cried, Moab to the Spoil, it was
indeed, Moab to a sore Destruction.

Now these, and many such like Instances, teach us, That the most casual and
fortuitous things do certainly and infallibly fall out by God's Providence, and
Heavenly Government. And again, That there is some Occurrence, which Providence
casts in by the way, to disappoint the most likely Means; and whatever Gifts
and Qualities Men are endowed withal, yet Events are not in their Power, but
depend on the free Concurrence of God. I speak nothing now of the Influence of
Angels upon Human Affairs, whom God makes use of in the Government of the
World.

III. The most able Instruments do often provoke God to disappoint them, whilst
their Abilities of Counsel and Strength are a Means of hardening their Hearts
in carnal Confidence, and often engage in Business that proves mischievous to
them; I say, In the most lawful Businesses they provoke God to disappoint them,
because they undertake them without God; but too too often being unrenewed and
unsanctified, their Wit and Power is used against God.

1. It is a great Crime to go about any Business without God. Prove. 3. 5, 6.
Trust in the Lord with all thy Heart, and lean not to thine own Understanding.
In all thy Ways acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy Paths. When our Wisdom
and Strength is set up as an Idol or Image of Jealousy, God is obliged to blast
it. Therefore they that make their Bosom their Oracle, their Wit their
Counselor, they seldom carve out to themselves a good Portion. In all serious
Business we must ask his Leave, Counsel, Blessing.

2. But many times Men of great Abilities, being unsanctified, employ them
against God. They are ordinarily the Devils greatest Agents and Factors for his
Kingdom. In seducing our first Parents he made use of the Serpent, which was
more subtle than any Beast of the Field, Genesis 3. 1. Now these make God their
opposite Party, that engage in any such Enterprise upon the Confidence of their
Wisdom and Strength, and then they are snared by the work of their own Hands,
Psalm. 9. 16. God delights to be seen to put Rubs and Stumbling Blocks in
their Way, that they may fall by some miserable Disappointment, and their Craft
and Power may turn to their own Ruin.

IV. To say and do, or to make a thing to be, is the Act and Name of Jehovah,
which Glory he will not communicate to any other. Lam. 3. 37. Who is he that
says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord commands it not? that is, Who is
able to bring about what he speaks and purposetn, unless God permit and give
way thereunto? Therefore whatever Preparation of Means or Likelihoods there
are, we must not be too confident of future Events. We cannot bring them to
pass by our own Power, and God does not always work by likely means; he hides
Events from Men, Isa. 48. 7. Lest thou should say, I know them. Now the Event
could not be hidden, if the Lord went on in a constant Course, giving the Race
to the Swift, etc. God carries on his Providence so as to leave no Footsteps
behind him. He goes not one Way so often as to make a Path of it, that Men may
see the plain Tendency thereof.

The USES follow.
It teaches us.

I. The Nothingness of the Creature, and the All Sufficiency of God. That is a
great Lesson indeed, and mightily useful to us throughout the whole Spiritual
Life.

First, It is a Notion which the Scripture much delights in, to represent God
as all, and the Creature as Nothing. At first, when Moses enquired God's
distinctive Name, God gives him no other but, I AM, Exodus 3. 14. And God said
unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM; And, I AM has sent me unto you. What thing is
there under the Cope of Heaven, that cannot say, I am that I am? The least Worm
has its own Being. But this, as God's distinctive Name, implies, that he
encloseth all Being within Himself. Secondly, The Creature is nothing. Isa. 40.
17. All Nations before him are nothing, they are accounted less than nothing,
and Vanity. Dan. 4. 35. The Inhabitants of the World are reputed before Him as
nothing. All created Beings must vanish out of our Sight, when we think of God.

But how are the Creatures nothing, which Faith teaches us? and how something,
which Sense teaches us? Something they are unquestionably, in respect of that
derived and dependent Being which they have from God. We must not establish the
Pyrrhonian Conceit, That the whole World is but a Phantastry, indeed nothing,
and our Life but a Dream. Or Sceptically, to look upon the Being and Modes of
all things as uncertain. No, Nor to imagine that Sense is so far fallible, that
a Man of sound Sense and Understanding may not be sure of the Objects
conveniently presented to his Sense. Certainly the Scepticks need to be
scourged as Fools, till they feel themselves something. But vet it is of high
Importance in the Work of Godliness, to see the Creature nothing. It is so, 1.
By way of Comparison with God. 2. By way of Exclusion of God. 3. By way of
Opposition to God.


1. By way of Comparison with God. So God's Name only is, I AM, and then there
is none besides him. If the Creatures be compared among themselves, some are
good, strong, wise, others not; but they are all nothing in comparison of God.
Though there be a Difference between the Stars in the Night, some are brighter,
and some are darker; some of the first Magnitude, second, third, etc. Yet in
the Daytime they are all alike inconspicuous, all are darkened by the Sun's
Glory. When we compare the Creatures one with another, we shall find different
Degrees of Perfection and Excellency; but by the glorious Brightness of the
Father of Lights all these inferior Lights are obscured, and their Differences
unobserved. God says somewhere, I am, and there is none else, I am alone. I
lift my Hand to Heaven, and swear, I live for ever. It is counted an Usurpation
of Divine Honor for the Creature to say, I am. Isa. 47. 8. Babylon said in her
Heart, I am. So Nineveh, Zeph. 2. 15. This is the rejoicing City, that dwelt
carelessly, that said in her Heart, [I am,] and there is none besides me. Isa.
47. 10. Thy Wisdom and Understanding has perverted thee, and thou have said in
thy Heart, [I am,] and there is none besides me. For us to reckon upon our
Wisdom, Strength, or Goodness, is a Derogation from God. God in Scripture is
represented as only Wise, only Strong, and only Good, Job 9. 19. 1 Timothy 1. 17.
Mat. 19. 17. The Creature has but the Shadow of these things. As it is but a
borrowed Kind of Speech to call a Picture or a Statue, a Man; this is Caesar,
this is Alexander, because of the Likeness and Representation. So the Creatures
are but a Resemblance, when we call them Wise, Strong, Good. To this Head may
be referred those Expressions, the true Light, Joh. 1. 9. The true Vine, Joh.
15. 1. These Terms originally agree to God, and but in a borrowed Sense to the
Creature.

2. By way of Exclusion of God. As the Sunbeam is nothing when the Sun
withdraws; or the Sound is nothing, when the Musician takes away his Mouth
and Breath from the Pipe and Instrument. Psalm. 104. 29, 30. Thou sendest forth
thy Spirit, and they are created; thou take away thy Breath, and they die.
The Creature in comparison with God, is in Reckoning nothing; but in Exclusion
of God, it is in Reality nothing. Because all their Life, Wisdom, Strength, and
the Acting of it is but borrowed and derived from God, and held only at God's
pleasure. Naturally and spiritually it is true. If any of us say, I am, we must
add with Paul, By the Grace of God I am that I am, 1 Cor. 15. 10. And again, I
live, yet not I, but Christ, Gal. 2. 20. If God withdraw his Providential
Influence and Supportation, we vanish into nothing. Job 7. 8. Thine Eyes are
upon me, and I am not. Meaning, That God fastening his Eye upon him in Anger
would look him into nothing.

3. In way of Opposition to God. Either to his Cause and Interest in the World.
Isa. 41. 11. Behold all that are incensed against thee, shall be as nothing.
The Creature bears a big Bulk in the Eye of Sense, seems not only as
something, but as all things; and as long as a Man looks to what is visible,
we have no Hope and Comfort to fasten upon. But what are the Swift, the Wise,
the Strong to God, or against his Providence, when God is angry for Sin, and we
use ordinary Means to avoid the Danger, and do not reconcile our selves to Him,
and take up the Controversy between Him and us? Alas! Human Endeavors can
avail nothing against his Wrath. Those probable Means, which have prevailed at
other times, will prove a mere nothing. Be we never so strong and wise, and use
never so many politic Means to avert the Judgment. Amos 6. 13. Ye rejoice in a
thing of naught, which say, Have we not taken to our selves Horns by our own
Strength? They gloried in this, that their Strength was renewed and increased,
and so hoped to elude the threatened Judgment, and to drive away any Enemy that
might invade them. They glory in a thing of naught, says the Prophet. Alas!
What are Armies, Troops, Confederacies, Councils? Things of naught when God
will blow upon them. All things on this side God are of naught, and vain to be
gloried in, when our Sins are come to an height, and Judgments are threatened
and near.

Secondly, I will prove to you, That the true Apprehension of this is mightily
useful to us throughout the whole spiritual Life. For no one thing keeps the
Creature upright, so much as to see All in God, and Nothing in the Creature.
This establishes our Dependence on God's Promises in the most difficult Cases.
As, Romans 4. 17, 18. What made Abraham to believe in Hope against Hope, and give
God so much Credit and Glory as he did? By his Faith he believed in him that
quickneth the Dead, and calls those things that are not, as though they were.
Again, there is nothing that does so encourage us in the difficult Services
which God calls us unto, as to remember God is All, and the Creature is
Nothing. As when the Apostles went to preach the Gospel first at Jerusalem, in
the very Face of Opposition, whose Interest led them to oppose it. When among
the Gentiles, possessed of a Religion entailed upon them by the Tradition of
many Ages, and for which they were zealous, the Devil stirring up the Hatred of
many furious Spirits against them. The Doctrine was novel, and did not court
the Senses, but persuaded Men to row against the Stream of Flesh and Blood,
slighted by the People, disputed against by their wise Men, persecuted by the
Powers that then were, had no temporal Interest to back it; and this to be
promoted in the Face of the learned World by a few poor Fishermen, when all
Civil Disciplines were then in their (...), and height. What encouraged them to
this? The Apostle tells you, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 28. That though they had not
many Mighty, not many Noble to own them; Yet God had chosen the Foolish things
of the World to confound the Wise, and the weak Things of the World to confound
the Things which are mighty; and the Things that are not, to bring to naught
the Things that are. In short, that though Magistracy and Populacy were against
them, the Creature is as nothing, God All in All. Again, to depend on God's
Providence in the midst of Losses, Wants, Straits, 2 Cor. 6. 10. As having
nothing, yet possessing all things. Again, if we have a due Sense of God's
Being, the tempting Baits of the World would scarce be seen; the Riches,
Honors, and Pleasures of the World would be forgotten, as if they were not.
Prove. 23. 5. Will thou set thine Heart upon that which is not? It is as if it
were not, if God will blast them, if God will not work by them. Again, to look
for a Blessing upon all the Means, 1 Cor. 3. 7. For neither is he that planteth
any thing, nor he that waters; but God that gives the Increase. The best and
wisest Ministers can do nothing, either to plant or water, to convert or build
up, unless God give the Blessing, and set in with their Labors. Again, to keep
us humble in the highest Enjoyments; 2 Cor. 11. 5. In nothing I come behind the
chiefest Apostles, though I am nothing. All is but a borrowed Excellency. Thus
you see it has an Influence upon our Uprightness and sincere Dealing, from
first to last, to look off from the Creature to God alone.

3dly. I shall show you that this is the intent of this Lesson which is given
us in this Place. For wherefore is the Race denied to the Swift, and the Battle
to the Strong, and Riches to Men of Understanding? but to show us that the
Creature does not do all, yea that it is nothing if you exclude God. Why does
the Holy Ghost direct us to this Meditation, but to carry up our thoughts to
the overruling power of the highest Cause and Agent, disposing of Time and
Chance, that second causes may be seen to depend upon him both in Being and
Operation, and that we should not abuse our Talents by confiding in them
without God, or turning and using them against God, either to oppose his
Interest, or defeat his Judgments? So that I might rest here: but the meanest
Capacities will require more explicit Application.

II. To teach us in this Lottery of Human Affairs, to look after surer
Comforts. This is the whole Drift of this Book. For Solomon in his Critical
Search and Observation of all things done under the Sun, aims at this, to
direct our Hearts to Blessings which are more stable and sure. God would leave
these things at uncertainty, that our Hearts might not too much be set upon
them, that we might not pursue after Favor, Riches, and Credit, as the best
things. If all things here did run in one certain Tenor, Men that are mightily
wrought upon by Sense, would look no higher; but there is a nobler Pursuit, a
better Happiness to be found elsewhere. The Race is not always to the Swift;
but in the Spiritual Race we run not as uncertain, 1 Cor. 9. 26. There the
Crown is sure, if we keep running, and faint not. Here the Battle is not always
to the Strong, and, He that puts on his Harness, must not boast as he that
puts it off: But, If you fight the good Fight of Faith, the God of Peace
will tread Satan under your Feet shortly, Romans 16. 20. Here Bread is not to the
Wise. Many Persons of Understanding labor and toil all their Days for the Meat
that perishes, and at length can hardly get it: But if you labor for the Meat
that perishes not, the Son of Man will give it you, Joh. 6. 29. In Spiritual
and Heavenly Things choose and have, seek and have, labor and have: But it is
not so in worldly Things, there many times we have but our Pains for our
Travail. Again, Nor Riches to Men of Understanding. Fools go away with the
World, and we need not envy them if we be wise to Salvation. Thou Fool, this
Night shall thy Soul be required of thee; So is he that heapeth up Riches to
himself, and is not rich toward God, Luke 12. 20, 21. Earthly things cannot
make a Man truly rich. The true Riches are the Heavenly Treasure, the Graces of
the Spirit; to be rich in Faith, James 2. 5. Fruitful in good Works, 1 Timothy 6.
18, 19. He that valueth an Estate, more by the Possession than by the Use, is a
Spiritual Fool, and will at length be thrown into Hell for his perverse Choice.
No matter if you want the Riches of this World, so you be rich toward God.
Christ gave his Spirit to the best Disciples, but his Purse to Judas, who was a
Thief and a Robber. Once more, Nor Favor to Men of Skill. The Favor of Men,
Princes, or People, is a very uncertain thing, and the best experienced in
Affairs do not always light on it; but if we have the Favor of God, this
breeds solid Joy, Psalm. 4. 7. Gladness is sent into the Heart when God
smileth, though the World frowneth. These Spiritual and Eternal Blessings are
dispensed by a sure Covenant, the others are promiscuously given by an
uncertain Providence.

III. What need there is God should be seen and sought unto in all our Designs,
and Resolutions about the disposal of our selves and ours.

1. What will the Use of Means and second Causes do without God? When we have
prepared best, and consulted best, the Intentions we travail with may miscarry,
for the Event is wholly in God's hands. Prove. 16. 1. The Preparations of the
Heart are from Man, but the Answer of the Tongue is from the Lord. Man
propounds, intends, purposes; but the Success comes from God.

2. When we have done our Duty, and used such good Means as God affords; then
we may quietly refer the Success to God, in whose Hands are all the Ways of the
Children of Men, and upon whose good Pleasure the Issues of all things depend,
Prove. 16. 13.

IV. The wisest and best of Men must not expect always to be happy, but must
prepare themselves for sinister Chances; for the Words are brought in upon this
occasion, of rejoicing in our Comforts. In an uncertain World we must always
reserve a Liberty of full and free Submission to God's Providence, if the Event
should not answer Expectation. For the Race is not always to the Swift, nor the
Battle to the Strong. We must not be too confident of future worldly Events;
for in these things, God, by whose Providence all things are governed, would
leave us to uncertainty. Alas! many times we mistake and miss of fit
Opportunities, and then the best Preparations and Sufficiencies will be lost.
My Times are in thy Hand, says David. Psalm. 31. 15. And sometimes God
interposeth, and will be glorified by us in an afflicted Condition. Therefore
you must reserve a Liberty to God, to order and govern you according to his own
pleasure, as to Success in your Callings, Comfort in your Relations, Favor
with Men in your Employments. God may make every Relation a Door to let in
Affliction. You should often consider the Sovereignty of God, the Uncertainty
of your own Lives, the Mutability of all worldly things. You speak arrogantly
when you presume of Success, and take more upon you than you are able to
perform. 1 Samuel 2. 3. Talk no more exceeding proudly, let not Arrogance come
out of your Mouth, that is, presumptuous Conceits of absolute Success. And the
Apostle James, Jam. 4. 13, 14, etc. Go to now, ye that say, To day, or to
morrow, we will go into such a City, and continue there a Year, and buy and
sell, and get Gain. -- Your Life is a Vapor, and ye ought to say, If the Lord
will, we shall live, and do this, or that. Now ye rejoice in your Boastings;
all such Rejoicing is evil. There are certain times when God is resolved to
proceed with his People in a Judiciary Way, and then all Means we can use will
not keep off the Stroke. Amos 2. 14, 15, 16. Therefore the Flight shall perish
from the Swift, and the Strong shall not strengthen his Force, nor the Mighty
deliver himself; neither shall he stand that handles the Bow, nor he that is
swift of foot deliver himself, nor he that rides the Horse: he that is
courageous among the Mighty, shall flee away in that day, says the Lord. No
Means, though never so probable, will avail us in a time of Judgments, neither
Speed of Horse or Foot, neither Strength of Body, nor Courage of Mind, nor
Provision of Armor, nor Skill to use it; but the Judgments shall reach all
they aim at. Then it is plainly fulfilled, that the Race is not to the Swift,
nor the Battle to the Strong, etc.

V. Take heed of carnal confidence, or depending upon the sufficiency of any
means, though never so likely to produce their Effect: partly because God
delights to cross Men in their carnal confidences, he blasteth those
sufficiencies which we depend upon, and rejoice in apart from Himself, to
maintain his own right. Success is his, the Battle is the Lords, 1 Samuel 17. 47.
He blasts Men in the things they boast of: Asahel's Swiftness was his ruin; so
was Ahitophel's Policy, and Absolom's Hair. God says to Babylon, Thy
Understanding has undone thee. Men often by their Wit bring themselves into
mischief, yea into Hell.

VI. To keep humble Men of the best Abilities and Sufficiencies for any Work.

1. Before the Event: for many times they meet with more disappointments than
those that want them; and their best designs miscarry, when meaner Persons are
carried through their difficulties with less ado.

After the Event, we must look above second Causes; not attribute any thing to
our own Strength, or Gifts, but to God's Assistance and Blessing on our
Labors. Let not the wise Man glory in his Wisdom, nor the strong Man glory in
his Might, etc. Jer. 9. 23. So Deuteronomy. 8. 17, 18. Say not in thy Heart, My Power,
and the Might of my Hand has gotten me this Wealth. Thou shall remember the
Lord thy God, for he it is that gives thee Power to get Wealth. Let us not
sacrifice to our own Net. The Battle is not to the Strong; nor Bread to the
Wise. It is God's, and he will not be robbed of his Glory. And as we should
carry it humbly toward God, so also to Men, not despising them of mean Gifts.
Many times God gives them more Success in the Ministry, in ordinary Callings,
in Favor and Preferments in the World; or esteem in the Eyes of the People. It
is God only makes the difference, and what thou have above others, thou have it
from God, and for God; not to lift up thy self, but to exalt God: Therefore
give thanks, and do not contemn others.

VII. To prevent the discouragement of those that want Gifts, or Parts, or
Means: suppose their Adversaries be Mighty, it is nothing with God to help with
many, or them that have no Power, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. The less in the Creature,
the more in God. 2 Cor. 12. 9. His Power is perfected in our weakness. God many
times passes over the Strong, Wise and Understanding, and gets himself most
Glory in protecting the Weak, and providing for them.

The issue of all is this. Let us bear all things befalling us from the wise
Hand and Providence of the Lord, and encourage our selves in his
All Sufficiency in all Straits and Difficulties.

SERMON XV.
ACTS 21. 14. And when he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying; The Will
of the Lord be done.
THe History that concerns this passage, begins at the 8th verse. In the whole
you may take Notice; I. Of the Occasion. II. Of the Carriage of the Saints upon
it.


I. In the Occasion I observe,

1. That Paul was now at Cesaria in Philip's House. ver. 8. Philip was one of
those that was scattered and driven out of his dwelling by Paul's Persecution,
Acts 8. 4, 5. and now he received him into his own House. Philip, that was
injured by Paul a Persecutor, is easily reconciled with Paul a Convert. It Is an
ill office to rake in the filth which God has covered, and it argues some
envy at the Divine Grace to upbraid Men with sins committed before Conversion.
Former miscarriages and Injuries should be forgotten. If Christ has taken them
into his Bosom; we should not be strange to them.

2. There Agabus comes to him, and prophesies of Paul's Bonds at Jerusalem.
Agabus was a Prophet, but by what appears of him in Scripture, ever a Prophet
of evil tidings; he foretold a Famine, Acts 11. 28. and now Paul's Bonds. God
will be glorified by all manner of Tempers, and Dispositions: some like Agabus
come always with a sad Message in their Mouths, and yet these have their use.
Even those that give warning of Judgments to come, should be accepted as well
as those that bring us hopes of Mercy, and Deliverance. It was an unjust
exception of the King of Israel against Micaiah, 1 Kings 22. 8. I hate him; for
he does not prophesy good concerning me, but evil. They that do evil, do not
love to hear of evil. And yet that may be true, which is not pleasing.

3. Agabus uses a Sign, verse. 11. he goes and binds himself, and shows, thus
it should be done with Paul at Jerusalem. This was usual with the Prophets: As
Isaiah went naked, and barefoot, to show what should be their usage under the
King of Assyria, Isa. 20. 2, 3. Ezekiel was to pack up his stuff, and remove;
to signify what should be the Lot of the People, Ezekiel. 12. 3, 4, 5. That God
might teach his People by visible Signs, as well as by word of Mouth; and what
was received by both Senses (Sight and Hearing) might make a deeper Impression
upon their Souls: Therefore he has instituted Sacraments. As Kings delight to
have their Royal deeds not only recorded in Chronicles, but to have some
Monuments set up as a sign which may be perpetuated in future Ages; so the Lord
Jesus having vanquished Death, Hell, the Grave, the Devil, and Sin, not only
has it recorded in his Word, but would give us Signs and Monuments, that we
might continually remember both the Victory and the Comfort we have by Christ.

But what needs Paul so often to be warned of his Bonds? He had been told
before, Acts 20, 22, 23. I go bound in the Spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing the
things that shall befall me there: save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every
City, saying, that Bonds and Afflictions abide me. And then again, in this
Chapter Acts 21. 4. There were some Disciples which said to Paul through the
Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem. How shall we reconcile these
Expressions. They said through the Spirit, that Paul should not go up to
Jerusalem; and yet Paul was bound in the Spirit to go to Jerusalem. In this
latter place we must distinguish between the Prediction of Troubles, and the
Counsel of Safety. The Prediction of Troubles; so they said through the Spirit,
that it would be dangerous for Paul to go to Jerusalem: but they dissuaded him
from going to Jerusalem out of their own private Love and Affection to him; so
that Paul was warned again and again.

Quest. But why was he warned so often?
Answ. That he might be thoroughly prepared. God does not love to take his
Children unprovided. Paul was not surprised, but had warning upon warning of
his present danger. If a sudden and unexpected Flood of Miseries break in upon
us, it is not because we want warning, but because we will not take warning.
When we are well at ease, we will not think of Death, and the Cross; and
therefore if we be unprovided, we may thank our own Security.

II. The carriage of the Saints upon this occasion. And there we may take
notice of four things. 1. The entire Affection of the Disciples to Paul who had
done them good, [They besought him. etc.] 2. Paul's entire Affection to God,
[Yet he would not be persuaded.] 3. Their Discretion, [when he would not be
persuaded, they ceased.] 4. The Ground of their Discretion, their Piety, [They
said, The Will of the Lord be done.]


1. Their entire Affection to Paul. Both we, and they of that Place, besought
him, that he would not go up to Jerusalem, v. 12. This Entreaty did not proceed
from Self-love, for they were resolved to go with him, verse. 15. but Zeal for
God's Glory. The Lives and Liberties of those that are eminent Instruments of
God's Glory, are very dear and precious to God's faithful People. Paul declares
of Aquila and Priscilla, Romans 16. 4. For my Life laid they down their own
Necks. And, Acts 19. 31. His Friends desired him, that he would not adventure
into the Theater. They have them in singular Love for their Worth's sake, and
therefore when they are in danger they weep sore, Act. 20. 37. And when they
are dead they make great Lamentation. Devout Men carried Stephen to his Burial,
and made great Lamentation over him, Acts 8. 2. As the Israelites said to
David, 2 Samuel 21. 17. Thou shall go no more out with us to Battle, that thou
quench not the Light of Israel; that is, lest the Glory and Splendour of the
Nation perish with thee. The Loss of a good Magistrate is a great Loss; and
such Instruments are not easily had again when once lost.

But was this well done to persuade him?

Yes; for though the Prophet had foretold what Paul should suffer, yet we know
of no Command they had to the contrary. All Desires against God's secret Will
are not unlawful, when we afterward submit to his revealed Will. 1 Kin. 8. 18.
And the Lord said to David my Father, Whereas it was in thine Heart to build an
House unto my Name, thou did well, that it was in thy Heart. And yet that was
against God's secret Will; it was in his Heart to build God's House, and it was
no Sin, for there was no Command to the contrary. So here, they were to desire
the Preservation of so precious an Instrument as Paul was; yet Satan might have
a hand in it, from their Persuasion to weaken his Resolution. Satan often
labors to take us off from our Duty by the persuasion of our loving Friends,
who mean us well in what they say to us. Mat. 16. 22, 23. When Christ had told
of his Sufferings at Jerusalem, Peter said, Be it far from thee, Lord, this
shall not be unto thee. Our Savior replied, Get thee behind me Satan. Who
would have thought, that Christ's Disciple should have been Satan's Instrument,
and then when speaking in Love to his Master? Therefore we must not measure
their Counsel by their good Meaning, but by God's Word; and be deaf to all
Relations, that we may discharge our Duty to God. See Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7. In our
Affections to eminent Instruments to God's Glory, there may be much of carnal
Infirmity.

2. Here was Paul's firm Resolution; He would not be persuaded.

Did Paul do well in this? How does this agree with that Character of Heavenly
Wisdom, that is easy to be entreated? Jam. 3. 17.

I answer: In our Duty it is praiseworthy to be easy to be entreated, but not
from our Duty. Paul went bound in the Spirit to Jerusalem; ke knew the Will of
God, and therefore though they did even break his Heart, they could not break
his Purpose. No Persuasions of Friends, no Apprehensions of Danger, should turn
us out of the Way wherein God commands us to walk. No Persuasion. So Christ,
when desired to avoid Suffering, which was the End of his coming into the
World, rejected the Motion. It is notable, the Lord Jesus with the same
Indignation rebukes Peter dissuading him from suffering, as he did the Devil
tempting him to Idolatry. See Mat. 16. 23. compared with Mat. 4. 10. No
Dangers. Here were Dangers threatened. Agabus foretold Bonds, the Spirit
foretold Bonds, others told him of Bonds, yet Paul was not persuaded. So when
the King of Babylon threatened the three Children, they resolutely answered,
Dan. 3. 18. Our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us: but if not, be it
known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship thy
Golden Image. And therefore Paul rebukes them, for they were weeping when they
saw his Resolution, What mean you to break my Heart? For I am not only ready to
be bound, but to die at Jerusalem for the Name of Christ. A little to clear the
Expression by the way.

Is it not a good thing to have a broken Heart? And are not they that further
it to be commended rather than reproved?

I answer, There is a twofold Heart; a Heart that is hard against God, and soft
for God; and a Heart that is hard for God, and soft against God. The first,
when it is bold in sinning, but fearful and soft in Troubles. As Deuteronomy. 20. 8.
The fearful and the soft-heartea. But now the Heart which is hard for God, and
soft against God, is the Heart which is a Coward in Sin; but like a Lion,
undaunted in all manner of Sufferings. They will trust in God, though he kill
them, and can confront the greatest Dangers; and yet tremble at the least
Offense against God, and dare not do it. Now says Paul, You break my Heart,
that is, even weaken my Courage, and take me off from my Purpose.

3. Observe their Discretion, That, when he would not be persuaded, they
ceased. Either Paul told them what Intimation he had from God, or else they
thought so wise a Man as Paul would not thrust himself upon danger without a
Warrant. It is the Disposition of humble Spirits, not to be peremptory of their
own Conceits, but to submit to those that are wiser than themselves. Mat. 3.
15. John would not at first admit Christ to his Baptism, out of Reverence to
him, and Humility. But says Christ, Suffer it to be so now. When he was
informed of Christ's Mind, then he suffered him. So those that were so zealous
for enclosing of the common Salvation, When they heard that God had granted
Repentance unto Life to the Gentiles, they held their Peace, and glorified God,
saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles granted Repentance unto Life, Acts
11. 18. It shows, we should not be too stiff in our private Conceits and
Humors, when a plain Evidence appears to the contrary; a Lesson that Men
have great need to learn.

4. Their Piety, the Ground of their Discretion, The Will of the Lord be done.
The Scripture speaks (1.) Of God's determining and decreeing Will, Ephesians. 1. 11.
He does all things according to the Counsel of his Will. (2.) Of his approving
or liking Will. Romans 12. 2. That ye may prove what is that good, acceptable,
and perfect Will of God.


The Text speaks not of his commanded, but of his intended Will; not of his
Will to be done by us, but of his Will to be done upon us. God's intended Will
is either, (1.) Secret, before the Decree bring forth the Issue and Event. (2.)
Or else declared by the Event. While it is secret, we pray for the
Accomplishment of it. Ier. 29. 11. I know the Thoughts that I think toward
you, etc. And we conceive all our Desires with submission to it. But now we
speak of his Will revealed and declared in his Providence. There is a
Submission required to both.

First, To God's intended Will, while it is yet kept secret.

That in every Business we should ask his Leave and Blessing. It is a piece of
Religious Manners to begin with God.

(1.) His Leave. As Judge. 1. 1. Shall I go up, and fight against the
Canaanites, or shall I not? And thus Iehoshaphat would enquire of the Prophet,
Shall I go up to Ramoth-Gilead, and prevail? The honest Heathens had this
Principle, A Jove Principium, that every Action was to be begun with God.
Balaam had a Conscience this way, he would enquire of God before he would
proceed either to curse or bless. By this Means we acknowledge God, our
Dependence upon Him, and his Dominion over us. It is Robbery to use any Goods
without the Owner's leave. We and all ours are the Goods of God. God has such
a Dominion over us, as a Man has over his Goods; not only a Dominion of
Jurisdiction, as Governor in Law, but a Dominion of Propriety. Therefore in
Journeys, in removing of our Dwelling, in disposal of our Children, God must
not be left out, but be treated with in the first place.

(2.) His Blessing. When the Event is uncertain, beg the Lord's Concurrence,
and the Blessing of his Providence. Ier. 10. 23. O Lord, I know the Way of Man
is not in himself: it is not in Man that walks to direct his Steps. Man
cannot manage his own Actions with any Comfort or Success, therefore we must
beg it of God, whose Will does all in the Case. So Genesis 24. 12. And he said, O
Lord God of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this day. We are
to desire all may speed while we are in God's way. It is a vain thing to
promise our selves great Matters without the Leave and Blessing of Providence;
for our Lives and Actions, and all which concern us, are in God's hands.

2. We must refer the Event to his Determination. This is a great Part of Trust
in God, and of Quietness of Mind when we are so persuaded of the Lord's
Goodness, Wisdom, and Power, that we leave the Event to him, and refer it, that
he shall cast it as he pleases, being so sensible of the Power of his
Providence, and so confident of the Goodness of his Conduct. Submitting all
things to God's Will after the Event, is Patience; and submitting all things to
God's Will before the Event, is a notable piece of Faith. When I trust God
absolutely, let him do with me what he pleases; but I know he is a good God,
and he will do nothing but what is good, and what is for the best. We are
obliged in all things we design to be subordinate to God's Will, and to accept
of it. Romans 1. 10. Making request, if by any means now at length I might have a
prosperous Journey by the Will of God, to come unto you. Jam. 4. 15. We ought
to say, If the Lord will. 1 Cor. 4. 19. But I will come to you shortly, if the
Lord will. So in many other places. This was a Truth evident to the Heathens.
Plato brings in Alcibiades, asking Socrates, how he should speak of future
Events, and in what manner he should express himself. And Socrates answers,
Even as God will. To use such an express Reservation in all our Undertakings,
is profitable to beget Reverence in ourselves, and to instruct others. Thus far
the Light of Nature teaches Men. I confess it is not absolutely necessary in
all Cases to express our selves so, but this Disposition should be in our
Minds. 1 Cor. 11. 34. And the rest will I set in order when I come. He does not
say there, If God will, but yet he reserves that. I speak this as the lowest
thing, that we be not too confident of Events, but refer them to the Lord's
Will. But a Child of God goes higher, he knows he has a good God, a Heavenly
Father, which guides all things in Wisdom, Power, and Goodness. And the Event
may be against his Desires, Appetites, Conceits, Fancies; but he knows God will
govern and do better for him than his own Choices. He trusts all to God.

3 Our Purposes and Desires must be so moderated, that we may be fore-armed for
all Events, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. If I shall find Favor in the Eyes of the Lord,
he will bring me again, and show me both it and his Habitation. But if he say
thus, I have no delight in thee; let him do with me as seems good unto him.
Such an holy Indifferency should there be upon our Spirits, that we should be
like a Die in the Hand of Providence, to be cast high or low, according as it
falls. When we are over-earnest for temporal Blessings, we do but make a
Scourge, a Snare, and a Rod many times to our selves. For when God's Will is
declared to the contrary, this fills us with bitter Sorrow; and obstinate
Desires pettishly solicited, put us upon great Vexation and Disappointment;
and that lays us open to Atheism, and Distrust of God, the Conduct of his
Providence, and the Promises of the Invisible World. Therefore, until God has
declared his Pleasure, there must be such Moderation, as to be prepared for all
Events.

4. When the Event depends upon a Duty, we must do the Duty, and refer the
Event to God, 1 Cor. 9. 16. Necessity is laid upon me, yea woe is me, if I
preach not the Gospel. It is a base Principle to say, we must be sure of
Success before we will engage for God; No, when there is an apparent Duty, we
must do our Duty, and trust God with the Event.

5. In a dubious Case observe the Ducture and Leading of Providence. The
Israelites were not to remove, but as they saw the Pillar of Cloud before them:
And so in all things, the Happiness of which depends upon God's secret Will,
see what God's Providence will lead you to. Acts 16. 10. We endeavored to go
into Macedonia, assuredly gathering, that the Lord had called us to preach the
Gospel unto them. Sometimes we are left to gather and collect from our own
Reason, what such or such a thing means. Now after earnest Prayer, when the
fair Course and Tendency of outward Circumstances lead us, we may look upon it
as the Way of God's Providence for our Good. It is said, Ezra 8. 21. I
proclaimed a Fast, that we might afflict our selves before our God, to seek of
him a right Way for us, and for our little Ones, and for all our Substance. How
did they know the Lord was entreated for them? Why, after Prayer they found
such an overruling Instinct, such a fair Invitation of Providence, that from
thence they apparently gathered, this is the right Way the Lord would have us
walk in. This is the Direction to be given to Christians, when the Event is
uncertain.

But when the Event is declared in God's Providence, then we have nothing to
do, but plainly to submit, and that very quietly and contentedly, with Hope and
Encouragement in the Lord. And that is the main Point,

Doct. That it is the Duty of all God's Children, to be willing to submit
themselves to the Dispensation of God's Providence, in whatever befalls them or
theirs.
In this Point there is,

1. Something implied, That all things come within the Guidance of God's
Providence.

There is Nothing so high, but God does it. Dan. 4. 35. He does according to
his Will in the Armies of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth; and
none can stay his Hand, and say unto him, What do thou? The Sun does not
shine by Chance, nor the Rain fall by Chance.

There is nothing so Mean, but it is under God's Providence. Mat. 10. 29, 30.
Not a Sparrow lights to the Ground without your Heavenly Father. A mighty
Support unto Christians in their Affliction.

There is nothing so bad, but the Lord can turn it to good. Genesis 50. 20. Ye
thought it for Evil, but God meant it for Good.

There is nothing which happens from wicked Men to his Children, but the Lord
has a hand in it. Job 1. 23. The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken,
etc. It is Chrysostom's Gloss upon that Place, He does not say, the Thief, the
Sabean, the Chaldean, has taken; no, but the Lord has taken, the same God
that gave it. If it come from Satan, God has a hand in it; for many of Job's
Troubles and Afflictions, especially upon his Body, came immediately from
Satan; and yet he says, (Job 6. 4.) The Arrows of the Almighty stuck fast in
me. They were the Arrows of the Almighty, though shot out of Satan's Bow. This
certainly is implied, that God has a Will, Hand, and Providence, in all those
things which are most contrary to us. The Will of the Lord is to be seen.

II. That which is expressed, is, That we ought to submit to the Providence of
God.

I shall prove it,

1. By the Example of the Lord Jesus Christ. Mat. 20. 39. Father, not as I
will, but as thou will. He had more to lose than any of us have, or possibly
can have; the Comfort and Influence of the Presence of God in a personal Union;
and more to suffer: yet he submits, and professes a full Subjection to his
Father's Will. His Cup was a bitter Cup, which made him sweat Drops of curdled
Blood: yet he was willing to drink it, even the Dregs, since it was his
Father's Will. But let me fully vindicate the Will of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Obj. You will say, Christ desires it to pass: Mat. 26. 39. Father, if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me. How could Christ make an Offer of Prayers
repugnant to God's Will and Purpose? He knew it was the Will of his Father that
he should suffer many things and be slain, and had rebuked Peter resisting the
Soldiers. The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? Joh.
18. 11.

Many Answers may be given for the clearing of this Matter.

1. We must know, contrary to the Monothelites, That there was a double Will in
Christ, as there was a double Nature, Divine, and Humane. These are not
contrary, but yet distinct. The Divine Nature would, because it was necessary
to our Redemption. The Human Nature was to show a reasonable Aversation of what
was destructive to it; and yet the Human Nature did not contradict the Will of
God, because he did it not absolutely, but only conditionally, Father, if it be
possible.

2. There is a deliberate Elective Will, and a Natural Velleity. Now mark, the
Human Nature did except against his Suffering, not with a deliberate elective
Will, but only by a natural Velleity. There is a resolute Will, which
overcomes all Impediments; and there is an innocent Desire, showing it self in
a simple Complacency in that which is good, or a Displicency to that which is
evil, but goes no farther. Apply this to the Business in hand. When Christ
would have the Cup pass, it is not meant of his resolute and effective Will,
but only of his Will, expressing a simple Displicency of the Human Nature to
what is destructive to it.

Aquinas gives us another Distinction, There is a Will natural and
indeliberate, and a Will deliberate and elective. The one shows the sudden
Inclination of Nature to what is good for us, as we are living Creatures; the
other is an Act of Reason, as we are reasonable Creatures. The natural
Inclination of all Creatures is to preserve themselves; but the Deliberate Will
chooses what the Understanding judges to be good, all Circumstances
considered. The Inclination of Nature flees Death and Torments, but Reason
submits to it. As for Instance, A bitter Potion is against the Inclination
of Nature, for as we are living Creatures, we would be put to no pain; but the
reasonable Creature by an elective Will takes that bitter Potion for Health.
Cutting off a gangreen'd Member is against the first Inclination of Man, as a
living Creature; we submit to it as a reasonable Creature, lest it corrupt the
whole Body. So in the Martyrs, the Flesh could not but be against Sufferings,
being contrary to their well-being as living Creatures; but the Spirit, that is
their Reason, guided by Grace, submitted to the greatest Torments for the Glory
of God. Thus the Lord Christ says, Let this Cup pass. There was the
inclination of an Innocent Nature declining so dreadful an Evil; but yet it was
his Meat and Drink to do his Fathers Will, therefore, not my Will, but thine be
done.

Others to the same purpose. There were two things willed by Christ; one was
Bonum Naturae, the good of Nature; the other was the Glory of God with our
Salvation. And the first was desired but subordinately to the second. So that
the Lord Christ is a notable Pattern; that our Appetites, and Desires are not
to be according to the Interests of the Flesh, but for the Glory and Honor of
God and the good of others.

The next Pattern we have is David, a Man after God's own Heart, in 2 Samuel 15.
25, 26. Behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him. What a
meek submission was here to God's Pleasure? resigning up his Person, Crown and
Estate, to the wise and gracious disposal of God; to receive a Benefit, or
Punishment, as the Lord should determine. David sets his Name to a Blanck, and
bids God write what he pleases. It is hard for us to consent to known
Articles, but David wholly refers himself unto God, Let him do what seems
good unto him.

So Abraham the Father of the Faithful, how contentedly does he speak? and he
thought no other but that Isaac, the Son of the Promise, should be sacrificed,
Genesis 22. 8. When his Son asked him, Where Is the Burnt-Offering for Sacrifice?
and he answered, My Son, the Lord will provide an Offering, and so they went on
their way together. When God declares his Will not only contrary to our
natural Affection, but our gracious hopes; when he takes away Instruments upon
whose Life his Glory seems to depend, we have the same Answer, God will provide.

The next shall be of Eli, 1 Samuel 1. 18. It is the Lord, let him do whatsoever
he pleases. When the Sentence was past, he humbly submits. He does not
murmuringly say, must I bear the punishment of my Sons Iniquity? their Will is
not in my power: if they be wicked, let them answer for it. No, It is the Lord,
and his Will must stand: It is the Lord, who is too just to do us wrong; too
good to do us hurt.

The next shall be the great Doctor of the Gentiles, St. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8,
9. And for this I besought the Lord thrice; He knocked thrice at the Throne of
Grace, as Christ prayed thrice, and Elijah prayed thrice for Rain. Well, but
the Lord made him no answer, But my Grace is sufficient for thee. The Thorn in
the Flesh, some painful Disease or Affliction must continue. And what says
Paul? Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my Infirmities, that the
Power of Christ may rest upon me; therefore I take pleasure in Infirmities, in
Reproaches, in Necessities, in Persecutions for Christ's sake. He does
entertain it with some kind of cheerfulness and Thanksgiving, if he may have
Experience that the Grace and Power of Christ may rest upon him; it is enough
that God's Will is fulfilled, though it be with our pain and loss.

Now let us Consider, I. Wherein this submission consists. II. Upon what
Grounds we ought to submit.


I. Wherein this submission consists.

Negatively, It is not to be insensible. Godliness does not teach Men Stoicism,
to harden themselves under the Rod of God. The Lord complains of that, Jer. 5.
3. I have stricken them, but they have not grieved, etc. We must lay his Hand
to Heart as well as his Word. We are not to be like the Cornerstone which
bears the whole weight of the Building and feels nothing. There are two
extremes, slighting the Hand of God, or fainting under it, Heb. 12. 5. and
slighting is worse than the other. There is no Patience where there is no sense
and feeling. Certainly there can be no improvement, where there is not a
feeling the Rod of God, the strokes of his correcting Hand upon us.

But Affirmatively. There is in it,

1. A work of the Judgment, which subscribes to the Justice and Goodness of the
Dispensation, that it is just. Dan. 9. 7. O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto
thee, but unto us confusion of Face. It is a smart and dreadful Correction, but
the Lord is Righteous. And to the Goodness of it, Isa. 39. 8. Good is the Word
of the Lord. Though it was a terrible Word, yet the submission of a sanctified
Judgment calls it good.

2. The act of the Will, is accepting of it; Lev. 26. 41. If they shall accept
of the punishment of their Sin. There Is a consent and choice of the Will: such
a perfect correspondence between the Temper of a Gracious Heart, and the Will
of God: they take it well and kindly from God, that it is no worse; as a
Patient takes bitter Pills for his Good. There are some kind of Reluctancies of
Nature, but their over-powering Judgment and Will does approve and accept.
Afflictions are to be taken as a Potion, not as a Drench, not forced upon us
whether we will or no: we must accept of them, take them down our selves; it is
a bitter Cup, but it is of our Heavenly Physicians tempering. Seneca a Heathen
could say, Deo non pareo, sed assentio ex Animo; I do not merely submit to
Divine Providence, but consent to it. A strange thing that a Heathen should say
so. It is good, and so we accept it: not barely out of Necessity, and by a
Patience per force, but there is a willing submission to what the Lord orders
concerning us.

3. There Is a Command reached out over the Affections of Anger, and Sorrow. 1.
Anger, that we may not fret against the Lord, Psalm. 37. 1. Fret not thy self
against evil doers. Many times when words are kept in, there is a secret rising,
and swelling of Heart against God's Providence: As an Oven stopped up, is the
hotter within. So though it may be words do not break out, yet the Heart boils,
rises, and dislikes God's dealing. Psalm. 62. 1. My Soul keep silence to God.
Not only my Tongue, but my Soul. Thoughts are as audible with God as Words;
therefore there is a Command upon our Anger and Indignation, that it may not
swell and rise up against God's Providence. 2. Upon our Sorrow, that it may not
run into Excess, causing disorder. We are allowed to grieve, but with temper
and moderation. To be horny, flinty, dead, and senseless whatever breaches are
made upon us, does not suit with the temper of a Christian. Christ has
legitimated our Fears and Sorrows, for in the days of his Flesh he had his
Tears, Sorrows, and Groans; therefore 1 Cor. 7. 31. mourn we should but as we
mourned not. If the Affection be stubborn and boisterous, it must be cited
before the Tribunal of Reason. We must give an Account of it; Why art thou cast
down, O my Soul? hope thou in God, Psalm. 42. 5. The upper part of the Soul
checks the Excesses of the lower part, when it is Commands are slighted.

4. The Tongue is bridled, lest discontent plash over. As Aaron held his Peace,
Lev. 10. 3. It was a sad stroke, but it was the Lord. He kept his Tongue from
murmuring against God. If there be a Fire kindled in our Bosoms, we should not
let the Sparks fly abroad. Murmuring is a taxing of God, as if he dealt hardly
and unjustly with us; and if it vents it self, it is more to his dishonor. Job
40. 4, 5. Behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my Hand upon
my Mouth. Once I have spoken, but I will not answer: (...) twice, but I will
proceed no further. Job was resolute enough before to fill his Mouth with
Arguments; if once he could meet with God, he would reason the case with him,
but presently is damped at God's appearance; and when his Passions were a
little calmed, he renounceth his former bold resolutions, and would no longer
give vent to his Distemper, and is resolved to be silent before God, and to
give over his plea, and bury all his discontented thoughts in his own Bosom. As
if he had said, Once in my Foolish Passion I was complaining of thee, and
desirous to dispute with thee: It is time to give over that debate, and humbly
to submit.

II. What are the Grounds of this Submission? For Patience is wise and
considerate, and proceeds upon solid Reasons; as Impatience is rash and
unreasonable.

1. They see God in his Providence. Psalm. 39. 8. I was dumb, and opened not my
Mouth, because thou did it. That Is the first Principle of submission; surely
God has a hand in it. Isa. 38. 15. What shall I say? he has spoken to me,
himself has done it. That Passage, though it be in a Song of Thanksgiving,
does not relate to the Deliverance, but the Affliction, the Disease and
Sentence of Death which he had received. There is Atheism and Anti-Providence
in our Murmurings. If we did see God at the end of Causes, we could no more
murmur against his Providence, than we can against his Creation. You would
laugh at that Man that should murmur and complain because God made him a Man,
and not an Angel: It is as ridiculous to oppose your selves against the Will of
God in other Dispensations. And the more immediately the Affliction comes from
God, the greater our submission should be; as in Sickness, and Death of Friends
and Relations, It is the Lord. But if subordinate Instruments be used in
bringing on the Affliction, every Wheel works according to the motion of the
first Mover: All the Links are fastened to God's hands; therefore if we look no
higher than the Creature, we murmur, and break our Teeth in biting at the next
Link. David was so far from opposing God, that he bears the contumely of the
Instrument, 2 Samuel 16. 11. Let him alone, for the Lord has bid him curse. That
was a time of Humiliation, not Revenge. If God will admonish us of our Duty by
the injuries of Men; and cure our Impostume with the Razor of their sharp
Tongue, we must be content. To resist lower Officers of the State, is to
contemn the Authority with which they are armed. They could not wag their
Tongues without God.

2. That God has an absolute Sovereignty to do what he will: Romans 9. 20, 21.
Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?
Has not the Potter power over the Clay? We are in his Hands, as the Clay in
the hand of the Potter. His Supreme Right, and Dominion over the Creatures, to
dispose of them according to his Pleasure, should be often thought of by us.
Job. 9. 12. Behold he takes away, who can hinder? who shall say unto him, what
do thou? He has an absolute Dominion, and is not accountable to any. A Man
may do with his own as he pleases. Why should we not allow him the common
Privilege of all Proprietors? A Man may cut out his own Cloth as he pleases. If
God deprive us of any enjoyment, there is no resisting him by force, seeing God
is Omnipotent; nor ought there to be any question to be made of the Justice of
the Fact, seeing he has absolute Dominion, and is not accountable to any. All
Creatures are in his Hand, to dispose of them as he pleases: and sometimes he
sees fit to take them away in a violent manner, so as may most affect the
Parties interessed, and show us his Sovereignty. He will do it in his own way,
by arming the Thoughts and Humors of our own Bodies against us. Here our
Subjection to God must begin, till he be pleased to give some farther account
of his dealing with us. Job 33. 13. Why do thou strive against him? for he
gives not account of any of his Matters. Before what Tribunal will you call
the Lord? Where will you cite him to answer for the wrong done to you? This
Sovereignty of God does exceedingly calm the Heart; God has right alone to
govern the World. He did govern it before we were born, and will do it when we
are gone. He deposes Kings, and disposes Kingdoms, and all Affairs as he
will. Men must not prescribe Rules to God, nor limit his uncontrollable
Authority: Our work is not to dispute and quarrel, but to obey and submit in
all things.

3. This Sovereignty of God is modified and mitigated in the dispensation of it
with several Attributes. As

(1.) With Infinite Justice. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. When every Curse was pronounced they
were to say, Amen, let it come to pass, for it is just. All that we suffer is
deserved, Nay, less than our Iniquities deserve. Ezra. 9. 18. As the restored
Israelites acknowledge, when they were in Babylon, they might have been in Hell.
Job 34. 10. Far be it from God that he should do wickedness, or the Almighty
that he should commit Iniquity. All such thoughts are to be rejected with
abhorrence and indignation. We have strange conceptions and thoughts of God
when under a Temptation; ver. 23. He will not lay upon Man more than right,
that he should enter into Judgment with God. No, he goes on just and sure
Grounds, though we do not always discern them.

(2.) God does it too with great Faithfulness, they look on all Afflictions as
federal Dispensations, as Appendages of the Covenant of Grace. Psalm. 119. 57.
In very Faithfulness thou have afflicted me. Mark, he does not say,
notwithstanding thy Faithfulness, but [in] Faithfulness he performs his
Covenant. When he thresheth us, it is to make our Husksfly off; that he may
quicken us to a serious Remembrance of himself, and of the Duties we owe to him.

(3.) It is ordered with great Wisdom: For God is a God of Judgment. Isa. 30.
18. He knows what is best for his People. We think this and that best, but God
is wiser than we: when many Providence fall out, we think it would be better
for the Church if it were otherwise. But this is to tax God's Wisdom, and
charge him with want of Love and Tenderness toward his People, they are dearer
to him than they are to you. Chrysostom shows how we take upon us to order
Affairs, he brings in an Instance of a Man that is very kind to the Poor; if he
dies they are undone: Have you more care of them than God their Maker? Job did
not eat his Morsels alone, but the Poor did eat his Bread, and were clothed
with his Fleece, therefore the sides of the Poor are said to bless him. Cannot
God provide for the Poor without Job? So in like cases, for the Churches sake.
This Providence seems to tend altogether to evince; but God knows how by these
and these means to provide for his People; and you must not prescribe to him.
It was Blasphemy in Alphonsus to say, Si Deo a consiliis adfuisset se
consultius multa ordinaturum; That if he had been by when God made the World,
he would have ordered some things with greater advice, and better care. He
would not have placed the Horns of the Beasts above their Eyes, but under their
Eyes. Such Blasphemy do we secretly lisp out in our murmurings and discourses
about Providence; when we are questioning how this, that, and the other thing
can be for his Glory. The Lord knows how to guide all things to his Glory, and
we must absolutely yield to it.

4. With much Love. For he that has the Wisdom of a Father, has also the
Bowels of a Mother. A Mother may sooner forget a poor shiftless Child, than God
will forget his People, Isa. 49. 15, etc. There Is a great deal of Love showed
in our Afflictions. Sometimes in mitigating them. 1 Cor. 10. 13. God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able to
bear. And as Jacob drove on, as the little ones were able to bear; so the Lord
suits his Conduct, and lays on the Affliction, as his People are able to bear.
Castles are Victuall'd before they are Besieged. After great Comforts, then
comes Affliction. Heb. 10. 32. After you were enlightened, ye endured a great
fight of Affliction. Then again, in refreshing their Troubles with many
gracious Experiences. The Lord does things which seem very bitter to the carnal
Sense, and Gust; but when he has defecated and refined our Taste, then he
sheds abroad his Love into our Hearts by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5. 3, 5. Their
Adoption is cleared up, and the loss of outward Comfort is accompanied with a
greater increase of Spiritual Comfort. Again, he shows his Love in ordering all
things for their Good, Romans 8. 28. Out of what Corner soever the Wind blows, it
blows good to the Saints. Arise, O North Wind, and blow thou South, etc. North,
and South, contrary Points, Cant. 4. 16. yet the Spices of his Garden flow out.
That which is against our Will, is not against our Profit. God is still
pursuing what is for his own Glory and Good of the Elect. So all that falls
out is either Good, or will tend to Good.

USE.
This teaches us upon what Grounds there should be such a submission to all
Personal and Domestical Calamities which may befall any of us, and to all that
befall the Church. It is the Will of God, and that is the great Ground of
composing the Heart whatever falls out. Whenever you hear of the increase of
Violence, or any Resolution against the People of God, this should calm us, The
Will of the Lord be done. God knows what is best for his People. This is an
everlasting Ground of Comfort, that we are still in God's Hand's, and whatever
befalls us, it comes by his special Providence, even by his that numbers the
Hairs of our Heads, and who carves out every condition to us. Deuteronomy. 33. 3.
Surely he loved his People, all the Saints are in his Hands. When the Disciples
were sore troubled and affrighted, Joh. 6. 20. Jesus comes to them and said, Be
not afraid, it is I that order this. There are many remarkable Passages in that
Story. The Disciples were in the dark of the night overtaken with a mighty
Storm, and for a long time did not know what would become of them; the Text
says, they had rowed about twenty five, or thirty Furlongs before Christ
appears: Christ sees it not fit to appear at first, but lets the Trial go on
until it be a Trial indeed. Now about the fourth Watch of the Night Jesus
passed by, Mark 6. 48. that is the Morning Watch, and then Jesus appears to
them. We are very tender of our selves, and soon think we are low and tried
enough; therefore would fain be delivered, but our wise Lord sees we need
more. When Christ came, then their fears are increased; Christ came walking
upon the Water, and they thought it was a Spectre. Spirits broken with troubles
are very apt to take in afflicting impressions from every thing they see and
hear. The very way of our Mercies may be matter of terror to us. At length he
discovers himself, it is I, be not afraid. I walk upon that Water which seems
to be ready to swallow you up. I that raised the Waves, know how to still them.
Here Is that which may allay all our disquiets and fears. Remember, it is not
the Instrument but Christ, and God must be eyed, and the Will of the Lord be
done.

In our darkest Condition God sees us, when we do not see him. Psalm. 73. 22,
23. and Job. 23. 9, 10. I looked on the left hand where he does work, but I
cannot behold him: he hides himself on the right hand that I cannot see him.
But he knows the way that I take: when he has tried me, I shall come forth
as Gold.

SERMON XVI.
JOHN 3. 16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son; that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life.
IN these words you have the Sum and Substance of the Gospel. In them observe,

1. The Fountain and Original of all that Grace and Salvation which is brought
unto us, God's unspeakable Love to Mankind; God so loved the World.

2. The way which God took to recover our lapsed condition, or the Effect and
Fruit which flows from this Fountain, that he gave his only begotten Son.

3. The end of it, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting Life. Where take notice of,

(1.) The Qualification, or the free and easy condition put upon Men in the
Gospel, that whosoever believes in him.

(2.) The benefit that resulteth to us, expressed Negatively, and
Affirmatively, should not perish, but have everlasting Life.

First, The rise and beginning of all is God's unconceivable Love; God so loved
the World. Where observe,

1. The Object, the World. 2. The Act, Loved. 3. The Degree, So loved.
1. The word by which the Object is expressed, is the World, which notes
Mankind in its corrupt and miserable State; 1 Ioh. 5. 19. The whole World lies
in Sin. The World is an Heap of Men, who had broken God's Law, forfeited his
Love and Favor; they neither loved nor feared God, but were unthankful and
unholy; yet this World God loved.

2. The Act, He loved. The Love of God is twofold, the Love of Benevolence, and
the Love of Complacence.

(1.) The Love of Benevolence is the Pity and Compassion of God toward Man
lying in Sin and Misery. This is understood in this place, as also in Tit. 3.
4. The Kindness and Love of God our Savior toward Man appeared.

(2.) The Love of Complacence. (...) he loves us, when he has made us lovely.
In which Sense it is said, Psalm. 11. 7. The Righteous God loves Righteousness.
Joh. 16. 27. The Father himself loved you, because ye loved me. This belongs
not to this place.

3. The Degree, So loved. He does not tell you how much, but leaves it to your
most solemn raised Thoughts. It is rather to be conceived than spoken of, and
admired rather than conceived.

Observe from the Words.

That the Beginning and first Cause of our Salvation is the mere Love of God.
The outward Occasion was our Misery, the inward moving Cause was God's Love.
1. Love is at the Bottom of all. We may give a Reason of other Things, but we
cannot give a Reason of his Love. God showed his Wisdom, Power, Justice, and
Holiness in our Redemption by Christ. If you ask, why he made so much ado about
a worthless Creature, raised out of the Dust of the Ground at first, and had
now disordered himself, and could be of no use to him? We have an Answer at
hand, Because he loved us. If you continue to ask, But why did he love us? We
have no other Answer, but because he loved us; for beyond the first Rise of
things we cannot go. And the same Reason is given by Moses, Deuteronomy. 7. 8. The
Lord did not set his Love upon you, nor choose you, because you were more in
number than any People, for ye were the fewest of all People; but because the
Lord loved you; that is in short, He loved you, because he loved you. The same
Reason is given by our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 11. 26. Even so Father, for so
it seemed good in thy Sight. All came from his free and undeserved Mercy,
higher we cannot go in seeking after the Causes of what is done for our
Salvation.

2. The most remarkable Thing that is visible in the Progress and Perfection of
our Salvation by Christ, is Love. And it is meet, that the Beginning, Middle,
and End should suit. Nay, if Love be so conspicuous in the whole Design and
Carrying on of this blessed Work, it is much more in the Rise and Fountain.
God's great End in our Redemption was the Demonstration of his Love and Mercy
to Mankind; yea not only the Demonstration, but the Commendation of it. That is
the Apostle's word, Romans 5. 8. God commends his Love to us, in that while we
were yet Sinners, Christ died for us. A thing may be demonstrated as real, that
is not commended or set forth as great. God's Design was that we should not
only believe the Reality, but admire the Greatness of his Love. Now from first
to last Love is so conspicuous, that we cannot overlook it. Light is not more
conspicuous in the Sun, than the Love of God in our Redemption by Christ.

3. If there were any other Cause, it must be either the Merit of Christ, or
some Worthiness on our part.

(1.) The Merit of Christ was not the first Cause of God's Love, but the
Manifestation, Fruit, and Effect of it. The Text tells, he first loved the
World, and then gave his only begotten Son. It is said, 1 Ioh. 3. 16. Hereby
perceive we the Love of God, because he laid down his Life for us. Look as we
perceive and find out Causes by their proper Effects, so we perceive the Love
of God by the Death of Christ. Christ is the principal Means whereby God
carries on the Purposes of his Grace, and therefore is represented in
Scripture as the Servant of his Decrees.

(2.) No Worthiness in us. For when his Love moved him to give Christ for us,
he had all Mankind in his prospect and view, as lying in the polluted Mass, or
in a State of Sin and Misery, and then provided a Redeemer for them. God at
first made a perfect Law, which forbad all Sin upon pain of Death. Man did
break this Law, and still we break it day by day in every Sin. Now when Men
lived, and went on in Sin and Hostility against God, he was pleased then to
send his Son to assume our Nature, and die for our Transgressions. Therefore
the giving of a Redeemer was the Work of his free Mercy. Man loved not God, yea
was an Enemy to God, when Christ came to make the Atonement; 1 Ioh. 4. 10.
Herein is Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be the Propitiation for our Sins. Col. 1. 21. And you that were sometimes
alienated, and Enemies in your Minds by wicked Works, yet now has he
reconciled. We were senseless of our Misery, careless of our Remedy, so far from
deserving, that we desired no such matter. God's Love was at the beginning, not
ours.

USE 1. Is to confute all Misapprehensions of God. It is the grand Design of
Satan to lessen our Opinion of God's Goodness. So he assaulted our first
Parents, as if God (notwithstanding all his Goodness in their Creation) was
envious of Man's Felicity and Happiness. And he has not left off his old wont.
He seeks to hide God's Goodness, and to represent him as a God, that
delights in our Destruction and Damnation, rather than in our Salvation; as
if he were inexorable, and hardly entreated to do us good. And why? That we may
stand aloof from God, and apprehend him as unlovely. Or if he cannot prevail so
far, he tempts us to poor unworthy mean thoughts of his Goodness and Mercy.
Now we can notobviate the Temptation better, than by due reflections on his
Love in giving his Son for the World. This shows, that he is fuller of Mercy
and Goodness than the Sun is of Light, or the Sea of Water. So great an Effect
shows the greatness of the Cause. Wherefore did he express his Love in such a
wonderful astonishing way, but that we might have higher and larger thoughts of
his Goodness and Mercy. By other Effects we easily collect the Perfection of
his Attributes; that his Power is Omnipotent, Romans 1. 20. That his Knowledge is
Omniscient, Heb. 4. 12, 13. And by this Effect it is easy to conceive, that his
Love is infinite, or that God is Love.

Use 2. Is to quicken us to admire the Love of God in Christ.

There are three things which commend any Favor done unto us. 1. The good Will
of him that gives. 2. The Greatness of the Gift. 3. The Unworthiness of him
that receives. All concur here.

1. The good Will of him that gives. Nothing moved God to do this, but his own
Love. It was from the free Motion of his own Heart, without our thought and
asking. No other Reason is given, or can be given. We made not suit for any
such thing; it could not enter into our Minds and Hearts, into our Minds to
conceive, or into our Hearts to desire such a Remedy to recover the lapsed
Estate of Mankind. Not into our Minds, for it is a great Mystery; 1 Timothy 3. 16.
And without Controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness, etc. Not into our
Hearts, to ask or desire; for it would have seemed a strange Request that we
should ask, that the Eternal Son of God should assume our Flesh, and be made
Sin and a Curse for us. But Grace has wrought exceeding abundantly, above all
that we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20. Above what we can imagine, and above what
we can pray for to him.

2. The Greatness of the Gift. Great things do even force their way into our
Minds, whether we will or no. The Gift of Jesus Christ is so great, that the
Love of God is gone to the uttermost in it. He has not a better Christ, nor a
more worthy Redeemer, nor another Son to die for us, nor could the Son of God
suffer greater Indignites than he has suffered for our sakes. God said to
Abraham, Genesis 22. 12. Now I know that thou fear God, since thou have not
withheld thy Son, thine only Son, from me. God was not ignorant before, but
the Meaning is, this is an apparent Proof and Instance of it. So now we may
know God loves us; here is the manifest Token and Sign of it.

3. The Unworthiness of him that receives. This is also in the Case. We were
altogether unworthy that the Son of God should be incarnate, and die for our
sakes. This is notably improved by the Apostle, Romans 5. 7, 8. For scarcely for
a righteous Man will one die, but for a good Man some would even dare to die:
But God commends his Love to us, in that while we were yet Sinners, Christ
died for us. The Apostle alludeth to the Distinction familiar among the Jews;
they had their good Men, or bountiful; their righteous Men, zealous for the
Law; and their wicked Men, obnoxious to Judgment. Peradventure one would
venture his Life for a very merciful Person; but you shall hardly find any to
be so liberal and friendly, as to venture his Life for a righteous and just
Man, or a Man of rigid Innocence. But mark, there are abating Terms, Scarcely,
and perhaps; the Case is rare that one should die for another, be he never so
good and righteous. But God's Expression of Mercy was infinitely above the
proportion of any the most friendly Man ever showed. There was nothing in the
Object to move him to it, when we were neither good nor just, but wicked;
without respect to any Worth in us, for we were all in a damnable estate, he
sent his Son to die for us, to rescue and free us from Eternal Death, and to
make us Partakers of Eternal Life. God so loved the World, when we had so
sinned, and wilfully plunged our selves into an estate of Damnation.

But you will say, If this Mercy be so great, why are Men no more affected with
it?

I answer:

1. Because of their stupid Carelessness, they do not see the Need of this
Mercy, and therefore do not prize the Worth of it: If they were sensible that
there is an Avenger of Blood at their heels, or God's Wrath making Inquisition
for Sinners, they would more earnestly run into the City of Refuge, Heb. 6. 18.

2. They do not truly believe this Mystery of Grace, but speak of it by rote,
and hearsay, after others. All Affections follow Faith; 1 Pet. 1. 7. Unto you
therefore which believe, he is precious.

3. They do not seriously consider the Importance of it, therefore the
weightiest Objects do not stir us. Our Minds are taken up about Toys and
Trifles.

4. They have not the lively Light of the Spirit, Romans 5. 5. The Love of God is
shed abroad in our Hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us. It is not
our dry Thoughts, and doctrinal Knowledge, that will affect and change our
Heart, till the Spirit turns our Light into Love, and our Knowledge into
Taste.

Use 3. Is to exhort us,

1. To improve this Love. It is an Invitation to seek after God; for see what
Preparations his Love has made to recover you to Himself, and will not you be
recovered? God does not hate you, and therefore you need not flee from him as a
revenging God. He so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son. In
that capacious Expression you are not excluded, therefore exclude not your
selves. And such a broad Foundation of his Mercy being laid, what may you not
expect from it? 2 Cor. 5. 19. He has procured a Remedy and Ransom; as soon as
you repent and believe you shall have the Comfort of it.

2. It exhorts us also to answer it with a fervent Love to him that has
given such a signal Demonstration of his Love to us. 1 Ioh. 4. 19. We love him,
because he first loved us. Men always expect to be loved there where they love,
and think it hard dealing if it be not so.

3. Let your Love to God be like his Love to you. Love was at the bottom of all
this Grace, let it be at the bottom of all your Duties. Let all your things be
done in Love, 1 Cor. 16. 14. Let your Carriage apparently be a Life of Love. 2
Cor. 5. 14, 15. For the Love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge;
that if one died for all, then were all dead: And that he died for all, that
they which live should not live unto themselves, but unto him that died for
them, and rose again.

I come now to the second Branch of the Text, the Way God took to express his
Love to us. He gave his only begotten Son. Jesus Christ is so called to
distinguish him from the adopted Children, and to show his personal
Subsistence, which is by way of Filiation, or being eternally begotten in the
Divine Essence. So great was our Misery, that no less Remedy would serve the
turn; and so great God's Mercy, that he withheld him not from us.

Doct. The greatest Manifestation of God's Love to the Sons of Men, is the
giving his only begotten Son to be their Redeemer and Savior.
There is a twofold giving of Christ.

1. He is given for us. 2. He is given to us.
1. He was given for us, when he was sent into the World to become Bone of our
Bone, and Flesh of our Flesh, and to die for our Sins. This is spoken of, Romans
8. 32. God spared not his Son, but delivered him up for us all.

2. He is given to us, when we have a special Interest in him, and a
Participation of his Benefits. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Christ Jesus is made of God to us
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.

He is given for us, as he took our Nature; he is given to us, as he dwells
in our Hearts by Faith. He is given for us, as he undertook the Work of our
Redemption; he is given to us, as he accomplisheth and brings about our
Conversion to God, and applying to us the Benefits of his Purchase. I shall
speak of both.

I. As he is given for us, it mightily bespeaketh the Love of God, and his Care
of our Salvation. In Creation God made us after his own Image and Likeness: In
Redemption his Son came in the similitude and likeness of sinful Flesh. In
Creation the Angels were dignified above us, but not in Redemption, Heb. 2. 16.
He did not redeem the Apostate Angels. In short, this was the most convenient
Way for God to bring about the Purposes of his Grace toward Man, for these
Reasons.

1. That our Faith might be more certain, by the appearing of the Son of God in
our Nature, by his dying, rising again from the Dead, and ascending into
Heaven, and so giving a sensible Proof of our whole Religion.

(1.) By appearing in Human Nature he had opportunity of conversing with Men,
to convince them of the gracious Will of God, and teach them Obedience to him,
not only by his Doctrine, but his Example, and securing the Truth of both by
the many Miracles which he wrought in the days of his Flesh. Ioh. 6. 27. Him
has the Father sealed; that is, owned, acknowledged, demonstrated, that
whatever he did or said was the Will and good Pleasure of God.

(2.) By his dying he satisfied the Justice of God, and so makes a way for the
Course of his Mercy to us, that we might obtain Release and Pardon of all our
Sins and Transgressions against the Law of God. Romans 3. 25, 26. Whom God has
set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his
Righteousness, for the Remission of Sins that are past, through the forbearance
of God, etc.

(3.) His rising again from the Dead was a visible Satisfaction to the World,
that his Sacrifice was accepted; Rom 4. 15. Who was delivered for our Offenses,
and raised again for our Justification. The unbelieving World by that supreme
Act of Power have no reason to stand out against his Faith and Doctrine.

(4.) By his ascending into Heaven, the Truth of Eternal Life was more
confirmed; for thereby he gave us a real Demonstration of that Glory which he
spoke of and promised to his Disciples and Followers. 1 Pet. 1. 21. God raised
him from the Dead, and gave him Glory, that your Faith and Hope might be in
God. He himself is entered into that Happiness, and we shall follow him.

2. That our Hope might be more strong and lively, being built upon the Example
of Christ and his Promises to us. The Example of Christ is of great Support to
us in all our Troubles; for if we fare as he fared in this World, we shall fare
as he fares in the World to come. Therefore we are said to be begotten to a
lively Hope by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead, 1 Pet. 1. 3.
That is, have a Ground of Hope and cheerful Assurance; as he by by his
Sufferings came to his Reward and Crown, so shall we obtain the matter of his
Promises. 1 Ioh. 2. 25. And this is the Promise which he has promised, even
Eternal Life. Joh. 12. 26. If any Man serve me, let him follow me, and where I
am, there shall also my Servant be: If any Man serve me, him will my Father
honor.

3. That our Love to God may be more fervent. If God had saved us some other
way, the Salvation had been something less; for according to the degrees of the
Gift, so is our Obligation. Now God would oblige us at the highest rate, and
therefore he gave his only begotten Son to die for us. It is said, He spared
not his own Son, Romans 8. 32. There is a twofold not sparing, either in a way of
impartial Justice, or in a way of transcendent Bounty; the last is chiefly
intended in that place, though the other not altogether excluded. He delivered
him up to die for our sakes. Now surely this should gain much upon us, when God
thought nothing too good to part with for our Salvation.

4. It makes our Obedience more ready, for Jesus Christ came to live by the
same Law that we were bound to. Gal. 4. 4. When the Fullness of Time was come,
God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law. Yea to obey God at
the dearest Rates. Heb. 5. 8, 9. Though he were a Sen, yet learned he Obedience
by the Things which he suffered: And being made perfect, he became the Author
of Eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him. He submitted unto and
performed the whole Law, his Obedience cost him dear, since an ignominious and
shameful Death was a part of it.

II. God, that gave Christ for us, gives him also to us, and with him the
Benefits of Pardon, Reconciliation, Adoption, and Right to Eternal Life, if we
be duly qualified. The Offer is made in the Gospel: on our part there is
required only a thankful acceptance of Christ on his own Terms. This also is
the greatest Gift, for the other is in order to this; and this is the
completing of it, and applying it for our Comfort. I shall prove it by three
Reasons.

1. Without Christ there is no Recovery of what we lost. 2. No Removal of that
Misery we incurred. 3. No Obtaining of what we should desire and pursue after
as our proper Happiness.
1. No Recovery of what we lost. What did we lose by the Fall? The Image, and
Favor of God, and Fellowship with God.

(1.) The Image of God was defaced by Sin. Man abode not in the honor of his
Creation, but became as the Beasts that perish. Now the Restitution of this
great Gift we only have by Christ, who is the Pattern and Author of it. The
Pattern, 2 Cor. 3. 18. We all with open face beholding as in a Glass the Glory
of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, even as by
the Spirit of the Lord. The Author, Tit. 3. 5, 6. Not by Works of Righteousness
which ye have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost which he shed on us abundantly,
through Jesus Christ our Savior. Till we are in him, and be one with him, we
have not this great Benefit. 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature. We are destitute of that Image of God, wherein we were created; and
better we had never been born, unless newborn.

(2.) The Favor of God, which is an immediate Consequent of his Image. God
delighted in Man as innocent, but Man sinful is the Object of God's Wrath,
Loathing and Aversation. Therefore Christ died to recover Man to the Love and
Favor of God; 2 Cor. 5. 14. To make peace between the offended Sovereign, and
Subject offending; To interpose between God angry, and Man guilty. Now this
Breach continues till we are reconciled by Christ, till we love God, and are
beloved by him. And better we had been in a lower rank of Creatures, than to
continue under God's displeasure; for the Misery of the Beasts dies with them,
Death puts an end to all their Pains at once; but the Wrath of God, not
appeased by Christ, continues on the Sinner for ever.

(3.) Fellowship with God was lost by the Fall. Man was driven out of Paradise,
and shut out of God's Presence by a flaming Sword, Genesis 3. 24. the Emblem of
his Wrath, and all Intercourse was broken off. But Christ came to open the Way,
by whom we have access unto God with boldness and confidence, Ephesians. 3. 12. Heb.
4. 16. Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may
obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in a time of need. We need daily access to
God, we cannot live without him. How can we look him in the Face with any
Comfort, when we have no Mediator? we cannot have any serious thoughts of him
without trembling.

2. There is no removal of that Misery which we have incurred, which is the
Death and Curse wherein we are involved by Sin. As long as the Curses of the
Law stand in full force against us, we can have no firm confidence: if we look
to time past, there is a huge heap of Sins, the least of which is enough to
sink us into Hell: if we look to time present, our nature being not yet healed,
our Hearts swarm with diverse Lusts, and we are ready to sin again: if to time
to come, Death, Hell, and Judgment affright us. Christ finds us where Adam
left us, in the Highway to Hell and Damnation, Joh. 3. 18. Condemned already;
and to hope for any release unless it be upon God's Terms, is to make him
untrue and unjust. Certainly God will not break his Word, and disturb the order
of his Covenant for your sakes. Therefore how will you escape the Curse and
Condemnation of the Law, if Christ be not given to you?

3. There is no obtaining of what we should desire and pursue after, as our
proper Happiness, but only by Christ. Man was made for God, and cannot be happy
without him, and he is most completely happy in the full Enjoyment of him. Now
there is no coming to that blessed State, but by Christ. Ioh. 14. 6. He is the
Way to the Father. The most eminent Sense is, with respect to our final
Blessedness, when we come into his immediate Presence. So Ioh. 5. 11. This is
the Record, that God has given us Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son.
It is Christ alone that can put us in the way, and bring us home to Eternal
Bliss.

USE 1. Is to confute the Worlds Opinion, who measure God's Love by outward
things, or worldly Felicity. Alas! The Love or Hatred of God is not known by
these things, Eccles. 9. 1, 2. Neither can the Heart of Man be satisfied with
them. These things can give us a Belly-full, but not a Heart-full, Psalm. 17.
14, 15. Those that take up with the Creature, never felt the weight of Sin, are
not serious in matters of Eternal Concernments. The only true Happiness is in
having God for our God, Christ for our Redeemer, the Spirit for our Sanctifier
and Comforter.

Use 2. Is to excite us to bless God for Jesus Christ. The Apostle does
frequently in all his Groans and Afflictions, Romans 7. 25. I thank God through
Jesus Christ our Lord, etc. Blessed be God for the Grace of Jesus Christ;
whereby we have Pardon for what is past, and Grace for the future to perform
what God will accept. So 1 Cor. 15. 57. Thanks be to God, which gives us the
Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. God by Christ has given us the Victory
over Sin, Death, and Hell. So should you, especially in the Lord's Supper; it
is an Eucharist, be thankful that God has given Christ for us, which is an
unspeakable Gift. And now he comes to give him to you, afford him an hearty
welcome into your Souls, as you take him, and apply him by Faith, and give up
your selves to him as his Redeemed Ones. You come to look upon Christ, who made
his Soul an Offering for Sin; he is here represented as crucified before your
Eyes, and is by God specially offered to your acceptance, and with him Pardon
and Life. You must be joyful and thankful for these great Gifts and Benefits,
so dearly bought, so surely sealed, so freely offered; and in the sense of all
this devote your selves to God.

Use 3. Make it your main Care to see if Christ be given to us. Without him you
cannot have any true Remedy against Evil, nor any solid Hope of Good. Certain
it is, that in our Natural Estate we were without him. Is there a Change? The
two great Ends for which Christ came were, to appease God, and to be the
Principle of a new Life. Is Christ given for these Ends? Have you received him?
Do not think Christ fell from Heaven into your Bosom, whether you would or no.
Did you ever feel your Misery without him, and cry mightily to God, Give me
Christ, or else I die, and perish for ever? I confess, Conversion is not always
evident in feeling, but it is in the Effect and Fruit. What Fruits have you
then abiding in you? The great Fruit of Christ being given to you is, the
Spirit's dwelling in you. Romans 8. 9. But ye are not in the Flesh, but in the
Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwells in you. The great Work of the
Spirit is, to sanctify the Soul to the Service of him that redeemed us. Titus
2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works. Clear this, and
the Cause is decided.

III. I come now to the third part of the Text, which is the end of this Love,
That whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have Life everlasting.
Where I observe,

1. The connection of our Duty and Privilege. Christ dyed to procure a Covenant
wherein Pardon and Life is offered to us upon gracious Terms. In the Gospel we
must observe what God has promised, and what we must do, both must be alike
acceptable us, the Duty as well as the Benefit, or else we consent not to the
whole Tenor of the Covenant.

2. The Universality of the Proposal, That whosoever believes on him; no sorts
of Men are excluded from the Remedy, but those that exclude themselves by their
Impenitency and Unbelief.

3. The Nature of this Act and Duty which gives a Right and Title to the
Benefits offered, and that is believing: no more is mentioned here. But none
truly believe but those that carry themselves accordingly, or perform the
Duties which that Belief calls for. If it be such a lively operative Faith,
it will secure our Title to these Benefits.

4. The Benefits are Negatively and Positively expressed; Negatively, they
shall not perish; Positively, but have everlasting Life.

(1.) The Negative Expression is mentioned, partly, because of our former
Deserts, we incurred the Sentence of Eternal Death; which is taken off from
penitent Believers, they shall not be condemned with the unbelieving World:
partly, because of our present Fears, Guilt presents Destruction before our
Eyes, but the cause of that is taken away, as Sin is remitted and weakened. And
partly, to support us in our troubles: they may be Afflicted, but not perish
for ever; Chastned, but not destroyed; not for Perdition, but amendment.

(2.) The Positive part is expressed; partly, to show our Heavenly Fathers
Love, who cannot be satisfied til he has brought us into his immediate
Presence. And partly, to answer the desire of the Faithful, who long for
everlasting Communion with him; we cannot be satisfied till we before ever with
the Lord, in a perfect state of Subjection to him, and Fruition of him.

Doct. That Faith is the Way which God has appointed, whereby to receive
Benefits by Christ.
I. What Faith is. II. How this is to be understood. III. Why the Gospel
Covenant lays so much weight on it.
What is Faith? surely it concerns us to know it, since the Scriptures speak so
much of it everywhere. There are in it three things.

1. Assent. 2. Consent. 3. Trust.
1. A firm and cordial Assent to this Truth, that Jesus is the Son of God, and
Savior of Mankind; who came down from heaven, and suffered for our Sins, and
became the Foundation of that new Covenant, which offers Pardon and Hopes of
Bliss to all those, who feeling the Burden of their Sins, will trust their
Souls upon Christ's Redemption and Ransom, and forsake the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil, and take him for their only Lord and Savior, that by him they
may return to God. This Assent is a part of Faith, but this is not all. The
reasonable Soul in Man has Life, Sense, Appetite and Motion, as the Souls of
the Beasts have; but this is not the difference between us and them: besides
Sense, Life and Appetite, we have Reason and Discourse. So here, Knowledge and
Assent are implied in Faith, but more is required to make it justifying and
saying. Assent is good as it is inductive of other things, or leads on other
things, to wit, Choice and Trust; and it is not only good, but necessary, lest
we build without a Foundation. It was of great weight heretofore, when Christ's
Person and Doctrine was more questioned and contradicted. Ioh. 8. 24. Unless ye
believe that I am he, ye shall die in your Sins; lose all the Benefit of his
Coming. It Is said 1 Ioh. 5. 1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is
born of God. It was a mighty thing then to believe and profess Christ to be the
Messiah, and to cleave to that Profession, whatever Temptations they had to the
contrary. But I dare not leave the Decision of Men's Spiritual Estate upon that
Trial only. The bleak Winds that blew then in their Faces, blow now on our
backs; and it as dangerous now to deny Christ to be the Messiah, as it was for
them to profess it. However, Assent is still necessary, to put the greater Life
and Power into our Faith; for if the Fire were well kindled, it would of it
self break out into a Flame. The stronger our Assent is, the more powerful to
beget Love and Dependence on God's Promises, Obedience to his Commands, and
Perseverance notwithstanding Temptations. This Assent to do its Work must be
firm and cordial.

(1.) Firm. You must believe unfeignedly, that Christ is the Messiah and
Redeemer of the World. Acts 2. 36. Let the House of Israel know assuredly, that
God has made this Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ. The
word signifies safely, they may venture their All upon it. Ioh. 17. 8. They
have known. There is a common customary superficial Belief, that Men take up
upon the Credit of their Forefathers, and the Consent of the Country where they
live: And there is a sound Persuasion of the Truth of the Gospel wrought in us
by the Spirit of God. And though Human Credulity does little, yet this last
serves to renew the Soul. Mat. 16. 17. Flesh and Blood has not revealed it to
thee, but my Father which is in Heaven; when Peter had said, Thou art the
Christ, the Son of the Living God. This makes us victorious over the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh. 1 Ioh. 5. 5. Who is he that overcomes the World, but he
that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? If this important supreme Truth
were well believed, it would doubtless prevail against the Allurements of the
World and the Flesh, and make Men see, that they have something else than this
deceitful World to look after. Truths go to the quick when soundly believed.

(2.) Cordial. Many seem verily to be persuaded that Jesus is the Son of God,
but are no way affected with this Mystery of Grace, nor changed. The Devils may
give a bare Assent to this great Gospel Truth. Compare Mark 5. 7. with Matthew.
16. 16. The Confession of the Devil with the Profession of Peter. The Devil
owned Jesus to be the Son of the most High God as well as Peter, the Son of the
Living God. Austms Observation is very good, Hoc dicebat Petrus, hoc dicebant
Daemones, Petrus ut Christum amplecteretur, Daemones ut Christus ab iis
recederet. Peter said the same thing, and the Devil the same thing; Peter said
it that he might embrace Christ, the Devils that he might depart from them. It
is one thing to be of this Opinion that Christ is the Savior of the World;
another to accept and receive him into our Hearts.

2. The next thing which I shall observe in Faith, is a Consent to receive
Christ as God offers him to us in the Gospel. Joh. 1. 12. To as many as
received him, etc. He gave Power to become the Sons of God to as many as
believed on his Name.

(1.) It is not a rash Consent, but such as is deliberate, serious and advised.
When we assure Men that God in the Gospel calls them to accept of Christ as
their Lord and Savior, and that they shall be pardoned and saved, they are
ready to say with all their Heart; but they do not consider what it is to
receive Christ, and therefore retract their Consent almost as soon as it is
given. Therefore Christ directs us to sit down, and count the Charges, that
we may allow for Opposition and Temptations, Luke 14. 28 to the 73. When you
have considered his strict Laws, made a full allowance for incident
Difficulties, and Temptations; and can resolve, forsaking all others, to cleave
to him alone for Salvation.

(2.) It must not be a forced and involuntary Consent, such as a Person makes
when he is frighted into a little Religiousness for the present, but would
never mind it, nor yield to it if he were in a state of full Liberty. It may be
in a distress or pang of Conscience, by all means they must have Christ, or
when sick are afraid to die, or under some great Judgments; as the Israelites
when they heard the Thundering on Mount Sinai, All that thou have commanded us,
we will do, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. No, this will not serve the turn, the Will must be
effectually inclined to Christ, and to God the Father by him, as our utmost
Felicity, and End. All Christ's People are a willing People, Psalm. 110. 3.

(3.) It must be a resolved Consent, a fixed, not an ambulatory Will, which we
take up for a purpose, or at some certain times for a solemn Duty or so. No you
must cleave to him with full purpose of Heart, Acts 11. 23. Trample upon every
thing that would separate you from him, Phil. 3. 8, 9, Romans 8. 36, to the end.
It must not be a feeble Consent, such as is contradicted by every foolish and
hurtful Lust, but a prevalent Consent, such as can maintain it self against
Difficulties and Temptations, and the Oppositions of the Flesh, and control
all other Desires and Delights.

(4.) It must not be partial, but a total universal Consent; not only a Consent
of Dependence or Trust, to accept of Christ as our Savior; but a Consent of
Subjection to him as our Lord. Col. 2. 6. As ye have received Christ Jesus the
Lord, so walk in him. Many would have Christ and his Benefits, but they would
not yield that he should reign over them. Luke 19. 27. Those mine Enemies that
would not I should reign over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me.
But the true Believing implies a taking of Christ and his Yoke. Mat. 11. 29.
Take my Yoke upon you, etc. Christ and his Cross. Mat. 16. 24. If any Man will
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me. It
is accompanied with a Resolution to obey his Laws, and keep his Commandments,
that we may abide in his Love.

3. The third thing in Faith is Trust, spoken of, Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom ye
trusted, after ye heard the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your Salvation. Trust,
is a Dependence upon Christ for the Blessings which he has procured for us,
and promised to us; and is represented by the Metaphors of Staying the Mind on
God; Isa. 26, 3. Thou keep him in perfect Peace, whose Mind is stayed on
thee, because he trusts in thee. By the staying of the Mind, is intended its
Fixedness and Stability; when being satisfied with the Promises, we can
comfortably wait for the Event and Issue. The other Metaphor is, committing
ourselves to God, 2 Timothy 1. 12. For I know whom I have believed, and I am
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against
that day. When we can trust our All in Christ's Hands, knowing that he can give
us that Righteousness whereby we may stand before God, and have comfortable
access to him, and at length give us that Eternal Life which is our Supreme
Happiness. When you can trust him for Deliverance from the Guilt, Power, and
Punishment of Sin, and for the beginning, strengthening and preserving of Grace
in us to Everlasting Life, you have obtained a good degree of Faith. Only for
the farther opening of this Trust, I must observe to you,

(1.) That this Trust respects all Christ's Offices, which are, Prophet,
Priest, and King. You trust him as a Prophet, when you give up your selves as
his Disciples to the conduct of his Word and Spirit, being persuaded that he
will infallibly teach you the way to true Happiness. Joh. 6. 68, 69. Lord, to
whom shall we go? thou have the Words of Eternal Life: and we believe and are
sure that thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God. This Trust is our
Remedy against all false Religions: for what should draw us from the true and
chief Doctor of the Church? You trust him as a Priest, when you believe the
value of his Merit and Sacrifice, and comfort your selves with his gracious
Promises and Covenant, and come to God with more boldness and hope of Mercy
upon the account of his intercession, especially in your great Extremities,
Heb. 4. 14, 15, 16. Therefore we may pray confidently, and make an open and
free discovery of our wants and requests to God, who will relieve us, and do
what is best for us in a fit Season, when we most want it, and least expect it.
We must trust him as a King, when we become his Subjects, and are persuaded
that he will govern us in Truth and Righteousness, in order to our Salvation,
and defend us by his Mighty Power till he has brought us to Glory and
Blessedness. 2 Timothy 4. 18. The Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and
preserve me to his Heavenly Kingdom.

2. That this Trust is practical, and is not to be determined by our Confidence
so much as Obedience, and resolution to take the way which God has prescribed,
that we may obtain the Blessings which he has promised to us. This
consideration is necessary, partly because God, or Christ, will be trusted no
farther than he has obliged himself, and so far we may depend upon him. Now
Christ has only obliged himself to be the Author of Eternal Salvation to those
that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. Partly, because this obedience is difficult,
Self-denial is required. Mat. 16. 24. Whosoever will come after me, let him
deny himself, etc. A surer note of our Faith than a confidence, or a
presumption that we shall fare well enough though we indulge the ease and
desires of the Flesh, and gratify our Interest in the World. And therefore
Faith, being an obediential confidence, does confute these vain conceits. Many
think they may the more boldly venture on Sin, the more they believe, or seem
to believe the Grace of God in Christ. Others think all their business is to
get a Victory over their Consciences, and though they do not deny their Lusts,
yet if they can be strongly persuaded that God will be merciful to them in
Christ, they shall not perish but obtain everlasting Life. No, we must obey, we
must deny our selves, or else we do not trust Christ to bring us to Heaven in
his own ways and methods, but trust to some vain conceits of our own.

II. How this is to be understood, That whosoever believes, since many other
things are required of us, as Repentance, Mortification of Sin, Self-denial,
new Obedience or Holiness. Luke 13. 5. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish. Mortification, Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die;
but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live.
Self-Denial, Luke 14. 16. If any Man come to me, and hate not his Father and
Mother, yea and his own Life also, he cannot be my Disciple. New Obedience or
Holiness. Heb. 12. 14. Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without which
no Man shall see the Lord. I answer, all Truths are not delivered in one place,
and therefore a solitary Faith will not bring us to Heaven, but that which is
seconded with other things. But more distinctly:

I. Faith is not required to exclude other things, that are connexed with it by
the Ordination of God. For every one that believes Christ, believes the whole
Gospel to be true. Except against one part, and you may except against all the
rest. Now it is evident in the Gospel, that without Regeneration, Repentance,
and Holiness, no Man can be saved, and see God: therefore every one that
believes in Christ, must trust him to obtain it in the way that he has
appointed, and promised to give it.

2. Faith is not required to exclude other things that are included in the
nature of it, or flow as genuine Effects from such a cause. A purpose of
Obedience is included in the Nature of Faith and actual Obedience is the fruit
of it. Every one that believes Christ, receives him in all his Offices,
therefore a purpose of Obedience is included in the nature of it: and if Faith
be sincere, universal Obedience in Self-denial, Mortification, and our duty to
God and Men, will naturally be derived from it. Therefore as he that is to
entertain a King, makes reckoning of his Train, and that he will not come
alone; so every one, of whom Faith in Jesus Christ is required, must reckon
that his Faith must be evidenced to be sincere by the Fruits of it.

III. Why is Faith required, that we may receive Benefit by Christ?

For these Reasons. 1. In respect of God. 2. In respect of Christ. 3. In
respect of the Creature. 4. In respect of our Comforts.

1. In respect of God, that our Hearts may be possessed with a full
apprehension of his Grace, who in the new Covenant appears not as a revenging
and condemning God, but as a pardoning God. This reason is rendered by the
Apostle, Romans 4. 16. It is of Faith, that it might be of Grace. The Law brought
in the Terror of God, by being the Instrument of revealing Sin, and the
punishment due thereunto. ver. 15. The Law works Wrath: for where there is no
Law, there is no Transgression, no such stinging sense of it: but the Gospel
brought in Grace. The Law stated the Breach, but the Gospel showed the way of
our Recovery. And therefore Faith does more agree with Grace, as it makes God
more amiable and lovely to us, and beloved by us, by the discovery of his
Goodness and Grace. The saving of Man by Christ, that is, by his Incarnation,
Life, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, do all tend to possess
our Hearts with his abundant Grace. To the same tend also his merciful
Covenant, gracious Promises, and all the Benefits given to us, his Spirit,
Pardon, and Communion with God in Glory, all is to sill our Hearts with a Sense
of the Love of God. And all this is no more than necessary: for a guilty
Conscience is not easily settled, and brought to look for all kind of Happiness
from one whom we have so much wronged. Adam, when once a Sinner, was shy of
God, Genesis 3. 10. and Sin still makes us hang off from him. Guilt is suspicious,
and if we have not one to lead us by the Hand, and bring us to God, we cannot
abide his Presence. For this End serves Faith; That Sinners, being possessed of
the Goodness and Grace of God, may be recovered, and return to him by a fit
Means. In the new Covenant, Repentance more distinctly respects God, and Faith
respects Christ; Acts 20. 21. Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ. Repentance respects God, because from God we fell, and to God we
must return. We fell from him, as we withdrew our Allegiance, and sought our
Happiness elsewhere; to him we return, as our rightful and proper Happiness:
but Faith respects the Mediator, who is the only Remedy of our Misery, and the
Means of our Eternal Blessedness. He opened the way to God by his Merit and
Satisfaction, and actually brings us into this way by his renewing and
reconciling Grace, that we may be in a capacity both to please and enjoy God;
and that is the reason why Faith in Christ is so much insisted on, as our Title
and Claim to the Blessedness of the new Covenant. It has a special aptitude
and fitness for our recovery from Sin to God, because it peculiarly respects
the Mediator by whom we come to him.

2. With respect to Christ.

(1.) Because the whole Dispensation of Grace by Christ cannot well be
apprehended by any thing but Faith: partly, because the Way of our Recovery is
so supernatural, strange and wonderful, that unless we believe God's Testimony,
how can we be persuaded of it? That the Carpenter's Son should be the Son of
that great Architect and Builder, who framed Heaven and Earth; that Life should
come to us by the Death of another; that God should be made Man, and the Judge
a Party, and he that knew no Sin be condemned as a Criminal Person; that one
crucified should procure the Salvation of the whole World, and be Lord of Life
and Death, and have such Power over all Flesh, as to give Eternal Life to whom
he will. Reason is puzsed at these things. Faith can only unravel them. Partly,
because the Comfort of the Promises is so rich and glorious, and the Persons
upon whom it is bestowed, so unworthy, that it cannot easily enter into the
Heart of a Man, that God will be so good and gracious to us. 1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye
has not seen, Ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man
to conceive, the Things God has prepared for them that love him. Therefore
Sense and Reason could look for no such thing. Faith is necessary, and a strong
Faith, that it may work upon us. These are things which we could neither
imagine, nor hope for; partly, because the chief of our Blessings lie in
another World, and Nature cannot see so far off, 2 Pet. 1. 9. Partly, because
Christ's most sincere People are afflicted with so many Difficulties, and so
seemingly forsaken; and Temptations to Unbelief are many and pressing, that it
is hard to maintain any Life in our selves, unless we have Faith, that is, a
strong Assent, and invincible Trust. Well now, consider for what good reason
God requires Faith. Sense only looks to things seeen and felt; Reason sees
Effects in their Causes, and yet but probably; but Faith is a believing such
things as God has revealed, because he has revealed them: and surely this
only can sustain us in the expectation of God's Grace and Mercy unto Eternal
Life. Whilst we are employed in Duties so opposite to the bent of the carnal
Heart, and have so many Temptations to the contrary, what can support us but a
strong and lively Faith?

(2.) Till we believe in Christ, we can have no Comfort or Use of all his
Offices. How can we learn of him the Way of Salvation, till we believe him to
be the Prophet sent of God, to teach the World the Way to true Happiness? Mat.
17. 5. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. How can
we obey him, unless we believe in him, that he is our Lord, who has power over
all Flesh, at whose Judgment we must stand or fall? Acts 17. 30, 31. Now
commands all Men every where to repent, because he has appointed a Day in
which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he has
ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all Men, in that he has raised
him from the dead. How can we depend upon the Merit of his Obedience and
Sacrifice, and be comforted with his gracious Promises and Covenant, and come
to God with boldness and Hope of Mercy in his Name, and be confident that he
will justify, sanctify, and save us, unless we believe that he is a Priest, who
once made an Atonement, and continually makes Intercession for us? Heb. 9. 25.
In the days of his Flesh, when any came for any Benefit to him, he put him upon
his Trial, Believe thou that I am able to do this? Mark 9 23. Jesus said unto
him, If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that believes.
Believe thou that I am able? to Martha, Joh. 11. 26. Thus they were not
capable of any Benefit, till they believed.

3. With respect to that Holiness and Obedience, which God expected from the
Creature. Christ came to restore us to God, which he does both as a Savior,
and Lawgiver to his Church; and till we believe in him, both these Qualities
and Functions miss of their Effect.

(1.) As a Savior, he came to take away the Curse of the Law, and to put us
into a capacity to serve and please God, by giving us his Spirit to renew our
Natures, and heal our Souls. Isa. 53. 5. The Chastisement of our Peace was upon
him, and with his Stripes we are healed. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare
our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, that we being dead unto Sin, should live
unto Righteousness; by whose Stripes ye were healed. We shall never mind our
Duty, nor be capable to perform it, unless we believe that he is such a Savior.

(2.) As a Lawgiver, obliging us by his Authority to live in obedience unto
God. The Kingdom of the Mediator is clearly subordinate to the Kingdom of God;
for he came not to vacate our Duty, but to establish it; he came to restore the
lost Groat to the Owner, the lost Sheep to the Possessor, the lost Son to the
Father. As the Grace of Christ does not vacate the Mercy of God; so the
Authority of Christ, that novum Ius Imperii, does not free us from the
Authority of God. Now who will submit to an Authority that is not convinced of
it, or does not believe it? But when once we believe, then we bow Heart and
Knee.

4. With respect to our Comfort. Often in Scripture Faith is represented as a
quieting Grace. The Comfort, Quietness, and Peace of the Soul depends much
upon Faith in Christ, as an all-sufficient Savior, which banishes our Fears,
and makes us in our greatest hardships to trust Christ with all our Happiness,
and to feast the Soul with a constant Peace and everlasting Joy. Whether this
World be turned upside down, and be dissolved; whether we be in Poverty and
Sickness, or in Health or Wealth; whether we be under evil Repute, or good;
whether Persecution or Prosperity befall us, how little are we concerned in all
these, if we know in whom we have believed? 2. Tim. 1. 12. Heaven is where it
was before, and Christ is at the right hand of God; how little then should all
these things disturb the Peace and Comfort of that Soul, that shall live with
God for ever? Psalm. 112. 7. But Sin is our greatest trouble. If Sin be your
Trouble, I answer, Is it your Infirmity, or Iniquity? If Infirmity, There is no
Condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus, etc. Romans 8. 1. If Iniquity?
break off your Sin by Repentance, and then there may be Comfort for you; for
Christ came to save us from our Sins.

USE 1. Is to confute Men's Presumptions of their Eternal good Estate, whereby
many damnably delude their own Souls.

1. Some, when they hear, that whosoever believes shall be saved, have a
carnal Notion of Christ, that if he were alive they would own him, and receive
him into their Houses, and use him more friendly than the Jews did. This is but
a knowing Christ after the Flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 16. He is not to be received into
your Houses, but into your Hearts. Besides, we do not know our own Hearts, or
what we should have done if we had lived then; a Person of such contemptible
appearance as Christ was, and so free in his Reproofs of the Sins of the Times,
would not have been for our turn no more than theirs. The Jews said, Mat. 23.
30. If we had lived in the days of our Fathers, we would not have been guilty
of the Blood of the Prophets. The Memory of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, was as
detestable to the carnal Jews, as that of Judas and Pontius Pilate to
Christians; but they were not a whit the better Men, no more are we.

2. They do great reverence to his Name and Memory, profess themselves
Christians, and abhor Turks and Infidels. No, this will not do neither. Many
prize Christ's Name, that neglect his Office; honoring the Physician, without
taking his Remedies, never brought Health. They have learned to speak well of
Christ by rote after others, but they do not savingly and sincerely believe in
him, to cure and heal their Souls, and suffer him to do the work of a Mediator
there. The other Respect is to be ascribed to the Chance of their Birth, they
have the happiness to be born there where Christ is the God of the Country:
that which makes others Turks and Infidels, makes them Christians; but though
they stand upon the higher Ground, they are not the taller Men.

3. They are very willing to be forgiven by Christ, and to obtain Eternal Life;
but this is what mere Necessity requires them. They will not suffer him to do
his whole Work, to sanctify them, and fit them to live to God, nor part with
their nearest and dearest Lusts, and come into the obedience of the Gospel; or
at least, if Christ will do it for them, without their improving this Grace, or
using his holy Means, they are contented. But having such precious Promises,
and such a blessed Redeemer, we are to cleanse our selves, 2 Cor. 7. 11. The
Work is ours, though the Grace be from him. So Gal. 5. 14. They that are
Christ's have crucified the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts.

4. Some have a strong Conceit, that they shall be saved, and have Benefit by
Christ. This which they call their Faith, may be the greatest Unbelief in the
World; that Men living in their Sins shall yet do well enough, is to believe
the flat contrary of what God has spoken in his Word. 1 Cor. 6. 9. Know ye
not, that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Be not
deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Drunkards, nor effeminate
Persons, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God. It is not Strength of Conceit,
but the sure Foundation of our Hope, that will support us; nor are they the
most happy, who have the least Trouble, but who have the least Cause.

Use 2. Do we believe in the Son of God? Here will be the great Case of
Conscience, for settling our Eternal Interest.

1. If we believe, Christ will be precious to us. 1 Pet. 2. 7. Unto them which
believe, he is precious. Christ cannot be accepted, where he is not valued when
other Things come in competition with him, and God will not be prodigal of his
Grace.

2. Where there is true Faith, the Heart will be purified. Acts 15. 9.
Purifying their Hearts by Faith.

3. If you do believe in Christ, the Heart will be weaned from the World. 1
Ioh. 5. 4. For whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the World; and this is the
Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith.

4. If you have the true Faith, it works by Love. Gal. 5. 6. For in Jesus
Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision; but Faith,
which works by Love.

By these things will the Case be determined. Then the Comfort and Sweetness of
this Truth falls upon your Hearts, that, God so loved the World, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting Life.

SERMON XVII.
DEUTERONOMY. 30. 15. See, I have set before thee this day, Life and Good, Death and
Evil.
MOses the Man of God having acquainted the People with the Tenor of God's
Commandments, both concerning Worship and civil Conversation, does enforce all
by a pregnant Exhortation, laying before their Eyes the Blessings of Obedience,
and the Plagues and Curses that should overtake them in case they should
decline from the Ways of the Lord thus recommended to them. In all which he
shows himself not only as an ordinary Preacher speaking by way of Exhortation
and Doctrinal Threatening, but as a special Prophet speaking by way of
Prediction, and that with such clearness and certainty, that these few Chapters
may be looked upon as an exact Calendar and Prognostication, wherein the good
or bad days of this People are expressly calculated and foretold; yea, comparing
Events with the Prediction, you would rather conceive Moses his Speech to be an
Authentic Register, and Chronicle of what is past, than an infallible Prophecy
of what was to come: nothing good or bad has befallen this People from the
beginning to this Day, but what is here foretold. What is more largely declared
upon in this Exhortation, is contracted into a narrow room, and summary here in
the Text, See, I have set before thee this day, Life and Good, Death and Evil.

In the Words observe,

1. The Matter propounded in two Pairs, that have a mutual Connection one with
another; Life and Good, Death and Evil.

2. The Manner of Proposal; I have set before thee.

3. A Duty inferred, or Attention excited; See.

1. The Matter propounded; a double Pair or Conjugation, Life and Good, Death
and Evil. Life as the End, Good as the Means leading to Life: Or else, Life;
that is, the enjoyment of God; and Good, the Felicity following it. The
Septuagint changes the Order, (...).

2. The Manner of Proposing, I have set before thee. The Septuagint, (...);
that is, in a lively manner laid forth and offered for choice. We have a
saying, (...); that contraries put together, do mutually illustrate each other.
Here is Good and Evil, Life and Death put together, that we may embrace the
one, and eschew the other. As the Poets feign of Hercules when he was young,
Virtue and Vice came to woo, and make court to him: Virtue like a sober chaste
Virgin offering him Labors with Praise and Renown: Vice like a painted Harlot,
wooing him with the Blandishment of Pleasures. So in the 5th of Proverbs,
Wisdom and Folly are represented both pleading to draw in the Hearts of Men to
them: ver. 4. compared with the 16th Whosoever is simple, let him turn in hither:
as for him that wants Understanding, she says, Come, eat of my Bread, and
drink of the Wine that I have mingled: The one has her Pleasures; and the
other has her Pleasures, only the Pleasures of Folly are stolen Waters, and
Bread eaten in secret; Comforts we get by Stealth, Jollity, and Mirth, when
Conscience is asleep. So here, Moses lays before them the fruit of Obedience,
and Disobedience, Life and Death.

3. The Word exciting Attention, (...), See, I have done this in order to
Choice; for so it is, ver. 19. Choose Life, that both Thou and thy Seed may
live.

Doct. It is the Duty of the Faithful Servants of the Lord, in a lively manner
to set before the People Life and Death, as the fruit of Good and Evil.
Moses was God's Minister to instruct this People, and what does he propose and
confirm in his Doctrine, but Life and Death, Good and Evil? and this was a part
of his Faithfulness. Witness that vehement Obtestation used, ver. 19. He calls
Heaven and Earth to record, that he had faithfully discharged his Duty herein.
This was the course that God himself took with Adam in Innocence, he set before
him Life and Death, a Blessing and a Curse, the Tree of Life, and the Tree of
Knowledge, Genesis 2. 9. That he might live by the one, and not perish by the
other. God had respect to the Mutability of his Nature, and therefore
restrained him by the threatening of Death as a curse not to eat of the one, as
he enjoined him to eat of the other, as a Pledge of Life and Blessing. This same
course did Christ take in his Sermons, by telling them of the wide Gate, and
the strait Gate, the broad and narrow Way, much Company and little; the one
tending to Destruction, the other to Life, Mat. 7. 13, 14. So Wisdom speaks by
Solomon, Prove. 8. 35, 36. Whose finds me, finds Life, and shall obtain
Favor of the Lord: but he that sins against me, wrongeth his own Soul; all
they that hate me, love Death. So that you see this is an excellent way to gain
Men to the Holy Life.

I. Let us consider our Work. II. The Reasons why we must do so.
I. Our Work, the Matter of it, and the Manner in which we are to propound it
to you.

1. The Matter: We must set before the People, 1. Life and Good. 2. Death and
Evil.


This I shall open in these Propositions.

First; That there is a distinction between Good and Evil, Vice and Virtue. He
that does not acknowledge it, is unworthy the name not only of a Christian, but
of a Man. Certainly he is unworthy the name of a Christian, for the whole Word
of God does mete out the Bounds between both these; and show what is forbidden,
and what is commanded, and therefore it is a defiance of Christianity to doubt
of it. But he is also unworthy the name of a Man. Nature apprehends that
somethings are worthy of Praise, and others worthy of Blame and Reproof; else
why should wicked Men be offended to be taken for such as they are, and desire
as much as possibly they can to seem better, and to cover their dishonest
Actions with a plausible Appearance?

Secondly; The matching these two, Death and Evil, Life and Good. And here I
shall speak, 1. Of the Suitableness of the Connection between them. 2. The
greatness of both.

Thirdly; The certainty of both these, Life and Death, as the Fruit of Good and
Evil.

1. The Suitableness or Correspondency there is between Holiness and Beatitude,
Sin and Misery. It must needs be so, if we consider the Wisdom, Justice,
Holiness of God.

(1.) The Wisdom of God, which does all things according to Weight, Measure,
and Number, cannot permit the Disjunction of these two things, so closely
united together; as Sin and Punishment, Grace and Happiness, but there will be
an appearance of Deformity and Irregularity. For if there be such a thing as
Good and Evil, as Bonum and Malum morale, as Reason will tell us there is: And
again, if there be such a thing as Pleasure and Pain, as Joy and Sorrow, or
that which we call, Bonum and Malum natural, as Sense will tell us there is;
then it is very agreeable to the Wisdom of God, that these things should be
rightly placed and sorted; that moral Evil, which is Sin, should be punished
with natural Evil, which is Pain and Misery; that the inordinate Love of
Pleasure, which is the Root of Sin, should be checked by a forethought of
Pain: And that Moral Good, which is Virtue and Grace, should end in Joy and
Pleasure. For God is naturally inclined, as the Creator of Mankind, to make his
Creatures good and happy, if nothing hinder him from it. Well then, we see how
incongruous it is to the Wisdom of God, who permits no dissonancy or
disproportion in any of his Administrations, to admit a Separation of these
natural Relatives. If there were no other Testimony of this, yet the
Dispositions of our own Hearts would know it; for they are some obscure Shadows
of the Properties which are in God. We have Compassion on a miserable Man, whom
we esteem not deserving his Misery; we are also moved with indignation and
displeasure against one that is fortunate and successful, but unworthy the
Happiness that he enjoys. Which is an apparent Testimony and Proof, that we are
sensible of an excellent Harmony and natural Order between these two things,
Virtue and Felicity, Sin and Misery; and to see them so suited, does
exceedingly please us.

(2.) The Justice of God, as he is Judge of the World, and so must and will do
right, does require, Ut (...), and malis male; That it should be well with them
that do well, and ill with them that do evil. God is naturally inclined to
provide for the Happiness of Man, as he is his Creator; and if there were no
Sin to stop the Course of God's Bounty, there would be nothing but Happiness in
the World. But since the Entrance of Sin into the World, Men are of different
sorts, some recover out of their estate of Sin, and live holily; others wallow
in their filthiness still. Now it is agreeable to God's general Justice, as he
is the Judge of the World, to execute Vengeance on the one, and reward the
other; that Happiness should accompany Virtue by a natural and inseparable
Dependence, and Misery incessantly attend Vice, Romans 2. 6, 7, 8. It is true,
the Bond which joyneth Happiness and Virtue together, is not so strong, and so
every way naturally evident, as that which joyneth Vice and Punishment. If a
Person in Sovereignty and Honor does not will that Moral Evils be punished,
it is in some sort to consent to them; but the Condition of the Creature is
such, that he ought to be holy and virtuous, though God had not positively
commanded him; and God having so commanded, we are bound to obey his Command,
though he had not proposed the Hope of a Reward, in as much as we owe all to
God, both because of the infinite Eminence of his Majesty, as because we hold
our Beings and all from him. And therefore there is a Distinction, Romans 6. 23.
The Wages of Sin is Death, but the Gift of God is Eternal Life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. The one is Wages, the other a Gift. The Promise which God
makes of Remuneration, and the actual Retribution which he performs of the
same, ought to be imputed only to his Goodness, and gratuitous Liberality. Men
cannot pretend any other Right before him, from whom we hold all things, yea
our very Being. Now that which proceeds of Goodness, seems not to be of so
strait an Obligation, but that he is at liberty to do, or not to do, especially
when the transaction is between two Persons, the Dignity and Authority of one
of which is infinitely above the Condition of the other, as the Majesty of God
is above his Creature. Therefore as to such a Reward God is free, and therefore
might have enjoined Holiness without the Promise of such a Recompense. But the
general Relation, that is between Punishment and Sin, Holiness and Happiness,
as to the consequence of one upon another, is agreeable to the general Justice
of God, which is a Perfection necessary to him, as he is the Supreme Governor
and Ruler of the World.

(3.) The Holiness and Purity of God, which inclines him to hate Evil, and
love that which is good. God excelling in Holiness himself, loves the Virtue
and Holiness of his Creature, Prove. 11. 20. For how can he be imagined but to
love his own Image? And as Goodness and Holiness are loved by him, so he hates
the Workers of Iniquity, Psalm. 5. 5. and abhors those that despise that
which is most glorious in Himself, his Holiness. And then, if God loves the
Good, and hates the Evil, he will express this in answerable Effects, Good
with Life, and Evil with Death.

In short, The Difference between Good and Evil is not more naturally known,
than it is naturally known that the one is to be punished, the other rewarded.
Whether we consider the Wisdom of God, which sorteth and joins all things
according to their natural Order; and therefore Sin, which is a Moral Evil, is
joined with Sufferings, a Natural Evil, that is, a feeling of something painful
to Nature, and afflictive to it: Or the Justice of God, which deals
differently with Men that differ in themselves: Or the Holiness of God, who
therefore will express his Love to the Good in making them happy, and his
Detestation of the Wicked in the Misery of their Punishment.

2. The Greatness of both these, Life and Death; they are both Eternal.
Punishment in one Scale holds Conformity with the Reward in the other. The
full Reward is an Eternal, and far more exceeding Weight of Glory, called
everlasting Life; so is the full Punishment, the Eternal Abode of Body and Soul
under Torments, expressed by everlasting Fire. If we did only deal with you
upon slight and cheap Motives, you might refuse to hearken; but when we tell
you of Life and Death Eternal, you ought most seriously to consider, Whatever
can be hoped or feared from Man is comparatively of little moment, because his
Power of doing Good or Evil is limited: But, on the one side, it is a dreadful
thing to fall into the hands of the Living God, Heb. 10. 31. On the other side,
Romans 5. 2. We rejoice in the Hope of the Glory of God. God will act like
himself, infinitely gloriously, especially when he is All in All, when he does
not act by the mediation of the Creatures, but immediately punishing the
Wicked, and rewarding the Good. The Vessel can convey no more than it
receives. When the Creature is an Instrument of Vengeance, God acts
according to the proportion and rate of that Creature, as if a Giant should
strike one with a Straw. If God does us good by an Ordinance, the Water runs
but as the Pipe will contain, he cannot manifest himself in that Latitude, but
then God is All himself immediately. Consider,

(1.) The Greatness of the Death that accompanies Evil. The Afflictions and
Sorrows of this Life are a part of this Death. When Moses here had insisted on
many temporal Plagues which should befall his People, he says, I have set Life
and Death before you. There are many Miseries in this Life which are the Fruit
of Sin, which would make your Hearts ache, and your Ears tingle to hear of. And
then Death, which consists in the separation of the Soul from the Body, is the
King of Terrors. But we speak of the second Death, which is far more terrible,
which consists in an Eternal Separation from the blessed and glorious Presence
of the Lord, no Death like this. In all Creatures that have Sense, Death is
accompanied with Pain; but this is a perpetual living to deadly Pain and
Torment, from whence there can be no Release. In the first Death the Pain may
lie in one place, but in the second it extends all over. The first Death, the
more it prevails, the more we are past feeling; but in this Death the
Sufferer has a greater vivacity than ever, the Capacity of every Sense is
enlarged, and made more receptive of Pain. While we are in the Body, Vehemens
sensibile corrumpit Sensum, the more vehemently and violently any thing strikes
upon the Senses, the more does it dead the Sense; as the Inhabitants about the
Fall of Nilus are deaf with the continual noise. Too much Light puts out the
Eyes. Taste is dulled by Custom. But here the Capacity is improved by feeling.
The Power of God sustains the Sinner, whilst his Wrath torments him. As the
Saints are prepared for the Blessedness of Heaven, we cannot bear the least
Glimpse of that Happiness which they enjoy above; so the wicked are fitted to
endure those inconceivable Pains. When the first Death approaches, there is
struggling for Life, Men would not die; but in the second Death they desire a
final Destruction, they would not live.

(2) The Greatness and Excellency of that Life that ensues Good. All manner of
Blessings in this Life is the lowest step of it. At Death, when the Spirit
returns to God that gave it, then it begins to be discovered, but it is
consummated when Body and Soul shall be translated to Heaven. This is Life
indeed. Nescio an ista Vita, mortalis Vita, an vitalis Mors, dicenda sit; the
present Life is a kind of Death, always in fluxu, like a Stream, it runs
from us as fast as it comes to us, Job 14. 1. He flees away as a Shadow, and
continues not. We die as fast as we live, like the Shadow of a Star in a
flowing Stream. This Life is annoyed with a thousand Sorrows and Calamities;
but there is a freedom from all Sin and Misery, and a full fruition of
Pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11. And our Capacities are strong to bear
them. This Life is patched up with Supplies from the Creatures, there is a full
Fruition of God himself, 1 Cor. 13. 12. And in this Life such Days may come,
wherein we have no pleasure, Eccl. 12. 1. Life it self becomes a Burden; but
that Life as it lasts for ever, so we are never weary of it. The Enjoyment of
God is new and fresh to us every moment. As the Angels for thousands of years
are beholding the Face of God, but never weary of so doing; so shall we always
delight our selves in seeing God as he is.

3. The Certainty of both these, Life and Death, Hell and Heaven, as the Fruits
of Good and Evil.

(1.) Reason shows it certainly, that there is Eternal Life and Death, or a
State of Torment and Bliss after this Life. All Men are persuaded that there is
a God, and very few have doubted but that he is a Rewarder of Virtue, and and a
Punisher of Vice. Now neither the one nor the other is fully accomplished in
this World, even in the Judgment of those that have no great knowledge of the
Nature of Sin, nor what Punishment is competent thereto. Therefore there must
be after the sojourning in the Body, a time in which retributive Justice shall
be executed, and Punishments and Rewards that here are dispensed so
disproportionably, even to what natural Reason would expect from the Hand of
God, shall most equally be dispensed to Persons. If any say, Virtue is a Reward
to it self, as in some sense it is, yet the full Reward lies in another World,
and the main Encouragements must be fetched from thence. There is an opposite
Principle against it in the Heart, which must always be curbed and suppressed,
and it meets with many Temptations from the Reproaches and Oppositions of
those who like not this sort of Life. The sensual and ungodly will use all Ways
and Means to brand the Holy and Heavenly, as an humorous Sort of Men; and if
their Hands be tied by the restraint of Laws and Government, so that we are not
exposed to Sufferings by their Violence, yet we cannot but expect slanderous
Abuses from them. Now the Case being so, the Motives must be sufficient to
resist all the Temptations of this Life, to keep us in the Love and Obedience
of God to the end, which the bare Sense of our Duty would hardly do in the
midst of so many Temptations. We are in an estate of Imperfection, and Sense is
very strong in us all, and the Sufferings of the Obedient are very great, that
if we had not an eye to the Recompense of the Reward, we could not so well deny
our selves. Let every Man consult his own Soul, what would support him when all
the World is against him, and he is hooted at by the Clamours of the wicked
Rabble, and pursued with sharp Laws, and exposed to great difficulties and
hardships: if he had no Life to live but this, what would he do? Besides, it
will not stand with the Goodness of God, if you can suppose one that loves
Goodness for Goodness sake, and is so hardy as to contemn all his natural
Interests, that such a Man should be a Loser by his Faithfulness and Obedience
to God, and be made altogether miserable by his Duty without any Recompense, 1
Cor. 15. 19. And upon another account his Goodness is engaged to take his
Servants into his own blessed Presence; for the prevailing Inclination of
Holiness, that is planted by his own hand in their Breath, to love, serve, and
see him, is an earnest that we shall not always be thus imperfect; for our
Reward consists, as of complete Felicity, so exact Holiness, seeing God, and
being like unto him. 1 John 3. 2. We know, that when he shall appear, we shall
be like him, for we shall see him as he is. But suppose this were true, that
Virtue were a Reward to it self, then what Provision is there made for the
punishment of Vice? Cannot it be said, that they that addict themselves to that
Course of Life are punished enough by doing so? Alas! wicked Men profess great
Contentment in that Course of Life which they lead, and would be glad of the
News, that they should have no other Punishment, than to wallow in their Lusts.
Nature teaches us, and the Practice of all Nations confirms it, that Evils
which consist in a breach of Duty, must be punished with afflictive Evils,
painful to Nature. Never such a Lawgiver was heard of, that would punish a Man
for Robbery by causing him to commit Adultery. And for Virtue, though it has a
Beauty to draw our Love, yet it cannot it self be its own price and recompense:
for Man is of such a Nature, as he is still drawn on with the hope of some
further good, till he come to the enjoyment of the chiefest Good. And so many
are the Trials of the Righteous in this World, that the Apostle tells us, We
were of all Men most miserable, if our hopes were only in this Life, 1 Cor. 15.
19. The Calamities of the Good are as great a discouragement and offense, as
the prosperity of the Wicked: therefore there is an estate of Life and Death to
come. Besides, if Man be God's Subject, employed by him in a Course of Duty and
Service, when his work is ended, then must he look to receive his wages
accordingly as he performed his Duty, or faulted in it. Now our work is not
ended till this Life be over; then God deals with us by way of recompense
either in Pains or Joys. Add further, Reason will tell us that these Pains and
Joys after Death should be everlasting, that the recompense should last as long
as Man lasts. For Man as to his Soul is immortal, and there is no change of
Estate in the other World after our Trial is over, and things of Religion
become mere matter of Sense. Certainly one that has lived holily, and is
translated to Glory, there is no Reason that he should afterward be made
miserable, and the Punishment holds Conformity to the Reward. Luke 16. 26.
Between us and you there is a great Gulf fixed, so that they which would pass
from hence to you cannot, neither can they pass to us that would come from
thence. There is no changing of Estates or Places in the other World; the
Blessedness and Misery is Eternal. Things to come would not considerably
counter-ballance things present, if there were not Eternity in the case.

(2.) Conscience has a sense of it; and on the one hand stands in dread of
Eternal Death, and on the other is cheared with the hopes of Eternal Life. The
first is proved, Romans 1. 32. and Heb. 2. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 56. Men are afraid of
Death, not only as a natural Evil, as it puts an end to present Comforts, but
as it is an entrance to an unknown Country. What is the reason of the stings
of Conscience which are never so sensible and quick as when Men approach near
Death, or behold themselves in some near danger? What are these but presaging
Fears that anticipate Miseries after this Life? If the Soul were extinguished
with the Body, then troubles should in reason vanish: but we find that this is
the time when these Allarms are redoubled; and these Tempests increase with
violence. On the other side, there are Joys of the Spirit which are a taste and
earnest of Eternal Life. Ephesians. 1. 13. He has given us the earnest of the
Inheritance. Good Men have so much of Heaven upon Earth, as may assure them
they may look for more; this has supported them in all their difficulties, and
labor. Now if there were no such thing, the wise and best Men that ever the
World saw would be Liars, or Fools: Liars in pretending Comfort which they had
not, or Fools in being deceived by their own vain Imagination, and in taking
such pains in subduing the Flesh, hazarding their Interests, and performing
their Duty upon the hopes of another World.

(3.) Scripture, if we will take God's Word for it, is express, Romans 8. 13.
Romans 6. 21, 22. and Gal. 6. 8. The present World is comprised in two Ranks,
either Sowing with the Flesh, that is such who employ their labor to make
Provision to gratify the Carnal Appetite: or, Sowing to the Spirit, such as
employ their Time and Study in advancing the work of the Spirit: and they issue
themselves into two States in the other World; the State of Everlasting
Perdition, or Everlasting Life. Thus do the Scriptures propound Good and Life,
Evil and Death.

Secondly, The Manner how this is to be done, it must be set forth with all
Evidence and Conviction, as to the Reason of Men, with all Earnestness and
Affectionate Importunity to awaken their Affections. In short,

1. So as will become the belief of these things. We must not speak of them as
a thing spoken in jest, and by rote, but as firmly persuaded of the truth of
things, as if Heaven and Hell were before our Eyes, and as evident to Sense,
Heb. 11. 1. We look upon these things naturally as at a distance, and so have
but a cold apprehension of them; but we should by Faith see them as near at
hand. As you would pull a Man out of the Fire, Jude 23. or as falling into a
deep Pit or bottomless Gulf, as one in the greatest earnest. Belief puts a
Life into Truths, which otherwise are but dead and weak in their Operation; I
believed, and therefore did I speak: as if we had a deep sense of these things
upon our own Hearts.

2. As will become Experience. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Knowing the Terrors of the Lord,
we persuade Men. A Man that knows the Terrors of the Lord, that has been
scorched himself, will set them before Men as if they were at hand, ready to
surprise them. Others that talk of these things but as cold Opinions, they will
not be so careful to rouse up Men to mind the case of their Souls: If one went
unto them from the Dead, then will they repent, Luke 16. 30.

3. So as will become Zeal for the Glory of God; which is much promoted by the
Subjection, and Obedience of his Creatures, and his Interest in them, therefore
we should be diligent and industrious in drawing Souls to Christ. Col. 1. 27,
28. Christ in you the hope of Glory, whom we preach, warning every Man, and
teaching every Man in all Wisdom, that we may present every Man perfect in
Christ Jesus. 2 Cor. 11. 13. They have blind unbelieving Hearts, therefore need
to be taught; cold careless Affections, and need to be warned, and this with
the greatest Wisdom that can be used, that all may be presented to Christ at
the last day. This is that which sets all a going. When we are wooing for
Christ we should not do it coldly and triflingly, but as those that would
prevail for their Master, that he may be glorified in their being gained to him.

4. So as will become compassioners of precious and immortal Souls, for whom
Christ died; Souls that must live for ever in Heaven or Hell. Oh mind them of
their Duty, warn them of their Danger, they are ready to tumble into the Flames
of Hell every moment, therefore with all earnestness set Life and Death before
them. We should use the more compassion to Souls, because God himself who has
employed us, has expressed so much of his Compassion, he does not only tell
them they will die, but expostulateth with them, Why will you die, O House of
Israel? Ezekiel. 33. 11. And Ezekiel. 28. 25. Have I any pleasure at all that the
wicked should die, and not return from his ways and live? The greatest quarrel
Christ has with Sinners is because they will not come to him for Life. John 5.
40. Ye will not come to me that ye might have Life.

Two Reasons make this more evident.

1. This is God's Will. 2. This is of great Profit to the Souls of Men.
First, This is God's Will that his Law should be propounded with the Sanction
of it; that is, with Penalties and Rewards. God might rule us with a Rod of
Iron, require Duty out of mere Sovereignty; but he will draw us with the Cords
of a Man, Hos. 11. 4. with such Arguments as are fitted to Man's Temper, as he
is a reasonable Creature, that is, by Promises and Threatenings. We are best
moved and induced to any thing by those two Affections, of Fear and Hope: the
one Affection serves for Aversation and Flight; the other for Choice and
Pursuit. Therefore he that knows the Wards of the Lock, accordingly suiteth
the Keys; and does not only require an exact Duty, but also promises Good, and
threatens Evil. Sovereigns in their public Edicts do not argue with their
Subjects, but only interpose their Authority; but God condescendeth to reason
with his Creatures: He does not say, as sometimes, Thus shall ye do, I am the
Lord; but if you do thus, this will be your ruin; and obey these Statutes for
your Good, Deuteronomy. 6. 24. and so does persuade as well as command.

Secondly, It is of great Profit to the Souls of Men.

1. It is of Profit that they should often be minded of the Issues of things.
Israel's want of Wisdom comes from this, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. O that they were Wise,
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end; that is,
how Obedience and Disobedience will succeed with them. Lam. 1. 9. David's
trouble at the prosperity of the Wicked arose from want of this, Psalm. 73. 17.
Then I understood their End. Romans 6. 21. The end of these things is Death.
Fugientes respice, what will they leave in their farewell, and departure? Jer.
17. 11. At his latter end he shall be a Fool. The first addresses of Sin smile
upon us, but the Sting is in the Tail. So the beginning of Godliness is Bitter,
but afterward it yields everlasting Peace and Comfort.

2. That they may reflect on both combined: either of them single is of great
force, but both joined together comes in upon the Heart with greater Power. We
need a Bridle and a Spur; a Bridle because of our proneness to Evil, and a Spur
because of our Backwardness to Good. We have both, we are compassed and hedged
in with our Duty on every side. If we look back, there is Death to affright us;
if forward, Heaven to allure us: there is Eternal Life to draw us, there is
Eternal Death to drive us. If God had only terrified us from Sin by
unexpressible Pains and Horrors, and made no promise of unspeakable Joys, this
were enough to engage us to live without Blame and Blemish, that we might not
be cast into the Prison of Hell: or if only to quicken our Diligence, he had
propounded Hopes and Happiness as the Privilege of those that live Virtuously
and Holily, and evil Men did utterly perish when they die, this were enough to
draw us. If God had only promised Heaven and no Hell, there would not be so
strong a Motive; but can we be cold and dead when both Life and Death are laid
before us, and both for ever? this is very unreasonable. Solomon tells us,
Prove. 15. 24. That the way of Life is above to the Wise, to avoid Hell beneath.
Every step they tread is a going from Eternal Death, and an approach to Eternal
Life. Therefore as we would escape the Torments of Hell, and possess the Joys
of Heaven, we should be serious. We are undone for ever, if we be not blessed
for ever; and the nearer we draw to the one, the more we avoid the other; so
that we have a double reason not to go back, and much to engage us to go
forward.

Application.
Use of Exhortation.

1. Suffer us to discharge our Duty in this kind. Heb. 13. 22. I beseech you
Brethren, suffer the Word of Exhortation. It is but a small request we have to
you, that you will but suffer us to take pains to save your Souls: it is
irksome to carnal Men to have their sluggishness stirred up: But what is there
that should make it grievous and distastful? Many can endure us when we treat
of the Joys of Heaven, but when we come to flash Hell Terrors in the Face of
obstinate Sinners, and tell them of Damnation and Wrath to come, they think us
harsh and severe, and say as Ahab of Micaiah, He prophesies nothing but evil
to me. I, but we must set both before you, both Life and Death; and it is
better to hear of Hell than to feel it. That is a cowardly Confidence that
cannot endure the mention of our Danger. There are others that like the offer
of Heaven, but would sever those things that are so aptly joined, Life and
Good, Death and Evil, that cannot endure this Doctrine in this Sense; they say
with those carnal Hearers, Evermore give us the Bread of Life, Joh. 6. 35. But
they mistake the Terms upon which it may be had. Oh! but we are not in the
place of God, and cannot make the way to Heaven easier than it is, but we
propound God's Covenant as we find it, Life and Good, the Conditions as well as
the Offer. Would you have us compound with you, and deceive your Souls with a
false hope, which will leave you ashamed when you most need the comfort of it?
Men would live with the Carnal, die with the Sincere; therefore suffer us to be
earnest with you.

2. The next thing that we exhort you to, is to believe the certainty, consider
the weight and importance of these Truths; that there is a difference beetween
Good and Evil, that the fruit of the one is Death, of the other Life; and
consider how irrational it is for a Man to love Death, and refuse Life. No Man
in his right Wits can make a doubt which to choose. In vain is the Snare laid
in the sight of any Bird. Prove. 1. 17. You cannot drive a dull Ass into the
Fire that is kindled before his Eyes. It is true you hate Death, and yet it is
proper to say, you choose it. Prove. 8. 36. All they that hate me, love Death.
Why refusing the Good, do you so eagerly pursue the Evil? How can ye hate the
Wages, and yet love the Work by which the Wages is to be earned, and in
requital of which it will be certainly paid? If you detest Hell, why not Sin?
if you love Heaven, why do not you do good? There is an inseparable Connection
between these. Who can pity the Torment of that Man that thrusts his Hand into
the Fire? What should be the cause of this, but Incredulity and Inconsideration?

1. Unbelief, and Atheism; they do not think God will recompense Men according
to their Works. Now till Men believe it, tell them of Hell or Heaven never so
much, it will not work upon them. Who would lose that which is certain and
present, for the hope or fear of that which is to come and doubtful, when they
suspect or believe it not fully? No wonder they go on still in the Paths that
lead down to the Chambers of Death, and are prejudiced against the Ways of
Life. But why are Men such Infidels as to future things?

(1.) You cannot disprove what is declared in Scripture, or by any sound
Argument evince that there is no Heaven or Hell, for all you say or know there
are both really existing; and if there were no more but that, it were good to
take the surer side, especially when you part with nothing but a few base
Pleasures and carnal Satisfactions. Reason should make us very careful. In a
Lottery, where there is but a possibility of gaining, Men will venture a
Shilling or a small matter for a Prize. If there be either no Hell or Heaven,
you part with no more than the vain Pleasures of a fading perishing Life; but
if this Doctrine prove true, you run the hazard of Eternal Torments, and lose
the Comfort of Eternal Joys: therefore it is better to trust this Doctrine than
try it; it is Prudence to make provision for the worst.

(2.) But does not natural Reason and Conscience, and the Presages of our
Hearts, shrewdly evidence that there is a World to come, as before was proved,
an Heaven for the Good, and an Hell for the wicked? At present the Wicked
flourish, and the Good many times suffer; what shall we conclude thence? Mol.
2. 17. Every one that does evil, is good in the sight of the Lord, and he
delights in him; or where is the God of Judgment?

(3.) If Nature be not so clear, Scripture is full and positive. If we do
indeed believe the Scripture, as we profess to do, certainly we cannot so
grossly go against the whole Current and Drift of it. That Scripture which you
profess to be the Book of God, and take for the Rule of your Lives and
Expectations, that Scripture which your Consciences dread as owning the Voice
of God therein; that Scripture which is confirmed by God's Providence, and
frequent Experiments; that Scripture which has such a rational Evidence in it
self; it is that assures us of a World to come, and brings it to light in the
Word. The very thoughts of such an Hell and Heaven as was invented by the
ancient Heathens, was enough to make them virtuous; though as to the Manner and
Circumstances of it, the more understanding knew it to be a very Fable and
Supposition, yet the Thing it self being bottomed and founded upon those
natural apprehensions of the Immortality of the Soul, and the Attributes of the
Deity, had powerful Effects upon them. Now shall we talk of Christianity,
pretend a Reverence to the Scriptures, and shall we tremble no more at the
Certainty of an Hell, than Gentiles at the possibility of it? Shall their
Suspicion work more than our Faith? If they were so pliable to Poets
discipline, how should we be molded and framed by the Doctrine of Christ? what
awe and holy trembling should it breed in our Hearts?

2. Inconsideration. We are so taken up with the Cares and Pleasures of the
present Life, that we are not at leisure to think of Death, and Life, Hell, and
Heaven, or upon what Terms we stand with God, Jer. 8. 6. Eccles. 11. 9.
Remember that for all these things God will bring thee to Judgment. The young
Man in the heat of his Lusts forgets that a time of reckoning will come. Oh
think of your ways, and whither you are a going: It is foolish to busy our
selves about many things and neglect the main. Luke 10. 41, 42. You think it
will bring a d^mp on your Hearts. But if you cannot endure to think of Hell,
how much less will you endure one day to suffer it? Is it such a trouble to
consider it? what is it to feel it? Timely Consideration is the way to prevent
and escape these Torments: it will help to preserve you from coming thither,
and cause it to work upon you. Oh then, Deuteronomy. 32. 46. Set your Hearts unto all
these Words which I testify among you this day. Consideration will awaken the
Soul that was formerly laid asleep. Will Heaven or Hell entice or deter the Man
that thinks not of it? Shall we not therefore have a little Patience while we
deeply ponder and weigh these things in our Minds? See Life and Death is set
before you; and will you not allow a few serious Thoughts about them, nor ask
your Souls what shall become of you to all Eternity? God's great complaint of
Israel is, Isa. 1. 3. My People will not consider; and the same complaint may
be made of us. Things are evident and clear to Faith, Reason, and Conscience,
but we will not consider, and so wander out of the way.

3. The next thing we exhort you to do, is to make choice for your own Souls.
That is the use Moses makes of it. ver. 19. Therefore choose Life, that both
thou and thy Seed may live. Hearing, Believing, Considering, are all in order
to choice; and without choice and a determined fixed bent of Heart, you will
never walk evenly in Heavens ways. Determine not only that you must, but you
will walk in the way which God has set forth for you. God's Ways must be
chosen. Psalm. 119. 30. I have chosen the way of Truth. And ver. 173. I have
chosen thy Precepts. Jos. 15. 22. If it seem evil to you to serve the Lord,
choose you this day whom you will serve. Not as if it were indifferent, but to
set an edg upon their Appetite. There is much strength in the Bond, when a Man
binds himself freely, and makes him the more inexcusible if he does not
observe it. All will choose Life before Death, but they are out in the Means,
they do not choose Good before Evil; the Good of Holiness before the Evil of
Sin. Every Man desires some Good; it is as natural for the reasonable Creature
to desire to be happy, as it is for the Fire to burn; but we do not make a
right choice of the Means that may bring us to that Happiness that we desire.
They would be happy, but they choose Means quite contrary to Happiness. Oh
then, choose the Ways of God, let Life be your Motive, and Holiness your
Choice; this is the way to live for ever, to avoid Hell beneath. As soon as we
come to years of Discretion, we should make our choice to go on in the ways of
Life. To this we are obliged by the most weighty Reasons, urged by the
enforcements of the Word, and by the sad and numerous examples of young People;
who make an ill choice in the beginning, and go on, and are hardened therein,
and perish for ever.

SERMON XVIII.
MAT. 7. 12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that Men should do to
you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets.
IT is a general Complaint of the World, that Christians are defective in the
Duties of the second Table. Some Hypocrites may be so, to mask over a dishonest
Life with a pretense of Worship and Godliness: But we are not to judge of the
rest of the People of God by these, no more than we would judge of the Glory of
a Street by the filthiness of the Sink or Canal; or of the sound Grapes in the
Cluster by the rotten ones. For certainly all that have truly submitted to
Christianity, do find that Religion does influence their Relations, and run out
and issue it self in all the Duties which they owe to Man, as well as unto God.
And it was not a Boast which Austin said to the Heathens, Let all the Religions
of the World produce such Princes, such Subjects, such Husbands, Wives,
Parents, Children, as the Christian Religion produces. This was the Glory of
Religion then, and it should not fall in our hands. Or possibly this may be the
Cause of it, Unrenewed Men which allow one another in their Excesses, and glory
in some kind of mutual Civilities, may equal or over-pass the Godly therein.
Look as Dogs excel Men in the acuteness of Smell, and the Eagle in sharpness
of Sight, and many other Beasts in other Senses, because it is their
Excellency; so there are certain lower Respects, which the Men of the World
mutually pay one toward another, and they may excel in these as their
peculiar Worth.

But however, be that Complaint true or false, it concerns us to take notice of
it, and to prevent all Suspicion of this kind. And therefore we need to press
Moralities upon Christians, and that from the true Root, the Love of God; for
that is the great Mistake of this Age, to set up a sort of false Morality, and
forget the true one, that is built on Faith in Christ, and Love to God.

Now to set down each particular Duty would be tedious. The Life of Man is
short, and the Law in all its necessary Explications long and voluminous; and
therefore to have a sure Rule, and a short one, would be a very great Advantage
to us in this Matter.

And this one Direction, which I have read to you out of the Word of God, will
serve instead of all. It is a sure Rule, for Christ gives it us, who is Truth
it self; and though it be short, it is full enough for our purpose, for here is
the Substance and Quintessence of the Law and Prophets, all drawn into one
compendious Rule and Abridgment of our Duty, the best Epitome that ever was. A
Sentence this is of such weight, that the Emperor Severus (as Lactantius
reports out of Lampridius) was so taken with it, that having heard it from
some Jew or Christian, he wrote it in his Palace, and caused it to be engraven
in Golden Letters in the Courts of Justice, and to be proclaimed at the
punishment of Offenders. And therefore I shall briefly discourse of this Rule,
and present it to your serious Consideration.

In the Words there is,

I. A Rule of Life, Whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even
so to them. II. The Commendation of it, For this is the Law and the Prophets.
III. The Illative Particle, Therefore.
My Business shall be to open these Circumstances.

I. Here is the Rule of Life. This general Precept may be considered in the
Affirmative, or in the Negative (for Negatives are included in their
Affirmatives). The Affirmative is in the Text. All those things that you would
Men should do unto you; the Negative is in that noted Saying, Quod tibi fieri
non vis, alteri ne feceris; that which you would not have done to you, do not
you to them. The one, the Negative conduces to restrain Injury; but the other,
the Affirmative urges us to do Good. The Negative enforces Justice and Equity
in us to others; the Affirmative, Love and Charity. Heathens by the Light of
Nature were more sensible of Negatives, that they should not hurt others in
their Body, Goods, or good Name, as we would not in either of these things be
wronged our selves; therefore Christ passing that, lays down the Affirmative,
of which Nature is less sensible, of doing good to them, as we desire they
should do to us in our Extremities.

But because one cannot well be handled without the other, I shall begin with
the Negative Consideration, which concerns Right and Justice to the Persons,
Names, Goods, and Possessions of others. We are earnest to have fair dealing
from others, we should be as earnest to yield the same again. There is no Man
but has a quick sense of Injuries done to himself. When we are wronged by
Lying, Slandering, Oppression; or by fraudulent Bargains, how will we discourse
of Equity, and plead for Right upon these occasions? Why the like tender
respect, the like Sense should we have in our dealing with others; as you would
not others should defame, oppress, or overreach you, so should not you do to
them. In other Men's dealings with us we are Masters, acute Discerners of Right;
in our own Case, able to teach what Men ought to do; but in our dealing with
others, we are scarce Scholars. We would be reverenced, commended, fairly used,
have others tender of our Credit; and if we be abused in Person, disgraced in
Speech, endammaged in Goods or good Name, we complain of the Wrong. Therefore
it was well said of Calvin, That it would be much better for Mankind, if we
were as faithful Learners of active Duties, as we are acute Doctors concerning
Passives; that is, That we would not offer such Usage to others, as we would
not be well pleased with our selves; but give as we would receive.

To impress the Rule upon you, I shall give four Considerations in the Negative
Sense.

1. That in the Duties of the second Table we have more Light than we have in
the first: for when Christ sets forth the Sum of both the Tables, Mat. 22. 36,
37. He tells us, that we must love God with all our Hearts, our Souls, our
Strength and Mind; but when he comes to the Love of our Neighbor, he gives a
Measure more easily discernable, we are to love our Neighbor as our selves.
Love will tell us what is good for our selves. The Love of God must be
preferred both to our selves, and to our Neighbors. And in guiding and
expressing our Love to God, we need many Rules. Our Desires of Good to our
selves, are a complete Measure and Rule of that Respect we owe to our
Neighbors. This Principle of Self-love would show us what we owe to one
another. But though Nature discovers a God; and Reason that this God should be
worshipped; yet Nature could never carve out such a Worship as is proper to
God, and as God likes; there needs a larger Explication. Let a Man be free from
Passion, and from inordinate Self-love, consider what he would have done to
himself; this will direct him plainly what should be done to others, that agree
with us in the same common Nature, and who have an original Right with us in
things that belong to Justice and Equity, and should be as fairly respected by
us, as we expect to be treated by them.

2. The Breach of this Rule is more evil in him which has experimented the
Bitterness of Wrongs or Misery, than in another; because Experience gives us a
truer knowledge of things, than a naked Idea and Conception of them. He that
knows things by mere Contemplation, does but know them at a distance, and as
it were afar off; but he that knows things by Experience, knows them at hand,
and feels the smart of them. Therefore Conscience should work more in them by
way of Restraint, because they know what it is to be oppressed and disgraced,
and remember how grievous it was when they did lie under any Wrong. Look as it
is made an Argument of Confidence in Christ's pity, because his Heart was made
tender by experience: He was tempted, he was despitefully used, he experimented
all our Sorrows; therefore he is able (that is, has a greater fitness) to
succor those which are tempted, Heb. 2. 18. And in another place we read, That
he learned Obedience by the things which he suffered, Heb. 5. 8. Did Christ
learn any thing better, or improve his Knowledge, which had the Spirit without
measure? Yes, he might have an experimental Learning and Feeling. Thus when he
suffered things so regretful and contrary to that Life he had assumed, he knew
what it was to overruled the natural Inclinations of Life, and subordinate them
to the Will of God, and learn Obedience by the things which he suffered, and
will more compassionate when poor Creatures are put upon Duties against Flesh
and Blood. And it is used as an Argument why we should come to the Throne of
Grace with boldness, Heb. 4. 15. Because we have not an High Priest, which
cannot be touched with our Infirmities, etc. He has experimented them in his
own Person, he knows these things himself. And so Exodus 22. 21. Thou shall not
vex a Stranger, nor oppress him; for ye were Strangers in the Land of Egypt.
The People of Israel knew what it was to be exposed to the Envy of the Natives,
where they had few Friends and many Enemies. But especiallly observe that
Levit. 19. 33, 34. for there you have this great Law repeated, And if a
Stranger sojourn with thee in your Land, ye shall not vex him; but the Stranger
that dwells with you shall be as one born amongst you, and thou shall love
him as thy self: Mark what thou would have done to thy self, do to the
Stranger. Why? For ye were Strangers in the Land of Egypt. They knew how
burdensome it was to their Souls to be under the Yoke, how grievous a thing
Oppression was. Now sutably it concerns all those which have lain under
Defamation, Slander, and Oppression, they should be mighty tender and careful
how they speak of others, and what they do to others. They which have been
Servants themselves, and have felt the Burden of heavy Tasks, and short
Allowance, hard and unmerciful Usage from their Masters; they should not exact
all their Labors, nor deal cruelly unto Servants when they are Masters
themselves; for not only the Law of God, but their own Experience will rise up
in Judgment against them, and increase the Sting of their Conscience. So the
Drift of that Parable would do well to be considered in these times, Mat. 18.
33. That Servant which had his own Debt for given him, yet he plucked his
Fellow Servants by the Throat. Should thou not have had Compassion on thy
Fellow Servants, as I had Compassion on thee? When we are under Restraint, and
groan for our Liberty, we would fain have an opportunity of glorifying God; if
God should hear us in these kinds, should not we be like affected to our
Fellow Servants? and not seek to hunt every one, (that do a little dissent from
us,) as Vermin to Death, and as unworthy to be allowed among us? A Man which
is in Debt, how grievous is it when others deal rigorously with him? Now for
him to deal so with others is a double Crime, as being a Sin against a Law, and
against Experience. You complain to God in the bitterness of your Soul, when ye
are under these Oppressions; so will they complain against you: therefore it is
more evil in you. The

3. Observation is this, That this Rule is Spiritual, and concerns the inward
Man as well as the outward: not only Actions, Words, and Practices (though it
be said, whatsoever Men do unto you) but the Thoughts. The whole Law of God is
Spiritual. Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of God is perfect, converting the Soul; not
only guides the Motions of the outward Man, but reaches to the workings of the
Heart. As is the first Table, so is the second: for we are told, Mat. 22. 39.
The second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. How like
to it? It Is as Spiritual as the first; and therefore not only what I do, but
what I would think and purpose to do to others, is comprehended in it. Christ
therefore speaks of Adultery committed in the Heart, by impure and wanton
thoughts and desires. This Rule which concerns the whole second Table, not only
concerns the Actions, but your Dispositions, and Inclinations; and not only
provides against hard Speeches, and outward Behavior, but the secret grudgings
in your Hearts against others, that your Affections may not be alienated from
them. For mark, what is here; What ye would Men should do to you, do the same
to them. In other places it is, Love thy Neighbor as thy self, Gal. 5. 14. So
that all the Duties, and Practices which concern the good of our Neighbor,
must proceed from a Principle of Love. The Justice of the second Table, as
required of Christians, is a Justice tempred and excited by Love. Though our
outward Acts be never so pleasant, yet if Love be not at the bottom of it, it
is not right. As 1 Cor. 13. 3. If I give all my Goods to the Poor, and have not
Charity it signifies nothing. You will think that is excessive Charity, to give
all my Goods: Yea, but if it be not done with Love, it is nothing worth, not
accepted, nor rewarded by God. And so we must refer these Words not only to the
outward Man, but the Principle of Love which is in the Heart.

4. Proposition, That all which is done by virtue of this Rule, must be done
not only out of Love to Man, but out of Love to God, and as an act of
Obedience. For when Christ gives us this Direction, Whatsoever ye would, etc.
he does not give it as a Politic Course, to establish Peace in the World, but
as a Compendious Rule, to guide us in the Duties of the second Table. Self-Love
is the Measure, but it is not the Reason, Ground, or Principle of our Actions: a
Measure it is, for we will certainly do right to our selves, but to make it an
act of Obedience, so it is accepted of God. It is a common Rule, All Moral
Duties must be done as in and to the Lord; out of the Love of God, Fear of God,
and Obedience to his Blessed Majesty. Therefore it is said, Ephesians. 5. 21.
Submitting your selves one to another in the fear of God: That must be the
great Principle which swayeth us; not Policy, or respect to our own Interest,
but Conscience: there must be a right Principle of Motion, as well as a just
Action, if we will do exactly and according to the Law of Christ. Therefore
here is the great difference between a Christian and an other Man in the Duties
of the second Table, in his Moralities; he turns second-Table-Duties into
first-Table-Duties, it is a thing carried on throughout the whole Scripture.
Thus if he gives Alms, his Alms is a Sacrifice; Sacrifice is a Duty of the
first Table; but Alms is clearly a Duty of the second Table: So all his
Commerce, (I do but instance in one for all) what he does to Men must be done
in and to the Lord. So here in this very Case, Love to Man, it is but a Stream
which comes from a higher Fountain, and that is Love to God. A Christian loves
God first, and indeed he loves nothing but God, for he loves God in all his
Creatures. In Men we love his Natural Image: but in the Saints, his Spiritual
Image. 1 John 4. 21. This Commandment have we from him, that he who loves God,
love his Brother also. Our Love to our ordinary Brother must be excited and
measured by our Love to God; and our Love to our Christian Brother, our
Fellow-Saints, must be from the Love of God. 1 John 5. 1. Every one that loves
him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him. So much for the
Negative part.

Secondly, Now let us come to the Affirmative part, which establishes Charity:
For it is not enough if we do not hurt others, but we must do them good. Now
Charity is seen in two things, both in Giving, and Forgiving.

First in Giving, What you would Men should do to you, do you the same to them.
Be as ready to do good, as to receive good. A Man is never in a right frame of
Spirit, until he takes as much delight in doing others good, as he would take
in having good done to himself: nay more, for our Lord tells us, That it is a
more blessed thing to give than to receive, Acts. 20. 30. Why a more blessed
thing? because this comes nearest to the Nature of God, who gives all, and
takes of none. And therefore as we would imitate God in other things, we should
in this also; for all God's Works should leave an Impression upon us: his
Election should make us choose him and his ways; his Love, to love him; his
Giving should make us to give. As a Child has Part for Part, Limb for Limb,
answerable to his Father; so should a Child of God answer God in all his moral
Perfections; especially in his Goodness. As you come behind, says the Apostle,
in no Gift, so do not come behind in this also, 2 Cor. 8. 2. And the Rule of
Christ here is that which does enforce this; (As ye would, etc.) do you afford
to others that Comfort, that Succor, that Relief in all their Distresses,
which you would desire they should afford to you, if you were in the same Case,
and in the same distress. Alas, you will say, Pity should be showed to a Man by
his Friend, and will you be Merciless, and shut up your Bowels, and not show
this pity to others? If you were pined with Hunger, and your Children cry for
Bread, and you have none to give them, would you not complain of the hardness
of their Hearts which have this Worlds Goods, and shut up their Bowels against
them, and not dispense any thing to their Necessities? Why, if you know the
Heart of an indigent Person, it cannot but move you to observe this Rule. And
the rather, because usually with what measure we meet to others, it is
recompensed into our Bosoms by God's Providence: for what ever need others have
of us, we have infinitely more of God; and there will a time come when we shall
be as destitute before God, as they are before you. For Instance, In a time of
Sickness, when all outward helps fail, Psalm. 41. 1. Blessed is he that
considers the Poor, the Lord will consider him in time of Trouble. Why, he
that is affected with an others Condition as his own, when it is a time of
trouble and distress with him, and it may be his Brother cannot help him, then
the Lord will help him, either in Sickness, or Trouble of Conscience; when all
outward Comforts are as the white of an Egg; when the poor perplexed Sinner
cries, Mercy! Mercy! the Lord will show him Mercy as he did to others; Mat. 5.
7. Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy. Those that only seek
to enrich themselves, and solace themselves with Mirth and Pleasure, in the
good things they have, must not expect the like Promises. But those which have
been Merciful, Bountiful, and ready to help others, God delights to show them
Mercy; and when they are most destitute, they shall find that God takes notice
of this, that they were ready to relieve others.

Secondly, In Forgiving, the same Rule holds. A necessary Duty. For while we
are here in the World, there will be Weaknesses and Offenses, and we need
mutually to forgive, and to take Pardon. It is said, Col. 3. 13. Forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another, if any Man have a quarrel against any; Even
as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. See the same, Ephesians. 4. 32. Forgiving one
another, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. Mark, he proceeds upon
this Principle that Christ lays down; Whatsoever ye would, etc. We are in the
World and in the Flesh, and therefore should not rigidly exact upon the
failings of others; lest they or others deal so with us when our turn comes. We
need Pardon in this kind, for we give Offense: Eccl. 7. 21, 22. Take no heed
unto all Words that are spoken, lest thou hear thy Servant curse thee: for
oftentimes also thine Heart knows that thou thy self likewise have cursed
others. The meaning is, we should not be over-affected with others speaking ill
of us, because we know we have spoken ill of others, and should pass it by with
meekness and neglect; therefore the consideration of our Passions, and of our
Infirmities should move us to Pardon. We have been, or may be as bad as they.
We have been once, Tit. 3. 3. Foolish and Disobedient, led by our unruly
Appetites and Desires, therefore we should show Meekness to them. I and we may
be surprised again, James 3. 1. My Brethren, be not many Masters, for in many
things we offend all: Be not many Masters, that is, severe, masterly, or
supercilious, if another be fallen and has offended us, for we shall receive
the greater Condemnation.

The Apostle argues from another Argument, Col. 3. 13. And Ephesians. 4. 32. Forgive
others, as God has for Christ's sake forgiven us. There is no Man can wrong us
as much as we trespass against God; and though we are but as the Drop of the
Bucket, and the small Dust of the Balance, yet our great and many Sins are
freely forgiven to us; therefore it should prevail with us freely and easily to
Pardon one another. The Scripture urges this. O when we consider Christ's
Example, how Christ has forgiven us, when we consider the greatness of the
Wrongs which he pardons, Sins that are of a Scarlet and Crimson die, Isa. 1.
18. when we consider our own baseness in comparison of him; Isa. 40. 22. Who
sits upon the Circle of the Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof are as
Grass-hoppers; and when we consider his Omnipotency to right himself of the
wrongs done to him, How he can cast Body and Soul into Hell Fire; Surely this
should move us to forgive others. Yea, and it is not only a Motive, but a Rule,
Forgive others, as God forgives us: what is that? Sincerely, not hypocritically:
freely, not unwillingly: fully, not by halfs: irrevocably, not for a time only;
but as God forgives and casts all our Sins into the depth of the Sea, so should
we forgive, and pass by the Sins of others.

Christians, shall I urge another Argument in this Case, what need there is of
Forgiveness? Hereby a Man overcomes himself; hereby he shames the Party that
did him wrong; and hereby he takes God's course to get the Victory over the
Person which has done him the wrong. Hereby he overcomes himself, his own
Nature which thirsts after Revenge, Prove. 16. 32. He that is slow to Anger,
is better than the Mighty: and he that rules his Spirit, than he that takes a
City: He is able to rule himself, so it is his Glory; he does overcome that
revengeful and froward Disposition which is in his own Nature. And hereby he
overcomes and shames the Party that did him wrong; there is no such way to do
this as by Forgiveness: Thus David did overcome Saul. 1 Samuel 24. 17. When David
had him at an advantage and spared him, Saul said to David, Thou art more
Righteous than I. O what a Victory was this to overcome that fierce Man's Heart
and reconcile him. And you keep God's way in overcoming him: it is God's
prescribed course that you should thus overcome him by Kindness and Meekness.
Romans 12. 21. Be not overcome of Evil, but overcome Evil with Good.

But wherein must we express this Forgiveness toward others? as to the wrong
to be forgiven; we must consider it either as an offense against God, or
sometimes against public Laws; or as it is an offense against us. So far as it
is an offense against God, or the public Laws, here we have not power to
Forgive, and Punishment is due to the common Good, Poena debitur. The Lord
himself that forgives us, and forgives for Christ's sake, has secured the
Honor of his governing Justice by Satisfaction: and if the Law requires it, we
cannot intermedle there; only we must pray to God earnestly for them, that is
our Duty, Iam. 4. 15. and in some Cases we may interceed with the Magistrate to
take off the Penalty, and are so bound.

This Forgiveness implies two things; a removal of an inward Grudg; and a
readiness to do all Duties of Love and Kindness to them.

1. A removal of an inward Grudg, and endeavors after private Revenge: Lev.
19. 17, 18. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine Heart: thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him: thou shall not avenge
nor bear any grudg against the Children of thy People, but thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self: Thou shall not bear a Grudg against him, for then you
hate him in your Heart.

2. There must be a readiness to do all Duties of Love, and Kindness to him who
has done the wrong, as God ministers Occasion and Ability. There are many
Laws for this, Exodus 23. 4, 5. If thou meet thine Enemies Ox or Ass going
astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again: If thou see the Ass of
him that hates thee, lie under his Burden, and would forbear to help him,
thou shall surely help with him. Luke 6. 27. Love your Enemies, do good to them
that hate you, Bless them that Curse you. Now so far are we bound to remit the
private grudg because of the offense done to us, and also to take all occasions
to do them good.

Object. But whether may not we have recourse to the Magistrate for the
recovery of our Right, and reparation of our Wrongs?

Answ. Certainly we may, provided we go not to Law for Trifles; for when we go
to Law for small Matters, and that before Infidels, the Apostle reproves it, 1
Cor. 6. 2. And when after all lawful Means and Courses are used before, for
taking away the occasion, as ver. 5. Is there not a wise Man among you to take
up the difference? And when it is not with a Spirit of Revenge and Rigor; for
a Christian should show his Moderation in all things, Phil. 4. 5. and his
Lenity, Gentleness, and Readiness to Forgive. But if it be out of a Spirit of
Revenge, not the Conscience of Justice, we abuse God's Ordinance to our private
Passions, Romans 13. 3.

Having thus explained the Law; let me vindicate this Rule.

1. It seems not to be so perfect a Rule: because many desire and wish much
evil to themselves, should they desire evil to others? As he that would be
Drunk, should he make another Drunk? And he that commits Filthiness, should he
entice others? Answ. The meaning is not what we do in a Passion, which works
not the Righteousness of God, but it is meant of a regular Will; not that we do
with evil Desires, as that we do in right Reason; that which you do well
informed, well advised, free from discomposed Passion; what is according to the
Law of Nature engraven upon your Hearts, which is most legible in our own Case;
what the Law of Nature would judge to be the Duty of other Men to do. It is not
meant of inordinate sinful Desires.

2. But does not this Rule make all Men equal, and destroy all Order and
Superiority, if every Man must do as he would be done unto? What shall a Master
require of a Servant, no more than he will do to him? Would a poor Man have a
rich Man give him Relief? Should he give him no more than he expects back again
from this poor Man? No, The meaning is, that for that time we should suppose
our selves in the Condition of Servants, and of that poor Man; you should put
your selves in their stead, and suppose if I were a Servant, if I were Poor; we
should put our selves in the same equality with them; and by the Law of
Proportion, the same things that would seem reasonable to you if you were in
their Condition, you should cheerfully do to them. For Instance, If I were a
Servant and did obey, would not I judge such exaction Burdensome, and
Unreasonable? If I were Poor, and driven to seek Relief, would not I judge a
denial harsh? If I were a Master, should not I judge such an Offense injurious
to my Authority?

3. Does not this establish Revenge and Retaliation of Injuries, to do to him
as he has done to me? Answ. No, rather much the contrary: for it is not, what
they have done to us, Christ does not say so, but what we would have to be done
to us, that do to them. See Prove. 24. 29. Say not, I will do so to him as he
has done to me, I will render to the Man according to his Work. That Is an ill
reasoning within our selves, and takes God's work out of his Hands; whose
Prerogative it is to give to every Man according to his Work. The Rule is not,
look backward, but forward. It does not look to what they have done to us, but
what we should do to them. To think to do the same would certainly break this
Rule of Christ, and make us be burthensom to others by such Actions, and
burthensom to our selves: and so sin not only against our own Conscience, but
against Sense and Feeling of the thing committed. Injury and Revenge differ
only in Order. He that returns Injury for Injury does but imitate the
Adversary; and he that imitates that which is evil in another, sins twice, both
against the Law, and his own Conscience.

4. If all the World were contented to observe this Rule, then we should have a
quiet World, but others are very oppressive, unjust, and very hard to me, this
is to live by the Loss, and to bring a restraint upon my self, from which
others are free. Answ. Do your Duty to them, though they do not theirs to you.
Others Sins will not exempt you from the Law of God which is your Rule, and not
their Actions. Whatever they do to you, yet carry it Christianly and Meekly
toward them. You are accountable to God for your own Actions, not for the
Actions of another Man. Therefore if you be able to guide your own Spirit to
them, how perverse soever they be to you, you will have the Comfort that you
have endeavored to do your Duty.

Having vindicated the Rule, let me show you the Grounds, and the Equity of it.
What are the intrinsic Grounds and Reasons, why Christ has given such a Rule
to us. No Question it is founded not in his bare Authority, but in great
Equity. There are two Grounds.

1. The Actual Equality of all Men by Nature. 2. The Possible Equality of all
Men as to their Condition, and State of Life.
1. The Actual Equality of all Men by Nature. Mal. 2. 10. Have we not all one
Father? Has not one God created us? Were we not all created by the same God?
I, and mark, the Equality goes further, We were all made of one Blood, Acts 17.
26. all descended from Adam. Unequal diversity of Rank does not take away
Identity of Nature. There is a diversity of Rank indeed: Some are High, some
Low; some Rich, some Poor; some Governors, some Governed; some Teachers, and
some obey: But we are all made of one Blood. So Neh. 5. 5. Our Flesh is as the
Flesh of our Brethren, our Children as their Children. Some are highly advanced
above others, yet the poorest Creature and you is one Flesh, and by Nature has
an equal right with you: Therefore it is said, Isa. 58. 9. Thou shall not hide
thy self from thine owe Flesh. Thy poor pined, starved Brother is thine own
Flesh.

2. The Possible Equality of all Men as to Condition, and as to State of Life:
They are equal by Nature, and it is possible they may be in the same State of
Life. You stand to Day, another is fallen; you are liable to the same
Corruption, and the same Calamities. To the same Corruption, Gal. 6. 1. If any
one be fallen, ye that are Spiritual restore such a one with a Spirit of
Meekness, considering thy self lest thou also be tempted. Rigid Censurers may
fall into like Sins, or worse themselves. Alas the Devil is very assiduous in
tempting, and the Lord permits him to surprise those that are severe to others:
Therefore you should show Pity and Compassion to the fallen. And then as to
possibility of Calamities, Heb. 13. 3. Remember them that are in Bonds, as
bound with them, and them which suffer Adversity, as being your selves also in
the Body. There Is a twofold Interpretation of that Place; some understand it of
the Mystical Body of Christ; but I think rather it is meant of the Body of
Flesh, while we are here in the present Life: Strange changes may come before
we go out of the Body: they that are highest may be lowest. In 2 Kings 4. 13.
We read of the Shunamite that had given Harbor and Entertainment to the
Prophet, and the Prophet said, What is to be done for thee? would thou be
spoken for to the King, or to the Captain of the Host? and she answered, I
dwell among mine own People. She was well and needed nothing, she was able to
dwell at Home, and to maintain her self well enough, and needed not the Prophet
to speak to the King for her: but afterward, there comes a great Famine, and
her Inheritance was invaded, and she that would not be beholden to the Prophet,
was beholden to Gehazi the Prophets Man. Compare 2 Kings 4. 13. with 2 Kings 8.
3.

There may be great Changes here in the Earth, great Calamities may befall us;
therefore since we are in the Body, and since those that are high to day may be
low to morrow, and you may need the like help from others, we must have a
fellow-feeling with them. God, who is the great Arbiter of Human Affairs, can
pull down and set up at his pleasure. We have opened the Rule, the first Part
of the Text.

II. The second Part is the Commendation of this Rule, For this is the Law and
the Prophets; that is, this is the Sum of the Doctrine of God. The Law and the
Prophets were the Scriptures only then in force, and therefore the Phrase is
used proverbially in many places, Mat. 11. 13. For all the Prophets and the Law
prophesied till John. Luke 16. 31. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them
hear them. Acts 24. 14. I believe all the Law and the Prophets have spoken. The
Law and the Prophets were all the Bible they had for that time. Now says
Christ, the Law was as the Text, and the Prophets as the Comment upon the Text,
to expound and confirm the Law by a larger Explication.

But you will say, Is this the whole Sum of the Law and the Prophets? Are there
not Doctrines delivered there, insisted upon concerning our Respects to God?
and all the Institutions of his Worship are they not contained in the Law and
Prophets?

I answer, The Proposition must be understood according to the Matter in hand,
this is the Law and the Prophets, as to all they say concerning our Converse
with Men. You may have many Rules in the Law and the Prophets, where they are
more copiously delivered, but they all issue themselves into this general Rule.
The Worship of God and Duties to him are also established by the Law and the
Prophets; for when our Lord had spoken of what we owe to God as well as to Man,
he says, Mat. 22. 40. On these two hang all the Law and the Prophets. These
are the two things, that all the Law and the Prophets seek to establish, viz.
Love to God, and Man. But our Savior here speaks only concerning the second
Table, what concerns that is comprised in this Sentence. All that part of
Religion which is, Inferioris Hemispherii, of the lower Hemisphere of Duty, is
distilled into this Quintessential Extract. As in the Spirits of things, the
Virtue is contracted, which otherwise is largely diffused while it is mingled
with grosser Matter. So here, the Spirits, the extract of Law and Prophets are
all distilled, as to Moral matters, into this one Saying, Whatsoever you would,
etc.

III. The third thing to be considered is the Illative Particle, Therefore.
From what is this inferred? In the foregoing Verses, our Savior speaks of
Audience in Prayer. If ye being evil know how to give good things unto your
Children, how much more shall your Heavenly Father know how to give good things
to them that ask him? Therefore whatsoever ye would, etc. Christ makes many
notable Arguments and shows that God is ready to give good things to us, Ask
and ye shall have, etc. he proves it from the kindness of Earthly Parents to
their Children. And now therefore to intimate this, that if Men have their
Prayers granted, they must observe this Rule; they must perform all duties of
civil Righteousness, as well as be earnest in acts of Piety. Upon this limiting
it to the audience of Prayer, it plainly implies three things.

1. That God is the Judge of Human Actions, he will take cognizance of this,
whether you do to others as they do to you, and you shall hear of it in your
dealing with God: that is the first and lowest thing: and remember you have to
do with God, as much as they have to do with you: he shows this to bridle the
Excesses of those that are in Power. There are a sort of Men that think they
may do any thing if they can do it safely, Mic. 2. 1. That do evil, because it
is in the practice of their Hand. They eagerly prosecute their Purposes and
Desires when they have Power to effect them. Now a Christian should pause upon
the Matter, and consider not only what is possible to be done, but what is just
and lawful to be done: and Conscience should put a severe restraint, when
nothing else can hinder us; as Joseph said, Genesis 42. 18. This do, and live: for
I fear God. He had a full advantage against them that wrought him so much
Mischief; but he had an inward Principle laid up in his Heart which begat a
tenderness, I fear God. But when Men will do every thing they are able to
effect; and will do any thing as far as their Power will reach; remember you
must come before God, and God can requite it though they cannot. It is not
Conscience which governs the greatest part of the World, but Interest. When it
is not for Men's Interest, they will do no wrong; but when they have Power
enough to do what they intend, they care not how they trample upon their own
Brethren, hate and pursue them with all that is evil. It is hard to avoid this
Snare, when we are in Power. Men forget God: and abuse their Power, and many
times by a strange Providence they are brought to suffer the like hardness
themselves. When we see the oppressions of the innocent, and things carried so
perversely, we are apt to say, Lord, who shall call these Men into question?
Who shall accuse them? Why, the Sighs and Groans of the oppressed before God's
Tribunal, upon all Persons depend every moment, these will be more Authentic
Witnesses than any matters of Fact can be produced in a lower Court.

2. It implies this, and it inlargeth the Rule, that whatsoever usage we
expect, to meet with at God's Hands, the same in some measure we should
dispense and deal out to others. He is willing to give all, provided you are
willing to do to others as you would be done unto. All the Mercy and Goodness
we expect from him, that must sway our Practice and Conversation with Men. What
ever need others have of us, the same need have we of God. Ephesians. 6. 8.
Whatsoever good thing any Man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord,
whether he be bond or free. So for other Relations. In the Practice of this
Rule Christians are to consider not only how they would be dealt withal by
Men, but with God himself for Christ's sake; which carries the Precept far
beyond the Heathen Latitude; and mightily inlargeth the Rule. Alas, from God we
have nothing but undeserved Mercy, pardon of Sins, etc. So we are to practice
this Rule, not only to those that love us, but to our Enemies, we must show
Mercy to the worst for Christ's sake. Strict Justice by the light of Nature,
requires the injurious should suffer according to the wrong is done to me: I,
but what do I expect from God? Therefore I am to consider how God will deal
with me if I am rigid, severe, exact, and stand upon all things to the
uttermost.

3. Another Consideration which mightily inforceth the Rule, is, that if you do
such things to others as you would not have them do to you, God will do that to
you which you have done to others; for Vengeance is his. They are not to do the
same to you again, nor exact, nor desire it, but God will. It is good to
consider God's Judgment, of Counter-Passion or Retaliation, As thou have done,
so shall it be done to thee, thy reward shall return upon thine own Head. Obad.
ver. 15. They that were Pitiless, Merciless to their Brethren in the day of
their flight from Jerusalem, God will pay them home in their own Coin. And with
what Measure you meet, it shall be measured to you again, Mat. 7. 1, 2. Genesis 6.
6. Whose sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed. It is not only a
Law, what is to be done; but a Rule of Providence, what God will do. What more
usual than Malefactors to be dealt withal according to their own Wickedness.
There are many Instances of this Judgment of Counter-Passion, God doing to them
what they have done to others.

Adonibezeck, when the People caught him and cut off his Thumbs and his great
Toes, said, Threescore and ten Kings having their Thumbs, and their great Toes
cut off, gathered their Meat under my Table: as I have done, so God has
requited me. And they brought him to Jerusalem, and there he died. Usually this
is the dealing of God. The Israelites had their Children drowned in the Water
by Pharaoh, what then? Pharaoh and all his Host within a little while, all his
Nobility and Men of War, were all drowned in the Water. Ahab's Blood was lapped
up by Dogs in the place where they shed the Blood of Naboth: and Iezebel being
more guilty, was devoured with Dogs: Ahab only permitted this Contrivance, but
Iezebel acted it: Ahab humbled himself, therefore he was buried with Honor,
but Iezebel, was intombed in the Belly of Dogs, and her Flesh devoured by them.
A Gallows we read, was made for Mordecai, and Haman was hanged on it himself.
Henry the third of France, in that very Chamber where the Massacre was
contrived against the Protestants, there he was slain; and his Brother before
him, Charles the ninth, was found flowing in Blood in his Bed, who had shed so
much of the Blood of God's Saints. Judge. 9. 18, 19. compared with ver. 23, 24.
When the Men of Shechem had done great injury to the House of Ierubbaal, Ye are
risen up against my Fathers House, and have slain his Sons, threescore and ten
Persons upon one Stone, what then? ver. 23. Then God sent an evil Spirit
between Abimelech and the Men of Shechem: and the Men of Shechem dealt
treacherously with Abimelech, that the cruelty done to the threescore and ten
Sons of Jerubbaal might come, and their Blood be laid upon Abimelech their
Brother which slew them. So also the Observation of Austin is not to be past
by, upon the Parable of the rich Man; he that denied a Crumb, could not find a
Drop to cool his Tongue.

But you will say, It is so with good Men also, the Children of God, if they
should break his Law, does the Lord give them according as they have done to
others? Yes, God observes the same Justice: though he does pardon the Eternal
Punishment and take it off, yet here in this World as to Temporals they shall
have like for like. Jacob supplanted his Brother, he came to Isaac as the
Elder, the Younger instead of the Elder; and Laban brings him the Elder instead
of the Younger, Leah instead of Rachel. Asa which put the Prophet into the
Stocks, we read of him that he was diseased in his Feet. Nay, I shall give you
greater Instances than that. Ioseph's Brethren they were not flexible to their
Brother, and did not hear his cry; at length they came to Egypt upon an honest
Errand for Corn in time of Famine, and the Man is inexorable. Genesis 42. 21. We
are verily guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress
come upon us. What was the matter? How comes this to work? In a Storm, things
at Bottom we see come up to the Top; so ever, Sins in trouble will bubble up,
and we shall see that we saw not before: How come they to remember the Trouble
of their Brother, for they knew not Joseph, and twenty years were past since
they sold him? They found the Man as inexorable, as they had been to their
Brother: God's Judgment of Counter-Passion sets their Conscience a-work. A
greater Instance we have of Paul that consented to the stoning of Stephen, and
was present too at his Execution, and it is said, They laid down their Garments
at Paul 's Feet, and he himself takes notice of it. Acts 22. 20. with great
remorse afterward. Well, what then? after his Conversion how does God deal
with Paul? Stephen had prayed for him too among the rest, Lord, lay it not to
their Charge; yet God gave him some smart remembrance of his Sin. When Paul and
Barnabas had been preaching at Iconium, though Barnabas had irritated them as
well as Paul, they called Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul Mercurius, because he was
the chief Speaker. Barnabas, who was equal with him in Preaching, God ordered
it so he was not Stoned; but Paul that had consented to Stephens Stoning, was
Stoned himself and carried out for Dead. What need have we to be exact in
observing what is required of us here; for the Lord by one means or other will
return it into our Bosoms: We have done that to others, which we would not
should be done to our selves, and therefore will God do that to us which we do
to others.

Application.
Use 1. To Inform us,

First, What an advantage Religion is to Mankind, even with regard to the
present Life. The World has a prejudice against Religion as if it were an ill
natured thing, and made Men forget Equity and humane respects in favorable
dealings with others. But certainly there is no reason for this Prejudice, when
it does require not only love of all in their several Capacities, but to do to
them all the good possibly we can, and to seek out Objects to whom we may do
good, and be of a God-like Affection. Therefore see that it be so in your
Profession and Practice, that you may recover the credit of Religion by this
Rule. If this were practiced,

1. How securely and safely might we live one by another? Whence come all the
Oppressions and Injuries wherewith the World abounds, but for want of love to
their Neighbors, as themselves? How easily might we be brought to pardon
Wrongs? And how patiently would we bear the modest Dissent of others, when
their Judgments are not of our Size and Mould? How far would we be off doing
hurt to others, even as far as doing hurt to our selves.

2. Consider how beneficial and mutually helpful Men would be to each other,
seeking others good as their own; and rejoicing in an others Welfare as our
own. If the World would but consider how much of Christianity does consist in
loving and doing good, as if all the World had but one Soul, one Interest, it
would render it very amiable to them. Take this Rule quite away, and there is
nothing so false, bad, cruel, that you would not be drawn to think, or say, or
do against your Brother.

Secondly, It informs us, how much Mankind is degenerated, and how few true
Christians are in the World; Witness our Injustice to the Names, Persons, and
Estates of others. We are very critical in determining our own Rights and
Proportions, and what others owe to us: Surely we have all reason to allow
others what they justly expect. When you are slandered you are Passionate; and
therefore should not you be tender of other Men's Names and Estates? When your
Debts are detained you complain of Wrong; should we not be as Conscionable for
the speedy Payment of others? To buy with a great Measure, and sell with a less
is an Abomination to the Lord, and to Men. We judge things done to us thus and
thus, and shall we be careless what we do to them? Uncharitableness, and want
of Sympathy with us in our Troubles, much more insulting over us in our
Miseries we look on with detestation, and shall we pursue and afflict others
when we have Power to do hurt?

Use 2. Exhortation. As that Emperor wrote it on the Doors of his Palace, and
Courts of Justice, so the Exhortation is to press you to get this Rule deeply
graven and written upon your Hearts. In all Matters of dealing toward others,
be exact: for God that is the Patron of Human Societies, observes whether you
do as you would be done unto. Remember it is a short Rule, yet sufficient; and
it is a clear Rule, therefore it should more prevail with you.

1. It Is a short Rule, and yet if it were well learned and kept, it would save
the World a great deal of Mischief. Change the Persons, and we need not many
perplexing Rules to guide us: if this were done to me, would I take it kindly?
turn the Tables, put your selves in their stead.

2. It Is a clear Rule. Look as the Apostle says of Onesimus when he was
converted, that he was doubly dear to Philemon, both in the Flesh and in the
Lord: so the same say I of this Rule, it is doubly dear to us both by Nature
and Grace. The Light of Nature binds us, and it is prescribed by Christ.

(1.) If you break this Rule, you offer violence to an inbred Principle of
Conscience. There are many talk of being Christians, Yea, but get to be good
Heathens first. Never speak of higher. Mysteries of believing in Christ, and
Communion with Christ, while you live so contrary to the Light of Nature. What
the Apostle discourses concerning the Natural Branches, and the Branches
contrary to Nature, is applicable in this Case. Romans 11. 24. what he speaks of
Persons, is true of Doctrines: For if thou were cut out of the Olive Tree,
which is wild by Nature, and were graffed contrary to Nature into a good Olive
Tree; how much more shall these which be the natural Branches, be graffed into
their own Olive Tree? The meaning is, if the Gentiles were taken into a
Covenant Stock, how much more shall the Jews be graffed into their own Stock.
So it is true of Doctrines: if the Doctrines contrary or above Nature, have
brought in Souls to believe in Christ, and the higher Mysteries of
Christianity, certainly much more should those Doctrines which are agreeable to
our Nature have a greater respect and regard by you.

(2.) It is also prescribed by Christ: now our Lord reasons, Luke 6. 46. If you
call me Lord and Master, why do ye not the things I say? It is a mockage to
call Christ Lord and Master, and disobey his Commands, as it was for them to
say, Hail King of the Jews, that spit upon him and buffeted him. Therefore
whatsoever ye would have others do to you, do ye the same to them; for he has
told you, and confirmed it, This is the Law and the Prophets.

SERMON XIX.
EPHESIANS. 2. 10. For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
Works, which God has before ordained that we should walk in them.
THe Apostle in the Context asserteth that our whole Salvation is of Grace, not
of Works, he now proves it. That which is the Effect of Salvation, cannot be
the Cause of it: but our well-doing is the Effect of Salvation, if you take it
for our first recovery to God; but if you take it for full Salvation, or our
final deliverance from all Evil, Works go before it indeed, but in a way of
Order, not meritorious Influence. To think them altogether unnecessary, would
too much depreciate and lessen their presence or concurrence; to think they
deserve it, would as much exalt them, and advance them beyond the Line of their
due Worth and Value. The Apostle steereth a middle Course between both
Extremes: they are necessary, not meritorious; they go before Eternal Life not
as a Cause, but a Way; for they are wrought in us by God, and are Effects of
the begun Salvation; so that the good that we do, is a part of the Grace that
we have received, a fruit of Regeneration; For we are his Workmanship, etc.

In the Words are two things,

I. The state of Believers; For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus. II. The End why we are brought into this Estate, Unto good Works which,
etc.
I begin with the former; and there note,

1. God's efficiency, (...), His Workmanship.

2. The Manner of his Efficiency, (...), Created; all proceeds from the
infinite creating Power of God.

3. The meritorious Cause, (...), Created in Christ Jesus.

From the whole Observe,

Doct. That those that are renewed and recovered out of the Apostasy of
Mankind, are as it were created anew through the Power of God, and Grace of
the Redeemer.
I. Let us explain the Words of the Text. II. Prove it.
I. For Explication of what is here asserted, three things must be explained.

1. Our Relation to God.

2. His way of Concurrence to establish this Relation.

3. How far the Meditation of Christ is concerned in this Effect.

First, Our Relation to God, We are his Workmanship. We are so two ways, 1. By
Natural Creation. 2. By Supernatural Renovation.

1. By Natural Creation, Which gives us some kind of Interest in him, and hope
of Grace from him. As Psalm. 119. 73. Thy Hands have made me and fashioned me,
give me Understanding that I may learn thy Commandments. God is our Creator,
and the end of our Creation is to serve God; therefore he gives some kind of
encouragement to ask the Grace, whereby we may serve him. But the Apostle
speaks here not of the first Creation: But

2. Of Regeneration or Renovation, which is called a second or new Creation: as
2 Cor. 5. 17. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, (...), a new
Creation has passed upon him. By the first Creation we are made Men, by the
second Holy Men. Holiness is a thing of God's making; we are regenerated and
sanctified by his Grace, and made capable of doing good by his Spirit. Now this
new Workmanship bestowed on us, implies,

1. A Change wrought in us, so that we are other Persons than we were before;
as if another kind of Soul came to dwell in our Bodies. This Change is
represented in Scripture in such terms, as do imply a broad and sensible
difference between the two States; that wherein we were before, and that into
which we are translated: such a difference as is between Light and Darkness,
Ephesians. 5. 8. Life and Death, 1 John 3. 14. The new Man and the old, Ephesians. 4. 22,
24. We seem to be as it were Creatures transformed out of Beasts into Men;
instead of being governed by Sense and Appetite, we are led by Reason; and
Reason is not only put into Dominion, but Grace, which is Reason sanctified,
directing and enclining us to live unto God.

2. This Change is such as must amount to a new Creation: There are some
Changes which go not so far. As,

(1.) A Moral Change from Profaneness and gross Sins, to a more sober course
of Life: for there are some Sins which Nature discovers, and may be prevented
by such Reasons and Arguments as Nature suggesteth, Romans 2. 14. This may be
done by ordinary discretion and advisement. But the new Creature signifies such
a change, whereby not only of Vicious we become Virtuous, but of Carnal we
become Spiritual, Ioh. 3. 6. Man naturally enclineth to things pleasing to the
Flesh, and only seeks, savoureth and affects these things; but in this
Change, the Spirit interposeth, and makes him Spirit. Before, Man only lived
as a nobler and better natured Animal or living Creature, and pleased himself,
that is, his Flesh, either in a grosser or more cleanly manner, being ignorant,
mindless of God, and another World: But new Creatures become Spirit, have a
Spiritual Inclination, cannot content themselves with an Happiness on this side
God and Heaven. Mere Humane Nature can never bring Men to this, but only the
Power of God.

(2.) A Temporary Change, as to fall into a sudden religious frame, which is
soon worn off; as Ahab's Humiliation, 1 Kings 21. 27. Or those That howled on
their Beds, etc. Hos. 7. 14. Frighted into a little Religiousness in their
Straits and deep Necessities; like Ice in thawing Weather, soft at top and hard
at bottom. Or those the Prophet speaks of, Jer. 34. 15. Ye were turned to
Day, and had done right, but ye returned again and polluted my Name. They seem
to be changed a while from Evil to Good, and then they change again from good
to evil: this will not amount to the new Creature, for that is a durable thing,
1 John 3. 9. (...), His Seed remains.

(3.) A Change of outward Form, without a Change of Heart; as when a Man
changes Parties in Religion, and from an Oppressor becomes a Professor of a
stricter Way. No, the Scripture opposes this to the new Creature, Gal. 6. 15.
The new Creature lies more in a new Mind, new Will and Affection, than in a
new Form of Religion. Lead is Lead still whatever stamp it bears.

(4.) A partial Change. Men are altered in some things, but the old Nature
still remains, their Religion is but like a new Piece in an old Garment, the
Heart is not new molded, so as to leave an Impression upon all our Actions.
The renewed are holy in all manner of Conversation. 1 Pet. 1. 15. 2 Pet. 3. 11.
(...), 2 Cor. 5. 17. They drive a new Trade for another World, and set upon
another Work to which they were Strangers before, must have new Solaces, new
Comforts, new Motives. The new Creature is entire, not half new half old; but
with many the Heart is like a Cake not turned.

3. When thus new framed and fashioned, it belongs to God, it has special
relation to him, Iam. 1. 18. It must needs be so, they have God's Nature, and
Life. 1. Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. They are made like God, bear his Image and
Superscription; it is a curious piece of workmanship, in which God has showed
his Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, and so they are sealed and marked out for his
peculiar Ones. 2dly, The Life of God, that came from him, and tends to him.
Others are alienated from the Life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18. They recover it, 1 Pet.
4. 6. His Spirit is a Principle of Life in them, so that they are really alive
to God, and dead to Sin and the World.

4. This Workmanship on us as new Creatures, far surpasses that which makes
us Creatures only. That came from his general Goodness, this from his peculiar
Love; there it is Goodness, here it is Grace, 2 Timothy 1. 9. He has called us
with an holy Calling, according to his own Purpose and Grace. Creatures are
sustained by his common Providence, but new Creatures by his special Care and
Covenant. He opens his Hand, and satisfies the desire of every living thing,
Psalm. 145. 16. But he especially preserves and supplieth Believers, 1 Timothy 4.
10. He gives others bodily Comforts, but these Soul-refreshings, and spiritual
Graces, Ephesians. 1. 3. There is Vestigium, a Tract or Foot-print of God in all the
Creation: these have his Image restored in them, Ephesians. 4. 24. The new Man is
created after God. Well then, this is that we should look after, that we may be
his Workmanship made again. It is a woeful thing to be God's Workmanship by
Creation, and not by Renovation; it is better never to have been God's Creature
in the first making, if not his Creature in the second making. Better thou
had been a Beast, yea, a Toad, or Serpent, than a Man: for when the Beasts
die, Death puts an end to their Pains and Pleasures at once; but all thy
Comforts end with Death, and then thy Pains begin: the Beasts have no remorse
to sour their Pleasures; but Man has Conscience, and therefore can have no
rest till he return to God.

Secondly. God's way of Concurrence to establish this Relation. It is a
Creation; the Phrase is often used, Ephesians. 4. 24. The new Man is created after
God: No other Hand could finish this piece of Workmanship. God often sets it
forth by this Term, Isa. 43. 7. I have created him for my Glory, I have formed
him, yea, I have made him. So verse. 21. This People have I formed for my self,
they shall show forth my Praise. So in other places. Now Creation is a Work of
Omnipotency, and proper to God. There is a twofold Creation; in the beginning
God made some things out of nothing, and somethings ex inhabili materia, out of
foregoing Matter, but such as was wholly unfit for such things as was made of
it. As when God made Adam out of the dust of the Ground, and Eve out of the Rib
of Man. Take the Notion in the former or latter Sense, and it will suit with
the Matter in hand. (1.) We are formed anew of God, as it were out of a State
of Nothing, and get a new Being and a new Life. To this there are frequent
Allusions in Scripture; as Romans 9. 7. He calls the things that are not, as
though they were. 2 Cor. 4. 6. (...), Who speaks Light out of Darkness, he
brings Life out of Death, something out of nothing. Now there is such a
Distance between these two Terms, that the Work can only be accomplished by a
Divine Power. (2.) Creation out of unfit Matter. We were wholly indisposed,
averse from Good, perverse Resisters of it. Now to bring us to love God and
Holiness, to restore God's lost Image to us, it is a new forming or making of
us, and must be looked upon, not as a low natural or common thing, but as the
Work of him who gave us his Image at first. Col. 3. 10. The new Man is renewed
after the Image of him that created him. To turn a Heart of Stone into an Heart
of Flesh, God challenges it to Himself, Ezekiel. 36. 26. This Creation shows
two things.

1. The Greatness of the Disease, that is clearly seen in the difficulty of the
Remedy. Nothing does make a Man so sensible of the Corruption of his Nature, as
when we hear by what Terms our Recovery or Restitution by Grace is set forth.
It is a second Creation, a new Birth, a Resurrection, a raising up of Stones to
be Children to Abraham; yea, in a sort Beasts are turned into Angels. From
these things we may a little conceive of the greatness of that Disease, which
all Mankind were sick of. Every Faculty of our Souls was both weakened and
corrupted, and God only by his Divine Power can restore us: for to be cured we
must be wholly new made, and who can make or create but God? Surely we
contributed nothing to it. What Enemies were we to our own Mercies? It is no
small matter for Darkness to become Light in the Lord; for a rugged stubborn
Creature to be mollified, and submissive to the Spirit's Discipline; for a
Slave of the Devil to become the Subject of Christ; that an Heap of Rubbish
should be erected into a Temple to God, and a Dunghill turned into a Bed of
Spices.

2. It teaches us to magnify this renewing Work. If you think the Cure is no
great matter, it will necessarily follow that it deserves no great praise, and
so God will be robbed of the Honor of our Recovery. But why then is this Work
so magnified in the Scriptures, and such high Expressions used about it? Why is
it called an opening of our blind Eyes, a turning us from Darkness to Light,
and from the Power of Satan to God; a quickening them that were dead, and making
us new Creatures? Why must the Holy Ghost be shed so abundantly upon us for our
Renovation? Surely it is some great thing which all these Expressions do
intend, and should be more magnified in our thoughs, that we may give God his
due praise and honor. And they sin greatly that have contemptuous thoughts or
a low esteem of it, or see not the absolute necessity of it; and by extenuating
this great Change, give shrewd suspicion they were never acquainted with it.
Surely all that have felt what God has done for their Souls, they know how
little they have contributed to it, they dare not make light of it, and ascribe
it to their own Wit or Will, or entertain undervaluing thoughts of this Grace.
Alas! there is an Enmity in every carnal Heart against Holiness, till God
remove it and subdue it, Romans 8. 7. Col. 1. 21. And what shall conquer this
Enmity, but his invincible Power? Surely this is the gracious and powerful Work
of the ever-blessed GOD, and to be ascribed to Him alone. Can a stony Heart of
it self become tender? Or a dead Heart quicken it self? Or a Creature wholly
led by Sense, and addicted to the Pleasures of Sin, be brought of it self to
seek its Happiness in an unseen World, and of its own accord deny present
things, and lay up all its Hopes in Heaven? No, it is God must take away the
Heart of Stone, quicken those that are dead in Trespasses and Sins.

3dly. How far the Mediation of Christ is concerned in this Effect. We are
renewed by God's creating Power, but through the intervening Mediation of
Christ.

1. This creating Power is set forth with respect to his Merit. The Life of
Grace is purchased by his Death, 1 Ioh. 4. 9. God sent his only begotten Son
into the World, that we might live by him; Here spiritually, hereafter
eternally; Life opposite to the Death incurred by Sin. And how by him? by his
being a Propitiation, that he speaks of there, verse. 10. We were in a State of
Death when the Doors of Mercy were first opened to us, under the Guilt and
Power of Sin; for while the Guilt and Tyranny of Sin remains, we are said to
be dead, and strangers to the Life of God; and we begin to live when first
regenerated by the Spirit of Christ. Now this we have not without Christ being
a Propitiation for our Sins, that is, without doing something whereby God,
without any impeachment of his Honor, might show himself placable and
propitious to Mankind; his Justice, Holiness, and Hatred of Sin, being
sufficiently demonstrated in the Sufferings of Christ. Now the Honor of his
governing Justice being kept up, his pardoning Mercy is the more freely
exercised. God may be propitious to Mankind, and yet still be acknowledged as a
sin-hating God.

2. In regard of Efficacy. Christ is a quickening Head, or a life-making
Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45. Whatever Grace we have, comes from God, through Christ,
as Mediator; and from him we have it by virtue of our Union with him: 2 Cor. 5.
17. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature. As soon as joined to him as
our Head, this Grace is applied to us by his Spirit. It is first applied by
converting Grace, and then continually supplied by the confirming Grace of the
Spirit, and so we are fitted to every good Work. Christ first applies it in
Conversion, when he gives us Repentance and a new Nature, Acts 5. 31. And
supplieth it by continual Influence, John 15. 5. We live on him as the Branch
does on the Root. Now from hence we learn what a great Benefit renewing Grace
is, it is a Fruit of reconciling Grace, 2 Cor. 5. 18. All things are of God,
who has reconciled us to himself by Christ. God gives Grace only as the God
of Peace, that is, as pacified by Christ's Death. The holy Spirit is the Gift
of his Love, and the Fruit of this Peace and Reconciliation, which Christ made
for us. First, our Lord Jesus Christ merited this Grace by the value of his
Sacrifice and bloody Sufferings, and then does apply it by the Almighty Power
of his Spirit; and Christ is first our Ransom, and then the Fountain of Life
unto our Souls; and so the Honor of our whole and entire Recovery is to be
ascribed to our Redeemer. When he satisfied God's Justice for our Sins, he
purchased a Power to change the Heart of Man, and he purchased this Power into
his own Hands, not into another, and therefore does accomplish it by his
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 18. We should often think what a Foundation God has laid for
the Dispensation of his Grace, and how he would demonstrate his infinite Love
in giving his Son to be a Propitiation for us. When he would show forth his
infinite Power in determining and changing the Heart of Man, all the Persons
concurred; the Father purposing, the Son by way of Redemption and Purchase, the
Holy Ghost by effective Power; and all to bring back our Souls to God, and to
make us capable of serving and pleasing him; it is surely a Workmanship of much
cost.

Two Reasons why they are as it were created anew.

1. Because of the Badness of our former Estate. Ruinous and decayed Buildings
are only to be thrown down, to make way for a new Structure and House to stand
in the same place. Man naturally is a Creature in a State of Apostasy and
Defection, under a loss of Original Righteousness, averse from God, yea an
Enemy to him, prone to all Evil, weak yea dead to all Spiritual Good: And what
must be done with such a Creature to bring him out of his Misery, but wholly to
new-mould him and make him, that he may have a new Being, and Life? The
Scripture represents Man as blind in his Mind, 2 Pet. 1. 9. Perverse in his
Will, Zech. 7. 12. Rebellious in his Affections, Ephesians. 2. 3. fulfilling the
Desires of the Flesh and of the Mind. What sound Part is there left in us to
mend the rest? If we will be brought home to God, we must of sinful and
polluted become clean and holy; and, Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? not one, Job 14. 4. We must of carnal become spiritual, and therefore
we must be newborn, new-made, Ioh. 3. 6. That instead of minding the things of
the Flesh, we may mind the things of the Spirit; we must of Wordly become
Heavenly. Now he that forms us for this very thing is God, 2 Cor. 5. 5.
(...), He that frames and creates us for this Heavenly State is God. He that
is the Framer and Maker of all things, of infinite Wisdom, Power, and Love, he
creates us anew in Christ, that we may look after Eternal Life. The Heavenly
Disposition wrought in us is a Pledge of it.

2. From the Nature of God's Work, which is not merely by helping the Will, but
by giving us the Will it self, or the Act of Volition of it; not by curing the
Weakness of it, but by sanctifying it, and taking away the Sinfulness of it,
and inclining it to himself. If the Will were only in a Swoon and Languishment,
a little moral Persuasion and Excitation, outward or inward, by the Word and
Spirit, would serve the turn; but we cannot say of it as Christ of the Damsel,
She is not dead, but sleeps. No, the Scripture says, We are dead in
Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. God's Grace is not only necessary for
facilitation, that we may more easily pursue and choose that which is good; as a
Horse is necessary, that a Man may pass on his Journey more easily, which
otherwise he might perform on foot with Difficulties: No, it is impossible as
well as difficult to escape the Carnal Life without God, Mat. 19. 26. He does
work such a Change on a carnal Man's Heart, that he contemns the World, and
seeks after Heavenly Things. Nay, he does not only give us a remote Power to
will if we please, or a remote Power to do if we please; but he gives to will
and to do, Phil. 2. 13. the Will it self, and the Deed it self. Thus is God's
Operation set forth, he renews the Faculties, and exciteth the Act of willing
and doing, by his powerful and victorious Influence, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27.
Otherwise if Grace did only give us an Indifferency, so that a Man may or may
not, then Man would be the principal Cause of his own Conversion, and God lose
the Glory of his Grace, and the Honor of it be ascribed to the Liberty of
Man's own Will. God does not give a power to repent and believe, and leave it
to the Determination of Man's Will to make it effectual; but he gives Faith it
self, and Repentance it self. Faith is his Gift, Ephesians. 2. 8. To you it is given
to believe, Phil. 1. 29. The Redeemer was raised, to give Repentance, Acts 5.
31. This is the Grace which the Saints pray for, Faith it self, Repentance it
self. Psalm. 51. 10. Create in me a clean Heart. Heb. 13. 21. The Lord make you
perfect to do his Will, working in you that which is pleasing in his Sight. We
pray not only for a Grace that gives the Possibility, but the Effect; not only
for such as does invite and solicit us to Good, but such as does incline and
determine us to Good. And this is the Grace we give thanks for, not a Power to
repent and believe if we please, but for Repentance and Faith wrought in us. If
God did only give a Power to will if we please, to do if we please, Man would
difference himself, 1 Cor. 4. 7.

3. With respect to Christ. We are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus,
who is the Head of the new World, or renewed Estate. All things are new in the
Kingdom of Christ, there is a Change of every thing from what it was before.
There is a new Adam, which is Jesus Christ; a new Covenant, which is the
Gospel; a new Paradise, not that where Adam enjoyed God among the Beasts, but
where the Blessed enjoy God among the Angels; a new Ministry, not the Posterity
of Aaron or Tribe of Levi, but a Ministry of Reconciliation put into their
Hands, whom God has qualified and fitted to be Dispensers of these holy
Mysteries: New Ordinances; We serve God not in the oldness of the Letter, but
the newness of the Spirit; therefore if we be in Christ, we must be new
Creatures. We are both obliged and fitted by this new Estate to be so. Some are
in Christ externally by Baptism and Profession, they are visibly in Covenant
with him, and de jure of right are bound to be new Creatures. Others are in
Christ by real internal Union; these not only ought to be, but de facto are new
Creatures, they are made Partakers of his Spirit, Romans 8. 9. and by that Spirit
they are renewed and sanctified. Well then, since there is a new Lord, and a
new Law, all is new, there must be a new Creation; for as the general State of
the Church is renewed by Christ, so is every particular Believer.

4. With respect to the Use for which this new Creation serves: One is
mentioned in the Text, Created unto good Works; but other things must be taken
in.

1. In order to our present Communion with God. Till we are created anew, we
are not sit to converse with an holy and invisible God, earnestly, frequently,
reverently and delightfully, which is our daily Work and Business. The Effects
of the new Creature are Life and Likeness; those that do not live the Life of
God, are estranged from him, Ephesians. 4. 18. Trees cannot converse with Beasts,
because they do not live their Life; nor Beasts with Men, for they have Sense
only, but no Reason; nor Men with God till they have somewhat of the same
Nature and Life. If one had Power to put the Spirit of Man into a brute Beast,
that Beast would discourse reasonably. God has Power to put a Divine Spirit
into his People to sanctify their Souls, that sits them for converse with God.
Look as in Innocence Adam was alone, though compassed about with a Multitude of
Creatures, Beasts, Birds and Plants, yet there was none (till Eve was made) fit
to converse with him, because they did not live his Life; therefore the Lord
God said, Genesis 2. 18. It is not good that Man should be alone; I will make him
an (...) meet for him. The Man was alone, because he had none like himself that
he might converse withal as a Man, in the exercise of Speech and Reason; the
Beasts of the Field, and Fowls of the Air were no fit Companions for him; they
wanted the means of Converse, Reason and Speech: So without Grace we are not
meet for Communion with God, till we have Faith and Love to admire, reverence,
and delight in him. So for likeness: Conformity is the ground of Communion.
Amos 3. 3. How can two walk together except they be agreed? Our state of Sin is
a state of Enmity, and our state of Holiness a state of Love. Our old Course
made the Breach between us and God, Isa. 59. 2. but the new Life and Likeness
qualifies us for Communion with him. 1. Ioh. 1. 6, 7. An holy Creature may
sweetly come and converse with the Holy God.

2. In order to our Service and Obedience to God. Man is unfit for God's use
till he be new molded and framed again: In the Text, we must be created in
Christ Jesus to good Works. Every Creature has Faculties suitable to the
Operations that belong to that Creature: so Man must be new created, new
formed, that he may be prepared and made ready for the Lord. You cannot expect
new Operations, till there be a New Nature and Life. When a Man is turned from
Sin, he is made meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good Work, 2 Timothy 2. 21. Our first care must be to get the Heart renewed. Many are troubled
about this or that Duty, or particular Branches of the Spiritual Life, first
get Life it self. There must be Principles before there can be Operations. In
vain do we expect strengthening Grace, before we have received renewing Grace.
This is like little Children, who attempt to run, before they can go or stand.
Many complain of this or that Corruption, but they do not groan under the
burden of a corrupt Nature; as suppose wandering Thoughts in Prayer, when at the
same time the Heart is habitually averse and estranged from God: as if a Man
should complain of an aching Tooth, when a mortal Disease has seized upon his
Vitals; or of a cut Finger, when at the same time he is wounded at the Heart;
of deadness in Duty and want of quickening Grace, when they want converting
Grace. This is like blowing to a dead Coal, to complain of Infirmities and
incident Weakness, when our habitual aversion from, and Enmity to God is not
yet cured; and unfitness for Service, when we are not come out of the carnal
State.

3. In order to our future enjoyment of God, and that Glory and Blessedness
which we expect in his Heavenly Kingdom. None but new Creatures can enter into
the New Jerusalem: It is said, John 3. 3. Except a Man be born again he cannot
see the Kingdom of God. Seeing is put for enjoying. Yet the expression is
Emphatical, as if he should not be suffered so much as to peep or look within
the Vail; therefore the mere carnal Man neither knows his true Happiness, nor
cares for it, but follows after his own Lusts, till he be new molded and
framed. By Nature Men are opposite to the Kingdom of God, it being invisible,
future, spiritual, mostly for the Soul; and by nature Men are for things seen,
present and bodily. The Interest of the Flesh governs all their choices, and
inclinations, and how unmeet are these for Heaven? In short, our frail Bodies
must be changed before they can be brought to Heaven. We shall not all die, but
we shall all be changed, says the Apostle. If the Body must be changed, how
much more the Soul? if that which is Frail, much more that which is Filthy; if
Flesh and Blood cannot enter into Heaven till it be freed from its corruptible
Qualities, certainly a guilty corrupted Soul cannot enter into Heaven till it
be freed from its sinful Qualities.

Application.
I. Use. Of Information.

1. That there is such a thing as the new Nature, Regeneration, or the new
Birth, and the new Creature. It is one thing to make us Men, another to make us
Saints or Christians. We have Understanding, and Will, and Affections, and
Sense as Men, but we have these sanctified as Christians. The carnal World
thinks Christianity puts strange names upon ordinary things: but is it an
ordinary thing to row against the Stream of Flesh and Blood, and to raise Men
above those Inclinations and Affections by which the generality of the World
are mastered and captivated? For a Man to be another kind of Creature than the
rest of Men are, surely proceeds from a new Nature put into him. 1 Pet. 4. 4.
The World wondereth at Believers in their contemning the pleasant, powerful
Attractives of sensible things.

2. That by this new Nature a Man is distinguished from himself as Carnal: he
has somewhat which he had not before, something that may be called a new Life,
and Nature, a new Heart, that is created. Psalm. 51. 10. and may be increased, 2
Pet. 3. 18. In the first Conversion, we are mere Objects of Grace; but
afterward Instruments of Grace. First, God works upon us, then by us. On the
Unregenerate the Spirit works while they do nothing that is good, sometimes
the contrary: The Regenerate he helps; whiles they are working, striving,
laboring, he quickneth and exciteth their Inclination to God. They have some
Principles of Operation, there is Life in them; and where there is Life, there
is some power to act, or else God's most precious Gifts would be in vain,
therefore it is their Duty to bestir themselves, 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4, 5. We have
Understanding and Memory sanctified and planted with a Stock of Divine
Knowledge, and can retain things on the Conscience, which if we do not, we are
highly culpable before God. Mat. 25. 25, 26. Thou wicked and slothful Servant,
etc. We have an inclination to God, and Heavenly Things, and we must blow it
up. Isa. 64. 7. There is none that stirs up himself to take hold of thee. 2 Timothy 1. 6. Stir up the gift of God that is in thee.

3. How little they can make out their recovery to God, and Interest in Christ,
who are not sensible of any change wrought in them. They have their old
Thoughts, their old Discourses, their old Passions, and their old Affections,
and their old Conversations still; the old darkness and blindness which was
upon their Minds, the old Stupidity, Dullness, Deadness, Carelessness that was
upon their Hearts, knowing little or nothing, or regarding nothing of God; the
old end and scope governs them, to which they formerly referred all things.
If there were a change, there would be some hope the Redeemer had been at work
in their Hearts. You can remember how little savor you had once of the things
of the Spirit, how little mind to Christ or Holiness, how wholly you were given
up to the Pleasures of the Flesh, or the profits of the World; what a mastery
your Lusts had then over you, and an hard servitude you were in: Is the case
altered with you now? is your taste of Fleshly Delights deadned, your Souls
taken up more with the Affairs of another World? Is the drift, aim, and bent of
your Lives now for God and your Salvation, and the great business you attend
upon the pleasing of God, and the saving of your Souls? Are ye not Servants to
your Senses and fleshly Appetites, and things here below, but can ye govern
your selves, and master these Desires? This is a change indeed. But in many
that profess Christ, and pretend to an Interest in him, there is no such change
to be sensibly seen; their old Sins, and their old Lusts, and the old things of
Ungodliness are not yet cast off. Surely so much old Rubbish and rotten
Building should not be left standing with the New. Old Leaves in Autumn fall
off in the Spring, if they continue so long; so old things should pass away,
and all become new.

4. It informs us in what manner we should check Sin, by remembering it is an
old thing to be done away, and ill becoming our new Estate by Christ. 2 Pet. 1.
9. But he that lacks these things is blind, and cannot see far off, and has
forgotten that he was purged from his old Sins. Former Sins ought to be
esteemed as old Rags that are cast off, and as Vomit never to be licked up
again. If we are and do esteem our selves to be pardoned we should never build
again what we have destroyed, nor tear open old Wounds. So 1 Pet. 1. 14. Not
fashioning your selves to the former Lusts of your Ignorance, nor cast our
selves into the old Mould and Shape, and return to our old Bondage and Slavery.
So 1 Cor. 5. 7. Purge out the old Leaven, that you may be wholly a new Lump. So
ver. 8. Therefore keep the Feast not with old Leaven, neither with the Leaven
of Malice and Wickedness, but with the unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth.
The unsuitableness of Sin to our present State should stir up our Indignation.
Hos. 14. 8. What have I to do any more with Idols? Worldly things are pleasing
to the old Man, therefore we should not overmuch esteem them. They are not new
Creatures, that have not put off the Lusts of the old Man.

II. Use. To put us upon Self-Reflection. Are we the Workmanship of God,
created in Christ Jesus? that is, are we made new Creatures? It will be known
by these things, a new Mind, a new Heart, and a new Life.

1. Have we a new Mind? A new Creature has a new sight of things, looks upon
all things with a new Eye. He sees more odiousness in Sin, more Excellency in
Christ, more Beauty in Holiness, more Vanity in the World, than ever he saw
before. Before they did (...), They knew a^l things after the Flesh. A new
value and esteem of things does much discover the temper of the Heart. Heb. 11.
26. Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures of
Egypt. They esteem the decay of the outward Man to be abundantly recompensed
with the increase of the inward. 2 Cor. 4. 16. A new Creature is not only
changed himself, but all things seem to be changed with him. Heaven is another
thing, and Earth is another thing than it was before, so is Sin and
Righteousness, yea he looks on his Body and Soul with another Eye.

2. As he has a new Mind and Judgment, so the Heart is new molded. The great
Blessing of the new Covenant is a new Heart. Now the Heart is new, when we are
inclined to the ways of God, and enabled to walk in them.

(1.) There is a new Inclination, poise, and weight upon the Soul, bending it
to Holy and Heavenly things. The inclination to Holiness David prays for;
Psalm. 119. 36. Incline my Heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to Covetousness.
To Heavenly things; Paul asserteth, 2 Cor. 4. 18. We look not to the things
which are seen, but to the things which are not seen: for the things which are
seen, are Temporal; but the things which are not seen, are Eternal. When we
always live in delightful foresight and expectation of Blessedness to come.

(2.) The Heart is enabled also. Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will put a new Spirit into
you, and cause you to walk in my Ways. Where there is a new Heart, there is new
Strength or Grace given; To serve God acceptably, and with Reverence, and Godly
Fear, Heb. 12. 28. Indeed God assists this Power, or else we fail and wax
faint: but a Power there is in some measure to will, and do; For the Kingdom of
God stands not in Word, but in Power. There is a Power to overcome Fleshly
Lusts, the Heavenly Mind is not given us in vain. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Dearly Beloved,
I beseech you, as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly Lusts, which war
against the Soul. A Power to overcome Worldly Lusts: Phil. 4. 13. When we seek
no great things for our selves here in this World, we can the better bear all
Conditions. I do confess, (as I said before) God must assist this Power both in
willing and doing, purposing and performing: We may have assistance in one kind
and not in another; Paul says, (...), etc. Romans 7. 18. To will is present with
me, but how to perform that which I would, I have no Power. To will is more
than to think, to exert our Will into Action is more than both. In all we need
God's help. Some may have the Power to Will, when no Power to Do; so Peter, se
posse putabat quod se velle sentiebat. But yet I describe a Christian, or a new
Creature, by his Power; because God's Children are never so deserted but that
there is some help from God. There are Auxilia necessaria, helps of Grace
simply and absolutely necessary, which are not denied when liberal and
plentiful aids of Grace are suspended; and therefore a Christian is to be
described by his Power, though still in a dependence upon God.

3. A new Life, or a new Conversation, called walking in newness of Life, Romans
6. 4. Surely he that has a new Principle, the Spirit, and not the Flesh; a new
Rule, the Law of God, and not the course of this World; a new scope, the
pleasing, glorifying, and enjoying of God, and not the pleasing of Men, and his
own fleshly Mind, must needs walk in a different course both from other carnal
Men, and from what he himself carried on before: but all these are true of the
new Creature, he is influenced by another Principle, Romans 8. 12. Gal. 5. 16.
looks upon himself as having another Rule, Gal. 6. 16. Psalm. 1. 2. and
propounds to himself another design and scope, Phil. 3. 20. 2 Cor. 5. 9. and
therefore must needs live another Life. Well then, by these things you may judge
of your Estate.

III. Use. To exhort you to look after this, that you be the Workmanship of
God, created in Christ Jesus. You will say, what can we do? This is God's Work,
in which we are merely Passive.

I Answer. It is certainly an abuse of this Doctrine if it lull us asleep in
the Lap of Idleness; and we think that because God does all in framing us for
the new Life, we must do nothing. The Spirit of God reasons otherwise. Phil.
2. 12, 13. Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling: for it is God which
works in you, both to will and to do of his own good Pleasure. This Principle
can neither be a ground of looseness, or laziness: You are under an Obligation
both to return to God, and to use the means whereby you may return. Your
Impotency does not dissolve your Obligation. A drunken Servant, is a Servant,
and bound to do his Work, his Master loses not his Right by his Default. An
insolvent Debtor, is a Debtor, and if he cannot pay all, he is bound to pay as
much as he can. Besides, you are Creatures in Misery, if you be sensible of it,
your Interest will teach you to do what you can to come out of it; and God's
doing all is an Engagement to wait upon him in the use of Means, that we may
meet with God in his Way, and he may meet with us in our Way. I say, in his
Way: for God has appointed certain Duties to convey and apply this Grace. Now
we are to lie at the Pool till the Waters be stirred, to continue our
Attendance till God gives Grace, Mark. 4. 24. And I say, that God may meet
with us in our Way; for God influencenth all things according to their Natural
Inclination. God that enlightneth the World by and with the Sun, burns with
Fire, reasons with Man, acts necessarily with necessary Causes, and freely
with free causes; he does not oppress the liberty of the new Creature, but
preserves the Nature and Interest of his own Workmanship; draws Men with the
Cords of a Man, Hos. 11. 4. He propounds Reasons and Motives, which we must
consider, and so betake our selves to a Godly Course. The Object of
Regeneration is a reasonable Creature, upon whom God works, not as on a Stock
or Stone, but makes use of the faculties which they have, showing us our lost
Estate, and the possibility of Salvation by Christ, sweetly inviting us to
accept of this Grace, that he may pardon our Sins, sanctify and heal our
Natures, and lead us in a way of Holiness unto Eternal Life. Now these means we
are to attend upon, and it is some advantage when you own your Duty, and are
sensible of a necessity of changing your Estate, who would otherwise be
altogether careless and mindless of such a thing. But when you look on it as a
Duty, that must be speedily and earnestly gone about, if you mean to be saved,
you are in a fair way of cure. By Exhortation we demand God's right, and make
the Creatures sensible of his own Obligation, that he may go about this work as
well as he can, at least that he may acknowledge the Debt, confess his
Impotency, and beg Grace. Besides, there are some things to be done before this
Renovation in order thereunto; as Wood is dried before it is kindled. There are
some preparations before Conversion, and we are to be active about them. As for
instance, that we should rouse up our selves, and consider our case: Psalm. 22.
27. All the ends of the Earth shall remember, and turn unto the Lord. Psalm.
119. 59. I thought on my ways, and turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies. Man is
very inconsiderate, his Soul is asleep till consideration awaken it again. We
are to search and try our Estate whether it be good or bad, Lam. 3. 40. Let us
search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord. We are to observe God's
Rebukes. Prove. 1. 23. Turn ye at my Reproof. To set our selves to seek after
God in the best Fashion we can. Hos. 5. 4. They will not frame their doings to
turn unto their God, that is, think of recovering themselves and bending their
course to him: chiefly we are to take heed that we do not hinder God's work,
and obstruct our own Mercies. Prove. 1. 25. They set at naught my Counsel, and
would none of my Reproof. Sometimes Conscience is startled, either as being
excited by the Word, Acts 24. 25. or some notable Affliction and Strait, Genesis
42. 21. by one means or another the Waters are stirred, great helps are
vouchsafed to us, observe these Seasons. However, check Despair. He that did
turn Water into Wine, can turn Sinners into Saints, Lions into Lambs; he has
not excluded you from his Grace, therefore do not exclude your selves. When did
he ever forsake the anxious and waiting Souls, that would not give over seeking
till they did obtain the sanctifying Spirit.

SERMON XX.
EPHESIANS. 2. 10. For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
Works, which God has before ordained that we should walk in them.
WE come now to the End, why we are brought into this Estate, created unto good
Works, etc. the End is not to live idly or walk loosly, but holily, according
to the Will of God.

In this latter Clause, Created unto good Works, which God has before
ordained, that we should walk in them; Observe,

1. The Object, Good Works, that is, Works becoming the new Creature; in short,
we should live Christianly.

2. God's Act about it, (...), Which God has before ordained. The word
signifies both prepared and ordained. 1. God has prepared these Works for us.
2. God has prepared us for them. He has prepared them for us either by his
Decree or Precept: if you understand it in the first sense, God that has
ordained the End, has also appointed Means, as Acts 27. 31. compared with 24.
Or else appointed by his Precept, and express Will. Micah 6. 8. And he has
prepared us for them by his Spirit, making our Hearts fit for our Work. Heb. 8.
20. enlightening the Mind, inclining the Will. The first shows the necessity
of them; the second, the easiness of them. God has accomodated all things to
that End, enabling us to know our Duty, and to do it.

3. Our Duty, that we should walk in them. Walking notes both a Way, and an
Action.

1. It implies a Way, that good Works are the way to obtain Salvation,
purchased and granted to us by Jesus Christ. Unless we walk in the Path of good
Works we cannot come to Eternal Life.

2. An Action. Walking notes,

(1.) Spontaneity in the Principle, not drawn or driven, but walk, set our
selves a going.

(2.) Progress in the Motion, he that walks sets himself forward, and gets
ground; he does not stand still or lie down, but goes on still.

Doct. That new Creatures are both obliged and fitted, or prepared for good
Works.
I. What is meant by good Works? II. What Obligation lies on the new Creature
to make Conscience of them? III. How they are fitted and prepared by that new
Nature which is bestowed upon them by and through Christ?
1. What is meant by good Works?

1. The Kinds. 2. The Requisits.
First, The Kinds, all acts of Obedience: more particularly they are divided
and distributed into five sorts or ranks.

1. Opera Cultus, Acts of God's immediate Worship, both internal and external.
The Internal Acts are Faith and Love, Trust, Delight, Reverence. The Children
of God are often described by these, by believing in his Name, John 1. 12. Love
to God and Delight in him. Psalm. 97. 10. Ye that love the Lord, hate Evil.
Psalm. 37. 4. Delight thy self also in the Lord. Trust. Psalm. 62. 8. Trust in
him at all times ye People. Fear or Reverence. Psalm. 130. 4. There is
forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. External; as to Pray, Read,
Hear, to be much in Communion with God in all the parts of his Worship. Without
Works of Piety we are practical Atheists. Psalm. 36. 1. and Psalm. 14. 1, 2, 4.
God's People do certainly make Conscience of these. The Internal Acts are the
Life of their Souls; the External are their Solace, Strength, and Support,
their Songs in the House of their Pilgrimage, their refreshing by the way.
Cornelius, Acts 10. 2. feared, and prayed to God always. Daniel would not omit
Prayer one Day, though in danger of Death, Dan. 6. 10, 11. There is little Zeal
in them that are not frequent with God, but forget him days without number,
Ier. 2. 32.

2. Opera Vocationis, Every Man must labor in the Work to which he is called.
God is pleased to appoint and accept the Duties of our Callings as a good Work.
Are they never so mean, yet Servants may Honor God by diligence in their
Duties. Tit. 2. 9, 10. Exhort Servants to be obedient to their Masters, etc.
That they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things. To be
profitable to Humane Society in your place is good; the new Nature helps us
so to be. Phil. 11. Onesimus in time past was to thee unprofitable, but now
profitable to thee, and me. All have their work, from the Mediator, to the
poorest Creature in the World. John 17. 4. I have glorified thee on Earth, I
have finished the work which thou gave me to do. So Tit. 3. 14. Let ours also
learn to maintain good Works for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful.
When John's Hearers came to know what they should do, he refers every one to
their Callings. Luke 3. 10, 11, 12. Walk conscionably therein, glorify God,
Soldiers, Publicans, etc. Without these good Works, we are Drones in the
common Hives, yea, Burdens upon the Earth.

3. Opera Iustitiae, Works of Righteousness and Justice; to hurt none, to give
every one his Due, to use Fidelity in our Relations, Acts 24. 16. The Credit of
Religion is much concerned in the just dealing of them that profess it. God
will have the World to know that Religion is a good Friend to Human Society.
Neh. 5. 9. Ought ye not to walk in the Fear of our God, because of the Reproach
of the Heathen our Enemies? This was the Primitive Glory of Christianity; Dent
Exercitum talem, tales Exactores fisci, etc. Some carry it so that they deal
with God's Commandments, as Hanun with David's Messengers, as if they had cut
off the whole second Table, and so prove a Stain and Blot to Religion. In
short, they that do not make Conscience of paying their Debts, and using
Justice, Equity, and Honesty in all their Dealings, they are Robbers, Thieves
and Enemies to Human Society.

4. Opera Charitatis and Misericordiae; as to relieve the Poor, to be good to
all, to help others by our Counsel or Admonition. We are often called upon for
these; thus Acts 9 36. Dorcas is said to be full of good Works, and Alms-deeds
which she did. So 1 Timothy 6. 18. Charge them to be rich in good Works. It is not
left arbitrary to you, but laid upon you as Part of your Charge and Duty, a
Debt we owe to God. Now if you do not mind these kind of good Works, you are
unfaithful Stewards in the good things committed to your Trust. You must not
deny God his own, when he or any of his have need of it.

5. I think there is another Sort of good Works which concern our selves, and
that is, Sobriety, Watchfulness, Mortification, Self-denial. A Man owes Duty
to himself. Tit. 2. 12. Teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and worldly
Lusts. we should live soberly, etc. These conduce to our Safety. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
Be sober, be vigilant; for your Adversary the Devil, like a roaring Lion,
walks about, seeking whom he may devour. And belong to our Fidelity to
Christ. Gal. 5. 24. They that are Christ's have crucified the Flesh, with the
Affections and Lusts thereof. Therefore take in these also, and call them Opera
Militiae Christianae, the Works of our Spiritual Warfare, by which we guard our
selves from the Enemies of our Salvation, that our Hands be not weakened and
enfeebled in God's Work, that we may carry it on without unevenness and
interruption.

Secondly, The Requisites to a good Work are,

1. That the Person be in a good State. Mat. 7. 17. A good Tree brings forth
good Fruit. Married to Christ. Romans 7. 4. Wherefore ye also are become dead to
the Law by the Body of Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to
him who is raised from the Dead, that we should bring forth Fruit unto God. A
Believer. Tit. 3. 8. Let them which believe in God, be careful to maintain good
Works. A carnal unregenerate Man may do that which is for the matter good; but
till he be changed in his Heart and State, his Works are not acceptable to God.

2. The Principles of Operation must be Faith, Love, and Obedience. Faith,
owning God's Authority. Psalm. 119. 66. Teach me good Judgment and Knowledge, for
I have believed thy Commandment. Love, inclining the Heart. 2 Cor 5. 14. The
Love of Christ constrains me. Obedience, swaying the Conscience. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
5. This is the Will of God, your Sanctification. 1 Timothy 1. 5. The End of the
Commandment is Charity, out of a pure Heart, and good Conscience, and Faith
unfeigned. There we have the Pedigree of good Works; Faith unfeigned begets a
good Conscience, and that a pure Heart, and that Love to God, and then all
particular Duties succeed.

3. A due Regard of Circumstances, that it may be not only good, but done well,
Luke 8. 15. with that Diligence, Reverence, Seriousness, Alacrity, which the
Nature of the Work does require.

4. The End, that it be for God's Glory. Phil. 1. 11. Filled with the Fruits of
Righteousness, which are by Christ Jesus to the Praise and Glory of God.

II. How new Creatures are obliged to these good Works.

1. With respect to God. He has ordained that we should walk in them. If you
refer it to his Decree, he will have his Elect People distinguished from others
by the Good they do in the World, that they may be known to be followers of a
good God, as the Children of the Devil are by their Mischief. His Eternal
Decree is made evident to us by our making Conscience of good Works, and so we
make our Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. If you take it for his
Precept and Command, surely we should make Conscience of what our Father gives
us in charge; he has appointed us to do so, sent us into the Vineyard to work,
and shall we say, I will not? Mat. 21. 29, 30. or loiter and neglect when we
have given our Consent, or pretend to go, and never set about it? To a gracious
Heart the Signification of God's Will is instead of all Reasons. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
18. In every thing give thanks, for this is the Will of God concerning you. 1
Pet. 2. 15. For this is the Will of God, that with well-doing you may put to
silence the Ignorance of foolish Men.

2. With respect to Christ, who died to restore us to a Capacity and Ability to
perform these good Works. Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, to redeem us
from all Iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good
Works; not only to do them, but do them with Alacrity and Zeal. As Christ came
to raise the Comfort of the Creature to the highest, so also the Duty of the
Creature to the highest, that his People might be eminent in Holiness, Justice,
Goodness, and Truth, above all others.

3. With respect to the Spirit, who renews us for this end. We are new made,
that we may look upon doing good as our Calling and only Business. All other
things are valuable according to the Use for which they serve; the Sun was made
to give Light and Heat to inferior Creatures, and we are enlightened by Grace,
and inclined by Grace, that our Light may shine before Men, Mat. 5. 16.

4. With respect to Heaven and Eternal Happiness. They are the Way to Heaven.
We discontinue or break off our Walk, when we cease to do Good; but the more we
mind good Works, the more we proceed in our Way. Phil. 3. 14. Pressing onward
to our final Reward, and at length our Entrance is more full, and with greater
peace, 2 Pet. 1. 11.

III. How they are fitted and prepared by this new Nature that is put into them
for good Works?

Answ. There is a remote Preparation, and a near Preparation.

1. The remote Preparation is an Inclination and Propensity to all the Acts of
the holy and heavenly Life. All Creatures have an Inclination to their proper
Operations, so the new Creature. As the Sparks fly up, and the Stones downward
by an Inclination of Nature; so are their Hearts bent to please and serve God.
The Inclination is natural, the Acts are voluntary, because it is an
Inclination of a free Agent. The Law of God is in their Hearts, Psalm. 40. 8.
Psalm. 37. 31. Others force themselves, but here there is an Affinity between
the Work and the vital Principle which is in us, so that we need not much
enforcement. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9. As touching Brotherly Love, I need not write unto
you, for you are taught of God to love one another. Now God's teaching is not
by Expression, but by Impression; he has inclined, suited our Hearts to it. As
there need not many Arguments to move the Mother to give suck to her tender
Infant, Nature has taught her, left such an Instinct and Inclination upon her,
which does sufficiently excite her to do it.

2. The near Preparation is called Promptitude and Readiness for every good
Work, or a ready Obedience to every good Work, Tit. 3. 1. So 1 Timothy 6. 18.
Ready to distribute. Heb. 13. 16. Ready to communicate. So Paul, (...), Acts
21. 13. This is beyond Inclination. The Fire has an Inclination to ascend
upwards, yet something may violently keep it down; so a Christian may have a
Will to Good, a strong, not a remiss Will, but yet there are some Impediments,
Romans 7. 18. Inclination implies a remote Power, but Readiness the next and
immediate Power; therefore a Christian ought to keep himself in a readiness or
fitness of Disposition for his Duty, whether it concerns God, our selves, or
others. This is seen in Zeal, that bears down all Impediments. All Graces are
operative, and Zeal is that earnest Impulsion and Activity of every Grace,
where it is in strength and vigor. Faith works, Gal. 5. 6. Love
constrains, 2 Cor. 5. 14. Hope quickneth, 1 Pet. 1. 3. A lively Hope. This
proceeds from the new Nature, when it is in right Frame and Strength. We need
not only make Conscience of our Duty, or have some mind to it, but our Hearts
will not let us have any Quiet and Rest without it. 2 Pet. 1. 8. They make you
that you shall be neither barren nor unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Christians must be zealous of good Works, Tit. 2. 14. Paul was
pressed in Spirit, Acts 17. 10. Acts 18. 5.

The Benefits that come by it are,

1. We do good Works more easily, as being inclined thereunto. Exodus 35. 29.
The Children of Israel brought a willing Offering unto the Lord. Psalm. 110. 3.
Thy People shall be willing in the Day of thy Power. There is a great deal of
Difference between doing things by Compulsion, and doing things from an
Inclination; between Israel's making Brick in Egypt, and building the Wall in
Nehemiah's Time, Neh. 4. 6.

2. With more Delight and Alacrity. 1 John 5. 3. His Commandments are not
grievous. Psalm. 112. 1. Blessed is the Man that fears the Lord, that
delights greatly in his Commandments. It is a Pleasure to them to do a good
Work, to others a Toil.

3. With Constancy. That which is forced lasts not long. Upon the first
occasion we break out, cast off the Burden which pincheth and galleth us. A Man
is never constant to his Duty, till he be held to it by his Heart; and the
Bias of the Heart is not Fear, but Love. You cannot easily persuade him
against his Love and Inclination, though you may overcome his Fears. Cant. 8.
6, 7. Set me as a Seal upon thine Arm: for Love is strong as Death, Iealousy is
cruel as the Grave. Many Waters cannot quench Love, neither can the Floods
drown it: If a Man would give all the Substance of his House for Love, it would
utterly be contemned.

The Uses are,

1. For Reproof of many professing Christians, who are not more prepared for
the Lord, and made ready for every good Work. Alas! some are to every good Work
reprobate, Tit. 1. 16. unfit for any Christian Practice. In others all their
Holiness stands in being less vicious or wicked than others. If they avoid
the greater Crimes, though they freely practice the less, they are accounted
good Men. Some talk, but do nothing, like Cypress-Trees, tall and beautiful,
but unfruitful; or the Carbuncle, afar off seeming all on fire, but the Touch
discovers it to be key-cold: their Zeal is more in their Tongues than their
Actions. Others are very unready, arguing for a Mediocrity, disputing every
inch with God, beating down the price of Religion as low as they can, as little
Worship and Charity as may be, and will do no more than needs, and it is well
if they do that. True Goodness, like live-Honey, droppeth of its own accord, 2
Cor. 8. 2. and is always desirous to do more for God. Psalm. 71. 14. I will
praise thee more and more. Phil. 1. 9. I pray that your Love may abound yet
more and more, in Knowledge, and in all Judgment. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. Furthermore, we
exhort you, Brethren, That as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk, and
to please God, so ye would abound more and more. But little of this Temper is
to be found.

2d Use of Information.

First, Observe the Deduction of good Works from their proper Causes, viz. The
Will of God requiring, our Regeneration fitting, the one determines our Duty,
the other makes us ready to perform it. While carnal, that which we do is but
the Image of a good Work, not really and spiritually good.

2dly. The Necessity of good Works.

1. Necessitate Consequentis, as the Fruit and End of Regeneration. All things
are valued by their use. What does the new Creature serve for, but that we may
walk in newness of Life? otherwise it is but a Notion. It is not given us to
lie hid in the Heart, as a sluggish idle quality, but that we may act by it,
and improve it for God. The Lord made no Creature in vain. Inded all that we
have from God, both in Nature and Grace, was, that we might be fruitful in
Holiness. In Nature we have Life, Health, and Parts for nothing else, but that
by our present Duty we may prepare our selves for everlasting Joys. All God's
Mercies bind us to Diligence, all his Ordinances are Means to help us, all his
Graces are Power to enable us, and there is over and above the holy Spirit to
excite and quicken that Power, Ioh. 4. 10. Ezekiel. 36. 27.

2. Necessitate Praecepti, God has required them at our hands. Now we must
make Conscience of what God has required, especially when all his Commandments
are holy, just and good. If some greater thing were required, ought we not to
have done it? 2 Kin. 5. 13. But when he has required such noble Work, shall we
refuse? There is nothing in his Law, but what becomes his Nature, preserves
and makes happy ours.

3. Necessitate Medii, as the Way to Heaven. Good Works are indispensibly
required of grown Persons, if they mean to be saved. Heb. 12. 14. Follow Peace
with all Men, and Holiness, without which no Man shall see God. A Christian
shall be judged at the last day by what he has done. Rev. 20. 12. I saw the
Dead, small and great, stand before God; and the Books were opened, and another
Book was opened, which was the Book of Life, and the Dead were judged out of
those things that were written in the Books, according to their Works. 1 Pet.
1. 17. If ye call on the Father, who without respect of Persons judges every
Man according to his Work. Profession will not carry it, but our Works come
into the Judgment. So Rev. 14. 13. Their Works follow them, that is, They have
the Fruit and Comfort of them in another World, and without them we cannot be
saved.

4. Necessitate Signi, as Evidences of our Right to Salvation, both to others
and our selves. Works, or external Acts, are more sensible and visible, and
also liable to the notice of our own Consciences; and it is more hard to judge
of the internal Grace, than the external Fruits.

(1.) As to others. God sees what is in our Hearts, but Men see it not till
the Effects manifest it. When John suspected the Pharisees, he said to them,
Mat. 3. 8. Bring ye forth therefore Fruits meet for Repentance. The Fear of God
is more known by the external Act, than by the internal Habit; therefore that
Description is given, Prove. 8. 13. The Fear of the Lord is to hate Evil; Pride
and Arrogance, and the evil Way, and the froward Mouth do I hate. And Job 28.
28. The Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom; and to depart from Evil, is
Understanding. The Current of a Man's Life and Actions does best expound and
interpret his Heart. Thus the Psalmist discovered the wicked, Psalm. 36. 1. The
Transgression of the Wicked says within my Heart, that there is no Fear of God
before his Eyes.

(2.) To our selves holy Conversation and Godliness is the surest note of our
Regeneration. We judge others by external Works alone, For the Tree is known by
its Fruit, Mat. 7. 16. Charity forbids us to pry any further: but we judge our
selves by internal and external Works together. If within we have Faith in
Christ, a love to God, and hatred of Evil, a delight in Holiness, a deep sense
of the World to come, all which Graces make up the new Nature, then these
things issue out into an holy Conversation, this breeds Joy and Peace of
Conscience. 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoicing, the Testimony of our
Conscience, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom,
but by the Grace of God we have had our Conversation in the World. 1 John 3.
18, 19. Let us not love in Word neither in Tongue, but in Deed and in Truth:
and, hereby we know that we are of the Truth, and shall assure our Hearts
before him.

(3.) That good Works must not be opposed to God's Mercy and free Grace, or
Christ's Satisfaction, Merit and Righteousness, either in the matter of
Justification or Salvation, but kept in a due subordination to God's Grace and
Christ's Merits. This is the business of this Context to reconcile the Grace of
God with the necessity of good Works, and e contra; and very well it may be,
for they are part of the Grace obtained. He is most beholden to God, and
indebted to Grace, who is enabled to do most good; for all is from him. Phil.
2. 13. He works in us both to will and to do, of his own good Pleasure: So
that our very doing is receiving. But because there are a sort of Men that may
be called Justiciaries, who trust, and teach others to trust to their own
Virtues and Works, without a Savior, or ascribe the part of a Savior to them;
and on the other side, the Libertines who teach Men not to look at any thing in
themselves at all, not as an Evidence, Condition, or Means, but to trust to
Christ's Blood to be instead of Faith, Repentance and Obedience, which is their
Duty to be performed by them; therefore it will be necessary to be well
acquainted with what is truly the Part and Office of Christ, what is truly the
Office of Faith and Repentance, what of Works, that you may be sure to give
every thing its due, and may wholly trust Christ for his part, and not join
Faith or any of your Works and Duties, in the least degree of that Trust and
Honor which belongs to our Savior, but regard them according to that use
for which they are commanded in the Gospel.

1. Our Works whatever they are either Duties to God or Man, are not the first
moving cause or inducement to incline God to show us Favor, or to bring about
our Salvation. No, this Honor must be reserved for the Grace of God, which
moves and stirs all in the business of our Salvation. It was his Grace to
provide us a Savior, John 3. 16. God so loves the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting Life. And the giving of Faith or converting Grace to some before
others, is the mere Effect of his Mercy and good Pleasure. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. God
who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he has loved us, when we
were dead in Trespasses and Sins, has quickened us together with Christ: by
Grace ye are saved. Then the Benefits consequent upon Conversion, are from
God's Love and Mercy. As Justification, Romans 3. 24. Justified freely by his
Grace: Not only by his Grace, but freely; that is, not excited by our Works,
but acting freely of its own accord. Then for Eternal Life, we have it from the
Grace of God, and the Mercy of our Redeemer. Jude 21. Looking for the Mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal Life. So that Grace is the first Mover and
Principle in the whole Business of our Salvation: it is originally from Grace,
and all along by Grace.

2. Our Works before or after Conversion are not that Righteousness, not any
part of that meritorious Righteousness, by virtue of which Sins are expiated,
the Wrath of God appeased, all Blessings of Heaven purchased, and we reconciled
to God. For this is only to be ascribed to the Merit and Satisfaction of our
Lord Jesus Christ. When we were Enemies, we were reconciled by his Death, and
are saved by his Life. Romans 5. 10. He is our Propitiation, we live by him. 1
John 4. 9, 10. In this was manifested the Love of God toward us, because that
God sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we might live through him.
Herein is Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be the Propitiation for our Sins. It is Christ's Office and Honor to be a
Sacrifice for Sin, and a Propitiation for us, and a perfect Savior and
Intercessor; to obtain the Spirit, to fit us for our present Duty and future
Happiness. We are his Workmanship in Christ.

3. Our Works or Duties which we perform in Obedience to God, are not the first
means to apply the Grace of the Redeemer, or the Condition of our first
entrance into the Evangelical Estate. No, that is proper to Repentance and
Faith. Romans 3. 22. The Righteousness of God is by Faith unto all, and upon all
them that believe. And Repentance is frequently required also to receive
Pardon, and the Gift of the Holy Ghost. Acts 2. 38. Repent and be baptized
every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of Sins, and ye
shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost. Acts 3. 19. Repent ye therefore, and
be Converted, that your Sins may be blotted out. It is the penitent believing
Sinner that is qualified for these Privileges; or he that thankfully and
humbly accepts of the offered Savior, and consents to the Covenant made with
God the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, he is washed from his Sins in the Blood of
Christ, reconciled, adopted into God's Family, and made an Heir according to
the hope of Eternal Life. Tit. 3. 7. This first Faith by which we believe and
consent to the Covenant, implies both a dependence on God's Mercy, and
Christ's Merits, and also a consent of Obedience or hearty Subjection to God.

4. When we have consented to accept Christ and his Benefits, and do give our
selves to him, then Works or new Obedience follow, as necessary to continue our
right to Pardon and Life. For none have benefit by God's Covenant, but those
that keep his Covenant as well as make it; and without this we cannot have
Communion with God, 1 John 1. 7. If we walk in the Light, as he is in the
Light, we have fellowship one with another: Nor evidence the reality of our
Faith and Repentance. St. Paul was sent to Preach to the Gentiles, That they
should repent, and turn to God, and do works meet for Repentance, Acts 26. 20.
Besides, we cannot preserve our claim and right, if we do not still go on to do
good. 1 Timothy 6. 18. Ezekiel. 18. 24. When the Righteous turns away from his
Righteousness, and commits Iniquity, shall he live? all his Righteousness
shall not be mentioned; in his Trespasses that he has trespassed, and in his
Sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die. It is true of the Hypocrite
without Scruple, and of the real righteous Man; if you suppose the one, you may
suppose the other. Well, these things must not be confounded nor opposed: not
confounded; but we must distinctly consider, what is proper to the Grace of
God, proper to the Merit of Christ, proper to Faith, proper to Works: not
opposed so, as to make the one exclude the other. As the Grace of God to
exclude the Merit of Christ, or serve instead of it, nor the Merit of Christ,
his Blood and Righteousness, to exclude Faith and Repentance, nor be instead of
them; nor Faith to exclude good Works.

5. All the applying Grace is from first to last wrought in us by the Spirit.
He does renew and heal our Natures, as coming to us from the Grace of God, and
Merits of Christ. Tit. 3. 5, 6. According to his Mercy he saves us by the
washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us
abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior. By the Holy Spirit working in us
habitual Grace and exciting it, we believe, repent, obey, do whatever is
necessary to be done to obtain Eternal Life. Therefore this must not be
omitted, but acknowledged as a great part of this Grace.

III. Use. To exhort us, if we would show our selves to be new Creatures
indeed, to be full of good Works. The Arguments to move us are,

1. It is a necessary fruit of inward Grace, and so does plainly show that you
are partakers of Heavenly Wisdom. James 3. 17. The Wisdom which is from above,
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy
and good fruits. The carnal Worldling all his Wisdom is to grow rich to
himself, which indeed is but Folly, Luke 12. 21. His business is to live to the
Flesh, Gal. 6. 8. He lays out all his Strength, Time, and Care, and Wealth
for the feeding his own carnal Desires: but the other sows to the Spirit,
lays out himself in works of Piety and Charity.

2. External Acts which flow from an Internal Principle, increase the Habit;
the more you do good the more you are enabled to do good; as bodily Strength is
increased by Exercise. Why is the right Hand more agil, stronger, and bigger
than the left? it is oftener exercised, and so fuller of Blood and Spirits. So
in Grace, the more you act Faith, the more is Faith increased. Love grows
more fervent being kept in a constant Exercise, and Hope more lively and
affective. Always Actions increase the Principles which did produce them;
partly of their own Nature. 1 John 2. 5. Whosoever keeps his Word, in him verily
is the Love of God perfected. The more acts of Love he puts forth toward God,
the more does his Love increase in him: partly by Divine Reward, Heb. 6. 10. He
is not unrighteous to forget your labor of Love, which ye have showed toward
his Name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and do minister. God rewards
them temporally. 2 Cor. 9. 12. God is able to make all Grace abound toward
you, that you always having all sufficiency in all things, may aboud to every
good Work: That is, to give you to be liberal at all times. And when he says
God is able, it not only implies that God is the Fountain of all Plenty, and
Sovereign Disposer of it, and so has power to make you the richer, rather than
the poorer by your Liberality, to make every Alms you give, like the Oil in the
Cruse, to multiply as you pour it out, that there shall be enough for every
Object and every Occasion, but also he is sure to make it good: for he quotes
it again in the next Verse, as it is written, He has dispersed abroad, he has
given to the Poor, his Righteousness remains for ever. It is taken out of
Psalm. 112. where there are signal Promises of Wealth and Riches in the House
of the liberal Alms-giver; God rewards them eternally. 2 Cor. 9. 6. He which
sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, and he which sows bountifully, shall
reap bountifully. Now is the Seed-time, hereafter is our Harvest and Crop, we
shall have a liberal reward from God, in the general Resurrection. God also
rewards his obedient Servants Spiritually, Internally, and that not only with
more Comfort and Peace, but by increasing the Grace it self: for God that
punishes Sin with Sin, does reward Grace with Grace. Wells are sweeter for
draining: on the other side; a Key that is seldom turned, rusts in the Lock. An
intermission of good Works makes us more unable and unready for them.

3. It is a greater Honor to God. John 15. 8. Herein is my Father glorified,
that you bear much Fruit. Phil. 1. 11. Being filled with the Fruits of
Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the Glory and praise of God. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11, 12. Wherefore we pray for you, that our God would count you
worthy of this Calling, and fulfill all the good Pleasure of his Goodness, and
the work of Faith with Power; that the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be
glorified in you, and you in him. Christ's Religion is not a barren Religion,
but full of good Works. It is a mighty credit to Religion in you that profess
it, when Goodness is the Constitution of your Hearts, to do good the business
of your Lives.

4. It edifieth others, and provokes an holy Emulation. Heb. 10. 24. Let us
consider one another, to provoke unto Love, and to good Works. We provoke them
most by our Example, when they are cold, negligent, and backward to Works of
Piety and Mercy. In all things we should be an Instance of Divine Virtues.

5. This is the fruit which God expects from us, that the Trees of
Righteousness should bear the Fruits of Righteousness. If we frustrate his
expectation, he will hew us down, and cast us into the Fire. Mat. 3. 10.
Therefore good Works are not needless things.

The means to enable us are,

1. Be sure that you are renewed. The Dead cannot do the works of the Living.
Neither do Men gather Grapes of Thorns, nor Figgs of Thistles, Mat. 7. 16. Our
first business is to look to our Conversion to God. All outward Duties begin in
the Heart, they are valued no further than they come from it sanctified.

2. Keep your Hearts under a Sense of God's Authority, that you may feel
something in your own Bosoms that may tell you, you are bound to obey him, and
may plead God's right with you. This is done by a frequent Meditation upon your
Creation, and Redemption: Your Creation gives God a full right to you, and
Redemption makes it comfortable, by both you see you are his. Acts 27. 23.
There stood by me this Night the Angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve.

3. You are entrusted with his Talents, and of their improvement you must give
an account. Mat. 25. 14. A Lord called his Servants, and delivered to them his
Goods, in order to Improvement.

4. What encouragement we have from a gracious God and Covenant, which takes
not advantage of involuntary Weaknesses, but accepts their endeavors who
sincerely do their best. Mal. 3. 17. I will spare him, as a Man spares his Son
that serves him.

5. Remember often your great obligation to God; you can never do so much for
him as he deserves of you. Psalm. 116. 12. What shall I render to the Lord for
all his Benefits toward me?

6. Do all as in God's Eye, and with a constant dependence upon him. Psalm. 16.
8. I have set the Lord always before me. Make him your Play Master, Governor,
and Judge, and it will not only keep you sincere, but diligent in good Works.
The work is not sincerely done, when you look to Man, nor thoroughly done. Such
have their reward only here, Mat. 6.

7. Love your Work. A little thing will stop him that does it unwillingly.
Psalm. 119. 47, 48. I will delight my self in thy Commandments, which I have
loved. And I will lift up my Hands to thy Commandments, which I have loved.

8. Account your selves much beholden to God, that he will employ you in any
Service for his Glory.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 3. for Condemned read Contemned. P. 41. l. 18. f. Love r. Fear.
P. 79. l. 31. f. it r. the Promises. P. 92. l. 24. f. that r. if. P. 104. l. 8.
f. Hearty r. Heart. P. 125. l. 3. f. External r. Eternal. P. 128. l. 26. after
they were, r. not. P. 150. l. 17. after Obedience dele partly. P. 168. l. 17.
f. Conversations r. Consolations P. 181. l. 23. f. of Cognizance r. of our
Cognizance. P. 212. l. 33. after ever-blessed add Life. P. 113. l. 17. f.
overaweth, r. outlaweth. P. 252. l. 20. f. them. r. him. P. 167. l. 11. dele
partly. P. 289. l. 9. f. to evince, r. toward its ruin.


