THE JUST GENERAL A Tragi: Comedy, Written by Major COSMO MANUCHE
LONDON, Printed for M. M. T. C. and G. Bedell, and are to be sold at their
Shop at the Middle Temple gate in Fleetstreet, 1652.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JAMES Earl of Northampton, and ISABELLA. his Most
virtuous Lady, all increase of health and Prosperity.
Right Honorable,
THis Critical Age, visibly discovers, to what disadvantage I must thrust this
poor Play into the world; so that I am forced to lay hold on discetion (the
greatest part of valor) for my defense. For although I well know they may
find fault with my wit, I am sure they can not condemn my judgment in (humbly)
choosing your Honors Patrons to these poor (friendless) Sicilians, which when
sheltered under your wings, will (though not from malice) yet be free (in mercy
to themselves) from their venting it. Right Honorable, it is only your
pardons I beg, which (out of that propensity to goodness, which is natural in
you) I doubt not of; as of your encouragement to enable me more serviceable in
a larger manner, to confirm, that I must live, and dye your honors most humble
and most faithful servant.

COS. MANUCHE.

The Prologue intended for the Stage.
Enter Prologue and Critic severally. Prolo. Critic forbear the Stage, what
do you here?

Crit. I come to judge your Play, not for to jeere.

Prolo. Although you know to judge, yet fancy rules
Which makes the best of Critics knowing fools.

Crit. Prologue you censure boldly, and condemn
The able Critic amongst the Wou'dbe men.
Who to describe from us, asks no more skill
Then to observe, how 'twixt each Act they will
Twirle on the toe, picking their teeth, and dance
Then, sometimes whistle Ala mode de France.
The Play being done, they on each other look
To read in one another's faces how it took.
None daring (though supposed valiant) for to say
It was well Acted, or it is a good Play.
When one non Guilty of ability
To judge, a^k^th his Friends advise, when he
Antickly answers (faith) with little pains
He could write better, yet never break his brains*
To which, his Lady with an easy Faith
And little judgment, answers, and says,
Such foolish fellows as have writ before
Should you but write (dear friend) would never write more*
At which he smiles, and cries fie, fie, there be
No question some can write as well as he.
Which she must doubt, whilst he denies it so
As if he knew 'twere truth, but would not know
These art your Crit^ck Wou'dbes rail at the Poet
For writing sense (poor souls) and they not know it.
When we, where there is a fault proclaim't it is true,
But never do it till judgment finds it due.
Distinguish then 'twixt Wo'udbe wits, and us
That dare do Justice, though miraculous.
Prologue farewell, if you deserve applause,
The knowing Critic shall maintain your cause.

Exit Crit. Prolo. To the audience. Now unto you that dare be just, and judge
Without partiality, we shall not grudge
To be chid gently, and shall study mend
Such faults as you shall say our Author penned.
If 'has writ nonsense, thus he bid me say,
He writ by'ch spirit, just as the (Brethren pray

Prologue. To the READER.
REader, least you mistake, and like my play,
Know it is the first I wrote, and how that may
Your wits disparage (faith) I Will leave to you
That best know (in such cases) what to do.
In spite of Malice venture I dare thus far,
Pack not a Jury, and I Will stand the Bar.
The Names of the Persons presented.
Amasius -- A young King in love with Aurelia. Bellicosus -- General of his
Army. Delirus -- Son to the General, in love with Artesia. Sebastian -- An old
decayed Lord, father to Aurelia Antonio. Noble Persons attending the King.
Cornelius. Noble Persons attending the King. Eugenio. Noble Persons attending
the King. Fabius -- Servant to the General. Ferdinando -- Servant to Sebastian.
Dull. Goldcalf -- Heir to a rich Usurer. Snap. ali. Sunkloe -- A decayed
Gentleman, servant to Goldcalfe. Captain Thunder. Pretenders to be cashiered
Officers. Lievt. Cannon. Pretenders to be cashiered Officers. Ensign Drake.
Pretenders to be cashiered Officers. Strephon -- An inconstant Shepherd.
Amintor -- A constant Shepherd. Aurelia -- The Kings Mistress, Daughter to
Sebastian. Artesia -- A proud rich Lady, daughter to a deceased Lord called
Endimion Bellira -- Woman to Aurelia, and Sister to Snap. Dorothy Dreswel.
Woman to Artesia. Executioner.
The SCENE Sicilie.

THE JUST GENERAL.
ACT. I.
SCENE I.
Enter Antonio, Cornelius, Eugenio. Antonio. It Is certain truth, the Letters,
this day, from our
Valiant General (to our young King) affirm
A Cessation Of Arms, on both fides,
For these three months.

Cornel. Can you guess the reason,
Our General having (as is supposed) much the
Advantage, should he give them battle.

Eugen. Believe it, our General
Has to much honesty, mixed with knowledge, to
Condescend, to any thing can prejudice
Our King and Country.

Anton. He Is a man, no one loves virtue can suspect,
I hear his Letter has struck a drooping melancholy
In the King.

Cornel. It Is truth, but the cause was not our Generals actions
But his Council, who (as it is talked) diswades him from
Loving the fair Aurelia: as a match too far beneath him.

Eugen. It Is probable, for questionless he loves her much,
And pity it is the virtuous fair one has not dowry
Equal her birth, and merit.

Anton. Which if she had, I know no reason, but she might
Make a wife, for any he that is mortal --
The King Flourish: Enter King, Sebastian Ferdinando; and guard
King. Sebastin: me thinks, thou droop'st as if thy spirits
Were with thy fortunes lost: both might be raised
Again, would but the subject please to let
His King command.

Sebast. He ill deserves the name of subject that should
Refuse to obey your just commands.

King. O Sebastian, What appears just to us, not seasoned
To the palate of the giddy headed multitude,
To them's unjust.
It Is not what we, but what they will that must.
Where Is Aurelia thy fair daughter?

Ferdinand. So please your Majesty, the Lady Artesia and she,
Wait in the presence.

King. Go call them in: Gallants, you hear our Army is --
Exit Ferd. Like to have a ^^ea^^ing ^^me, the General has my
Consent, for a three months Cessation.

Anton. Sir. the General (we know)
Can nothing act but what must visibly appear
(To men of reason) much advantageous, to your
Self, and Country.

Enter Aurelia, Artesia, Ferdinando. King. We doubt it not. How does the fair
Artesia --
Kisses her What not yet in love? me thinks our Courtiers
Are grown dull, but it is Delirus (son to our
Noble General) is the man: Have I
Not gue'st unhappily?

Artesi. That Is as it proves Sir.

King. May it prove well as I wish it.

Artesi. And may your Majesty in your love prove happy.

King. So wishes my Aurelia: if I mistake not --
Kissesher
Artesi. My Aurelia: See, see, he kisses too close, as
Contracted lovers, when fore't to part. --

aside King. Aurelia: harbor not within thy Ivory breast, that
Traitor to thy beauty, Melancholy; he is an ill guest,
Not to be rooted out (if settled) but with a certain
Ruin of that fair fabriek. There Is not (within
The compass of my power) that thing, thy virtue
Can command, I will not carefully see performed,
By my chaste love I will.

Aurel. Royal Sir, low as the earth, I thank you, you, --
She Kneels That can pity in distress, a thing not worth
Your noble thoughts.

King. Arise, Aurelia: Reach me a chair there --
Takes Aurelia by the hand.
Aurel. Artesia, stay.

Artesi. When you are Queen perhaps I may obey --
Artesia offers to be gone.
King. Call back Artesia. Artesia, what desert
Your friends? come we must have your opinion too, --
Ferdinando goes off Artesia returns. Reach another chair here.
Aurelia, sit.
Aurel. Pardon great Sir, the humblest of your handmaids.

King. Come sit I say, when you are Queen; Artesia
Will obey, and as I am your King I do expect
No less from you.

Aurel. Great Sir, the practice of my obedience,
Shall be my joyful study.

King. Show it in this, sit down.

Aurel. Your will, shall be my law.

King. Gentlemen, pray tell me (you that are Landlords
To the Commonwealth) what creature living
(Dares own me for his King) can justly envy
At the favors, I bestow on this fair Virgin --
What all silent? Antonio,
What say you?

Anton. Sir, I should be loath to stand engaged, for that many
Headed beast (the commonwealth) yet confidently
Dare say, there is not, a Noble breast, would not
(With me) rejoice to see, such virtue matched.

Artesi. This is gross flattery --
aside
King. Artesia, what say you?

Artesi. Sir, I am so far from diveing into the thoughts of
Others, I hardly know my own.

King. But I can shrewdly guess them, and never cast a figure. --
Exit all but King. All leave us, but wait in the next room.
What are we Princes, bove other men, more then in,
Our care? I do remember (blessed be his memory)
My Royal Father, would lay his hand upon my head
And say, boy, wed not thy self to pleasure, it is
An insinuating evil; which once embraced, and of
Thy heart possession got will ulcerate the body,
And if not timely cured, may infect the soul.
It Is care, not pleasure, must preserve thy crown
Which if thoud'st have, upon thy head, sit fast
Study to know thy subjects, and so rule
Not to be thought too wise, not yet their fool.
It was good council, which to my best of power, I Will labor
To find out, and follow; here Bellicosus (our General)
Writes, my love to fair Aurelia is generally known
What if it be? and that considering her birth, and
Beauty, she may deserve my pity not my bed,
And that the event may prove dangerous to act,
What the subject may make his pretense of quarrel:
(I had best have the banes of matrimony, ask in
Every Parish Church in my dominion, with the hands
Of the Parson, and Churchwardens, for the approbation,
Of the lawfulness of my choice) but Bellicosus,
Is honest, and carefully instructs us for the best, as
One whose gray hairs, pleads an insight, in those
State affairs, my unexperien't youth, nere understood.
Besides, it was my Fathers charge, on his sick
Bed, I should 'bove all, take his advice,
As one, near us in blood
Whom he has found, entirely faithful to his Crown.
It Is ill to loose a subject, hardly to be found.
You' powers above instruct my tender youth
Love her (by all the Gods above) I do more then
My life; Nor can I find a posibility, to spend
The remnant of my days, on this frail earth,
In peace, without I do enjoy the fair
Aurelia for my wife, what though she be poor
In what our earthly fools adore, more then
There Gods, she has, in her Chaste breast
Virtue enough, for to redeem, forth from
Captivity, 'bove half the world.
Court dross, that love it Aurelia I am thine
As much from thee, entales thy virtue mine. --

Exit. Enter Mr. Dull Goldcalfe in an Antique dress. and Snap his man. Gold.
But Snap do thou still continue thy dissolution
That there is, things mortal, and in Coats, like
Women, that can deserve my embraces.

Snap. Pardon me, Sir, I spoke not in the plural number.

Gold. Plural, Snap; what is that

Snap. Why plural signifies; more then one,
Plural, may be many

Gold. Plural, many, I shall remember plural, an excellent
Word, what is that one, thou would make happy
In my acquaintance.

Snap. She is a Lady, Nobly born; of a high Spirit,
And heir to great Estate

Gold. Let her be as Nobly born as she will, I care not a pin
And for her high spirit, here is that shall take it down --
Points to his sword. What may her state be, say you.

Snap. Some five thousand pounds, per annum.

Gold. Snap, I understand you well, per annum
Is by some kinswoman of hers, is it not so

Snap. Sir, you mistake per annum is meant
Five thousand pound a year

Gold. A very trifle Snap, but because she is thy friend
And I fear thou have acquainted her with my good
Parts, I may be merciful, and pity her.

Snap. I thank you Sir, I hope, she will deserve it

Gold. It may be so Snap; what may her name be

Snap. The Ladies name is Artesia Daughter, and heir to the
Late deceased Lord Endimion

Gold. Heir me no heirs, when will her father dye

Snap. He has been Coffind under ground this twelve-moneth

Gold. Nay then he may be dead, but Snap, you might have
Told me so.
You know her lodging.

Snap. I do Sir,

Gold. Some time to day Il'try her wit.

Snap. You will find her, well worded, and discreet.

Gold. For that Snap; I shall word with her, I believe, and
For discretion, those that know me, know I have
My share, Snap; has not my Tailor done his part
How do I look.

Snap. Singular well Sir, for ill' be sworn their's none looks
Like you.

Gold. Snap; I do believe thee hark in thine ear --
They whisper. Enter Antonio, Cornelius, Eugenio.
Corneli. It Is without question, he intends to make the fair

Aurelica, his Queen.

Anto. It Is doubtless so, And though the Generals letter
Some what displeased him, I find his resolution fixed
Which has strangely wrought, an unaccustomed
Mirth in him.

Euge. By all the Gods, I joy in it

Corneli. He loves not virtue, does not. In the name of --
Spies Goldcalfe. Jupiter, what may yon' monster be
If a Baboon, he is of the largest size I ever saw

Eugeni. We know the beast, his name is Dull. Goldcalfe --
Goldcalfe struts by One (however ill bestowed) The fates have pleased
To shower down wealth in abundance, I wonder much
Sebastians fortunes, being sunck, he begs not
This same fool oth' King, He has an Estate
Few Noble men in our Land, can purchase
With their own

Anto. Now by the gods, it were but Justice, lets move it to
The King, Sebastians Noble mind will never
Condescend to do it

Corneli. By Jupiter, Il' join in the motion, Engenio, thou
Know the Gilded calfe
Prithee accost him, I long to see
How his inside does, with his out agree

Gold. Snap; They have spyed me,
And come to do me reverence.

Eugeni. Mr. Dull Goldcalfe; your most undoubted friend
I shall desire you take acquaintance, of this my
Noble friend, I am confident he will deserve
Your love.

Gold. It may be so

Corneli. Noble Sir, Although a stranger to your worth,
Yet the Noble Character fame gives of you, has
Encouraged me, to become, an humble suitor, you
Would vouchsafe, to list me amongst, those happ
Mortals, you dain to style your servants.

Gold. Snap; This is a large Complement,
Not suddenly to be answered

Snap. It Is stale and out of fashion.

Gold. Say you so? Sir though I understand by my man
Snap; your complement be stale and out of
Fashion, yet for this Gentleman's sake (I honor
With the name of friend) your suit is granted

Corneli. Right Noble Sir, I thank you

Eugeni. And I in his behalf.

Anto. Mr. Dull Goldcaulse, the confirmation of your
Health, is joy to me.

Gold. Noble Antonio, I give you plural thanks,
And gentlemen, I am glad I met you, I must
Trouble you on friday next to my wedding,
Snap; where shall it be?

Snap. For that we shall contrive

Eugeni. Please you to make us happy, in your brids name
And place of being, we shall be proud to wait on you.

Gold. Tell my friends her name, I have forgot it, I never
Saw her yet gentlemen

Anto. How never saw your bride, and yet your match so near

Gold. No faith not I, but Snap; will show me where
She is, anon.

Eugeni. Snap; pray what may this creature be, that can
Deserve so high, and rich a match, as this my
Nob'e friend.

Snap It is the Lady Artesia, daughter, and heir to the
Late deceased Lord Endimion.

Gold And yet Snap; you told me he was dead

Eugeni. Noble friend he is

Gold. Say you so, 'twas more then I understood

Eugeni. And Snap; has done you justice, she is the only
Match, for wealth, and beauty, our country does afford

Gold. You will not fail to come then

Anto. Name but the place, and we will attend you

Gold. Snap; we will have it at the Cake-house
Behind the Hospital

Snap. Not for the world Sir, a Lady of her birth and breeding
Keep her weedding at a Cake house, 'twould be avile
Disparagement to you both

Gold. Why Snap; my father (I have heard him say)
Kept his wedding there, and he thought himself
As good a man, as she.

Snap, It Is true Sir, but now the fashions altered

Gold. Where lies the fashion now

Snap. Her house will be the only place

Gold. Gentlemen, at her house a friday. I will about
It straight, Snap show me the way --

Exit Gould, and Snap. Snap. I wait your worship.

Anto. He scapes well, with tossing in a blancket, if he
Dare attempt this, her high spirit, will have no mercy on him.

Eugeni. It Is but the prologue to the misery, he is like to endure
His ignorance will be his daily punishment.

Corneli. By Jupiter, I neither hear, nor in my travels
Ever saw his fellow, in other shape then in
Long coats, and bells, what is his man, he seems
To be a cunning knave.

Eugen. The man has better blood runs in his veins, then
His ridiculous master, and questionless, aims at his
Private ends, in this same borrowed shape
Of servingman.

Cornel. May he prosper in it, more then a bare subsistence,
For the fool's to much, come Gentlemen it is time
We did attend the King.

Anton. Then lead the way. --
Ex. Antonio, Cornelius, Eugenius.
Enter Artesia, sol. looking in her glass. Artesi. This is no flattering glass:
if true, my judgment
Cannot find, Aurelia's face, five thousand pounds
A year, more beautiful then mine. I have been
Much flattered, if this face speak, not it self the
Best in the Court; And at that rate, I have sufficently
Tyraniz'd over my poor Idolaters, mong'st whom
I must find out one, that must gladly act, what
Ever I prescribe,
Artesia must not, cannot see
Aurelia in the Throne of Majesty
And I a poor neglected looker on,
My fortune, and my beauty
Speak me (aloud) I do deserve the best.
And shall a beggars brat, skip over my head, and
I, when it is to late, whine out my griefs, and
Say I might have done. Aurelia, you may be
Queen of Faries, or of some petty Island in the
Other world,
This is to hot for thee, thy eyes strike fire
When thoroughly quenched, mine then, will blaze the higher.
What monster have we here --
Enter Gould, and Snap.
Gold. Snap. I perceive the Lady is at leasute, by being alone
Prithee remember my service to her, and tell her I
Will find some other time to wait on her.

Snap. By no means Sir, you shame your self for ever if
You speak not to her; could you have found a
Better time then when she is at leisure.

Gold. Sa^st thou me so Snap; Hem, hem, Lady:
Would it were out.

Artesi. Would what were out?

Gold. Nay there is it; I cannot tell that;
Snap; tell her my name, and riches and that
I love her, for my good parts they will speak for themselves.

Snap. This you must do your self;
Or be for ever shamed.

Artesi. Sir, have you any thing to say to me?

Snap. Now, now, now. --
to Gold.
Gold. Lady my name is Mr. Dull Goldcalfe, of an
Ancient family; my father, was above fourscore
When he dyed; his arms is a sleeping calfe,
You may see them Lady in every Tavern window,
I have heard my father say they cost him
Forty shillings, my Estate is infinite; for my parts
Judge you, if you have any wit.

Artesi. So much, I have, I think I know your business,
You come to proffer your self to be my jester.

Snap. She paies him home --
Aside
Gold. No i will be sworn Lady, Snap; can tell
I am in earnest,

Artesi. Sir I am indisposed, to entertain a fool,
But if you dare be troublesome, i will have you
cudgeld out of doors.

Gold. Why Lady, take you me for a fool
And a coward.

Snap. Else she mistakes abominably --
aside
Gold. If you do Lady, I can dispense wirh my conscience
Choose my side, and with my money buy a Colonels
Place, entertain half a score casheer'd,
Officers that shall be at my command,
Can I not Snap,

Snap. But when their monyes done, (you feed
Them with) they will command you.

Gold. To give them more money, is it not so snap?

Snap. Very right.

Gould. But Snap, because they shall command but seldom
I Will give them swinging sums at a time, there is diverse
Of my kinsmen have don't before me
Lady, how do you like my way?

Artesi. So well, that if you do not find it out quickly
I Will make my foot man show it you by the head
And shoulders.

Gold, Thanks Noble Lady, Snap and I know
The way very well, no ceremony Lady to your servant;
But you mistake me Lady, I mean the
Way of being (for your preferment) a Colonel,
For no disparagement to you Lady, I have
Heard that Colonels are no Cobblers, nor
Tinkers, but companions for Princes,
Be they not Snap?

Artesi. This Ass is troublesome. Well Sir
I have considered of it, and when
You are a Cobbler or a Tinker, (I mean a
Colonel) you shall expect a
Further answer from me --
Exit Artesia.
Gold. Hay Snap, was it not well done to make
My self a Colonel? I had never carried
The peevish ape else.

Snap. Most excellent well contrived. Now
Sir, that she may understand that you are a
Very Colonel, for so you suddenly must be;
I speedily will endeavor to find out some of
These Officers you speak of, on whom
I must spend freely, and after you have
Furnished them well with money (which you
Must do) there is not a vintner, nor Alehouse keeper
In the City, but within three days
After receipt, will with cap in hand salute
Your Officers, as thus. Save you Noble Captain;
Save you Noble Lieutenant, how fares it with
Your Noble and truly valiant Colonel
Goldcalfe. Ten days will ripen your
Fame to that perfection, that not a
Parrot, nor starling in the City, but will prattle
Colonel Goldcalf. This to your Lady known,
(As soon 'twill be) you need not
Doubt her favor.

Gold. O rare Snap; about it straight,
Thou shall have money store. And Snap;
Because she shall not understand I am a
Usurer, as was my scraping father,
I Will summon in all my principal money,
Hang use, we will find use for it
Shall we not Snap?

Snap. Admirable use (Noble Colonel.)

Gold. Sa'st thou me so boy? here is half a piece
For that, how rarely it sounds, (Noble Colonel)
Come away Snap; I long to be confirmed a Colonel

Exit Goldcalf and Snap. Enter Aurelia sol. Aurel. The king, is sure, too full
of Noble thoughts, to
Play upon my present misery, and to believe those
Favors he bestowed (so publicly) on me, as real, as
Spoken they appeared; would amaze one that deserves
No better then my self. You gods give me, a worthy
Patience to undergo, what ere' you lay
Upon me. Noble Antonio, --
Enter Antonio Welcome, what news from Court?

Anton. Most Excellent Lady, by (me unworthy)
The King commends his best of love to your fair self,
Who sadly knowing, fortune has blindly dealt
With you, and doubting your present supplies,
Has sent you a thousand pounds, which he
Commands you to dispose of, as what he has
Pronounced, your own.

Aureli. I humbly thank his Majesty. Ferdinando --
Enter Ferdinand.
Ferdinand. Madam.

Aureli. Lay by that bag.

Ferdinan. Madam I shall --

Exit. Ferdina. Aureli. Your burden (Antonio) has heat you,
I hope it is not in respect of me,
You use this Ceremony. --
Meaning, being uncovered.
Antoni. Madam, it is a reverence, my loyalty commands,
To her, my King, intends his Queen.

Aureli. Fie Antonio, This speaks you aright Courtier
But to me, the poorest of your friends,
It was too much.

Anto. Madam, I ever shall acknowledge the Court
The place has brought me up,
Yet never looked on flattery with other eyes,
Then those that saw it monstrous,
It is my judgment, not my will that ers, if I mistake
The King.

Aureli. Which sure you do Antonio, and easy may
Confess it, as what is your Princes daily exercise,
(His charity) your judgments known too sound,
To entertain a thought,
The King whose state and virtue, can
Command the worthiest she,
His own and neighboring Princes Country
Does afford: can cast his eyes upon a
Wretched thing fortune is pleased to frown on,
My poor deserts, examnin'd by my self;
And known, can swell my humble thoughts,
Up to no higher pitch then to be known his
Grateful creature, and when my prayers, for
Him and duty to his Majesty I neglect,
May I be blasted, as one not worthy day light.

Anton. And may his envy burst him, that looks with
Grudging eyes, on your preferred deserts.

Aurel. Thanks good

Antonio. And to the King,
My duty; and my thanks* as heartily as I pay
The gods in my devotion.

Anton. And may you be,
No more nor less then what I wish to see;
So blessings attend your goodness. --

Exit. Aurel. How rare does honesty at Court appear,
Yet is not strange, when virtuous Princes stee'r. --

Exit. Enter Sunklow, alias Snap, and Bellira his sister. Sunk. Come, you are
too fondly peevish, and
Must be ruled, you know our fortun's sunck
Beyond recovery, (but by this means)
Have I with early care and pains,
Made it my study to contrive (most for your good) in
This neglected shape of slavery, a way to raise
Our low sunk house, And must you out of a
Self wil'd nicitie, refuse that which your betters
Gladly would embrace (and joy to compass)
What freely I have offered, to throw into your arms.
Consider, and be wise, for rather then I Will act the fool,
To my own ruin, and others mirth,
I Will leave my Country, never to return, where
You may live to say, you had a friend --
Offers to go, And brother.

Belli. O Gentle Brother; stay, hear me but speak,
You would not tie me to a thing, I shall be shamed
To own, a gilded monster, one that the people never call
A man, but when he buys the title. Come, you do
But this to try me. I know you are too full of Nobleness
To engage me to a misery, I cannot hope for end of,
But with the loss of life; be merciful in your
Commands, and i will obey.

Sunk: How have you spent your time, has not your
Court experience, nor education in the Common wealth,
Taught you to understand, he wants for no good parts,
That has enough to purchase tongues at his command?
Besides, when valor (although not in himself)
But once is known, to curb the daring Talker,
He may as freely pass the muster-role of Gentry
As he, that yesterday Commenc't at Paris.
Come, you must and shall be ruled, or loose a friend,
More precious, then most Brothers
You know Gold-calf young, and easy wrought upon,
Apt (yet enough) to take any impression your more solid
Judgment shall find fit to mould him in. No whining,
But consent, the rest shall be my care to see performed.
Come, come, your speedy answer; It Is the last I Will urge.

Belli. Things of this high concernment, require some time
Of study, which I shall urge you grant.

Sunk. Be speedy, as what much concerns our business
And think, what women would refuse so rich a fool;
The world goes well with woman, when they rule. --

Exit. Belli. To such as do desire it. All I can think, or say,
Study, or not, I find I must obey. --

Exit. ACT. II.
SCENE I.
Enter Dorothy Dreswel sol. as from sleep. Dorothy, HEY, ho, I have had the
most sweetest, pleasant'st
Comfortabl'st dream, That ever woman wak't from.
Beshrew their noise, that put me out on it,
Me thought I could have spent -- all this morning in it;
Venus assist us we may dream,
For we have but little comfort waking;
Waiting call you it? yes we are waiting women,
We may wait long enough, ere these
Courtiers will do a poor soul a good turn.
Yet, Why do I rail at them?
They are but men, flesh and blood,
And can do no more then they can do.
It is our unmercifull Ladies, that give the poor souls
No breath, nor time to recrute.
What hopes can we have then?
Yes, Ferdinando, the Lord Sebastians man,
Begins to promise something;
Yet he com's on too, just like a posse Captain
With his forlone,
Upon a breach he has been beaten from;
But time and experience may increase his valor.
And see to my wish, he is here. --
Enter Ferdinando.
Ferdin. Fair Mistress Dorothy, I kiss your hand.

Dorot. You may make more bold, and be more welcome
Sweet Ferdinando.

Ferdin. Fair one, you have invited me to a bliss,
Exceeds what men call joys on earth.

Dorot. It Is all you Courtiers can do, to dissemble
With our sex.

Ferdin. Number not me, amongst the prophaners
Of such beauty, I must for mercy sue to: if I may
Hope to enjoy, what you fair self, has only to dispose of.

Dorot. You will not find me proudly Coy,
It Is love in love (they say) makes all the joy.

Ferdin. This kiss,
The happy prologue to our ensuing bliss.
The business (I gladly snatched to wait on your
Fair self) was to commend my Ladies service
To the fair Artesia: please you to let her
Understand so much.

Dorot. Sweet Ferdinando, I shall, as one your
Employment has made proud. --

Exit. Dorot. Ferdin. If you be proud, the devil shall
Lime you for me; was there ever such a piece of
(Second-hand formality) wrapped up in silk?
The Goat, and sparrow's chaste to her,
Il' have her married to a Regiment of Swiss,
The Eldest company will but awake her lust;
Nor shall the youngest find reason to despair
She Will not hold out, she is returned quick. --! --
Enter Dorot.
Dorot. My Lady (seemingly) thanks the fair
Aurelia, and does return her service, but so
Coldly, as if she intended not to deserve
Wages for it.

Ferdin. It Is strange my only joy, (for so I now
Shall make bold to call you) can you guess the cause?

Dorat. Why truly yes, (I shall not doubt your secrecy)

Ferdin. Not if you think I love; Racks cannot
Force reveal, when you command a silence.

Dorot. Then know, my Lady hates Aurelia,
More then she loves to be admired.

Ferdin. And that is enough. By what strange means
Has she deserved it?

Dorot. Her envy for the favors, the King
(Is pleased) bestow on her, while she
(As she conceives) is slighted.

Ferdin. It Is probable, And what you have pleased
To impart, is with my love locked here. --
Points to his heart. This kiss. Time calls away, --
Kisses her. When Cupid knows it is here, my heart bids stay, --

Exit Ferdin: Dorot. Blessings go with thee; despair not wench.
My dream some pleasure brought
A real wake's beyond a sleeping thought. --
Exit. Dorot. Enter Delirus Sol. From the camp. Artesia not at Court? with her
my business lies,
What ever to my father I pretend.
It Is well the King picked out Aurelia for his
Choice, my jealous heart first at the sound
He loved, began to faint.

Enter Anto. Eugeni. Anto. Delirus, welcome to Court
We hope the valiant General (your Noble father)
Enjoys his health.

Deli. He does; and by me saluts you both
As his best of friends.

Anto. We thank him, and wish victory may
Crown his actions.

Deli. You make him happy in such noble friendship.
Pray Gentlemen how fares it with our virtuous King?
The camp generally speaks him in love,
In which they wish him prosper.

Eugeni. So we do all, as you in your fair Choice, Artesia

Deli. Truly Eugenio, I should be proud for
To be known her servant, (would she accept the
Service.) And do confess it were a happiness,
I know none greater could I deserve her favor, which
She well knows I am too unworthy of.

Eugeni. A soldier Delirus, and doubt the Conquest.
Men that would seem to know,
Reports she loves you.

Deli. Eugenio report's their own.
I shall believe it too, when (truth it is known
Enter Artesia.
Anto. See where she comes, a confirmation
To your wished success, Crown your desires --

Exit. Anto. Eugeni. Deli. Content wait on Artesia, fairest of thy sex --
Kisses her.
Artesi. Delirus welcome, how fair
Our friends in the camp.

Deli. As men, whose swords your beauty
Sharpens; resolvedly well.

Artesi. Sure you mistake Delirus, you mean
The Kings Mistress, the fair Aurelia.

Deli. Madam; The King looks not with
My eyes, he is young, and possible may err in's
Tender judgment. would he be tried by votes,
His double voice would hardly carry it.

Artesi. You have a smack ot'h Court yet;
Delirus this savours not ot'h Camp;
Do they dissemble there too?

Deli. My faithful love speak for me,
I understand it not.

Artesi. Do you love me then?

Deli. So well, I must not live, if you
Refuse to accept it.

Artesi. But.

Deli. But, what Maddam? If a piece of duty,
Within the compass of my poor power, has
Been by me neglected, let me but know
Wherein I have offended, and I Will redeem it,
Though with the loss of life.

Artesia, I take you at your word. And know, I can
Return so much of love again, I equally will engage in the
Hazard, dare you (with me) join, to revenge
My wrongs? till righted, I have vowed
A single life

Deli. Else may my blood turn cold as Iberian Ice;
And may my name be (through all after Ages)
Blasted with coward.

Artesi. Enough, I dare not doubt the non performance,
Of what is so firmly bound, yet least you startle,
I Must enjoin your secrecy,

Deli. Which I (by all the Gods) vow to perform.

Artesi. Then know, it is the King has wronged me,
Dare you now right me.

Deli. Protect me all you powers; the King; pray speak --
He starts. That I may understand you.

Artesi. Then thus, the love he bears Aurelia, too loudly is
Proclaimed not to be known by you, who not content
(In public to acknowledge) must in the face of all the Court,
Make me, his scornful mirth, whilst every savcy flattering groom,
Derides my sufferings, as one, that not deserved
Common commiseration: you now have understood my
Grief, and if your love burn with that fervent
Flame, you have with protestation here professed,
I shall expect you Act, what I prescribe, and you
Engaged (by oath) stand bound for to perform

Deli. Why do I shake? you have an Angels shape,
Proclaims you virtues storehouse; there cannot then proceed,
Forth from a Mine of virtue, a bastard issue.
I know you are as good as fair, and in that
Confidence, stand prepared, to put in execution,
What you vouchsafe command.

Artesi. The King then must not live.

Deli. The gods forbid it, my blood begins to chill,
The very name of King, has struck an icy coldness
Through my veins, my sinews shrink, and strength
(Like an ungrateful servant) deserts me in
My misery. O yet be merciful; and let this piece
Of life I hold, appease your anger, and
Redeem my King

Artesi. You have shown your love, valor, and strength
Of protestations in your fear. I did but this to try
You, suppose t'had been a subject wronged me.

Deli. O that again, and but the knowledge of a name,
You Would have destroyed, and by our loves it is done.

Artesi. It Is Aurelia.

Deli. A simple woman, poor maid, I am thy murderer.

Artesi. A soldier Delirus, and so tender conscienc'd,
Think what it is you enjoy (my love) no beggars fortune
With it; besides I Will take you off from being
Executioner, which if enjoined you were bound
For to perform by Oath. Ferdinando servant
To old Sebastian, is poor, and vehemently
Courts my woman, who with the promise
Of her love and gold to boot, you easily may
Tempt, for to perform the deed, either
By poison, or as you both shall else contrive.
What hopes can you expect, I can enjoy a peace
Within my self, when she is Queen, that at the
Hopes of rising, dares publicly affront me?
You cannot love, and yet refuse to right me.
I must acknowledge. I have not boasted much of
Love to you, yet dare confess,
Had you been wronged like me, my tears bear --
Pretends to weep. Witness for me; I should have righted you
Though life had been engaged.

Deli. As I will thee, urge it no more, it is done;
Dry those fair eyes.
This kiss confirms she sleeps, Aurelia dead
Our joys at full, leap to our marriage bed. --

Ex Ambo Enter Snap, Captain Thunder, Lieutenant Cannon, and Ensign Drake.
Snap. You understand your charge.

Thund. At full.

Snap. Then see you do perform't with care,
As you expect to cate again.

Thund. Thou man of Mars we shall, recrutes
Must then acrew the trifling summ's exhausted we
Received Not a denier, our linings can produce.

Snap. Already gone, all on the gut or have you victuall'd
For this week, fearing a siege of Bailiffs; pray let
Me understand what you must spend a day, I
May prepare to furnish you, my Ignorance
May make me err.

Cannon. Nobly spoken, and to the purpose,
Thou man of metal. Captain our usual rates declare.

Capt. Lieutenant, I understand you, you mean
When laden with the spoil, we did return victors
From Poland.

Ensig. Or when that powerful arm (with
Our assistance) fell on the rear of the Swisse;
In which great slaughter we seas'd ten thousand
Pounds, then but a trifle.

Lieu. Or,

Snap. Or when you spoke truth, which no man
Can remember. Come, come, no noise, nor blustering --
Snap stopps the Lievtenants mouth. Here, I understand you well, and shall (if
you dare
Talk such words;) but when I license you, return
You with your leaguer pipes to the chimney-corner,
Where when your doxyes nim the pocket small,
You then perhaps may drink again, and then
Betwixt each draught, recount your valourous acts
To oyster wives, who can admire them, and
Weep at every arm or leg, you phillip from the
Foe, sighing parentheses at your sad Catastrophe,
Why you worms, poor as Carthusian munks,
That borrow titles, to fright Tapsters from their reckonings,
And dare usurp titles of honor you never understood,
Could you hope with your con'd speeches ever to possess, me
With belief, that you were valiant; or ever fought,
But when engaged for reckonings with your Host,
Or with the boys for to redeem your Ladies
From the pumpe, which you protect not out of love,
But livelihood; and though the sin of theft
You love, as what you live by, yet dare you not
Attempt your selves, more for fear of beating then
The law. But thrust your females into danger,
Who once a month do penance under last for
Your maintenance. What, all silent? Lieutenant, faith
What might your last great victory in Poland
Be worth to you? Ensign; speak, what brave a
Acheivements lately.

Cap. Thou man of knowledge, we do recant,
Nor will we more the History of war repeat.

Lieu. Victorious Sir, we are your captives,
Command and we will obey.

Snap. Then to your holes again; all is forgot,
Your bodies Il' see vampt; which if you dare
But pawn, Il' find a baliffe shall Command
In chief, mean time here is to subsist, --
Gives them money. Till further order you receive; and as you do
Expect supplies from me, be careful in the
Husbanding of this, adieu --

Exit. Snap. Capt. Heroic Sir, Your bounty has chained us to
Your commands, we are your moving creatures. --

Ex. Om. Enter Sebastian Ferdin. Sebast. Breathe there in Christian shape,
Such monsters? Ferdinando, be careful in your relation,
The'yr things you utter of a high concernment;
Suppose Artesia monstrous as you make her,
Delirus has a noble soul, and surely would not
Aid her in a fact, but to repeat is horrid;
Besides Aurelia (poor Girl) never understood
What 'twas to injure any thing had life.

Ferdin. O Sir, your noble soul (too innocent to
Understand the guilt in their foul breasts) will
Not give leave to think; what pride and envy harbor.
My service (though far unworthy your
Acceptance) after this ten years trial (I hope)
Cannot beget suspicion of a truth; I soundly can
Maintain. Behold this --
Pulls out a purse. Purse full of Delirus gold, by him put in this
Hand to murder your Aurelia.

Sebast. Protect her you just powers,
Why did thou take it?

Ferdin. To save her life, which else had been
In hazard. Had I refused to undertake the
Murder, my single testimony would have appeared
My shame, as not believed, when he should
Please deny it; and some distressed wretch tempted
With gold, have been her executioner.

Schast. Thy bare testimony, is yet all can be
Alleged against them.

Ferdin. Her woman with me is bribed, who as they
Vainly think I fondly dote upon, who I must
Have in marriage (for sooth) into boot;
Who should I urge to witness against the
Murderers, she might be bribed against me.

Sebast. Thou faithfullest of servants, preserver
Of our lives, my wretched state unable to
Requite thee, produces tears of sorrow. --
He weeps, The gods reward thy trust, and may they bountifully
Shower their blessings on thy head.

Ferdin. My Honored Lord, dry those aged
Eyes, for my reward his great, in your
Acknowledging me your creature; it was but mercy
To my self, to keep my self from sin. Honored
Sir, Think what is to be done, in what so
Much concerns you.

Sebast. The thought of so much wickedness,
Captives my reason, I know not what to think, or
Do; what do thou think most fit?

Ferdin. Since you are pleased command my
Poor advice, my duty binds me thus. The
Favor our virtuous King has deigned to shower
On your fair daughter, has been great,
And what may swell to yet stands doubtful.
Could you (with the consent of her) unknown
To the Court, for a small time conveigh her to so me place
Of safety; the King would then (as needs you
Must pretend no knowledge of her being) express
That love as yet is but suspected; the which
When known, as your grave wisdom shall direct, our
Course we will steer, besides my attendance on her
In disguise makes for my safety. And if so
Great and honorable a charge may be committed
To me unworthy, I shall with care and duty
Express my joy to embrace it.

Sebast. Ferdinando, I should ungrateful be,
For to suspect neglect of care of her, thou have preserved
From death; take her into thy charge, she is
Still Aurelia; who knows not how to disobey,
Whatever I command.
Blessings light on you both, you prosper must,
Where there is so good a child, a man so just --

Ex. Ambo. Enter Delirus Sol. Deli. How black and ugly to my self do I
My self appear? methinks my hands look
Bloody; and my friends stare on my face with that
Unaccustomed earnestness, as if they saw my
Guilt. It Is but my foolish fancy, a factious spirit
Within me that rebels, which I Will suppress.
How many thousand in our kingdom quaffe
Up this cup, that never starte in sleep. And yet
Methinks sometimes I hear the innocent fair on,
With milky hands held up for mercy
Pleading. Artesia too (the price of blood)
Who I must love if live; she yet as fair
Appears as Sainted innocence, sure 'twas but
Justice in her, and no fault at all. Then am I
Quit, when we too are but one.
Enter Artesia. See where she comes, no Angel but of light,
Durst ere assume that shape. Justice it self,
Must quit me for a fact, the gods would have
Committed, to have enjoyed that Saint.
What man that is but mortal would refuse my guilt,
But for to touch that lip? My Artesia, I bring
You joy; Aurelia's not long lived

Artesi. My dear Delirus, is it done?

Deli. Few hours will confirm it, the slave
Bit greedily at the golden bait, and cunningly
Contrived her death, as thus. He as his custom is,
trusted to guard Aurelia in her private walks,
Drills her to the sea side; where drowned, he
straight way ships for flight.

Artesi. It Is to my wish; but from my woman,
This must be kept close, she dotes on him,
And must not know his flight.

Deli. Aptly considered, her death once known
Our longed for joys draw near. Sweetest fair one,
I must a little leave thee, and to Court; from whence
I hope to bring thee news, she is lost;
This kiss, farewell. --

kisses her. Artesi. Pray make no stay.

Deli. When thou command'st it were sin, not to obey --

Ex. Deli. Artesi. How vainly hope, fond fools deludes:
Delirus, thou art contracted my instrument, not yet
My husband; where there is a Prince, I cannot love
A subject; Aurelia dead? Delirus stands too deep engaged
(Although his passion boil) to dare an injury to me.
And then, (who knows,) but that the King may cast his eyes
On me; my wealth and beauty, (if I mistake not) will put
Him to his travels to out-match them.
That spirit's poor, and weak that judgement's seen,
Who lives a subject that may be a Queen. --

Exit Enter Snap, Gold. Gold. Snap. It Is strange; I do nothing but dream
Of that Lady, I would I were a Colonel we might be
Married: When shall I see my Officers?

Snap. I have appointed some of them to wait upon you
Here, I wonder at their stay, I hope they are not
Engaged in fight; which should they be in
Some unlucky quarrel,
The streets would bleed.

Gold. Will they fight so Snap; they will not be angry with
Me, that give them money I hope.
What are their names? how must I call them?

Snap. You must observe their Titles, as I present them
To you; the Captain (however, through the fortune
Of the wars, brought low) is Nobly born and
Must your kinsman be, as one that is near allied unto
The fair Artesia, your beauteous Mistress; whom you (with
Great respect must use) as the only man, should
She prove coy, can make you happy in her marriage;
For know, she fortifies her self upon his judgment,
And must approve her choice.

Gold. Honest Snap; how I love thee; then he sai's I shall
Have her? If he do, he shall want nothing.

Snap. Sir, I have procured you his consent; and know
He could not want, would his great spirit give him
Leave to spend some of his Couzens thousands;
Which as she is a woman, he scorns to do. And to the
Furtherance of your business, know you are much in's
Favor, he will accept your money.

Gold. Which Snap, he shall not want while
I have any; and so I Will tell him.

Snap. It Were an affront, your life would hardly satisfy;
For know, what ere (by me) you let him have,
Should he perceive that you but notice took on it; his fury
would be great, and he in scorn return your money, besides
The certain loss, of your fair Mistress.

Gold. Sai'st thou me so Snap; why then I Will not say
A word on it.

Snap. By no means Sir; I think I hear them coming.

Enter Lieutenant Cannon, Ensign Drake. holding Captain Thunder, with their
swords drawn Lieutenant. Renowned Captain, the slaughter (you have
Made is great, and fury may be slack't.

Captain. Now by my fathers Ghost (who when alive)
The Tamer of the Eastern world, let go your hold,
Or mercy I forget. And shall the son of Mars be bark't at,
By the whelps of Lilly, and not destroy the fry?

Snap. Sir, speak to the Noble Captain,
You may appease his fury.

Gold. Pray Sir, let me entreat you put up your Sword.

Capt. Sir you have prevailed, --
Puts up his sword. Your breath has from the jaws of death,
Redeemed the caitiffes, which else had slept.

Gold. Sir I thank you, pray how
fell you out?

Capt. Lieutenant, my breath is hot, declare
To this (my Noble friend) the matter.

Liev. Then mark, for thus it chanced:
My ever to be renowned Captain, from
Visiting his Cozen, (a virtuous Lady your
Worthy self is pleased to honor with the name of
Mistress) her coach being --
Gold. Hum, Hum. Otherwise employed, on foot made hither;
When in the street (and not far hence) some scattered
Troops, of Curiassiers chanced to pass by, an
Officer in the Rear, (whether by chance) or at
My Captain is unknown, held up his finger to his
Nose; which soon my Captain seeing, (not
Used to such affronts) straight drew his sword,
And with a blow glanc't from his
Armor, killed his horse.

Snap. The Officers horse you mean,
That held his finger up.

Liev. The very same; when on the ground,
My Captain scorning to take advantage on
His foe, gave him fair leave to rise,
Who being up presumed to draw, (which dear
He paid for); for with the loss of his sword
Hand, he was forced retreat; my Captain being
Merciful, was pacified with this. His bloody
Sword, not being fully sheathed, when back,
A Troop returned threatening (alowd revenge)
But had you seen, (how then) like lightning, my Captain
Flew about him, you would have thought, the god
Of war, had then descended from his throne.
For to destroy the world; my Captain by the multitude
Engaged, we to his rescue drew; who we,
Through lanes of scatterred limbs redeemed, and as you saw
Brought off, impatient we withheld him
From further pursuit of the foe.

Snap. With what a confidence the impudent rogue
Delivers his invention. --

aside Capt. Lieutenant, no more, the skirmish is not worthy mention,
Sir your attention has been great to what deserves but
Little, I shall be honored in your acquaintance as
One, my fair Cozen Artesia, is proud to call her Servant:
Pray take some notice of these Gentlemen,
However fortune plays the whore with them,
You Will find them men of metal.

Snap. If of any, 'twill be of his own --

aside Gold. Gentlemen, I am proud to be your friend.

Liev. As we to acknowledge our selves to be your
Vassals, Noble Colonel.

Capt. Noble Cozen, for shortly I must call you so.

Gold. Good Captain no more of fighting
If you love me, I shall never hold out another Conquest.

Capt. The Drums shall beat no more, nor Trumpets
Sound of war, what think you of the Spanish
Grape? Shall we to the Tavern go my valiant Colonel?
Where we will toss your mistress in good Canary.

Gold. Valiant Colonel, he has it right. Captain I Will wait on
You, but Gentlemen there will be no fighting?

Capt. Who draws his steel's; my foe.

Gold. Nay Gentlemen; if there should, you see I am
Not unprovided; but Noble Captain let not your Cozen, --
Points to his sword. Know I am given to quarelling.

Capt. He sleeps, that dares pronounce it.
Colonel pray lead the way.
A feast my stomach, better fits, then fray.

Snap. Miraculous! he has uttered truth --

Aside. Gold. Come Snap. Ensign command your
Lieutenant to follow --

Ex. Om. Enter Antonio, Cornelius, Eugenio. Eugen. It Is above wonder, where she
should be,
If dead she would be found; and if alive,
I know no cause of discontent, she had
To quit the Court.

Anto. It is a thing, there is not two heads in all the Court,
'Gree in one thought. Some that that the King is
Privy to her retirement; others that she is made away,
But on what grounds, they know not, and every one their
Verdict spends, while none knows where she is.

Cornel. That which, to me most strange appears, is
That her father, the lord Sebastian; (enraged
With sorrow) utterly disclaims the knowledge of
Her being; but that which much suspicion breeds, is
That Ferdinando is missing too, who questionless (if
Alive) must know how she is disposed of; the
Fellow too, ever accounted entirely
Faithful to his master.

Eugen. What course is taken in the
Search of her.

Anton. To all parts messengers dispatched;
Noble Delirus, Welcome, Is fair
Enter Delirus. Aurelia heard of?

Deli. Nor will be I think. Gentlemen good day to you.
The King is close retired into his closset, nor will
Admit to speak with any.

Cornel. If so, it is then without dispute, he knows not
Of her being.

Deli. It Is bu'zd (but upon what intelligence I know not)
That she was seen near the sea side, some that
She Is fled with Ferdinando; others that Pirates seas'd
Her, but both improbable; the harbor being
So near, and yet none know it.

Enter King. King. Gentlemen, a nobler employment (at such a time
As this) would more become you all. All leave us --
Ex. All but King, The fair Aurelia gone, and none knows whether?
Yes, there is some that knows -- it must be so.
I am confirmed in it, This is our Generals plot.
It Is he is King, and he shall rule; he had no way but
This, to gain it with his credit; sure he would
Not murder her, he lives not that can do it, and
Look her in the face. The Courtiers cannot all be
Ignorant of this, (but I may find a time to pay
Them for their Loyalty) Poor harmless maid, thy
Virtue all good men should protect, has been
Thy ruin. You gods above (the just protectors
Of my childhood) give me a manly patience to
Undergo what you are pleased to inflict upon me
I must dissemble grief, how ere unfit to act
Another part. Aurelia, Thy King must now
Turn wanderer; for by those gods whose aid I crave,
Il' leave no ground unsearcht, while life supports
My fainting limbs, till I Am confirmed thou art alive
Or dead.
If living 'Im rewarded, but if dead
That grave injoys thy body, is my bed.

ACT. III.
SCENE I.
Enter Anto. Euge. Cornel. Anto. THese storms presage no good. The
General now arrived at Court,
Whose business with the King requires have; Delirus
With confidence conveighs him to the King his
Closet; where when arrived, instead of King
They found a letter with his own hand writ, directed
To the General. what the contents are, is unknown
To any but himself, but his distracted looks
Speak them not pleasing. The Gods prevent
What I much fear.

Cornel. It Is to be feared indeed; this strange conveiance of
Aurelia we sadly may lament; for questionless he
Loved her much, but where he should abscond
Himself, or go without assistance of some 'ith Court,
Is more then ordinary strange. The gods instruct
His youth, and bring to light the authors of these troubles.

Euge. Amen; Nor is there mis't (a man) in the
Court, we can conceive the King would make
Privy to any secret design of his; it is impossible
He should be far or long unheard of; But see,
Here comes the General.

Enter General Delirus Fabius. The General reading to himself the King his
letter. Gener. The gods assist me, what ridl's this?
Gentlemen. Antonio your ear, The rest I
Shall entreat forbear the room.
Antonio; The King I ever --
Ex. All but the General, and Anto! Have observed, has loved you much, nor
Has it been without your just desert. Pray peruse
That letter, it must be he (if any) the King --
Anto. Reads to himself. Imparts his secrets to --
Aside.
Anto. My Lord. I understand it not, more
Then that Aurelia being strangely shuffled out
O'th way o'th sudden, where none will seem to know,
Has caused his discontent.

Genesis Aurelia; (the gods protect her innocence)
I hope she is not murdered.

Anto. My Lord, I hope so too, for sure
There Is not (on earth) a soul so black,
Can act the murderer.

Genesis Forbid it all you powers, knows not the
Lord Sebastian of her being?

Anto. His grief and close retyrement,
Confirms him ignorant.

Genesis I am amazed with horror; Antonio prithee
Read out, for sure my aged eyes mistake,
Or else I fain would think so. --
Anto. Reads to him the Kings letter.
Amasius. Anto. My Lord, we received yours, dated
The fifteenth of this instant; but were to weak in
Judgment to understand your plot. Which the
obscureness of our travel confirms, takes well;
Some small pretense of sorrow for my departure,
May make good your title. I am in health,
And shall return ere long: In the mean time,
Remember I had a father loved his subjects well.
If you have spared the life of poor Aurelia, use
Her as one, on whose well doing my life depends.

Genesis Rash and uncharitable young man,
My tears in pity --
Weeps. For thy folly shall Plead me guiltless. Have I
With sweat and blood (proud of the toil) this
Thirty years and upward; when this unhappy
Kingdom with fear and conquest almost spent,
Redeemed thy totering state from swift approaching
Slavery, when every eye proclaimed their fear,
And every down cast look despair.
Raised thy low sunck fortunes to such a height,
Thy (then victorious foe) now trembles to behold?
And must I now have treason and murder
Laid to my charge for my reward.
Antonio thou art honest, one that the flattering
Court could never bring (yet) 'ith fashion;
Prithee tell me, have I deserved this black,
Ungrateful charge?

Anto. My Honored Lord, may I become a scorn
To virtue, if ought of these sad accidents
I know; nor can I guess from whence the
Rise should come, more then the discontent
Your letter brought with it.

Genesis Protect me innocence; my letter were
Your partaker, made of the contents.

Anto. Only my Lord, your mild disswasion
From Aurelia's love.

Genesis Curse on the time I moved him in it;
But it is no time to talk. Antonio, by the
Dear and tender love thou bear the King,
Labor his search in what thou may.
Patience assist me, thy need I never more wanted,
Our speedy course must be to lay the ports.
The gods direct us for the best, and may he be
Accursed for ever sought this miser:

Anto. My Lord, in what you please
Command, I ever shall obey --

Exit. Enter Aurelia Ferdin. Disguised as shepherds. Aureli. Ferdinando, what
place is this?

Ferdin. Madam, The village near is called Felix.
The country (we are in) the fair valley, the
Only seat for shepherds, and pastoral delights our
Country yields.

Aureli. That little of the world my youth has
Traveled through, never yet discovered to my
Sense a place of so much beauty. The
Guiltless here (perhaps) may walk, protected
With their innocence, free from Artesia's
Envy. My doubtful thoughts will
Hardly give me leave to credit, Artesia
Meant me so much harm. Truly I ever loved
Her well, and can forgive her, would she yet be good.

Ferdin. O Madam, your clear virtue,
Unspotted with the thought of sins of that
High nature, pleads ignorance in the trade the
Vicious husband. --
Enter Amint. Sol. Here comes a shepherd with a sad asspect
Lies on the ground. So please you Madam step aside unseen,
We will observe --
They step aside.
Amint. And must Amintor, poor Amintor,
Only be the object of Cleoras scorn. My harmless
Sheep bleating bewail my moan.
And every Shepheardess but she,
In pity can bewail my misery.
But it is Amintor's fault, whose slow pac't Courtship
seldom conquers love.
He must be bold, and active in embraces, that gains desire,
While I with bashful dullness quench the fire.
Why do I blame the fair Cleora? when bashful
Fear in me, may possibly in her beget the like
Suspect. Forgive me fair Cleora, that uncharitably
Condemn my Judge, before there is sentence given:
But Il' repent, and let the fair one know,
How much of love (though dare not speak) I owe. --
Enter Streph. Cupid, assist me as I thee obey,
If that offend, what then must be the way.

Streph. Hey day, what stuff's here: This should be
The pitiful Amintor by his sad complaints.
It Is he; Amintor, what not yet contracted to
Cleora? It Is much she should continue coy,
And you Court her at this distance.
In the name of Cupid how long have thou lost
Thy wits, thou worshipper of weather-cocks.
Come, come, listen to my good counsel, that shall
Convert thy Pagan Idolatry. --
Strephon sits down by Amintor
Streph. Cease Amintor, cease for shame,
Let not dotage blast thy name.
Love but as I do, dote on none,
A woman's worthless when she is known.
Love this fair face to day, to morrow the other;
When that is enjoyed, think where to find another.

Amin. Tell me master of your Art,
You that can command your heart.
So to love; (if love it be)
You profess to every she.
How Courtlike you can swear each face you see
Though forty in one day, still Captives thee.

Streph. I had rather swear for to enjoy,
Then Captived be, by one that is coy.
Man naturally freedom loves,
Leave chastity to Turtle Doves;
For he is as blind as love, that fettered lies;
Beauty when men are fond will tyranize.

Amint. Could thou but unswear an oath,
As freely as thou breakst thy troth;
Or could thou but as constant be,
In ought else, as in inconstancy:
You then might painfully confess with me,
You love too much, for min's Idolatry.

Streph. When fading beauty shall disguise
My free born heart to Idolize;
I then perhaps, may pity thee,
As partner in thy misery.
Variety of dishes is my fare,
That face I never yet saw, when seen is rare.

Amint. Think thou I Will pity crave of thee
Or ruin love, variety*
No Strephon; no, thy change of fare,
Diseases breed; sad looks, despair:
Whilst I triumphantly despise thy charms,
And laugh at thee, in my Cleora's arms.

Streph. Amintor thou art lost, good counsel is
Cast away upon thee: did ever man complain
Of cruelty on her, that hardly knows
Thou love? or if she do, it is but at second
Hand. Rise and repent, and I Will be merciful and
Court her for thee; or if of late you are so valiant grown,
You dare alone venture the thing (you call a virtue)
Your chastity, with Cleora: go and whine
Out in some sad madrigal your dotage;
Which she will in scorn deride,
Had thou my Confidence, she were thy Bride.

Amin. Away thou lewd prophaner of
Those rites; the god of holy marriages must
Punish for thy perjuries.
It Is sin gain'st Cupit, to hear
Such profanation.

Streph. Amintor thou art past recovery, I Will
To my wanton Nymphs,
Who love like me,
Ex. sever. Not so to dote, yet fancy any He. --
Amintor passes by Aurelia.
Ferdinand. Honest shepherd stay.

Aureli. Virtuous shepherd, may Hymen to your
Blessed content crown all your chaste desires.

Amin. Fair Nymph, if yet not wed,
The self same wish attend thy marriage bed.

Ferdinand. Courteous shepherd, can you entertain
This Nymph and I; who much desirous, to imitate that
Harmless life, we hear you prosper in, hither invited
Us? Our stock is not so great to boast, nor yet so poor
To fear a want; your looks speaks you a
Friend to strangers, who can forget to live,
Sooner then be ungrateful.

Amin. Truly I pity you as strangers, and
Should be proudly glad to entertain you, were I
But master of where withal; for know
I am but a servant to my father,
An ancient shepherd age gives not leave
To go abroad, his house is not far distant
Hence, a poor small cottage; such as it is
Please you to go with me, my poor endeavors
Shall not be wanting, for what
It can afford.

Ferd. Brother, we thank you, and shall to
The utmost you shall please demand, prove your
Faithful paymasters. My sister here unused
To travel, would gladly be at rest,
Please you to lead the way?

Amin. Most willingly, this is your path, --

Ex. Om. Enter Delirus, Artesia, severally. Deli. Fairest of creatures, I can
(alowd) proclaim tyidings
Of joy, Aurelia's death, Ferdinando's flight; and what
Beyond our wishes, most hapily falls out; the
King in discontent has left the Court,
I hope never to return.

Artesi. Delirus, it is a Traitors wish.

Deli. How Artesia?

Artesi. You understand me sure, if I
Mistake not; he is your King, or ought to be.
Fie Delirus, so long a Courtier, and not
Know your duty.

Deli. I am confounded, sure it is not Artesia.

Artesi. For that I shall resolve you straight.
It Is the very same. --
Looks in her glass. Where are your eyes?

Deli. My reason's at a loss, this cannot be;
Come, come, no more of this, beshrew me,
But you almost staggered me, I know now
'Twas but in jest to try my temper,
And I forgive it.

Arts. Hah, hah! forgive it? you are not my Ghostly --
Laughs. Father, 'Twas language might have become your
King, but sounds to saucy for a subject.

Deli. Nay now Artesia, you over act your part, this
Kiss concludes the Scene. --
Offers to kiss her, she thrusts him by.
Artesi. You are abominably out Delirus, you
Should have acted at more distance, you must go con your
Part anew, and learn to know, to whom you are to speak.
The Poet man instruct you.

Deli. May I believe this real, and from Artesia?

Artesi. 'Thats as you please; I gladly would find
Out a way would more confirm you, which
I shall study, since plain dealing will not do.

Deli. By what neglect of mine, have I deserved this scorn;
Let me but know, if but to lessen my admiration?

Artesi. Neglect of duty to your King (if well
Examined) you will find deserves no less.

Deli. Why Artesia, can neglect of duty be a
Fault in me, to him you would have murdered?
Pray recollect, and but consider what you would
Have courted me to do, which I refused in duty.

Artesi. This but confirms thy ignorance, which
Would not let thee see I did it but to try
You, in which assurance know, There Is not on earth
A thing can acceptable be, from you to me,
But your diligent search o'th King,
Who when you have found, and that
You tidings bring of his dear safety; I
May forget your faults, tell when
I take my leave. --

Exit. Artesi. Deli. The gods above are just, nor am I
Punished yet to my desert.
Here but begins your justice, which must so heavy fall,
That but to think of, wracks my Eclipsed soul.
Aurelia now afresh begins to appear, her hair
Disheve'ld 'bout her Ivory skin, threatening (aloud)
Revenge. Thou shall have justice fair innocent,
And thy appeased ghost, no more be put to wander
Through the deep in ghastly horror. Artesia, it is time
To think of death; for rather (then to my shame)
Il' live to see thee lodged within another arms;
I will in death enjoy, what (scornfully) thou have
Alive refused; from this accursed hour, let no man
Ere believe a woman can be true; And where
There wants invention to contrive a just man's fall,
Think of Artesia. O women, women! The sun whose
Glorious beams survey the frantic world,
Would stay his motion and stand still, as proud
For to behold a constant fair one.
Why should their inside be so foul, there out so fair,
But to entrap mortality? but I too late (with
Death must purchase knowledge.
Bad consciences are household clocks that tells,
On earth one minutes joy, ten thousand hells. --

Exit. Enter Bellira sol. Deli. Angels protect my Lady, what ground so ere
She treads, it was unkindly done, not to acquaint
Me with her flight, for sure it must be so, for when my lord
(In tears) saw me bewail (as by my fear, I did conceive)
Her loss, he did with cheerful looks (such as
Would seem) confirm the knowledge of her safety;
Put me in lively hopes she lived.
His language too, who would not say she lived;
Would not confess, he thought her dead:
But what of all I least can understand, is that when any
But my self, (of those same few he will admit) name
But daughter, or Aurelia, he throws him on his bed;
And for the while they stay, never answers to them more;
Some thing there is, I fain would understand,
But dare not urge to know, the gods above assist her,
What ere her undertakings be. --
Enter Snap.
Snap. Health to Bellira. what no news
Yet of Aurelia's being?

Belli. Not any; only bare hopes she is well.

Snap. From whence spring they?

Belli. From little else more then that I fain would hope
The best; yet Ferdinando's being with her
Does half assure me she can have no harm,
As one, whose actions were ever known virtuous,
And Noble.

Snap. I understand you well, the Character you give
Him* plainly speaks you love him; which is the
Cause you embrace so coldly, what I have labored for;
But know Goldcalf will be delayed no longer,
Therefore you must prepare, to morrow to be his bride.
What more whining? I had thought your
Resolution had been fixed, or after all my
Pains; must I yet travel for it? --
Bellira kneels. What may this mean?

Belli. O worthy brother! If ever tears and prayers
Unfeigned, from a distressed maid did move
Compassion, behold (with pity) your miserable
Sister, who cruel fortune has so unkindly dealt
With, that I must choose to loose my brother,
Or my life. And with the loss of that, I am
Resolved to purchase peace hereafter. Heaven
Knows I mean no other force to do it, more
Then the confirmation of the match you speak of:
'Twill soon dispatch me, yet in obedience to
Your will, that little time I have to live
I Will call him husband. --
Sheriseth.
Snap. Never, never Bellira; Thou have a noble
soul, not fit to match in dunghill breed.
And know I practiced but a trial of thy love to me,
Be happy in thy choice who ever it be.
Thy love confirms my liking. For know, I
Have fit instruments to compass my honest
Ends on Goldcalfe, (how ever the busy world
May judge my actions) for well thou know, his
Griping father, with base cosenage.
Ruined my uncle, so consequently me.
This the world knows is meet,
To cheat the cozener, can be no deceit.

Belli. Worthy Brother, you have revived
My blood that began (apace) to chill
Within my veins; for which, the life I hold, shall
Ever be employed, as you shall please dispose
Of it. May all your undertakings prosper
To your hearts desire. You have no present business
To command me? if not, my
Occasions call.

Snap. Bellira, first know, I have prepared a habit for you
You must put on to further my designs;
A man you must appear Bellira for a few hours,
Which shall be undiscovered to any but my self,
I shall instruct you in the part you have to
Act, at our next meeting: it is a trust Bellira,
I dare impose in none but you;
Till when farewell.

Belli. Which I shall gladly execute,
As you shall please command --

Ex. Ambo Enter Corneli. Eugeni. Corneli. Antonio's gone in search o'th King.

Eugeni. May his endeavors prosper; what a
Hum this accident has raised in the Court: In
What strange shape* and by whose assistance,
He could contrive (so suddenly) his this,
So secret being, begets in me a wonder. The gods
Divert his mind from quitting (long) the
Court; the event may prove much dangerous
To us all, that wish him well.

Corneli. The common people ignorant of their
Own safety (wedded to change) unanimously begin
To call Bellicosus King; some crying up his
Valor, and experience in the wars, some his
Justice, all his honesty; whose loyal heart appears
So far from coveting a crown, he seems much
Troubled at the clamor. And should the King
His discontent detain him long from Court, it is
Thought the General must accept it, to appease
The frantic multitude, who rashly may (should he
Refuse) elect more undeservedly.

Euge. His wisdom will foresee, and carefully
Prevent such dangerous consequences, as one
Whose approved Loyalty 'twere great injustice to
Suspect. Saw you Delirus lately? The Court
Speaks of strange alterations in his looks and carriage.

Corneli. I did, and know it speaks no more but
Truth; for never (to my knowledge) did I
Behold a more dejected creature. The cause must
From Artesia spring* or none.

Euge. It Is without question so, there is an ambitious
Spirit lodged within that seeming modesty of hers,
Has almost cracked Delirus. How fondly does
That man inslave his reason, that dotes on pride
And envy. She strangly has forborne the Court
Of late, and may be hatching mischief, were but
Her envy backed with politic assistance.
Her pride and scorn apparently was seen, (as
Wanting government to hide it;) when as the
King was pleased to throw his favors so
Liberally on Aurelia.

Corneli. On which I much observed, the King
Great notice took: here comes the General.

Enter Bellicosus. Bellico. Gentlemen, for love of virtue, your
King and countries good, disperse your selves
Into the City, where confidently you must give out,
The King (by letters I received from him) confirms
His health and safety, and that his strange deserting of
The Court, was only to perform a penance he
On himself enjoined (by vow) for some unruly
Thought his blood provoked him too; which once
Performed, he will return with speed. This
The distracted people may (for a time)
Appease, in which we possible may hear some
Tidings of the King. And as I well know
You Are honest, I doubt not but with care you
Will perform this trust, as what (at present)
Much concerns the common good.

Cornell. Sir, You honor us in a trust, wherein
We can express that love, and loyalty, our duty,
And allegiance binds us to --

Ex. Ambo. Gene. How unconsiderably violent does untamed
Youth, hurry to its own destruction? The gods
Can witness bear how innocent I stand (in but a
Thought to act what other ways (might
More then to my reason) just appear. My counsel
In that letter I wrote the King, has bred
In him a jealousy Aurelia is by me removed.
This by the flattery of some fawning slave
In The Court, must be confirmed a truth; and all
My services in balance put with some base
Wretch, not worthy name of man; ('it is
But a small reward, for what the world
Well knows I justly have deserved.) But
Bellicosus, now is the time to right thy self, and
Crown thy actions with the height of honor; when
As the changeling rout with uncontrouled fury
Proclaim the King. And must I (when thrown
Into my arms) refuse to accept what with the
Slaughter of a seven years war, could not be purchased.
It speaks a weakness in my self, I know unfit to
Govern. But I Will resolve -- never to deceive a trust.
Amasius, live to enjoy what is thine, I will usurp
In nothing, but thy care.
It Is a known truth.
He Is more then man, offends not in his youth --
Exit Enter Ferdinando Sol. I must in some disguise venture to Court, where
Since we parted, the Country speaks of a sad change
Of things; the King (in every shepherds mouth)
Is spoken privately gone from Court, none
Knows, or will do whither, but questionless in
Discontent at fair Aurelias retyrement.
And what we but suspected of his love to her,
By this we may confirm is real. Some quick
Prevention must be studied, or it speaks
Danger to them both. My absence too from
Hence (till my return from Court) will offer to
Aurelia the knowledge of the Kings deserting of the
Court, which fain I would keep her from
Knowledge of; for how so ever her virtuous soul,
Not willing to be thought ambitious of the
King his love (more then a Loyal subjects duty
Can deserve) she strangely loves his person,
Which she in modesty (to her weak power) makes
It her labor to conceal.
My laboring fancy is at a stand how to contrive,
What I would gladly act, the poor Bellira too,
Left alone unsatisfied laments her Mistress
Loss, though I deserve not pity, or forgiveness;
Once more, must undiscovered see her,
And part unknown. Bellira, I love thee well,
Yet would be loath to have it found in after
Story, I brake my faith to satisfy thy love;
It shall suffice I Am true,
When known to all, I needs must be to you --

Exit. Enter Goldcalf, Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign, and Snap. As in a Tavern.
Gold. Drawer. --
Enter Drawer
Draw. Here Sir,

Gold. Draw a pottle of the best sack; Mr.
Captain (Cozen that must be) What say
You, is it not so?

Capt. It is a grape of power, which were I to
Encounter Priams fifty sons, all at one time
(The quarrel being just) would make the
Victory doubtful.

Gold. O strange! Drawer, let it be sack then,
But Mr. Captain it will not make you angry
With your frinds, will it?

Capt. It operates the contrary effect on friends,
And does increase affection, never
To be divided.

Gold. Directly it is wonderful; we will taste it
Most horribly then; Mr. Lieutenant,
Shall we not?

Liev. Noble Colonel we will. Till your
Fair Mistress at (but relation) of her healths
We drink; shall stagger and turn round.

Gold. Excellent good I protest. Mr. Ensign,
You are for Sack too?

Ensig. Renowned Colonel, since from our
Mothers wombs, we strech't our warlike limbs,
We scarce have tasted other, Behold
Our Nectar coms. --
Enter Drawer with wine.
Capt. Colonel uncase. Cloaks are superfluous weeds,
The blood shall boil with Sack, and scorn the Robes
Of shelter. Drawer fill to the brim.
Here noble Mr. Snap. --
Drawer fills and gives him; Captain drinks.
Snap. Sir, you shall behold a miracle, I Will do you Justice.

Capt. By the life of Bacchus, bring me a more inspiring
Glass, or Rogue you bleed; must
We in thimble drink?

Snap. Captain, It Is well.

Capt. Must it be so then, thou man of
Temperance? we then will sip in little. --
Drawer fills Snap wine.
Snap. Lievttenant, your Noble Colonels Lady,

Liev. My murrion then lies low, while I --
Throws his hat on the ground. The goddess pledge.

Gold. O admirable rare!

Lievt. Thou standard bearer to the son of Mars. --
Drinks to the Ensign. Prepare to pledge his Venus. Sir, let measure due be
Given, fill to the brim.

Ensig. Come to me.

Gold. But Gentlemen, is it the fashion for all to have
My Mistress, but my self,

Capt. Colonel you are the last must have her.

Gold. Why then we shall never be married I think --
Drawer fills to the Ensign
Capt. Sir, you mistake, I mean the last must have her
Health in drink. It Is a la mode de France.

Gold. Say you so? nay I shall learn quickly.

Ensign. Lieutenant I thank you, Colonel, to your fair
Mistress, the incomparable Artesia.

Gold. Thank you heartily good Mr. Ensign. Snap.
These are all brave men?

Snap. Sir, you speak them just, they are men will do you
Credit, (though I confess they are costly) but Artesia's
Wealth shall pay for it in the end. --
Draw. gives Goldcalf some wine
Ensig. Sir, It Is your Ladies health.

Gold. And her money too shall pay for it shortly;
Shall it not Snap. --
To Snap aside.
Snap. Mary shall it sir, please you to drink. --
Goldcalfe drinks.
Gold. Gentlemen, here is to you to all, I Will be sworn
It is a cup of right, excellent right wine; boy give me --
Drawer fills to Gold. TO other cup. Cozen Captain and the rest, here is
To you all.

Capt. Heroic Coz, I thank you. Drawer, some
Of your Spanish smoke?

Draw. You shall sir. --

Exit Drawer. Capt. Lieutenant; come, shall the foes bones be twirl'd.
Colonel, you will not stand out for half a dozen glasses?

Gold. How mean you Captain?

Capt. Art thou a stranger to the twirl of die,
Behold a brace, made of a Germains bones --
Captain pulls out dice. I slew in duel. --
Enter drawer with Tobacco and candle.
Gold. What is your game?

Capt. He that throw's least must drink.

Gold. Say you so? a match, come Snap.
You shall make one.

Capt. By any means, come Gentlemen, stand round,
It Is all in fashion. Drawer, see you that stakes be made.
So, so, it is well, set down. Come here is for me --
Drawer fills.
Lievt. A five, a special throw. Colonel, please you
The die to hurl.

Gold. Come hey for me; hey day an ass. --
Goldcalf throws
Capt. By the bright splendour of Artesia's eyes, it is true --
Lieut. throws. A four that, come the next Mr. Snap. a six --
Snap. throws. Colonel, he out throws you much. A deux --
Ensign throws. Colonel you then must chirpe, come off with it
To the next mu'st pledge.

Gold. Come, come, give me it, an ass do you say at first? that
Was ill luck in faith; here is to the next shall drink. --
Gold. drinks. Drawer fill full; come begin I Will be the last this time.

Liev. A trey? throw Mr. Snap. Come, come,
It Is half the die. --
Liev. throws, Well done Mr. Snap. A five? he throws exceeding well --
Snap. throws.
Capt. Ensign, throw you the next.
Drawer light me a pipe. --
Drawer lights a pipe for the Captain. He drinks, he drinks; by Jove a deux --
Ensign throws. Come this for me. A six, pox ot'h bone --
Captain throws. I shall not drink to day: Here Colonel above --
Goldcalfe throws. A deux you escape. Now by the whore of fate an ass again. --
all laugh.
Sap. The dye runs true, an ass he will remain --
aside.
Gold. An ass always? besworn a pretty jest --
Snap whispers to the draw. drawer goes out. Captain, I feel my self grow
valiant
Another ass will make me draw.

Capt. By no means on your friends.

Snap. Captain for all your blustering, the other cup --
Lieutenant and Ensign drink to one another in private. May make him valiant.
And now I do remember
Some twelve month since, when but a puny lad,
In such a humor just as this, he shrewdly
Hurt two fencers,

Capt. Which to prevent again, I Will drink
For him, for know I hate to draw
Upon my friends.

Snap. Or foes if you can help it, if I mistake
Not much.

Gold. Come, come; who throws? --
Enter Drawer.
Draw. Noble Colonel. There Is a young Gentleman
In the next room, has stayed this hour for
Company; who not coming humbly desires
Admittance into your acquaintance as
One fame lowdly speaks of.

Gold. Snap. Shall he come in?

Snap. By any means. 'Twere uncivil to deny him,
Drawer, tell him he shall be welcome.

Draw, I shall sir. --

Ex. Draw. Gold. Has he a sword Snap? we should
Have asked him that.

Capt. Colonel, what afraid? Were he as
Stout as Ajax armed with his sevenfold buckler; this
Steel should (on his knees) force him confess --
Points to his sword. Himself your slave,
By Jove a pretty stripling. Colonel --
Enter Bellira in the habit of a Gentleman. Pronounce him welcome.

Gold. Sir, you are kindly welcome.

Belli. Noble Colonel, (if I mistake not)
Fame gives you out the man, I humbly thank you.
And must acknowledge some boldness in my
Request; which if a fault, pray blame report, --
Lieutenant and Ensign drink to one another. The only spur, invited my
ambition; you
Would be pleased to call me your servant.

Gold. Sir, I understand you, and can tell
You, here are Gentlemen (besides my self) have
Swords which when they please to draw,
The frighted people tremble.

Belli. Gentlemen, I shall be proud to serve you, as
One would gladly be your valor scholar.

Capt. Then know young man, from this time
Forth thy foes must fear. Drawer, fill
Me a brimmer of rich Canary. --
Drawer fills.
Belli. Gentlemen, I hope my rude intrusion, breaks
Not up the sport (I understood by the Drawer
You were at) I gladly shall make one, I have some
Trifling crowns, I Would sport to pass away the time.

Capt. To him (in faith) Colonel.

Gold. What say thou Snap. Shall I play with him?

Snap. By any means, should you refuse, it might
Breed suspicion, you either wanted money, or that you were
Exceeding miserable, which might endanger coming
To Artesia's ear; which must not be.

Gold. Excellent well thought on, honest Snap.
Cozen Captain, pray drink to the Gentleman.

Capt. Sir, have at you, to all that honor our Noble Colonel.

Belli. Sir, you make me proud to pledge a health, I so
Much honor. Sir, to the Noble Colonel. --
Drinks to the Lieutenant.
Liev. Which to refuse were death, let come.

Gold. Noble Colonel. How exceeding perfect, Snap,
This stranger has it?

Snap. It Is perfect through the City, thank my care.

Gold. Honest Snap. right honest Snap. Come sir,
Shall we to this sport? --
To Bellira.
Belli. With all my heart sir, here is that will hold
Some minutes play. --
Pulls out a bag of money.
Capt. Lieutenant. Would Bess, and Doll. were here,
To nime the sum, they should have garments fine,
And strut the streets by day. --
Aside.
Liev. The chimney corner then should smoke,
Without our helps, and double pots stand still; while we the
Tavern fortify, against the potent Constable.

Gold. Come, come; the dice.

Snap. Gentlemen, I can furnish you rarely,
Behold here is choice. --
Snap. pulls out some dice.
Gold. Sir, what is your game? I am good at nothing but
At Passage. Drawer make clean the Table.

Belli. Sir, I set you this?

Gold. Sir, That Is too much.

Snap. Refuse to throw at none.

Gold. Say thou me so, honest Snap? Then here is at all --
Throws.
Belli. You then must pay me this.

Capt. Courage Colonel, 'twill come again.

Gold. Hang it dirt, I care not a pin,

Belli. Come Sir, set me deep. --
Throws. That's mine, come again.

Gold. Snap; You must fetch me more money --
Aside.
Snap. Sir, You must not want here, one good
Hand brings all again; if there be not money enough,
What think you of two or three Manors,
I Will bring the deeds.

Gold. Do Snap, make haste honest Snap.

Snap. I shall return with speed. --

Exit. Snap. Gold. Come, I set you this.

Capt. Courage Noble Colonel, the next pull's ours.

Belli. It Is all my own.

Gold. I Will swear he has the best fortune I ever saw,

Capt. Come cheer up, give him a brimmer;
Colonel you are a cup to low to win: Sir, you
Have admirable throwing.

Belli. Sir, it is by chance, I seldom part a winner --
Drawer gives Gold wine, he drinks
Gold. Here Cozen, -- It Is excellent wine I feel it
In my head. Here drawer, fill my valiant Cozen.
Sir, Snap my man will come with more money Presently.

Capt. Cozen if this shit-breech wins, this steel --
Points to his sword. Redeemes it all again, what ever it be.

Gold. That will be rare in faith --
Enter Snap. Come Snap, here Sir, this bag I set you --
Gold takes a bag.
Belli. At all, were it a million --
Throws. It Is all mine

Snap. Sir, this is the last bag; but here are Deeds.

Gold. Come Sir, here is to other bag. --
Sets to other bag.
Belli. This for it all. --
Throws. It Is mine.

Gold. Snap, did you ever see the like?

Snap. After so often winning he needs must loose;
Set him five hundred pounds a year.

Gold. A match. Come Sir, you have all the money;
Here are deeds of five hundred a year;
Will you pay as much if you loose?

Belli. Come Sir, I Will not be out-brav'd.
Set them, and and if they prove so much, or more,
Or less, accordingly, I Will pay, it.

Gold. A match.

Belli. Then lusty dice at all --
Throws. They Are mine. --
Takes up the Deeds.
Capt. Mushrome, deliver all you have put up, back to
The Colonel, or you eternally shall sleep. --
Captain draws.
Belli. How Is that? return again what I have won,
Deliver that again so sawcily, and slave you dye.
You slaves. --
Captain comes firce up to Belli, Belli draws, they all run off the stage, he
following. I Will try your manhood, my coin is easily made
Good, without my brothers help: what things
In shape of men did here appear.
It will be wondered at, but more when known;
By what a handsome shift we got our own --

Exit. ACT. IV.
SCENE I.
Enter King Sol. Disguised in the habit of an Aged Pilgrim. King, AS yet my
pilgrim weed, has been my safe protection.
Surely the Court is mercifully, sparing in their
Search of me; I hear no hew and cry sent after me.
(Though I have read t'has been a course, some
Saucy subjects have presumed to take in search of
Their lost King.) My tender feet have faithfully
Performed their promised penance, in hope
To appease the angry gods, for the by paths they
Have trod, and must have present ease. --
Lies down For heaven knows, they are unable to support me
Longer. Poor Aurelia, were thou but living now
(The sad remainer of all the comfort left me)
Thy tender heart would (pitifully) say I loved,
But that poor little hope I have, waits on despair.
Death would be welcome now, but deaths a
Tyrant to those that covet him, and only
Loves to prey upon the worlds idolaters.
Who vainly clambring in it to catch at all,
By death receive an everlasting fall.
Content is sure the Landlord of this happy place,
Who lets out parcells to his Nimphs and swains,
As harmless as the flocks they tend.
Here on a hillock sits a shepherd swain (free in
His choice to love) only with natures help,
Composing what his un-envied wit brings forth
To court his mistress with, while she seemingly
Bashful smiles, to hear her self so courted.
Near whom a merry swain, with his oaten
Reed, defies the bag-pipe, and proclaims a
Challenge to all the valley, which when received, the
Pretty discord in variety, begets a joy in (the then)
Feeding flocks, who skip to hear the melody,
Their safe protectors make. A universal silence
Crowns this happy place; and I must sleep in jest,
That fain would do it in earnest. Bad world, I
Can forgive you all, O my poor unfortunate Aurelia. --
Sleept. Aurelia undiscouered, sings hard by him.
A Song.
YOu God of love, whose aid I crave,
Look down and pity me;
A harmless maid, from ruin save
Lies wounded here by thee.
Heaven knows my unaspiring heart,
Ambitiously never aimed
'Twas you great god) chose out the dart,
So Nobly me inflamed.
Then since (loves god) the power is yours,
'Twere just to let him know;
How much a simple maid endures
That dares no love to show.
'Twere then but just, to ease my pain,
And grant me my desire;
That he as I, may burn again
Or quite put out my fire.
Enter Aurelia. Aureli. Thus to the unpittying air, I vent my
Sad complaints, who more a tyrant then a
Comforter, in my own tone of woe, returns
My words of sorrow; (poor satisfaction to a maid --
Meaning the Echo. In love.) Aurelia, how have thou lost thy Loyalty,
Who most unworthily have disobeyed the
King his last commands? Did he not charge thee
Not to harbor within thy breast that traitor
To thy quiet melancholy, as one (he by experience
Knew) if not with care prevented, would seek thy
Ruin; yet thou like an ungrateful wretch,
Have entertained the Traitor. I want a confidence
To see his face, that could refuse his counsel, (I
Undertook to follow in my silence.) Would
Ferdinando but return from Court, my doubtful
Thoughts would find more settled reft, Pray
Heavens all be well, for my disquiet sleep^
(I fear) presage no good O you preservers of
The innocent, protect the virtuous King; who
Had he been a subject. (I blush to speak the rest)
I might perhaps have lived to have enjoyed,
What now were a presumptuous sin but for to hope;
Yet heaven can quit me, it is not to enjoy his
Honor as he is King, but as he is man
His virtue. Defend me, you just powers; how
Have I betrayed --
She starts at spying him. My innocent thoughts? I hope he sleeps; his age
And habit speaks no danger in him. It Is surely
Some religious man, wearied by long travel,
In the performance of some holy Rites, has laid
Him here to rest.
He does begin to stir; did not my modesty
Forbid, I would observe him further, here is none so
Near to see me, if I should venture?
Which I Will for once attempt. --
Steps aside.
King wakes and stretches. King. Where am I? such joys I have received in
sleep;
I am afraid to know I am awake: for I am from a
Short sleeping hight of happiness, thrown headlong to
A lingering sorrow. Sure it is some heavenly place?
Me thought I heard the music of the sphear's charming
My troubled senses into happiness, I dare not think of waking.
I should (to the just gods) appear unthankful,
Should I repay this blessing I enjoyed (although but
In a dream) with base despair; heaven knows (what
Ever I deserve) what is yet in store laid up. I am unjust to
Nature and my self, by want of food to punish that
Life I should preserve. I Will to some honest Cottage near
To find relief; Heaven knows I cannot
Travel far. --
The King wearily rises, Aurelia goes toward him.
Aureli. There Is something in this holy man, speaks
Much of sorrow, Me thinks we might be partners
In our griefs, durst we but make them known:
I was but late my self a stranger here,
And should uncharitable be, not to acquaint
Him, where there is relief.

King. Sure I am in Paradise, and this
Some goddess is --
The King spies Aurelia. For since my eyes left to behold the
Fairest of that sex, I never behold so excellent
A form. There must be pity in that Angel shape.
Fair Nymph, assist a wearied wandering Pilgrim
In your directions to some place of succor.
But if thou art the goddess of this heavenly place,
Forgive the doting error my age pleads pardon
For, and I shall pay (when known) the due
Performance of your holy Rites.

Aureli. Thou holy man, (such you appear to me)
And truly I believe, I am no goddess I, but an
Unfortunate poor shepheardess; too much acquainted with
The afflictions, of this too bad world, who glad
To show, (in what I may) respect to reverend age; will
Carefully conduct you to a house near hand, my self
Is but a stranger to, yet dare presume what it affords,
You shall be kindly welcome to.

King. Sure I still dream, and did but think I wak't
That voice, that face; and all does so agree,
My easy faith would fain believe 'twere she.
Or else her Ghost assumes this shape; to let me know
Her murderers; It Is so it is so, fair innocent
Thou shall have justice, let me but know the authors of
Our woe. But whether does my passion lead me?
Fair Nymph, let me but know thy name,
And whence thou art?

Aureli. Father I am ashamed I have
Presumptuously disturbed your quiet; which was
A fault of ignorance, I heartily can be sorry
For. Can you forgive it?

King. Pardon thou exellent creature; that I
Have called thy blood out of thy cheeks, with my unruly
Passion; the sad remembrance (your fair form presented
To my aged eyes) put me in mind of a lost child
I had, so like your self; I durst almost have challenged
You for her. But my Aurelia's dead. --
Aurelia starts. Why starts she at that name? It Is she. it is she.
You gods let me not surfeit with excess, but by degrees
Receive my thankful joy. --
Throws down his staff and runs to her; takes her by the hand. This fair
white hand is flesh and blood?
And this Aurelia, Living Aurelia? I am made for ever;
This happy hour will gain me more then all my
Laboring life could ever purchase.

Aureli. You cannot blame me sir, to start at such
Unusual passions in an aged man, which would they give
You leave, I gladly should embrace the knowledge of
What (as yet) I am a stranger to.

King. Madam, Then know, I am a man (how ever with
Age I do appear unable) has been employed
In search of your fair self.
For though my low condition in the Court, deserve
No knowledge from your honored self; know it
Has been my place of boad, before your honored
Father (the lord Sebastian) ever could call you
Daughter. Dear Madam? let --
She starts Not my honest meaning truths afright you more, but
Understand I am employed in search of you,
By none but by your King.

Aureli. Away, you are an Impostor, or some unhappy
Man, (with too much care) bereft of Reason.
It was my charity to your assistance, and not
My custom, made me thus fondly inquisitive
Of your condition, which I have found my self
As much mistaken in, as you appear in mine;
For know I am a poor shepherds daughter, not
Far from hence, that daily tends my flock
Which I have so long neglected, I fear I shall
Be shent: So heaven preserve you. --
Offers to be gone, he pulls her back.
King. Lady, pray know I cannot so mistake, but
Since it is your will to have it so, I have no
Commission to force you to confession, yet I
Would gladly know whether the letters to your
Fair self (I have with many a weary careful step)
Brought you from the King will be accepted,
If not, it is my duty to return them, and onl^ greet
Him with the glad tidings of our health and safety --
Offers to be gone.
Aureli. Pray stay; but have you letters from
The King? and are you secretly (by him) employed?
Pray let me see them.

King. If you be that Aurelia they are directed.
To, I have.

Aureli. Come, you will be secret. I am the
Same, pray let me see them; I hope the King
Injoyes his health.

King Never better Madam --
The King puts one hand in his pocket as for letters, and with to other takes
off his false beard Know you this superscription?

Aureli. My Lord the King. --
Falls on her knees, and swoones away.
King Her colour's gone; she faints, Angels
Above, assist me; Aurelia look up, speak, or thy
King never more shall utter word. She breathes;
How does my joy, my bliss, my all delight on earth!
One word of comfort, speak.

Aureli. How fares it with the King? I am pretty
Well thanks heaven, and your assistance,

King Why that is well said; rise my Aurelia,
And let this kiss confirm our never to be divided loves,
I now could surfeit here with joy, did reason not
Command forbear. O let this happy day be to all
After ages kept as a day of joy, which I (while
The just gods shall lend me breath on earth)
With care will see performed, in memory of that
Happiness, this hour confirmed Thee living.
But my Aurelia, it was unkindly done (unknown
To any) to desert the Court, and take this borrowed
Shape, leaving me desperately unsatisfied of thy life
Or death; it was a punishment (Aurelia) I could
Not well collect, I had deserved from thee.

Aureli. My much loved Lord, that virtue shines
Within your noble breast, will hardly give
You leave to credit; the plot was laid to take
Away this harmless life: which to preserve (only
With the assistance of faithful Ferdinando)
We privatel^ got hither as to a place of refuge,
Where with the change of habit we meant to spend
Some days, in the contrivance of our future safety.

King. Aurelia Thou do amaze me with a story,
Of that unheard of cruelty, had any tongue but
Thine related, I could (as soon) with the same faith
Have credited, what man's invention could proclaim
Impossible. Sure the^ have no Christian names,
Or if they have, let me but know the fiends, and as
I am thy King I Will see thee righted.

Aureli. My Lord, I freely can forgive them,
They may repent, and in their after life deserve your
Pardon. Please you my Lord to put on your
Disguise, we else may be (by some unwelcome guest)
Discovered; And (as to my poor present home)
We walk, I shall in duty to your commands discover all.

King 'Twas carefully remembered; the joy I
Have received in the blessed encounter of m^ fair
Aurelia, made me forget I was to all the world
(But thee) a counterfeit.
This kiss; now lead the way,
Where virtue is my guide I cannot stray --

Ex. Ambo. Enter Antonio. In a riding habit, a switch in his hand. Anto. Where
should this King be, I have
Endeavored pretty well to find him out, with
What diligent search my wit, and labor could
Contrive, yet all in vain I seek. From the city, to
The small cottage, hills, and dales, woods and
Plains, yet no ridings; not a stripling of eighteen
I see, but I from top to toe examine. Had but some
That I know the large commission I have there is
Not a handsome gentlewoman in the country
(Without a protection from the General) should
Go unsearch't, 'Twere well if they escaped too.
Indeed I am too modest for the employment, which
Was a fault the General might possibly have
Thought me not guilty of, considering I was bred
In The Court. But if I persist in it, I shall be able
To give but a very slender account of my travels.
It being now in fashion for Princes to make escapes in
VVomens habit; but I must mend my fault, and
Stretch my modesty.
But who comes here --
Enter Amint.
Amint. Save you Courteous Gentleman, pray saw
You a fair young she pheardess straggling here
About, I fear has lost her way.

Anto. You speak as if she were a stranger to the
Place, dwells she far hence?

Amint. But here at hand*

Anto. What danger is there then, that she can
Straggle here if dwell so near.

Amint. Although she dwell so near,
She is a stranger here.

Anto. Prithee courteous shepherd, let me but understand thee
And I perhaps may tell some tidings of her.

Amint. Then know, she is but lately come amongst us,
For we (as yet) not know her name, nor whence she came;
But sure she is as courteous a Nymph, and fair,
As ever sung to pipe.

Anto. What years do think she is of?

Amint. She looks some seventeen,
Or much about.

Anto. Shepherd, (may I a stranger to
This place my Beast being tired request you help
Me to some refreshment for my horse, and me;
For which in part of payment, take this
Gold; with it, my hearty thanks.

Amint. Excuse me Sir, the poor entertainment
Our Cottage will afford, cannot deserve this pay;
I wish we had it for you.

Anto. Shepherd, I ever made content my
Feast; which I am sure to find,
In what you have.

Amint. Thank you Noble Sir, since you will
Have it so; please you to stay till I but search the
Next Cops for a stray Lamb, I will
Return with speed, --

Ex. Shepherd. Anto. Shepherd. I shall attend; I do not
Know, more then a simple hope, grounded
On strong desire it should be so:
But I am on the sudden strangly overjoyed, with
Confidence of a discovery of something.
A young shepheardess (did he not say?) of
Some seventeen years of age, I and a stranger too;
One that as yet, he neither knows her name, nor
Whence she is. Well my young King, if I
Do chance to find you in the smock habit, I
May hap to make you look re di'th cheeks,
Without the help of Spanish paper.
You gods, I Will pray my beads o'r twice a day
The more, should this stray shepheardess
But prove my King. And all you powers, bear witness
With me, it is not for honor, or reward, I covet thus to
Find him, as that I fear, some more unwelcome to
Him, may do it to his more prejudice. But here is my
Shepherd come. Shepherd shall we go,

Amint. Sir, I now will wait on you; this is
Your way to your horse.

Anto. Thanks honest shepherd, the joy I apprehend,
Made me forget I had any --

Ex. Am. Enter Cornelius Eugenio. Eugen. I hope the rout's now pleased they
have a King,
Yet some cried out for none (the devil stop their wind-pipes)
The General appeared much backward, in the judgment
of the standers by, to accept the Government; yet Crowns
Are things, seldom unwelcome come,
How ever with care maintained.

Cornel. Eugenio, be confident, the General nothing acted
Outwardly in show, but what his loyal heart provoked him too,
Nor could he with the safety of the Kingdom (as things
Then stood) refuse to accept the Crowa;
For that besides the present danger might have ensued
By the domestic rabble, had he refused.
His known acceptance of it now* strikes terror in
The Foreign Enemy, as under whose victorious
Arm, they have long groaned.

Eugen. Cornelius, I am satisfied, and hope (as you)
The best, but where the King Amasinus (if alive)
Should live so long recluse, to my poor sense.
Appears miraculous; the gods protect him, and prevent,
What we have just cause to fear.

Cornel. He is hardly honest, joins not in that prayer.

Eugen. Amasius, Till I here thy death confirmed, (which
Heavens forbid) I never shall acknowledge other King but
Thee, and cursed be he that does.

Cornel. Prithee forbear, I think I hear him coming.

Enter Bellicosus, Sebastian, Fabius, and attendance. Bellicos. My lord
Sebastian, what ever I Am forced (to my best
Care for all your goods I hope) to take upon me, This is --
Sebastian stands bare. A ceremony, from you, I neither will expect nor suffer,
Pray my lord put on; it is your grave assistance
In this great charge I have undertaken; not what in duty
Does become a Subject to his King, that I expect from you.
And I am glad (my lord) to see these over-acted passions,
So well blown o'r, that did so ill become your gravitie.
We men that know the world, if thankfully would
Receive a blessing; must patiently endure a Cross.

Sebast. But mine is great (my lord.)

Bellicos. It Is truth; therefore your patience in it appears
The more commendable; for know, there is not a Loyal heart
Amongst us all, but has received a loss, a great one too.
Though I must confess yours comes with advantage;
But let us not despair; The gods are just and merciful,
And when we least expect, may bring us joy.
Cornelius, what no news yet from Antonio, in his
Search ot'h King? he is a man I put much
Confidence in his Noble care.

Corneli. My gracious lord, I dare (with reverence to your self)
Presume there is not that thing alive, that owns the name
Of man, would more rejoice, to bring you happy
Tidings then himself; nor make a more laborious
Search in what he has undertaken.

Bellicos. It is believed Cornclius. and you mistake my
Meaning much, if you but think I spoke as doubting,
In the performance of that trust he did with joy embrace,
I know he is honest, as you can think him. Gentlemen,
I fain would urge a question to you all, which could
You satisfy, 'twould be a favor I ever should acknowledge.

Corneli. My Lord, please you propound, (my honor
Stand engaged) in what I may, I Will satisfy.

Bellico. Thank you Cornelius, the question's then,
What you conceive may be the cause, my son
Delirus so dejects himself.

Corneli. Then here my Lord, I take off my engagement;
I think it does proceed from fair Artesia's scorn,
Whom he unfortunately, yet entirely loves.

Eugeni. My Lord, he speaks my thoughts.

Sebast. And mine.

Bellico. Gentlemen, I thank you all, and shall as
Carefully (in what I may) acknowledge this great favor.
Fond Boy, how have thou lost thy self? I fear past all
Recovery. Proud scornful woman; yet why do I
Blame her, when she stands bound as she expects
Her future bliss, to make her free election. Yet how he should
Deserve her scorn, I understand not: the blood that fills his veins
Speaks him as nobly born as she, stand was as well deserving. Things of
This nature must be gently curbed, and by degrees, with
Moderate persuasion weaned from.
He that with violence, seeks to restrain loves fire,
Instead of quenching, makes it flame the higher.
My Lord, and Gentlemen, your good advise in matters that much
Concern the common good, requires your present aid.

Corneli. We ever shall obey, in what you please command. --
Ex. Om.
Enter Artesia. Sol. Artesi. The King not to be found? He doated strangely so
to leave the
Court, ne't to be heard of more. Upon a beggar too, a thing not worth
His Royal thought: and whether dead, or living, it matters not,
The multitude with noise has made their General King:
And since it is so, Delirus ought to be considered of, as now the
Best in being -- it must be so;
A few good words will reconcile the man. --
She calls. Within there, Dreswell? --
Enter Dreswell.
Dres: Madam here,

Artesi. Haste to the Court, there to Delirus Lodgings, and if by
Any means thou can procure admittance to him, pretend you come as
Of your own accord, in pity of your Ladies sufferings, who ever
Since she heard of his melancholy retirement, has kept her chamber,
And denied access to all comers of what quality soever, nor will
She eat, or drink, or sleep, (as is conceived) till she has seen him.
All this you must do in so melancholy a posture,
He shall not doubt a syllable you utter,
(And if thou can deliver it in tears, it will do better.)
This done, strictly examine all his gestures, and every word and sigh,
So exactly, that you may be able to give me a just account how he
Stands moved with your relation, that thereby I may accordingly
Prepare my self for his encounter. Is my Coach ready?

Dres. Madam it is.

Artesi. Then I Will abroad, but will return by that time I
Conceive thou can be here again. Be careful in it.

Farewell -- Exit Artesia -- Dreswel looks back. Dres. Well go thy ways, thou
woman, indeed thou art the very
Master piece of all thy sex for cunning. I thought I could have
Done pretty well; but I am a very puny, and but begin to learn
The art of dissembling. Delirus, you shall be happy; My Lady
Does love you, but it is because the mad-folks of the Town
Have made your father King. Who should they but depose, as
They are like enough, (it being now in fashion) my Lady
Then must sue out a Divorce, and marry the next heir
Apparent to the Crown.
Now shall I have this melancholy Coxcombe (who she has
Sufficiently abused) believe me; for I shall do it rarely. I serve
So exquisite a Lady in the trade; I cannot choose but move
Compassion. 'Twere rare durst I but laugh, to see him sit cross
Armed, and sigh out (in some pitiful tone) his folly, which I
Must charitably call his repentance, which he, (in hope I will be
Merciful to him) and call it so to my Lady, gives me five pieces,
Which I must seemingly refuse, yet hold it fast. What necessary
Commodities to our Ladies are we waiting-women; and faith
Should not grudg at any thing we do, if they would but in (some
Reasonable measure) consider us. We must not kiss (forsooth)
The Gentleman-usher, not for a hundred pound that is not to
Be forgiven; they are very tyrants to us in that particular,
And covet all. I had but some small hopes of Ferdinando, the
Lord Sebastians man, and indeed to say truth, the fellow was of
A pretty able make, and promised well. And he they have shuffled
Out of the way; all is too good for us poor souls, but we
May find a time to fit them for it: But to
My business now in hand. --

Exit. Enter King, disguised as before, Aurelia, Antonio. King. Aurelia, thou
have filled me with amazement, in the
Relating of such a piece of villainy, the fiends of hell, would surely
Tremble at to see perfor'md. Put on thy hat Antonio, this is no
Stands bare. Time nor place to show respect to persons. O Aurelia, how are we
Bound to the just gods, for thy miraculous protection, and sure
Those gods have blessings yet in store for thee, that have so safely kept thee.
Faithful Ferdinando, I yet may find a time to pay thee for thy
Loyalty. Antonio, thou lately came from Court, and
Can advise us for the best; delays do often prove dangerous,
What woul'dst thou have us do?

Anto. Since you are pleased to think my poor advice
Worthy the following; I humbly should request you not
Conclude on any thing, till Ferdinando be returned, who
Madam (if I mistook not) you hourly here expect.

Aureli. I do Antonio, and wonder at his stay.
Pray heaven all be well.

King. Antonio, I like your counsel well, and will be ruled, how took
The General our strange departure from the Court --
Enter Ferdinando
Aureli. Ferdinando is returned, Ferdinando welcome.
Ferdinando starts to see Antonio. Nay be not frighted, here is none but are your
friends.

Ferdi. Noble Antonio, I know not whether my joy; or wonder
To see you in this place, is greater, but both speak much.

Anto. Thanks good Ferdin ando, thou living miracle of honesty,
Pray take acqaintance of this aged man, as one we all stand bound to,
Which you (at more convenient time) shall understand.

Ferdinand. Heaven still increase your age, and happy days.

King. Thank thee my good son, and may thou live
Long to be wondered at for thy fidelity.

Aureli. What news from Court, I hope my
Father does enjoy his health?

Ferdinand. Madam, he does.

Anto. Ferdinando, thy looks speak no good tidings
No news yet of our King?

Ferd. Madam, I expected that enquiry to have been made by you.

Aureli. Indeed 'twas coming out, had not Antonio
Prevented me, I hope he is well.

Ferd. That hope is all we have left; for hitherto their search has
Been in vain. Madam, I much mistake (if since my late departure,)
Your looks speak not much more of cheerfullness, then
When I left you. And I am sorry I have not news for to deliver,
Would fetch more of that blood into your cheeks, has
Been so long a stranger to it is home.

Anto. Thou speak a Prologue to a Tragedy, prithee be brief.
We stand resolved to hear, the utmost can befall us.

Ferd. Then thus it is. The King (as yet not heard of) the factious
People, (mutable by nature) generally rise; some crying out Bellicosus
Should be King; others would have no King; but most of all,
Would have they knew not what. Thus in the streets
Tumultuously they swarm, who Bellicosus (for some small time to
Appease) in hopes to hear ot'h King, pretends receiving Letters
From him; wherein he certifies his health, and that the reason of his
Stealth from Court, was to perform a penance he on himself enjoined by
Vow, for some unrulie thoughts his blood provoked him to, and
Would return with speed. This by the eminent'st men in the Court
Delivered as a truth amongst the Rout, did for a time appease; but
Long it lasted not; for being shortly after, thoroughly whet with wine,
They all brake out; crying aloud Bellicosus should be King.
At which the General under pretense of what might have fallen
Out more prejudicial to the Commonwealth, accepts it for prevention;
And since makes strong apologies in his own defense.
But may they all be swallowed up alive, that own him for their
King, long as Amasius lives, or we confirmed,
(Which heavens forbid) he is dead.

King. Let this confirm thee, Amasius is alive --
King pulls of his disguise. Alive to thank thee for thy Loyalty.

Ferd. Which life, long may the gods preserve --
Ferdinando kneles. With health and joy. --
Rises,
Anto. Ferdinando, leave off to wonder at this happiness, it is
No time to talk but do. Sir, the long experience of the Generals
Loyalty and faithful service to your crown, may justly arm
You with a considence, he dares not act the Traitor.

King. But Antonio, what think you of the intended murder of
This fair Virgin; there was a fault Antonio, a great one too,
One that the gods command should not be smothered.

Anto. So please your Highness. if you but think the General
Guilty but of a thought, (of what I know his very soul abhors)
I soon could clear that doubt.

King. Till when, I shall conclude him not Aurelia's friend,
Though he may take my Crown, and yet never injure me.

Anto. Then on my knees, I beg this favor (for your satisfaction, --
Antonio kneels* That you vouchsafe me leave to go to Court, where speedily
I will contrive a way to clear your doubts, in what
You can desire to know.

King. Rise Antonio, It Is granted on those conditions, and how
In the mean time (for the advantage of your undertakings)
We shall dispose our selves, consider; and it is done.

Anto. Virtuous Sir, it is a trust, my life could never deserve, which
I Will perform or loose it in the attempt. Madam please you to let
Your faithful servant show me to the road I am a stranger to,
I shall (to him) impart what is best for you to do, suiting
With my designs. So heavens shower down his blessings on you both

King. And speed thee in thy honest undertakings.

Aureli. Ferdinando, conduct Antonio, as he shall desire.

King. Come my Aurelia, our poor hom's the best,
Although no Palace, there is more quiet rest --
Ex. Amb.
ACT. V.
SCENE I.
Enter Snap, Captain, both Drawn, a fighting, the Captain Forcing Snap backward
on the Stage. Snap. CAptain, hold, hold, I say; thou now deserve that Title;
Come let us put up, you shall have your desire.
But know it is not out of fear I do it; fear being a thing I never
Understood. But it is thy valor that has won my love,
Which shall continue, long as you dare thus valliantly make good
Your honor, which I (in pity to your self)
Much fear is not long lived.

Capt. Then welcome death, who in the horrid'st shape he
Can put on, shall ever make this flesh of mine (but now redeemed
From the base brand of coward) ever tremble to behold him.
Sir, be not too incredulous nor wonder-struck; that I
Can speak a truth; which to my shame (I must confess)
I have but seldom uttered. Forknow the baseness
Of my former actions, has wak't my better judgment
To a repentance of my sinful folly; nor is there in these veins
One drop of blood but came from noble springs. And if this
Small sprinkling of my redemption can nothing gain on your belief,
But name an undertaking honorable, that may confirm
Me to the world I am a man, and I Will attempt it, or
With the loss of life leave ample satisfaction,
I dyed no coward.

Snap. I do embrace thy friendship, and believe thee --
Embraces him. Heartily believe thee, as one that joys in thy recovery,
And what (before) I could not think thee worthy of; now does
Appear unworthy thy acceptance. But for the present
Here take this bag, with it the assurance, of --
Gives him a bag. My assistance in what I shall be able. And what so ever you
Have done for me, (how ever to your judgment it appears) yet
Know, it was but honest, and but a slight to get my own;
Long since by Goldcalf's fathers unjust dealing
Detained from me.

Capt. Sir, it is believed, and for your money (my want compels
Me to accept of) I thank you, as what I not deserve, but
What your Nobleness (in pity of my present state) is pleased
Bestow on me. And that you shall see your money well
Employed, I Will to the army, where my actions shall speak me
Willing to redeem my misspent youth, or
Find a Noble death.

Snap. May victory and reward, crown all your
Undertakings. So farewell. --

Exit Snap. Capt. Succeess attend your wishes to your desires, while I
Practice to live, that I shall dare to d^e, --

Exit. Enter Bellicosus, Delirus. Bellicos. Delirus, however I have past by the
inquiry of
Your discontent, yet know I have a fathers eye, that sees your
Wound that bleeds, and know it must be searched well, ere it can
Be cured; therefore I charge you on my blessing (as
You expect that I should prove your faithful Surgeon) prove
You a dutiful patient, in plainly laying open to me
The cause of this your present grief.

Delir. Sir your Commands are too powerful for me to
Disobey. And what of Discontent you have lately
Seen in me, sprung from Artesia's scorn
On my impatient love.

Bellicos. Me thinks thou should consider, whose son thou art
A Soldier too, and have thy reason captived
By the imperious pride of a vainglorious woman. For shame
Collect thy scattered senses; (and if not out of pity to thy
Self) yet in respect of my commands (which here I lay upon
Thee) return her scorn again. And then she will sue to thee.
Fond Boy, thou do not know the subtle trains of women,
Whose wavering minds prove labyrinths to the most ingenious
Searchers, can thou yet love, and she yet scorn?

Deli. My Royal Father, in all obedience to your Demands
I thus must answer; and call the gods to witness with me,
I hate her actions more then I ever loved her person;
Which now with scorn, I both disdain.

Belli. That Is spoken like thy self. What news with thee? --
Enter Fabins.
Fabi. My gracious Lord; There is; a traveller (a stranger he seems)
Desires to be admitted to your presence; who (as he
Does pretend) has business of much concernment to deliver.

Belli. Admit him in. Welcome friend, would --
Enter Anto. his coat changed, a false beard. Thou ought with us?

Anto. Yes, my good Lord, I have something to impart that
Much concerns your knowledge.

Deli. I do not like this fellows looks, what should his
Business be. Sir, your business may require privacie,
I Will wait within your call. --
Deli. offers to go off, Anto. stays him,
Anto. Pray stay sir, my gracious Lord, such is the nature
Of my business, I shall not only crave this Gentleman may
Hear the delivery of it, but also such of your Royal
Council as are near at hand.

Belli. Fabius, call those that wait without --
Fabius goes to the hangings calls them. Ent. Corneli. Eugeni. Now when you
please begin.

Anto. Then (by your gracious favor) it sadly thus fell out.
'Twas, when the harbinger of light, had given notice
To the late darkened world, that the bright Sun was darting
Forth his radiant beams upon the teeming earth, when near
To the black Cliffe (a place well known to all) and fit
So black a purpose; upon the top of which, a man (I thought
I spied, (but proved a monster) near whom, after a
Stricter view, I could discern something to move, (but
Knew not what it was. Toward it I gently made, willing
To see, unseen: when by the help o'th craggy Cliffe I soon
Had got within the hearing of a voice (in such a Tone of woe
Sadly lamenting) the neighboring rocks in tears did seem
To melt, to hear the moan it made. Pity, and curiosity,
To know what it might be, joined to contrive, how
I might make my approach so near, to satisfy my doubts
Remaining undiscovered, when envious nature conspiring
The ruin of what she should preserve, by a small creek
O'th Sea divided us. Yet at so small a distance, I could
Discover a maid (for such she seemed to be) upon her knees.
With hands held up for mercy to her murderer. Who
Less relenting then the hardened Rocks, proclaimed himself an
Enemy to pity. And with a voice befitting such a bloody
Mind, demanded if she were prepared to dye.
(As if he meant, for to preserve in her, what in himself in the
Very act he must destroy.) To which she answered something,
So faintly dying not to be understood, when straight I could
Perceive the slave prepare (into the Sea) to cast the innocent
Fair one, whom he before had drowned in tears.
This sight, I tremblingly beheld, cursing the water that divided
Us. Yet hoping to prevent his bloody execution, a loud
I called, as confident in the consideration of his own present
Safety, being discovered, I happily might save her life:
But all in vain; for what with threats, fair promises, and tears
I could prevail, was only to behold her fall into the sea.
At which unheard of piece of cruelty, the Sun not daring to
Behold so foul a murder, withdrew his waterish beams
(Made pale with fear) behind the burdened clouds, who big
With Tears, in thousand spouts did trickle to the earth,
There witnesses of sorrow.
The Villain, his black deed done, question's the justness
Of the Gods, in hopes he should escape: which to prevent
I nimbly down descended, fetching a compass to the place my
Reason prompt me to believe he must attempt to make his
Flight, where (by the Justness of those Gods he so mistook)
We met. I drew and bid him stand; at which the daring
Slave grin'd in my face, and with a confidence, as if his
Cause were just, draws in defiance of my single opposition.
To blows, and thrusts we went, when guided by the hand
Of Justice, my sword soon found a passage to his death.
When he (afraid to die) when death appeared so near,
Tremblingly for mercy begged, in hope he might have lived.
On which I took advantage, and with the promise of
My assistance in his cure, and silence for the fact he had
Committed, he to my joy (in his behalf) discovered, not
Only who it was he had murdered, but also who had hired
Him to that accursed deed of darkness; which when at
Full delivered (to my amazed wonder) I fell to earth, as if
I had received the greater wound. Only I rose again, which
He did never; for just (as if the Gods had lent him breath
Enough for his confession,) he left the world.
My Lord, I have not yet quite finished, --
Deli. offers to go out. And shall desire all that are present, may hear my
story out.

Bellicos. Delirus stay, I do command you stay.

Deli: My Lord, I am not well, o'th sudden.

Bellicos: So short a stay as this requires, can no ways
Prejudice your health. Friend go on to let us know, as well
The Murderers, as the murdered; heaven knows, I tremble
But to think, at what I urge to know.

Anto: As soon as grief will give me leave
(My Lord) I shall. --
Anto. pretends to weep. The murdered person, was that virtuous innocent, the
Fair Aurelia, Daughter to the Lord Sebastian.

Deli. O Delirus, thou art lost for ever, ever lost. --
aside.
Bellico. Sure friend thou did but dream, and this some
Vision was. It was an act so horrid, the gods in justice
Never could have beheld. And there must want temptation
In the fiends of hell, to work on man (though frail)
To be her murderer.

Anto. My Lord, it was no idle dream; yet heaven can
Witness, I could have gladly slept for ever, rather then lived
To see this waking truth.

Bellico. Then briefly speak her murderers.

Anto. First on my knees I beg your gracious
Pardon, for what --
Kneels. I must deliver or burst. And here I stand to accuse --
Rises. Your son Delirus, and the Lady Artesia, daughter to the
Late Lord Endimion, the innocent Aurelia's murderers.
And Ferdinando, servant to the Lord Sebastian, (whom with this
Hand I slew,) by them was hired her executioner.

Bellico. My trembling heart will hardly give my tongue
The utterance to say it is impossible.

Deli. My Lord, I am confident your grave wisdom's such,
There Is nothing (this loose fellow) in madness has delivered,
Deserves your serious consideration, more then what punishment
He has deserved; for give me leave my Lord, had he his wits,
(Which no man here can think) in what has fair Aurelia
Injured me? or if she had, my fair actions in the world
Speak me no murderer Besides this frantic accusation,
Delivered by a single man, whom none knows whence,
Or what he is. My Honored father, this rightly weighed.
'Twere fit the slave should know his punishment, which
Must be great as his offense. For villain know --
Turns to Anto. Thy lif's to poor a satisfaction for my injury.

Anto. Sir, I have heard you, and must take leave to tell
You, I am no slave nor villain; nor is there in these veins of
Mine one drop of blood (however I appear) but sprung
From Noble parents. And here I call the gods to witness
With me; I wish, and heartily, you could but clear your
Self of fair Aurelia's murder as thus I clear
The doubts of what I am --
Pulls off his disguise, pulls out a purse. All Antonio!

Anto. You knew this purse Delirus, when laden with
The price of innocent Aurelia's blood, you gave it Ferdinando
In part of payment for his black deed.

Deli. True Antonio, it is all but truth. O cruel Artesia,
By thee I fall, to my eternal ruin --
Deli. Falls.
Bellico. Be merciful great powers too a weak aged
Man, and load me not too much with your afflictions,
Your burden is to great, yet fain I would support it
Bravely. Cornelius, I do command you take speedy order,
That object of my shame be carefully conveyed to the
Castle. And you Eugenio --
Ex. Corneli. Haste to Artesia's lodgings, where seize her with a guard,
And house them both together. They may forgive each
Other, and repent before their deaths. --
Ex. Eugen. O Antonio, I looked for joy at thy return, but thou have brought
Me woe; bitter woe Antonio, but I forgive thee freely, --
They fetch Deli. off the Stage And commend thy honest care, thou have nothing
done,
But what our Laws, and thy religion bound thee to.
Antonio, I mean to act the Judges part my self, for since
Corruption crept into the Bench, the Jury finds it death for to be
Poor, the rich may plead not guilty. Poor Lord Sebastian
Thou shall have justice done thee. (Small satisfaction for thy loss)
Yet all the world shall see,
If thine be great, mine cannot lesser be --

Exit Bellicosus, Antonio. Enter Sebastian, Ferdinando. Sebast. O Ferdinando,
thou have made me young again,
Thou happy messenger of joy; me thinks thou have pulled back
Least twenty of my years. And will the King be here
(Do say) and in disguise, and my Aurelia too?

Ferdinand. My Lord they will; be confident they will.
I do expect them every minute.

Sebast. But Ferdinando, I want how to contrive to entertain
Him, my poor house is quite unstored, and no direction's given
For any thing, can look like welcome to him.

Ferdinand. My Lord, since you so much desire to make him
Welcome, I shall instruct you how to make him so.
If you but think his welcome does consist in feasting (my Lord)
You so mistake our present business, that know you ruin all
His honorable designs, he hitherto (with care and pains) has
Labored for to compass. First you must let it be your care,
Your joy transports you not; but what of joy
You must express, must be upon good grounds you are securely
Private; other ways to take no notice of them, more
Then what they outwardly appear to be.
This, and no other is the welcome that the King expects.

Sebast. Thanks Ferdinando; honest Ferdinando, thou
Faithfullest of servants, I thank thee for thy advice, which
I in all things carefully will follow. I can no longer keep my
Joy within the narrow bounds of my poor breast,
It must (at these weak aged eyes of mine) have vent,
It must, it must. --
Weeps for joy.
Ferdinana. My Lord the King is here.
Enter King, Aurelia.
Sebast. Long live my gracious King, and may your poor --
Kneels. Sebastian live to be truly thankful to the gods
For this blessed hour of joy.

King. Rise Sebastian, no more of this, we know thy
Love and Loyalty. But must enjoin you (in all your actions
To express to us, not what we are, but what
We appear to be.

Sebast. My much loved Lord, your poor Sebastian can be
Aquainted with no other study but what shall teach me to obey.
O my poor girl, never more welcome to thy fathers arms.
Aurelia kneels. You gods, let not my joy make me forget my duty.

King. Ferdinando with speed find out Antonio, and let him
Know of our arrival at the Lord Sebastians, where we shall
Hourly expect to hear, as he shall find occasions offer.

Ferdinand. I shall with care perform it --

Exit. King. Come my lord Sebastian, we are now your guests;
Dispose us as you please, you dare without suspicion, trust
Your fair daughter with us, her vertu's guard enough.

Sebast. Your own, (great Sir) may challenge a far
Greater trust. So please you, I shall conduct you to
The best part, of a homely house.

King. Sebastian you are happy you have a house that
You may call your own; it is more then I dare do.
Come my Aurelia, it is all my joy, that
I can call thee mine.

Aureli. Sir, were not a sin I am a stranger to,
I should begin to fear I should grow proud ot'h honor
You are pleased to do your creature.

King. As I to have such a creature for to honor.

Ex. Ambo. Enter Dorothy. sol. Doroth. My Lady hurried (with a guard) to the
Castle?
It Is so, the scorn she threw upon Delirus has made him desperate,
And confess the murder; my jealous heart presaged
No less, when no entreaties could prevail on him, I might
But speak my message; which when I but
Attempted, he seemed in scorn, and hate
Of her to stop his ears.
Lady, your plot's are now discovered to the world; at least,
To Ciciley, which is too hot for me to live in.
A ship (now weighing anchor) stands bound for Italy.
I Will take this profer'd means for my escape.
Farewell Artesia, my safety bids not stay,
She dies a fool, that dies, when live she may --

Exit. Enter. Enter Antonio, Cornelius. Cornel. Cruel Ferdinando, how were we
all mistaken in
That murdering villam, whose name (to all posterity in
Memory of this damned act) shall never be thought on but with
Horror for fair Aurelia's loss. The gods (in her) have
Robbed us of our Magazene of virtue

Anto. In her we have just cause to fear our Princes loss,
Their virtues were as inseparable, as I fear their fortune.
Cornelius, how took Delirus his conduct to the Castle?

Cornel. With much seeming patience, but not a syllable
Enter Eugenio, Could be urged from him. How now Eugenio? how have you
Disposed of your bloody fair one, the everlasting shame
To all her sex? how does her pride and envy
Bear her present fortune?

Eugen. Prithee be merciful be merciful in thy opinion of her, for
Though the thought of her foul deed proclaims her monstrous,
Beshrew me but she made me weep, and so would thee
Cornelius, had thou but seen her penitence.

Cornel. They Are Crocodiles tears Eugenio, for know she can
Put on what shape she please, to act her present part,
And 'twas thy charity, not her true penitence,
That so prevailed on thy believing sense.

Eugen. Cornelius, I boast (my self) to have no knowing
Insight in the women's trade, yet dare with confidence affirm,
Those passions I saw in her of sorrow for her fact could not
Be counterfeit. For know* soon as she saw Delirus, in
The Castle, her tears in floods gusht forth, as
Witnesses, she sorrowed more for him, then for her self;
And humbly on her knees before us all, confessed her self
His murderer. At first he seemed with loathed eyes to
Look on her, who still her self, confessed her self to be
The principal in blood. This penitence in her, compassion
Wrought in him, who took her up and kissed her
In witness of forgiveness, she wept the more to see him
Pity her, for which she knew she did deserve the less
From him. So like two weeping Niobies they stood and read,
(As well as tears would give them leave,) their own
Misfortunes in each others face; and both in pity
Wept, while they themselves, themselves unpittied,
Yet for each other pitifully wept. When I (unused I
Must confess) to wash my face in tears, made up
A third in mourning. Which she perceiving, humbly
Thank't me for my compassion, and hoped it was
Bestowed on him, as what she not deserved. This,
And such like expressions of repentance, with streams
Of hearty sorrow flowing, wrought so in him, he asked
Her if she loved him dying, she so much injured
Living. Which she (as well as words and tears could witness
For her) answered, yes, so well, that were she but as
Sure of his, she should rejoice a faithful penitent in death.
This, in true signs of love, and sorrow uttered, he
Sends away (straight) for a holy man o'th Church,
Who after some private confession on both sides made,
Joined both their hands in holy marriage; which
Done, as grief would give them leave, they both
Rejoyc't, and kissed; then wept again, so that my
Pity (in my tears) rather increast, then lessned by my
Stay. When urging necessity for my departure, I sadly
Took my leave, and left them prodigally bestowing
Their tears upon each others face.

Anto. I blame thee not Eugenio, for being a weeping
witness of their woes, when I can scarce forbear
At the relation; heaven knows, I wish them long
Life on earth to enjoy each others love.

Corneli. Eugenio, Thou have delivered miracles,
But know, I can believe what comes from thee,
Which had appeared much doubtful from another
Mouth; she has purchac't now my pity and my
Prayers, which I Will acknowledge justly due, and pay --
Enter Fabi. weeping
Anto. How now Fabius, weeping for your young master?

Fabi. You cannot blame me Sir, when I am
Made the messenger of death.

Eugeni. How? sure it is not yet come to that.

Fabi. I would it were not; or else some other had
Been made the messenger.

Corneli. Prithee speak out, that we may understand you.

Fabi. The King enraged, to understand his son
Was married to his murderer, commanded me to
Let them know 'bout four a clock this afternoon,
They must prepare to dye, and keep their
Wedding in the other world. Which they (poor
Souls) with joy received, and thank't me for my pains;
(As willingly) as if I had deserved it:

Anto. 'Twas but short warning, the gods
Prepare them for their long journey. Gentlemen,
I have some present business calls me aside, but
I shall soon return to share with you in sorrow.

Ex. Anto. Eugeni. You Will hardly find us unprepared for that.
But think thou Fabius the King intends this
Hasty execution; it is surely done to fright them into a
Preparation for the other world:

Fabi. Sir, Pray heaven you not deceive your self.
The King is known too constant in his resolves,
To alter what he with seriousness protests, which to our
Griefs we too too soon shall find.

Corneli. Eugenio; The tim's but short, and it is
But labor lost if we not speed. If he will have
Them dye let us move for longer time.

Eugeni. With all any heart, I shall plead hard for one.

Corneli. Then let us away. --

Exit. Enter Delirus Artesia. In mourning habits, as in prison. Deli. Come my
Artesia, dry those fair eyes, the gods
We know are merciful, and can forgive what
We can act. Thou have with penitential tears, in
Streams of sorrow (from thy swollen eyes)
Washed off that guilt that clouded thy fair soul,
And do appear as white as sainted innocence. We
Are married to another world Artesia, let them
Enjoy the happiness in this (if there by any in it)
That are wedded to it, whom we with pity, not
With envy must behold. And it is no little joy, amid'st
Our sea of troubles, to see thee thus prepared for
Death; which we will embrace as greedily, as
Shipwrackt travelers do the longed for shore:
And O thou injured maid, in what celestial
Part so ever (thy now made glorious soul) does hover;
Look down with pity and a forgiving eye, on us
Thy sorrowful murderers, who ready stand to
Sacrifice two lives, to appease thy angry ghost.
Give me thy hand Artesia, our time draws on apace,
And yet methinks I fain would have thee live;
Would my poor life pay the great debt we owe,
But the devouring law cries all or none. Thy blood
Artesia, sits with a confidence in thy fair cheeks,
As if it meant not suddenly to leave its habitation.
And it is great pity, now it has possession, to turn it
Out of doors.

Artesi. My Lord, I have but ill deserved this
Noble pity; and here my dying breath shall witness
For me, I would not live on earth after your
Death, to be commandress of the world. Yet know
My Lord, I gladly could both live, and dye, to serve you.
Dye, for to confirm this doubtful world, with
What a feeling sorrow for my sins, I could endure
Death, and live with you on earth; to witness to the
World how I could love, and honor you. Which
Since denied, I gladly shall embrace my death, and
Only grieve I have robbed the world of you --
Enter Fabius.
Fabi. My Lord, your guard waits you, and you to
Death are summoned.

Deli. It shall be welcome Fabius. Thou see no
Pannique fear about us. --
Takes her by the chin. See how the lillyes, and the roses in these
Fair cheeks undaunted fit. Why do thou weep for us.

Fabi. I weep (my lord) for you, and for my self; for
You, that you must loose your life; and for my self that none
But I, must be chose out the messenger of death.

Deli. Thou art vainly troubled, at what I thank thee for.
Come my Artesia, this kiss, now lead us to our deaths.

Kisses her. Exit. Enter Goldcalf sol. Gold. Here Is doings indeed, my Mistress
going to pot
In Faith. What a deal of mony't has cost me to be a Colonel
To no purpose. A plague of that stripling stranger, he made no
Stranger of my money I am sure; the Jack napes firkt
Me too, out of my Deeds of almost a thousand pounds a year.
Pox of those German's bones, my Cozen Captain slew in Duel;
They were sufficiently revenged on me for the murder, but
It Is no matter, I have saved my life yet, by not being
Too hasty. If I had married Artesia, I had been peppered in faith,
(However I escape yet) for there is Delirus, a brave spark
Must dye, but for offering to have her. --
Enter Snap gallaut. Hey day Snap, what turned Gentleman?

Snap. Sir, no more such buggs words; which if you dare
But utter, I Will nail your ears to the wall; a punishment
Your honorable father (long before his death) wisely
Prevented, by leaving them behind him on the Pillory,
For Cozening such honest Gentlemen as my self.
For know you wretch, you that dare talk saucily, the
Gentleman that won your Deeds of you at play, when be perused
Them, and knew them to be the very same your father
Cozened my uncle of; He, in pity of my present wants
Bestowed them upon me, and they are mine.
And should I chance to hear you should but say they ever were
Yours. People should soon forget you were alive.
But as you may behave your self, I may forget all your
Past folly, and keep you company.

Gold. Thank you good Snap.

Snap. You draw no breath if I but hear that word again.

Gold. Pray sir, forgive me for this once and I Will remember;
How may I call you, are you a Colonel too?

Snap. No sir, by chance, I am no Colonel; the name I
Answer too, is Sunck-low.

Gold. Sunck-low; Methinks you are risen very high. --
A side Well honest Mr. Sunk-low, pray let me have your company for
Old acquaintance sake; you know you can loose nothing by it.
But by no means, be not known, how I was beloved, for
Mr. Sunk low, it were as much as my lif's worth, were it but
Known Artesia would have married me, for there is one
Must dye, but for offering to have her.

Snap. Well Sir, I shall be careful, so you observe as I
Instruct. Farewell --

Exit Snap. Gold. I am finely gulled in faith, but I must wiser be,
Or else resolve, to wear Snaps liverie. --

Exit. Enter upon a black Stage. Bellicosus, Sebastian, weeping. Antoni.
Corneli. Eugeni. Fabi. Delirus, Artesia, in mourning. Executioner. After them,
the King and Ferdinando. Disguised. Belli. My Lord Sebastian, the gods (you
see) have here
Miraculously discovered to the world, your daughters
Murderers. (And yet, but that we know them to be so,
They do not look like such) my Lord you shall have
Speaking to Sebastian Justice done. Delirus, were thou a Stranger to my blood
as
It ill becomes a Judge. And all you gods can witness, amidst
My mass of grief, I have rejoiced to hear your sorrows for
Your faults expressed, and willingness to dye. I must confess
Your have been cruel, bitterly cruel to your selves and us; for by your
Means (Heaven knows I not accuse your wills to do it) we have
Lost a general loss, unspeakable, a King, a virtuous King, never to be
Enough lamented. But I shall cease to add unto a grief,
This world affords no cure for; and will forbear to stop
You longer in your journey to a better.
But ere you go, take with you my forgiveness, and with it,
Both my blessings. And may that comfortable joy good men
Receive in death, fill both your breasts.

Deli. My gracious father (unhappie in so unfortunate a son)
We come with no set speeches here, for to prolong
Our wretched lives. Let not those aged eyes distill a tear
For us, we are prepared for death. Can you (my lord Sebastian)
And all the rest, show mercy to a dying pair, in your
Forgiveness; we gladly would depart this life in peace,
With all the world, if you vouchsafe, it may be so.

All. Our prayers, and tears speak for us, we both
Forgive and pity.

Deli. The gods above (with store of blessings

Art. Reward your charity. We are now at peace with
Heaven, and earth, and fain would be at our expected rest.

Bellico. Then Sir do your office. --
The executioner prepares to strike.
King Hold, hold I say.

Bellico. Who Is? that dares contradict what we command?

King If you have not forgot me Bellicosus, it is one
That had power to dare; nor do I know by what
Strange means I have lost it; know you this face --
King discovers himself.
Anto. The King? Long may the gods preserve your
Life, and make us thankful acknowledgers of his
Blessings in your Highness safety.

Bellico. Pardon me gracious Prince, my sudden joy
Encountering so much grief, made a confusion in my troubled
Senses, and did retard my duty. Which thus upon my knees --
He kneels. I beg forgiveness for; and what so ever (for'cd for the
Common safety of your distracted kingdom) I have taken
On me, here on my knees, in duty to your Highness
I surrender with tears of joy. Long live our gracious
King Amasius, King of Sicily.

All Long live Amasius King of Sicily. --
all kneel
King My Lords, and Gentlemen, I thank you all
For the Loyal remembrance of your poor Prince,
Whose tender care shall be to study all your
Safeties, and preserve them. Rise Bellicosus, thou
Ever to be admired pattern of love and Loyalty. Just man,
I ask thee pardon for every evil thought, I ever
Harbored against thy virtue. Justice and mercy still
Walk hand in hand, I know thou can forgive it.

Belli. O my much honored Lord, your virtue ever
Kept too strong a guard on vice, to let you act what
Could deserve forgiveness, from any but the gods.
My Lord, I shall become an earnest suitor, that
You Will vouchsafe to let a piece of justice pass on these
Prepared Offenders.

King Offenders? Delirus, and the fair Artesia,
(If I mistake not) --
King looks at Deli. Artesi. My Lord, what masque is this, for sure they cannot
act
Offenders parts in earnest; pray make me understand you.

Belli. Forgive me then my Lord, that must be the sad
Reporter of my shame, and their unheard of cruelty.
In them behold the fair, and virtuous innocent
Aurelia's, murderers.

King You have unjustly done, but to suspect them
Guilty, your witnesses are false, Delirus, and Artesia,
Murderers? it cannot be, it is impossible; poor soul she ever
Loved them well, so they did her; it is some villainous
Train, (by forgery) laid to betray their innocent lives.
And here I set them free --
King takes them by the hand.
Belli: My gracious lord they have confessed the fact.

King 'Twas then because they were ashamed to live
After so foul a charge maliciously laid on them:
Delirus, Artesia, speak, was it not so?

Deli. My Lord, and King, we are Aurelia's murderers,
For which foul deed, we have with tears and prayers
Made peace with heaven and earth, if you will be
Merciful and but forgive us too.

King With as much willingness, as I Will receive a blessing;
Rise both, rise I say, so. Bellicosus, I hope (in my --
They rise. Late pilgrimage, I have made my peace with heaven,
For all my youthful sins, and am (at length) returned
With joy. As for Aurelia (know Bellicosus) I
Loved her more then life; but since unfortunately
She is dead, and these her murderers (as they confess)
Have truly sorrowed for their offense; I here
Pronounce their pardons, which stands irrevocable,
If I command in chief.

Belli. Why then my Lord, you are to your self, and
All the world unjust. In your commanding hands you
Hold a sword, as well as scales; can it be mercy called
To act injustice. Princes, as the Ambassadors
From heaven are bound to right the wronged, and not
To wrong who should be righted. Behold this
Aged man whose bitter tears of sorrow cry out --
Turns to Sebast. (Aloud) for Justice. And if my gracious Lord) you
Have made a vow (at the return from your devotions) to act
A piece of mercy; now show it on your self, in
Doing Justice on these prepared offenders.

King O Bellicosus, thou art my safe Protector and my
Guide to virtue, behold this warrant for the justness --
The King brings in Aurelia, in rich attire; Bellira following. Of my actions
-- nay be not wonder-struck,
She is alive --
And warm. --
Kisses her
Bellicos. I am o'rcome with the apprehension of a joy,
I fear my self unable for to bear. Welcome to
Life thou virtuous maid. Cornelius, Eugenio, all see, Aurelia
Is alive, and our lost Prince returned; safely returned;
Delirus and Artesia, ask mercy of the King, and
Fair Aurelia; they are good, exceeding good, and can forgive.
So, so, my joy must have a larger vent,
Or I shall burst, --
Turns about and weeps.
Deli. The gods preserve your Highness, --
Deli.
Art. And the much wronged
Art* kneels
Aurelia. -- Ferdinando discovers himself to Bellira.
Artesi. O my most Gracious Prince, and thou
Much injured maid, if ever tears, from a true sorrowing
Heart compassion moved; pronounce forgiveness
To a pair, whose tears in prayers, to the just Gods, we'll
Daily pay for your Eternal happiness.

King Rise, and here receive (from us)
Forgiveness and our favor.

Aureli. May all my actions prosper as I freely do forgive
You both. Long may you live and love.

Deli. The gods crown all your desires, with joy

Art. And length of days.

King. My Lord Sebastian, I now must call you father,
For by to morrow night, I doubt not your consent,
To bed the fair Aurelia,

Sebast. My Lord, we are your poor creatures, can only pay
Our daily thanks, for what undeserved honors you
Are pleased to throw upon us.

Aurel. So please your Majesty, I see a pair
Of lovers met (I have long parted) desirous
To kiss your hand. --
Ferdinando kneels, and Bellira; the King gives him his. hand to kiss
King Rise Ferdinando, and may thou joy in thy
Fair choice, thy faithful services, shall be
My Care to see rewarded.
Come Bellicosus we shall some mysteries unriddle to you,
And let you understand, Antonio's mistake in his relation
Our following days, do fairly promise joy.
He ignorantly fears,
The sailing of his ship, that Bellicosus steers.

The Epilogue, intended for the STAGE.
ALL from our Author that I have to say,
Is that he hopes (as we) you will like his play.
Confirm then what (as yet) but stands in doubt,
As you came welcome in, you will go pleased out.
Epilogue, to the Reader.
NOw Critic woudbees, (faith) my play's not good
You Will say, because when read it is understood.
Would I have pleased you, I should have written so,
Not to understand't my self (nor you) you know
When you have read it. (pox on it) what is easily said,
Though never so quick, ought to be buried.
Which if it be, 'twill rise again by fits,
To fright you (if you have any) from your wits.
Which to preserve, be modest, or write better,
You'h more then paid me then, I Will rest your debtor.
As unto all wipes out my faulty score,
Till by my next, I run indebted more.
FINIS.

