ADVICE TO MOURNERS Under the Loss of Dear RELATIONS.

In a FUNERAL-SERMON, long since preached by the late Reverend Dr. Thomas
Manton, D. D.

And now occasionally published on the much lamented Death of Mrs. Ann Terry,
who died the 9th of November, 1693.

With a short Account of some Passages of her Life, and Papers left under her
own Hand.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1694.

THE PREFACE.
READER;
THAT which occasioned this Discourse and Preface, is a late Stroke of
Providence, in translating a Daughter of Abraham from hence to Abraham's Bosom,
where she now rests in the delightful Expectations of her full Resurrection
unto Life Eternal. She was a Person whom I well knew, and greatly valued, and
that I did discern by free and frequent Conversation with her, Treasures of
Knowledge and Grace richly abiding in her; and with great Judgment and Savor
pertinently brought forth by her, in order to her fuller Satisfaction and
Edification in what concerned her Soul, as to its Duty whilst embodied, and its
full Bliss when it was to be removed hence. She ever was concerned to know her
Duty, and the true Matter, Grounds and Usefulness of her Christian Hope, in
order to the effectual influencing of her concerned Spirit in her determined
Services and Station. She ever was solicitous to know her Work, and to
discharge her Trust as a Christian, and answerably to her Relations and Family,
wherein she behaved her self not as without Law to God, but as under Law to
Christ; and so deported her self with true and commendable Exemplariness as a
Wife, a Mother, and a Mistress, and as one full of Thoughts and Care therein
to abide with God, and to approve her self to him in his own solemn Day of
Judgment. She was a Person of great Exercises through the tedious Urgencies of
her long and many bodily Infirmities, which she bore with Patience, and
providently improved unto the great Advantage of her better Part. She would not
suffer Sense to sit in Judgment upon Providence, but fetched her Measures of
God's dealing with her from that Faith, and from those Thoughts which took
their Directory from God's own Sacred Oracles. She concealed her Resentments of
her Troubles (so far as I could see) from all save only such as she judged able
judiciously to minister to her Satisfaction. Her Objections were not trivial,
but such as did require considerable Resolutions of, which she was very
apprehensive, observant, and (I think) tenacious of. Her Troubles hindered not
her Converse with God in Solitudes, nor the fit Indearments and Improvements of
both relative and friendly Converse. She is now gone to the Felicity and
Employments for which she was, through Grace and holy Industry, considerably
prepared. And what her Spirit breathed for and after, may be discerned in part
by these few Instances of her Closet-work, which her sorrowful Husband has
thought fit to communicate to the World. It Is such a Wife as he has lost, as
that the Sense and unavoidable Remembrances of that Loss may well urge
sorrowful Nature to its Tears and Groans. And of these, considerable Measures
are needful and allowable, but Provocations to excessive Grief, through such a
Stroke, render it needful that Christian Bounds and Limits to such Sorrows be
seasonably proposed and well considered. And therefore this Funeral Text is
fitly offered to the Mourners Thoughts by the Apostle that recorded it, and by
the Reverend Author who has fitly insisted upon that Clause. The serious
Perusal whereof, and of these few Memoirs of the Deceased, so devoutly
contemplative for her own Good, and for the Benefit of others, is really judged
worthy of due Consideration, both by the Publisher, and by thy true Friend, in
and for the great Disposer of Times and Lives, whilst,

I am thine, in all Christian Services, Matthew Silvester.

It being thought necessary to make some particular (though short) mention of
the Party, on the account of whose Death this Sermon and Papers are published;
it naturally follows from a Principle of Gratitude, Honor and Justice that is
due to the dear and precious Memory of Mr. Terry's first Wife, to take notice
also of some of those indearing Qualifications that were very conspicuous in
her. The less indeed will be said of either, because what is related of the one
is so applicable in all respects to the other.
IT is no small part of the Honor that is due to her Memory that she was a
Daughter of that excellent Divine Dr. Thomas Manton, and bestowed in Marriage
to Mr. Terry, by his peculiar Choice, out of that most kind and cordial Respect
that he had for him. She was, as to her Person, very lovely, of most curious
and excellent Parts, of a ready and quick Wit, and good Understanding, and such
a transcendent Sweetness of Temper, joined with true Religiousness, that she
was highly valued and esteemed by all that knew her. In all relations she
answered her pious Education, as a Child, a Mother, and Wife, never any went
beyond her. It has been often said, that she was made up of Love, which
Character she fully answered: She had Love sufficient for ten good Wives; it is
impossible for any in that Relation, to express more than she did to her dear
Husband, (who was, as to her, the Life of all her other Comforts) and this
expressed not with childish Fondness, but with Prudence and Discretion. To the
Day of her Death she would say, that her Love was still increasing, and she
found that every Day she loved him more and more.

She carried her self with all imaginable Duty and Respects to her Relations,
to whom she was very dear. Great was her Prudence and Conduct in the Management
of her Houshold-Affairs. She had the Bowels of a tender Mother to the Souls as
well as the Bodies of her dear Children, and did endeavor, by Counsel and
Instruction, to instill in them the Principles of true Godliness.

She had that true Piety toward God, and Publickness of Spirit to do Good,
that she was beloved of all that knew her; she was of that free and generous
Temper, that she thought no Pains too much to serve her Friends to the utmost
of her Power, as many can witness in the late public Troubles.

She had a most indeared Respect to all the Ordinances of the Gospel, which she
frequently attended on, and that many times when she was more sit to be
confined to her Chamber. She had many Mercies to bless God for, for many Years
together, but not without her sore Troubles (which did not apear to every one)
both outward and inward; but under them all there was no Abatement or Decay in
respect of her Duty, either to God or Man. The Death of several of her Children
was the Beginning of her Sorrows; and afterward that of her dear Father, whom
she loved with a most passionate Love: This bore hard on her tender Spirit, and
brought her into a great Melancholy: Her Troubles continued more or less
(though with some Abatement) to her dying Day, by which her Life was many times
a very Burden to her. Her Doubts, as to her Eternal State, were sometimes very
grievous; but yet through the Goodness of God she still kept up this
Resolution, to venture her Soul in the Hands of her Redeemer. Having one time
asked very earnestly, Will not Christ receive me if I come to him? receiving
some encouragement in this Matter, she replied with Cheerfulness, Then will I
come to him. She took great Delight in reading her Father's Sermons, especially
those of the Life of Faith under our Affliction: and very comfortable was the
ensuing Passage of one of them to her under her Doubts and Fears, viz.

The Question being propounded by poor doubting Souls thus, How shall we know
whether God be our God? Answ. Why, do you love him as your chiefest Good? Do
you seek his Glory as your utmost End? Do you obey him as your highest Lord and
Lawgiver? and do you depend on him as your Paymaster and Benefactor? But if
all this will not help you to judge your Hearts, there are but two things will
give you Comfort, and those are your Choice and your Resignation: Do you choose
God for your Portion? Though you cannot say God has chosen you, and that he is
yours, yet you will choose him: Do you by an Holy importunate Faith thus fasten
your selves upon God, and say, Lord, if thou will not honor me, love me, bless
me as thine, for I am resolved to be thine; and if I perish, one must perish
that desires to be thine. And this she would often repeat.

The Night before she died, her Husband earnestly and humbly besought the Lord,
that he would graciously be pleased to give her some comfortable Manifestations
of his Love to her poor Soul, (O let it never be forgotten, the gracious
Condescension of God to his unworthy Creature.) The next Morning her faithful
and loving Servant (who attended her in all her Ilness) brought him Word that
now the Case was altered with her Mistress; she was now reconciled to the
Thoughts of Death, and was refreshed with the Sense of God's Love, and desired
to have no more Cordials given her, she had better Comforts to refresh her
Soul. This was on the Lord's Day in the Morning. She spoke not much after, but
lay in a quiet composed Frame of Spirit, softly groaning under the Pains of
Death, that made his nearer Approach to her every Hour: but even then when she
heard her Husband speak to her, she would answer with a very pleasing and
cheerful Voice.

A dear Friend lay on the Bed by her a very little space of time before she
expired, and heard her utter distinctly, though softly, full of Comfort. Soon
after she ended her Life with the Sabbath, and went to Rest on the 16th of
March, 1689.

THE Person that succeeded her in this Relation, was also the Daughter of that
Reverend and worthy Divine Mr. Thomas Buroughs, Minister at Cotsbrook in
Northamptonshire, till the Year 1662, when he, with some hundreds more, were
turned out for Nonconformity.

After a convenient and decent Space of time (of her continuing a Widow) she
changed her Condition into a married State, though much against her own
Inclination and Temper, but purely out of her Respect and Kindness to Mr.
Terry, whom she knew entirely loved her. But when once the Nuptial Knot was
tied, her Carriage, as a Wife, was with all imaginable Respect accompanied with
most indearing Tenderness, often expressing how much her Love was increased to
her Husband, much more than she thought it could have been, though before as a
Friend she equally preferred him to all others of that Rank.

Her Domestic Affairs she managed with great Prudence; and in that Station she
gained Love and Respect from all. She had a most tender and compassionate
Regard for the Souls of her dear Children. She took great Care to instruct them
in the Principles of Religion, and encouraging them to read and learn the Holy
Scriptures. This her Care also did extend to her Servants, whom she would on
all occasions be ready, either by her Advice, or by reading some good Book to
them her self, when their Business would permit, and endeavor to beget in them
a true Sense of their Sin and Misery, and the Worth of their precious Souls.

God, who is the God of Nature as well as of Grace, was pleased to endow her
with a great Proportion both of Natural and Spiritual Excellencies. She was a
very beautiful and lovely Person in her younger Years, few exceeding her, and
of most excellent Parts, and of great Understanding, yet of a very humble
Spirit, and very mean in her own Eyes, though deservedly valued by those that
knew her: Such was the Sweetness of her Temper, accompanied with true
Godliness, that she was an Ornament to her Profession.

To speak of her as a Christian, would exceed the Limits of these Papers: God
had greatly adorned and beautified her Soul with the Graces of his Holy Spirit;
and agreeable thereunto she lived in some Holy Proportion answerable to the Vows
of her Consecration, and to the Godly Education she received from her pious
Relations: She entirely devoted her self to God, to be wholly his, and at his
Disposal. She had a singular Value for the Holy Scriptures, which she
constantly made conscience of reading, and would sometimes write them out with
profitable Remarks on them, for her own spiritual Use. Other good Books also
had their due Esteem and Use; but she would often say, none (of that kind)
yielded her more Comfort and Satisfaction than Dr. Manton's. It was very usual
in her own Bible and Books, to give some little Mark at those Passages that
were of particular Concern to her self, under the Variety of the Dispensation
that she passed through. She had a most high Esteem for the Public Worship and
Service of God, which she never, or rarely, omitted to frequent, unless hindered
by some unavoidable Occasion. The Sabbath was a Day of Delight to her; she made
conscience as of seeing Religious Duties performed in the Family, so also of
redeeming Time for her private Converse with God: and this was resolved and
subscribed to under her own Hand, many Years ago, that she would spend some
Time in Prayer and Meditation; and herein followed the Method she received from
the Directions of Worthy Mr. Daniel Burgess, to help her in that Work, viz. to
go over the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and Commandments; all which she did
perform, with many other Portions of Scripture, as appears from the many Papers
left under her own Hand. She was much pleased with what she heard a worthy
Divine relate (in pressing his Hearers to Private Prayer) of a Holy Man that
would never omit this Duty, but when like to be hindered by any Company, would
make this honest Excuse, I must take my leave of you for a while; there is a
Friend above stays to speak with me, meaning God, that has commanded this Duty.
And indeed private Prayer, conscientiously and constantly performed, is a
notable Sign of a gracious Heart, for I think an Hypocrite can rarely be
constant and uniform in this Duty; for that of Job may be very applicable to
this, Will he delight himself in the Almighty? will he always call upon God?

I neither do nor dare I censure all those that make such a Bustle about their
Ten and Three a Clock Devotions; I hope and believe that many serious and godly
Christians may in all Sincerity perform them; but I think, as they are now
ordered, they come not so near that Command of our Savior, When thou prayest,
enter into thy Closet.

Besides, there is too much Ground to fear they shut out both Private and
Family Prayer too in many Places: and it is too too common a Practice in this
City, to go from the Temple to the Playhouse, from the House of God to the
House of Belial. It Is very observable that such as are most zealous this way,
accompanied with the Neglect of Family and Private Prayer, are generally very
loose and irregular in their Conversation.

As to her Deportment under Afflictions, which she was exercised withal, both
spiritual and temporal, (for God chastens every Son whom he receives) it was
accompanied with great Humility and Selfjudging, often expressing her
Unworthiness of the least of the Mercies that God vouchsafed to her. She was
far from a querulous or murmuring Temper, endeavoring after a humble
submissive Frame of Spirit: and under these Afflictions that sometimes did
greatly depress her sweet and tender Spirit, she would frequently express how
much Comfort and Reviving she received from God's Holy Word, and not only under
her Troubles, but also when freed from them, in the most quiet and sedate Frame
of Spirit. She would bless God that this Life would not last always. She had
frequent Illness, and was once thought by her Friends past Recovery, but when
restored again (though thankful to God for his Favor to her) she did seem to
bewail her Infelicity: I thought, said she, that I was going off the Stage of
this evil World, to the Place where I should sin and sorrow no more; but I now
see I must again be tossed on the Waves and Billows thereof. When it was told
her, that according to the Course of Nature she might yet live thirty or forty
Years; this was so far from pleasing her, that Nature that usually abhors the
Thought of Death, did as it were shrink and recoil within her, to think of
being so long kept out of Heaven. Under her last Ilness, (being with Child) in
which there were some more than ordinary Symptoms of her Danger, at which she
was not at all dismayed, but said, As to Application of Means, I am willing to
submit to any thing for the Satisfaction of my Friends; but as for my self, I
am content without any. This cutting Expression she uttered to her dear Husband
with great Cheerfulness. She was so far from desiring to live, that she much
rather desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. The Night before she
died she had spent some time in secret, and read one of Dr. Manton's Sermons;
but such was her humble and self-condemning Temper, that she to her very last
bewailed her not Improvement of her last Days Mercies, as she thought she
ought. Her Death was very surprising to her Friends, though not to her self.
She always believed her approaching Change was near, though her Friends had
some Hopes of her Recovery, till by a sudden and surprising Stroke they found
her Desire accomplished, and her Words true, to their astonishing Grief and
Trouble. She died the 9th of November, 1693. in the 38th Year of her Age.

No more shall be here mentioned of her, but refer you to the Perusal of some
few (amongst many) of her Manuscripts, in which you will perceive a Vein of
Virtue and Piety running through all the Course of her Conversation; an humble
Avouchment of God to be her Portion; and a thankful recounting of God's Mercy
to her, from her very Infancy; her tender Regard to the Souls of her dear
Children; her humble and submissive Temper under her Afflictions; her earnest
Persuasion to others and her self, to work the Work that God has given them to
do; with a Sense of the Sins and Judgments deserved and expected on the Nation;
her awful Sense of the Day of Death and Judgment, with the happy State of
glorified Souls; with her Fear and Hopes in relation to these.

A Pindarique Ode, to the ever glorious Memory of my honored Aunt, Mrs. Ann
Terry, who put on her Immortal Robes, and Incorruptible Crown, March the 16th,
1689. in the 36th Year of her Age.
Stat sua cuique dies: Breve, and irreparabile tempus
Omnibus est Vitae; sed, famam extendere factis,
Hoc Virtutis opus. -- -- -- -- Virgil.
Stanza I.
MY melancholy Muse, so ost employed
On the ungrateful Themes of Death,
Hoped now a Vacancy to have enjoyed,
And for a while to suspend her mournful Breath.
But, lo! a recent Scene of Grief appears,
Ponderous, overwhelming Grief,
Without Allay, without Relief,
Too great to be expressed by any Poets Tears.
For who amongst the Sons of Harmony
Can give due Praises unto thee?
Or can sufficiently deplore
The Loss of such in vulgar Excellence,
As took its Flight, in thee, from hence,
And will (perhaps) bless the unworthy World no more.
II.
Ah! how unequally does Heaven bestow
Its Favors on poor Mortals here below?
Sometimes it suffers us to be
O'recharg'd with surfeiting Felicity.
Grown big with Joy, we think our selves secure
Of the much-wish'd-for Blessing; but alas!
We little know how soon from us 'twill pass:
A sudden Metamorphosis
Deprives us of our charming Bliss;
Bliss too Soul-ravishing long to endure:
Else had we not been summoned now by Fate
(With overflowing Eyes)
To sing thy much too early Obsequies,
And Godlike Virtues to commemorate.
III.
From the Illustrious Manton sprung,
(Too great a Theme for my mean Song)
And fit alone for his, who David's glorious Actions so di-
In whom the Graces all conspired (vinely sung:
To render him beloved, admired;
Who firmly has enrolled his Name
In the most durable Records of Fame;
Who with such wondrous Art conjoins
Solidity and Sweetness in his Lines.
Great by thy Birth, yet greater by thy Merit;
Thou did more of his Worth than Wealth inherit.
Such was thy generous St^^k!
Nor did thou any Luster thence derive,
Thou did not back again (which greater Int^rest) give.
IV.
Thy Spring with Beauties did abound,
With them thy riper Years were crowned:
Thou all Perfections had, and more
Than any of thy Sex before.
The Composition of thy Heavenly Mind,
In which Judgment, Fancy, and Wit,
Did every one enthroned sit,
Was fra^'d to Virtue, and from Vice refined.
A kinder Wife no Husband e're could boast;
A more indulgent Mother never Children lost.
Tender thou wast, to an Hyperbole,
To all thou knew'st in Misery:
So very ready to relieve,
They scarce could ask faster than thou did give.
Friendship in others but a Name,
A mere Pretense, an empty Sound,
In thee Reality became;
In thee (and scarce in any else) was sound.
Many of Wisdom's Daughters have done well;
But thou (Great Heroine!) did all excel.
V.
By sharp and long continued Pains
To thee this World embitter'd was:
That Cheer with which God entertains
Those whom he has appointed to a better Place.
Thither (at length) you are gone; allowed to be
One of that Heavenly Royal Society.
Eight lovely Babes before thou sentst from hence,
To take Possession for thee, of thy Blessed Inheritance.
There do thou shine in Robes of uncreated Light,
Whose dazzling Luster than the Sun's more bright.
There do thou with a tuneful Voice,
And more melodious Heart, rejoice:
For ever love, for ever sing
The Praises of thy glorious King.
Yet give us leave, though we congratulate
Thy never-fading Happiness,
And Scenes of unpoluted Bliss,
Our own Loss to regret.
Thou wast so well beloved, Death's fatal Dart
Wounded ten thousand others when it pierced thy Heart.
VI.
Heaven knew thy Worth, and called thee hence, lest we
(Too ready to commit Idolatry)
At thy Virtues amazed should prostrate fall,
Court the Idea, and contemn the great Original.
Let those aspiring Ones erect a Tomb,
And with a fruitless Cost adorn
Some stately, though decaying, Urn;
Who only great by being buried would become.
Thy Fame, by pure Desert, is raised so high,
That 'spight of Time and Fate it shall not die;
But (as it well deserves) live to Eternity.
Sic raptim cecinit. HEN. CUTTS.

Her EPITAPH.
HERE lies (or rather lives) a Saint, whose Worth
No Heraldry's able to blazon forth:
Perfectly fair, as to her outward Form,
But greater Beauties did her Soul adorn:
Good to a Miracle; in Temper even,
Always submissive to the Will of Heaven.
By her own Deeds she most her self commends:
The best of Wives, of Mothers, and of Friends.
Precious in ours, but in her Maker's Eyes
A Pearl of most inestimable Price:
Much too Angelick long on Earth to stay,
To Heaven (her blessed Home) she is flow'n away,
There Is her immortal Part; her frailer Dust
Shall have the Resurrection of the Just.
To sum up all her Virtues, this is she
That was what others should, but cannot be.
HENRY CUTTS.

On the greatly lamented Death of Mrs. Ann Terry, my most dear Aunt, who
departed this mortal Life on the 9th of November, 1693. in the thirty eighth
Year of her Age.
A Pindarique Ode.
O faciles dare summa Deos! eademque tueri
Difficiles. -- -- -- -- -- Lucan.
Stanza I.
IN vain do Mortals court Eternity;
In vain do they attempt to baffle Fate,
And hope by Actions worthy Praise
Themselves to Immortality to raise:
No: they are all to Death predestinate.
For both the Virtuous and the Vicious must
Fall, alike, undistingaish'd in the Dust:
Else thou, bright Mirror of thy Sex,
Had been preser^'d ali^e
To endless Ages; but thy glorious Fame
Thy fading Ahes shall survive,
And with Arabian Sweets persume thy fragrat Name.
II.
O that my (long since bedridden) Muse
Could somewhat worthy thee produce!
But how (alas!) can she, enfeebled, sing
The Praises of an earthly Cherabim?
How can she he prepared for such a losty Theme?
Or such rapturous Strains bring forth
As may be adaequate to thy immensurable Worth?
He that unto thiue Altar comes,
Must bring no less than Hecatombs.
Thy Virtues do require a nobler Pen:
Virtues above the reach of mortal Verse,
And all that the sublimest Flights of Fancy can rehearse.
But yet, (methinks) though not inspired,
I may be suffered to attend
Unto her melancholy Urn,
So dear an Aunt, so much esteemed a Friend.
Thy Bed of Rest with briny Tears I Will strew,
And on thy gloomy Hearse my Wreath of Cypress throw.
III.
Thy outward Beauty was so exquisite
It claimed, at once, both Wonder and Delight.
Had thou but lived in Apelles time,
(And thy corporeal Graces in their prime)
He had not picked up Features, here and there,
To limn a Goddess, all in thee collective were.
Nature thy Form thus elegant ^^^^iv'd,
As if that (yet more) radiant Gem thy Mind
Disdained, in a less glorious Case, to be confined.
But O! who can express
The Immensity of thy ubounded Tenderness?
A Temper so for Obligations frram'd,
Requests were ever granted, soon as named.
A general Philanthropy thou had,
And so the whole Universe thy Debtor mad't.
For thy surprining Goodness did extend
Beyond the narrow Limits of a Relative or Friend.
Thus we in thee a Female Titus Vespasian the Roman Emperor.
Titus find,
Born to be the Delight of all Mankind.
IV.
But still those had the best Pretense
To thy distributive Benevolence,
As were afflicted, tattered, poor,
Who up and down the World, by want, were thrown;
And unjust Fortune's Langhing-stock become:
Rarely did they go unrelieved from thy Door.
Nor did thou hereby aim at Praise,
(The wise Man's Scorn, though Pride of Fools)
Or strive vain-gloriously to gain Applause.
Thou wast too generous, such mean Ends to have,
Thy left Hand seldom knew what 'twas thy right Hand gave.
Virtue, that is so transcendent, wants a Name,
Exceeding Wonder, and surpassing Fame.
Such was thy exemplary Piety,
So imaffected, and so void of Art,
As made appear, Sincerity
Had Livery and Seisin of thy Heart.
What, did thou not attempt to be
A Denizon of Immortality?
Whilst here on Earth, in thee we might have seen
A Citizen of New Jerusalem.
Thou could not with inglorious Sloth dispense,
But stormedst Heaven with a Holy Violence:
Inflamed with Seraphick Fire,
Thither thou did, from whence thou came, aspire.
Thither thou did both Aims and Actions bend,
And to that blessed Port did all thy Steerage tend.
V.
Knowledge, the richest Boon that can be given,
To Earth's Possessor, by indulgent Heaven;
Which others (often) labor for in vain,
And reap no Fruit to recompense their Pain,
Thou had, without a stint;
Dispensed with such Liberality,
That it was not difficult to find
A whole The Circle of Instruction.
Encyclopaedia in thy Mind.
It came so swift, we (almost) did believe
'Twas not acquired by Study, but intuitive.
Yet so transcendently immense was thy,
Not to be parallell^d, Humility;
As is that vast illustrious Magazine of Worth
That with so great a Splendour did shine sorth,
And unto all that knew thee was revealed,
Were only from thy modest self concealed.
Thus, over his radiant Face, a Vail the God-like Moses drew,
And shrouded Glories much too bright for mortal Eyes to
(view.
VI.
Yet so divinely great a Life
Found not uninterrupted Ease:
Thy Conduct in full Luster did appear,
When thou, by Fate, wast summoned to steet
Thy fluctuating Bark in most tempestuous Seas.
Heaven saw it fit to exercise
Thy passive Virtues, that Afflictions should
Imbitter a vain World to thee,
(A World made up of Vanity)
And from its Ore refine such precious Gold.
This Blessing only did thou want; before
Thou wast a Saint, but now almost a Consessor.
At length (too good for Earth) you are called hence,
A Member of the Church Triumphant to commence.
But why, (invidious Death) O why so soon?
Why must her Night come, e're she has ended Noon?
Well may those Wretches fear to die,
Whose ill-spent Life
No Prospect, but Eternal We does give.
Thou calmly did surrender up thy Breath,
Unterrify'd at the Approach of Death.
Nor did emasculating Grons betray
Thee, emulous of any farther stay,
Or loath the ghastly Summons to obey.
Thy Life was wondrous, but its Exit is
A Glorious Taken up amongst the Blessed.
Apotheosis.
Thus though with Splendour Phoebus gilds
The Morning of his Race,
Yet are his brightest Beams reserved
The setting Sun to grace.
Feb. 19. 1693/4. Sic moerens deflevit, HEN. CUTTS.

The CONTENTS of the Papers.
Paper I. AN humble Avouchment of God to be her Portion, page 34. Paper II. An
earnest Expostulation with her self in reference to the great Concern of her
Precious and Immortal Soul, p. 37. Paper III. Her most serious Thoughts on this
Passage, You will not come unto me that you may have Life, p. 44. Paper IV. Her
grave and godly Advice to her Children, p. 47. Paper V. Her humble and cheerful
Deportment under Afflictions, p. 53. Paper VI. A thankful recounting of many
particular Mercies vouchsafed to her, p. 55. Paper VII. The Scriptures of great
Use and Comfort, p. 63. Paper VIII. Serious Reflections on the late Earthquake,
p. 67. Paper IX, and X. An awful Sense of Death and her own approaching
Dissolution, p. 71, and 76. Paper XI. A delightful Contemplation of the
Blessedness of the Saints in Heaven, p. 82. Paper XII. Texts of Scripture that
yielded great Comfort and Support under her desponding Thoughts, p. 90. Paper
XIII. An earnest Desire to be fitted for and brought unto Heaven, p. 99.
A Funeral Sermon.
1 COR. 7. 30. And they that weep as though they wept not.
I Shall insist upon that Clause at this time. In it I shall observe,

1. A Concession. He grants them some kind of Sorrow and Grief.

2. A Correction. He moderateth it.

1. He grants them some kind of Sorrow, in that he puts Weeping for Adversity;
the Affection for the Condition; the Effects for the Cause; as allowing them an
holy Sensibleness of their Misery, they that weep. Then he corrects and
moderateth this Sorrow, as if they wept not, because he will not trust such a
dangerous Weapon in their own Hands, and leave the Corinthians to the Vileness
and Waywardness of their own Affections; though I allow you to weep, yet it is
as if you wept not.

The Points are two.

I. That God allows, yea requires of his People some Sorrow and Sensibleness
of their Condition.

II. That the Heart must be so managed under this Sorrow, that we may be said
not to weep, rather than to weep, at the same time; it must be with such
Moderation. Or thus; Christians should so sorrow under the Sense of their
Condition, as if they did not sorrow. I shall speak briefly of both these.

Doct. I. God requires and allows some Sorrow: They that weep.
I shall, 1st. show you that God does so. 2dly. Show you what this Sorrow is.

1. To prove that so it is, I will not stand to instance Places of Scripture in
a Point so familiar.

The Reasons are;

1st. This is the End why we have Affections, that they may be exercised in
their Season. God has planted in every Man Affections suitable to every
Condition in which he places him. It is said, the Stars in their Order fought
against Sisera; so Affections. We have Joy for Prosperity, Sorrow for
Adversity. What did God mean, to give us such contrary Affections, if not that
they should be acted in their Order and Time? that these Affections should,
like the Spokes, turn with the Wheel of Providence? And therefore God
complains much, as if he were frustrated of his End, when we do not answer
Providence by an Exercise of those Affections that are suitable to it; as Ier.
5. 3. I have smitten them, and they have not grieved. God wondereth they should
be so unnatural, as not to grieve when stricken by him. So for Mercy; Hos. 11.
3. I taught Ephraim to go, taking them by their Arms; but they knew not that I
healed them: that is, they were not sensible of it, did not take notice, and
were not sutably affected with the Love of God: They are ranked among the rest
of Men that are under their natural Condition, who are (...), without natural
Affection; to be flinted, hornyhearted, such as have no Smartness, no Quickness
of Affection; especially when the Misery is of such a Nature, that near Friends
are taken from us, is very displeasing to God.

2dly. Because that due Exercise of Sorrow under Affliction is very serviceable
and beneficial to the Soul: (1.) To help spiritual Duties. Anima nunquam melius
agit, quam ex impetu insignis alicujus affectus: The Soul works best when it
has the Advantage of an Affection. When the Soul is made better by the
Bitterness of Grief we feel, and the Soul makes the Affection of Sorrow to be
Vehiculum, a kind of a Chariot to carry on the Work of Repentance; Ier. 2. 19.
Know and see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the
Lord thy God. When the Iron is hot, if you strike in, you may get good; take
the Advantage of your Hearts under your Sorrows.

3dly. To make it serious. Sorrows gather the Soul together, and make it more
it self: A Man comes to himself in his Grief. Usually God takes this Course
with his People; though they begin in the Flesh, they end in the Spirit. Sorrow
makes Reason to stand still. Solomon speaks of bethinking themselves in the
Land of their Afflictions, 1 Kings 8. 57. Jolly Persons are slight, never think
upon any thing. Those that wallowed in Pleasures did put far away the Day of
the Lord, Amos 6. 3. Till the Prodigal was tamed by outward Grief and Want, he
never had Thoughts of returning. They that did not grieve when God struck them,
Ier. 5. 3. refused to receive Correction. The more sorrowful the Mind is, the
more serious. Sorrow dries up all those swimming Thoughts and pleasing
Imaginations, by which Men drive away their Time, and divert their Care: and
therefore there is a great deal of Benefit comes by it; it puts the Soul in an
advantageous way of receiving Good.

4thly. This would double the Affliction, not to grieve for such things as
nearly touch us. To break the Bent and Course of Nature is dangerous.
Affections, when strongly stirred, must have their Exercise, for fear of
greater Harms. It is an Ease sometimes to mourn: Strangled Grief choaks the
Heart: 1 Samuel 25. 37. Nabal's Heart became as a Stone within him, when he heard
Tidings that mightily affected him; it had been better he had wept and mourned.
As Surgeons first let the Sore soften, before they begin to draw it. Job 2.
13. Job's Friends said not a Word to him the first seven Days, for they saw
that his Grief was great: They let Sorrow have its Course for a while. Stop
Floods in their full Career, and they rage and swell. When the Death of a near
Friend has opened the Sluices, let the Waters play a little in the Channel,
till it be calmer. Passions spend and tire themselves in their Exercise. Grief
is sometimes eased by the Expression of it. There is Reason too for it, if that
of Cardan be true, that an heavy Heart is eased by nothing so much as by Sighs
and Tears; because Tears empty the Head of some Vapors with which it is
surcharged, and Sighs lighten the Heart of some fuliginous Damps that oppress
it. These are Nature's Offers for Ease. You see the Reasons.

2. What Grief and Sorrow this is that God allows and approves. What is
sinful Grief I shall show you in the next Point: here what is lawful and
required.

I answer; Not every Sorrow: For there is (...), as well as (...); a godly
Sorrow, and a worldly Sorrow; 2 Cor. 7. 10. Godly Sorrow works Repentance to
Salvation, not to be repented of; but the Sorrow of the World works Death. In
the general it must be a godly Sorrow. In these Respects;

(1.) You must see somewhat of God in the Affliction. It is a Motive this on
both Hands, both to Sensibleness and Patience, that it is from God: Heb. 12. 5.
My Son, despise not thou the Chastening of the Lord; because it is from God. A
Man slights every ordinary Chance; but when it is from God, then it works
more effectual upon the Spirit: As we see in the case of the Philistines; 1 Samuel 6. 9. If that Stroke that happened upon them were a Chance, they would
trouble themselves no further about it; but if it were from the God of Israel,
they would advise about sending home the Ark.

(2.) It must be serviceable Sorrow, to set you the nearer to God. Sorrow is of
the Nature of those things that are required, not for themselves, but (...),
for some farther thing. You must not rest in your Sorrow, but make use of it;
that it may work kindly, employ it about the Work of the Sanctuary. Do not
cherish your Affections for their own sakes, but so as they may be helpful to
the Soul. Do not go about to still the Affection, to think that is all that is
required; let it do the Soul Service, and be glad you have your Hearts under
such an Advantage. You know how Joshua served the Gibeonites, he did not slay
them, but condemned them to be Hewers of Wood and Drawers of Water for the
Sanctuary. Grief and Sorrow, well managed, will make a good Drawer of Water for
the Sanctuary. Make your Sorrow your Servant now to draw Water for you, to make
you smart and bleed for a good Use and Purpose. There is a gracious Promise to
them that sow in Tears; Psalm. 126. 5. They that sow in Tears, shall reap in
Joy. Now we are in Tears, but we do not sow Tears; Tears are not Seed, we have
not the Crop. But what shall we do to make them Seed? spiritualize them, make
them spiritual Tears; let the Water run in a holy Channel, and then, like the
Waters of the Sanctuary, they will be healing Waters. The Death of a Friend,
though never so dear to us, will never cause any but carnal Tears; they
minister a good occasion of Mourning, but they do not minister a Cause and
Ground of Mourning. It is good to distinguish between the Cause and the
Occasion. At such a time God calls for more than ordinary Sensibleness and
Sorrow; but not because he has declared his Pleasure concerning our Friends,
that is Murmuring, not Mourning. We should take this occasion indeed, but our
Sorrow should work upon a spiritual Ground and Object.

1st. We should take this Occasion to mourn for our own Sins. Miseries are but
the Effects of Sin. You should labor to make Sin bitter by your present
Feeling. There should be, I say, a special renewing of our Repentance by such
Providence. Experience teaches best. Now you see what Sorrow Sin brings. If
Men would but improve their Occasions of Sorrow thus, their Hearts would be
more keen against Sin. It is a great Argument to make Men continue in a Course,
when it never proves Evil to them: Therefore God challenges them, Ier. 2. 5.
What Iniquity have you found in me, that you depart from me? Just as a Martyr
said, I have served Jesus Christ thus many Years, and should I deny him now?
But if Men would thus observe these Experiences, Sin cannot make this
Challenge: We can say of Sin, Thou have killed my Husband or Wife at such a
time, my Daughter, my Brother at such a time, etc. Consider and say, Have not I
provoked God to remove the Comfort of a Parent or near Relation from me? It is
said of Gideon, Judge. 8. 16. that with Briars and Thorns he taught the Men of
Succoth. So God many times teaches us.

2dly. We should take this Occasion to weep for the public Abominations. When
Polus the Tragedian was to act a mournful Part, he brought in the Urn, or the
Pot of Ashes of his own dead Son, that drew real Tears from him. We are all to
act a mournful Part now, even to mourn for our Abominations before the Lord. It
may be your Grief is flat and low, awaken it by these private Instances. But
take heed, let it not stay there; this is but to give the Occasion, some other
thing must be the Cause and the Object of it. O pour out a little Water upon
the public Sins, they are Sparks that we have kindled! as the Prophet speaks,
Isa. 50. 11. Behold! all ye that kindle a Fire, and compass your selves about
with Sparks. It is meant of Sins; not, as it is wrongly expounded, of walking
in our own Duties. Well, pour out this Water upon these Sparks. When a Town is
on Fire, every one will bring his Bucket. Why when the whole Kingdom is
compassed about with these Sparks, God gives you these private Occasions, that
you may bring your Bucket to quench the common Flame. So Luke 23. 28. Weep not
for me, but weep for your selves and for your Children. Alas, who could choose
but shed Tears, to part with such a blessed Companion as our Savior? Yet not
for me, says he, but for the Survivors: Weep for your Sins and Calamities that
are coming upon you: Let such an Occasion open the Floodgates; but then cut out
a Passage for them, that they may run this way.

3dly. For the public Miseries. Private Sorrows should be swallowed up in the
public. Look, as private Mercies are no Mercies, unless it be well with Sion;
and therefore it is annexed as a special Blessing, Psalm. 128. 6. that they
should see their Childrens Children, and Peace upon Israel. Descensive Love is
strong always, but in these times more strong, because every one expected the
Messiah to come of his Race; but that is nothing without Peace upon Israel, it
is not a consummate Mercy without that. Private Griefs are nothing in
comparison of the Miseries of Sion; 1 Samuel 4. 21. The Glory is departed! the
Glory is departed! Though she lost a Father, lost an Husband, that was sad; but
she reflects upon the principal Cause of Grief, the Misery of the Church of
God. So see Ier. 22. 10. Weep ye not for the Dead, neither bemoan him; but weep
sore for him that goes away, for he shall return no more to his native
Country: Not for good Josiah, but the Misery of wicked Shallum. Thus it must be
Godly in respect to the End, to draw you to God these ways.

Use 1. It condemns that Slightness of Spirit that is in most Persons. God
enters into their Families, and takes thence a principal Pillar, a Husband
or Wife, but they are not affected with it; they carelessly slight it, as if
nothing had been done, or some chance had befallen them. A Roman bragged, Se
nunquam cum matre, etc. They may say they were never comforted, they never
needed it, they lay nothing to Heart. Brethren, the Use of Divinity indeed is
to compose and still the Spirit, not to make it stupid. I am sorry that I am
forced to speak any thing to trouble you, I had rather comfort: but there is no
true Rest where there has not been a due Trouble; therefore I must a little
speak against this Stoical Patience and Insensibleness. And because Discovery
of Sin does more wound the Heart, than all the Forcibleness of Expression we
can use, I shall not cudgel it with barren Invectives, but labor to discover
this sinful careless Insensibleness to the Heart, and distinguish it from an
holy Patience. I have been often upon such like Subjects, therefore shall say
the less now. I shall difference it chiefly in their Grounds.

1. This Slightness proceeds;

1st. From want of Consideration. There can be no Patience where there is no
Sense of Evils. They will not give their Thoughts leave to work upon such
Objects. I do not say, we must make it the Cause or Object of our Mourning; yet
I say, we must make it the Occasion: this must awaken sad Thoughts in us about
our own Sins, or others Sufferings; but they will not think of it. These are
such as are described by the Prophet, to put far away the evil Day, Amos 6. 3.
that is, all Consideration of God's Dealings with them, or others.

2dly. From indulging Pleasure. A voluptuous Spirit is an insensible Spirit;
Ephesians. 4. 19. Who being past feeling, give themselves over to work Uncleanness
with Greediness. So it is said, Hos. 4. 11. Whoredom and Wine do take away the
Heart; that is, all Smartness and Quickness of Affection. When the Soul is
sleeping in Pleasure, there is a Brawniness brought over it. Pleasure is the
Drunkenness of the Soul, and a drunken Man feels nothing; Prove. 23. 35. They
have stricken me, shall thou say, and I was not sick; they have beaten me, and
I felt it not.

3dly. Vain Thoughts; Ier. 4. 14. How long shall vain Thoughts dwell within
thee? Evil Workings of Spirit, either seeking a way how they may get out, or
contriving how it makes for their worldly Advantage. The Devil darts evil
Thoughts in us, how a Cross by some sinful course may work for our temporal
Good, our State augmented thereby, or capable of farther Contentment and
Advancement in the World.

2. Christian Patience comes from this Ground; it does not exclude a Sense of
Evil, but a quieting of the Heart against Evil. These are the Grounds and
Workings of the Thoughts.

1st. It sees God in it: 1 Samuel 3. 18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems
him good. Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb, and opened not my Mouth, because thou did
it.

2dly. It sees God acting with Sovereignty: Dan. 4. 35. None can stay his
Hand, or say to him, What do thou? Job 9. 12. Behold, he takes away, who can
hinder him? Who will say to him, What do thou? Job 33. 13. What, do thou
strive with him? he gives no Account of his Matters.

3dly. This Sovereignty mollified with Attributes. As;

(1.) With infinite Justice; Dan. 9. 14. The Lord our God is Righteous in all
the Works which he does: Just and righteous in all his ways. It is just,
because God does it: His Will is the measure of his Actings; Deuteronomy. 27. 15. All
the People to say, Amen; it is just, Lord.

(2.) With infinite Wisdom; Isa. 28. 29. He is wonderful in Counsel, and
excellent in working: He knows what is better for you than you your selves;
for God has the Bowels of a Mother, so the Wisdom of a Father.

(3.) With infinite Love: It looks upon God as a Father; John 18. 11. The Cup
that my Father has given me, shall I not drink of it? Though a bitter Cup, it
is from my Father.

(4.) With infinite Faithfulness; Psalm. 119. 75. I know thy Judgments are
right, and that in Faithfulness thou have afflicted me. It looks upon
Afflictions as a Means in God's Hands. I proceed to the second Point.

Doct. II. That Christians ought so to sorrow under the Sense of their
Afflictions, as if they did not sorrow.
Their Affections must be moderately exercised. Having in the former Point
showed what Sorrow may be allowed, or is required of a Christian, I shall show
you here what Sorrow is disallowed or unlawful.

1. Such as overwhelmeth and dejecteth the Spirit, so as you are not your own
Man. This is called a Fainting, or a sinking of the Soul under Affliction; Heb.
12. 5. Faint not when thou art rebuked of the Lord. As we must not slight it,
so we must not faint under it; Fainting is, quando anima dejicitur de statu,
when the Soul is put out of the Condition of a free Soul, and delivered over to
the Possession of another. God has given every Man this Fee-simple, to possess
himself. Now we are not our selves when we are overcome with Grief and Sorrow;
and therefore it is said, Luke 21. 19. In Patience possess your Souls:
implying, that a Man has not the use and command of his Soul, when he is
overcome with Grief; it does as it were dispossess a Man of himself. You know
of a drunken Man we say, he is not himself, because he has not the free Use of
his Reason. Now this being overwhelmed with Sorrow, is expressed in Scripture
by this very Term, being drunk; as Isa. 63. 6. I will tread them down in mine
Anger, I will make them drunk in my Fury: that is, bring such Affliction as
they shall not be able to enjoy themselves under it, to have the free Use and
Exercise of their Reason.

2. Such as is peevish. When Men indulge themselves in their Disquiets, and
will not hearken to what might make for the Settlement of their Souls. When the
Heart yields to Passion, and huggeth Grief, and will not let it go. There is
a great deal of Pride and Stomach in Men against God's Dispensations, and
therefore the Prophet expresses that intolerable Misery that should light upon
her Children by the Stomachfulness that was in Rachel: Jer. 31. 15. Weeping for
her Children, she would not be comforted. Men have no Ear to hearken to what
may be said for God, and therefore are resolved to hold the Bitterness of their
own Thoughts. This stubborn Pettishness and wilful Grief may be sometimes in
God's own Chosen: it was in Jacob, Genesis 37. 35. He refused to be comforted; for
he said, I will go down into the Grave unto my Son mourning. I will; it was a
stomached wilful Grief. Christians, by a perverse peevish justifying of their
Passions, they say of their Sorrows, as Jonah did of his Anger, Jonah 4. 9. I
do well to be angry. When Men take it for granted, they do well in it, they
resolve then to shut their Ears against whatever might appease and quiet their
Thoughts.

3. Such as are impatient and discontented, as if God had not dealt wisely or
worthily with them. When a full Vessel is shaken, the Water will plash over:
And when there is such a Tumult in the Heart, unseemly Expressions will drop
from us; as if God should not have dealt thus with us, as to take away these
Comforts in which were all our Solace, the Staff and the Stay of the Family. We
that are Neighbors are apt very often in Discontent to say, What a serviceable
and useful Person has God taken away, and so many bad ones left? as if God had
not made a right choice. Foolish Man would be accounted wiser than God. But if
a Man were well skilled in God's Attributes, he would never murmur, especially
if he did but consider, this comes from a Wise God. The Cause of all the
Disorder in the Heart, is the want of fearing God's Name, we are not skilled in
his Attributes. Alphonsus blasphemously said, Si in principio mundi ipse Deo
adfuisset, multa melius ornatiusque condenda essent; things should have been
ordered better, if he had been of God's Council. Many of you do not utter such
Expressions, but yet too often conceive such Thoughts in your Hearts; you will
not think so; ay, but what mean the bleating of the Sheep, and the lowing of
the Oxen? such Expressions as these, O! would to God I had died first; as
David, 2 Samuel 18. 33. O Absalom, my Son, my Son! would to God that I had died
for thee! And again; would to God I had been dead a long time ago, rather than
to survive my Happiness; all my Estate gone in an instant, as (Brethren) in
these empty trying Times it is many a Man's Case: but remember, foolish Man,
the All-wise God thought it fittest for thee. Yet thus does the Prophet Elijah,
when he was driven into the Wilderness by Jezebel, 1 Kings 19. 4. in a
Discontent requests for himself, that he might die; It is enough now, O Lord,
take away my Life.

4. Such as unfit for Duty. Affections are no further lawful than they fit for
Duty. When Grief takes off our Hearts from the Duties of our general or
particular Calling, it is an evil Grief: See Genesis 35. 19, 21. Rachel died, and
was buried; and Israel journied and spread his Tent. Having lost so dear a
Wife, he does not stand puling by the Tomb; but Israel journied, he went on
about his Business. We ought so far to be sensible of Providence, as may serve
to quicken us to Duty, not to hinder us. There is a great Question now, whether
we ought to fear or hope in our Misery; some of one side cry down Fear; some on
the other side cry down Hope: Why, Brethren, there is not much Matter in the
Exercise of either of these Affections, but according as they do more or less
quicken you to Duty. If you be the more earnest in Prayer, because you hope
Success is near, truly that is a good Disposition of Heart; if because Fear,
that is the most unchristian. I confess, Fear is good when it ends in Duty:
Iehosaphat feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. And Noah
moved with Fear, prepared an Ark, Heb. 11. 7. Brethren, the bare Exercise of
Affections is but a natural and an indifferent thing; the great Trial of them
is when they fit you the more for the Service that God requires of you.
Therefore when Persons grieve so for the Loss of an Husband, Wife, Children, or
Estate, that they have no mind to pray, no mind to go about their Callings with
any Comfort, that is an evil Grief. It is true that God winketh at some
Omissions of Duties for a small while, in such cases, till we are able to
manage our Thoughts, and digest our Sorrow; and the Letter of the Law gives
place to such great Necessities: as Aaron's Excuse is but reasonable; Levit.
10. 19. Such things have befallen me this Day, that if I had eaten the
Sin-offering, should it be accepted with the Lord? The Death of his two Sons,
though he held his Peace, he could not tell how for the present to frame his
Heart to a joyful Duty: As if a Minister cannot tell how to bring his Heart to
preach, if God has entered upon his Family, taken away a Wife or Children
thence. I confess this comes from Corruption, but in such Cases God winketh at
it for a short time. The Reasons are:

1. Because otherwise our Carriage would be very dishonorable and derogatory
to Jesus Christ, as if he were not better to us than all the Comforts that we
lose; 1 Samuel 1. 8. as Elkana said to Hannah, Why weepest thou? am not I better
to thee than ten Sons? So why weepest thou? Is not Christ better to thee than
ten Wives, ten Children, ten Parents, a thousand times as much as thou have
lost? If we had but Faith to see it, Christ is to a Believer whatever he
wants. The People of God in the Wilderness wanted Houses; Psalm. 90. 1. Lord,
thou art our Habitation. A Christian has never more Comfort than when he sees
that particular thing made up in Christ, which was taken from him by the
Providence of God. If a Believer has lost her Husband, she sees Christ her
Husband. So for any other Relation; if a Parent, sees Christ his Parent; if a
Brother, Christ's a Brother. We are to Christ instead of all these Relations,
and therefore why should not Christ be so to us? See Matthew. 12. 50. Whosoever
does the Will of my Father, the same is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother.
Mark, we are so to him, and therefore why should we not account Christ to be so
to us? Certainly it is a great Dishonor and Disparagement to him, if we do not
see all our Losses abundantly made up in him.

2. It would be a Dishonor to our Profession. It is a Credit to Christianity,
that the Professors of it can be joyful in all Conditions; Heb. 10. 34. Ye took
joyfully the spoiling of your Goods, (...); though all they had were snatched
from them by rude Hands, yet they were joyful. Let guilty Cains look with
fallen Countenances, Genesis 4. 6. Let the Pharisees please themselves in their
sour Looks, Mat. 6. 16. A Christian's Countenance should show him to be above
his Misery, sprightly and cheerful; though you take away their Coat, as
Ioseph's Mistress did, you cannot take away their Comfort; they are glad they
can escape with their Conscience, though they should leave their Coat behind
them. I remember Scaliger plays the Critic with Homer, because Champion
Achilles is brought in weeping, his beloved Briseis was taken from him. So it
is a Disgrace to our high Profession when a Christan is brought in (...),
weeping, it is beneath you. It is said in Acts 5. 41. They departed from the
Presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer for
Christ. Philpot's Stocks in the Bishop of London's Coal-house was but a pair of
Organs, as he says. Nor is it true only in these honorable Sufferings for the
Glory of our Religion, but in the Strokes of Providence in this very Business
of deceased Friends. The Apostle makes it the Property of Pagans to mourn
excessively, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. Sorrow not as those that have no Hope, i. e. as
Pagans; they did abound in it: as see Genesis 50. 3. compared with v. 10. Joseph
mourned for Jacob but seven Days, the Egyptians seventy, even ten times as
much. Nay, Pagans err so much this way, that if they could not find Grief, they
would force Grief; and therefore at their Funerals, if they had no Sympathy,
they would slash their Faces, and cut their Flesh, that they might be
sorrowful. And therefore God says, Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Ye shall not cut your selves,
and make Baldness in your Eyes for the Dead; ye are the Children of the Lord
your God; that is, you have higher Principles, you know such Sorrow needless.
And hence was it that the Primitive Christians were wont to sing triumphant
Psalms at Funerals, as it appears out of many Places of Chrysostom, to show
they had higher Hopes of their departed Friends.

3. It is very prejudicial. You have no Benefit, but a great deal of Hurt by
it; 2 Cor. 7. 10. there it is summed up in one word, Worldly Sorrow works
Death; that is, chiefly; Sorrow for worldly things, that works Death temporal
and eternal in its Desert; temporal Death, as it exhausteth the Spirits,
wastes the Marrow. Worldly Sorrow leaves a very strong Impression upon the
Body, as Solomon says, Prove. 17. 22. A broken Spirit dries the Bones; it
dulleth and deadens the Heart. If a Man would not save his Tears, yet he should
reserve them, keep them up for holy Uses: God may give you many spiritual
Occasions to empty your Bottle, do not be over-free of them. Affections
over-exercised are usually restrained against the next Occasion. And as they
procure Death in respect of the Vigor of the Body and Soul; so an eternal
Death too, it deserves it. And so the Apostle is to be understood; for he
opposes it to Godly Sorrow, which hereafter you shall see you have no cause to
repent of, as you have of Worldly. Grief is a most serious Passion: and though
a Man may forget himself in his Joy, he should not forget to think of the
Danger; Worldly Sorrow works Death.

4. It is very unreasonable. If Men would cite their Affections before the
Tribunal of Reason, and ask them what is the matter why they are so violently
stirred? they might discern much of their Folly; Psalm. 42. 5. David calls
himself to an account, Why art thou so disquieted, O my Soul? why art thou cast
down within me? Ask why it is, and you will see either no reason, or a corrupt
one. Iniqua lex est quae se examinari non patitur, says Tertullian. And so it
is an evil Heart that will not be called to an account. Suspect those Passions
that are loath to be examined. Do but ask your selves, why do I grieve now? you
shall see the Answer will be foolish, unreasonable, unthankful, or savouring of
Discontent. Why, it may be you will say, Many dear Comforts are taken from me.
O Brethren, that is an ill Expression, no outward Comfort can be taken from a
Christian. We should live in such a continual waiting for God's Pleasure, and
in such a quiet Submission thereunto, as not to look upon our Comforts as taken
from us: Job indeed uses the word, Job 1. 23. The Lord has given, the Lord
has taken: but he uses it so as if he would be understood, as if the Lord had
accepted of the Resignation; for he blesses God for it: Even our highest
Comfort, our Lives, the Lives of the Saints are not taken from them; God does
but as it were accept of the Resignation: As Stephen, Acts 7. 59. Lord Jesus
receive my Spirit. So Rev. 22. 20. Even so, come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. It
is said of the Wicked indeed, that their Lives are snatched, or taken away; as
Job 27. 8. What Hope has the Hypocrite, when God takes away his Soul, or
snatcheth it away? So Luke 12. 20. Thou Fool, this Night shall thy Soul be
required of thee, (...); they shall challenge and get away thy Soul from thee.
Therefore we should resign up our holy Friends to God, as well as they do
themselves. But let us see how unreasonable this very Particular is of Mourning
for the Dead.

Is it to do them good? They are not the better for our Tears, they are past
Recovery by our Weeping. Is it not to envy their Blessedness, to wish them
alive again? 2 Samuel 12. 23. Wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back
again? I shall go to him, he shall not come to me. Is it because they were so
good that we mourn? The better for God, they are gone to their own home. Is it
because so bad? 2 Samuel 13. 39. David was comforted concerning Anmon, because
dead, though he died in Sin: Or is it because they died so soon, which
heightens your Loss? Consider who decreed it; are you wiser than God? Is it for
your own Good you weep? that is an holy Weeping: Weep as if you wept not. Thus
if Men would expostulate with themselves, they would see the Unreasonableness
of their Sorrow; it is to no purpose. We express things to no purpose by Water
spilt on the Ground: certainly Tears in such Cases are but spilt Water.

Use 1. To instruct you to take home this Lesson; so to sorrow under the Sense
of your Afflictions, as if you did not sorrow, be it the Loss what it will;
though I shall chiefly speak to the present Occasion. Do not let the Grief
oppress your Heart. Ay, but how shall we do so? I shall give you some Motives:
As,

1st. Be sure to get an Interest in spiritual Mercies. The Doctrine says,
Christians ought so to sorrow, as if they sorrowed not. We cannot speak to
others in this Language, unless we should persuade Men to slight the Hand of
God. We throw Bones to Dogs, but Bread to Children. We cannot comfort you in a
carnal way; Psalm. 94. 19. In the Multitude of my Thoughts within me thy
Comforts refresh my Soul. Mark, thy Comforts. To comfort a Man's self upon
carnal Grounds, argues an Insensibleness of God's Hand, and it is a shrewd
Sign that God gives us over to our selves. Therefore if you take Comfort, take
it from your Interest in spiritual Mercies. If you cannot look upon them under
a Condition of Propriety as yours, (as every Christian cannot) yet at least so
far look upon them, that from thence all your Comfort must be fetched. It is a
Neglect of Providence to go away with a general Thought. We must not sorrow too
much, and yet we are to consider whether we have good Ground why we should be
comforted. God gives wicked Men these Experiences of Sorrow, that he may
awaken them, and show them there is no Comfort to be had thence whence they
would fetch their Comforts in carnal Delights; Isa. 57. 21. There is no Peace,
says my God, to the Wicked. There is a Peace in their Fancies and Conceits,
but no Peace, says my God. There is a great deal of hurt done this way by
Sermons, Ministers instruct Men in a Moral way, that they should not grieve too
much; but they do not instruct a Man upon what Grounds he should not grieve:
You must be sure of better Mercies, or at least look after them for your
Comfort. A Man that has an Interest in Christ, is (...), a four-squared Man,
unmoved in all Conditions. There can be no Peace between a Man's Affections and
Condition, till there be a Peace between him and God. Mark that, Eccles. 9. 7.
Go thy way, eat thy Bread with Joy, and drink thy Wine with a merry Heart; for
God now accepts thy Works. When God accepts us, we may then eat our Bread
with a merry Heart, let things fall out how they will.

2dly. Live in a continual Expectation of the Creatures Change. Things are not
half so burdensome when we look for them. A Burden cast upon a Man's Back
breaks it; but when it is compacted and fitted for his Shoulders, he goes
away well enough with it. It was some Solace that Job could say, Job 3. 25. The
Evil that I feared is come upon me. Suppose it be your own, or your Friends
Dissolution, live in a continual Readiness to part with Life, or any thing else
at God's Call and Intimation, and it will not be so grievous to you when it
comes.

3dly. Learn an holy Greatness of Mind, to be able to live above the Creature.
Consider, the Happiness of Man is in God alone: All Happiness consists in
Conformity to, and Communion with God the chief Good; so that though the
Creature be gone, your Happiness is not gone. That troubles a Man most, when
his Happiness is gone, he will not care so much for other things. It is good to
see by what Enjoyment they reckon themselves happy; if to have Husband, Wife,
or a House well furnished, every thing to our Command; then when God takes
away these things, your Comfort is gone. There is much of Peoples Conceits this
way: But consider, what do you reckon the best of your Enjoyments? that you
have God for your Portion; Psalm. 144. 15. Happy is the People whose God is the
Lord. So see Psalm. 30. 7. Thou did hide thy Face, and I was troubled. Set but
the Heart right in this Point, and it will be well. Grace is but the Change of
a Man's chiefest Good and utmost End; that is only the Difference between a
natural Man and a spiritual Man, about the Conceits of Happiness.

There are other Considerations, as the Shortness of our Misery; the continual
Abode of other Comforts with us; though some be gone, we are not left naked to
the World; the happy End of all the Good of our Souls. But this for a Taste.

Men will think a Sermon is to no purpose that is spoken to comfort Persons in
this kind. To this end;

1. Consider, there is none of us but may have need of Comfort one time or
other; though our Mountain stands strong for the present, it may be removed:
And it is good to lay up against a dear Year. Such Truths are most welcome when
they come in their Season.

1st. Consider, you may have a Season when it will be necessary for you. Who
knows what a Day may bring forth? The Woman that entertained the Prophet, he
would fain do her good; no, says she, 2 Kings 4. 13. I dwell among mine own
People. But now that very Woman, as in 2 Kings 8. 5. She cried to the King for
her House, and her Land: she that did not stand in need of the Prophet, stood
in need of the Prophet's Man. You have your Wife, your Children and Friends
about you; O there may a time come when you will be glad of one Drop of this
Comfort to support you when they are gone.

2dly. Consider, when it is upon you, you will find it the hardest thing in the
World truly to assuage your Grief, to grieve so as if you did not grieve.
Afflictions are evil, and we are apt to make them worse, to turn Wormwood into
Poison: Heb. 12. 11. No chastening for the present but will seem grievous.
Seneca could slightly speak of Miseries when he had the Use of rich Gardens
about Rome; but when he had lost all, he was as much to seek as others.

Now I shall apply all that has been spoken to this present Occasion: 1st. To
show you why we should mourn. 2dly. Why mourn so, as if we did not mourn.

First; Why we should mourn: Consider, we have lost a pious Neighbor, and that
deserves Sensibleness.

1. Because such are a great Loss: We have lost her Service, Help, and the
Benefit that we might have had by her. There is no Member of Christ, but one
way or another is useful to the Community. And indeed we found her to be so; we
lose an Example, we lose useful Conference, we lose the Pledge of a Blessing to
a Family, to a Neighborhood: May we not say of her, as of David, Acts 13. 36.
After he had served his Generation by the Will of God, he fell asleep? She did
serve her Generation, and it was her Grief that she did it no more and better,
it should be ours that she did it no longer. Serviceable Christians are a great
Loss, especially in these times of need.

2. It is a sad Intimation to us, and therefore we ought to be very sensible of
such a Loss: Isa. 57. 1. The Righteous perish, and no Man lays it to Heart,
none considering that they are taken away from the Evil to come. Wicked Men
think they are the Bane of a Place: Plurimos defecit Christiani nominis gratia;
Christianos ad Leones: Wicked Men are but preserved in reference to the Godly;
they are but as a Fence of Thorns about a Garden of Roses: Now when the Roses
are cropp'd off, what shall become of the Thorns, but be cast into the Fire?
God will dash the Potter's Vessel: Genesis 19. 22. Haste thee, escape to Zoar, for
I cannot do any thing till thou be come thither. I cannot, mark that. Exodus 32.
10. Let me alone, and I will make of thee a great People: God offers Moses
Composition. Acts 27. 24. The Lord has given thee all them that sail with
thee. These are the Staff and the Stay; therefore we have Reason to be sensible
of their Removal from us.

Use 2. We have Reason also to be comforted.

1st. For the Glory that comes to God by her sweet Departure. Those that have
envied her Life, may wish for her Death, even such Solace as she felt in the
most bitter Agony,: Numb. 23. 10. Let me die the Death of the Righteous, and
let my latter End be like his. It is a great Comfort that wicked Men have not
wherewithal to blast Religion, when they see how the Love of God can compose
our Spirits in the greatest Extremities that befall us either in Life or Death.

2dly. That she has left us for Glory. It was indeed through many Throws, and
Pains, and Sorrows; but Death played the Midwife, to help her into Glory. It is
the Apostle's Exhortation to the Thessalonians, 1 Epist. chap. 4. ver. 13. That
they should not sorrow, even as others which have no Hope concerning them which
are asleep in Jesus; but admonish them, to comfort one another with these
Words, That at Christ's Coming, they which survive and remain, shall be caught
up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air: And so shall
we be ever with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these Words.

FINIS.
PAPER I.
I Hope I have avouched the Lord to be my God, and resolve to walk in his Ways,
and to keep his Statutes, and his Commandments, and his Judgments, and to
hearken unto his Voice. And I humbly implore, that the Lord would avouch me to
be one of his peculiar People, and that he would enable me to keep all his
Commandments. I often question whether I have any Interest in the Eternal God,
or whether he will own me as one of his; but, Lord! I humbly say, I have and do
avouch thee to be my only God and Savior; (O cast me not off!) and I earnestly
beg Grace to walk in thy Ways. Help me to keep thy Statutes continually: Let me
not dare to offend thee: O that I might never provoke thee my good God to be
angry or displeased with me! but let me, O Lord, be a Doer of thy Commandments,
that so I may have Right to the Tree of Life: Lord, I have no Right, I can
plead no Right, I fall infinitely short of my Duty; but have not I a blessed
Savior to plead for me, who died for the Chief of Sinners? and he has
promised that none that come to him, he will in any wise cast out. I know he is
able to save to the utttermost, all those that come to God through him: in his
prevailing Name, and for his sake I implore Divine Assistance to enable me to
persevere and hold out to the end, that at the last I may enter in through the
Gates into the City, into the Heavenly Jerusalem, where the Saints, and Angels,
and Cherubims, and Seraphims are continually singing Hallelujahs to their King,
Holy, Holy, Holy Lord. I acknowledge my Unfitness, my Unworthiness for this
great inexpressible, inconceivable Privilege: but though I am unworthy, if thou
my God wilt count me worthy through the Merits of my dear Savior, I shall have
Cause for ever to bless thy Name in the highest Heavens, World without End.
Though I have no Right, if thou will give me Right to those Treasures and
Pleasures which are at thy right Hand for evermore, this will be Matter of
Thankfulness to Eternity. Give me some Hopes that I have an Interest in these
invisible things, by my Care to please thee, and my Fear to offend thee; by my
unfeigned Respect to all thy Holy, Righteous, and Just Commandments, and by my
harkning to thy Voice, the Voice of thy Word, and the Voice of thy Rod. Thy
Dealings are variously dispensed toward me. I met with many contrary Winds; O
let them all blow me nearer to thy blessed Self.

Lord, I humbly say, I have avouched thee to be my only God, my Salvation, my
Portion, my Rock, my Fortress; O be thou my reconciled Father, to whom I may
continually resort: and when my Flesh and Heart here fail me, (as frequently
they do) be thou the Strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever. O God, my
God, do not forsake me, nor cast me utterly out of thy Sight. The Things of
this World they do not, they cannot, they will not content me. O give me some
comfortable Hopes that I am thine, that thou have adopted me, and that thou will sanctify me, and make me meet for thy blessed Self! I would be every Day
sitting and preparing my self for my last Day, for my accounting Day, when I
must be summoned before thy Tribunal Seat, to give a strict severe Account for
all my Thoughts, Words and Actions, whereby I have offended thee, my gracious
and good God: but I find my self unfit for any spiritual Duty. Lord, help me to
mind the Work of Time while Time lasts: furnish me with Divine Assistance to
enable me to do my Duty, without which I am utterly incapable of serving or
pleasing thy blessed Majesty. Death is hastening, Eternity approaching, the
particular Day of Judgment near; and yet for all this, how inconsiderate art
thou, O my Soul, to neglect the things that belong to thy everlasting Peace! I
am often thoughtful what will become of me here, and how Matters will go with
me here in this Life; Ah but when is the time to provide for Eternity, to get
my Title to Heaven cleared, to get an undeniable Interest in Christ Jesus,
which will yield me Comfort in the greatest worldly Distresses? Lord, give me
some Hopes that thou have avouched me to be thine; and that I have sincerely,
without Reservation, or Power of Revocation, avouched thee to be my God.

PAPER II.
DO thou, by a patient Continuance in Well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor,
and Immortality, and Eternal Life. Be not weary of Well-doing, for in due time
thou shall reap if thou faint not. Is there Glory, Honor, Immortality, and
Eternal Life set before me, and yet shall I tire and wax weary? Dare I be
impatient and fret at any of the Lord's Dealings toward me? If Heaven were
oftener in my Eye and View, I should be more calm and composed in the midst of
all Trials, Troubles and Afflictions that do or may overtake me during my Abode
in this distracting and Sin-defiling World. Is there Glory to be had hereafter,
and shall not I endeavor to be a Sharer therein? Is there Honor to be
conferred upon those that are true Worshippers of the Lamb, and shall I be
dull, and dead, and sluggish, and unmindful of the Honor that shall be
bestowed upon the Saints? Is Immortality set before me, and yet I so glued to
this mortal Life, that the Interests and Concernments thereof so fill up my
Time and Thoughts, that these Heavenly Objects are too seldom thought of, and
presented to my Mind? An eternal Life is offered in the Gospel to all those
that by Faith lay hold on it, and yet I, Fool that I am, so solicitous for this
temporal Life, this animal, this perishing, this fading Life, so that I do too
too much neglect my precious, immortal, never-dying Soul? so that should I
hereafter be banished thy comfortable Presence, and excluded from those Joys
and Pleasures that are enjoyed by those admitted to thy Kingdom and Glory, I
could blame none but my self, who have not in a due manner sought the Welfare
of my Soul. I have a blessed Hope of the glorious Appearance of the Great God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ, which I pretend to look, long, and wait for: but
do I live as an Expectant of such tremendous Appearances? Can I, with Comfort,
and Confidence, and Hope, look for this glorious Appearance of the great God,
when he shall come in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them that know him not,
nor obey his Gospel? If I be found in this Number, how sad and deplorable will
my Case be? Help me, O Lord, to search and see how Matters go with my Soul: If
thou art not in Christ; If I have not got an Interest in God the Father, Son,
and Spirit, there will be no blessed Hope for me, but a fearful Expectation of
the fiery Indignation that shall consume his Adversaries: O! to be found an
Enemy to God, and he an Enemy to any at Death and Judgment, is an astonishing
thing! therefore fly for Refuge, lay hold on the Hope set before you. Christ is
the only Refuge for a poor undone Sinner to fly to: in his Name, and for his
Sake, thou may be accepted, and not only pardoned, but restored to Favor and
Friendship: Not only be delivered from the Terrors of Hell, but be made an Heir
of Eternal Life. O blessed are those that have secured an Interest in the
Eternal God; for to those he will be a Sun and Shield, he will give Grace and
Glory: And though they may meet with many Troubles in this Life, many Ups and
Downs in the World, yet if they bear it with Patience, Heaven will make amends,
and will pay for all. I am sensible, O Lord, that I stand in need of a great
Almighty Power to keep me from falling; let me be kept through Faith unto
Salvation: Let me not be frustrated of that blessed Hope that thy Word reveals,
whereof many shall be Partakers: O let not me be excluded, but permit me to be
a Beholder of those glorious Appearances that shall be revealed to all those
that love, serve and obey thee. If thou should say unto me. I know thee not,
depart from me, thou have wrought Iniquity, and done foolishly, therefore
depart, depart into everlasting Fire: Though this Sentence would be severe, it
would be but just, for I have deserved a perpetual Banishment and Separation
from thy comfortable Presence. But, Lord, suffer me to plead with thee: Is
there not a Refuge for poor distressed Sinners to fly to, even the Blood of
Christ, which cries louder for Mercy than my Sins can cry for Vengeance? In him
alone I desire to be found; for his sake only I desire Acceptance. O let not my
Name be blotted out of thy Book, but give me some comfortable and sure Evidence
that I am thine, that so I may run the Ways of thy Commands, and not tire and
wax weary, but may, by a patient Continuance in Well-doing, seek for that
Glory, Honor and Immortality, and that Eternal Life which thou have laid up
for those that persevere in Holiness, and go from one Degree of Grace to
another, till they come to appear before thee their God in Sion. Hold out
Faith, hold out Patience, it will not be long, O my Soul, e're thou be at thy
Journey's End; therefore do and suffer the Will of God patiently: If he see sit
to deprive thee of those Comforts that thou have and do now enjoy, be
content; e're long it will not be a Pin to choose what part thou have acted
here upon the Stage of this World. You must (shortly) appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, that you may receive according to the things done in
the Body, whether it be good or bad. O what a dreadful and fearful Account have
I to give; the Sins of my Youth and riper Age are so many and so great, that I
am confounded and amazed when I (though slightly) take a View of them. My
Omissions, and my Commissions, my original and my actual Sins are such, that I
cannot bear the Scrutiny of my own Conscience, how then shall I do when the
Almighty contends with me? My Sins of Ignorance, and Sins against Knowledge, my
presumptuous Sins, my Abuse of Mercies, my Incorrigibleness under Judgments, my
Unthankfulness for former Mercies, and my Distrust of the Goodness of God for
the future; these may justly provoke God to depart from me, and say, he will
have no more to do with such a vile Wretch as I am. But blessed Father! I
humbly implore, that thou will not leave nor forsake the Work of thy own Hands:
Thou can make me clean; O when shall it once be? Let my Sins be all done
away, and let me (me poor Sinner) be made meet to partake of thy Kingdom and
Glory. O that my Savior would say, as Paul did of Philemon, What he owes, put
that on mine Account. Lord, my Sins are so many and so foul, that I cannot
answer for one of a thousand; how then shall I appear before thy Tribunal,
where I must give a strict Account of all I have done in the Body, whether it
be bad or good? Lord, I cannot answer for my numberless Number of Sins: Since
thou have (dear Redeemer) died for Sinners, let me not die in my Sins. Thou
have paid a sufficient Price for the Sins of the whole World; let not mine be
laid to my Charge, nor rise up against me in this World to shame me, nor in the
other to condemn me. Remit my Debt, too vast for me to pay, before the last
accounting Day. Let me have some well-grounded Hope, that the State of my Soul
is in good Plight; that however it goes with my Body and bodily Concerns, that
I may be assured it will go well with me to all Eternity, and then I may be
enabled to bear the Inconveniences of my Pilgrimage-State. Lord, I humbly beg
thou would take Care of me, and provide for me what thou in thy infinite
Wisdom and Goodness see fit for me, and let me be perfectly willing to be,
do, and suffer what my God sees good: not my Will, but thine, O Lord, be done
in all things; only I beg I may not be left to unsupportable Difficulties. Let
me have thy Love to sweeten all, and carry me patiently through the remaining
part of my Days and Trials. Be with me when I pass through the Fire, and
through the Water, for my Eyes are unto thee, O Lord my God; in thee is my
Trust, leave not my Soul destitute.

PAPER III.
YE will not come unto me that ye may have Life. O the Stupidity of poor,
careless and secure Sinners! What, will you not come to Christ, who alone can
give you Life, Natural Life, and Spiritual Life, and Life Eternal? We spare no
Pains nor Cost to save the Life of the Body; but O what Fools, what senseless
and sottish Creatures are we, not to provide for Eternal Life! What is this
momentary Life given us for, but to provide for our Departure hence, to labor
to get an Interest in God and Christ? Our Time was given us that we might have
an Opportunity of working out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling, and that
we may make our Calling and Election sure; that we may get some comfortable
Hopes that we do belong to the Election of Grace. O get your Title to Heaven
cleared, that you are born again, that your Sins are pardoned, that your Person
is justified, and that you are truly sanctified and cleansed from all (wilful)
Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit: Don't indulge your self in any known Sin,
not in omitting any known Duty, nor in the Commission of any known Sin. The
least Sin, without Repentance, is damnable; but the greatest Sin, upon true
Repentance, is pardonable: for the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us
from all Sins, even those that are of a Crimson Die; If our Sins be as Scarlet,
God can make them as white as Snow, if we do but truly repent of them, and
forsake them. Let not that Complaint of the Prophet, Hos. 5. 4. be verified in
you, that you will not frame your Doings, to turn unto the Lord. What, will you
not do what in you lies, to frame your Doing to please the Lord? What, will you
not avoid some petty Sins that do highly offend your good God, and may cause
him to hide his Face from you? Thus says the Lord, Seek ye me, and ye shall
live. But may not our Conscience condemn us, and tell us, that that precious
Time that our good God has given us to seek him, and to be reconciled to him,
and to make our Peace with him, even that Time has been spent in Sin and very
Vanity, in adding Iniquity to Iniquity. We are commanded to keep our selves in
the Love of God, looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal
Life. It is to no purpose to expect Mercy from Christ, or to hope for Eternal
Life, if we do not what we can to keep our selves in the Love of God. O then!
let it be your Study Day and Night to approve your selves to the Lord,
cheerfully obey his Commands, patiently submit to Afflictions, thankfully
receive Mercies, and make a holy Improvement of them: look to your selves, that
you lose not those things which ye have wrought, but that ye receive a full
Reward. Allow not your selves in any Sin, though never so small in your own
Eyes, lest God should say, as unto the Church of Ephesus, Though thou have made
a Profession of my Name, and have made conscience of some gross Sins,
nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first
Love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, or else I
will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of his Place,
except thou repent. If our Love to God and his Ordinances be not as fervent as
formerly; if our Hatred of Sin, or sinful Courses be lessened; if our Care to
please God, and our Fear to offend him, be less than heretofore, we have just
Reason to fear that God will deprive us of our forfeited Gospel, or harden our
Hearts that we shall not profit by it; (which dreadful Judgment, O Lord, in
Mercy prevent.) If our outward Carriage before Men should seem never so well;
nay, if we can approve our selves to our own Consciences in many respects, yet
the All-searching God may truly say, not only that he has a few things against
us, but many things against us; therefore it is our Wisdom to search and try
our selves, and turn again to the Lord, from whom we have too deeply revolted.

PAPER IV.
GOD has been pleased to deprive me of my dear Husband; so that my Care ought
to be doubled in the Education of my poor Children, when I must discharge his
part, and my own Duty too: I know not how soon God may call me out of this
World, I have frequent Warnings of my Mortality by the Death of others, and my
own often Indisposition. My Children are now young, and therefore what I say
may not make due Impressions on them, by reason of their tender Age; and when I
come to die, I know not whether I shall have Time, Opportunity, or my Senses,
then to speak to them of the things that belong to their everlasting Peace: for
ought I know, I then may be seized (as often I have been) with Convulsion-fits,
which may soon carry my Soul out of this into an endless Life; so that I may
not have any leisure to counsel, instruct or charge them to take care of their
dear, precious and immortal Souls: therefore I shall leave my Charge and
Commands in Writing, that they may often take a View of them, as being the
Commands of their dying Mother. Dear Children, I charge you, as you hope to
meet me with Comfort at the Day of Judgment, that you avoid all Sins, as Lying,
Swearing, taking God's Holy Name in vain, (which I particularly mention as
incident to your Age;) I charge you make Conscience of keeping the Sabbath Day
holy: Do not think your own Thoughts, nor speak your own Words, nor do your own
Actions; remember it is God's Day, and must be spent in his Service. Before you
go to Church, bless God for the Mercies of the Night past, for giving you leave
to see the Light of another Day, especially another Sabbath Day, wherein you
may have an Opportunity of waiting upon God, and getting good to your poor
Souls. When you are in the solemn Assemblies of God's People, let your Carriage
be grave, serious and awful, as remembering God sees you; and let your Minds be
attentive to what the Minister says: Hear so that your Souls may live: Be not
forgetful Hearers, but be ye Doers of the Word, and so shall ye be blessed in
all that you do. Do not spend any time in idle Recreation, or walking in the
Fields upon the Lord's Day, for the Profanation of that Day is an Inlet to many
other Sins. My dear Children, spend some time every Day in reading God's Word,
and in Prayer; you know not what a Blessing it is to have the Bible, therefore
do not slight it, but make a good Use of it: Do not squander away your Time in
reading Plays and Romances, and filthy Books, which will corrupt your Fancies,
and make you unfit for the Service of God. I say to you, as David to his Son,
And thou Solomon, my Son, know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with
a perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind; for the Lord searches all Hearts,
and understands all the Imaginations of the Thoughts: If thou seek him, he
will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.
Children, as soon as you are capable of knowing any thing, I would have you
labor to know God, own him, love him, obey him, and serve him, and that with a
willing Mind, knowing that he searches your Hearts; you cannot deceive him,
for he knows the Imagination of all your Thoughts better than you know them
your selves. If you seek him, he will be found of you: You may seek earthly
Friends, and at last be disappointed: you may seek Riches, and lose your
Labor: but if you do rightly seek God, he will be found of you, and then happy
are you for ever. You see that if you forsake him, he will cast you off for
ever. O miserable and wretched are they that are cast off by God; where shall
they go for Comfort that have lost his Friendship and Favor? Children, if you
lose all you have in the World, it is nothing to the Loss of God's Favor: If
you lose Father and Mother, yet if God will take you up, you are happy: If all
Friends fail you, if God do not fail nor forsake you, nor cast you off, still
you may be happy: your true Felicity lies not in the things of this Life, but
in your Portion in the everlasting God.

My Children, if you honor God, he will honor you; but if you despise him, he
will lightly esteem you: He will be with you while you are with him; but if you
forsake him, (wonder not if) he will forsake you. Draw nigh to God, and he will
draw nigh to you.

Children, honor God by choosing his word for your Rule and Guide, by choosing
him for your alone Portion: prefer him before all the World; so that if the
Devil should come to you, as once to your blessed Savior, and tell you of
giving you great Matters if you will but serve him, yet resolve to serve and
please God: Though he see fit to afflict you, yet love him and cleave to him,
trust in him, and rely upon him: Honor God, by keeping his Commandments, by
believing his Promises, by walking in his Ways; rather choose to die at a Stake
for your Religion, than to deny God or his Cause. Has God said, he will be
with you while you are with him? O then keep close to God, beg him to keep you
from falling, to preserve you blameless and unreproveable unto his Heavenly
Kingdom: Implore him to keep you by his mighty Power through Faith unto
Salvation. Draw nigh to God in a way of Duty, and he will draw nigh to you in a
way of Mercy. My dear Children, I charge and command you to love God, and keep
his Commandments; his Commandments are not grievous, but his Laws are all holy,
just and good. Let it be your Aim and End, living and dying, to approve your
selves to God: Let his Word direct and guide, counsel and comfort you in all
Conditions and State of Life, whether high or low, rich or poor, in Health or
Sickness: whatever your Conditions be in the World, if you belong to God, he
can and will order it for your Good; therefore let that be your first Care that
you are his: you are his by Creation, you are his by Redemption and Purchase;
therefore give up your selves entirely to him, to be ruled, and guided, and
disposed of as your Heavenly Father thinks meet. Say, Lord, here we are, do
with us as seems best to thy Godly Wisdom: Do but love us, and delight in us,
and own us, and approve us, and take us for thine own; and then take what
Method thou please to bring us to Glory.

Dear Children, you were both dedicated to God in your Infancy, remember to
renew and keep your Baptismal Covenant, wherein you did promise before God,
Men, and Angels, to Renounce the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and to be
entirely the Lord's, and his only; to keep his Laws, and Commandments, and
Statutes, all the Days of your Life: Dare not to live in the Breach of any of
them; Watch and pray, that you enter not into Temptation. Take heed of taking
God's Name in vain, of playing on the Lord's Day, of Lying, Swearing and
Idleness. I repeat these again, as being very common, and little taken notice
of in the World. My dear Children, remember this Counsel of your dear,
deceased, Mother, as one that had a great Concern for your precious and
immortal Souls.

PAPER V.
WHen my Spirit is overwhelmed, lead me, O Lord, to the Rock that is higher
than my self! If I had no Supports now to fly to, more than this vain World
affords, I were a miserable Creature; but God has been pleased, in some
measure, to bless me with the Knowledge of himself, whom to know, to love, and
to enjoy, is Life Eternal. I cannot express the Comfort that the Word of God
does yield me, even now in my Distress; so that I can say with the Psalmist,
that thy Word is better to me than thousands of Gold and Silver. What though
the Figtree should not blossom, neither should there be any Fruit in the Vine:
If the Labor of the Olive shall fail; if the Fields shall yield no Meat; if
the Flock shall be cut off from the Fold; if there be no Herd in the Stalls; if
dear Relations and Friends die; if Husband and Children are taken away; yet if
thou can rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of thy Salvation; if thou
can but say, that the Lord God is thy Strength, thy Portion, thy Refuge, and
thy Deliverer, thou may be happy, whatever thy Condition be in this World. If
thy good God will but say, as unto Israel of old, in Isa. 43. 1. But now thus
says the Lord that created thee, and he that formed thee, Fear not, for I have
redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy Name, thou art mine. Lord, I know I am
thine by Creation, it was thou alone that formed me; I beg that I may be thine
by Redemption; let me be effectually called. O blessed Lord, assure me that I
am thine; and let me know that thou love me, though thou afflictest me; that
thou art not angry with me, though thou chastisest me sorely. There is much
Bitterness, let there be no Wrath in this Cup: Give me some Hopes thou will be
with me when I pass through the Water, and through the Fire. Lord, if thou will
be but with me, I will fear no Evil: Lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance
upon me, and then it will put more Gladness into my Heart than if I were
possessed of all the good things in the World. Deal with me as thou usest to do
to those that love thy Name. Lord, I hope I love thee! Lord, I desire to love
thee, and to be beloved by thy blessed Majesty; and then all the Afflictions
that I meet with, will make no Breach between thy self and my poor Soul. Thou
art pleased to afflict me very sore, but I do not, I dare not, I will not say
unto thee, What do thou? for thou give no Account of thy Matters. It is my
Duty to submit, admire, not to quarrel at thy Providence; therefore with all
humble Submission, I acquiesce to thy Sovereign Will, saying, as my Blessed
Savior, Not my Will, but thine, O Lord, be done.

PAPER VI.
I Am willing to recount some of those many Mercies God has been pleased to
bestow upon me, to excite my Self to Thankfulness, and to encourage me still to
trust in, and wait upon that good God, who has bestowed so many Mercies upon
me, the least of which I am altogether unworthy of. I may say with David, While
I live will I praise the Lord: I will sing Praises to my God while I have any
Being; to that God who has bestowed my Life, Health, my Strength, my Memory,
my Reason, my Understanding, and all the Blessings of this Life upon me, and
has, through Grace, given me Hopes of dwelling with himself in Glory, when
this miserable Life shall be ended. O my Soul, praise thou the Lord; O give
Thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his Mercy endures for ever. Remember
the Goodness of God to thee, from the very Womb to this very Day; nay, before
thou had a Being in this World, God was pleased to form thee, and write all
thy Members in a Book; or else what an imperfect Creature might I have been, if
there had been an Eye, or an Ear, or any part wanting? O that I could be truly
thankful for these Mercies! I desire with Thankfulness to remember the Dealing
of God to me in my Infancy and Childhood: How many Dangers and Accidents have I
been liable and exposed to, and yet God has been pleased to take Care of me,
and preserved me from innumerable Mischiefs that have compassed me about? I
look upon it as no small Blessing, that I was born of Christian, Religious, and
Pious Parents, such as did truly fear God, and did what in them lay to instruct
their Posterity in early Piety: they were those that frequently addressed
themselves to the Throne of Grace, the Benefit of whose Prayers I hope to reap,
both in Life and Death. I desire with Thankfulness to own the Goodness of God
in taking Care of me, and providing for me when I was left motherless in my
tender Age, when I was incapable of minding my self; yet then was God pleased
to raise me up Friends that were careful, kind and tender of me; some of which
did instruct me in the best things, and were very solicitous for the Good of my
poor Soul, and did daily counsel, instruct and admonish me, to mind my Creator
in the Days of my Youth, and to live continually as one that must one Day give
an Account of all the Good or Evil done in the Body. And that you may see how
the Goodness of God has followed me all my Days, I will endeavor to recollect
those many comfortable Places of Scripture which have been of most excellent
Use to me, to comfort, support and encourage me in many Difficulties and
Troubles I have met with (some of which, I hope, will ever keep my Spirits from
sinking.) In my younger Years being seized on by a severe Fit of Illness, that
comfortable Place was a Support to me, Heb. 13. 5. Be content with such things
as you have, for he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. I was
well satisfied with my present Condition, (though painful and sick enough)
hoping that God would not leave me nor forsake me. Some time after, being in
great Fear and Danger of some approaching Evil, that encouraging Place was
brought to my Mind, Isa. 41. 10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee: be not
dismayed, for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee; yea,
I will uphold thee with the right Hand of my Righteousness. This Place vanished
all my Fears, and caused me to put my Trust and Confidence in the Almighty God,
who never fails those that rely on him. Afterward, when I came to part with
Children, though this Affliction was very heavy, God was pleased to mitigate it
by the Consideration, that there was a Name better than that of Sons and
Daughters: and though God saw fit to deprive me of them, (for wise Reasons I
doubt not) yet he was pleased to silence me under his Hand, by the
Considerations of Heb. 12. 5, 6. My Son, despise not thou the chastening of the
Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord loves he
chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives. I have sometimes
thought, that if I were assured of the Love of my Heavenly Father, I could then
bear any Affliction. Lord! I beg I may be truly humbled, that I have deserved
so many severe Scourges, and yet, Lord, I would be thankful that thou art
pleased (though by the Rod) to bring me home to thy Blessed Self.

When my dear Husband has met with many Losses and Crosses, I have been apt to
be desponding and cast down; but God has mercifully composed me by the
Consideration of Matthew. 6. 25, 26, etc. There I see that God clothes the Grass,
and feeds the Fowls, and has bidden poor Creatures not to be anxious for these
outward things, assuring us, that our Heavenly Father knows we have need of
these things, and that he will graciously supply the Wants of those that seek
to him. Phil. 4. 6. He has bidden me to be careful for nothing, but in every
thing by Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving, to let my Request be made
known unto him: and God has encouraged poor Souls to cast their Care on him,
letting them know he cares for them. What should I go to for Comfort, if I had
not the Word of the Eternal God to fly to? It would be endless to reckon up the
thousand Parts of those refreshing, comforting, and quickening Places that are
to be had in the Word of God, to comfort poor disconsolate Souls in all
Conditions of Life: and it ought to be took notice of how God is pleased to
suit them to our present Conditions of Life. I was once so perplexed with
groundless Fears of Troubles, that I was for some time unfit for any thing; but
my good God was pleased to fix upon my Mind Psalm 23. 1. The Lord is my
Shepherd, I shall not want. There was then no room left for any tormenting
Fears, but they all vanished away at the Consideration of the Happiness of
those that have so careful a Shepherd. It is my earnest Request that God will
own me as one of his Flock, however he deal with me as to worldly Matters.

I was not a little comforted and refreshed also by the last Verse of that
Psalm, which says, Surely Goodness and Mercy shall follow me all the Days of
my Life, and I will dwell in the House of the Lord for ever. I am sure Goodness
and Mercy have followed me to this very Day, therefore I will not distrust the
merciful Kindness of God to me to my Life's End. But if I should be stripped of
earthly Blessings, I beg I may have the Liberty of God's House here, and the
Happiness of dwelling with him for ever hereafter: If I should with Lazarus be
clothed with Rags, and fed with Crumbs, all my Days; if my Body should be full
of Sores, yet if God will own me, and approve me, and at Death receive me to
himself, I may with tolerable Patience bear the Inconveniences of my
Pilgrimage-state, knowing that they will not last long.

And that I may with the more Confidence cast my poor fatherless Children upon
God, I will call to mind those Places that did quiet me under the Loss of my
dear, and loving, and tender Father, which were these; that God was pleased to
promise to be a Father to the Fatherless; and that when Father and Mother
forsake, then the Lord would take them up. God has bidden poor Creatures to
cast their Burden upon him, assuring them, that he takes Care of them, and
sustains them. And the forementioned Place, Isa. 41. 10. is a sufficient
Cordial to keep any Soul from fainting and sinking under any Distress
whatsoever; therefore I hope, and trust, and believe, that the good God, who
has been so bountiful, so merciful, and so kind to me, to extend so many
Favors to me, will also take pity of my fatherless Babes. With him the
Fatherless find Mercy: Lord, I therefore commit them into thy Hands, as unto a
faithful Creator and Redeemer, and beg that thou would here guide them with
thy Counsel, and afterward receive them to Glory.

Sometimes when my Children have been taken very ill, so that there was no room
for hope of Life, to outward Appearance, yet even then has my good God
supported me by some comfortable Portion of his Holy Word. Once one of my
Children being given over, I was in great Perplexity of Mind; that Place came
to my Thoughts, Call on me in the day of Trouble, and I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me. I was extremely revived at the Consideration of that
Place, for that was then a Time of Trouble to me: And then being encouraged,
that if I called upon God he would deliver me, I did then, with firm Hopes and
Confidence, rely upon my merciful God and Father, whom I have found ready to
help and deliver me out of many Distresses. Blessed, and for ever blessed be
his Name, who was pleased to hear the Cries and Groans of his poor, unworthy,
undeserving, ill-deserving, and Hell-deserving Creature.

And seeing God was pleased to deliver me from my great Fears, my next Inquiry
should be, how I may glorify this good God: Lord, help me to make it the Care,
and Business, and Study of my Life, how I may please thee, and honor thee, and
serve thy Blessed Majesty the remaining part of my Days.

Amen. Amen.
PAPER VII.
WHat a Cordial to the Godly is the first of Peter, the first Chapter, the
second Verse, and so on? Where we find that God intends Heaven for them, and is
graciously pleased to reserve and preserve them for it; it being a reviving
Consideration to me, sometimes, to see how God deals with his poor Children,
and what Steps he takes to bring them to Glory. I will, for the Benefit of my
(too often) desponding Soul, ruminate on this Place of Scripture, where I find
these Words of Peter, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, who writes to the Strangers
scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia; Elect
according to the Fore-knowledg of God the Father, through Sanctification of the
Spirit unto Obedience, and sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ; Grace unto
you and Peace be multiplied. In this Verse I observe how the whole Trinity are
employed in the Salvation of Sinners: God the Father, he elects, he
fore-knoweth whom he will bring to himself: then the Spirit sanctifies those
whom God has elected, and makes them obedient to their Heavenly Father; and
they are sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus Christ, their Sins for his sake are
all done away; therefore the Apostle may well say, Grace unto you and Peace be
multiplied: for who can want Grace or Peace, whom God the Father, Son, and
Spirit, are contriving how to bring them to Glory?

We may well go on with the Apostle, blessing God for his unspeakable Mercies,
saying, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according
to his abundant Mercy has begotten us again unto a lively Hope, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead, to an Inheritance incorruptible and
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you; who are kept
by the Power of God, through Faith, unto Salvation.

O Blessed, Blessed, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Here in this Life we want Time and Hearts to bless the Lord for his abundant
Mercy toward us. Eternity will be little enough to sing forth the Praises of
the King of Kings; for giving us a lively Hope, that one Day we shall be so
happy to be admitted into the Heavenly Society, that are continually viewing
the Face of the Lamb, and contemplating his Glory. This inestimable Privilege
is only procured and purchased by the Sufferings, Death, and Resurrection of
our alone Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, who has provided an Inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away. O the Emphasis of these
Words, an Inheritance! What, a poor Mortal to be an Heir of Heaven! And this
Inheritance is incorruptible, not subject to Corruption, Alteration, or Change;
and it is undefiled. The Things of this World are defiled with Sin, they are
vile, contemptible and vain, (nay Vanity it self) but this Heavenly Inheritance
we see is incorruptible and undefiled. And to complete our Fruition, it fades
not away, but continues throughout all Successions of Ages: There is no
Probability nor Possibility of Decay or End; for the Immutable and Eternal God
has assured us, that they fade not away, but are reserved in Heaven, a secure
Place, beyond the reach of Men or Devils: It is not in the power of Friend or
Foe to dispossess the Children of God of this Heavenly Inheritance. When I
consider the Happiness, the inconceivable Felicity of the Saints above, that
are now Possessors of this Inheritance, that is incorruptible, undefiled, and
that will never fade away, I am apt to say with Austin's Mother, when she had
heard a Discourse of the Glory above, What do I here then? So am I reflecting,
What do I here in this defiling World, sinning against, and offending God, when
many are got safe beyond the reach of Sin and Sorrow, and are now Possessors of
this Blessed Inheritance?

We are told it is reserved, but for whom? For those who are kept by the Power
of God, through Faith, unto Salvation. Lord, it is thy Work from first to last;
it is thou that preparest this Inheritance, and thou alone can make thy
People meet to be Possessors of it. Let me find the comfortable Effects of thy
Almighty Power, which may enable me, through Faith, to attain Salvation; that
at the end of my Days I may receive the Salvation of my poor, precious, and
immortal Soul, for his sake, who I hope loved me, and washed me, and died for
me, and is now at thy right Hand, interceding for poor penitent Sinners. Let me
have a share of those Benefits he has purchased for his Elect People. Do thou,
O Blessed Father, prepare Heaven for me, and make me meet for it; and however
thou dealest with me in this World, do not deny me Heaven at last; the Hopes of
that alone does sweeten my Pilgrimage, and make my Passage through this World
tolerable: therefore I humbly beg that whatever I miss here, I may not be
excluded from thy comfortable Presence, but may be of the Number of those
blessed Ones, for whom thou have prepared an incorruptible and undefiled
Inheritance, which fades not away, but is reserved in Heaven, for all those
that Infinite Grace qualifies for, and makes meet to be Partakers of.

PAPER VIII.
WHen thy Judgments, O Lord, are abroad in the Earth, the Inhabitants should
learn Righteousness. What Is the Lesson that I and all Persons ought to learn by
the late dreadful Earthquake? Has it not a Voice? Does it not cry aloud, and
tell us, that our Sins have reached Heaven? that God is angry and displeased
with us? and that, except we repent, we shall likewise perish? We are as
grievous Sinners as any, therefore have just cause to think God has a
Controversy with us in this Kingdom. In a neighboring Nation God has seen
meet to lay his afflicting Hand in a tremendous manner; he has visited them
with a sore, amazing, and dreadful Judgment, in permitting thousands to be
destroyed by a lamentable Earthquake and Inundation of Water. And who, or what
are we, that we should expect to be exempted from the same or worse Judgments?
We, whose Sins have exceeded theirs, may rationally look to drink the Dregs of
their Cup; for we in England have had more Means of Grace than they, but we
have not improved them: we have had the Gospel, but we have slighted it: we
have had the Offers of Salvation, but we have rejected them: we have had
Sabbath upon Sabbath, Sermon upon Sermon, and yet have not made a due
Improvement of these precious Opportunities. So that it is but just with God to
destroy us, and our Habitations, in which we have too too often dishonored our
good God, and brought a Scandal on that Holy Profession which we have made: We
have the Name of Christians, but too many amongst us live like Devils
Incarnate. How much Swearing, Lying, Stealing, Killing, and filthy Lewdness is
to be found in this Land and Nation, and especially in this City? O the horrid
Oaths and Imprecations that are every Minute uttered, is dreadful to consider!
What little Conscience is made of keeping the Sabbath, that is as a Day of
Recreation to most; and those that spend it best, do too much think their own
Thoughts, and speak their own Words, and do their own Actions? So that every
one must lay their Hand upon their Mouth, and cry, Guilty, Guilty. Have not we
in this Nation cause to expect great and amazing Judgments, when in our Land
those Sins are found, that a moral Heathen would blush to commit? Our Sins, as
well as the Ninivites, have reached to Heaven. O that our Repentance was as
real, universal, and unfeigned as theirs; and then there might be still some
Hopes that God in Judgment would remember Mercy, and would not stir up all his
Wrath, though we are an undeserving, ill-deserving, and Hell-deserving People.
Lord, we are in the dark, and know not what thou art adoing with us: Thou have
lately let us see what thou can do in a Minute: thou have shaken the Earth,
and it trembled; and it was of thy infinite Mercy that we were not all
destroyed, and sent quick to the lowest Hell. Thou art God, and not Man,
therefore is it that we are not consumed. It Is of the Lord's Mercy that we are
yet spared. Help us, O Lord, to make a good Use of this Reprieve, for we are as
Brands plucked out of the Burning. What Jeopardy were we in when the Earth of
late trembled under us, and our Houses seemed to be tumbling about our Ears;
our Hearts failing us, no Place left to run to for Shelter: How dejected and
astonished did People look one upon another? What Fears possessed the Breasts
of many, all in expectation of sorer Calamities than yet felt: but God has
hitherto spared us; we are yet in the Land of the Living, on this side the
Grave and everlasting Burnings? God has of late shook the Earth, O that we
poor Mortals could get a Title to those unshaken Regions above, which are not
obnoxious to those Vicissitudes and Changes that here in this lower World we
are liable to. We ought to make a good Use of the late Earthquake; it should
awaken every one in particular to see in what Posture of Readiness we are in to
meet our God. What if he should repeat this amazing Judgment, and not only
threaten, but actually destroy us? It were but just with God to deal with us,
as lately with Iamaica. How insensible have we been of their Judgments and
Calamities? how unreform'd are we, though we see how God deals with others of
our Fellow Creatures? We, in probability, are as great Offenders as they; we
spared, they consumed; God gives us Space to repent; O that he would not deny
the Grace of true Repentance! We may look upon this late Warning, like Ionah's
Message, that within a little while this City and Inhabitants shall be utterly
destroyed. Without dispute our Sins have reached Heaven; the Cry of them is
very great: and should God deal with us as we have deserved, we might long
since have been consumed, our Bodies been sent to the Grave, and our Souls to
Hell. But we have a God whose Compassions fail not, therefore is it that we are
not utterly forsaken. He is God, and not Man, wherefore it is that we are not
Monuments of his Justice: But his Mercies are still extended to us, a sinful
rebellious Nation. O that they may lead us to Repentance, and that the Effects
of his Goodness may be showed in our thankful Lives, for this, and all other
Mercies which the Bounty of his Providence still vouchsafes us.

PAPER IX.
DEath seems to make its near Approach to me; and I am of all Persons most
inexcusable, who have frequent Warnings of my Departure hence, if I do not in
some measure bethink my self, and consider my latter End. Lord, I have reason
to conclude, that few Sands remain in my Glass to run: With what Astonishment,
Anguish, and Trouble, may I review my Life past; not one Thought, Word or
Action, but needs a Pardon: I blush to see how vile I have been; and if I
cannot bear the Scrutiny of my own Conscience, how shall I abide thy severe
Trial, who has kept an exact Account of all my Sins and Offenses? A numberless
Number of Sins may be charged upon me, which I confess I have been guilty of.
To whom shall I betake my self for Relief and Mercy but to thee, O my gracious
God? for that I have heard that the God of Israel is a merciful God; that he is
slow to Anger, and plenteous in Mercy; that he does abundantly pardon and
forgive the Sins, Offenses, and Provocations of his poor Creatures; and
therefore as I would not presume, so I dare not despair. Lord, I fly from the
Throne of thy Justice to the Throne of thy Mercy, and humbly implore Pity,
Pardon and Compassion, for thy Son's sake. Magnify thy Grace in pardoning me:
though my Sins have abounded, let thy free Grace superabound. Blot out all my
Sins out of the Book of thy Remembrance, and let my Name be written in the Book
of Life: Let me be meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, when this
earthly Cottage shall crumble to Dust. Let me be admitted to that Building, an
House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens. Let not me, though unworthy,
be excluded from thy Presence. Look on me in and through thy well-beloved Son,
in whom only thou art well pleased, and for his sake be reconciled to me a vile
Wretch: By his Stripes let me be healed. I have nothing to plead for my self,
only the Satisfaction of my Blessed Savior, on whom alone I rely for Pardon
and Life. Give me some undeniable Evidence that I do belong to the Election of
Grace; and that within a little while I shall be released from this Body of Sin
and Death, and shall be made perfectly blessed in a full Enjoyment of thee to
all Eternity. Let me have some comfortable Hopes and Foretaste of a blessed
Immortality, to sweeten my Passage through and out of this World. I am hastening
and posting apace into an endless Eternity; O that I were ready for my
Appearance at thy Bar. Ah Lord! if my Judge be not my Advocate, with what Dread
and Astonishment must I needs think of thy Tribunal, where I must appear before
a Heart-searching, and a Sin-revenging God! There is not one Sin in my whole
Life but is seen to thine all-seeing Eye, and is all naked and open to thee.
Lord, I would humbly beg that my Sins, though many and great, may all be
pardoned and forgiven. Many horrid Sinners have been received to Mercy; and
though my Sins are of a Crimson and Scarlet Dye, yet the Blood of an
All-sufficient Savior can wash them white: He is able (and willing) to save
all those that come to God through him, and he ever lives to make Intercession
for them. Help me, by Faith, to lay hold on this Redeemer, who came into the
World on this very Errand, to save poor Sinners, and reconcile them to God. If
so, I dare not, I will not despair: yet, Lord, I beg I may not presume. Help me
humbly to cast my self prostrate at thy Feet, and implore thy Heavenly
Benediction. Bless me (even me) in turning me away from all my Sins; let them
never separate between thee and my poor Soul: Let them all be remitted, and
then it will be as if they had never been committed. In my last and sorest
Agonies let me see thou art reconciled to me. Be with me till I die; and when I
die, and when this World can yield me no Help, Comfort, or Support, let me find
it all in thee. I know thy Presence can sweeten all the Troubles of this Life,
and Death it self: Then let me not be dismayed at that last and great Enemy.
When I pass through the Valley and Shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil, for
thou will be with me. O Lord, I beg thou would not (then) be a Terror to me:
Thou art my Hope in the Day of Evil: Help me then to hold up my Head with
Comfort, hoping my Redemption draws nigh. Let not this World have such
possession of my Heart and Affections, as to make me unwilling to dislodg and
go hence when thou call me off the Stage of this Life. Let the last Scene of
my Life be the best part of my Days. Let me honor thee by doing thy Will, and
submitting to whatever thou my God shall think fit to lay on me. Help me to
bear patiently thy afflicting Hand, either Sickness, or worldly Crosses, or
Death it self. Let me not dare to murmur, grumble or complain when Death looks
me in the Face: Let me not be too much daunted, startled, and affrighted at its
Approach. Thousands, and ten thousands have gone through that dark Passage, and
shot that Gulf, and there is no escape for any of the Children of Adam: they
that have deserved Death Eternal, have no cause to grumble at Death Temporal,
especially if it be unstung; nay, then there is Cause of Triumph, for it is an
Entrance into Life, and Messenger to Glory; therefore I hope, and firmly
believe and trust, that that God who has conducted so many safe through those
dark Regions, will not leave my poor Soul in its last Conflicts.

PAPER X.
I Sensibly find my outward Man perish and decay, but how comfortable would it
be to me, if I could as easily perceive the inward Man to be renewed day by
day? This Earthly Tabernacle is tottering, and e're long will tumble down; but
in what plight is the poor Soul that now inhabiteth this ruinated Cottage? What
Provision has it made against that Day when it must be turned out? has it got
an Interest in, and a Title to an enduring Substance; a House above, eternal in
the Heavens? This Life of mine is but a Vapor, it appears but for a little
while, and then vanishes away. Lord, teach me to number my Days, that I may
know how frail I am. This outward Man is daily consuming, wasting, perishing
and decaying, and shall I be careless, negligent, remiss and unconcerned about
my future State, how it will go with me hereafter in the other World? Though my
bodily Strength abate, yet let the inward Man be renewed every Day, and wax
stronger and stronger: When the Comforts of this Life are, as Job says of the
White of an Egg, unsavory, have no Relish, and are no Satisfaction to me, let
me have Comforts and Cordials that this World knows not of, even the Light of
thy Countenance, and that will put Gladness into my Heart, more than all the
Treasures and Pleasures of this vain World. Whatever thou deniest me, deny me
not thy self to be my God and Portion; and let me have an Interest in thy Son,
my only Savior and Redeemer: and do thou graciously give thy Holy Spirit to
direct, guide, quicken, counsel and comfort me the remaining part of my
sojourning here. How few Days may put a Period to my Life, I know not: In all
probability it will not be long before I leave the Stage of this World, and be
summoned before the Bar of God, to give a strict and impartial Account of my
past Life. O it is an awful thing to die and come to Judgment! I beg, O Lord, I
beg that I may be made meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.
Sanctify me wholly; let my whole Spirit, Soul and Body, be preserved blameless
unto the Coming of my Lord Jesus Christ. O be thou pleased to preserve me unto
thy Heavenly Kingdom. Many Fears, and much Ground for Fears have I, that I
shall never enter into Rest: But blessed Lord, do not exclude me from thy
comfortable Presence hereafter: Do thou make me fit to be a Member of those
blessed Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem. Though I am altogether unworthy, yet
if thou, O Lord, please to account me worthy, I may then be so happy as to
stand before the Son of Man with Courage and Comfort. Keep thou me by thy
Almighty Power, through Faith, unto Salvation. Let me be preserved from
fainting, sinking, and desponding in my last Conflicts and Agonies. Let me see
thee who art invisible, and with an Eye of Faith look within the Vail, whence I
look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, to change this vile Body (of mine)
that it may be fashioned like to his glorious Body. Let this Savior be my
Savior and Redeemer, even the Lord Jesus Christ: and let me be assured that he
is mine, and I am indeed his; and that this vile, contemptible, wretched Body
shall be changed, and made like to his glorious and blessed Body. This is such
an Honor and Privilege, that I have hardly a Face to ask: But I find a Warrant
in thy Word, to look, long, expect, pant, and wait for so happy a Day and Time,
as to be in a sinless State and Condition, where we shall see our Savior, and
be like him; where earthly Troubles and Sorrows shall vanish and decay; where
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, shall have no Power to tempt, molest or
disturb those that thou, O Lord God Almighty, shall admit into thy Heavenly
Kingdom and Glory. O blessed Souls that are here owned by thee, approved by
thee, and shall at last be received by thee into those Eternal Mansions above.
Lord, I humbly put in for a Share in these inestimable Mercies and Privileges:
Earthly things cannot content me, without some Hopes, some Prospect, some
Glimpse of thy Love and Favor: If thou afford me this, I may then bear the
Inconveniences, the Hardships, and ill Usage I meet with here in this howling
Desert. Let not my Unworthiness be a Bar and Hindrance to hinder good things
from me. Look not on me as in my self, a vile, polluted, wretched, undone
Creature; but behold me in and through thy well-beloved Son, and for his sake
alone be gracious and merciful to me. I have been guilty of black and horrid
Sins, and Millions of Sins have I been committing daily, without Sense, Sorrow
or Remorse. O may such a Sinner as I find Mercy! Lord, I sometimes doubt and
despair, and conclude there is no Hopes for me; I fear Heaven-Gate is shut
against me; and though I cry and knock, it may all be in vain. Lord, I cannot
bear such a Thought as to think I am rejected, forsaken, and cast off by thee.
I e'n cry out with the Jailor, What shall I do to be saved? What shall I do to
obtain Eternal Life? I find many comfortable Promises in thy Word to repenting
and returning Sinners, that those that come to thee thou will in no wise cast
out; and that the Blood of Jesus Christ thy Son cleanses from all Sins. Lord,
I desire to come to thee, and come in a right manner, and humbly beg thou will
not cast me out, nor cast me off, as one whom thou no more can love. Let me
have the Benefit of that healing, cleansing, Peace-speaking Blood of the Lamb
of God, which takes away the Sins of the World. I find in thy Word a black
Catalogue of Sins, and Sinners too, who have been guilty of gross Offenses,
whose Crimes would certainly exclude them Heaven, unless thy unlimited Mercy
and Compassion had inclined thee to look with Pity on them. When the Apostle
had mentioned those foul and horrid Sins that should deprive poor Souls of the
Joys of Heaven, he immediately, for the Benefit of After-Ages, and the Comfort
of desponding Souls, adds, But such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. Lord, thou alone know what numberless Numbers of Sins I
am guilty of, and for which e're long I shall be summoned to give a strict and
severe Account. Lord, I have nothing to plead for my self why I should not be
condemned, but I humbly cast my self at the Throne of thy Grace, and implore
Mercy; Mercy, Lord, Mercy I need, without this I cannot live comfortably, nor
die safely. O let me (even me) be washed, let me be sanctified, let me be
justified; in the Name of the Lord Jesus let me be a Partaker of the Benefits
of his Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession; and let me be assured
I am one of those that shall live and reign with him, World without end. In my
sorest Distresses, and last Agonies and Conflicts, let me see thee, a God in
Covenant, and reconciled to me: Let not my Evidences for Heaven be then to get.
When I come to die, let me have nothing to do but to die, and surrender up my
Soul into the Hands of that God who gave it me. Let not the Foresight or
Prospect of Death be so terrifying as to overwhelm me, and cause me to fall
from thee. Be with me when I pass through the dark and dismal Passage of Death:
When Flesh, Heart, and all Creature Comforts fail and forsake me, O Blessed
Lord, be thou the Strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever-more.

PAPER XI.
WORK while it is Day, the Night is coming in which none can work. Now is the
Day of God's Patience and Forbearance; this is the only time that God has
allotted for Work and Service: He that does the Work for which he came into the
World faithfully and carefully, shall in the Evening of the Day receive a
bountiful Reward; but if he neglects his Opportunity, and squanders away his
Time in Idleness and Sloth, the Night will surprise him, and then it will be
too late to begin that Work which before he would not be persuaded to set
about. This Counsel is serious and grave, every one has Work to do; (O that
all would be convinced of this great Truth!) we have Souls to save, Heaven to
secure, an Interest in Christ to get, and yet we are stupid and negligent, as
if this were a Matter of no great moment. O my God, give me Wisdom that I may
see the Necessity of looking after my Soul, that it may go well with that,
however it fare with the Body and worldly Concerns. Now is the Day, now is the
Time to provide for a happy Eternity: to Day if you will hear his Voice; to
Morrow may be too late, therefore now set about this Work in good earnest; see
how it stands with thy poor Soul, Is God and thy Soul Friends? or are they
still at a distance? Is God dearer to thee than all the World? Do thou think
thy self happier in being a Child of God, an Heir of Heaven, than if thou were
possessed of all the things of this lower World? Do thou not prize and value
God as thy Chief Friend, and rather have his Favor and Friendship, than to
have the greatest Monarchs on thy side? Do thou humbly resolve to be the
Lord's, and his only; and that thy Time, thy Heart and Strength, thy Memory,
Understanding, shall be all exercised in thy Maker's Service? Study his Mind
and Will, and then readily comply with his Commands: fear his Threatenings,
believe his Promises, obey his Precepts, and resolve with Job, that though he
slay thee, yet thou will trust in him. Resolve to follow God through all
Difficulties; beg of him to own thee for his, to avouch thee to be one of his
peculiar People. Secure a Title to Heaven: this World is passing away apace;
the Day is spending, and the Night approaching, in which I cannot work. I am
sensible of the Greatness of my Work, and know not how short my Time may be; it
may be shorter than I or the World imagine. My Work is so great and difficult,
that in my own Strength I can do nothing. Lord Jesus, I implore thy Aid and
Assistance; for thy Merit sake let my Sins all be done away; let me be
sanctified, justified, pardoned, and be made meet to be received into those
blessed Mansions that are prepared for thy Redeemed Ones. Let me have those
Qualifications that are requisite in all those whom thou admittest to live and
reign with thee for ever, that Holiness of Life, that Purity of Heart, that
Sincerity, that Heavenly-mindedness, that Weanedness from this World and
worldly Enjoyments, which is required in all those that love and fear thee. Let
me have those Divine Qualities that may render me amiable in the Eyes of my
Judge. O blessed Jesus, let thy Righteousness be imputed unto me, and my Sins
washed away with thy precious Blood. Deny me not an Interest in thy meritorious
Death and Sufferings. I cannot be happy here nor hereafter, without some
comfortable Hopes that I do belong to the Election of Grace. Lord, if it be thy
Will, let me know assuredly that I am one of them for whom Christ died; seeing
he died for Sinners, let me never die in my Sins.

And as I trust Christ died for me, so let thy Holy Spirit live and reign in
me. Let me be guided, directed, counseled, comforted, strengthened, and
supported, the remaining part of my Days, that whether they be few or many,
they may be so spent, that when I come to lie upon a sick and Deathbed, I may
lift up my Head with Joy unspeakable, hoping my Redemption draws nigh. In my
last Agonies be not thou far from me; thou art now (and I am sure wilt be then)
my only Hope, therefore be not a Terror unto me. Let me then find that the
Eternal God is my Refuge, and that underneath are his everlasting Arms. I do
expect to have my Flesh and my Heart (within a little while) to fail me; but
Lord, be thou the Strength of my Heart and my Portion for ever. Lord, I hope I
have chosen thee (long ago) for my Portion, and am resolved by thy Grace
enabling me, to stick to my Choice; therefore be thou pleased to be with me in
my sorest Conflict, at the Hour of Death, and in the Day of Judgment. Let me
not then be left by thee, or forsaken and rejected by thee the Great Judge of
all the World, whose irreversable dreadful Sentence will ever long be passed
upon all those that forget and neglect thee; in which Number I beg I may not be
found.

Seeing Time is posting away, and Eternity appoaching, and none knows how soon
Death may arrest them, it is highly necessary to be often considering what will
do us most good, and stand us most in stead at a dying Hour, when this World
and all its Enjoyments will (as Job says of the White of an Egg) have no
Relish nor (...) in them. When we come to the Brink of Eternity, all our
earthly Comforts will vanish and disappear, our Friends and nearest and dearest
Relations will bid as adieu, they cannot help us, nor hinder Death one Moment:
Our Riches, though we had gained never so much, cannot ease one Pain, nor find
one Remedy for our mortal Disease; the Sergeant Death will not be bribed to
stay till another Year, or Day, or Hour; no, they must be gone, nill they will
they, they must into the other World. Let me, O Lord, be in a Posture of
Readiness, that when thou shall summons me to appear before thy dreadful
Throne, I may not be found naked, but may be found in Christ, and not in my
Sins. Let me by every Sabbath, Sermon, Prayer, and Sacrament, be brought nearer
to thy self, whose I am, and whom I hope to serve here, and enjoy hereafter in
thy Heavenly Kingdom, where are an innumerable Company of Angels, and the
general Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, which are written in Heaven;
where is God the Judge of all, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect, and
Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and the Blood of Sprinkling that
speaks better things than that of Abel. Who can think of these glorious
Inhabitants, and not long to be with them? O happy and blessed Souls are they
that are safe got home, and are now with God and his Angels; and this Assembly
and Church of the Firstborn, whose Names were written in Heaven. Who would not
desire to be with the Spirits of the just Men, who are made perfect? O the
Goodness of God to make Men perfect, and then receive them to himself, because
they are so! O what Thanks should be ascribed to our dear Lord Jesus, the
Mediator of the New Covenant, for purchasing at so dear a rate such inestimable
Privileges and Blessings for such vile Worms as Men! This Blood of Sprinkling
cries louder for Mercy than the Blood of Abel did for Vengeance. These holy
Ones have washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb. The
Lamb's Blood can wash the foulest Sinner white, therefore are they brought
before the Throne of God, and serve him Day and Night in his Temple; and he
that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them: they shall hunger no more,
neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor the Heat; for
the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall feed them, and shall lead
them unto living Fountains of Water: and God shall wipe away all Tears from
their Eyes.

O what blessed Employment are the Saints engaged in, in serving God Day and
Night in his Temple, where the everlasting JEHOVAH, that sits on the Throne,
shall eternally dwell among them: The Bliss of these Heavenly Inhabitants is
inconceivable. Well may the Apostle say, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, what
God has laid up for them that love him. It is exceedingly above what we can
think, or imagine, or conceive: Who can tell what it is continually to enjoy
the comfortable Presence of the great God and the Lamb? When God's People have
had but some Glimpse of his Favor and Friendship, and some Hopes of dwelling
with him, they have impatiently longed for a Dissolution: They count this World
as a Prison in which they are separated from their God, their Christ, and the
Holy Angels, which will be their everlasting Companions.

Those that God will admit into his everlasting Glory, he has told us, they
shall be exempted for all hurtful Evils; never shall they hunger more, nor
thirst any more. Lord, too too many Thoughts do I spend about these outward
Supplies of Meat, and Drink, and Raiment. O when, when will thou bring me to
Heaven, where these things will be of no Use nor Value to me? Happy, and only
happy are they whom the Lamb, which is in the midst of the Throne, will feed,
and lead to the Fountain of Living Water, from whose Eyes all Tears shall be
wiped; they shall know no more what Death means. In Heaven there is no
Sorrow, nor Crying; nor shall there be any more Pain, for all old things shall
be done away: the former things are passed away, past and gone; nothing remains
but Joy and Gladness, and praising of our Great Creator, sounding out continual
Halleluja's to the King of Kings. Lord, is it my Duty to be fitting and
preparing my self for this blessed State, and for my Approach before thy awful
Tribunal? and dare I still neglect it? Help me to remember that I must work
while it is Day; the Night of Sickness, Sorrow, and Death are approaching, and
then I cannot work. Lord Jesus, make me meet, make me fit for thy blessed self,
that when I come to leave this base World, I may be admitted to the Heavenly
Society of Saints and Angels, Cherubims and Seraphims, where are ten thousand
times ten thousand, saying, with a loud Voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and
Glory, and Blessing. Every Creature in Heaven and Earth shall then say,
Blessing, Honor, and Glory, and Power be unto him that sits upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever.

Amen and Amen.
PAPER XII.
I Am frequently assaulted with this sore Temptation, that I shall never
persevere and hold out to the end, but shall tire and saint, and grow weary, so
that every Trial shall master and overcome me; so that I sometimes fear there
is no Hopes for me of entering into Rest: I fear I shall fail short of eternal
Life, which is a cutting Consideration to me, and sometimes sinks me into the
Depth of Misery. But that I may not wholly despond, I will here recite some
Places of Scripture which consist of Precepts and Promises; and which, I hope,
may be of use to me, and may make me stir up my self to do what in me lies to
lay hold on the Hope set before me; and may cause me to look to thee, O blessed
Father, for Grace and Strength to hold out to the End of my Days. Let me not
grow weary in Well-doing, for in due time I shall reap if I faint not.

In Rev. 2. 10. it is said, Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer:
Behold, the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, that ye may be tried, and
ye shall have Tribulation ten Days. Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will
give thee a Crown of Life.

Does God say, Fear none of those things which ye shall suffer? and yet shall I
be overwhelmed, and dejected, and distracted, for fear of Troubles and
Calamities? Here is mentioned the worst of Enemies, the Devil; he shall afflict
some, and cast them into Prison; but at this we ought not to be terrified, for
sometimes God does it to try his poor People, and he does permit them to be in
Tribulation: but God limits the time, it is expressed here ten Days, that is a
certain for an uncertain time; it implies but a short time: were it at our
Adversary's, the Devil's Disposal, we might be as many Years as here are
mentioned Days, yea all our Lifetime in continual Sorrow; but we are in the
Hands of a merciful God: and though he see meet sometimes to scourge and try
us, yet he will not let us be tempted beyond what he will enable us to bear;
and for our Encouragement he has said, If we be faithful to Death, he will
graciously reward us. He that says, Be thou faithful, make me faithful, and
then I need not doubt but he will give me this Crown of Life: It is not, nor
cannot be merited by us; it is the free Gift of God. Here are several Promises
he has graciously made to those that hold out to the end; as in ver. 7. To him
that overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree of Life which is in the midst of
the Paradise of God.

Who would not strive to overcome, that at last he may be admitted into the
Paradise of God, where he shall eat of the Tree of Life, and then shall hunger
and thirst no more, but shall be happy in the Enjoyment of God and the Lamb, to
all Eternity?

Ver. 11. He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the Second Death. What a
comfortable Promise is this! The First Death is nothing in comparison of the
Second: What Is Death Temporal, if compared to Death Eternal? When we die, we
are deprived of earthly Friends, and earthly Comforts; but if the Second Death
has Dominion over us, then there is an eternal Banishment from the comfortable
Presence of God, and an eternal Separation between God and the poor Soul,
(which is Hell it self.) O Lord, give me Grace that I may so fight, strive, run
and conquer, and at last overcome, that I may not be hurt of the Second Death.

Ver. 17. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and
will give him a white Stone, and in the Stone a new Name written, which no Man
knows, saving he that receives it. This is an unspeakable Privilege indeed,
to have the Bread of Life: This hidden Manna, it is hidden from the World, and
given only to those who through Faith and Patience lay hold on eternal Life.
How happy are those that have the White Stone of Absolution, and have in it a
new Name written? Once indeed they were Children of Darkness, Children of this
World; but now, through Grace, they are made Children of Light, they have the
Image of God impressed upon their Souls; and though the World know it not, yet
the Persons that receive this inestimable Privilege, find (at least sometimes)
a Change in their Heart, and can rejoice in their future Hopes, that however it
goes with them here, yet they can be contented, knowing it will not be long
e're they be past the Inconveniences of their present Pilgrimage, and shall
then be admitted into the Heavenly Canaan, where all Troubles, and Sorrows, and
Calamities, shall be done away, and they shall enjoy God World without End.
Amen.

Chap. 3. v. 5. He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white Raiment,
and I will not blot out his Name out of the Book of Life, but I will confess
his Name before my Father, and before his Angels. How many Motives are here to
Perseverance? Just now a Promise of hidden Manna to eat, now of white Raiment
to clothe the Person that overcomes. This white Raiment is the Righteousness of
Jesus Christ, in which poor Sinners must be clothed: If they should have
nothing but their own Righteousness to appear in, they would not be able to
stand in the Judgment. How blessed and happy are all those for whom this white
Raiment is prepared? they are assured that their Name shall not be blotted out
of the Book of Life. It is an inestimable Privilege to have their Names
registered in Heaven, for to them Christ says, that he will confess them
before his Father, and before his Angels, to be owned, approved, and commended
before Men and Angels, and the great Assembly of the Just. This should excite
us to be diligent and faithful to the end, that at the last we may overcome,
and be Sharers of these great Benefits that are promised unto those who are
clothed with this white Raiment.

Ver. 11. Behold, I come quickly; hold that fast which thou have, that no Man
take thy Crown. We not knowing how soon our Savior may come, ought to be
watchful, careful and diligent, and hold fast Faith and a good Conscience, that
so we may hold out to the end, that none may deprive us of our Crown.

Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God; and he shall
go no more out: and I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the Name of
the City of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven
from my God; and I will write upon him my new Name.

To be a Pillar in God's Temple is an high Honor, it is a fixed Place; no
danger of being removed, if once set there: and God will write his Name upon
it, and own it for his own, and ingrave the Name of the City Jerusalem which is
above, as a Token that they are Denisons and Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem,
and then the Lord will write upon him a new Name. The Lord knows them that are
his, he distinguishes them from the rest of the World: Happy are those that be
in such a Case: Blessed are those whom God has chosen to be a Pillar in his
Temple.

To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me on my Throne, even as I
also overcame, and am sat down with my Father on his Throne.

Who would grudg at a little Pains, and Labor, and Difficulties, if at last he
may overcome his Spiritual Enemies? Here Is a gracious Promise that our blessed
Savior makes, that if we do overcome, (though it must be by his Grace, his
Strength and Assistance) he will grant us to sit with him on his Throne. What
an Honor is this to be conferred upon poor Mortals? What, to sit with Christ
and his Holy Angels upon a Throne! Well may we say with the Apostle, Eye has
not seen, nor Ear heard, what God has prepared for those that love him. If we
do overcome a few Difficulties, and deny our selves some small things for
Christ's sake, will he thus amply reward us, by admitting us to be Sharers with
him in the Glories of Heaven? He has said it, and his Word shall stand, that
if we overcome we shall sit with him, even as he has overcome, and is set down
with his Father. Our Savior indeed did the whole Will of his Father, and
overcame all the Hardships and Difficulties that he met with, in accomplishing
his Father's good Pleasure. He was despised of Men, he was spit upon, he was
mocked and buffeted, and at last crucified; and yet how meekly did he submit to
all this! We find him in his greatest Agonies saying, Not my Will, but thine be
done; and, the Cup that my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? And
shall I dispute his Will and Pleasure? Our Savior he endured the Cross,
despised the Shame, and is now set down at the right Hand of the Throne of God.
He bore all the various Difficulties, he passed through here with an invincible
Courage and Constancy; and now we are assured that he is set down on the Throne
of God, and has promised that those that are true Followers of him, shall in
due time inherit Eternal Life, and shall sit down with him on the Throne of
God, as certainly as he is already set down with his Father.

Chap. 21. v. 7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things; and I will be his
God, and he shall be my Son. Here are several Particulars instanced, in what
those shall possess that overcome: and here, to conclude, it is said, he shall
inherit all things, all things necessary for this Life, or a better; all things
conducing to this Life and the other. But to complete the Happiness of the
Godly, God has promised to be his God, and that he will own him as his Son:
And I am sure none can be miserable that have this God for their God and
Portion.

Seeing here are so many comfortable Promises to those that overcome, help me,
O my God, that I may not seem to fall short of entering into thy Rest, but help
me to persevere and hold out to the End. Do thou strengthen me against all
needless Fears. Thou that said, Fear none of those things that thou shall
suffer, give me an undaunted Spirit against all earthly Troubles. What though
thou meetest with many Troubles and Trials, yet thy God has told thee, they
shall not last long. If thou sink under thy Burden, thou art undone; but if
thou courageously overcomest, these Promises to thy Comfort thou may lay hold
on. Be faithful to the Death, and then thy good God will give thee a Crown of
Life, which fades not away, but is reserved in Heaven for these that love and
fear him.

PAPER XIII.
O Lord, I beg a Meetness for Heaven; make me meet to be a Partaker of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light. I am unmeet, unfit, unprepared, unworthy to
be a Partaker of those Privileges that are enjoyed above at thy right Hand by
thy redeemed Ones: But, Lord, I humbly desire thou would sit, prepare and
qualify me for Communion with thy self in Glory. Help me to be getting
Dispositions for Heaven, to be meet to live above. I often desire to be at home
at my Father's House, to be there where God and Christ is, where the Saints and
Angels, and all the Host of Heaven are continually lauding, blessing, praising,
and magnifying thy Great and Holy Name. O Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Hosts,
shall ever such a poor Worm as I be admitted to dwell with thee in thy Heavenly
Temple? I that am so ill-deserving; I that am so undeserving, dare I presume?
Can I hope upon good Grounds that I shall be of the Number of those happy Ones
who shall be called unto thy Kingdom and Glory; there to live and reign with
thee, World without End? Sometimes I am overwhelmed, and utterly despair of
this high Honor, when I consider what a vile Wretch I am by Nature. And when I
reflect on the Sins of my Life, that my whole Life has been one continual
Provocation against thy Divine Majesty, I can hardly find Day or Hour wherein I
have not offended thee: Nay, I fear my very Prayers are Sins and Abominations
to thy pure Eyes: And if my Condition be such, how is it like to fare with me
to all Eternity? Who will be my Companions in the other World, if I am cast off
by thee, and excluded from thy Presence? (which, Lord, I earnestly implore may
never be my Portion.) Give me leave to plead with thee; I find in thy Word that
the Blood of Christ cleanses from all Sins, those of a Crimson and Scarlet
Dye: and also I read that he came to save the Chief of Sinners that are
sensible of their lost and undone Condition, and that fly to him for help. He
has said, those that come to him he will in no wise cast out. Being encouraged
by thy Holy Word to come to thee in thy Son's Name, I humbly beg, for his sake,
that all my Sins may be pardoned, and done away; that I may be sanctified,
washed, and cleansed in the Laver of his Righteousness. Let me have a Meetness
and Fitness for Heaven, where I long to be: Help me to be laying up a good
Foundation against the time to come, that I may lay hold of Eternal Life. Let
me be kept by the mighty Power of God through Faith unto Salvation. O keep me
from falling, and preserve me blameless to thy Heavenly Kingdom, for Christ
Jesus's sake. Amen.

FINIS.

