A POEM UPON THE CORONATION Of His Most Sacred MAJESTY King JAMES II. WITH AN
Additional Poem UPON THE DEATH Of our late Sovereign Lord CHARLES II. Of ever
Blessed Memory.

By R. MANSELL, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for J. Hindley, MDCLXXXV.

A POEM ON THE CORONATION Of His Most Sacred MAJESTY King James II. etc.
NOw! are our Joys fulfilled, our Pleasures Crowned,
Ore all the World, Fame does her Trumpet sound.
Inspired Muse, vast Trophies raise to Jove,
And there proclaim an Universal Love.
There in Seraphick Strain (my Angel) sing,
And with thy tuneful Lyre Charm every thing.
Make Groves and Mountains, in due measure move,
And mollify hard Rocks and Stones with Love.
Dart from they Throne, thy Rays of Eloquence,
And make each God admire thy Influence.
It Is thou can speak of greater things than they;
What e're they spoke, thou more of it can say.
Besides, their Power thou boldly dare disown,
Whilst thou assum'st a greater of thy own.
Thou, in three minutes, six days wonders, wrought
Thy Sense their Nothing to perfection brought.
Out of an undigested Lump; thou did refine
The grosser Atoms, that did frame Mankind.
At thy command all things do new appear,
Equal and gay, in manner of a Sphere.
The unknown paths of Fame, thou make'st thy way,
Where thou Foundations of new Worlds do lay.
Thou make the Abyss of thoughts a Second Cause,
And Matter Forms, by thy Diviner Laws.
It Is thou (alone) can with thy Heavenly Fire,
The Soul of Verse, our humane thoughts inspire.
It Is (only) thou art fit to breath the Praise
Of Mighty JAMES, (who does thy Fancy raise.)
He (thy Apollo) inspires thee with sense,
And fills thy World with his Worlds influence.
Come is the day, the great Coronation Day!
Which (also) thee Crowns with eternal Bay.
Till Heaven melts the fleeting plumes of Time,
So deathless is his Glory as thy Rhyme.
Great JAMES, like Sol, with his Aurora rose,
And through her blushes did the day disclose:
Painting his Glory, gilding every thing,
Begets the sweet fruition of the Spring.
A spring of Joy, came darting from each smile,
And charming Nature lay dissolved the while.
The Gods themselves, their Power did bestow,
That they more perfect might appear below.
With Reverence, and Ceremonies great,
They do allow, we them should imitate;
And by Divine Assistance, do put on
Two Glorious Crowns, which do adorn one Throne;
But more their Glories do their Crowns adorn.
The Choirists Anthems most Divinely Sing:
(Even so the Birds do welcome in the Spring)
Music their thoughts to Heaven does aspire,
(Joining in Consort to the Heavenly Quire.)
The bright Attendants did themselves admire:
Each found his thoughts, a Paradise entire.
The Guards, like those of Heaven, smiling stood,
Whilst Joy proclaimed them, more than flesh and blood.
Angels did Guard those that did Guard the place,
Gracing each motion which the place did grace.
Hark! how the Bells in joyful consort sound,
The Loyal Motto, writ on them around.
The rocky Steeples to their Music move,
And every Stone yields in the act of Love.
The thundering Cannons echo from the shore,
Healing the wounds which they had made before.
They simpathize with every joyful sound,
Proclaiming Love (which does more strangely wound.)
The Drums and Trumpets echo through the Air,
And to the Heavenly Spheres their consort bear.
The Wind in gentle whispers, tells his Tale,
Curling the Ocean with each wanton Gale.
Thames gentle streams swell into waves of pride,
And does forget through joy, her usual Tide.
Healths Crowned with Huzzahs, heals each factious Wound,
And makes the drunken World reel faster round.
The Tide of Nature faster ebbs and flows,
And every fragrant Birth her glory shows.
Whilst from the ancient Chair, the blessed abode,
Where Crowned has been many an earthly God,
Creat JAMES and MARY in glory did retire,
(The Gods as well as Mortals did admire;
Crouding, looked down, and wondered for to see
The illustrious Pomp and glorious Jubilee.)
As Heaven unto us will new appear,
So our Coronation unto them did there.
Their pleasant smiles they freely did bestow,
And made each Gemm with greater luster show;
As pleased to see the manner all Divine,
And their Vicegerents in their glories shine.
Next raise (my Muse) a high and mighty Throne,
Such as great Jove himself does sit upon:
And if a Jove on Earth he will allow,
Set on great James, and let him Thunder too.
Down from his Heaven let Lightening round be hurled,
And Blast the spreading Factions of the World;
Until He Calms the raging Universe,
And Heals the Ulcers which abroad disperse.
Let the Seditious Torments of the mind,
Free from one spark of Glory be confined.
In Darkness let them infamously dvvell,
And every Crime combine to make a Hell;
Where may each Furie's Conscience own his Sin,
And be sufficient Hell to Damn him in.
On the Death of His late Majesty.
I.
GReat Consternation like a Tempest rose,
Whilst Cesar's mighty Soul,
(Too great for Nature to oppose)
Launched through the Ocean to Eternity:
Loud storms of Grief, in folds did roll,
And drowned all the Worlds Supremacy.
II.
All things looked sad and mourned at the Depart,
Till Heaven pleased to smile,
Eased the reluctance of each Heart,
And all around the solid Universe,
His beams of gentle influence (the while
He rose in glory) like mercy did disperse.
III.
So when bright Sol, draws from the fruitful earth,
His wearied beams of Light;
Which do beget each fragrant birth,
The sable Curtains ore the Heaven's drawn;
But soon he does (in flaques) disperse the Night,
And usher in Aurora through the Dawn.
IV.
Whilst mighty Hosts of glorious Souls extend,
Thoughout the spangl'd Sphere,
All Saints his Presence do attend;
A High and Mighty Saint, they him proclaim,
As we great James our King did here,
The Second, of that Everlasting Name.
V.
Angels conduct him to the glorious Throne,
Where all things new appear.
He comprehends the Three in One:
A Crown of Glory's to him given,
Whilst Mighty James, Great Baittains Crown does wear,
And Joy's proclaimed throughout both earth and heaven.
VI.
Our Caesar was too Pious, Great and Good,
Amongst Mortals to remain:
Heaven saw they thirsted for His Blood,
(But Traitors Crimes do still require their own)
Justice the Murderers themselves has slain,
And placed Great Charles on an Eternal Throne.
VII.
Near to our Great Jehovah, he is set,
Adorned with Gemms of Light;
Fine Azure Clouds about him get,
But soon his luster through the Laune displays,
Dispersing round the Globe of Atoms quite,
And gilds the Heaven with his refulgent Rays.
VIII.
He like Apollo, swayed, vvhilest here on Earth,
Justice fulfilled his Law,
His Influence inspired his Birth;
When from the Martyr's sacred Loins he came,
By a Divine Intent, the World to awe,
Which now is filled with his immortal Fame.
IX.
The Auspicious Star, which at His Birth appeared,
Great Prodigies foretold,
That such a Prince, beloved and feared,
Should Crovvn'd with Miracles, adorn a Throne,
Whose Fame should Register great Deeds of old,
And Chronicle far greater of his own.
FINIS.

