Catholic Religion: OR, THE JUST TEST OR CHARACTER Of every Person that in any
Nation is accepted with God: Discovered, IN An Explication of the Nature of the
true fear of God, and working of Righteousness, with which the same is
connected. In some Discourses upon Acts 10.35, 36.

WHEREIN Several important Doctrinal Truths, more immediately influential upon
practice, are plainly opened, and vindicated from their too common
misunderstanding.

By WILLIAM MANNING.

Happy is the man that fears always,

Pro. 28.14. LONDON: Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Kings Arms in the
Poultrey, 1686.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 12. dele may, p. 2. l. 10: d. Preached Christ's Death, put in
proceeds l. 17. r. the Gentiles, l. 20. r. Cohort, p. 10. l. 1. r. Economy.
p. 20. l. 8. r. Mat. 7. p. 33. l. 4. r. their, p. 41. l. 4. r. it means, p.
57. l. 25. r. (...), p. 68. l. 22. r. its assigned, p. 69. l. 11. r. Nation, l.
27. r. Man's, p. 90. l. 16. d. and, p. 92. l. 12. r. now, p. 93. l. 17. r.
attemperation, p. 98. l. 13. d. as, p. 102. l. 21. r. unreserved, p. 118. l. 3.
r. is, p. 133. l. 16. r. convert, p. 153. l. 11. r. I say, l. 12. r. thou, p.
156. l. 11. d. but, l. 12. d. that they are, p. 158. l. 3. r. awaiting, p. 161.
l. 25. r. on, p. 163. l. 16. d. nay.

CATHOLIC RELIGION, etc.
ACTS X. 34, 35. Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive
that God is no respecter of persons: but in every nation, he that fears him,
and works righteousness, is accepted with him.


THIS Chapter gives us the first account of the Apostles Preaching the Gospel
unto, and Converse with the Gentiles; amongst whom, Cornelius and his Household
are mentioned as a kind of first Fruits of them, given in unto Christ. The
whole Story is very Remarkable; and many useful Instructions does the Context
and Coherence offer to our consideration; some few whereof it may may not be
amiss to gather up, and briefly to insist upon, in our way to the Text.

In the first place, its worthy our notice and consideration, who or what this
Cornelius was, the Subject immediately concerned in the Apostles Discourse;
since that the witness which he obtained of God, touching his Acceptance of
him, is the Foundation whereupon St. Peter Preached Christ's Death; unto his
General Conclusion, or Inference, That in every Nation, etc.

Of that, the first Verse gives us an account; and therein both of the
freeness, and exuberancy of the Grace and Goodness of God to Sinners, even of
Gentiles. Why, he was a Roman Soldier, a Centurion, i. e. Captain of a Hundred
Footmen, of the Italian Squadron or Cohorts, consisting of about Six hundred
Men, and which was the tenth part of a Legion. They were Heathen; nor was he
himself Proselited to the Jews Religion (as is Evident in the Sequel of the
Discourse) tho he might in that degenerate Age yet have help to light his
Candle from them. He lived in Cesaria, a City of the Jews, (the Scepter being
then departed from Judah), as his Station allotted to him by the Roman Powers,
to keep Garrison upon them, and to hold them in subjection; and what the Temper
and Religion, (or rapine rather) of such Military Persons ordinarily is, or
has been in such circumstances, all the World knows.

Now, it is not so much matter of wonderment, that in every Nation, all that
fear God should be accepted of him; as this, that so singular Humanity
Benignity, Charity, Piety, and true Devotion, should to such a Degres be found
in a person of such a Nation, without God in the World, devoted to Idolatry in
a Stranger born to the Covenant of Promise; his Place or Station also
considered, and the disadvantage of his Education preponderating against it.

Surely he was more than in an ordinary way indebted to the Grace of God; no
less than St. Paul was, who, tho a Jew in Religion, yet being withal a
Blasphemer, a Persecutor, and Injurious, (an instance of another kind), when
called by the Grace of God, Gal. 1.5. He could not but speak his resentment of
it, as superabundant toward him, 1 Timothy 1.14. as was the Mercy of God, which
thereupon he obtained of him, v. 16.

Now, as that so remarkable instance of the Grace and Mercy of God toward the
Apostle Paul, was in the intention of God, (...), for type or exemplar sake, as
himself notes; for a pattern to them which hereafter should believe to Life
Everlasting; to remove all discouragement in any, in the like cases, laboring
under the sense of Heinous Guilt: So is this Instance of Cornelius brought into
Example, first to show how that God out of any Nation, Kindred, Quality, or
Condition of Persons otherwise, can select a People to himself, and Implant his
Fear in their Heart; and then, that having so done, he will never fail, be
their outward circumstances what they will, to testify his acceptance of them.

Cornelius his Character for Piety (notwithstanding the disadvantages that lay
in his way) summarily mentioned, v. 2. will fall in particularly hereafter to
be handled.

Gods special care in the mean while over him, whilst he is found in the way of
his Duty, we have Exemplified, v. 3, 5. in his directing an Angel in a Vision
to speak to him, that he should send for Peter, that he might open unto him
more fully the way of Salvation, Chap. 11.14. which as yet he was not
instructed in.

But there was a Remora in Peter's way, which must be removed. He could not
converse with a Gentile; and such a one was Cornelius.

The case thus stood: Time was, and that but now, that the Jews were the only
chosen People of God, Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7* whilst the Gentiles were no People of his.
They were nigh unto him; these afar off, Ephesians. 2.17. They were a People Holy to
the Lord; these a People common, and profane, Gal. 2.15. They a peculiar
Covenant People, Romans 9.4. we Gentiles, aliens to the advantage thereof, Ephesians.
2.12. Consequently they were nearer to Salvation than we; comparatively
Salvation was of them, John 4.22. whilst we were without hope, Ephesians. 2.12.
beyond the Line, sitting in darkness, and in the shadow of Death, Luke 1.79. 1
These. 2.16. nor were there any Commissionated to gather in the Nations of the
Gentiles then.

This Difference, the Pious Jews, and even the Apostles themselves thought
should continue; yea and such a distance, as that they thought they might not
Lawfully eat with a Gentile. This was a common received opinion among them, and
known to other Nations, as appears by the Woman of Samaria her Reply to Christ,
John 4.9. (tho but of Ecclesiastical Constitution, that we find); how severely
did the Apostles, and Brethren, they of the Circumcision contend with Peter
after this, about it, Chap. 11.2? they were of opinion, that under the Messiah,
the Jews Church State was to be continued and enlarged; that men must turn
Jews, or they could not be Saved; that the gathering in of the People, must be
unto them. Of this persuasion was Peter himself as yet, till better enlightened,
v. 26.

It Is true, multitudes of Prophecies were Extant in the Sacred Records, of the
gathering of the Gentiles unto Christ, of whole Nations and Kingdoms of them:
Such as spoke of his sprinkling many Nations, Isa. 52.15. Of giving him a
Portion with the great, chapter 53.12. That Kings should be Nursing-Fathers, when
God should lift up his hand to the Gentiles, and set up his Standard to the
People, chapter 49.22, 23. That every man should worship him from his place, even
all the Isles of the Heathen, Zeph. 2.11. That God would call them his people,
that were not his people, Hos. 1.10. And many Nations should be joined to the
Lord, and should be his people, Zech. 2.11. Till his Dominion should be from
the River, even to the ends of the Earth, chapter 9.10. And his Name become great
among the Gentiles, from the rising of the Sun, even to the going down of the
same, Mal. 1.11. Psalm. 22.27, 28. and 68.9.

But their Case was not much unlike to the Ethiopian Eunuchs, Acts 8.31. they
wanted an Interpreter; and no wonder, when the Vail (if I mistake not) is not
yet done away on the minds of the generality of men, both learned and pious, in
the reading of the Scriptures, which speak of the Kingdom of God, or of Christ
here in this World, or of the external Church State of the Gentiles: whilst not
doubting but that Salvation is of them, or that Gods Election runs among them,
they yet interpret all the Scriptures (such as these forementioned) of the
Mystical Church State of the Gentiles; or which yet is more wide, would have
them to speak of a visible Church State only of the Gentile Nations, or of
their becoming only visibly a People to the Lord, so far as concern the whole
bulk of the unregenerate; at least or of a Kingdom to be erected unto Christ,
of visible Saints, or of persons in visibility, or in foro humano pious; which
has no footing at all in the Scriptures; something real does sub esse,
respecting the whole.

To proceed in the Story.

The time was now come, that the Wall of Partition between the Jew and Gentile
was to be broken down, Ephesians. 2.14. All were to be gathered up under a new Head,
and the Gentiles no longer to remain afar off, as strangers, v. 19. but to
become fellow Heirs, and of the same body, chapter 3.6. Now was Abraham to become
Heir of the World, Romans 4.13. And the Gentile Nations to be discipled, Mat.
28.19. and grafted in amongst the Jews, or in their room, into the Olive Tree,
or Covenant of Abraham; no longer neither they nor their Children to be
accounted common or unclean, Romans 11.16, 17. 1 Cor. 7.14. If consequently they
embraced the Gospel, they stood upon even terms with the Jew, in the point of
Salvation as nigh as they; and accordingly Conversation might be held with them
in order to it; tho it was meet that the Jews should have the Pre-eminence of
the first tender, as they had on the account of their antecedent
covenant relation to God, Acts. 3.25, 26. Job. 1.11. Acts 13.46 Matt. 10.6.

This was a Mystery which in other Ages was not made known unto the sons of
men, as now it is, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.5, 9, And here it was that Peter
stuck, as was said, notwithstanding the Prophesies of old, and last
Instructions of Christ, Mar. 16.15. Acts 1.8. given to the Apostles; yet he
could not get over it; still two things lay in his way; the one relating to the
external Ceremony of the Kingdom of God, which he thought should still be
confined to the narrow compass of one single Nation, the Commonwealth of
Israel, (little thinking, that the Children of the Kingdom rather should be
shut out, Mat. 8.12. or the Kingdom of God should be taken from them, and given
to other Nations, chapter 21.43.) Hence it was that he accounted it unlawful (as
was said) to keep company with one of another Nation, v. 28. whereof eating was
a symbol also; or to preach the Gospel to them; to the Jews belonged the giving
of the Law, and the Service of God, and the Promises, Romans 9. and he doubted
not of going unto the lost Sheep of the House of Israel, tho otherwise wicked,
but of giving the childrens Bread unto Dogs, or of the enlarging the sheepfold
unto the Gentile Nations. The other Obstacle in his way was a prepossession of
mind, respecting the future state of Persons; he doubted, it seems, of Gods
acceptance of any of the Gentiles unto Life Eternal; being strangers to the
advantages of the Covenants of Promise, whereof the Jews were the Heirs,
whether or no in any single Instance, any one of them could be in favor with
God.

The method which God took to convince Peter, was extraordinary; the account
whereof begins at ver. 9. he went up to pray, about the sixth Hour; that is,
at noon-time, according to the computation of the Jews; at which time being
very hungry, while they made ready, he fell into a Trance, and in a Vision he
saw Heaven opened, and a Vessel descending unto him, wherein were all manner of
Beasts, etc. Amongst which were unclean meats, prohibited by the Law of God for
a Jew to eat of them; and yet there came a Voice to him, Rise Peter, kill and
eat, v. 11* this he regreted as a thing which he had never done; but the Voice
answered him again, What God has cleansed, that call not thou common, v. 15.
this being interpreted to him, not only to relate unto meats, but unto men
also, that he should not call any man common or unclean, v. 29. he was now
fully satisfied in his mind, and so continued: However after this, through his
too much Condescension for Peace sake, or preposterous fear of offense to some
leading good people, he sometimes dissembled it, and led others into the same,
for the which he received a severe check from the Apostle Paul, Gal. 2.11, 12.

Now was the Apostolical Commission broken up, and opened unto him; and the
Vision had been thrice doubled unto him for the more Assurance; hereupon Peter
forthwith goes to Cornelius, taking along with him certain of the Brethren;
whom Cornelius meeting, fell down at his feet, v. 25. whom Peter first corrects
for his too much Worship or Reverence giving unto him, tho an Apostle or
Minister of Christ, being but a man, v. 26. and then proceeds to his discourse:
First by way of Apology for himself, lest Cornelius should suspect him to do
what he did with an evil Conscience against the Law of God, or manner of the
Fathers; he clears himself by showing his Warrant from Heaven for his coming
unto him, v. 28. which when Cornelius himself had confirmed by the like
Testimony recited by him, and declared with what earnest expectation they were
there met before God, to hear what Message it was that he had commanded him of
God to deliver unto him; Peter goes on directly to the matter in the Words of
the Text: Which Words contain a general Inference from what goes before, and
are but introductory unto what he immediately subjoins.

Then Peter opened his mouth; which Phrase of Speech in Scripture imports
much seriousness in the delivery of some weighty matter; and he said, Of a
truth I perceive; now I do assuredly understand. What was that he was so
clearly convinced of? Why, that God is no accepter or respecter of persons: but
in what regard, or to what purpose is he not so? Why, in the point of
acceptance unto Life: But in every nation says he, be they Jew or Gentile,
Circumcised or not, he that fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted
with him.

It Is the latter part, contained in v. 35. that I have designed mainly to
insist upon, and therefore shall but briefly touch upon the opening of the
former in our way, to give light thereunto: Nor need there much to be added to
what has already been spoken, for the understanding of the sense of the
Apostle, or for the confirmation of the Truth by him inferred and asserted in
those Words, That God is no respecter of persons.

Respect of Persons must relate to something as the Reason or Motive, and that
may be either something of Internal Qualification in the Subject, or of
Extrinsick difference of State or Condition.

There is also a double Respect of God unto men, in the communication of his
Goodness to them, to be considered.

1. That of his provision of a Remedy for Mankind in general, in his counsel of
peace, Zech. 6.13. And giving of his Son unto death for them, John 3.16. Heb.
2.9. Opening unto lapsed man a door of hope, whilst the Angels fallen, were
passed by, v. 16. And the conditional grant of acceptance unto all thereupon,
by the Gospel, Heb. 9.15. This in the whole contrivance thereof was without all
respect of persons absolutely, i. e. without regard unto any thing without or
within them lovely, as the reason thereof: Yea, Mankind, ut in esse cognito,
were all alike considered, as Enemies and Rebels, Romans 5.6, 8. No foundation
was left for it. So likewise for his communication of Grace unto this or that
particular person: However God has constituted a Law about it, habenti
dabitur, Matt. 25.27, 29. Laid out the ordinary method of it, and prescribed
the means, Jer. 13.27. Prove. 2.4, 5 so as to leave all men without excuse that
have it not, to be cast by the Gospel; yet has he reserved to himself the
prerogative of a Supersedeas, to dispense the same to whom he pleases; and this
is founded in his Dominion, without all respect of persons: It was Typ't by
Gods Election of Israel, without all reason, to be a people to himself, when no
better than any other people of the Nations, Josh. 24.2, 3, 4. Isa. 51.2. Was
not Esau Jacobs Brother, says the Lord, yet I loved Jacob, and I hated Esau,
and laid his Mountains wast: As there is the Dominion of Providence, so is
there the Dominion of Grace irrespective, the regulation whereof belongs to
Gods Will of purpose only, not of precept: When men have forfeited the Grace
of God, what now if God will do more for one than for another, as in the
Instance of Saul and his Companions, Acts 9.3, 14. what wrong to any? May he
not do what he will with his own, in a matter of bounty, Matt. 20.13, 15?
Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called, Romans 8.30. chapter 9.11,
15. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. what tho there
be nothing Antecedently lovely in the creature, absolutely considered, for God
to have regard to? Tit. 3.5. yet may God make a person lovely; to allude to
that Ezekiel. 16.6, 8. when thou wast in thy Blood, I said unto thee, live. Behold
thy time was the time of love. Why may he not make a difference where he finds
none? This is the most absolute irrespective effect of Divine Love, without all
motive or reason taken from the person on whom it is terminated. And although it
be not that meant in the Text, yet does it not carry any the least
contradiction unto it, as some would have it.

2. There is yet another Respect of God unto men, and that is, in the
Communication of his Complacential Love, and the effects of it unto them, in
their acceptance to favor and life. And this is it of which the Text speaks.
And this is without all respect of persons too, in a limited sense; but not as
before for, here God has a special regard to the qualification of the subject,
or his Grace in the Soul, and has obliged himself thereunto, without
discrimination. And for that very reason is he here said to be no respecter of
Persons; for that in every Nation, in whomsoever true Piety is to be found,
such persons shall be sure to find acceptance with him, as the next words do
explain it.

The genuine sense of the Apostles assertion then is this, In whomsoever the
Essence of true Piety is, and the fruits of it, let him be of what Nation he
will, (for that is his own instance) be he Jew, (a Jew, imported a covenant
people) or Greek, God respects not that; let him be Bond or Free, Noble or
Ignoble, Poor or Rich; yea, Circumcised or Uncircumcised, let his outward
Condition or Religious Advantages be what they will be, or Disadvantages, still
without Respect of Persons on any such score, he shall be accepted with God. If
the old Man be put off, and the new Man be put on; why then, there is there
neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian,
bond nor free, but Christ is all and in all; the person is accepted in him.
Col. 3.10, 11. If the uncircumcision, says the Apostle, (and there the stick
was) keep the righteousness of the law, shall not it be counted for
circumcision? Romans 2.26. He is a Jew that is one inwardly, and circumcision is
that of the heart, v. 29. such a one was Cornelius, a Jew inwardly, though a
Gentile outwardly, and consequently no Bar could lie in the way of his
acceptance with God. But what advantage then has the Jew? The objection the
Apostle puts chapter 3.1. and answers, v. 2. much every way in the point and
means he grants it; but not so as if no other were capable of Salvation; that
he denies, even then when Circumcision was in force, Chap. 2.25. Circumcision
avails nothing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. And as many as walk
according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, Gal. 6.15, 16. without
respect at all of persons, otherwise than as they are differenced by the new
Creature.

Yet farther to clear up this (...), the Word here used in the Greek, is a Word
of Assise, as is noted by the Learned, and is Denominated of Judges, who are
then Termed Respecters of Persons, when in Judgment they have regard to any
thing but the Equity of the Cause; when respecting the Face, and overlooking
the Cause, Equalibus inaequalia tribuuntur, right is not done, the cause is
commended for the person sake, and not the person for the cause. And this is it
which Peter denies of God. How grossly then are they mistaken, who would make
this to be one Essential difference between the first and second Covenant, That
in the former, acceptance began at the Work, and so proceeded to the Person;
but in or under the later, the Person is first accepted, and thereupon the
Work: that the former says, Do this and Live, the later, Live and do this.
Contrary to the whole Current of Scripture, Prove. 4.3, 4. Ezekiel. 18.21. Mat.
19.17, 27, 28. 1 Cor. 7.19. 1 Timothy 4.8. Jam. 1.25. Rev. 22.14. Making the
Command of Christ to the Young man, Mat. 19.17. to be exploratory only, to try
him; as likewise the Declaration made by God unto Cain, Genesis 4.7. If thou do
well, shall thou not be accepted? As if he meant not one word as he said to
him, Mat. 2.21. Romans 2.13.

Gods Love of Complacency, Favor, and Acceptance, has its rise in his
Legislative Rigteousness and Justice; is regulated by his standing Law, in its
Gospel (...), equity; and is dispensed judicially.

Hence, look as on the one hand, God abhors that his Damning of any Person
should be resolved into mere Dominion. Is God unrighteous, says the Apostle,
when he takes vengeance? Absit! God forbid: how then shall he Judge the World?
Romans 3.5, 6. No! it is a Just Recompense of Reward, Heb. 2.2. a Revelation of
the Righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2.5. So on the other hand, in saving any
one, he will render to every man according to his deeds: to them who by
patience continue in well doing, seek for Glory, to them eternal life, Romans
2.6, 7. But glory, and honor, and peace to every man that works good, to the
Jew first, and also to the Gentile, v. 10. for there is no respect of persons
with God, v. 11. It Is a Righteous thing with God thus to do, 2 These. 1.7. For
God is not unrighteous, to forget your work and labor of love, which ye have
showed toward his name, Heb. 6.10. Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and
not to me only, 2 Timothy 4.8. the free Gift of God indeed it is, Romans 6.23 but
withal, quoad ordinem conferendi, it is the reward of Righteousness. And as the
Remunerative Righteousness of God, (with a contemperation of Mercy too, Psalm.
62.10. 2 Timothy 1.16, 18. for still we are sinners) is concerned in the
constitution of the Law; so is his Essential Justice in the Execution thereof
(as supreme Governor of the World, and final Judge thereof) concerned, that his
favor and acceptance be equally dispensed, (in the case in hand) according to
his Law; Psalm. 11.7. and that without regard to the outward advantages or
condition of persons, Religious or Civil. Knowing, says the Apostle, that
whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord,
whether he be bond or free, whether servant, Ephesians. 6.5, 8. or master, v. 9.
neither is there respect of persons with him. So Col. 3.23, 24, 25.

Now we are come to the main point considerable in St. Peter's conclusion
contained in v. 35. namely the restriction of the Subject by their Character:
showing who they be that in every Nation are accepted with God. And they are
such, and only such as sear him, and work Righteousness.

Of the predicate much need not to be spoken. It has been hinted at already
what we are to understand by acceptance with God (...). It Is a most
comprehensive term. It includes Justification, Reconciliation, Pardon of Sin,
and title to Life Everlasting. Now when they heard these things, they held
their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles
granted repentance unto life. So ends the Story, chapter 11.18. what greater
privilege than to be a favorite of Gods? And God accepted Job, chapter 42.9. In
his favor is Life. (To be rejected or disallowed of God, (...) 2 Cor. 13.5, 6.
is the direct opposite thereunto). The publication of the Gospel of peace and
salvation, is the proclaiming of this Jubilee, for the manumission of sinners,
termed the acceptable year of the Lord, Luke 4.19. Abraham was called the
friend of God; and that involved within it, his Justification, Jam. 2.23. and
this comprised the whole of what St. Paul labored after, that whether present,
or absent, clothed with the Body, or out of it, that he might be accepted with
God, 2 Cor. 5.9. and he it is that works us for the self same thing, v. 5.
and for all the Glorious Effects of it Giving thanks unto the Father, which
has made us meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light,
Col. 2.12. nothing more is required to make meet, for one, than for the other.

The description of the Subject, who they are, that without all discrimination
do and shall partake of this great privilege, is it which I design more fully
to dwell upon.

The Character here given of a Petson accepted with God, is one, the most just,
full comprehensive, and indisputable, in the whole Book of God. And every Souls
Concernment it is to be solicitously inquisitive about it. It Is the only true
Wisdom, Job 28.12, 28.

The same is Reduced in the Text unto two Heads. (1.) A Fearer of God. (2.) A
Worker of Righteousness. Each of which we shall speak particularly unto, with
regard to Cornelius all along, the Samplar which the Apostle had in his Eye,
for the contribution of light unto our enquiry.

Some Interpreters do expound the former, of sound Piety, and true Religion
toward God. The later, of unspotted Integrity, Equity, and Justice toward Man:
in Conformity to the two great Commands, to love God with all the heart, and
our Neighbor as our self; on which two, hang all the law and the prophets,
Mat. 22.40. Or in the general, I choose rather to Interpret the former, of
Internal Religion, or Veneration paid to God in the Heart; and the latter, of
the exterior overt acts thereof, whether respecting God or man, Psalm. 15.2.
which in the issue comes much to the same. However, the particular handling of
both Branches, will fully let us into the understanding of the meaning of the
whole.

But before we proceed, there lies a double objection in our way, which must be
removed.

1. How Cornelius (or any one in his Circumstances) could be said to be a Pious
Man, on a true Fearer of God; when as yet he had not imbibed the Doctrine of
the Gospel, nor had any explicit belief of Christ; as it is Evident that he had
not, nor yet his Household?

2. How he could in the mean while be accepted of God, without Faith in the
Mediator, (or his Prayers) considering also the hint which himself received
from God, that he should send for Peter, who should tell him words whereby he
and all his house should be saved? mentioned, chapter 11.14.

I would willingly wave what is controversal, in so practical a Subject; but
the Text must be cleared. Besides that whatsoever is written, is for our
instruction; and the slighting, and passing over whatever seems difficult at
first, in the opening of the Scriptures, do but betray men to perpetual
ignorance in the things of God.

One Answer will serve to both Objections. Without Faith it is impossible to
please God, or be accepted with him, Heb. 11.6. or to be a Pious Person. True!
but the Faith necessary thereunto has been diversified according to the
several Editions of the Gospel, and Gradual Revelations made by God of his mind
unto Man. Cornelius had the Faith there described by the A postle, which was
the Faith of the Ancient Patriarchs: Namely, the belief that God is, and that
he is the rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Nor can any one come unto
God without it. He came to God, as Gracious, and Merciful, and Pardoning sin,
and as a Rewarder of all that uprightly serve him; on the Principles that the
King and People of Nineveh went, Jonah 3.5, 9. tho he knew not distinctly on
what account, on whose score it was, that God was so propitious.

Never was any man Heard, Saved, or Accepted, but for the sake of the
Satisfaction and Merits of Christ. But what on man's part was absolutely
necessary to be known unto him, or believed by him, in order to his actual
participation of the Benefit of the undertaking of Christ, is another question.
The same has been oft-times varied. The Rule of Gods Final Judgment shall be
the remedying Law, or new Covenant with all Men; but still according to the
several notices, or discoveries, that in several Ages, and to several Persons,
he has made of the same to them. Romans 2.12, 14, 17. Luke 12.48.

Nor can there remain any matter of wonder or doubt, touching this Instance of
Cornelius his acceptance with God, unto any one that shall but impartially
think upon the Faith of the Apostles and Disciples of Christ* how short and
defective it was in the main Fundamentals of the Christian Belief for a time;
whilst yet they were in a state of Salvation for all that; notwithstanding the
advantages they had moreover to know more, above what Cornelius had. They
looked for some visible outward Kingdom to be erected by him in the World, Acts
1.6. to be set up under the Messiah, Luke 19.11. they thought not that he was
to die, Matthew. 16.22. chapter 17.23. Mark 9.32. nor believed his Resurection from
the Dead, v. 10. not after it was attested, John 20.25, 29. Luke 24.20, 21, 25,
37, 41. much less did they think of his Ascension to the right hand of the
Father. How little did the Virgin Mary her self understand of Christ her Son
according to the Flesh, Luke 2.50, 51. yea how little did the Angels, or
glorified Spirits, know of Christ his Priestly Office, before his Incarnation?
1 Pet. 1.12. Ephesians. 3.9, 10. Rev. 7.15. the full understanding of which Mystery,
was much more hid from former Ages, Col. 1.20. no instance we have of their
putting up Prayers to God in the Name of a Mediator, before the assumption of
the Humane Nature by Christ, in which he was a middle person. Ye believe in
God, believe also in me, John 14.1. The way into the holiest of all was not yet
fully made manifest, Heb. 9.8. chapter 10.20. whence was the bondage state, even of
the Jews. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name, Joh. 14.24.

Whether or no there be any now in the World, out of the Church, that have not
heard of Christ, that are strangers to the Covenant in its peculiar advantages
now under the last edition of the Gospel, that be true fearers of God, (the
Candle of the Lord being so far extinct among them, Gal. 2.22. 1 These. 2.16.)
may be a doubt; but whether if any such there be, they shall be accepted with
God, cannot be doubted: Cornelius was such a one; the Faith that he had,
purified his Heart, and influenced his Life, and he was accepted of him; tho
his Faith was short of what was necessary to his Salvation afterward, when he
had more revealed unto him, chapter 11.14.

Two great Truths are in this our Enquiry cleared up by the way, to this day
hid unto many good men.

1. That Faith precisely in the Brieftly Office of Christ, is not the only
condition of our Justification in the sight of God. Nor is it truly said, that
such Faith alone justifies, and must so do; for that it is alone apt to receive
Christ, and that no other Grace is capable of such an Assignation.

True it is, that we are justified by Christ alone, as the meritorious cause
thereof, Romans 5.9. But besides that the Scriptures do indispensibly require now
more of us, to the end that we may be justified by him, than Faith only;
namely, Repentance, Acts 3.19. Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. And an upright
Conversation, Heb. 5.9. 1 John 1.7. Yea, denies it to Faith only, Jam 2.24
Besides this I say, then must the truth asserted in the Text be quite
overturned; for Cornelius was so far from being justified by such Faith alone,
that he was justified before he had it, or without it, or he was not justified
or accepted at all; now, when the Apostle affirmed it of him, some other Grace
was capable of being the condition thereof; or he must be utterly incapable of
it.

2 Yet farther; then is Justification, or Acceptance with God (for it is all one
thing meant) a continued act, suspended still on the future performance of the
commands of God, whatever God has or shall reveal to be his Will. Cornelius
was actually in a state of Favor with God, so says the Text: But yet if upon
Peter's Preaching unto him, he embraced not the Faith of the Gospel with his
Household, neither he nor they could be saved, chapter 11. No, man is but
conditionally pardoned and admitted unto Favor with God here; it is suspended
still with an If, and Except; it will not be questioned in the matter of Faith,
which was Cornelius his case; and vice versa, it is as sure, and as plainly
affirmed in the Word of God, in the matter of Obedience in all other Instances
of it: Let a Man's Faith be what it will, suppose him once justified too, Gods
complacential Love and Favor, or Acceptance to Life, is still suspended on his
future continuance in obedience unto what he knows to be his Will, or may to
him be yet further revealed so to be, tho the Revelation its self be already
finished. If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love, John 15.10,
14. If we walk in the Light, as God is in the Light, the Blood of Jesus Christ
his Son cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7 so Romans 2.7. chapter 8.13.

And in as much as so great weight is laid upon the message sent by Peter from
God unto Cornelius, termed Words by which he and all his House should be saved;
that is, if attended unto, believed, and embraced, as we have it 1 Cor. 15.1,
2, in a parallel Instance, v. 3, 4. It might be very pertinent in our way,
first to open what that message did contain and import; but that it would prove
too long a digression from what we have undertaken; yet I cannot wholly pass it
over neither, because what was last proposed unto him to be believed and
recelved, as ever he would be saved, is first to be attended unto by us, as the
leading condition of the Gospel now; yea it began already to be perilous to
Cornelius and his Household to be ignorant of Christ That word, says Peter, you
know, which was published throughout all Judea, v. 37. The same with us, all
must needs have heard of, and he that believes it, shall be saved; that is,
coeteris paribus, other things alike answering, John 3.36. ( And he that
believes not, shall perish, Joh. 8.24.) Who by him do belive in God, 1 Pet.
1.21. This Narrative of his unto Cornelius and the rest, met together with him,
begins v. 36. and ends v. 43.

And the same contains a summary collection of their credenda, or chief
Articles of the Christian Belief, contained in our Creed, the like whereof we
have again, chapter 13.23. to v. 39. Let me but mention the Heads.

1. He declares unto them the Unction of Christ, or his anointing to his
sacred Offices, both of Priest, Prophet, and King, v. 38. the execution of his
Sacerdotal Office he chiefly designeth to open; he is also Lord of all, v. 36.
by him peace was preached, by him it was obtained, and he was anointed
thereunto, Luke 4.18.

2. How he was Crucified: Whom they slew, and hanged on a Tree, v. 39. Who his
own self bare our sins in his own body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. in our Room,
chapter 3.18.

3. That he was raised up by God from the dead, the Third day, v. 40. Who was
delivered for our Offenses, and was raised again for our Justification, Romans
4.25. And he showed himself openly to witnesses, chosen before of God, even to
us who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead, v. 41. Who
therefore could not be mistaken, Acts 1.3.

4. That it is he that is ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead, v.
42. The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto the Son,
John 5.22. This, says he, we are commanded to testify; and then he concludes
with the suffrage of all the Prophets, That through his Name, whosoever
believes in him, shall receive Remission of sins, v. 43. that is, who assents
unto what he had dellvered to them, as a faithful saying* and embraces it as
worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15. Termed a believing in him; or receiving
of Christ Jesus the Lord, Col. 2.6. for faith is in the will also, John 5.40.

These were the words, or the sum of them, which Peter delivered in that
Assembly; God was now manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. And it was the
design of God the Father, that he should have the Honor of his Redemption of
man; and that every Knee should bow to him, Phil. 2.10. Therefore as God
ordered it, that by Aquila and Priscilla, Apollos should be instructed in the
way of the Gospel more perfectly, Acts 18.26. So by his special Dispensation
was Cornelius directed unto Peter, to give him light into the former rudimental
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, that he might know the way of Salvation
more fully, and his present obligation in order to it. In whom ye also trusted,
after that ye heard the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your Salvation, Ephesians. 1.13.
So they, While Peter spoke these words, the Holy Ghost fell on them, v. 44. and
they were baptized in the name of the Lord, v. 48. Now was the Character of
Cornelins completed, and his acceptance with God confirmed to him, Mark 16.16.
Nor can any one with us now be termed a true fearer of God, but the Faith of
Christ must be presupposed unto it; to which add the fear of God, and working
Righteousness, and it makes up the full Character of a Person accepted with
him: Which two Branches (having cleared our way), we shall now proceed to the
more distinct opening of them each in particular.

1. To begin with the former: But in every Nation he that fears him, that is,
God; he alone is the Object of all religious fear; and the fear of him here
imports the very essence of true Piety: This do, and live, says Joseph, for I
fear God. Have thou considered my servant Job, a perfect and an upright man,
one that fears God, and escheweth evil, chapter 1.8. It matriculateth or
initiateth into the power of Religion: The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
Wisdom, and the knowledge of the holy, is understanding, Prove. 9.10. A devout
man, Cornelius is termed, v. 2. (still we must have an eye to him) (...) it is
a pious godly man; the same Character with that of Annanias, who opened Paul's
Eyes, Acts 22.12. Devoted to Godliness, as the Word is Translated, 2 Pet. 3.11.
The same with (...), a Word peculiar to the Scriptures; which becomes Women
professing Godliness, 1 Timothy 2.10. And one that fears God, is but exegetical
of the former, it imports the same thing. More particularly,

1. The Fear of God imports the whole of his Worship, and is ordinarily put for
it: The children of Israel had sinned against the Lord their God, and had
seared other Gods. 2 Kings 17.7. That is, had worshipped or served them; and
their fear toward me, is taught by the precept of men, i. e. their Worship,
Isa. 29.13. So shall your Children make our Children cease from fearing the
Lord, Josh. 22 25. The worship of the true God, and that according to his own
Prescription, enters the Character of a fearer of him: And Jacob swear by the
fear of his Father Isaac, Genesis 31.53. That is, the Eternal God whom his Father
worshipped, v. 42. And this act of his was an Instance of his own Fear of the
same God: He swear by the Lord only; not by the Gods of Laban, or by the Lord,
and by Malcham, Zeph. 1.5. Him only shall thou fear. Thou shall fear the Lord
by God, him shall thou serve, and to him thou shall cleave, and swear by his
name, Deuteronomy. 10.20. Him shall ye fear, worship, and do Sacrifice to, 2 Kings
17.36. What is the basis or foundation of this fear or Worship, which God
requires de novo; from lapsed man, to be paid unto him, the Psalmist gives us
an account of; But there is forgiveness, that thou may be feared, Psalm.
130.4. It lies in the discovery of Forgiveness with God, or that he is a
rewarder thereof: The entrance of sin had laid man under the curse, and so
unhinged all. Adam and his wife hid themselves (to no purpose neither) from the
presence of the Lord God, Genesis 3.8. It was the revelation of pardoning Mercy,
that retrieved and brought back again the fear of God, or his worship into the
world: Take away the assurance of that; namely, that God is placable, and there
is no foundation of hope, or encouraging motive left for service or obedience
for the future: If any of the sons of men were left as remediless as the
Devils, why then God would not expect this fear from them; the belief of the
contrary is the very first notion that God requires our assent unto, next to
his Being, in all our Addresses unto him* Heb. 11.6. If the Lord were pleased
to kill us, be would not have received a burnt-offering at our hands, Judge.
13.23. It was a good Argument; the very prescription of worship to fallen man,
is a most sure Indication, that he will deal with him upon new terms of Mercy.

This was the Faith of Cornelius, and that which induced him unto the fear of
God, whilst as yet he little understood, that without the Blood of God there is
no remission, Heb. 9.22. Or that the Offering of Christ at Jerusalem, was the
only way to it.

And are not they near as wide from the truth of the Gospel, who admitting the
Death of Christ to enter the Covenant Grant of Forgiveness, would limit his
Sacrifice only to the Elect; saying, that he obtained not remission for any
more, on any terms? What has been said, carries in it a demonstration to the
contrary, and reflects light into the extent of the Death of Christ. It Is most
certain, that God has prescrited his fear unto every sinner; and as certain it
is, that he expects no love, fear, or new Obedience from them, who antecedently
thereunto, can have no particular assurance, that there is any forgiveness or
acceptance with God for them; much less would he exact of them to believe it,
if it were not so, or thereupon to bottom their service, or to return unto him
on that supposition. Either then Christ, by the grace of God did taste death
for every man, Heb. 2.9. pro singulis generum: or there is not forgiveness with
God for them, (which yet was the Faith of Cornelius, (as short as it was) that
he might be feared: or we must say, that there is forgiveness with him for some
men, without respect to Christ; or a Conditional Covenant grant thereof unto
them, never Ratified by, or Founded in his Blood; which is not the Christian
Belief. This then is the first sense to be understood of the fear of God; it is
to pay Worship and Homage unto him; nor can the fear of God be without it.

2. It imports further, an awe and reverence of his Divine Majesty, reaching
the mind and affections. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be
your fear, and let him be your dread, Isa. 8.13. Fear ye not me, says the
Lord? will ye not tremble at my presence? Jer. 5.22. God is greatly to be
feared in the assembly of his Saints, and to be had in reverence of all them
that are about him, Psalm. 89.7. let all the earth fear the Lord, and let all
the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him, Psalm. 33.8. stand in awe, and
sin not, means not a bare dread of his wrath, a mere passion, or fright, or
anguish of conscience, respecting the guilt or danger of some atrocious sin, or
wickedness: This may serve to restrain, or to impel to some partial
acknowledgment of God; but serves not to any heart-change. They feared the
Lord, and served their own Gods, 2 King 17.33. unto this day they fear not the
Lord, v. 34. that is, aright. No! they were none of those that tremble at the
commandment of God, as it is said, Ezra 10.3.

It imports a tenderness of Heart. Because thy Heart was tender, 2 Chr. 34.27.
How shall I do this thing, and sin against God? says Joseph. It Is an habit of
mind and Soul, disposing to an aweful regard unto God, aversation unto sin, and
jealousy of offending him. The affections are the Wings and Feet of the Soul;
and have need to be balanced with the awe of God, in order to its flight from
sin. They shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days, Hos. 3.5. In
a Pious Soul, this fear has in it a Contemperation of Love. It Is no
Bondage-fear, 2 Timothy 1.7. It Is Conjugal; without amazement. So far as Love is
perfected, it casts out tormenting fear, 1 John 4.18. it brings into the
liberty of the Gospel, Romans 8.15. And Moses said unto the people, fear not: for
God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before your faces, that ye
sin not, Exodus 20.20. Fear not; yet fear and love him, Deuteronomy. 10.12. Neither yet
does this filial fear of God, Exclude the fear of everlasting Destruction from
him, in case, or on the supposition of a Covenant breach, or presumptuous
finning against him. Fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in
Hell, says our Savior to his Disciples, Mat. 10.28. Let us serve him with
reverence and Godly fear, for our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. Know ye
not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwells in you?
If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.
the flesh lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5.17, now the works of the flesh are
manifest; of which he gives a Catalogue, v. 19. of the which, says he, I tell
you before, as I have told you also in time past, that they that do such things
shall not inherit the kingdom of God, v. 21. nor of Christ, Ephesians. 5.5. To be
sure, what ever God threats, it behooves every Pious Man to fear. Be not high
minded, but fear, Romans 11.20. let him that stands do so, 1 Cor. 10.12.

(Obj.) But it is here Objected by many, That all this is the voice of the Law
of Works; that such threats belong not to believers; only that of Fatherly
chastisement, in case they sin. If his children forsake my law, etc. I will
visit their transgression with the rod; my loving kindness will I not utterly
take from him. Psalm. 89.30. how then can the fear of Destruction in such case
belong to a Believer, or enter the Character of a true Fearer of God?

(Ans.) The Objection lies deep, and involveth in it, a mistake in the whole
Tenor of the Covenant of Life, as it is the Instrument of Gods Government over
Mankind, one and other. It proceeds upon these following false suppositions;
Namely,

1. That Faith alone enters the condition of the New Covenant; the Covenant
which God has Enjoined unto us, as the Apostle Phraseth it, Heb. 9.20.
contrary to Genesis 17.1, 2. Psalm. 103.17, 18. Exodus 24.7, 8, etc.

2. That all such Texts as those forenamed, belong to the Original Law of
Works, or of Innocence, such as 1 Cor. 6.9. Be not deceived, neither
fornicators, nor Idolaters, etc. shall inherit the kingdom of God. And if so,
then no man dying impenitently in those sins can be barred Eternal Life; for
the Penalty of the first Covenant is not conclusive, but of those whom the New
Covenant does not Relieve. And it alike commands spotless Innocence also, and
threats all sin alike with damnation, as well as such. Or,

3. That if such Texts, with the threat contained in them, do belong to the
Gospel; yet as soon as any one believes, he is privileged with a special
exemption therefrom. Tho he violate the precept, the threat can take no place,
not for any time to hold him under the same.

The Sum of the Hypothesis, or Supposal, which is by those who make the
objection, defended; or must be, is, viz. That the Gospel Commands (or Counsels
rather) obedience to the whole Law of God, and Obedience thereunto is necessary
by Precept unto every Soul, under the pain of sin: But that it has but one
single Precept, (which is that of Faith) belonging to it, qua foedus, as a
Covenant, or in Conjunction with the promise; nor yet but one that belongs to
it, qua lex, as a Law, i. e. in Conjunction with its Sanction or Threat. And
then let a Man's Faith work, or not work, to his escaping of all or any the sins
or pollutions enumerated, still it will save him. What should bar his
acceptance with God, when the whole condition of the Covenant is performed, and
kept? What need of the fear mentioned, if all this be true? Or how can it
consist?

That it is more than possible for a believer to relapse into the sins
mentioned, which are threatened with death by the Gospel, or Law of Christ, is
not, nor can be denied. Most dreadful instances we have upon Record attesting
the same. Neither let any one that girdeth on his harness, yet boast himself as
he that puts it off? What shall we now say in such case? was there not cause
to fear destruction? To give but one instance. David upon an affront given him
by Nabal, contrives to murder him, with all his Family, 1 Samuel 25.22. was he
now Pardoned, I ask, all that while that he was upon his March, with his four
Hundred Men, to put the same in Execution? Repent him for that time, he could
not (nor can that be true without reformation, which is of its Essence) either
now he had forfeited his acceptance with God, and lay bound under the guilt of
his sin unpardoned, or our Saviors Doctrine to his own Disciples could not be
words of truth, but a mere scarecrow, Mat. 6.15. But if ye forgive not men
their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. So again
expressly, chapter 18.35. the forgiving of others is made the indispensable
condition of our obtaining pardon from God; yea, and a recognition thereof
enjoined us, in our prayers to God for it, and forgive us, as we forgive them,
v. 12. and this David himself very well knew and feared it in cases of that
Nature, Psalm. 32.1, 5. Romans 4.6, 8. And if that be not pardon in the most
proper and strict Sense, it is not spoken of in all the Scriptures; so 1 John
1.9.

To that Text alleged, Psalm. 89. I answer, It Is of the final event, whereof it
speaks; it belongs to Gods Will of Purpose, or his Decree, which speaks not the
Tenor of Gods Covenant with us. It Is spoken of Christ, v. 19. and of his Seed,
v. 29. and belongs to the Doctrine of Gods Decrees, (wherein the perseverance
of the Elect is founded) not to his legal Constitution with man. There it runs,
v. 30 if his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments; if they
break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments. Here directly contrary, If thy
Children will keep my Covenant, and my Testimony, Psalm. 132.12. So it ran with
David, and so it does with us, Psalm. 103.17, 18. Romans 8.11, 13. The meaning of
the former is no more, but that he will secure a seed unto Christ, Isa. 53.10.
who they are, belongs to his secret purpose only to know, whilst they are out
of his way. But whoever they be, if they belong to him, such Prophesies, or
Promises do evermore include in them, Gods Will or Purpose to recover them from
their sin, or sore relapses, (and that sometimes by their sufferings too) in
pursuance of his decree, Phil. 1.6. to the end that they may not perish by his
Law, 1 Cor. 11.32, 34. in the mean while, they are to fear, Heb. 4.3. and to
take heed, Heb. 12.15, 17. 2 Pet. 1.5.9. yea the best of Gods People. For
destruction from God was a terror to me, Job 31.23. that is, to awe him from
sin, v. 24.26, 28. so it was with David, Psalm. 119.120. so with St. Paul, 1
Cor. 9.27. neither is it inconsistent with Faith. Nay it is the genuine product
of it. By faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with
fear, prepared an ark, to the saving of his house, by the which he condemned
the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith, Heb. 11.7.
Nor yet is it inconsistent with a filial free obedience, to be governed by a
Law, and to be influenced by the fear of it, whilst there is a love to the duty
prescribed by it, 1 Pet. 1.17. nor yet with true Gospel Consolation, and
security, whilst man keeps within the Bounds of Gods Covenant, not to violate
the same, 1 John 3.21. and to others it belongs not. No man holds his Estate by
a Title so Indefeazible, but that by the Guilt of any Capital Crime, it may be
forfeited; yet an honest Man may remain comfortably secure for all that, in his
possession. The law is not made for a righteous man, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy
1.9. he says not for a Believer only, but for a Godly man in his walk; against
such there is no law, Gal. 5.23. that is, it cannot hurt him; continuing such,
it has nothing against him. Yet will not God, for the sake of any man's peace,
reverse his law (the Law of Christ now I am speaking of, 1 Cor. 9.21.) nor yet
invalidate it, by severing the Precept from the Sanction or threat of it, so to
render his Government merely Precarious. Nor can any Believer make it good,
that the Law of Christ, abiding his Relation thereunto, is altered, that it
has nothing to say to him if he break it. So much for the second instance of
the fear due unto God, which yet remains unshaken, as belonging to the
Character of a true fearer of him; namely the Awe and Reverence of his Majesty,
and dread of Offending him.

3. Yet further, the Fear of God here, Imports an Habitual Inclination of
Heart and Soul unto a regard to God, with a due respect to all his Commands.
Hence the fear of God is often put for his Service or Obedience. If then I be a
father, where is mine honor? and if I be a master, where is my fear, says the
Lord of Hosts? Mal. 1.6 ye offer the blind for sacrifice, the lame and sick, is
it not evil? offer it now unto thy governor, will he be pleasod with thee, or
accept thy person, says the Lord? v. 8, 14. It Is termed a fearing of the
Commandment, Prove. 13.13. That they may fear thee, to walk in thy ways, 2 Chr.
6.31. It Is all Grace and true Piety in the Root, Spring, and Principle of it. I
will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me, Jer.
32.40. to walk in the fear of God, and in his Commands, is one and the same
thing. Only that it connoteth the inward respect that the Soul has unto God in
the keeping of his commandments, (it is eye to him) and deference of all to his
Glory; which is it that specifieth every instance of obedience, and renders it
truly Religious. Then had the Churches rest, walking in the fear of the Lord,
and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, Acts 9.31. the words of David speaks out
the sense of those: I have set the Lord always before me, Psalm. 16.8. this
works holiness into the very frame of the Soul. Oh that we might never forget
it! but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, speak we in
Christ, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.17. as in the sight of God. This is indeed
to walk with God, which was the Encomium of Enoch and of Noah; they walked with
God in their Generation. No man dare to call God to Record for a Witness, when
he is about to commit any notorious sin. Let him but dismiss the thoughts of
God, and shake off his fear, and then he has let himself loose to all manner
of Abominations. And Abraham said, because I thought, surely the fear of God is
not in this place; and they will slay me, Genesis 20.11 he could have no security,
whilst the fear of God was not before their eyes, nor God concerned in their
actions contrariwise, as the Fear of God whereof I am now speaking, does
seminally and virtually contain in it all obedience to his will: so does it run
through every line of it, and preserve the Soul in it. A Prince that fears
God, rules Justly, and that because he fears God. For the former governors
had been chargeable to the people; yea and their servants bear rule over them;
but so did not I, because of the fear of God, Neh. 5.15. such a one is a
Conscientious, a Dutiful Subject, Romans 13.5. subject for conscience sake. Such
a one is a Just and Righteous Judge in his place. Wherefore now let the fear of
the Lord be upon you; with him there is no respect of persons, nor receiving of
reward, 2. Chr. 19.7. It makes good and faithful Wives, Col. 3.18. as it is
fit in the Lord. Husbands, v. 19. Children, v. 20. Fathers, v. 21. Servants, v.
22. Obeying in singleness of heart, fearing God. Masters, chapter 4.1. knowing that
ye also have a Master in Heaven. It influenceth the most secret Actions, and
runs through all. Obadiah feared the Lord greatly, 1. Kings 18. and he hid the
Prophets of the Lord, v. 4. I thy servant fear the Lord from my youth, v. 12.
There was a good beginning and example unto such as are young, Eccl. 12.1. The
Midwives feared God, and did not as the King of Egypt commanded them, but saved
the Men-children alive, Exodus 1.17. and therefore God made them houses, v. 21.
Such a one fears an Oath, Eccl. 9.2. or to do any injustice, 1 These. 4.6.
It Is the fountain of life, Prove. 14.27. It sets all a work; and whilst it keeps
the Dominion, it keeps the Soul steady to God, throughout the whole course of
its life. It Is not so much one single Grace, as it is the habit of all. Further
instance of its effectual Operation, in whosoever it is, the next Branch of the
Text, will furnish us with, which is the other Character of a Person accepted
with God; of a Person, I say, accepted with him; not only of a working saving
Faith, as some would have it, which is to read the Scripture backward; but
immediately of a Person accepted to Life. For it has the Promise thereof
connected with it, as well as Faith its self, as the Text witnesses. Nor
indeed can any evidence of a man's Justification, or Acceptance, be fetched from
that which has no Promise of it.

2. But in every nation, he that works Righteousness is accepted with God:
That is the other Character to be opened; what it is to be a worker of
Righteousness.

Righteousness is the Commensuration or answering of what a man does, to the
Rule or Standard of it, which is the Law of God; even as sin, to which it is
opposed, is defined by its Transgression of the Law, as containing its whole
formal nature: Look then, as he that does any thing which in the matter or
circumstance thereof, the Law of God forbids, (and so for omissions), he
does (...) make, or work sin, 1 John 3.9. The illegality of the action is its
obliquity; and that can never be separated from the entity of the action, or
the being of the same, so long as the Law does abide that prohibiteth it: so he
that does what is conformable to the same Law of God, he does or works
Righteousness: He that does righteousness, is righteous, even as God is
righteous, 1 John 3.7.

For the more distinct understanding of what we are upon, it is necessary in
the first place, that we enquire into the Rule or Standard of this
Righteousness, whereof the Text speaks.

The Mosaic Law, strictly such, as it was peculiar to the Jews, to be sure is
not it. The Gentile Nations then knew it not; nor was Cornelius proselited to
it: Among the Jews, whilst some of the Highest pretenders to it, and to an
absolute conformity to it, Phil. 3.6. misinterpreted it to a subversion of the
ancient Faith of the Gospel, and neglect of Christ, they fell short of so much
as a sincere obedience unto it, in its spiritual interpretation, Except your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven, Matt. 5.20. When the Gentiles
attained unto it, Rom 9.30.

Wherefore let it be considered, that there has been a twofold Law, or Rule of
Righteousness enacted by God, and given to mankind; the one to him whilst
innocent, the other to fallen man; the one termed the law of Works, of perfect
sinless obedience; the other the law of Faith, Romans 3.27. Tho neither did the
former exclude all Faith; nor yet the later all Works.

To the former there is none righteous now, no not one, Romans 3.10. Some are
more atrocious sinners than others; but none that does good, and sins not,
Eccl. 7.20. 1 John 1.10. No work done, measured by that Law or Rule, can be, or
be termed to be a work of Righteousness; this Law is still in force, with its
Threat, Gal. 3.22. But no man by or according to it, can be accepted with God:
This the Apostle concludes, Romans 3.20. The same did David before him, Enter not
into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be
justified, Psalm. 14.3.2. i. e. by that Rule.

To the latter, viz. to the remedying Law, which is the standing Law of Christ
his mediatory Kingdom, constituted for the relief of lapsed man, there are, and
may be righteous persons, i. e. such as are not wicked, as David interprets it,
Psalm. 18.21. and 19.12, 13. but upright with God; and such were Zecharias and
Elizabeth; Both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luke 1.6. According to this Standard, through
the Grace of God there are works, and workers of Righteousness to be found in
the world, tho but few comparatively, God knows. Cornelius to the best of his
light was such a one; and accordingly he found acceptance with God.

The universality, or unreservedness of it, is the main test of its sincerity,
which the Scriptures lay so much stress upon, That ye may be sincere, and
without offense, till the day of Christ, Phil. 1.10. For our rejoicing is this,
the testimony of our consciences, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not
with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in
the world, 2 Cor. 1.12. I say, its trial lies in the universality of obedience,
which is indispensably necessary even unto life, that we be not put to shame,
or confounded: Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy
commandments, Psalm. 119.9. Cornelius was (...), a just or a righteous man, v.
22. he was entirely such, (...), if ye fulfill the royal law, ye do well, Jam.
2.8. That is, the Gospel Rule, the Law of Liberty, the Rule of Gods Judgment,
v. 12. if not, your Faith neither cannot save you, v. 14. Such are the (...),
the perfect men, of whom the Scriptures speak, Jam. 1.4. Col. 1.28. Such were
Noah and Job, whilst they stood perfect and complete in the Will of God, Col.
4.12. Upright according to the interpretation of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 8.12.
Reaching still forward in the degree of it, Phil. 3.14.

Now that we may not rest altogether in Generals, and that yet we may give some
bounds to our discourse upon this Head, it remains only but to exemplify
this working of Righteousness by a collection of what the particular Instances
thereof were in Cornelius, whence the Apostle took his measures that he was
such a one, and from whence he draws his Inference in the words of the Text,
Now I perceive, etc.

And they are reduced to these Four Heads, in the Story of him. (1.) His
Invocation of God. (2.) The Order of his Family, and his care of their
Spiritual Estate. (3.) His Compassiion or Charity. (4.) His maintaining of a
good report for Piety and Religion. Of all which briefly in their order (not to
speak of bare negatives) here.

1. For his Invocation of the Divine Being whom he feared, he prayed to God
always, v. 2 4. So do all that fear God, and are accepted with him. Whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved, Romans 10.13. In what way
he prayed, we have no account, whether by a Form or without; Prayer its self is
a part or medium of Divine Worship; whether after this or the other way, is but
a mode or manner of Worship, not limited by the Law of Nature or Institution:
Out of doubt, praying by or with the help of a form, is lawful, yea and
sometimes may be a duty, rather than to neglect Prayer, where abilities are
wanting, Luke 11.1. But for Cornelius, his appears rather to be ex pectore out
of his own Heart; he prayed with the Spirit, and with understanding, as it is 1
Cor. 14.15. no doubt; but who of all the Nations should compose his prayers for
him, I think no man can Divine. Prayer is a part of natural Worship and
Religion; neither was there ever any Nation so Barbarous, who acknowledged any
God at all, that doubted of their Obligation to invocate his Name; whatever
their ignorance have been of the true God; so were the Ninivites conv^nced,
Jonah 3.9. so the Mariners in the Storm, Chap. 1.5. And they cried every man to
his God. And, which therefore was a wickedness in Darius and his Nobles, to
Establish a Law but for thirty days to restrain it, Dan. 6.7. which therefore
also Daniel contemned, v. 10. It Is a duty most expressly commanded of God, Phil.
4 6. and a principal part of our acknowledgment of him, Psalm. 79.6.

Cornelius prayed with his Family, out of question. God will be worshipped in
Societies, this the Light of Nature does Dictate; and Families were the first
Churches, and Original of all Societies. Shall men associate for other ends,
and not for the Worship of God? Then began men to call upon the Name of the
Lord, Genesis 4.26. i. e. in Societies: the fear of God is not in those Families
where it is otherwise; but it was in his.

But it seems to be private Closet prayer that is here noted of Cornelius, the
same which our Savior recommends, Mat. 6.5. where more frequency and liberty
may be used, wherein he himself was so frequent, Matt. 14.23. Mark 1.35. and so
were all the most Eminent Saints in the Scriptures, Genesis 32.24. Psalm 55.17.
and 119. I have prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried, v. 147, 148.
Daniel 9.20. 2 Timothy 1.3. so here in the Context, Peter went up to pray, v. 9.
The praying Person is the thriving Christian, and enjoys most of God.

Two Circumstances of Cornelius his Prayer, we have here noted. (1.) The
Solemnity. (2.) The Assiduity or Continuance.

1. The Solemnity. It was joined with fasting, he was fasting until this hour;
and at the ninth hour; that was, about three of the Clock in the Afternoon, the
Angel of God appeared unto him, v. 30. Fasting on extraordinary occasion, is a
Gospel Duty, Matt. 9.15. 1 Cor. 7.5. and it speaks the importunity of his
Prayers. The energetical fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much, Jam.
5.16. fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.11.

2. The Assiduity of it. He prayed always, v. 2. sometime in a more than
ordinary manner, as before; but he never left off the Duty. Praying always,
with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance, Ephesians. 6.18. that is, be always ready for it, never neglecting it,
in its due Season. Men ought always to pray, and not to faint, Luke 18.1. When
men go on merely in a formal way, keeping their rounds in the Duties of
Religion as the door turns on its hinges, without any Life or Progress; they
are apt to knock off, or grow weary. Ye said also, behold what a weartness it
is? Mal. 1.13. What is the Almighty, that we should serve him, and what profit
should we have, if we pray unto him? Job 21.15. This is to speak it out, they
could gain nothing by driving the Trade, and no wonder if they slight it, or
totally give it over.

But Cornelius feared God, and his Soul followed hard aster him, and kept his
way; and what profit he found therein we have this account of it, v. 4. And he
said unto him, Thy prayers are come up into remembrance before God i. e. as the
Sacrifice and Incense offered: Let my Prayers be set forth before thee as
incense; and the lifting up of my hands, as the evening sacrifice, Psalm. 141.2.
God will not forget them; and a Book of remembrance was written before him, for
them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name, Mal. 3.16. And they
shall be mine, says the Lord of Host, in the day when I make up my Jewels, v.
17. which is in answer to what the wicked had said, v. 14. It is in vain to
serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinance? This was the
Character of Cornelius unto Peter; the same with that of Saul, recommending him
to Ananias; behold he prays, Acts 9.11. and how signally did God show his
Acceptance of them both!

2. The order of his Family, and his care of their Soul-concernments, was
another instance of his working righteousness. He feared God with all his
household, v. 2. such he endeavored to get into his Family, or to make them
such. He called two of his servants, and a soldier that feared God, one of them
that waited on him, v. 7. What a strait had he been now put to, had he had none
about him that savoured the things of God, to declare his mind to, or to send
on such a message? he would likely have been exposed to scorn. He that walks
in a perfect way, he shall serve me, says David; he that works deceit, shall
not dwell within my house, etc. Psalm. 101.6, 7. Lord, who shall abide in thy
Tabernacle, Psalm. 15. He in whose Eyes a vile Person is contemned; but he
honors them that fear the Lord, v. 4. Cornelius looked not only to have his
Family obsequious to himself, but he would not endure the contempt of God in
it; he taught them the fear of the Lord. How had he invited and gotten together
his Kindred and Friends also, to hear the word from Peter; words, whereby he
would have them saved as well as his own Household, v. 24, 33. the neglect of
Family Care and Instruction, or incapacity for it, is the bane of the Church,
and holy Commonwealth. For I know Abraham, says God, that he will command his
Children and his Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord,
Genesis 18.19. Yea, how often has a pious Family Instruction and Nurture, been
blessed of God, being accompanied with a good Exemplary walk, unto the
ingenerating the fear of God, or the Seed thereof, in the tender Branches of
the same; and the neglect thereof, is Cruelty to them. I was my Fathers Son,
says Solomon, tender and only beloved in the sight of my Mother. He taught me
also, and said unto me; let thine heart retain my words: keep my commandment,
and live, Prove. 4.3, 4. those were the commandments of God, that have the
Promise of Life; Ephesians. 5.2. so did David Catechize him. Timothy was taught the
Principles of Religigion from a Child, and knew the Holy Scriptures by the
Education of his Parents, 2 Timothy 3.14, 15. whose pedigree the Apostle derives
from worthy Ancestors, tho by the Mothers side. When I call to remembrance the
unfeigned Faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and
thy Mother Eunice, chapter 1.5. And I am persuaded in thee also. Train up a child
in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it, Prove.
22.6. Ordinarily (tho not always) a Blessing may be expected; the Duty is
unquestionable; and so for Servants also, the same care is to be had, tho of
Children more especially, Ephesians. 6.4. How else can a pious Family, such as
Cornelius's, be expected?

3. His Alms are noted, as another instance of his Piety, or a fruit of
righteousness. Who gave much Alms to the People, v. 2. The word in the Greek
signifies, Mercy or Compassion, which is more intimate to the Soul, and is
translated to the exterior Act, or relief given to the Indigent. Without the
later, there can be no pretense to the former. If a Brother or Sister, that is,
one of the Christian Religion, (for so it is to be understood, as the term of a
Believer often is, and Saint, 1 Cor. 6.1. chapter 7.14. 1 Pet. 2.17. Gal. 6.10.) be
naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto him, depart in
peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding you give them not those things
which are needful to the Body; what does it profit? Jam. 2.15. so neither is
this any thing, without the inward Affection, and Eye to God also in it; it
belongs not to Religion. Remarkable is that of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 13. Tho
I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor, and give my Body to be burned, and have
no Charity, it profits me nothing, v. 3. It Is a seeming Paradox; what, give
all to the Poor, and have no Charity? Yes, it may so be, Mat. 6.1. This Duty of
Bowels of Mercy, and seasonable help to such as are the proper Objects of it,
the Gospel enjoyneth, and highly recommendeth it Luke 11.41. It is their right,
Luke 16.12. It Is of the weighty things of the Law: Mercy is one, Mat. 23.23.
Continuing instant in prayer, Romans 12.12. to which is subjoined, Distributing
to the necessity of Saints, given to Hospitality, v. 13. these went together in
Cornelius. And this later is so much the more a Duty, as it may be of use to
make way for the weightier exercise of Compassion and Charity toward the Souls
of them we have to do with, as it is dispositive to Instruction; all kindness
is so. Hence, it is in a special manner required in those of the Ministry, Tit.
1.8. It Is an essential part of Religion; Pure Religion, and undefiled before
God and the Father, is this, to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their
Affliction, and to keep himself unspoted from the World: this is more than
tything of Mint and Anise. Thine Alms are come up for a memorial before God, v.
4, 31. For with such Sacrifices the Lord is well pleased, Heb. 13.16. As it is
written, he has given to the Poor, his Righteousness remains for ever, 2
Cor. 7.9. It Is a high Expression, but not the least Derogatory to the Grace of
God; it means no more, than that God will not forget to reward it, Heb. 6.10.
For I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me Drink:
Naked, and ye clothed me, Mat. 25 35. For, is a rational particle, and assigned
for the reason, tho not the proper efficient or meritorious cause of
acceptance. That they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold of eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. not so
as Christ is the Foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. but in Christ it has the Promise to
it, and Gods word is to be trusted to; it is attested by his Apostles, and all
the Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20. See Matt. 7.24.

4. He maintained a good report for Piety and Religion, which is the last Fruit
of Righteousness instanced in. And of good report among all the Nations of the
Jews, v. 22. They would scarce think that he could be saved; but for all that,
they thought that if any one, a Gentile, could, he might; he was true to his
light, and walked most convincingly; they could say no other of him; the same
was the Character of Ananias, Acts 22.12. And a weighty one it is, that wherein
the Test of a pious Man does much lie, that is one Qualification of a Person
called to the Ministry, That he must have a good Report of them which are
without, 1 Timothy 3.7. His usefulness otherwise in the Church of God, must needs
be impaired; and so will any man else in his place. Yea, and tho to be a
man-pleaser, to get every ones good word, may be an evil, and is, Gal. 1.10.
And moreover, no man's name, be he never so exact, is in his own keeping;
through evil report, and good report, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.8. and our
Lord himself found it so: Yet I say, a good man ought to look after it, and to
value a good report for Piety and Godliness. Demetrius has a good report of
all men, and of the Truth its self, 3 John 12. so ought we to endeavor it, 1
Pet. 3.16. The trial of Sincerity lies not only in a regard to things
obviously commanded, or forbidden; but in a regard to the Glory of God, in
matters not so particularly or expressly provided for in the letter of the Law,
as being but of ill report, or carrying but an appearance of evil, which comes
within the Construction of the Law. Abstain from all appearance of evil, 1
These. 5.22. A bare appearance of Good, is of no worth in the sight of God; but
to avoid the appearance of Evil, is: Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are
True, Honest, Just, Pure, Lovely, whatsover things are of good Report; if there
be any Virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things, Phil. 4.8.
It Is an ill sign for a man to take the stretch of his Liberty, and strain the
Law it may be too. A pious Soul that fears God, will have a care, and
conscience exercised, to keep him back from any thing that may border upon
evil. 1 Cor. 9.15. or that any ways (tho without just cause) might likely give
occasion to others to reflect a dishonor unto God, or cause the name of
Religion to suffer. He is tender of Gods Name, and the Reputation of pure
Religion, which he Professes, tho with an Abridgment of his own Liberty
otherwise, or receding from his right. Such a one was Cornelius, or he had not
kept up his good report among a people so self-confident and scornful of all
other people of the Gentiles, as common and profane. Thus have we finished the
second character of a person accepted with God, and the indication or mark of a
true fearer of him; which may suffice for the doctrinal part. It remains only
to bring the same more home, in its Application, or Use.

The Use we shall handle, (1.) by way of Information or Instruction. (2.) Of
Reproof or Conviction. (3.) Of Consolution and Establishment. (4.) Of
Exhortation and Direction, pursuant to the Doctrine insisted upon.

1. By way of Information or Instruction. Is it so, that of a truth God is no
respecter of persons, or of what Nation they be, in the point of acceptance
with him, otherwise than as they be found fearers of him, etc? Then, how vain
will the pretentions of multitudes, even with us, one day be found, who hope to
put in their claim unto the Favor and Mercy of God, on no better foundation or
plea, than that they are a Christian people, or of a Nation or Body of that
belief and profession? Could not Uncircumcision stem the current of the Grace
of God, to anticipate his acceptance of true piety in whomsoever it might be
found? Neither would Circumcision avail any thing unto his favor, where the
same piety and fear of him was wanting. This the Text concludes, and is
directly within its scope. In every Nation, such as sear not God, neither work
Righteousness, shall not be accepted with him. And what was true of the Jews,
is as true with us: and what their pretensions were, are obvious; and thine, no
question, may equal them, and more, if thou be a Christian. Let us weigh the
parallel, and give thee thy advantage, and try what it will amount unto in the
case, without the fear of God.

They were a Vovenant People, the whole bulk of them, good and bad. God was
their God, otherwise than of any other people; and they his people by virtue
thereof, Isa. 1.2, 3. Jer. 31.32. Deuteronomy. 32.19. Not putative, or secundum
apparentiam only, in visibility, or appearance only. The notion of a visible
Church, or people of God, as now sensed, was not then known in the World. Coram
Deo, In the sight and judgment of God, they stood so related unto him in
reality, who yet were no true fearers of him, many of them, yea the greater
part. Well then, the Kingdom of God is now taken from them, Matt. 21.43. and
amongst others its given to this Nation, an Isle of the Gentiles, Isa. 42.4.
and thou have thy share in it. Behold therefore the severity and goodness of
Good: on them severity which fell; but toward thee goodness, if thou continue
in his goodness: otherwise thou also shall be cut off, Romans 11.22. Thou art
grafted into, and partakest of the root and fatness of the Olive Tree, the
Covenant of Abraham, in the room of the branches broken off, who also were once
really in, but stumbled at Christ, and fell, v. 17. O the depth of the riches,
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! v. 33. With what a passion did Paul
resent the wicked Jews loss of their antecedent relation to God! Romans 9.3. the
which, through the forbearance of God, thou yet retainest: But all this availed
not unto life or acceptance; nor will thee. Yet further, They were Jews by
nature, in the force of God's Covenant, and not sinners of the Gentiles, Gal.
2.15. i e. Natural branches, Romans 11.21. born such, and their seed Gods, (tho
of wicked Parents, Ezekiel. 16.8, 21.) And thou art a Christian born Romans 11.16,
17. and thy Children holy, not common, 1 Cor. 7.14. I will not deny thee any
advantage that God will account with thee for. But God is no respecter of
persons merely on that score, to accept thee. Tribulation and anguish upon
every soul of man that does evil, of the Christian first, and also of the Jew,
Mohammedan, and Pagan Infidel World, Romans 2.9. For there is no respect of
persons with God, v. 11.

Again, They were nigh to God, and had more hope and helps for Eternal Life,
than others that were strangers to the covenant of advantages peculiar to them,
had, Romans 3.1. they had the custody of Gods Oracles, which was more than to be
within the sound of them, v. 2. And this is now thy privilege with others: and
all the World comparatively are in a hopeless condition besides, if not
absolutely lost. But God respects thee not for this; thou may perish by thy
own neglect for all that, without escape, Heb. 2.3. as well as they.

Again, They were Circumcised, and took upon them to be debtors to the whole
Law: And thou art Baptized, and become a debtor to the whole Gospel, and have
the badge of Gods Covenant upon thee as they had, Acts 7.8. But, as
Circumcision profited not, unless they kept the Law; but was made
uncircumcision, Romans 2.25. so, neither can Baptism now save without the answer
of a good Conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21. it shall no more be accounted to
thee, than if thou were unbaptized.

They had the Law and the Service of God, Romans 9. The Temple of the Lord are
these, Jer. 4 7. so do the Ordinances and Service of the Gospel belong to, and
oblige thee; thou art of the Church, and all the institutions of the Gospel
belong to it. If thou be secluded, it is for thy own profaneness or contempt;
and thou art not thereby neither broken off the Olive Tree, I grant, 2 These.
3.15. but however, this is not to be trusted to: God respects no man's person
for that. The Israelites partook of Sacraments with Gods Warrant, with whom,
many of them, God was not well pleased, 1 Cor. 10.4, 5. Thou may have eaten
and drunk in Christ's presence, and yet he not own thee, Luke 13.26.

To come yet nearer; In the point of Belief: Thou believe that there is one
God; so did they, when they worshipped the golden Calf which they had made,
Exodus 32.5. and so do the Devils also believe and tremble, Jam. 2.19.

Again, The Jews did believe the Scriptures of the Old Testament to be the word
of God, a divine Record in the whole; some understanding less, some more of it,
they admitted it for the Standard of Doctrines, Acts 18.28. chapter 26.27. We are
Moses Disciples, say they. We know that God spoke unto him, Joh. 9.29. in him
they trusted: For in them ye think ye have eternal Life, Chap. 5.39. so thou
believe of both Testaments; thou ownest the Revelation of the Gospel; but
what is this to acceptance with God? Who have received the Law by the
disposition of Angels, and have not kept it, Acts 7.53. Out of thy own, mouth,
upon the Gospel will God take issue in his final Judgment against thee, Romans
2.16. 1 Timothy 1.9, 11. The Bible which thou carriest to the Church with thee, if
thou fear not God, even it shall condemn thee, as now it judges thee. Yet
farther,

They also call themselves the holy City, and stay themselves upon the God of
Israel, Isal. 48.2. They leaned upon the Lord, and said, Is not the Lord among
us? Mic. 3.11. this was their National claim, but what was all that, whilst
they built up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, v. 10. In the
general also, they looked for the Messiah; Unto which promise our twelve Tribes
instantly serving God day and night, hope to come, Acts 26.7. Tho their
apprehensions of him were indeed very confused; and now being come, to the most
of them he was a Stone of stumbling, Acts 4.11. In like manner thou leanest on
God, and thou call thy self a Christian, (some scarce knowing at all what
Christ was; others more distinctly understanding (and believing the Truth of
him) thou art a Disciple of his, Acts 9.26. Cha. 11.26. a Believer; not almost,
but altogether a Christian in Belief and Religion, tho not such a one as Paul
was, Acts 26.28. But a Believer thou art; not ore tenus, or nominally only; but
really in its kind; the style may truly belong to thee, as heretofore it did
to all that were of the Christian belief, and is frequently denominated of
them, 1 Cor. 6.1. Chap. 14.22. 1 Timothy 6.2. Who believed not to the saving of
their Souls, Heb. 10.39. nor were influenced any more by it, than others by
their belief of the Deity, Romans 1.21. of which no question could be made, nor
doubt, were not men deficient to themselves.

Suppose then this to be thy plea, for respect unto thy person with God; that
thou art no Jew, nor Gentile, but of the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10.32. built on
Peter's Confession, that Jesus is the Christ, the son of the living God, Matt.
16.18. This thou believe, that there is no other name under Heaven given,
whereby thou must be saved; but so did the Devils believe of him most expressly,
Mark 5.7. Luke 4.41. so the Damsel cried concerning Paul and Silas, These men
are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of salvation,
Acts 16.17. (whilst the Anticipation of Education, Laws and Customs, prevailed
with a great part of mankind to disbelieve and reject the same, and do to this
day, 1 Cor. 1.23. Acts 25.19. (which is not thy case.) Thy Faith is sound and
Orthodox so far forth. Moreover, possibly thou art so far true to thy
Conviction herein, that thou renouncest thy own Righteousness which is of the
Law, and all other Pleas, and betakest thy self (in thy way) wholly to Christ
for Salvation. So do all with us generally recognize in the preamble of their
last Will and Testament; and do mean, no question, as they say. Flesh and Blood
has nothing in a bred Christian against it, that is, no Heretic; whilst
Christ is looked unto as a Savior only. Thou think it may be, that the fear
of God, and working Righteousness, enter not the terms of acceptance with him,
nor is supposed to a regular belief on, or particular trust to, or hope in
Christ for thy Salvation: Or that thou art a fearer of God, when there is no
such thing, and hereupon thou believe in his Name, as they did, John 2.23,
24. and the Rulers, Chap. 12. Who believed on him, v. 42. but did not confess
him; loving the praise of men, more than of God, and there split themselves;
rendering that their Faith a mere Presumption, being deficient in that which was
to come between their assent, and such reliance, Romans 10.10. so did Simon the
Magician, Acts 8.13, 23. so Luke 8.13. John 8.30, 31. or it may be thou
renouncest the Plea of the Pharisee, as Heretical, Luke 18.11. neither indeed
can thou say, that thou art no Extortioner, Unjust, Adulterer, etc. (which
yet may be true, that thou art not, and thou not a righteous Person for all
that, v. 9.) but wallowing in such Sins, thou art yet resolved to betake thee
to the Plea of the Publican: God be merciful to me a sinner, v. 13. and hopest
to have the privilege on this plea of thy Sin, and Mercy too. If thou be
otherwise convinced, thou may be nearer to acceptance, or the way unto it,
than he that thinks himself whole, and is not, Mat. 9.12. But tho Christ be
added to thy Plea of Mercy, or the belief of him, and thou make thy boast of
him, and intendest to abide by thy plea to the last: Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy Name, etc. Mat. 7.22. Thou shall have the Privilege of thy
Nation, and outward Relation to him, granted thee; but thou may read thy
Doom for all that, if no doer of his Will, v. 26. Depart from me ye that work
iniquity, v. 23. Thou buildest not aright on the foundation; and tho thou, like
Joab, art fled unto the horns of the Altar, there shall thou perish. The Lord
of that Servant (there is thy Badge and Title) shall come in a day when he
looked not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him
asunder, Mat. 24.50. and will appoint him his portion with the Infidels, Luke
12.46. If Christ be not in thee, the hope of Glory, Col. 1.27. God is no
respector of Persons; but the Children of his Kingdom, even they shall be cast
out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, Mat.
8.12. No one of any Nation or Religion, that fears not God, or that works
not Righteousness, shall be accepted with him. What the Apostle said of the Law
and Circumcision, Rom 2.25, 27. or of the Jew, v. 28, 29. Mutatis mutandis, is
as true of the Christian, of Baptism and the Gospel, now in its last Edition,
to which my Text agrees, and which is also the Argument of the Apostle James,
Chap. 2. from v. 14. to the end of the Chapter, respecting Faith alone, without
the works of Righteousness, whereof we have been treating, when he says, That
it profits not.

2. By way of Reproof, Trial and Conviction. Is this the discriminating
Character between the Christian outward and inward, (as before of the Jew) and
the only sure Test of any Persons acceptance with God, to be a fearer of him,
and a worker of Righteousness. What a multitude then are there, who upon this
Issue do stand convict and judged by the Gospel, for Persons disallowed and
rejected of God, who can put in no claim to acceptance with him; whilst yet,
almost all men amongst us, do verily hope to be saved at last: Gods favor they
will not despair of.

To be mistaken in this great point, is very common and easy, as it is also
dangerous. What else means those so frequent Cautions in Scripture given unto
men, to take heed that they deceive not themselves in the case? Know ye not
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kindom of God? be not deceived, 1
Cor. 6.9. Who they are, he subjoyns, v. 9, 10. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked, Gal. 6.7. Let no man deceive you with vain words, Ephesians. 5.6. The
unrighteous, and such as fear not God, can have no part nor portion in his
favor or acceptance. Let us then in his fear, search this matter to the
bottom* God cannot be Just nor True, if it should be otherwise; all our Religion
must be a Cheat, and the Scriptures a Fable, if this Doctrine be not true: But
if it be true, as it is,

(1.) What will become of the multitude of those who very seldom, if ever, do
all the Day or Week long, so much as think on God or his Name; such can have no
pretense to the walking in his fear. How can that man set God always before him,
or be influenced by the fear of him, who has committed the thoughts of him to
Oblivion? God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm 10.4. a sad and black
Character. So are the paths of all that forget God, and the hypocrites hope
shall perish, Job 8.13. Shall not God search this out? Psa. 44.20, 21. What no
room for so much as a thought of God* It Is not difficult to find whence it is,
or what, that lies at the bottom. Can a Maid forget her Ornaments, or a Bride
her Attire? Yet my People (the Jews) have forgotten me days without number,
Jer. 2.32. Why cannot the Maid forget her Ornaments if she would? Scarce; or the
Bride her Attire? Why, those things have gotten the Heart and Affections, are
esteemed of as a Treasure, and so carries the Heart after, Matt. 6.21. and the
Thoughts, which are as the Pulses of the Heart, work accordingly: but they had
no esteem or love for God in their heart, and so forgot him. How many is this
the case of with us? That mind their business, it may be, but mind not God at
all: As to such, God is as if he were not; fear him they cannot, or concern him
in what they do, who think not of him, and desperate is their Condition, Psalm.
9.17. far from acceptance with God.

(2.) Set aside such as would industriously extingnish out of their mind and
conscience the light and sense of the Being of God* These may be afraid of him,
but can have no pretense to the fear of God, of which we have been treating.
And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them
over to a reprobate mind, Romans 1.28. Know God they did, but they liked it not;
whether they liked it or not, it broke in upon them the Conviction thereof; but
fain they would shake it off, so as not to retain it: They liked not, at least,
to retain it. Therefore they say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.14. they would get loose from him. What is the
Almighty that we should serve him? v. 15. These are far from being true fearers
of him, or accepted of him.

(3.) Set aside all those, who if they retain the Sense of the Deity, yet frame
in their mind a false Notion and Conception of his Being; make him an Idol, or
what he is not. They slay the widow, and murder the fatherless: yet they say,
the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it, Psalm. 94.6,
7. Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as they self, Psalm. 50.21.
that is, that God minded not what they did, or kept no Record of their Actions:
But I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes: Now consider
this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver, v. 22. Whosoever takes God for all Mercy, and no Justice, or make a blind
or a false God of him, that will not make good his Word, how can such possibly
truly fear him, or consequently be accepted with him?

(4.) Set aside all the workers of Iniquity, who harden themselves openly
against God, such cannot pretend to the fear of him. Remarkable is that of
David, Psalm 36.1. The transgression of the wicked says within my heart, that
there is no fear of God before his Eyes. It spoke out the thing to the quick
sense of David's heart, that it must be impossible for such to have the fear of
God before their Eyes. What, for men not to fear an Oath, to commit Whoredom,
Drunkenness, Injustice, and all Filthiness, and yet to fear God in the mean
while! It Is a Contradiction. Who drinks iniquity like water, Job 15.16. He
stretches out his hand against God, and strenghneth himself against the
Almighty, v. 25. He runs upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses
of his Bucklers, v. 26. that is, he boldly, and without all fear, hardneth
himself against God, and rusheth upon him, and the Violation of his Law, when
he comes forth against him, armed as it were for his Destruction. Such there
are in the World, and whosoever they be, whose wickedness do show them to be of
that number, we may without any breach of Charity conclude them not to be
fearers of God. Shall the man, who knowing the judgment of God, that they which
commit such things, are worthy of Death, Romans 1.29, 31. go for one that has any
fear of God, whilst he not only does the same, but has pleasure in them that
do them? v. 32. And don't we see or hear of such, who will acknowledge
Drunkenness to be threatened with Death, and yet will not only do the same, but
rejoice to drink down a Person, or take pleasure in it, and so in other Sins;
which is to bid a defiance to the Almighty? Will God accept such a Person? No,
he may bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, tho I walk in
the imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19. (and
the case is the same as to other Sins) But the Lord will not spare him, but the
anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, v. 20. It Is
a certain Indication of a reprobate state.

(5.) Yet farther, What shall we think of those, who are Scorners and
Contemners of those who fear God, to whom a vile Person is not so contemptible,
as one that makes conscience of his ways. Surely such are far from the fear of
God themselves; yet this has been, and still is the case of many. Wherein they
think it strange that you run not with them to the same excess of riot,
speaking evil of you, 1 Pet. 4.4. Who shall give account to him that is ready
to judge the quick and the dead, v. 5. they wonder that any should be so tender,
whilst their own Consciences are cauterized or seared as with a hot Iron, that
they don't bleed any longer, 1 Timothy 4.2. yea, and have them in derision, Job 12
4. A Person that truly fears God, will like the Principle in whomsoever he may
hope it to be; however possibly he may take another to be misguided or
mistaken, in the conduct of his Conscience toward God, he would not have him
cast off the fear of God for all that, or be too bold with his Conscience,
whilst it speaks in Gods Name, 1 Cor. 8.10. Chap. 10.20, 28, 29. It Is a
reproach with us, not to be called a fearer of God; but I wish that with many
it were not a greater reproach to be one truly fearing him. To ridicule
Purity, Preciseness, Conscience, or the Fear of God, under the Pretext, that
it is the Person only that is struck at, who pretends to it, and and has it not;
is a practice introductory to Atheism and Irreligion; and for the most part is
but a pretense neither; it is the Life, Power and Practice of true Religion that
is indeed exposed, whilst men are ashamed openly to relinquish the empty Name
of it themselves; and where it is so, it is a certain Conviction of such a
Person, not to have any sense of God, or of his fear, on his Soul, nor
consequently any Interest in, or claim to his Favor, 2 Timothy 3.3.

(6.) All the former being set aside, as openly judged of God, so as to have no
pretense left for their coming within the Character of the Text. Let us now
more intimately reflect back upon the Explication of the meaning and import of
the fear of God and working Righteousness, by a Recapitulation of the heads
before insisted on, for the opening of their essential Nature, and see then how
many more will be found short of acceptance with God, who may have some kind of
pretense unto it, as taking themselves qualified for it. Cornelius was a godly
Man, that was his Character, exemplified in the Text. But now there is (...),
the mere form, Cask, Garb, or show of Godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5. as well as the
Life and Power of it; or, which may be without it, thou pretendest to the fear
of God, as ever thou look for acceptance with him; but can thou make good
thy plea? Thou have it in thy Creed, but have thou it in thy Heart?

Particularly for Instance, Art thou a Worshipper of the true God, and that in
Spirit and in Truth? What revenue of Glory, what homage do thou pay to him?
Or on what foundation do thou go? Without Faith it is impossible to please
God, Heb. 11.6. Is it a reasonable Service that thou payest unto the Divine
Being? Have thou ever considered that the entrance of Sin into the World, had
laid Mankind under the Curse of God, so as that no Worship or Service of his
could find acceptance with him? How come thou then by the persuasion, that
God will not accept an Offering at thy hands? Or, have thou considered these
things? Or, how stands thy heart affected with the good Pleasure of God, in
the Revelation of forgiveness with him, that thou might not want
encouragement, tho a Sinner, yet to cleave to him, to Worship or Fear him?
Without Knowledge, neither thy Heart, nor thy Worship can be good. Put thy self
on the Trial all along as we go; the test of any ones Fear of God, and of his
Acceptance with him, is one and the same; and if God has no Worship from thee,
he is not thy fear. But to hasten.

Again, how stands thy heart affected toward God, as to thy awe of him, and
reverence of his Majesty? He will not hold him guiltless that so much as takes
his name in vain, Exodus 20.7. What shall we think of those then, who have
commonly in their mouths, O Lord! O God! so, O Jesus! without any the least
thought or sense of his glorious Majesty; yea, who by profane Cursing and
Swearing, do customarily expose and tare the holy Name of God? Can such have
any dread of God on their Soul? Any tenderness for him? Let Conscience speak;
or suppose thou art sometimes afraid of his Wrath; yet consider what a
Temptation of Love have thou at the bottom? Do thou fear him, and hate him,
Romans 1.30. and fly from him; this is not to fear God with acceptance; even
according to thy fear, so will be his wrath against thee, Psalm. 90.11. if that
be all.

Yet nearer; how stands the habitual frame of thy Heart and Soul, with respect
to the fear of God; has it pointed it toward himself and holiness, or not?
Do thou set the Lord always before thee, as the Record and Witness of all
thy Thoughts and Actions; his Will as the Rule and Measure of them; his Glory
as the Scope and End of them? Do thou walk in the fear of the Lord all the
Day long? Is it wrought into thy Soul? Does it influence thee in the whole
course and tenor of thy Life? Do it run through all? If not, lay aside thy
pretense to it, or to acceptance with God. The fear of God is another thing
than what many take it to be; it imports the whole frame of the new Creature,
entire Piety and Godliness, and infers it; where it is, all a man does will
savor of it; it is always at hand to govern his Actions, and to keep him steady
in his walk with God. Oh, how many do their walk witness to have no part nor
lot therein! what fruits of it do appear?

Finally, look back no further than to those few Instances before enumerated,
of the works of Righteousness, which do evermore accompany the fear of God, or
that it does exert it self in, (as it does in all other instances, if it be
true) and what a multitude have we cast in that valley of Decision, on that
test also.

How many are there, who scarce pray unto God at all, unless in some time of
extremity, howling on their beds of languishing, Hos. 7.14. There is none that
calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee, Isa.
64.7. How many that do it only for form-sake, but seldom neither, or that give
unto God but the refuse of their time and strength, and are indeed weary of it?
How many more, with whom it has no place in their Families; God dwells not
there, nor is his Name recorded among them, and yet they will hope for
acceptance; but God speaks the contrary. Pour out thy fury upon the heathen
that know thee not, and upon the families that call not on thy name, Jer. 10.25.

Again, how many, who will rise early, and sit up late, to lay up for their
Families and Posterities, but take no regard what become of their Souls, or to
their Nurture in the fear of the Lord; without which yet they cannot deliver
their own Souls? We read of an inquest of Blood against the Watchman, Ezekiel. 3.
It concerns the Ministry, but not them alone; God has committed also a trust to
the heads of Families, which they must be accountable for likewise. If thou
speak not to warn the wicked from his wicked way to save his life, the same
wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine
hand, v. 18. Chapter 33.8. nor is it to be limited to the guilt of their temporal
ruin only. Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the
blood of all men, says the Apostle, Acts 20.26. In the same case, the Soul of
another may be lost through thy default, and thou may repent it when it is
too late. But to be careless of a man's Family, not to regard of whom it is made
up, or care for their spiritual Estate, convinces such Persons to be
unrighteous, and void of Gods fear. Righteousness consists not in bare
Negatives: consult thy own state upon this test also, whoever thou art that
pretendest to acceptance with God.

So for Compassion, and Ministering to the necessities of those who are in want.
But whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his Brother has need, and shuteth
up his bowels of compassion from him; how dwells the love of God in him? 1 John 3.17. Yea, or the fear of God, who requires the contrary: Yet, how many
are far from this! I will be a swift witness against those that oppress the
hireling in his wages, the widow and the fatherless, and that turn aside the
stranger, and fear not me, says the Lord of hosts, Mal. 3.5. here is quite the
contrary, and we see how God resents it. How many are there that fail in this
great Duty? And how many more that do it not in singleness of heart, as unto
God? And so he accepts it not.

The like and much more may be said as to men's concernment for the repute of
pure religion, or the keeping of a good report for it. How many regard not
that, otherwise than as their own affectation of the credit thereof may oblige
them to it, if at all? How many, who seem to be unwilling that any others
should preserve their good Name, for Religion and Piety toward God, but will
endeavor to raize it, and are glad to find occasion, or make one against the
strictest Professors of it? Report say they, and we will report it, Jer. 20.10.
But how few that seem really tender for the Name of God concerned even on
themselves, not to take the liberty to do ought that is, or that may carry the
appearance of evil; whereby, not their Name, but the Name of God may have
dishonor reflected upon it? Besides those (that affect not to be over
religious, are ashamed of it, and covet not any good report for it at all) who
will not pretend to it, nor consequently are capable of scandalizing Religion
so much as for the want of it. All things which are simply Lawful, may not be
expedient to be done, 1 Cor. 10.23, 24. And whosoever is tinctured with the fear of
God, will have some discerning and exercise of Conscience therein, and will
pursue things lovely, and of good report, as well as things honest, and in
their nature just; but God knows how few such there be in the World; the fear
of God is no such common thing as some take it to be.

Let now but the whole be put together, and considered; and would thou,
whoever thou art, but as impartially look within, and measure thy present State
and Condition by the same Standard as God will certainly lay Judgment to the
Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet, and sweep away the Refuge of lies, as
the Prophet speaks; in case thou do not, thou might come to some
Conclusion about it, and touching thy everlasting estate, how thy case stands
in the point of acceptance with God.

But know, whether thou will see, or not see it, if being weighed in the former
balance, thou be found wanting in the fear of God, and working
Righteousness, thou art cast by the sanction of the Gospel of Christ, and
thereby sentenced to be in a reprobate state, Eccl. 8.12, 13. 1 Cor. 6.9.
Expostulate the case therefore now with thy self, and not as they of old did
with God, Mal. 1.6. But ye say, wherein have we despised thy Name? Wherein have
we polluted thee? v. 7. The Lord regards not the Offering any more; Yet ye
say, wherefore? Chapter 2.14. ye have wearied the Lord with your words; yet ye say,
wherein have we wearied him? When ye say, Every one that does evil, is good in
the sight of the Lord, and he delights in them; or where is the God of
judgment? v. 17. Look to it, before it be too late, and God answers you with a
witness, Chap. 3.5, 16, 18. and don't set down in the bare Notion, or hearing
of these things, or be like the man that beholds his natural Face in a Glass,
and straightway forgets what manner of man he was; Paralogizing, or with
fallacious reasonings, putting a cheat on your own Souls, as we have it, Jam.
1.22. Whilst the word is not ingrafted there, v. 21. or nothing comes of it;
the stock is not changed, nor yet the fruit; take heed that Conviction be not
blasted, and come to no issue.

3. By way of Consolation and Establishment. Is it of a Truth, That in every
Nation, he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted with him?
Is the voice of the Gospel of God and our Savior? Then whoever upon the trial
can witness within themselves, that they are of that number, they may with good
warrant assume the comfort thereof, and conclude themselves justified in the
sight of God, and in favor with him. Art thou one concerned about the evidence
of thy everlasting Estate, and it may be, dubious about it? Why, here thou have
the just Character of a saved Person, if it may please God to help thee to
discern how it is with thee. Thou art one that believe the Scriptures, and
assentest to the Record of God concerning his Son, 1 John 5.11. and have
betaken thy self to it, not only as a Revelation worthy of Credit, but also
worthy of all Acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15. Thou trusts in Christ, Ephesians. 1.13. and
in God the Father through him; this thou do, so far at least, as to conclude
Christ Jesus a Savior alsufficient for thee, and to look to him, and to no
other Name for Salvation, save unto his alone, without which thou art not of
the Christian Religion, and it is to no purpose to enquire any further for thee;
(with us, he that is no Christian, can be no pious man to be sure) else a bar
is already put in against thee, Joh. 3.36. But moreover, have thou counted the
cost? Luke 14.28. And considered the terms of thy Salvation by Christ, and the
Tenor of the Grant thereof; that not Faith only, But Godliness also, has the
promise of the life which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. (as Death is threatened to the
contrary, Heb. 12.14.) have thou accounted this also a faithful saying, as the
same Apostle affirms it to be, v. 9, (which is more hardly believed, for that
the flesh is unwilling to have it true) or accounted it worthy of all
Acceptance, as the Apostle subjoyns? How ungrateful soever to corrupt Nature,
and where the pinch with us lies, this comes home to the business; yet
further, art thou one that truly fears God? Is his fear in thy heart? Do
thou walk in it? A Sinner thou art; thou dare not abide by a strict Trial,
according to the Original Law of Innocence; thou art sensible of thy need of
pardoning Mercy; but art thou a righteous Person (not Wicked) i. e. upright to
the Standard of the new Law or Gospel? Does the fear of God influence thee,
unto a universal and undeserved Resignation of thy self up unto his Will and
Commands? Has it changed the habitual Frame and Disposition of thy Soul? Is it
become the governing Principle of thy Life? Does thy Conscience witness it so
to be, in the ordinary course and tract of thy Conversation? Preserving thee
from those Wickednesses which would entrench upon Sincerity; and keeping thee
steady (in some prevalent measure) in thy walk, more immediately with God, and
in all the Duties of thy Place and Calling, in the Station wherein lie has set
thee, as becomes the Profession of Godliness, accordingly as has been before
opened, and I hope shall not need here again to be repeated? If I say, this be
thy case; whatever thy circumstances otherways be, or may have been; how
heinous soever thy former Guilt; how dark or doubtful soever thy present
Condition may remain to thee; Of a truth, I am assured that thou art accepted
with God; thou have the condition unto which the Promise is made, and have Gods
warrant to assume therefrom, and to conclude thy happy estate; and God is
faithful, and cannot deny himself, his Truth, his Word, and he would have thee
to take the comfort of it; his Attributes (as has been showed) he has laid at
Stake for thy security; it is a righteous thing with God, that it should so be.

Are men said to believe unto the saving of their Souls? so are they said to
repent unto Salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10. and unto life, in the case of Cornelius and
his household, Acts 11.18. and by patient continuance in well-doing, to seek for
it, Romans 2.7. and true Piety has the promise of it. If now the messenger, the
interpreter, one among a thousand, shall show unto thee thy uprightness, as
Elihu speaks, Job 33.23. tho thou tookest thy self for lost, v. 22. Yet will
God be gracious to thee, for he has found a ransom, v. 24. Lift up thy hands
which hang down, and thy feeble knees! He will be favorable to thee, and thou
shall see his save with joy; for he will render unto thee thy righteousness, v.
26. Thou shall behold his face in it, Ps. 17.15. and thou may trust to it in
its place, Ezekiel. 33.13. How full is the Scripture for thy encouragment? The
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his
covenant, Psalm. 25.14. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him,
Ps. 33.18. like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that
fear him, Ps. 103.13. His mercy is from everlasting to everlasting; upon them
that fear him, v. 17. To such as keep his Covenant, and to those that remember
his commandments to do them, v. 18. when they walk in darkness and have no
light, let them trust in the name of the Lord, Is. 50.10. The sun of
righteousness shall arise unto them, with healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2. When
the day of the Lord shall burn as an Oven against all the proud, and all that
do wickedly shall be as stubble, v. 1. Blessed is the man that fears the
Lord, that delights greatly in his commandments, Ps. 112.1. The righteous
shall be in everlasting remembrance, v. 6. He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings, his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, v. 7. Say to the righteous,
it shall be well with him, Isa. 5.10. The work of righteousness shall be peace,
and the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever, Chapter 32.17.
And what more can be said? O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up
for them that fear thee, Psalm. 31.19. No man is warranted to trust to the Grace
of God in Christ, that abides an unrighteous Person; but he that trusts to
his own righteousness; (if indeed he be righteous) namely, that God will accept
him thereupon; it is an instance of his trust to the Grace of God, to the Blood
of Christ, and to the Promise of the Gospel in their place also; for the one is
no way inconsistent with the other, but inclusive of it; and God is to be
trusted of his word. Hence the Godly have appealed, and may do unto God for his
favor on that plea, Neh. 1.11. Psalm. 18.20. Isa. 38.3. (as they were sure,
that if they had it not, they ought not to expect it, Mat. 5.12.) Psalm. 26.1.
Tho it is not the Portion of all the faithful, to be able so to discern the Work
of God on their Souls, as that they can always be capable of pleading it;
especially, not of those whose Progress is so small; that it is hard to discover
any change scarce in them: Yet is it pleadable, where it is discernable, and
the God of Mercy will admit it; the word is gone out of his Mouth. Well then,
If thy heart condemn thee not, upon a due scrutiny and search into this matter,
then may thou have confidence toward God, thou have his word for it, 1 John
3.21. If thou fear him, and workest righteousness, thou art and shall be
accepted with him. The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses, or absolveth
thee from all Sin, 1 John 1.7. and so will the Judge at last pronounce of thee,
Matt. 25.35, 46.

4. It remains only to improve the Truth asserted, by way of Exhortation,
Counsel and Direction, and so to draw to a Conclusion. Is it so, that they and
they only that fear God, and work righteousness, are accepted with God? The
Exhortation then is, to a thorough and speedy coming up to the same Duty, and
it concerns two sorts.

(1.) Such as upon a Reflection on the frame and temper of their heart, and
course of their life, may from what has been said, find reason to conclude, or
suspect that as yet they are short of the fear of God, and true Piety, or the
Character of a Person in favor with God. This is no condition for thy Soul to
rest one moment in, if that be thy case; yea, if thou but suspect; it is to
sleep as on the top of a Mast, on the very brink of Ruin for ever. Let me
therefore inculcate upon thee, the necessity and reasonableness of thy
compliance, with the call of God unto thee in the Text. As I live, says the
Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked
turn from his way and live, Ezekiel. 33.11. Why will ye dye? What Moses said unto
Israel, the same say I unto thee; What now does the Lord thy God require of
thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him,
and to serve him with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul? Deuteronomy. 10.12. To
keep the commandments of the Lord, and his statutes which he has commanded
thee for thy good, v. 13. What have thou to except against these terms? Are
they not equal? Is not the thing it self required of thee, for thy good, if
nothing more did depend on it? Was not the fear of God, and the Impress of his
Holiness upon the Soul of man, the Primitive perfection of his Nature? How
comes it to pass then, that now, the retrieving, or bringing of it again into
thy Soul, should not be accounted for its good? Yea, God be hardly thought of,
as if he meant ill to mankind, or would abridg him of what is for his good, in
laying this restraint upon him? This Suggestion does but show, how deeply an
Aversation unto God and Holiness, has rivetted its self into the nature of
lapsed man, with a potent Inclination to all Sin, as if a man could not live
one good day without it. In the mean while, if this be thy arguing, or these
thy inward thoughts; what Notion have thou of the future state, or condition of
those who are accepted with God? No man can be happy against his will or
liking. Happiness consists in the pleasure that arises from the harmonious
agreement between the Object and the Appetite; and the sight of Gods face, and
the assimilation of the Soul unto him in the perfection of Holiness, are the
constituent parts of it, Psalm. 17.15. 1 John 3.2. If then thou abhorrest from
this, and disgusts it, Heaven it self can be no State of happiness for thee, if
indeed without a change first made in the temper of thy heart and soul, it were
possible for thee to have thy lot there; Absolutely thou can not desire it,
but Hypothetically only, or for a reserve on the supposal that thou must dye,
and can enjoy the pleasure of Sin and the World no longer, as of two Evils to
choose the least, Heaven rather than Hell at last; a sad Omen!

But what is it that thou would have or desire, (to be the terms of thy
acceptance with God, I cannot call it, but) that with a non obstante, thou
might find favor with God, or be saved from Wrath to come? What, that he
would recede from his establishment, and not insist on his Fear, or such strict
Piety, or works of Righteousness in order thereunto? That is as much as to say,
thou would have Elbow-room for the Flesh, and Indulgence to affront the
Divine Majesty, and contemn his Laws, to cast off all fear and regard of God,
to pay him no Homage or Service all thy days, and yet to be saved by him at
last. Let conscience now speak (if thou be not given up to a Reprobate
sense) were this becoming the Holy God, and Rector of the World? No, God will
not resign his Government, or revoke the Constitution of his Gospel for thee. I
know here it pinches, but thou will find it true, wherefore flatter not thy
self with the hopes of the contrary, but consider, and set thy self to the Work
and Duty God calls thee unto*

Yet further, let it be reminded, which has been laid down before, and is
proper for thee here to make use of, that tho thou art a Sinner, and may as
yet have no ground of pretense to Gods favor, yet art thou not in a remediless
Estate. The first Transgression concludes thee not. Here then is infinite
Mercy, that on any terms thou may be restored to a state of Acceptance with
God, which thou had once forfeited; that thou have another cast for Eternity:
it was not so with the Angels that fell, Jud. 6. Here is then a foundation of
encouragement: There is forgiveness with God for thee, that he may be feared by
thee. Thou art a Prisoner in the pit, wherein is no water, no refreshment,
Zech. 9.11. Yet a Prisoner of hope through the blood of the covenant, v. 12.
Christ died for thee, and God is propitious toward thee on his score; he can
with safety to his Honor, and the repute of his law be just and righteous, and
yet pardon thee, and receive thee to favor, Romans 3.25, 26. on the terms
proposed to thee; so runs the preamble of our Ministerial Commission, and that
which in the first place we are to declare, To wit, that God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, 2
Cor. 5.19. that is, as to the Impetration thereof, doing what belonged to him,
as to so much as concerned the sufficiency of the ransom toward an actual
Reconciliation, whereupon our Embassage is bottomed, v. 20. I don't say that
thou art immediately to believe thy sins to be forgiven thee; for that may be a
lie, and is so, if thou fear not God: Nor do I say, that thou art bound only
to believe that there is forgiveness with God for them that do, or shall fear
him; for they are then actually forgiven; but that there is forgiveness with
him for thee, i. e. a readiness to pardon, antecedently to thy fear of him, as
the motive to it, whether thou finally acceptest, or refusest it, or the terms
of it; trampling under foot the Son of God, and despising the blood of the
covenant, Heb. 10.29. Defeating thy self of its advantage; still there was
forgiveness with him for thee; otherwise, he would not have sent to thee an
Embassage of Reconciliation, or therein have prescribed his fear unto thee, in
order to it; that stumbling-stone is therefore removed out of thy way.

Yea moreover, so sure it is, that the belief of the Atonement made for thee by
the Sacrifice of Christ, so far as to render God appeasable toward thee, Joh.
3.16. as also the belief of thy actual acceptance with him on the same score,
Ephesians. 1.6. So soon as thou shall entertain the terms, or receive and embrace the
atonement, Romans 5.11. Is now become the leading condition of the Gospel, and
indispensibly necessary to life, first to be admitted as true, and worthy of
all acceptance, before any farther treaty with thee can be had touching thy
acceptance with God; it behooves thee therefore to mind it.

The fear of God, and working righteousness, compriseth all the rest that God
does require of thee. We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God, 2
Cor. 5.2. Thy sins may have been as scarlet and crimson, of a dye or tincture
on the account of some aggravating circumstances greatly inhauncing their
nature and demerit; but come now, says the Lord, for all that, and let us
reason together, Isa. 11.18. Say not, wherewith shall I come before the Lord?
Will he be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of
Oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression? Mic. 6.7. No, God has
found a ransom. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does he
require of thee, but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy
God? v. 8. to fear him; and obey him.

First then, if thou would begin at the right end, look to get thy Heart and
Soul possessed with the fear of God, that is the very beginning of Wisdom, as
it imports a thorough change, habitually determining the whole man toward God
and Holiness. Here lies the root of the matter; without it nothing can be
referred to God, or be truly Religious; some partial and superficial Change or
Reformation may be had, or attained unto, and something effected or done more
than formerly; but nothing without it, that may denominate thee a righteous
Person. Nay, it is ten to one, but that at one time or other, thou will get
loose again from thy convictions and restraint, whilst thou rowest against the
stream and tide of thy native inclination, tugged on by a kind of force from
without thee, destitute of the Spirit, without the new Nature, or any holy
disposition or tendency toward God. Thy goodness will be but as a morning
cloud, and as the early dew will it go away, Hos. 6.4. and in the mean while
thou live not to God, as the Apostle expresses it, Romans 6.11.

In the next place, look to thy walk, thy fruits; That they be the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God, Phil.
1.11. The wicked must forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts,
and return unto the Lord, or there is no mercy for him, Isa. 55.7. Be exhorted
then in the fear of God, that thou put off concerning thy former
conversation, the old man, with its deceitful lusts, and let thy conversation
witness thee to have put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.22, 24. Talk not of thy heart, or good
meanings toward God, whilst the Flesh, the World, and the Devil bave thy
service. Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey, Romans 6.16. Herein the children of God are
manifest, and the children of the Devil: whosoever does not righteousness, is
not of God, 1 John 3.10.

For a motive or argument enforcing the word of Exhortation, take that of the
Text. Thy acceptance with God, or eternal Rejection by him, is immediately
suspended thereon; be not deceived in this point. See, I have set before thee
this day, life and good, and death and evil: in that I command thee this day,
to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments,
Deuteronomy. 30.15, 16. The word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy
heart, that thou may do it, v. 14. (this was the voice of the Gospel to
lapsed man, Romans 10.6, 8.) The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and
the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with
all thy Soul, that thou may live, v. 6. The two Tables of the Law did ever
enter the Covenant of Life struck with fallen man; termed thence the Tables of
the Testament or Covenant, Chap. 9.11. made with Israel in the Blood of Christ,
in the Type, Exodus 24.7. Psalm. 103.17, 18. Thou art inexcusable who ever thou
art, if ever thou did read in the Bible, or hear the sound of the Gospel, and
have taken no notice of this, That Godliness has the promise of the Life to
come, and that without it no man shall see the Lord, or find Acceptance with
him. It Is then a matter of no small moment unto thee, whether thou obeyest the
call of God this day unto thee, or not. Thy Soul lies at stake on it; thou have
the promise of God on the one hand, to invite and encourage thee; if but thy
own Life, eternal Life, may bear any weight with thee, till thou be capable
of seeing something higher. Is Gods favor not worthy acceptance or regard,
when in it is Life? Again, on the other hand, if thou will none of the fear of
the Lord, Prove. 1.29. to cleave to him, and serve him, he will be thy fear, and
thy dread another day, whether thou will or no, to thy confusion, v. 7. when
thou would be glad to have a hiding place in the Rock, or to lie buried in
the dust, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty, Isa. 2.10. be
thy greatness now what it will, Rev. 6.15. For the great day of his wrath to
come, and who shall be able to stand? v. 17. The sinners in Zion are afraid,
fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites; who among us shall dwell with the
devouring fire, who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Isa. 33.14.
He that walks righteously, etc. v. 15. None other shall dwell on high, but
their heart shall meditate terror, Heb. 18.12, 13.

Nor do thou cheat thy self here, in the hopes that the righteousness of Christ
shall excuse thee, or stand thee in stead to answer the demands of the Gospel,
requiring of thee the fear of God, and the personal righteousness whereof we
have been speaking. Christ has answered the demands of the Law of Works; but
where do thou read that he was substituted in thy room or stead, to Believe,
to Repent, to Love and Fear God, and work Righteousness, or obey the Gospel, so
as to render thee capable of acceptance with God unto Life without them? No,
it is of thee that the Gospel requires all this, as the condition of thy
interest in, or title to the advantages of the purchase of Christ, Heb. 5.9.
Chapter 9.15. And if thou failest, or fallest short of this Gospel righteousness,
thou art wholly left remediless for ever; there is no third Covenant to relieve
thee against the demands of the Gospel, 2 These. 1.7, 8. Heb. 2.3. Christ came
into the World to lay a foundation for the love and fear of God, and obedience
to him; not to render it unnecessary to his favor; mind therefore thy Duty,
and look up to God for help, Hos. 13.9. and forget not to have an eye unto
Christ also, as the Spring and Fountain of that Grace thou yet want, Ephesians.
2.10. Phil. 1.11.

Obj. Here it may be thou may after all that has been said, be objecting
and reasoning thus within thy self, What I must do to be accepted with God, and
eternally saved, I know, that is out of question with me. But what shall I do
for the Grace enjoined me to have, whereby I may serve the Lord acceptably with
reverence and godly fear? Heb. 12.28. How is this possible unto me? Here my
feet stick as in the miry clay. Some Conviction of the Truth I have, but like
one in a Fever; I know my thirst after sin and flesh-pleasing is my Disease,
and that if it proceeds, it will prove mortal to me; but for all that, I cannot
quench it, nor resist its importunity. An Alienation from God, and strict
Godliness, I find rooted in my mind, and the Flesh preponderating me the other
way, notwithstanding my Conviction, and the various Impressions I struggle
under. What now shall I do? so far forth as Grace is possible to me, so far is
it possible for me to be saved, and no further. To say, That God can change my
Nature, and dispose me to his Fear, is true; but nothing to my case, whilst he
does it not. Is it attainable by me in any means using, so as that it must lie
at my door, if I have it not? If it be so, let me know what the Gospel says,
if any Constitution there be, any Treaty with lapsed man concerning it. Whether
there be any promise thereof on any terms ever once made, or any thing that
lies before me to be done in order to it, ascertaining it to me in the use of
means, without which I may be remediless for ought that I know, or is revealed,
without any relief by the Gospel; what hope is there left? Jer. 10.12.

Ans. To press upon the Sinner the necessity of the new Creature, or change of
the frame and temper of his Spirit, and course of his Life, without any motive
of encouragement respecting the possibility of attaining to it, can only
perplex, not at all relieve him, I grant; supposing it every way absolutely
impossible unto him. No Argument can rationally be pleaded to urge thereunto in
such case, nor could any man's heart reproach him for the not having of it.

Nor will that well-meant Distinction, of a Natural and Moral Impotency, or
Impossibility rather, help our here; the meaning whereof is no more, than that
man notwithstanding the entrance of sin, is not destitute of any natural
Faculty, Power or Capacity, to the Reception of Grace, or the Exercise of it;
but is morally only incapacitated unto it, i* e. from an insuperable Aversation
thereunto, and Propension to the contrary, rooted in the Mind and Will. Hence
it is said, that since man's Impotency or Incapacity of turning unto God, and
working Righteousness, is not such, as that he cannot if he would; but consists
rather in this, that he Wills it not, he affects not to be Holy: that is no
excuse therefore, why he is not changed; for that it is what he chooses; he might
be better if he would. He has the natural Power, or possibility unto it, tho
not the moral.

This distinction has its use; but it reaches not the Solution of the present
Difficulty. It shows indeed where the Disease lies, namely, in the elective
Powers of the Soul; not barely in its executive Power, but in the first
Digestion rather; and imports no more but that man is yet habile subjectum, a
subject capable of having Grace, (and so he is of spotless Perfection) he is
not destitute of any natural Faculty, that is, he is man still, with his
faculties of vital Power, Reason, and Will; but wants the well-disposedness
only of them, that for all that, he cannot be a good man. But the Objection is
of the elicit acts of the Mind and Will, viz: whether the unregenerate man can
obtain of himself, simply, to sense or savor the things of God, or to will and
to do what is well-pleasing in his sight, without the Divine help, suscitating
his natural Faculties, healing their Distemper, and new disposing and
determining them toward God and Holiness. This in the Objection is supposed,
and that truly, to be immediately impossible unto him, and in the Solution by
the former Distinction to be morally so; and why not naturally also? Since the
disaster is not only now congenite to fallen man, but withal, according to the
Institution of Nature, it is naturally impossible for the mind or will, till it
be first rectified and changed, to exert, or put forth any act in the mean
while, against its radicated insuperable Inclination, or unto which it is
destitute of any Principle, Aptitude or Disposition, as for the Ethiopian to
change his Skin, as the Prophet expresses it, Jer. 13.23. And if this be so,
and no more can be answered or said; still the difficulty remains, what
Obligation man can justly have to a new Law introduced, binding him to a
natural impossibility, (or call it moral, it comes to the same) or what relief
the new Covenant can design, in proposing and enjoining happiness unto Sinners,
whilst the terms are impossible (not to God, but) to them, as to stop the
course of the Sun in the Firmament. How is this a Law of Grace to them, if it
be so?

But in Answer to the Objection, and for the further vindicating of the Truth,
I must here distinguish between that which is mediately and ultimately possible
to the Creature, or impossible, and what is nextly and immediately so. In the
latter Sense, in the case of Naaman the Syrian, 2 Kin. 5. the cure of his
Leprosy was to him absolutely impossible, nor could any one else but God do
it, v. 7. It was a Miracle; (and no less power is necessary to the cleansing
away the Leprosy, and Contagion of Sin) but in the former Sense, viz. in the
use of the means, or direction given him by the Prophet, v. 10. by the force of
Gods Promise norified to him, it was more than possible to him. His recovery
was equally within his Power, as was his washing seven times in Jordan. Yea,
and if he was not recovered, it lay peremptorily at his door, and it was ten to
one that it proved not so, v. 13. And yet, when the cure was done, for all that
he did his part; yet in his conscience he could not but ascribe it in the
whole, unto the sole Power and Goodness of God, to a Conviction thereof beyond
whatever he had before, v. 15, 17. so is the case here, and the Application to
it is easy.

More particularly and plainly; for I am not here disputing; if thou be in
earnest, whoever thou art that objectest thus within thy self; let me come yet
closer up to thee. And first let it be reminded, which in the Objection is
suggested. (1.) That thou stand at present convinced of the absolute
necessity of a change of thy Heart and Life, (the whole need not the Physician)
and that without it the favor of God is unattainable by thee. (2.) That
without the Divine help, illuminating thy mind, and renewing it, altering the
Biass and Inclination of thy Will, and implanting the fear of God in thy heart,
thou can not dispose thy self unto holiness; this thou art sensible of, and
the Scriptures speak the same, and directs thee to look up to God for it, Joh.
6.44, 45. Romans 8.7. Acts 5.31. Ephesians. 2.10. Phil. 2.13.2 Tim. 2.25. Jam. 1.17,
18. hold thee then there. (3.) How pleasant soever Sin may as yet be to thee,
and hard to part with, (if thou will speak out) how uneasy soever the yoke of
Christ may seem to thee, who were never as yet accustomed unto it: Yet knowing
it to be thy disease, and reflecting on the danger of it; thou say, that
thou art not averse to be healed. Thou know the Will of God, and art so far
enlightened, as to have some taste of his good Word, and approvest the things
that are more excellent: Take heed then of going back again this step toward
Conversion. Some are most desperately bent against it, and averse to any treaty
about it. They have refused to return, Jer. 5.3. by a positive act of their
will. Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? when shall it
once be? Chapter 13.27. Matt. 23.37. that is not absolutely thy case. (4.) Thou art
sensible that God, de novo, enjoins thee to fear him, and walk uprightly before
him, in order to his favor, notwithstanding thy former forfeiture, and that he
knows perfectly thy present frame, and what can possibly be expected from
thee. He commands thee to circumcise thy heart to love and to fear him, Deur
10. Yea, to make thee a new heart, and a new spirit, Ezekiel. 18. to be a new man;
and that under a new Penalty, and more sore than was that of the Law of
Innocence, Heb. 2.3. and 10.29 But withal, declaring his hearty willingness
rather that thou should repent and turn to him, than perish under that
double guilt for thy not doing it, 2 Pet. 3.9. 1 Timothy 2.4. So, in the same
verse, where he exacts this return at thy hands, Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. For, why will
ye dye? This may reflect some light unto thee, by the way.

Now that it may appear to thy own Sense and Conscience, that the Holy and
Gracious God does not mock thee in all this, but intends thy relief in it, if
thou be not deficient unto thy self in what is possible to thee, from what
thou have already received, and the help he affords thee; know yet further,

1. That he has instituted or appointed means of Grace, and has vouchsafed
the same unto thee, Prove. 1.21, 22. I speak here of Gods means, which are the
Instrument of the principal efficient in Conversion; thou have the Word of God
to attend unto, the appropriate means unto it. The law of the Lord is perfect,
converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple,
Psalm. ^9.7. It Is the Seed of the new Birth, Jam. 1.18. the Spirit of God
cooperating with it, Joh. 6.63. whereof the Gospel is the Ministration, 2.
Cor. 3.8. Romans 10.14. Hearken unto me, says the Psalmist, and I will teach you
the fear of the Lord, Psa. 34.11. I have sent also my servants the prophets
unto you, rising up early, and sending them, etc. Ezekiel. 35.15. Gods prescience
of the event, that the means will not always attain the end, hinders not, but
that he will use it as ordained to it; and it will go for a cost that he has
been at; that the Sinner will be accountable for, if it be lost. What should
have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done? Isa. 5.4. Mart.
11.20, 21. Isa. 48.18.

2. Moreover, God has made a Law or Covenant obligatory unto man, with respect
unto his conferring, or denial of Grace to him, a proper establishment about
it, which comes home to thy case.

Neither do I mean here, Gods absolute Promise of giving Grace unto some, or to
write his Law in their heart, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. Romans 11.27. Isa. 59.21.
which belongs to his will of purpose only, or his Decrees; and is termed his
Covenant in an improper sense. That belongs only to the elect, and amounts not
to a promise claimable by all, or any singular person in particular. It Is
indeed directive, whither to go for help, and from whom all grace is to be
received; but the purpose of God revealed that he will give it to some
indefinitely, is extrinsical to the nature of a Law; it is not man's fault that
he is not the object of such absolute promise, nor shall it be the rule of Gods
Judgment, when he shall be condemned for his failing of the Grace of God,
whereof we are enquiring, Heb. 12.15, 17.

The Law of God, respecting the restoring of the Soul of man unto his lost
Image (without which he cannot be happy) consists of three parts. The Precept,
the Promise, and the Threat.

1. For the Preceptive part. It cannot be denied, but that something in the way
of Duty is incumbent on the Sinner, to the end, that he may be converted and
healed, and this is his means to be used in order to it; and may be reduced to
two heads (1.) Something respecting God more immediately as the Author of
Grace, or the giver of it; such are the reading of the Scriptures, attending on
the ordinances of God; especially the Ministry of the word, Romans 10.17. and
Prayer unto God by Christ, Isa. 55.6. frequenting good company, etc. Pro.
13.20. God commands that the Creature meeting him, quantum in se, so far as
in it lies, in the way of his Grace. There is none that stirs up himself to
take hold of thee, Isa. 64.7. (2.) Something respecting the subject to be
wrought upon, as namely, the avoiding of those Sins, which it is capable of a
restraint from, and which in their own nature tend to increase the habitual
strength of Sin by custom, and to render Conversion more difficult, this God
commands, And withal, to come up to those Duties of Justice, Mercy,
countenancing and following after that which is honest and good, in the due im
provement of every Talent received, and which in its own nature is dispositive
unto a change yet further, (tho not gradus in re, any degree as yet in that
which is saving) as a body organized is in a nearer Disposition to be animated
with a rational Soul, than a mere lump of Clay. This God requires by Precept of
man, in order to his recovery to Grace and Holiness, that is savingly such,
that he be in the way of it.

Now, that of all this is impossible unto thee, who make the Objection?
Nature is presupposed to Morality; and whilst God sustaineth thy being, and
supplies thee with his common Influences, Acts 17.28. this thou can do.

Man's Capacity unto the Reception of Grace, or Renovation unto the Image of
God, is not merely Logical or Obediential, like to that of a Stock or a Stone,
(tho in some sense worse) as has been said. He has still his natural
Faculties abiding, rendering him immediately fusceptible of it, and it is but
their rectitude, or new well-disposedness unto Holiness. And consequently, also
he can use his Faculties which are reasonable, with design for the bettering of
his estate, in the way of Gods Ordination, and can do something in order to it,
Mar. 12.34. Luke 13.24.

Neither yet is all the Ignorance of men invincible, nor all their Aversation
unto the ways of God and Holiness insuperable. The mind can reflect, and fetch
in Intelligence of the danger; it can consider, and keep guard: More violence
can men use with themselves than they do, Isa. 44.19. their cannot here, is no
more or other than that of his who said he could not rise, and give his Friend,
Luke 11.7. that is, he could not without some difficulty, and great
unwillingness, get his mind to it; who yet upon his importunity did do it, v.
8. All mankind have recognized this Power in their Constitution of human Laws
against moral Impieties. No just Law can be made that should bind men to moral
Impossibilities, or to what is not within the Power of any one, till he be
first regenerated, and in a state of Salvation. No man does think but than when
Malefactors are found guilty, and adjudged to Penalties for their Crimes, they
might and could have done otherwise, and weknow it is so. In short, thou can
consider thy Condition, and Reason about it* thou can Hear, Read, Pray, give
Alms, and come up to the external Acts of Religion, both Personal, Family, and
Public; and can forbear this or that act of gross Sin, such as Murder,
Theft, Adultery, Lying, Cheating, Swearing, Drunkenness, etc. men short of
saving Grace have done it, and may do it, through the knowledge also and belief
of the Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 2.20. and yet be again entangled
in the same Pollutions of the World, if they look not to it, v. 22. Mat. 19.20.
Yea, and further, whenever God changes or choverteth any one, it is in a way
congruous to his Nature, and the Soul goes along in the exercise of its
Faculties, which it had before, like as when our Savior was about to cure the
man of his withered hand, Mat. 12. he bids him stretch it forth; and not
without reason might he be didden lift at it, for that he had the first Power
and Faculty of it, and he must essay, whilst Omnipotency healed the
Indisposition of the Organ, and produced the effect. Still something in the way
of Duty (yet not impossible to the Creature) is enjoined thee in order to thy
cure, if thou will be made whole. Yea, and thou must work, if ever thou
expectest God to help thee to will, or to do, Phil. 2.12, 13.

2. Nor is there a bare command, but withal there is a promise of Grace
connected with the forementioned precepts, either expressed or employed; which
constituteth it a Covenant, and alone renders the former Duties complied with,
proper means to be used by us, unto Grace. To him that has, shall be given,
says our Savior, Luke 8. It Is accommodated to the parable of the sower, and
brought in as a reason, enforcing the caution given by him to take heed how
they hear, v. 18. And again, take therefore the Talent from him, Mat. 25.28.
for unto every one that has, shall be given, v. 29. that is, to everyone that
rightly uses, or improveth his Talent received, will God give more; in diverso
genere, it must be meant of the Communication of saving Grace that the promise
speaks, as is evident in the main scope of the Parable. It Is past doubt, that
the wicked and slothful Servant was condemned for the want of Truth of Grace,
or of that, which had it been gained, had been rewardable with eternal Life; if
not, his case had been the same, he had perished notwithstanding: If so, his
Plea is considerable, and no man can object more: I knew thee, Lord, says he,
that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou have not sown, gathering where
thou have not strawed, v. 24. q. d. If I am sentenced for the not gaining or
having that, the Seed or Power whereof was never once personally given unto me;
the which he alleges himself before to have been aware of, and therefore was
discouraged or afraid, but could not help it: See now the Answer, Thou ought
therefore to have put my money to the Exchangers, i. e. have improved the
Talent I betrusted thee with, and then thou should have gained that, for the
want of which I now doom thee as an unprofitable Servant, like to that, Luke
16.11. If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who
will commit to your trust the true riches?

Yet further, that it is the Duty of all men to seek the Lord, and to pray unto
him for Grace, is out of all question; but whoever comes to God, is expressly
obliged to believe, not only that he is, but that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. without which no foundation or motive of
encouragement does remain. Now Faith cannot stand alone without a bottom; what
warrant can any man have to believe in such a case, that which God has not
promised? Either they have Gods word for it, or they cannot be bound to believe
it. Faith is an assent upon Testimony, that is its formal Nature; and the thing
testified, namely, that God is a rewarder, (yea, in the very case in hand, Luke
11.10.) does not transcend the faculty of the natural Man, to yield his assent
thereunto, as the foundation of his Application unto God for the Grace that he
wants. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him, Jam. 1.5. but let him
ask in Faith, v. 6. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you: cleanse
your hands ye Sinners, Jam. 4.8. most express is that, Prove. 2.3, 4, 5. If thou
criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding, etc. then
shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. The
fear of God is the thing in my Text required unto his favor: And here the
Dispensation thereof is made conditional, and the tenor of the new Covenant,
with respect thereunto expressed. As also in the former Chapter; on the same
foot of account; it is put upon every man's election or choice, and laid there
that they do not fear God, Chapter 1.29. for that they wanted not assurance of help
from God, v. 23. if they had not rejected it, and disregarded his methods unto
it, v. 25.

3. There is moreover a Threat belonging to this Constitution. It Is no bare
Counsel, but has the force of a Law, which serves further to confirm what is
before asserted. Every Threat does virtually include a promise to the contrary,
in any establishment. The Precept in Conjunction with the Sanction, in case of
disobedience, Genesis 2.17. For in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
dye; is all that we have upon Record, touching the first Covenant established
with man. Yet, is it hence concluded, that a promise of Life unto Adam, in case
he continued in his obedience, cannot be doubted; for that it must be
certainly, tho tacitly included in the Threat.

The Commination or Threat here, is the denial of Grace, a Dereliction of God,
a judicial blinding and hardening, the taking away of former Talents
mis-improved, and leaving the Soul in an after-incapacity of Grace, as now past
it. How full is the Scripture in this point? From him shall be taken away, even
that he has, Mat. 13.12. lest at any time they should be converted, and I
should heal them, v. 15. When God commands the use of means in order to the
further communication of his Grace unto men, that they do what they can do: If
now they will not seek unto God, but set themselves down in a supine sloth and
negligence, at best; or speaking evil of those things which they know not: what
they know naturally, as bruit Beasts, in those things they will corrupt
themselves, as Jude speaks; affronting the Divine Majesty, grieving his Spirit,
resisting it, Act. 7.51. debauching their own Consciences, and quenching the
Spirit striving therein with them; then he threatens to give them up. Israel
would none of me: so I gave them up to their hearts lust, Ps. 81.12. O that my
people had hearkened to me, v. 13. God gave them over to a reprobate mind, Romans
1.28. that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.11, 12.
Now they are hid from thine eyes, Luke 19.42. thy day is past. I will put a new
Spirit within you, Ezekiel. 11.19. but as for them, whose heart walks after
their abominations, I will recompense their way upon their own head, v. 21.
Zech. 7.11, 13. The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed, i. e. the cost is
lost: Reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord has rejected
them, Jer. 6.29. Thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I
have caused my fury to rest upon thee, Ezekiel. 24.12, 13. My Spirit shall not
always strive with man, Genesis 6.3.

It Is true, that the Threat here does not every way run parallel with the
promise. In the Promise, God has laid an Obligation on himself, when the
Condition is performed. But the Threat carries in it but the nature of a penal
Law, which in its due Construction, tho it obliges the Sinner unto its Penalty
in case of forfeiture; yet it binds not the Lawgiver unto Execution in such
case. God has, as Supreme Governor, for weighty Reason, reserved to himself
his Prerogative Royal, as to the Execution of the Threat, (and the timing of
it, when he does it) as was hinted in the opening of the Text. Sometimes he has
foretold that he will, and we find actually that he has stepped out of the
course of his standing Law, and prevented some in the way of discriminating
Mercy, Act. 9.14, 15. (without wrong to any other in the like circumstances)
whose undoubted right it is, to have in his disposal some special grace and
favor, (which no mortal but has) to bestow on whom he pleases: according to
that noted saying of Prosper, Deus neminem deserit, etc. God leaves none, till
they forsake him, and many such, he often converts. But in the mean while, when
ever he does it, the Sinner had no warrant to expect it, or to adventure on it,
(which were to sin, that way might be made for discriminating Grace to abound)
no man has any ground to believe that God will convert him out of the way and
method prescribed unto him, in order to it. How many may have perished on that
Presumption, and that by their own wilful neglect; whilst they well knew, that
in the Communication of pardoning Grace and Acceptance unto Life; God has not
reserved to himself any the like liberty of Supersedure, to save any one, who
by a previous work of sanctifying Grace on his Soul, is not before prepared unto
Glory, Romans 9.23, 24. and therefore it must be a madness to adventure it.

Now then, Soul, if that be so, and this be thy case, say now, whether God
requires any impossibility of thee? or whether no relief was indeed offered
thee in the new Covenant grant? God has signified his willingness to admit of a
conference with thee here, and to put it upon thy Conscience, thy self being
Judge, touching the equality of his ways, Isa. 5.3, 7. What encouragement more
would thou have, or what assurance touching the possibility of thy attaining
unto favor with God, or unto Grace in order to it? If then thou declinest the
use of means, or every thing of duty required of thee, and persistest in those
evils which thou can avoid, to provoke God to withdraw his help from thee;
how can thou pretend thou would be healed of thy Souls distemper, as thou
suggestest, whilst yet thy own Conscience must subscribe to the righteousness
of Gods Judgment in condemning thee, eo nomine, if thou acceptest not
deliverance? What had the foolish Virgins to say, that they have not Oil in
their Vessels? Was it not their own fault, Mat. 25.9. Yea, and his mouth was
muzled, as it is in the Greek, that was challenged for not having on the
Wedding Garment, Mat. 22.12. he had nothing to say for himself. Can thou
think that thy Conscience will not reproach thee in Hell, for sinning against
real mercy and kindness, and for thy neglect of so great Salvation, if thou
be not converted and healed? Will not thy non-deliverance from wrath to
come, think thou, lie justly at thy own door by the Gospel? Can thou say,
that thou were left remediless under the first Apostasy? No, let God be true,
but every man a liar, Romans 3.4. God is not unrighteous, who takes vengeance:
the worm that shall not dye, will one day attest to it.

Let me then reassume the Exhortation, in the Apostles words, 2 Cor. 6.1. We
then as workers together with him, beseech you, that you receive not the Grace
of God in vain; comply with the offer of acceptance with him. Endeavor after
the fear of God, and work righteousness, which are the terms of it. Man is the
immediate formal efficient of it, not God; therefore essay it, use the means to
it, and look up to God for help. I have heard Ephrahim bemoaning himself thus,
turn thou me, Lord, and I shall be turned, Jer. 31.18. so do thou, and do it
speedily, as the Apostle subjoyns in the formentioned place, v. 2. Now is the
accepted time, behold now is the day of Salvation. So say I, set upon the work
now, without delay. While it is called to day, says the Author to the Hebrews,
lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin, Chapter 3.13. Sin is of
a charming nature, and has its subtle insinuations to keep its possession* and
that of the Presumption of an after repentance or change, which shall be time
enough, is none of the least of its deceits, or the less dangerous, when (1.)
life is its self short and uncertain. What a vanity and cheat then is it, to
dispose of that time, which no man is sure to enjoy, and that for the doing a
work, which if death comes before, he is remedilesly undone for ever. (2.) It Is
not Gods method to Convert men at the last hour. If it were so, what would
become of his Glory in this world? It would invert the order of his Government.
Sick bed repentances are seldom true. After Relapses do daily evince it. One or
two Rare instances on the other hand, are not to be, drawn into consequence, to
secure men of acceptance with God at last, in the neglect of his fear, and
their continuance in the service of the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, till
the last point of time. (3.) Sin continued in, and this change put off,
argues, the one for the present to be rather chosen, and the other nauseated.
And then to morrow and next day is likely to be as bad with thee, and worse
than to day. This procrastination tends to further hardening in sin; as in the
Text before named. (4.) That this Heart-change is the gift of God, in order to
his Favor, thou confessest, and insists upon; why then art thou not afraid
that for thy putting off the work which he enjoins thee to day, and not
answering to his present call and overtures of Grace, in complying with the
methods of it, that he should execute his threat, and seal thee up to
obduration? It may be thy case before thou art aware of it: Seek ye the Lord
while he may be found; call ye upon him while he is near, Isa. 55.6. then shall
they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they
shall not find me, Prove. 1.28. because I have called, and ye refused; v. 24.
for that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord, v. 29.
take heed that thou do not rue it when it be too late. Time may be left, and
yet the season be lost, Luke 19 42.

(2.) The other branch of the exhortation is unto all those who truly fear God,
and hope to be found righteous before him. Do you continue to walk in his fear,
and more and more to abound in the fruits of righteousness; more particularly
in those that have been instanced in, which were so Characteristical in
Cornelius. Pray always, look to the Soul concernments of all under your charge;
let Gods Name be Recorded in your Families, that they may be Nurseries for
Religion, and give hopes for posterity. Be kind, and merciful, like unto your
Heavenly Father. Keep up the repute of Religion, by an exact Conversation that
may be convincing. And let it appear not so much in a zealous pursuit of some
singular walk or opinion, as in the more weighty things of the Law, wherein all
that fear God must be agreed, and wherein the men of the world have also some
discerning, and are able to judge of a man's integrity; That they may not be
tempted to conclude, that strict piety and conscience toward God, is a thing
only verbally professed, and talked of, but no where to be found. Peter gives an
instance herein, of the prevalency of an exemplarary walk, even in women, tho
the weaker Vessels. That if any obey not the word, they also, i. e. their
husbands may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives; while
they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. with the
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great
price, v. 4. so of Husbands also in their place, without which their prayers
will be hindered, v. 7. what will any man's profession amount unto, without this?

Above all, if thou be one who desires to be found faithful with God, and be
kept steady in the way of Righteousness, look to preserve thy conscience
tender, and to keep the fear of God always upon thy Soul, in the several
instances before explained, wherein it does consist; especially as it denoted
an awful fixation of the eye of the Soul on him, or regard unto him in all thou
do, in the whole tract of thy life: O fear the Lord, ye his saints, Psalm.
34.9. this is the root and spring of all obedience, and of the entireness of
it, and that alone which will infer it, Genesis 22.12. let the fear of God possess
thy Soul, set him always before thee, call him to Record in all that thou
undertakest, and it will preserve thy footsteps, that they shall not halt, nor
slide. Happy is the man that fears always, Prove. 28.14 or that is in the fear
of the Lord all the day long, chapter 23.17. He walks surely: If the fear of God,
(which has always an attemperation of love in it, as was opened) once begin to
languish, or a forgetfulness of him begins to creep upon thy Soul, sin will
soon invade thee, and thou will fall into a decay. Thou art already withering
at the root. Take heed of Relapses. If you call on the father, who without
respect of persons judges according to every man's work, pass the time of your
sojcurning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17. Perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2
Cor. 7.1. this is the whole design of the Gospel. Tit. 2.11, 12. hereby is God
honored, Mal. 1.6. and without it, the design of our blessed Savior were
frustrated in his redemption of mankind; which was to retrieve, and bring back
the fear of God; and working righteousness into the world; that God might not
lose the homage of all his whole Family on earth at once, by the Apostasy, 1
Pet. 1.18.

Once more, to enforce the exhortation, let the Argument in the Text yet
further be weighed, and considered. Thy acceptance with God here and hereafter,
is suspended thereon by the Gospel. God will secure his own Glory, and has done
it, by the same method that he has done thy happiness.

Acceptance with God, as was opened, is a continued act; and so is the
condition whereon it is suspended, as the Scriptures do abundantly testify. It
is so in the promise, with which it is Connected. There is no condemnation to
them who are in Christ Jesus; but who may assume this to themselves? they who
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8. 1. see Genesis 17.1, 2.
Neh. 1.5. Psalm. 103.18. 1 Timothy 4.8. Chapter 6.18, 19. Romans 2.6, 13. Rev. 22.14. so
it is in the threat of the Gospel. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall
die, Romans 8.13. i. e. your justification, v. 1. shall be discontinued If we
deny him, he also will deny us, 2 Timothy 2.12. But if any man draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him. But he that shall endure to the end, the same
shall be saved, Mar. 13.13. not only the hazard of the loss of thy inward
peace, but of thy soul also, lies at stake, in case thou declinest from the
sear of God, or be again entangled and overcome of thy lusts, and turnest
from the way of Righteousness, and neglectest the holy Commandment of God,
according to that of the Prophet; but when the righteous turns away from his
righteousness, and commits iniquity, shall he live? All his righteousness
that he has done shall not be mentioned; in his sin that he has sinned he
shall die, Ezekiel. 18.24. that is, if he be not renewed again to repentance, and
amendment of life, or recovered from under his forfeiture. Here is that fear of
God called for, which was spoken to in the opening of the Doctrine, namely, of
his wrath in case of presumptuous sinning against him; which David was so
concerned about, Psalm. 19.13. and for the guilt whereof, he had his bones
broken and consumed. Psalm. 31.10. and 32.4. for thine arrows stick fast in me,
and thy hand presses me sore, Psalm. 38.2. There is no soundness in my flesh,
because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my
sin. My wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness, v. 3.5. Psalm.
51.8. all thy waves and thy billows are gone over me, Psalm. 42.7. and 88.7. his
sin had sprung a leak, that the waters came into his Soul, as he elsewhere
speaks. He might have ridden out any storm from without, if all had been right
within, had not a Capital guilt lain at his door, a Covenant breach; 2 Samuel 11.
and forfeiture of Gods complacential Love and Favor Iremembred God, and was
troubled, Psalm. 77 3. here was a sad change with him, who at other times could
say, how precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God, how great is the sum of
them, Psalm. 139.17. when he kept his integrity, v. 24.

Obj. But I have been taught, that faith alone is the condition of the new
Covenant, and consequently, that acceptance with. God is not suspended on his
fear or any works of righteousness to be performed by the creature; besides,
that the argument unto holiness from the hazard of Salvation, urged upon
believers, seems to subvert the doctrine of the Saints Perseverance in the love
and favor of God. The suspension of the arbitrary influences of Gods favor,
or the hidings of his Face, a Saint may fear, upon foul miscarriages, but not
the loss or suspension of acceptance with him, as if his pardon or title to
life eternal could be discontinued thereby.

Ans. The former part of the Objection is wholly resolved into the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith only, as being the same thing with acceptance with God,
and the leading promise of the new Covenant, as it imports the remission of
sins, and title to life everlasting. What a Labyrinth art thou brought into, by
thy not understanding the tenor of the Covenant? I appeal to thy own soul,
whether when thou read such Scriptures as Heb. 12.14. Ephesians. 5.5. thou can
shake off the fear of destruction, if thou would, in case thou relapsest
into such sins as there are threatened with death? If thou can, sad is thy
case: It Is not every imperfection thou know, that by the Gospel (however it
is by the Law) is of so mortal a nature.

Nor do thou any where read in the Bible, that man is justified by Faith
only, or alone, precisely taken, and without any restriction; but thou may
read the direct contrary, Jam. 2.24. and in other words, Luke 13.3, 5. However,
I hope thou will hold to the common distinction of a working Faith; that it is
necessary at least to the Faith that justifies, that is, works by sincere
obedience to all Gods Commands; that it is necessary to it as Faith, that it be
no dead Faith, tho not qua justificat, as justifying. To avoid controversy
then* in so momentous a point, I will come to thee on thy own Principles, if
thou will be true to them: I say, that we are not justified or accepted with
God, nor do continue so to be, through Faith only or alone, on our part,
(however we are agreed that it is by Christ alone): Thou say that it is not
by or through that Faith that is alone in the Subject; as that the fear of God,
and working Righteousness is required immediately unto acceptance with God, or
continuance in his favor, to qualify the person for it? Then, that it is so
required only to qualify Faith, or to make it perfect, Jam. 2.22. that it be
no dead carcass; but still thou deniest not but that mediately it is
indispensibly necessary to life, by the intervention of that Faith whereon
alone thou say it is suspended: Accordingly then, if thou have no other
standard of Righteousness to measure thy living Faith by, than I have before,
insisted on to measure and delineate the fear of God, and true Piety in any
person by, the issue at last is brought to the same.

Now then to come to the business; suppose thou should neglect the fear of
God, and not bring forth the fruits of Righteousness mentioned, or relapse into
any one of those gross wickednesses enumerated by the Apostle, Gal. 5.19. With
a (...), and such like, v. 21. that the flesh carries it in the combat
against the Spirit, (which was none of Paul's own case, Romans 7. he speaks not
there of the perpetration of any gross sin; the thief cannot say when he takes a
purse, that it is no more he; that what he would not do, that he does, etc. v.
17.20.) Suppose, I say, the government protempore, of Grace to be suspended,
and sin to usurp the rule and dominion for any time, notwithstanding the
vanquished dissent of thy mind, to the presumptuous conrtivement, and
harboring of some notorious impiety, which yet is no impossible supposition;
if thou look not to it, as I might give instances once and again, were it a
thing grateful to stay upon. What now would thou think of thy condition in
such case? Thou must say either, (1.) That the Faith which is alone, whether it
works, or not works, (if it be not lost) does continue to justify thee; or
that through it rather, to speak in the Scripture dialect, thou continuest
still justified, accepted, and meet for eternal life, tho it be no operative
Faith; which is to eat thy own words. Or, (2.) that such works of
Righteousness, as have been insisted on, or thy being cleansed from such sins
as the Apostle gives a catalogue of; for the fruits of the flesh in its regency
belong not to the works thou meanest, or the holiness or obedience which thou
take for necessary to qualify or inform thy working faith, as not belonging
to its essential Character: In the point of duty thou hold them required;
but that if they be wanting, and the flesh prevail, yet that at the same
instant of time it is no dead Faith which thou have; tho it works not as it
should do, yet it does so far as is necessary to thy Justification and
acceptance with God: If so, here then thou speak out. Or, (3.) If thou have
any misgiving that such fruits of Righteousness, brought forth in the fear of
God and abstinence from the contrary fruits of the flesh, do belong to the
Character of a living working Faith, thou must grant, that if it be otherwise
with thee, or should be thy case, thy Faith cannot be it that will save thee;
but that at such time being alone, thy title to acceptance with God will be
suspended and discontinued, which is that I have been urging upon thee to
consider, that thy Soul lies at stake upon thy obedience, as well now, as
before thy reception to favor with God, (but to the continuance I have proved
that they are), which as yet remains unshaken; and it therefore behooves thee
to look to it.

As for the other foot of the Objection, respecting the Saints Perseverance,
that belongs to the Doctrine of Election, or the Decrees, which can never run
cross to the standing Law of God neither. Know then, (1.) That such is the
connection between continuation in the fear of God, and working Righteousness,
and continuance in his favor, and title to blessedness, that he has not
decreed to preserve any one in the latter, without the former, 2 These. 2.13. 1
Pet. 1.2. and so runs his Law, Job. 15.10. 1 John 1.7. of which before. So that
perseverance in the favor of God, and his love of acceptance, and perseverance
in holiness, run parallel, and there can be no pretense to the one without the
other. (2.) We have a law or establishment, which God has made with his
people, touching their preservation and progress in grace, which is to be
attended unto. The dispensation of more grace and help in time of need, is
conditional unto them, in and by the Gospel. There is no promise, no provision
made in the Covenant of Grace struck with man, the administration whereof is
absolute to preserve any one from the greatest and most enormous sins, nor yet
from Apostasy it self, if he attends not to the duty prescribed in order to it;
nor has God promised that he shall so do; Grace is in its own nature loseable;
the best of men are mutable or defectible here; it is actuation, and
conservation depends on new supplies from him that gave it, 2 Cor. 12.9. which
God communicates through Christ, who is become the head of influence, John
15.4, 5. Gal. 2.^0. But the dispensation thereof is connected in the promise,
with a diligent heeding and attending on the duties prescribed in order to it,
which man through the talents received, and help availing him, is in an
immediate capacity unto; such are watching, 1 Cor. 16.13. Prayer unto God, Mark
14.28. Unite my heart to fear thy name, faith David, Psalm. 86.11. and take not
thy holy spirit from me, Psalm. 51.11, 12. To shake off sloth, and use
diligence, Heb. 6.11, 12. not to cater or provide for the flesh, Romans 13.14. to
avoid the occasions of evil, and abstain from the appearance of it, and resist
its first motions, 1 These. 5.22. to put on and keep in use the whole armor of
God, Ephesians. 6.11. and in exercising his Grace received, Joh. 5.2. adding thereby
Grace to Grace, with all diligence, 2 Pet. 1.5. If ye do these things, ye shall
never fall, says the Apostle, v. 10. i. e. into your old sins, v. 9. which
will blur your evidence for life, or stain your acceptance with God.

Hence it is, that the faithful are cautioned to take heed of falling, 1 Cor.
10.12. Heb. 3.13. and of Apostasy from God Heb. 10.25, 38, viz. in the diligent
use of the means Connected with the promise of their preservation, the which
while some have attended, they have been in a flourishing posture Godward,
Cant. 7.12. John 3.2. whilst other some have pined away; grace in them has
languished, and been ready to die, Rev. 3.2. and they, if in a saved state, yet
saved so as by fire, hardly, and not without loss, 1 Cor. 3.15. and who might
they thank but themselves? all is not to be resolved into the inevitable
consequent of the Lapse, or first transgression. They might have helped it. Nor
does the prerogative of God, here also reserved for the recovery of any one
after Relapses, or preventing the same, in pursuance of his hidden purpose,
derogate at all from this his standing law. No promise has God made on any
other terms than as before mentioned, Jude 20.21, 23, 24. Jam 4 5, 6.

3. If then through any man's wilful neglect, as before, the precept of the law
of grace becomes violated, I say again, the Sanction or Threat takes place,
without all respect of persons. If sin not only rebels, but proceeds for any
time, or in any single instance thereof, that is properly against the Gospel,
(...), to Reign, or to Lord it, Romans 6.12. susspending the government of Grace;
conscience it may be reniting; but served as the Prophet was by Asa, 2 Chr.
16.10. put in prison for reproving him; acceptance with God, as has been said,
is that while suspended, be it in any one whomsoever. The Law of God, as it
belongs to the first Covenant, condemns for every the least transgression of
it, as well as the greatest; and the greatest is as pardonaable, with respect
thereunto, as the least is, by the Gospel, Acts 13.39. But the Gospel relieves
none, whilst they remain uncleansed from wickednesses, Ps. 119.133. 1 Cor. 6.9,
11. or that violate its own proper obligation.

This new Law of God is immutable, as stable as the Pillars of the Heavens, and
of the Earth. What it once says, it always says, to any one whosoever. It Is a
most dangerous in let to profaneness, to suggest or harbor such a notion, that
a believer (or convert, let me add) is from under the threat of the Gospel, in
case of disobedience to its commands. I mean the threat of eternal destruction,
binding over the person immediately to it, (or rather leaving him to the Law;
not relieving him) tho it be not peremptory, save in the case of its finallity.
The proper penalty of the Gospel abides indeed only on the finally impenitent
and disobedient; and then it is remediless. Non est distinguendum, ubi lex non
distinguit. Either the Gospel threats no man with Exclusion out of the Kingdom
of God, and of Christ, for such acts of sin as those, Ephesians. 5.5. or it does all
men. Either it never did, or still it does, after believing, as well as before.
The Law is not changed, nor has any man a patent of Exemption from under the
Gospel Sanction; or if any have, who is there, but will put in for it?
Believers are as often cautioned in the case of Sin, to fear and take heed of
ruin, as others are, as has been before instanced in Scripture, To look to
themselves, that they lose not those things they have wrought, 2 John 8. and to
hold that fast which they have, that no man take their crown, Rev. 3.11, 21. to
fear, not the way of sin only, but themselves, if they start aside into it,
Mat. 10.22, 28. 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. as belonging to the true fear of God.

Neither does all this, at all interfere with the Doctrine of perseverance
duly stated, which has its rise and foundation only in Gods decree; the
Execution whereof is regulated by his standing Law, or according to it. Gods
purpose of bestowing his favor in, or continuing of it to any one, is so far
forth and no further, than as the subject shall according to his Law be found
meet or competent for it. Every unconverted person is condemned,
notwithstanding Gods secret purpose to convert, or call some, that they may be
justified. So his purpose to recover his elect from Apostasy or lying in Sin,
in order to their recovery to his favor, secureth none from forfeiture thereof
in the mean while. Nor has he decreed that no elect person shall ever so fall
as to forfeit it, and it were well that some men's heads were exercised less
about the Decrees, and that they attended more to the Law. The Leper under the
law, Lev. 14. upon his cleansing, atonement being made, was in statu quo;
restored to his rights, but not before. Nor was Peter upon his denial of
Christ, till his particular repentance, or his new conversion, Luke 22.32. the
threat took place to put a bar in his way unto life, if Christ may be believed,
who expressly had told him that it would, Mat. 10.33. and had he died without a
change, (which yet the seed of God remaining did propend toward) he had been
undone. Whom God elects to the end, he does to the means, which may fully serve
to remove that part of the objection out of the way, respecting the Saints
perseverance.

And for what is further insinuated, touching believers obligation only to fear
the hiding of Gods face, or loss of former peace, in case they relapse into
conscience-wasting sins, It Is obviated before in the doctrinal part. What the
word of God threats in such a case, that is it they are called to fear, and
that we have proved to be eternal destruction; the fear whereof is twofold,
Either (1) Suppositive, which is antecedent to any sin, and is required only to
awe them from it or prevent it. Such was Jobs, chap. 31.23. and Paul's, 1 Cor.
9.27. and such ought to have been David's fear, and Peter's, when no other motive
or inducement of the Gospel unto holiness, could or did hold them fast to their
duty. A manifold cord is not so soon broken. Love to God and Christ, is indeed
the most genuine spring of obedience, but it may also well consist with this
fear. Nay, it is an essential ingredient into the whole of that fear of God all
along insisted on, love, I say, in sincerity, is so, Ephesians 6.24. Yea, and it
must, under the same penalty of an Anathama Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. For, God
will not leave his government precarious. He knows our frame, and what is
necessary to us; we are not yet perfect as Adam, nay, much less confirmed. (2.)
Or Positive, this is only under such relapses as entrench on sincerity, and is
necessary in order to a recovery from under them; and imports the sense of
present actual danger of destruction upon the fall into, and lying in such sin.
And to admit the former to be a duty, but not this, is to grant the premises,
and then to deny the conclusion; to oblige a man to fear that, which when it
comes, cannot hurt him, nor touch him.

It is indeed the Prerogative of God, to create Peace in any Soul, Is. 57.19. 2
These. 3.16. and he may possibly for some time, vail the light of his
countenance from an upright walker with him, that he may wrongfully conclude
against himself, Job 33.23, 24. Is. 50.10. (which yet is not ordinary neither,
Is. 33.17.) whilst God in and by his Gospel, speaks Life and Peace to him. And
clear evidence, and strong consolation, is another thing; accompanying not
always the being and sincerity of Grace, but its growth, and gradual perfection,
rendering it discernable, Ps. 92.14. It Is not the portion of the negligent
unthrifty Christian however.

But our inquiry is not only about Consolation, but safety; not touching Gods
arbitrary withdrawings, whilst his word speaks peace all that while, if the
Soul could read it; but of what the Gospel speaks; not of what the Soul will
lose, but of what it ought not to keep, and of that active fear which is
necessary in the point of duty to it, in case of notorious decays or relapses.
Shall we think that David, for instance, (not to name many others) under his
blood-guiltiness, or whilst in the pursuit of it, 2 Samuel 11.15. was indeed
pardoned, but only wanted the sense thereof in his own Soul, as some
distinguish? Or that the depths, or perplexity that his conscence might be cast
into thereupon, before his return to God, Ps. 32.3, 5. was only a dereliction,
or on a misprision, or mistake; God not speaking peace to him, while his word
nevertheless did? or that the arrows of God shot into his soul, Ps. 38.2. were
not pointed or sharpened with any word of his? Or that his fear of the loss of
Gods favor must be but infidelity added to his former sin, and to fear where
no fear was? who dare to think this?

Nor can the decree of God touching the recovery of his elect from such
relapses, help out here, if that be thy case, who ever thus objectest; if as
yet, thou art not humbled, nor brought back to God. That thou can not at
present have or keep any evidence of thy acceptance with God, all do grant it
impossible; and I have assigned the true reason thereof, from the tenor of his
Covenant. Nor can thou now know that thou art elect, or be assured that thou
were once effectually called, nor consequently that thou shall ever be renewed
again to repentance, whilst thou art not in the way of it. Nor, which is more,
thou art not sure to live to another moment of time in order to it; say if thou
be assured of it. David was aware of this, when he cried unto God; O spare
me, that I may recover strength before I go hence and be no more, Ps. 39.13. he
knew he was not fit to die; nor yet certain to live neither.

Dismissing then the Objection, which I have thus largely answered; for that I
have not found it by any fully spoken to, tho I have found the consequent of it
dangerous to many that have insisted on it. Let me once again exhort thee, if
thou be one who retainest the fear of God at the bottom, to walk in his
fear, and to abound in the fruits of righteousness, which is the just Character
of one accepted with God. Cast not off the Authority of his Law on the one hand
to aw thee to it; on the other hand, account it not mercenary to lay hold of
the promise of the Gospel to encourage thee therein, even that of the Text, Of
acceptance with God. Nor don't think that thou have no need of either;
diligence in the exercise of Grace, is the only method prescribed by God, for
the making thy calling and election sure to thee, 2 Pet. 1.5, 10. No wonder if
thou be at a loss about thy condition, and afraid to appear before God, if
thou have been, or art neglective in the sear of him, and the fruits thereof,
which have been insisted on. Acquaint thy self with God, keep the eye of thy
soul fixed toward him; set him always before thee, in thy mind, as the rule
and measure, the record and witness, the scope and end, the judge and final
rewarder of all thy actions; always, that is habitually, as the Traveller
thinks of the place he is going unto, so often, (tho not every instant of
time) as not to lose his way at any turning; and this fear will preserve thee
in the path way of righteousness, and at length will safely conduct thee to
blessedness, Ps. 37.31, 37. Nor be discouraged at thy own weakness, or the rubs
in thy way. For, tho the youth shall faint and be weary, and the young men
utterly fall: they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength. Is.
40.31. they shall neither faint, fall, nor give over. I shall wind up all, in
the words of the Preacher, Ecc. 12.13, 14. Let us hear the conclusion of the
whole matter; fear God, and keep his commandments; for this is the whole of
man. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil. God is no respecter of persons, etc.

FINIS.

