THE Fifth Volume OF LETTERS Writ by a Turkish Spy, Who lived Five and Forty
Years, Undiscovered, at PARIS: Giving an Impartial Account to the Divan at
Constantinople, of the most Remarkable Transactions of Europe; And discovering
several Intrigues and Secrets of the Christian Courts (especially of that of
France) continued from the Year 1654, to the Year 1682.

Written Originally in Arabic, Translated into Italian, and from thence into
English, by the Translator of the First Volume.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Henry Rhodes, near Bride-lane, in
Fleet Street, 1692.

Mahmut The Turkish spy Aetais suae 72
F. H. van. Hove. sculp:


TO THE READER.
PRefaces, methinks, are so much like the Printed Bills, pasted upon the Booths
in Bartholomew-Fair, to give an Account of the Entertainment you are to expect
within; that, were it not in Pure Compliance with Custom, one would forswear
writing any. But the World is humorous, and must be served according to its own
Fashion. Every Thing's damned, that is not a la Mode. And he that publishes a
Book, without Civilly accosting the Reader at the Beginning, is thought to
entrench upon Good Manners.

To prevent all these Inconveniences, it is thought fit once more to say a Word
or Two; not in Praise of this Volume of Letters, (even let it take its Fortune
as the other Four have done) but by Way of Apology for some Things which may
seem liable to Censure.

Some perhaps will be offended at the Zeal which appears in this Arabian, when
he writes in Honor of the Mohammedan Faith. Others will as much wonder at his
Looseness and Indifference, his Doubtfulness of all Things: For, in some of his
Letters, he appears a Great Sceptick, and confesses himself so.

These Gentlemen ought to consider, that his Style and Sentiments, are suited
to the Quality of the Person to whom he writes. To his Intimate Friends, he
unbosoms himself with Abundance of Frankness: But when he addresses to the
Mufti, or other Grandees of the Port, he is Cautious and Reserved.

It may be supposed, that he understood himself very well, or else he was not
fit for that Employment in Paris. And, without Doubt, having had his Education
in the Seraglio, as he professes, he was no Stranger to the Punctilio's of
Address used in the Turkish Court. It was his Policy and Interest, to appear a
very Devout Mohammedan, when he wrote to the Ministers of State: And it is
possible, he was so in Reality, or at least persuaded himself so at certain
Seasons. And yet this hinders not, but he might at other Times take the Liberty
to descant on some Absurdities in their Doctrine and Practice, when he wrote to
his Familiars, and was minded to converse with Freedom.

If in some Points, he seems to give Credit to the Arabian Writers, who have
treated of Egypt and its Antiquities; in others, he shows himself a Man not
overfond of Fables and Romances.

However, let his Opinions be what they will, and his Sentiments never so
Extravagant in Matters of Speculation and Controversy; so long as his Morals
are sound and good, there is no Occasion to be Captious. We need not fear that
any Christian, or any Man of Sense will be Proselyted by his Letters, to a
Religion which he himself, though professing it, yet so often doubts of, and
ridicules.

He speaks very Honorably of Christ, and Impartially of Christians, accusing
their Vices rather than their Doctrines, and appearing all along a Moderate Man
in his Sentiments of Religion, and a Friend to Virtue and Reason. If he
discovers some Failings, in being too Melancholy; consider, that he was a
Mortal like other Men. However, Reader, admire his Untainted Loyalty, and
Imitate it.

You will find in this Volume, True History, with Variety of Solid Remarks. And
not a few Secrets of Cardinal Mazarini, and Oliver Cromwell, Uncabineted.
Particularly, that Famous Intrigue carried on by Colonel Spintelet and his
Confederates, to save Ostend from being surprised by the French in the Year
1658, and to bubble Two of the Ablest Statesmen in Europe.

After all, assure thy self, that the next Volume will contain more Illustrious
Relations, than any that has gone before. Where you will hear of an End put to
the War between France and Spain, after it had lasted Five and Twenty Years;
and the Marriage of Lewis XIV. with the Spanish Infanta; as also of an
Universal Peace in Christendom: The Restoration of Charles II. to his Crown
and Kingdoms, after Twelve Years Exile in Foreign Countries, and Twelve several
Revolutions of Government, here at Home. With many other Memorable and
Important Events and Transactions in the World: As the dreadful Earthquake
which overturned Part of the Pyrenaean Mountains; the more Destructive Plague
which swept away almost a Hundred Thousand People in London; and the Deplorable
Fire which consumed the Greatest Part of that Famous City, in the Space of
Three Days.

You will there also find an Account of the Death of that Great Minister of
State, Cardinal Mazarini: Of the Duke of Orleance, Uncle to the French King: Of
the Duchess of Savoy: Of Carolus Josephus, the Emperor's Brother: Of the Duke
of Vendome: Of the Queen Mother of France; and of Philip IV. King of Spain,
with other Persons of Princely Quality.

For this Arabian was Careful to transmit to the Ottoman Port, Intelligence of
all Things which were most Remarkable in Europe. And that his Letters might not
seem Tedious, he intermixed Moral Reflections, with some Maxims of Policy,
Essays of Reason, and now and then a Touch of Philosophy. And if we may guess
at the Cause of his more abounding in these Kind of Miscellany Discourses after
the Year 1659, than he did before: It seems probable, that a General Peace
about that Time being established in Europe, he had little else to write, but
his Observations on the several States and Courts of Christian Princes, the
Different Manners, Customs and Laws of People; the Counsels and Intrigues of
Statesmen: With such other Matters as occurred worthy of Notice.

If either in this Volume, or in those that are to come, he seems in any of his
Letters to alter his Opinion, and contradict his Former Sentiments; remember,
it is no more than what the Greatest Writers have done, who have lived to Old
Age, as this Agent did. No Body is Ignorant of St. Augustine's Retractations,
and Cornelius Agrippa's Vanity of Sciences; wherein those Two Great Authors run
counter to all that they had writ before. And 'twere easy to produce a Hundred
Instances besides.

In a Word, Reader, take in good Part the Translator's Pains, who renders
Things as he found 'em, without Altering or Corrupting the Sense of his Copy.
Farewell.

A TABLE OF THE LETTERS and Matters contained in this Volume. VOL. V.
BOOK I.
LETTER I. MAhmut the Arabian, and Vilest of the Grand Signior 's Slaves, to
the Mysterious Esad, Arbitrator of doubtful Problems, Prince of the Mufti's. p.
1. He complains for Want of Fuller Instructions in several Cases; and
particularly desires his Counsel as to the Fast of Ramezan.

II. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. p. 6 Remarks on the Death of the
Roman King: with some Curious Epitaphs.

III. To Mahummed Hodgia, Venerable Eremit of the Cave replete with Wonders. p.
12 Of Mahmut's Infirmities: A Remarkable Story of Clearchus, a devout Man in
Asia.

IV. To the Kaimacham. p. 20 Of the Sieges of Stenay and Arras. A Notable
Instance of Gallantry in the Garrison of Merdin.

V. To Dgnet Oglou. p. 23 Mahmut acquaints him how he spends his Birthday.
With Reflections on the Usual Vanity of Mortals at such times.

VI. To the Selictar Aga, or Sword Bearer to the Grand Signior. p. 27 Of the
Surrender (...) Stenay, and Relief of Arras. Remarks on the Signs which went
before the King of the Roman's Death. Of Queen Christina's coming to Antwerp.

VII. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Grand Signior 's Customs at
Constantinople. p. 31 He advises him to be frugal of Time, and not to spend it
in Gaming. The Misfortune of a Chinese Captain.

VIII. To the Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. p. 37 He
expostulates with him, about Kienan Bassa's Old Grudge, etc.

IX. To the Venerable Mufti. p. 40 Of the Popes Sickness, and Last Will. A
Character of his Sister-in-Law, Donna Olympia. Of the War between the
Moscovites and Polanders. Of the Grand Signior's Losses by Sea.

X. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Grand Signior 's Customs. p. 44
He informs him of the Arrival of his Mother Oucomiche, and his Cousin Isouf, at
Paris.

XI. To Adonai, a Jew, Prisoner in the Tower of Nona at Rome. p. 50 He
reprehends his Immorality, for meddling with the Religion of the Romans. Teaches
him a Receipt to procure his Escape.

XII. To Mehemet, once an Eunuch-Page in the Seraglio, but now an Exile in
Egypt at Grand Caire. p. 55 Of the Lawfulness of Wine. A Dispute between Noah
and the Devil about it. Of Joseph's Prison; the Land of Alphion; the Story of
Hagar the Mother of Ismael, and other Matters.

XIII. To Kerker Hassan, Bassa. p. 62 Of the Popes Death; and of the Ambition
of the Roman Clergy.

XIV. to the Kaimacham. p. 65 He blames Kisur Dramelec, Secretary of the
Nazarene Affairs, for not sending him timely and good Intelligence. Of a
Violent Plague in Moscovy. Of Egyptians or Gypsies.

XV. To the same. p. 70 Diverse Opinions concerning the Original of the Gypsies.
Of the Conclave at Rome, and of Cardinal de Retz.


BOOK II.
LETTER I. TO Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior. p. 75 A Story of
Helal, a Physician of Arabia. Of Avicen, and of Thabet Eb'n Abrahim.

II. To Afis Bassa. p. 85 Of the Strange Punishment inflicted on a Deer-Stealer
of Wittemberg by the Elector of Saxony. A Story of an Arabian Captain.

III. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. p. 87 More on the same Subject.
Remarks on the Indians, and on the Law of Moses.

IV. To Dgebe Nafir, Bassa. p. 91 Of the Sects and Divisions among the
Christians. Particularly, of the Wars between the Catholics and Protestants in
Piedmont.

V. To William Vospel, a Recluse of Austria. p. 94 Of the Sepulcher of King
Childeric. Mahmut presents him with a Cabinet of Curious Antiquities.

VI. To the most Illustrious and Invincible Vizir Azem at the Port. p. 99 Of a
Secret Order given him by the Vizir; and the Necessity of a Turkish Ambassador
in the French Court to carry on the Design.

VII. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. p. 103 He advises him not to be too
Religious, but to follow his Business cheerfully.

VII. To Mustapha Lulu Beamrilla, a Man of the Law. p. 105 He argues against
the false Notions of the Resurrection Common among Mahometans and Christians.
Of the Apparition of Bones in Egypt.

IX. To Solomon, Kuslir Aga, Prince of the Black Eunuchs. p. 110 Of the Advance
of the Bassa of Aleppo to the Prime Vizirate.

X. To the most Illustrious Vizir Azem, at the Port. p. 113 He Congratulates
his New Dignity; and claims a Reward for having formerly accused him to the
Divan, when he held Correspondence with the Venetians.

XI. To Mehemet, an Exiled Eunuch, at Caire in Egypt. p. 117 He ridicules some
Stories of the Egyptians, and relates in short the Voyage of Domingo Gonsales
to the Moon.

XII. To Zornesan Mustapha, Bassa of the Sea. p. 121 He wishes him good Success
against the Venetians; a short Character of that People. Of the Conquest of
Jamaica by the English. A Discourse of Oliver, the English Protector. Of
Leopoldus Ignatius Josephus's being Elected King of the Romans.

XIII. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Grand Signior 's Customs. p.
126 An Encomium of his Cousin Isouf. Of his being in Moscovy. He desires him to
recommend Isouf to Kerker Hassan, Bassa. Isouf's Remarks on Egypt.

XIV. To Ismael Kaidar, Cheik, a Man of the Law. p. 130 Of Queen Christian's
Rambles through Europe. With an Italian Libel which was found in the Hands of
Pasquin.

XV. To the same. p. 133 Of a New Star appearing in Europe. The Jews Opinion of
it, and of their Messiah. Of the Rebellion of the late Vizir Azem's Son. Of a
Peace between the French and the English.

XVI. To Solomon, his Cousin, at Scutari. p. 138 He reprehends his
Discontentedness, and encourages him to follow his Trade, by several Eminent
Examples. A Story of Diogenes and Plato.

XVII. To Melec Amet. p. 144 Of a Moor Baptized in Paris. Of the Ottoman Friar
in Malta. And of Don Philippo, Son of the Dey of Tunis. Of Cardinal Mazarini's
Trick to hinder Suedeland and Brandenburgh from making a League against King
Casimir.

XVIII. To Sedrec Al' Girawn, Chief Treasurer to the Grand Signior. p. 149 He
Congratulates his New Honor. Of Kienan Bassa's being found by the Tartars on a
Dunghill in Moscovy, when a Child. He descants on the late Sedition at
Constantinople.

XIX. To the same. p. 156 How Mahmut's Chamber was searched, and the Method he
took to secure his Box of Letters.


BOOK III.
LETTER I. TO Dgnet Oglou. p. 165 He discourses concerning Chance, and the
Origin of Evil. Of Deists in Europe. And of the Sincere Fraternity among the
Ancient Arabians.

II. To the Nazin Eschref, or Prince of the Emirs at the Port. p. 172 Of a
Terrible Plague broke out in Rome, Naples and the Adjacent Parts. Of the Loss
of Valenciennes to the Spaniards. Of Adonai's Death at Rome.

III. To Melec Amet. p. 176 Of a Great Chasme or Breach made in the Earth not
far from Paris.

IV. To Zornezan Mustapha, Beglerbeg of Erz'ram. p. 177 He Congratulates his
Retreat from the Toils and Perils of the Seraglio. Reflections on the Authors
of the late Troubles at Constantinople.

V. To the most Renowned and most illustrious Vizir Azem at the Port. p. 181
Mahmut Congratulates his Assumption to this Dignity. Presents him with the
Pictures of the French King, Cardinal Mazarini, Queen of Sueden, and others: As
also with Twelve Watches of his own Workmanship. Of Queen Christina's
Entertainment at the French Court.

VI. To Abrahim Eli Zeid, Hogia, Preacher to the Seraglio. p. 86 He descants on
the Covenant of Mahomet with the Christians. Some Prophetic Passages of
Mahomet. A Story of a Black Image in Spain.

VII. To Murat, Bassa. p. 191 Of the Death of the King of Portugal, and the
Coronation of his Son. Of Count Harcourt's playing Fast and Loose with the
French King. And of the Marshall de la Ferte's Bravery.

VIII. To Hebatolla Mir Argun, Superior of the Convent of Dervishes at Cogni in
Natolia. p. 194 He condoles the Death of Bedredin his Predecessor: Sends him
the True Effigies of the Messiah; With a short History of John the Baptist.

IX. To Selim Al' Mosel, Venerable Imaum of the Mosch of Santa Sophia. p. 201
Of Columbus the First Discoverer of America. And of the Destruction of Lima and
Calao, Two Cities in Peru, by an Earthquake and Fire from Heaven.

X. To Mustapha, Bassa. p. 206 Of Ismael Bir Couli Can, the Persian Ambassador
at the Port.

XI. To Mehemet, an Exiled Eunuch in Egypt. p. 210 He acquaints him with the
Death of Solomon the Kuslir Aga. Of the Antiquity of the Pyramids. King
Saurid's Vision. Another of Aclimon the High Priest. He asserts the Eternity of
the World.

XII. To the most Venerable Mufti. p. 220 He congratulates his Assumption to
that Sacred Dignity: Proposes the Advantage of Translating Histories into the
Turkish Language. And discourses of the Ancient Arabians and Scythians.

XIII. To the Kaimacham. p. 206 Of the German Emperor's Death: The Ill State
of the Empire: The Factions of the Electors; And Cardinal Mazarini's Aims.

XIV. To Raba Mahomet, General of the Ottoman Forces, at his Camp near
Adrianople. p. 229 Of the Affairs of Babylon, and the Persians. Of the Troubles
in Europe. Of a Terrible Eruption of Fire from Mount Aetna in Sicily.

XV. To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior. p. 234 He descants on the
Succession of Abu-Becre, Omar and Othman, the First Caliphs. And seems to
favor Hali, the Prophet of the Persians.

XVI. To Cara Mustapha, Bassa. p. 238 Of the Isle of Tenedos; and the Trojan
Wars. Of Ajax's Folly in Killing himself. Of Seventeen Spanish Ships of War
burnt and sunk by the English under the Command of Admiral Blake. With other
Matters.

XVII. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. p. 243. Of the Quarrel between the
Elector of Bavaria and Prince Palatine, about the Vicarship of the Empire.

XVIII. To Melech Amet. p. 247 Of Trances and Ecstasies. A Story of Saleh, an
Indian Physician.

XIX. To the Kaimacham. p. 252 Of the Surrender of Montmedi to the French, and
the Speech of the Governor to the King. Of the Turks Ill Successes in Candia.

XX. To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna. p. 258 He relates in short the Life
and Miracles of Mahomet.

XXI. To Dicheu Hussein, Bassa. p. 264 Of a Quarrel between the French and
Spanish Ambassadors at the Hague. With other Intelligence from Denmark,
Portugal, Munster, and the German Court.

XXII. To Dgnet Oglou. p. 267 He complains of his Friends Reservedness and
Silence. Rebukes the Trivial Controversies of the Mussulmans. And denies that
God has a Body or Passions like us.

XXIII. To the Aga of the Janissaries. p. 273 Of the Suedes taking
Fredericks-Ode by Storm. An Interview of the King of Poland and Elector of
Brandenburgh. Of the taking of Mardike by the French and English.


BOOK IV.
LETTER I. TO Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior. p. 277 He discourses
of Free Will and Predestination. A Digression, occasioned by a sudden Tempest
of Thunder and Lightning.

II. To Mustapha, Bassa. p. 283 Of Queen Christina's Sentencing one of her
Domestics to Death. And the Censure of the Civilians thereupon.

III. To Mustapha, Berber Aga. p. 286 He acquaints him with the Birth of a
Young Prince of Spain, and the Extraordinary Magnificences exhibited by the
Spanish Ambassador at the Hague on this Occasion.

IV. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Grand Signior's Customs, at
Constantinople. p. 289 Of his Mother Oucomiche; and of Isouf his Cousin. Of the
Pyramids and Mummies; With some Remarks on the Nile.

V. To the Kaimacham. p. 297 Of the Sentence pronounced by the Venetians
against Girolamo Loredan, and Giovanni Contarimi. Examples of Justice on
Traitors. Of great Inundations in Germany and Flanders.

VI. To Solomon, his Cousin, at Constantinople. p. 301 He expostulates with him
about his being too Religious. Several Opinions of Philosophers concerning the
Soul.

VII. To Afis, Bassa. p. 306 Of an Interview between the Kings of Denmark and
Suedeland: And the Peace that ensued.

VIII. To the Mufti. p. 309 He acquaints him with the Project of a certain
Jesuit, to reform the State of Christendom.

IX. To Abdel Melec Muli Omar. p. 315 He relates in Short his Education, and
the Method of his Studies in Sicily. A Word or Two of Porphyry.

X. To Murat, Bassa. p. 320 Of the taking Dunkirk by the French, and the
putting it into the Hands of the English. Of the French King's Illness and
Recovery.

XI. To Mohammed, the Eremite of Mount Vriel in Arabia. p. 323 He discourses of
his own Passions and Vices. With something of his Virtues.

XII. To Achmet Padishami Culligiz, Bassa. p. 330 He congratulates his
Succession to Darnish Mehemet, Bassa. Of the Election of a New German Emperor.
The Death of Oliver; and the French Design on Ostend.

XIII. To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Grand Signior 's Customs, at
Constantinople. p. 338 Of the Artick Regions, and the Nature of Cold. Of the
Works which the Northern People build upon the Ice. Of the Funeral Monuments of
Ancient Hero's.

XIV. To Zeidi Alamanzi, a Merchant of Venice. p. 313 He recommends to him
Fidelity: And gives him a Short Account of his Life.

XV. To the Kaimacham. p. 345 Of the Jealousy of the Venetians toward
Strangers. A General Character of the Italians. A Comparison of them with the
French.

XVI. To William Vospel, a Recluse of Austria. p. 350 Of a Street in Paris
called the Street of Hell. Remarks on the Nature of Incorporeal Beings.

XVII. To the Venerable Ibrahim, Cadilesquer of Romeli. p. 353 Of the Interview
between Cardinal Mazarini, and Dom Louis de Haro, the Spanish Minister, in
Order to a Peace.

XVIII. To Musu Abul Yahyan, Alfaqui, Professor of Theology at Fez. p. 355 Of
the Zune, o^ Book of Doctrine. Of the Piety of Omar Eb'n Abdil Azis, the Ninth
Caliph.


ERRATA.
PAge 94. line 24. for have enjoined, read have been enjoined. Page 181. line
20. for I renew, read I revere. Page 192. line 12. for of Fathers, read of
their Fathers. Page 286. line 25. for the Moon, read this Moon. Page 288. line
33. for 7th. of the 1st. Moon, read 17th. of the 1st. Moon.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
VOL. V.
BOOK I.
LETTER I.
Mahmut the Arabian, and Vilest of the Grand Signior 's Slaves, to the
Mysterious Esad, Arbitrator of Doubtful Problems, Prince of the Mufti's.
WHEN I first came to Paris, my Instructions were not so Full and Particular,
as to direct me in all Emergencies. A great many Things were left to my own
Conduct and Prudence, both in Civil and Religious Matters. So that if I have
made any false Steps, I hope 'twill be Excusable; in Regard, it is not so much
my Fault, as that of the Ministers who reside at the August Port. I have often
addressed to them, desiring Supplemental Rules and Cautions in some Peculiar
Cases which I proposed: But they have been very sparing of their Counsels. It Is
true indeed, about Five Years ago, I received some Particular Orders from the
then Vizir Azem, and the Kaimacham, as also from thy Sanctity: Wherein I was
commanded to write with all Freedom to the Grandees. This, with the other
Directions, has been of great Use to me. It has armed me with fresh Courage,
and removed the Melancholy Apprehensions I had of some Men's Revenge, whose
Vices I reproved. Praise be to God, King of the Day of Judgment, I have accused
no Man wrongfully. Yet I was full of Fears, even in the Performance of my Duty:
Knowing, that Mortals Generally love to have their Faults Concealed, and pursue
those with Malice, who discover or reprehend 'em. But now, all my Fears in that
Kind are vanished. Yet, I have Scruples of another Nature, which none but the
Infallible Guide of the Faithful can disperse.

Ever since I have resided here, I have been precise in observing all the
Precepts of our Holy Law, so far as consisted with the Security and Success of
my Commission. For, I have been forced to leap over many Lies and False Oaths,
to conceal my self. I have likewise done Abundance of other Irregular Things,
to promote the Cause I am engaged in. For all which, thou have vouchsafed me a
Dispensation. There remains One Thing, in which thy Advice is Necessary.

I have been hitherto Punctual in keeping the Fast of Ramezan, at the Time
appointed to all Mussulmans. Which, thou know, falls Earlier by Eleven Days
every Year, than it did the Year before. So that in the Space of Four and
Thirty Years, it passes through all the Four Seasons. Now this Successive
Variation of the Great Fast, causing it sometimes to fall at the very Times of
the most solemn Festivals among the Nazarenes, such as that which they call
their Christmas, which is a Feast of Thirteen Days; I fear lest I may be taken
Notice of, should I, by Celebrating the Ramezan at those Times, contradict the
Universal Practice of all the Franks, and start Suspicions in those with whom I
converse, to my Disadvantage and Ruin.

To thee therefore, who art the Wisest of the Wise, I fly for Counsel in this
Exigency: Beseeching thee, to dictate plainly what I am to do.

I know, that the Sick, or Wounded, or Travelers, are Dispensed with, if they
Violate the Sacred Moon. At which Time, the Gates of Paradise are Opened, and
Invisible Favors are done to the Devout Observers of this Precept: Whilst the
Avenues of Heli are barricado'd, and all the Devils Chained up from appearing
abroad, or doing any Mischief in the World. I say, I am not Ignorant of the
Indulgence which is given to Men under such Circumstances; provided they
satisfy the Law, by keeping the Fast at some other Season, more agreeable to
their Health, or other Necessities. And thus far I could have silenced the
Alarms of my own Conscience, without molesting thee: Knowing, that a Mussulman
is always allowed this Liberty in a Foreign Country, much more in a Region of
Infidels.

But that which I aim at, is to be informed, Whether, to put the better
Disguize upon my self, and more efficaciously to prosecute the Interest of the
Grand Signior, I may not always Celebrate this Fast, at the precise Time that
the Christians keep their Lent? For then I should pass unsuspected, and no Man
would take me for any other, than a Christian and a Catholic. Nay, my Manner
of Daily Fasting at that Time, would raise me a Considerable Credit among the
Christians that know me. They would cry me up for a Saint, or a very Holy Man.
For, the Fast of the Christians is a Feast, in Comparison with the Rigorous
Abstinence of the Mussulmans. Those indeed refrain all Sorts of Flesh, but they
load their Tables with Variety of Fish and other Dainties; neither have they
Patience to tarry for their Repast beyond the Midday. Whereas, the Mussulmans
taste of Nothing during the Ramezan, till the Sun is gone down, and the Stars
appear. No, not even in the parching Deserts of Arabia, where Men are ready to
perish of Thirst. Yet no Man will extend his Hand to the Water-Pot, to refresh
himself in those Unspeakable Agonies, till the Shadow of the Earth, is advanced
into the Higher Region of the Air, and has banished the least Glimmerings of
the Sun. When therefore the Franks shall see me Fast after this Austere Fashion
in their Lent, they will say, I am a very Mortified Man, and a Devout
Catholic: For, they judge altogether by the Outside. So, if any Danger should
threaten me, I should find Friends among the Zealots: And the Indifferent,
would not appear my Enemies: But the Wicked, whose Black Guilt has rendered 'em
a Terror to themselves, as well as an Abomination to others, would stand in
fear of me. Thus, on all Hands, a Way would be open for me, to escape a
Discovery of the Secrets committed to my Charge.

'Twould be much more to my Satisfaction, if I could with Safety Celebrate this
Fast, in the very Moon wherein the Alcoran was brought down from Heaven, as all
Good Mussulmans Generally do. But I am taught, not to betray, or so much as
hazard the Affairs of my Great Master, for a mere Nicety or Punctilio of
Religion. God is the Merciful of the Merciful. And it is his Will, that the
Empire of the True Faithful, should be extended wherever the Moon or the Sun
shine on Earth.

Great Oracle of the Mussulmans, Doctor of Faith and Verity, it is in thy Power
to confirm or shake my Resolution in this Point. For, from thy Sentence, there
is no Appeal.

Paris, 5th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER II.
To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
THou Informest me, that the King of the Romans is dead, and that diverse
Prodigies happened about the Time of his Expiring. Whilst others report, That
the German Emperor himself died the 9th. of the last Moon. However, I shall
transmit thy Advice to the Shining Port; not trusting to the Uncertain
Intelligence of Fame.

Kings and Emperors must resign up their Breath, as well as Other Mortals.
It Is a Tribute we all owe to Nature, who will be paid, one Time or other.
Neither has she ever exempted any from the Common Lot, save Enoch, Elias, and
Jesus the Son of Mary. These were Holy Prophets, Perfect Saints, and void of
Original Sin; and therefore received an Indulgence. Though those of your Nation,
and the Christians believe, That the last of these Three died on a Cross.

As for all others, they have either been dissolved by Sickness, or snatched
away by sudden Death: Some by an Invisible Dart from Heaven; Others by the
Ruder Hand of Mortals like themselves; Millions by the Sword and Spear, and Ten
Millions by the swifter and more Unavoidable Stroke of the Arrow and Bullet.
Whilst not a few have received their Death, from the very Elements which
supported their Life. An Unruly Fire has crumbled some into their First Atoms,
and mingled their Ashes with those of their Houses and Beds of Repose: Whilst
Water, a Contrary Principle, has quenched the Vital Flame in others. There is
but One Way to enter into this Life; but the Gates of Death, and the Invisible
State, are without Number. And the Greatest Monarch may as well fall by the
Prick of a Thorn, as by the Edge of a Sword. Every Time I swallow my Meat, I
remember the Fate of him who was choked by a Grain of Pepper; And that of
Anacreon the Poet, who was strangled by the Stone of a Raisin.

Yet I am not solicitous in Choosing or Avoiding Particular Deaths; knowing,
that no Human Counsel, can prevent the Decrees of Destiny. It rather pleases me
to think (such is my Ambition) that by whatsoever Method I am sent to the
Grave, there I shall be Equal to the Alexanders, Caesar's, Timurlengs, and the
Greatest Mortals. For there is no Distinction of Noble and Vulgar, in that
Region of Anarchy, where all ranks are levelled in the Dust: As Diogenes told
Alexander the Great; when the Monarch, beholding that Philosopher in a
Charnel-House, his Eyes attentively fixed on the Bones of the Dead which lay in
Heaps, asked him, What he was doing? To whom Diogenes replied, I am looking for
thy Father Philip 's Bones, but cannot distinguish 'em from those of his
Slaves. Some such Thought as this, might perhaps first occasion the Custom of
writing Epitaphs on the Sepulchers of Eminent Persons. Among which I have read
some made by the Entombed themselves, whilst they were on this side the Grave;
and for their singular Fancy, were thought worthy to be Recorded by
Historians. Such as this:

I Sabbas of Milan, by Blood a Castilian, Friar and Knight of Jerusalem, wish a
happy Resurrection to my Ashes. While I was alive among Mortals, a little
satisfied me. Now I am dead, and alone in my Grave, I am content with less. I
neither knew my self, what I was; nor do thou enquire. Traveller, whoever thou
art, if thou be Pious, pray for me, and pass on. Farewell, and live mindful of
Death. Living, I provided this Epitaph, knowing I must die:

The Birth and Life of Mortals, are nothing but Toil and Death.

Such another was that of Heliodorus, a Moor; who caused himself to be Buried
near to the Pillars of Hercules, with this Inscription on his Tomb.

I Heliodorus, a Mad Carthaginian, have commanded by my last Will and
Testament, that I should be Interred here in this Farthest Angle of the World:
To make Experiment, whether any Man more Mad than my self, would travel thus
far to visit my Sepulcher.

But that which Semiramis caused to be Inscribed on her Tomb, was a perfect
Satyr on the Living. It was this.

I Semiramis, whilst Living never was in need of Money; yet was always
Compassionate to the Poor. Now I Am Dead, my Grave is my Treasury. If any of
Royal Race be in Want, let him open this Dormitory, and he shall find a Supply.

When Darius Conquered Babylon, and was told of this Epitaph; stung with
Avarice, he caused the Sepulcher to be opened, in his own Presence. But instead
of Money, they only found a Tablet of Brass, with these Words Engraven on it:

My Epitaph is a Riddle. This is the Interpretation. I never was Covetous;
only such are Poor, these I pity; and have therefore provided this Lesson as a
Treasure, for the Man who for Lucre shall presume to violate my Tomb:

If thou will Rob the Living, forbear to Plunder the Dead; lest they bring thee
to Shame, as I have done.

Thou tellest me, that the Emperor seems not to be much grieved for the Death
of his Son, the Roman King. Perhaps his Sorrow is so great, that it cannot find
a Vent. Violent and Uncommon Passions, are apt to smother within the Heart,
whilst only smaller Griefs break forth in Tears.

It was a Memorable Saying of a certain King of Egypt, who was overcome by
Cambyses the Persian Monarch, and taken Captive with all his Children; When the
Cruel Conqueror, to sport himself in the Misery of his Royal Prisoners, and
insult over the Vanquished Egyptians, first caused the Daughter of the Captive
King, to be employed in the Meanest Offices with the Common Slaves, before her
Father's Face: Then his Son to be bridled, and curbed like a Horse, with a vast
Burden tied on his Back. At both which dismal Spectacles, the Poor Egyptian
Monarch shed not one Tear: But when he saw one that had formerly been his
Servant, reduced to great Poverty, he wept bitterly. Cambyses aching him the
Reason, Why he seemed so Insensible of his Childrens Calamity, and yet was
touched with so tender a Grief for the Misfortune of a Stranger? He answered,
Son of Cyrus, the Desolation of my Family afflicts me with so profound a
Sorrow, that no Tears can express it: But my Compassion to this distressed
Servant, being not so Violent, easily breaks forth in Tears.

Nathan, I wish thee neither Extreme Joy nor Grief; for they are both hurtful
to the Heart.

Paris, 1st. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER III.
To Mahummed, Hodgia, Venerable Eremit of the Cave replete with Wonders.
WHen I contemplate thy Life so full of Innocence, and void of the very Shadow
of Vice, I am like a Serpent rowz'd from his Sleep, by a Breeze of Cooler Wind,
or the Noise of a Traveller on the Road. My Soul starts; and unfolding all the
drowzy Curls of Sensuality, stretches it self at full Length. Surpised and
ashamed of its own Lethargy, it swiftly retires into any dark Corner, to cover
it self from the Light of its own Faculties, and from the brighter Reflections
of thy Spirit, which penetrate like the Beams of the Sun.

I do not presently curse my self, the Hour of my Nativity, my Friends that
have flattered me into an Erroneous Belief of my own Virtue, or my Enemies that
have provoked me, and by various Trains entangl'd me in the Paths of Vice. Such
Malediction, only becomes the Mouth of a Jew or a Libertine: For, we arrive at
Perfection, not by Cursing the Evil, but by Imitating the Good.

I rather bless the Hour of Conjunction, the Influence of my better Stars, and
the Constellations of a more propitious Horoscope; The Moment when I had the
Honor to touch the Sand before thy Feet with my Lips, in that Sanctuary of
Holiness. O thou Patron of Good Intentions, Sincere Reformer of Human Errors,
Refulgent Pattern of the Pious, Glory of the Wise, most Excellent of the
Excellent, Phoenix of the Age!

Praise be to God, the First and the Last: Peace to the Angels who stand round
his Throne, and to the Prophets who rejoice in his Presence. An Universal
Jubilee to all the Inhabitants of Paradise: And Eternal Felicity to the Saint
of the Desert on Earth, whose Soul is Expanded Wide as the Firmament.

I am ravished and full of Ecstasies, because there is not found thy Equal on
this Side the Clouds. When thou shall be cropped from the Earth, the Mirror of
Mortals, the Flower of Human Nature is gone. The Trees of the Wilderness will
lament thy Death, by whose Presence they flourished, and brought forth their
Fruit in due Season. At thy Departure, the Grass of the Field will fade and
wither, conscious that thy Merits drew down the Rain and Dew of Heaven, to
render Arabia fertile in Herbage.

The Beasts will Languish for want of Pasture, and Men will bewail the Dearth
of the Land; knowing, that the Life of the Just, causes the Ground to produce a
Plenteous Harvest.

But no Mourning will be like that of Mahmut, who can boast of thy particular
Friendship; and in losing thee, will be as if he were deprived of the Light of
the Sun, or the Morning Air, or the Benefit of Fire and Water. For, so thy
Favors are refreshing, as the Elements, without which we cannot live.

Therefore, as often as I turn my Face to the City Sanctified by the Birth of our
Holy Prophet, I send up Vows to Heaven for thy Long Life; beseeching God, for
the Universal Good of Nature, to continue the Man on Earth, the Vestment of
whose Soul, is composed of Rays darted from all the Fortunate Stars.

Tell me, O thou Holiest of the Holy Ones in the East, Favorite of the Angels,
secret Friend of the Eternal, Envoy Extraordinary from the Omnipotent, Agent
Incognito for the Court of Heaven! Tell me by what Chart I shall steer my
Course through this Life, Uncertain as the Sea, and tossed with as many
Tempests. I find in my self, manifest Inclinations to Virtue, and whatsoever is
Good: Yet I still mistake the Methods of attaining my End. I would fain be
Perfectly Pious, Just and Wise, but know not how to compass my Design. One
Event or other, still frustrates my Labor: Either a Friend or an Enemy, a
Relation or a Stranger, Casualties Without, or my Passions Within, stop me in
the Beginning, or the Midst of the Glorious Career, the Race which cannot be
run without noble Agonies.

Then I take Breath, and rowzing my self with fresh Vigours, I cheerfully
address to the Combat, which crowns the Victor with Immortality. My Courage is
Great, my Resolution fixed, at the First setting out: I gain Ground on a
Sudden, the Wheels of my Chariot are for a Time like those of the Sun, whose
Momentary Advances are not perceived by Mortals. But before I get half way to
the Meridian, some Unskillful Phaeton, an Erroneous Thought or a Giddy Passion,
overthrows me. Either Old Habits or New Temptations, hinder me from gaining the
Prize, in the Olympicks of Virtue.

Thus, often foiled, I retire with Shame and Weakness: And finding no Redress
within, I fly to thee, who art Created a Director of the World.

'Twill be an Offense to make Repetitions, and ask thy Counsel again: I will
henceforth endeavor to follow thy Example, which is certainly the most Correct
Rule of a Religious Life. But then I cannot serve the Grand Signior in this
Post. Resolve my Doubts. Is it Lawful for me to abandon my Duty, and retire
into a Desert? If not, I will erect a Solitude in the Midst of this Populous
City, and build an Hermitage in my own Heart. If I cannot arrive at the
Perfection I aim at, I will at least endeavor to be as Good as I can. There is
a Religious Dexterity, by which a Man may in the Midst of Worldly Business,
make to himself Paths of Innocence, and walk free from the General Contagion of
Mortals. If I cannot perform any Eminent Good, I will take Care to abstain from
Enormous Evils: Neither will I commit the Least, without a Good Intention;
which I am assured by the Mufti, sometimes sanctifies a Bad Action. If I lie or
forswear my self, it shall be to serve my Great Master. If I dissemble my
Religion, and Counterfeit a Christian; I will propose to my self, the greater
Advantage of the Mussulman Faith. Thus, some Higher End, shall always direct my
Intention and Performances.

But if thou shall tell me after all, That this is not the Way to Paradise, I
will forsake all Worldly Interest, wherein I find so many Entanglements, and
take up my Residence in some humble Cave, or Cleft of a Rock, or Hollow of a
Tree, where I will spend the Rest of my Days, in Contemplating the First
Essence, and all that flows from it. I will bid a Final Adieu to this
Perfidious Age, to the Vain Generation of Mortals that live in it, to whose
Converse I shall have Reason to prefer that of the Beasts, who are far more
Innocent, and less debauched than Men. Even Lions and Tigers in the Utmost Fury
of their Hunger, abstain from preying on those of their Own Kind. Man is the
only Cannibal, who devours his Brother, and greedily swallows down the Blood
of him, who bears the same Image as himself.

I speak not of the Ancient Scythians, Massagetes or Tartars, nor of the more
Modern Salvages in America, who stuffed their greedy Paunches with Human Flesh.
Their Barbarism has crept by Transmigration, into the most Civilized Empires
and States; and is not the Less Cruel, because it has changed its Form.

Nor do I tax the more excusable Epicurism of those, who ransack all the
Elements for Dainties, whose Tables are loaded with the slaughtered Carcasses
of Birds, Beasts and Fishes; their Houses polluted with an Extravagant
Profusion of the Blood of those Creatures, which the Eternal Mind Formed to
Live, and Enjoy the Fruits of the Earth, as well as our selves.

But I accuse the Oppressors of Men, those Cannibals in Disguise, whose very
Bread is mingled with the Marrow of the Poor; and their greater Delicacies are
Ragoo's, compounded of the Blood of Widows and Orphans: Whilst they starve and
ruin whole Families, to support a Needless Grandeur, a Momentary Pomp, which
vanishes almost as soon as it appears.

Yet these Men think to pacify Heaven, by building Magnificent Temples and
Oratories; by entailing their Estates to Convents and Hospitals: As if the
Omnipotent were to be bribed; or took Pleasure in Gifts, which are but the
Fruits of Robbery and Injustice. Can the Sacrifices of Infidels be more
Acceptable, because they are made on Altars of Gold? Or even the Prayers of
Mussulmans, in that they are breathed out in Mosques, built of the finest
Marble, crusted over with Precious Stones, and adorned with Carpets and
Hangings of the Richest Tissues and Broccades? The Ancient Pagans can instruct
us better.

Thou will not think me tedious, if I relate a Passage which just comes into my
Mind; Of a Certain Great Man in Asia, who possessed vast Herds of Cattle, and
was accustomed to make Magnificent Oblations to the Gods. This Grandee once
made a Pilgrimage to Delphos, Famous in those Days, for the Oracle of Apollo.
He carried with him a Hundred Bulls, whose Horns were enchas'd in Gold, being
spurred on with Extraordinary Devotion, and designing to do a singular Honor
to the God. When he arrived at the Place, puffed up with his Costly Presents,
and the Flatteries of his Attendants; he boldly approached the Temple, thinking
no Man on Earth more worthy of the Gods Friendship than himself; demanding of
the Pythoness (for so they called the Woman, who performed the Office of
Priesthood there) Who among all Mortals made the most acceptable Sacrifices,
and departed with the Greatest Blessing from the Oracle? (for he presumed, the
Pre-eminence would be granted to himself:) When she answered, That one
Clearchus of Methydrium, was the most devout, and dear to the Gods of all Men.

Astonished above Measure at this unexpected Reply, the vain Bigot resolved to
find out this Man, and learn of him what Method he took to please the Divinity.
He hastens therefore to Methydrium: And when he first came within View of it,
he despised the Meanness of the Place, judging it impossible, That one Man, or
all the Town, could be able to present the Gods with more Magnificent Oblations
than he. Having found out Clearchus, he asked him, What Sacrifices he used to
make to Appollo? To whom Clearchus replied, I am a Poor Man, and when I go to
Delphos, I carry neither Silver nor Gold, but only a Basket of Fruits, the
Best that my Farm affords, which I freely offer to the Powers which Govern All
Things, and from whom I receive whatsoever I enjoy. Moreover, I keep the
Appointed Holy Days; and my Poorer Neighbors, go Cheerful from my Table. I
never Killed, any Thing: Nor have I done to Another, that which I would not
have done to my self. I pray to Jupiter every Morning before the Sun arises,
and at Night when he goes down. I keep my self and my Cottage clean. In all
Things else, I live like the Beasts, that is, according to Nature.

Thou will perceive by this, O Pious Eremit, that Simplicity and Innocence, are
the most Acceptable Sacrifices to the Supreamly Merciful: And, that the most
High God, takes no Pleasure in the Smoke of Burnt-Offerings, or the Pompous
Addresses of the Great, but only in the Pure Flames of a Devout Heart; the
Integrity of a Just Man, void of Deceit and Guile.

Thou Illustrious Mahummed, art the Person in whom these Things are verified.
May God shelter thee with his Mercies, to the Hour of Transmigration, and
beyond the Last Flight of Time.

Paris, 1st. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER IV.
To the Kaimacham.
THere are Two Actions, which take up all the Discourse at Present. One is the
Siege of Stenay, a Strong Town in Flanders, before which the French Army is
newly laid down. The other, is the Investing of Arras by the Spaniards.

It Is the Presence of many Illustrious Personages, that renders both these
Sieges considerable. In the French Camp are present, the King, Cardinal
Mazarini, and all the Grandees of the Court. In the Spanish, are Archduke
Leopold, the Prince of Conde, Francis Duke of Lorrain, with others of Prime
Quality.

They are very Vigorous on both Sides, in pressing and defending these Two
Places; as if the Fate of both Kingdoms, were now at Stake. In my Opinion,
France runs the Greatest Hazard: For, if the Spaniards should prove Successful
in what it is said they have resolved upon, that is, the Relief of Stenay; If
they should give Battle, and get the Victory, a Way would be open for them to
penetrate into the Bowels of France. And it is thought, many Towns in this
Kingdom would open their Gates to them, whilst the Prince of Conde is at the
Head of their Army, who does all Things in the Name of the French King: Even
his Rebellion it self, is masqu'd under the Specious Title, Of taking up Arms,
to rescue the Captive King from the Hands of Mazarini and his Adherents. A
pretty Way of seducing the People from their Obedience. The Parisians, and
indeed all the French, are divided into Cabals and Parties; some espousing the
Prince of Conde's Interest, whilst others manifest an Incorruptible Loyalty to
their Sovereign. I approve the Morals of the Latter, yet privately rejoice at
the Treasons of the Former, wishing their Intestine Quarrels may continue till
the Day of the Earthquake.

Eliachim the Jew follows the Court, which rather ought now to be called the
Camp. His Private Affairs call him that Way. From him I receive frequent
Advice, of the most Important Matters in that Theater of War. He informs me,
That the King of France's Presence in the Siege of Stenay, inspires his
Soldiers with more than Ordinary Vigor: And, That he shows daily Proofs of an
extraordinary Courage. He was one whole Night on Horseback, giving Orders and
directing his Enginiers. Next Morning, he sent a Summons to the Governor: Who
made a stout Reply, being resolved to hold out to the last Extremity; and
therefore sallied out of the Town with a Party of Resolute Men, who killed near
Four Thousand of the Besiegers.

But alas, these Infidels are only stout, whilst well fed: Not knowing what it
is to endure the Rigours of Famine, and other Intolerable Hardships. In all the
Western Histories, they cannot match the Bravery of a Garrison in the
Impregnable Fortress of Merdin, Famous in our Annals for sustaining a Seven
Years Siege, when the Mighty Timurlen lay before it with his Invincible Army.
That Scourge of Heaven, to terrify the Besieged, and give 'em an Earnest of his
Resolution, caused all the Old Trees round about this Place to be cut down, and
Young ones to be planted in far greater Numbers: Declaring at the same Time,
That he would not raise the Siege, till those Trees should be mature enough to
bear Fruit. When that Time came, he sent a Present of the Fruits to the
Governor of the Garrison, as likewise of Mutton, with this Message, That he
took pity on so brave a Man, fearing lest he would starve for want of
Necessaries.

As soon as the Governor had received these Presents, turning to the Messenger
he said, Go tell thy Master, I thank him for his Present of Fruits: But, for
the Flesh, we shall have no Occasion, so long as our Ewes afford us Milk enough
to sustain the Whole Garrison. And that thy Master may be assured we are not in
Want of that, I will send him a Present of Cheeses made of the same.
Accordingly, he commanded Four Cheeses to be delivered to the Messenger. Which
when Timurlen saw, and had heard the Words of the Governor, he despaired of
reducing that Place, though he had lain before it Seven Years, wanting only Two
Moons. But, had he understood what sort of Cheeses these were, he would no
doubt have changed his Resolution. For, it seems, they were made of the Milk of
Bitches, and were the very last Sustenance the Garrison had, except the Flesh
it self of those Unclean Animals.

Believe me, Sage Minister, such Examples of Patience and Fortitude, are very
Rare. And this was the more Remarkable, in that it was the First Place, where
that Invincible General had met with a Repulse.

Paris, 1st. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER V.
To Dgnet Oglou.
THis is the Anniversary Day of my Nativity. Which I Celebrate not, as others
do, on such an Occasion, with Mirth and Revelling, with Music and Songs. My
Chamber is not perfurn'd with the Incense of Arabia, nor with any Extraordinary
Odours: Neither is it adorned with Flowers, Laurel, or the Branches of Green
Trees. I am not at the Expense of Costly Oils, to burn in a Multitude of Lamps,
and make Joyful Illuminations, as at a Feast. Such Pompous Vanity, I leave to
those who perhaps have more Reason to be Merry in this Life, than the
Thoughtful and Pensive Mahmut can find out.

On the other Side, I spend not this Day in Extreme and Fruitless Mourning: But
retaining an Indifference of Mind, I Consecrate it to the Service of my Reason
and Contemplation: Which are the only Things considerable in Mortal Man.

From the Minute that I first awaked this Morning, I have been pondering on my
self, and Humane Nature. I suffered my Anxious Thoughts to start back beyond
the Hour of my Birth, reflecting on the Imprisonment I suffered in my Mother's
Womb: Which yet I cannot in the least remember. And this is the Case of all
Men. We know not how we came into this Open World of Light, from that Region of
Darkness; nor that ever we were so shut up, but as we are told by our Parents;
and Common Experience confirms us, that this is the Lot of all Mortals. How
then shall we be able to discover, what State we were in before our Conception?
Whether we were in the Rank of Things which have Existence, or whether we were
not hid in the Womb of Nothing? I tell thee, this Thought has filled me with
great Inquietudes. I am restless to know my own Original. I would fain be
informed, if that which they call the Soul, be a Substance distinct from the
Body, or only the Finer Part of Matter, a Quintessence of the Elements. If it
be distinct, as I have Reason to believe, 'twou'd be a Singular Happiness, to
be satisfied where it was, before united to this Machine of Flesh and Bones:
And whether that Union be Voluntary or Forced. For, I must profess my self to
be altogether in the Dark as to these Scrutinies. Sometimes I join with the
Platonists, and conclude, all Humane Souls to be Particles of the Divine
Nature, Beams of the Eternal Sun: And that though our Light be now obscured and
veiled under this Cloud of Earthly Matter, yet we have formerly shined with an
undiminish'd Splendour, when only embodied in the Clearer Air, or more Refined
Substance of the Sky. Perhaps, think I, for some Errors committed in that
Superior State, we are sent down into these Bodies as into Prisons for our
Punishment. Then I am vexed at the Fatal Dullness of my Memory, that retains no
Idea of my past Condition.

At other Times (for like all Mortals I am subject to Change) I embrace the
Doctrines of Pythagoras, which thou know are generally entertained all over
the East: And believing the Transmigration of Souls from one Living Creature to
another, I cannot be certain but that I have been an Elephant, a Camel, or a
Horse, or perhaps some more Contemptible Animal; and for ought I know, I have
undergone all the Various Kinds of Metamorphosis that ever Ovid mention*d.

However, be it how it will, I see no Grounds to make any Extravagant Solemnity
on the account of my being born to what I am now, that is, a Man. For, I think
we are the only Spectacles of Folly and Misery, among all the Creatures of God.

We boast of Arts and Sciences; yet the Wisest of Mortals are always most
sensible, That they know Nothing. One Man builds a Stately House, a Place of
Repose and Refuge for himself and his Family: Another comes and pulls it down,
demolishing the only standing Monument of his Brother's Prudence, or rather of
his Folly, who perhaps consumed the greatest Part of his Estate in that Costly
Fabric; Whereas, among all his Sciences, had he but learned to KNOW HIMSELF;
an humble convenient Cottage would have served his Necessities during this
Short Life, and so he might have avoided the Stroke of Envy.

I tell thee, my Friend, I cannot build Altars to Fortune, nor adore the
External Pageantry of the Rich and Great. I equally hate to be flattered my
self, as those are, who invite their Friends to solemnize their Birthday.

Yet in thus contemning External Honor, I do the greatest Reverence to my
self, whilst I preserve my Reason free from being* violated or profaned by
Foolish Customs.

Paris, the 1st. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER VI.
To the Selictar Aga, or Sword Bearer to the Grand Signior.
SOmetimes we seem to be asleep here in this City, for Want of News. But of
late, we have been rowz'd by Post upon Post: Some bringing Intelligence of the
Surrender of Stenay to the French King, others of the Revolt of Barcelona from
the Spaniards. But that which is of freshest Date, and for which all the
Streets of Paris are this Night Illuminated with Bonefires, is the Relief of
Arras; Where the French have obtained a Glorious Victory. The Number of the
Dead is not yet known, but said to be very great. And it is certain the Victors
have taken above Seven Thousand Prisoners, Sixty Cannon, Five Thousand Wagons,
an Equal Number of Horses, with all the Plate and Rich Furniture of the Prince
of Conde, Archduke Leopold, Francis of Lorrain, and the other Grandees of the
Spanish Army. In Fine, the French are Masters of the Town, and of the Field,
and all Flanders appears now too little to hold 'em.

These continual Successes redound much to the Establishment of Cardinal
Mazarini, who now seems above the Stroke of Misfortune or Malice. Yet no Man
can call himself Happy till the Hour of his Death, which alone releases us from
all Human Miseries.

Some Days ago I received a Letter from Nathan Ben Saddi, which informs me of
the Death of the Roman King, and of several Prodigies which were seen before,
and about the Time of his Departure.

When he was first taken Sick, there arose a Violent Tempest of Wind, which
blew down the Cross from one of their Churches. After this, followed a terrible
Earthquake, that shook the whole City, threatening to remove its Foundations.
Moreover, an Old Eagle, a Domestic of the Imperial Palace, and that had lived
there many Years, took Wing the Day before the King's Sickness, and flew quite
away. Then the Bells of the Imperial Chapel rung Thrice of their own Accord in
the Space of Twelve Hours. Thus far the Jew assures me is true. There are
Additional Reports, of strange Apparitions that were seen about Vienna during
the Sickness of this Prince, as of a Funeral Procession after Midnight, through
the Courts of the Palace; and of a Shower of Warm Blood that fell at Noon Day
in the Streets of that City. But these I have only from the Mouth of Common
Fame, which, thou know, does not always speak Truth.

I desire thee and all the Ministers, to make a Distinction between those
Passages which I ascertain, and the Doubtful Relations of the Multitude. In
these Cases, Men are prone to Superstition, and love to be the Authors of
Portentous News. But thou may believe what the Jew relates; for he never
affects to be Fabulous.

'Twould tempt one to ask, What strange hidden Power produces these Unusual
Signs? Whether we Mortals are under the Custody of Invisible Beings, who teach
the Elements and other Creatures to utter the Future Events of Fate? Or,
Whether all these Things which appear so strange and surprising, be not mere
Casualties; Accidents of Nature happening of Course, and only made Remarkable
by their Timing? Who knows, but that the Voluntary Ringing of the Bells, might
proceed from the Motion of the Tower where they hung, during the Earthquake?
Or, Why, need we wonder, that a Cross or a Crescent should be blown down from
the Top of a high Minaret, by a Violent Tempest of Wind?

These Things appear to me as Natural, as for the Rain to lodge all the Corn in
the Fields, or for a Storm to tear up Trees by the Roots, overturn Houses, and
commit a Thousand other Violences. Neither do I perceive any Thing worth
Admiration in the Flight of the Eagle. Perhaps, some Royal Caprice sprung in
the Head of that King of Birds, which he never felt before. There Is Nothing of
Prodigy in all this, but only because it happened at such a Critical Juncture.
Had it been at another Time, no body perhaps would have taken Notice of it, any
more than they do of Earth quakes at Naples, which are Common in that Country,
where the Earth is very Hollow, being made so by Veins of continually burning
Sulphur. They have felt several in that Kingdom within these Two Moons, as also
at Rome. But no great Hurt has been done.

Nathan informs me also, That the Venetian Ambassador at Vienna, has
distributed great Sums of Money, in Token of his Joy, for the late Victory that
Republic obtained against the Moselmans. This appears to me a Real Prodigy,
That the Ottomans who are Invincible by Land, yet still come off with Loss at
Sea.

Queen Christina of Sueden, is expected here ever long. She came to Antwerp in
the Habit of a Man, which occasions Variety of Censures. The French call her,
The Learned Amazon, She being well versed in many Languages and Sciences: They
extol her Virtues and Perfections, styling her, The Phoenix of this Age. All
the Western Nazarenes, are devout Admirers of Women. And one of their Famous
Sages, whom they call Henry Cornelius Agrippa, wrote a select Treatise in
Praise of that Sex, wherein he endeavors to prove, That they are more
Excellent and Noble Creatures than Men. But he would find few Proselytes in the
East.

It Is certain, there have been very Famous Women in all Ages, and it would be
Envy in Men to deny them their due Praise. Such was Dido Queen of Carthage, the
Roman Lucretia, the Sybills, Theana Pythagoras's Wife, with his Daughter Dama;
Sappho the Poetess, with Innumerable others both of East and West, Renowned for
their Virtue, Learning, or Valor in the Wars. But it does not follow, that
they therefore surpass Men.

Let us keep the Rank, in which God and Nature have placed us, without being
Churlish or Effeminate. And this is the best Way to get and retain the Esteem
of that Nice Sex, who hate a Clown, and despise a Dotard.

Paris, 30th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER VII.
To Pestelihali, his Brother, Master of the Customs at Constantinople.
THou art he, to whom I can unmask. With others I converse (like our Women in
Turkey) under a Veil. When I write to the Grandees of the Port, it is necessary
for me to dissemble many Things; and, to feign some, that I may be credited in
Others, and not be suspected in all. But with thee, I use no Artifice or
Disguise: Thou have a Kind of natural Right to my secret Thoughts, beyond the
Claim of a Brother. I owe thee an Entire Confidence, on the Score of
Friendship; and I seem to wrong my self, when I conceal my Sentiments from
thee. For, besides the Tie of Blood, we were Partners together in the
Adventures of Youth; and the mutual good Offices that passed between us,
fastened our Affections with Stronger Bands, than those of our Birth. Nor were
we so unhappy, as to suffer the little Youthful Emulations which are common
between Sons of the same Mother, to stifle the more solid and generous Efforts
of real Love. Our Friendship grew up with our Years, cemented by Interest as
well as Affection; and I esteem Pesteli, but my self in another Figure. If thou
have the same Regard to me, I am happy. Let us continue to cherish this noble.
Passion: The least Coldness or Reserve now, would appear to me more hateful
than a Divorce, more terrible than Death.

It Is but Reasonable, That among the many Services our Great Master claims at
our Hands, we should employ some of our Time and Care on our Selves. We owe the
Sultan much; but both He and We owe Nature more, without whose Bounty and
Providence, We had never had the Honor, nor He the Profit of our being in his
Debt. He is more deeply engaged in Fortune's Tally than We; but in the Accounts
of Nature, We are all Equal. She is the Universal Creditor of Mankind. We are
indebted to Her, for all we have; yet methinks, Nothing so much enhances our
Score, as the ill Menage of Time. In that we still run in Arrears, whilst the
hasty Minutes post forward, never to be revoked; and yet, we neither lay hold
on 'em in their Flight, nor so much as imprint on any of them, the least
transient Mark of Virtue or Wisdom. Thus our Lives slide away without Profit,
till the Last Sand tells us, We are Bankrupts, Nature will not trust us with a
Moment longer.

It Is Time therefore, Dear Brother, for thee and me to look about us; and,
since it is impossible for us to make a full Payment, let us at least compound
with Nature; and getting an Acquittance for what is past and Irrecoverable, let
us be sure to cancel the remaining Part of the Score, by a Wise Improvement of
every Minute.

Think not, that Mahmut is persuading thee to turn Dervise, or to bestow all
thy Time in Prayers: Such Rigorous Devotion is not consistent with the Life of
a Man in thy Station. But, permit me, Dear Pesteli, to counsel thee, not to
build Altars to Fortune, and consecrate all thy vacant Hours to her Service. I
am told, thou art grown a great Gamester, not only at the Polemick Traverses of
Chess, but also at Plays of Hazard. The Former of the Two, is the most
Innocent: Yet, it is too Intricate and Puzling, deserves the Name of Business
rather than of Recreation: It commits a Rape on the Mind, whilst it requires as
much Attention and Abstractedness of Thought, as would serve to trace out the
Conduct of a Battle or a Siege. But, the Latter have a far worse Influence on
our Passions, by exciting us to immoderate Desire, Hope, Joy, and Grief for
mere Trifles, the uncertain Products of Chance. Therefore are they forbidden by
our Holy Prophet. And, it is not to be numbered among the Commendations of a
Mussulman, to be dextrous at managing the Cards or Dice.

When thou art disposed to unbend thy Mind, I would rather counsel thee, to use
some healthful Exercise, such as may ventilate thy melancholy Blood. Our
Fathers were wont at such Times (...) divert themselves with Bows and Arrows,
Hunting, Wrestling, and the like manly Pastimes; thus, making their Private
Recreations subservient to the Public, whilst they sported themselves into the
Discipline of War, and inured their Bodies to Labor, even at those Hours when
their Minds sought Rest.

What! though Claudius Caesar devoted himself to Gaming with Dice, and wrote a
Book in Praise of his Folly; What! though Domitian the Emperor, and Theodorick,
King of the Goths, spent whole Nights and Days in this Unprofitable Play? Thou
have not read or heard of such Examples, among the Renowned Sons of Ottoman.
Our Glorious Sultans, were never Vacant to these Fooleries. And if they had,
their Practice cannot justify a Subject's Imitation. Neither would thou be so
in Love with Gaming, did thou consider what unhappy Destinies have commonly
attended the Votaries of Fortune. Whole Estates have been squandered away at
Dice in a Night, Families ruined, and the Gamester himself Imprisoned in the
Morning. He that Yesterday was Master of great Possessions, and a Companion for
Princes; by the Effects of this accursed Vanity, has bereaved himself of All,
and is to Day become the Scorn of Beggars.

The Chinese are so bewitched with Love of Gaming, That when they have lost
all their Stakes, they will pawn themselves, their Wives and Children; which if
the Fortune of the Dice run against them, become all Bondslaves to the Winner.
Here is a Dervise in this City, of the Order of the Jesuits, who lately came
from China. Among other Learned Men, I sometimes converse with Him. He relates
many pretty Passages of that People, but one is Tragical, whereof he himself
was an Eyewitness.

He says, That in the Province of Queintong, a certain Nobleman who had served
in the Wars, and acquired great Fame and Honor, was envied by one of his
Neighbors, who likewise had been a Captain and much in Favor at the Court.
Their Emulations carried 'em to many Ill Offices, and at last to open Defiance.
The Emperor being made sensible of the Hatred that was between these Two
Officers, and being unwilling their Fury should precipitate them to the Ruin
of each other, became himself an Arbitrator of their Quarrel; laying his
Commands on 'em, to embrace and eat together, which is an assured Token of
Reconciliation and Friendship in that Country. They obeyed the Will of their
Sovereign. But sitting up late one Night at Dice, it was the Captain's ill
Fortune, to lose all he had to the Nobleman. Mad at his unluckly Chance, and in
Hopes to retrieve his Loss, he sends for his Wife and Three Young Sons, whom
with himself he pawned to the Nobleman for a considerable Sum of Money, and
falls afresh to play: But Fate was his Enemy; he lost All. Whereupon in
Despair, he stabs his Wife and Three Children, and lastly falls on his own
Sword; glorying, that he and his Family, should thus escape a hated Captivity,
to his Old Enemy.

Tell me, Dear Pesteli, had thou seen this Tragedy, would it not have made
thee resolve against Gaming during thy Life? Assuredly, our Holy Prophet frowns
from his Paradise, on those who violate his Laws. He knew our Passions, and
which were the most dangerous; therefore he prohibited such Things, as are most
likely to betray us to Violence, and an Incurable Disorder. If thou will acquit
thy self a good Mussulman, thou must not leap over these Prohibitions,
accounting them small and indifferent Trifles. Remember the Saying of the holy
Doctor, and Leader of the Mussulman Armies, the Chaste Osman, A little Spark
will set a whole City on Fire. And the Roman Satyrist has observed, That no Man
becomes Wicked all at once. Think then with thy self, it is for this Reason the
Messenger of God has forbid Gaming to the True Faithful; not as a Thing in it
self Naturally Evil, but only Morally, so as it is a Step to the greatest
Vices. For whilst we captivate our selves to Chance, we lose our Authority over
our Passions. We stand or fall at the Uncertain Cast of the Dice. We are Slaves
to the feeblest Wishes; which if they succeed not, we grow Furious, Profligate
and Impious. Banishing all Prudence, Temperance and Justice, we become
Impudent, and fit for the blackest Crimes.

Take not in Ill Part the wholesome Admonition of a Brother, who manifests his
Love, in thus reproving thee without Flattery. Use the same Freedom, when thou
hear I am guilty of any Unnecessary Vice: For, the Public Service, turns
some Vices into Virtues.

Paris, 14th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER VIII.
To the Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
I Believe, thou have a Mind to try my Temper; to make an Experiment upon me,
and see, Whether I Am Proof against thy Anger: Else, why should Kenan Bassa's
Business be revived again, after it had been buried above these Four Years? I
examine not, what mighty Interest thou have in that Officer, that thou afresh
espousest his Old Quarrel, as if 'twere thy own. Thy Affairs are best known to
thy self. But let me tell thee, 'twill not redound much to thy Credit, to be
found Partial. I honor thee with all the Devoir that is due to a Minister in
thy Station, and with something more: For, the Esteem a Man has for his Friend,
is Singular and beyond Ceremonies. But still he owes some Regard to himself.
Self-Preservation, is Rooted in the Center of our Nature; and few will be
Knowingly Complaisant to their Ruin. I am puzzled what to think, or how to
write, thy last Letter has put my Mind into such a Hurly-Burly. A Thousand
Imaginations like Whirl-winds, tear up my most solid Thoughts by the Roots. I Am
in as Wild a Condition as a Man in an Earthquake, leaping this Way and that
Way, yet knows not where to fix his Foot in Safety.

If I persevere in calling thee Friend, perhaps thou will accuse me of
Presumption. If I change my Style, and suppose thee under another Character,
Ingratitude will be laid to my Charge. To vindicate my Actions, will be
Interpreted Obstinacy; and to own my self in the Fault, will be counted
Weakness. Nay, all the World will call me Fool, in condemning my self for
Things whereof I never was Guilty. What shall I do in this Case? I am Naturally
Thoughtful and Melancholy. The Words that spring from Resentment, cleave fast
to my Mind, and breed a Thousand Inferences. My busy Apprehension, extracts
Menaces out of the most Artificial Expressions. I look on my self, as marked
out for a Sacrifice, one Time or other. The Will of Destiny be done, Early or
Late. I will not go out of my Road to avoid it; Since it is but an Ill
Husbandry of Time, to borrow it from the Ineffable Joys of Paradise, to
multiply a few Days or Years, of a Miserable Life on Earth.

As for the Treasurer and the Rest of my Accusers, let them know, that I will
persevere in doing my Duty to the Grand Signior, without warping to the Right
Hand or to the Left, for Fear or Favor.

But if my Private Agency in these Parts meet with Rubs and Checks for Want of
Money, let the Blame rest on those whose Charge it is, to supply me with what
is Necessary for a Man in my Station: For, henceforward, Mahmut will be
reproached no more for demanding his Pension.

Think not, it is an easy Thing for a Man to be always a Counterfeit, and never
to have his Mind unbent; to act Two contrary Parts at the same Time; to be true
and false; a Mussulman and Servant of the Grand Signior in Reality, a Christian
and Subject of France in Appearance. My Soul is perpetually stretched upon the
Rack of Watchful Thoughts and busy Invention, lest by some Improvident Word or
Deed, my Disguise should fall off, and I appear in my Naked Colors.

It Is but Reason therefore, that whilst this vast Solicitude takes up all my
Faculties, the Care of my Subsistence should rest on those who employ me. Let
not the Ministers of the Benign Port, be peevish at me without a Cause. For I
imprecate, Serene Grandee, that God would split my Soul into Ten Thousand
Immortal Splinters, if ever I betray my Trust. But Needless Suspicion, would
tempt a Man to Treachery.

Paris, 14th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER IX.
To the Venerable Mufti.
THE Pope has been sick for a considerable Time, and it is now strongly
reported, He is dead. They talk of an Express that is come to the Chancellor
of France, to certify him of it, and to consult about the Next Election. But
this is not credited here; being only looked upon as a Roman or Spanish
Artifice, to sound the Inclinations of this Court beforehand, that so they may
be able to countermine the French Interest, when the Pope shall really die. And
it is not expected he should live long, being of a great Age, and worn out with
Cares and Sickness.

It Is certain he has made his Will, wherein Two Millions of Gold are given to
the Treasury founded by his Predecessors, to serve the Church in its extreme
Necessities. But it is a Thousand to one, if some future Pontiff succeeding in
that Chair, do not in his Unnerring Judgment, interpret his own Personal
Occasions, or those of his Nephews, to be the Extreme Necessities of the
Church; and then, all this huge Mass of Wealth, is Infallibly gone.

He has likewise bequeathed large Legacies to his Sister-in-Law, whom they call
Donna Olympia; and to others of his Relations and Creatures. And it is thought,
this Lady will more than doubly pay her self, having the Management of all his
Affairs. Indeed, during his Reign, it may be said, the whole Roman Church was
governed by a Woman. For this Prelate, would never do any Thing without her
Advice.

She was born of an Obscure Family, but is of a high Spirit, Ambitious of Rule,
and a Person of great Abilities: Extremely Covetous and Subtle; turning and
winding all Events to her own Prosit. All Preferments were at her Disposal: She
sold Bishoprics, Abbeys and other Ecclesiastic Dignities at her own Rates,
and to whom she pleased: In fine, whosoever had any Business with the Pope,
made their Addresses to her. By which means, she has heaped together a
Prodigious Treasure, and is esteemed the Richest Lady in Europe. It Is thought,
she would have sold even the Pope, and Rome it self, the Capital Seat of the
Christian Empire, rather than refused a proportionate Offer of Gold, could she
have met with a Chapman to her Mind. This would have been a Merchandise fit for
the Grand Signior, were it not reserved as a Prize for the Victorious Arms
destined to conquer All Things.

The French seem mightily concerned for the Tragedies Acted in Poland by the
Moscovites. It Is affirmed, that they have taken the Town of Vitebsko by Storm,
(putting Men, Women, and Children to the Sword) with diverse other Cities and
Places of Strength: And that they have laid in Ashes, all the Towns and
Villages round about Smolensko, so that there is Nothing to be seen but Ruin
and Desolation for above a Hundred Miles round that City; which also is now
closely besieged by the Forces of the Czar. If these Northern Infidels go on,
and make such bloody Work wherever they come, they will, in a short Time,
overrun and dispeople all Europe. But it is to be hoped, the Tartars, who are
lately entered into a League with Poland, will put a Check to the cruel
Victories of the Moscovites, and chastise the Treason of the Cossacks, who join
with 'em contrary to their Faith given to the King of Poland.

They say, Four Grandees of Tartary are arrived as Hostages at Warsaw, and as
many Lords of Poland sent on the same Errand to the Court of the Cham; who as a
farther Evidence of his Integrity, has released all the Polish Captives in his
Dominions, and sent the Ambassadors of the Cossacks home, without their Noses
and Ears, as a Mark of his Irreconcilable Indignation, at their Infidelity.

In the mean while, I am extremely afflicted to hear of our continual Losses by
Sea. They say here, That above Six Thousand Moselmans were killed in the late
Fight in the Hellespont, and that we have lost Sixteen Galleys, besides Ships
of War. That Element, one would conclude, is Fatal to the Ottoman Empire.
Neither have we had much better Success by Land this Campaign. Yet Chusaein the
Vizir Azem, and General in Candia, has performed very Heroic Things. To speak
impartially, and give due Honor to our Enemies, the Malteses, Venetians and
French, have not been wanting in any Point of Bravery. Which also redounds to
the greater Honor of the Mussulmans, in that they draw their Sword, against
the Flower of Christendom, and not against Owls and Pigmies. Such are the
Persians, when we Encounter 'em; for either they dare not endure the Luster,
and stand the Brunt of our Invincible Arms, or if they do, they sink under the
First Shock.

When I name those Heretics, I spit on the Ground, in Detestation of their
Errors: For they are worse than the Zindicks and Giafers. I have more Charity
for a Christian or a Jew, than I have for these Vermin of the Land. In fine, I
wish they were extirpated from the Earth; and that they may after this Life, be
either Metamorphos'd into Hogs, which Creature, thou know, is an Abomination
to all Good Men and Angels (and they already resemble it in their Uncleanness)
or else that they may become the Asses of the Jews in Hell, to carry their
Burdens for a Thousand Ages.

Paris, 17th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER X.
To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Grand Signior 's Customs.
THE God of our Fathers grant thee as much Joy every Minute of thy Life, as I
feel at this Instant. Will thou know the Occasion of this Unusual Transport? I
can hardly believe my self, when I tell thee of an Adventure, the most
surprising that ever happened to me since my Arrival in this City. And perhaps
thou will think I Romance in relating it: But assure thy self, that of a Truth
Oucomiche our Mother, is at this Time in Paris, with our Cousin Isouf.

May a Thousand soft Passions thrill thy Heart, when thou read this News, as
they did mine, when at my Chamber Door I first saw and knew the Face of her
that bare me, after I had given her over for Dead long ago; for I had heard no
Tidings of her these Eleven Years. Good God! So strange and unexpected a Sight,
had almost dismantl'd my Senses, those Outworks of the Soul. For a while I
stood still, astonished and trembling with Ecstacy. I was not presently
satisfied, whether I beheld a Mortal, or the Ghost of one: For, they say, these
appear in the same Forms as they bore when Alive. Neither Age nor Travel, with
all the other Infirmities and Crosses of Human Life, had so altered her
Complexion; but that I easily discerned the manifest Features, Lineaments and
Air of my Mother. I concluded therefore, it must be She, or her Apparition, if
there be any such Things.

These were my First Thoughts, in that Waking Trance: But her Voice and
Address, soon put me out of Doubt, when impatient to see me stand like one
Thunderstruck, she ran to me with open Arms and Tears of Joy in her Eyes;
crying out with a Tone and Affection peculiar to Women. Art thou alive, my Son
Mahmut? Do these Eyes see thee, or am I in a Dream?

For my Part, I was as much upon the Rapture as she, and hardly knew how to
deport my self, or what to say or do. Yet the Fear I was in lest somebody in
the House should over-hear us, and make ill Consequences of this Passionate
Interview, taught me a Lesson of Moderation and Prudence. Wherefore I beckoned
to her, to suppress her Passion, and converse by Signs, as the Custom is at the
Mysterious Port. Those Silent Expressions of our mutual Love, Joy and
Admiration, were not less significant, because not clothed in Words. Thou
know, there is Eloquence enough in this Mute Language. And I was Jealous of
Words, lest some Inquisitive Soul might understand us, though we conversed in
Arabic.

After our first Endearments and Tendernesses were over, in which my Cousin
Isouf also had his Share (for we were all reciprocally overjoyed to see one
another, in this Nest of Infidels) I began to consult the Safety of us all
Three, in providing convenient Lodgings for my Mother and Kinsman. In Order to
this, we made a Visit to Eliachim the Jew, who entertained us at a Banquet,
after the Fashion of the East. We advised with that honest Hebrew about our
Affairs; I having made frequent and sufficient Proof of his Fidelity and
Friendship. In fine, he took them both into his own House, under the Notion of
Greeks, his Acquaintance; judging this the securest Way to prevent any
Discovery, or even the least Suspicion of our Circumstances. They have
continued there these Five Days, and their Character has not been questioned by
any. I visit 'em daily, and we pass away many Hours in recounting the different
Adventures of our Lives, in discoursing of our Friends in Arabia, Greece and
other Parts of the World, and in concerting the best Methods to serve one,
^^other, till Death shall divide us from our selves as well as from our
Friends, and rank us (...) a List of Invisible Beings, whose State and
Qualities we know not.

Well, but all this while I believe thou art Impatient to know what Motive of
their own, or Turn of Fortune, drove them into so remote a Region as France, a
Country Inhabited by none but Infidels? Shall I tell thee in a Word? 'Twas
Love, on her Part; and the Desire of Novelty, on his.

Our Kinsman Isouf, from his Childhood felt powerful Inclinations to travel:
Which increased with his Years, and were much heightened by his Converse with
Greeks, Armenians, Franks, and some Mussulmans at Constantinople, who had seen
many Foreign Countries, both in the East and West.

The Relations they made of the Curiosities they had seen, and of their own
Adventures, fired his Youthful Blood, and he formed a Resolution to depart,
with the First Convenience, from Constantinople, and visit all the Regions in
the World, if his Life and Health would hold out. I formerly acquainted thee,
that he had surveyed the Greatest Part of Asia: Since which he set forth again,
and having finished his Travels in that Quarter of the World, he bent his
Course for Africa; where he visited Egypt, Barbary, the Empire of Morocco and
Fez, with that of the Aethiopians, and many other Regions under the Torrid
Zone, too tedious for me at this Time to mention particularly, because I write
in Haste. Hereafter I shall give thee a more ample Account of his Observations,
etc. Wherein thou will find, that Isouf has not altogether lost his Time.

At length, having satisfied himself with whatsoever he thought worthy to be
seen and known in that Southern Tract, he parted from Fez with a Design to see
Europe. Some Bills of Exchange, caused him to take Grand Caire in his Way,
where he encountered my Mother. She perceiving, that he would take Shipping
directly for France, resolved to lay hold on so favorable an Opportunity, of
seeing me once more before she died. Wherefore, imparting her Design to him,
Isouf offered her his utmost Service. And having settled her Affairs at Caire,
and packed up her Money, Jewels and other Necessaries, they took the Road of
Scanderoon, where they soon arrived; and putting themselves into the Habit of
Greeks, Isouf also speaking pretty well that Language and the Lingua Franca,
they bargained with the Master of a Vessel then lying in the Harbor, and bound
for Marseilles: He took them on Board, and under the Protection and Favor of
Heaven, they arrived safe at Marseilles, and are now in this City.

Yet amidst all the Pleasure I conceive in the Presence of so near a Relation
as a Mother, I am not without some Qualms of Fear, lest some Unfortunate
Occurrence should discover her to be no Christian: For then, the Issue might
prove dangerous both to her and me.

As for Isouf, he designs to tarry no longer in Paris, than to inform himself
of what is most Remarkable in this City, and to satisfy the other Ends of a
Traveller. From hence, after he has visited the Chiefest Cities in France, he
talks of traveling into Flanders, Holland, Germany, Suedeland, and the other
Kingdoms of Europe. But for Spain or Portugal, he has no Thoughts; either out
of Fear of the Inquisition, which is very severe in those Countries, or out of
an Aversion for the People who expelled the Moors, of which he relates very
Tragical Stories, which they told him during his Residence at Morocco and Fez.
In a Word, he gives this Character of a Spaniard, That he is a Mungrel, between
a Man and a Devil. He likes the Company of the French, in Regard they converse
with a Natural and Unreserv'd Freedom, which becomes them very well. But he has
spoke with none but Travelers yet, who have been otherwise employed, than in
studying the Artificial Disguises of Courtiers. If he sojourns the Space of
Three Moons in this Kingdom, he will find some of the French as Affected in
their Way, as other People: He will encounter with a New Sort of Frenchmen in
every Province. For France is a mere Gallimaufry, made up of the Fragments and
Remnants of other Nations. They differ also in their Language, as well as in
their Manners, one from another. So that the Inhabitants of Gascoigne and
Bretagne, can hardly be understood by those of Paris and Blois, with the
Adjacent Parts. These Western People, are not Curious in preserving the Dialect
of their Fathers, but every Age, introduces a Change in their Speech. Neither
are they diligent in retaining their Genealogies. Whereas in the East, thou
know, the Languages remain uncorrupted, the same now as they were Two
Thousand Years ago, or from the Confusion of Babel. The same Care we Arabians
have of our Tribes and Families.

Son of my Mother, when thou read the Two enclosed, and shall see the very
Handwriting of the Dear Oucomiche, and of Isouf our Kinsman; let thy Heart be
like the Valley of Admoim, Fragrant as a Grove of Spices: For then thy Eyes
will convince thee, that what I write is Truth.

Paris, 22d. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1654.
LETTER XI.
To Adonai, a Jew, Prisoner in the Tower of Nona at Rome.
THIS comes to thee by the Hand of a trusty Friend: Give entire Credence to his
Instructions. To say I Am sorry to hear of thy Misfortune, would but faintly
express my Passion: It Is not easily described in Words. I am as Melancholy as
an Antelope, when the Sun's in Conjunction with Saturn. This is a sad sort of a
Beast, that will neither Eat, Drink nor Sleep, during that Dull Aspect.

In Gods Name, how came thou to be so free with thy Tongue among the Romans?
Or, what tempted thee to meddle with their Religion and Laws? Was it not
enough, that thou and all the Jews in that City, had Liberty to frequent your
Synagogues, and there curse the Christians in Antiquated Hebrew; must you needs
Rail at 'em in plain Italian too? And that, over your Cups, when Men ought to
be Good-natured to all the World? Of what import is it to you, whether they be
Idolaters or no, so long as they give you Leave to Adore One God, Creator of
the Worlds? Or, what signifies it, if they are Guilty of Ten Thousand
Injustices and Follies among themselves, whilst you live quietly under their
Protection and Government? Adonai, I Am ashamed of the Immorality of those of
thy Nation. I blush for your Ingratitude, Pride and Malice. Surely, if the
Nazarenes did really believe what they profess, they would Sacrifice you all to
the Ghost of their Messiah, whom they say, you Crucified. They would not leave
a Jew living in Christendom, but do their utmost to exterminate you from the
Earth. I speak not this as my Wish; but only to upbraid your Impertinence and
Vanity, in thus foolishly provoking those, with whose Permission it is, that
you live and enjoy the Elements.

The Prophet Moses, your Lawgiver, left you another Rule, a Lesson of
Civility, when he said, Ye shall not blaspheme the Gods of the People. Had thou
and thy Companions obeyed this Precept, ye might have been at Liberty: But it is
bad falling into the Hands of the Inquisition. However, I am glad to hear, that
you are not transported to the Castle of St. Angelo. That would have been a
Tragical Remove, at this Juncture. But now, as I Am informed, not one of you is
in Danger: For, they say, that all the Prisoners in Rome, are by Custom
released upon the Death of the Pope, except those who are in that Fatal
Fortress. And it is Generally supposed, the good Old Caliph is no long-lived
Man. For, they never use to remove the Prisoners designed for Death; till the
Physicians are past all Hopes of the Holy Father's Life.

However, in Regard there is no Certainty in Human Affairs, but a perpetual
Change and Circulation of Events; lest some Unhappy Turn of Fortune should
either now continue thy Restraint, or hereafter bereave thee of thy Liberty, I
send thee here enclosed, a Receipt of a Chemical Liquor, which may be of some
Service to thee, in the strongest Prison on Earth. 'Twas revealed to me by my
Mother, who learned it of an Egyptian Artist at Caire. Despise it not, because
it comes from a Woman's Hand: For I have made an Experiment of it, and find it
effectual. 'Twill render Iron as brittle as Glass. It Is more powerful than the
Water of the River Styx, which no Vessel could hold, but the Hoof of a Mule.
After an Hours Application, thou may make the thickest Bars, Chains and
Bolts, fly in a Thousand Pieces, as if they were made of Porcelain.

Thou will not wonder at this, when thou consider'st the Innumerable strange
Inventions of Men prying into the Secrets of Nature, and Fortunate in their
Searches. Above all, Chemistry has brought to Light the greatest Prodigies of
Art, and Knowledge. This Mysterious Science, was the peculiar Boast of the
Primitive Egyptians, from whom all other Nations learned it. And had not Moses
himself been instructed from his Youth in all the Learning of Egypt, perhaps he
would have been at a Loss, when he Calcined the Golden Calf, and gave the Dust
to the Israelites to be mixed in their Drink, as the only Expiation of their
Idolatry. Doubtless, this Secret, among others, was transmitted down to those
Times from Philemon, the good Priest, who was in the Number of them who escaped
the Flood in Noah's Ark, and whose Grand Son Masar, was the First King in Egypt
after the Deluge.

Philemon, the better to establish the State of his Offspring, revealed to them
many Hidden Things; taught them the Hieroglyphics of the Dgebel Pharan, or the
Pyramids, with all the Mysteries of the Talismans, and the Chemical
Preparations of Moncatam; the forcible Waters and Essences, Powders and other
Ingredients, by which they made Marble as pliable as Wax or Clay. These Things
he had learned of those who perished in the Flood: He retained the Wisdom of
the Ancients, his Coevals and Predecessors; leaving the Rudiments of so
profound a Knowledge to his Posterity, as an Invaluable Treasure, of which they
could never be robbed. Thus, Science became Hereditary to the Coptites, who
bear that Name from Coptim, the Son of Masar, the First King of Egypt, since
the Rainbow appeared in the Clouds. And, 'twas from one of that Race, my Mother
learned that Admirable Secret.

Trust not to Words, but try the Experiment. The Receipt will give thee all
Necessary Directions. Yet I counsel thee not to be big with it, like him who
having found out the Art of making Glass Malleable, or fit to be beat by the
Hammer into any Shape or Figure, as the Silver-Smiths work their Metal; must
needs go and discover his Secret to the Prince, expecting a great Reward. When,
on the contrary, he lost his Head on the Spot; the Prince thinking it great
Injustice, that so many Thousand People as got their Bread by making of Common
Glasses, should be all ruined, to promote one Man's Profit and Advantage.

In fine, use this Secret to serve thy self, or the Cause thou art engaged in:
But trust it not to another, unless on the same Equal Terms as I commit it to
thee, wherein the greater Hazard is thine in divulging it.

Paris, 15th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER XII.
To Mehemet, once an Eunuch-Page in the Seraglio, but now an Exile in Egypt, at
Grand Caire.
WHen I first heard of thy Banishment from the Imperial Palace and City, think
not that I was sad, or entertained the usual Sentiments of a Friend, on such
Occasions. No: I tell thee on the contrary, I rejoiced, (yet not with the Joy
of an Enemy) at that Seeming Misfortune, as knowing it has delivered thee from
a Real one, in which, according to my Presages, all the Attendants of thy
Mistress, the Old Queen, were soon after involved.

Thou art obliged to Bacchus, for that Fortunate Calamity; which though it for a
while eclipsed thy Honor, yet was the only Means to save thy Life.

When I formerly sent thee an Account of my Imprisonment here, and how I was
regaled by my Keeper at a Banquet of Wine; when in that Letter I played the
Advocate for the Juice of the Grape, I little thought that thou would ever
make an Experiment of that Bug-bear-Liquor. Though I know it is common, even in
the Seraglio, to drink Wine privately, and chase away Melancholy, the constant
Familiar of Restraint and Servitude, with generous Compotations.

I am no stranger to the counterfeit Sickness of those, who for the Sake of
this stolen Mirth, put themselves into the Infirmary, that they may there
carouse with Freedom, and drink Healths to the Grand Signior without Suspicion.

Were it not for the convenient Situation of that Apartment, and the Favor of
the Bostangi's, no Wine could find Admittance into the Seraglio, save what is
for the Grand Signior's Use. But now his Slaves drink it as merrily as he: And
I am not sorry, that thou art one of the Number. It Is a groundless
Superstition, to refuse the Gift of Divine Liberality, and deny our selves the
Use of that Plant, which was made to cheer the Hearts of Mortals. Nay, our Holy
Traditions themselves, and all our Doctors tacitly own, that the Vine is
allowable, in that it was saved, among the Rest of the Vegetables, by Noah in
the Ark: And that Holy Prophet cursed the Devil for stealing it away. Perhaps
the Story will not be Unpleasant to thee.

When God commanded Noah, with his Companions, to descend out of the Ark in
Peace, they built them Houses, and began to exercise Husbandry; They sowed
Corn, and the Seeds of other Vegetables: They planted also all Sorts of Trees;
but when they came to look for the Vine, it could not be found. Then it was
told Noah by the Angel, that the Devil had stolen it away, as having some
Right to it. Wherefore Noah cited the Devil to appear before the Angel, in the
Name of God, to answer his Theft. The Angel gave Judgment, That the Vine should
be divided between 'em into Three Parts, whereof the Devil should have Two, and
Noah One: To which both Parties consented. Whereby it is evident, that Man has
some Share in the Juice of the Grape. For, this was the Decision of Gabriel,
That when Two Thirds of the Liquor of this Fruit, should be evaporated away in
boiling over the Fire, the Remainder should be lawful for Noah and his
Posterity to drink: And thou know, we Mussulmans generally obey this Law, in
preparing our Wine.

Let the Devil therefore, in the Name of God, have his Share in this Tempting
Fruit, and then there can be no Injustice in enjoying our own Part. For, when
that which Inebriates, is separated by Fire from the Rest, this Liquor becomes
pure, holy, and blessed. This is the Sentence of the Ancients, the Immediate
Auditors of the Messenger of God, as is to be seen in the Manuscripts they left
behind them; which though they are rare and difficult to be met with, yet such
as diligently seek Wisdom, shall not lose their Labor. Abu Becre Eb'n Mahumet,
has taken great Pains to collect the Memoirs of Antiquity. He was a Learned
Doctor among my Countrymen, of the House of Sulpha, (may he rest under the
Vmbrella's of Paradise) From him I had this Relation.

But, tell me, my dear Mehemet, if thou know, how came thou to be the only
Man that had the good Fortune to be Sentenced to this Happy Disgrace? Or, if
thou art Ignorant, I will tell thee. For, it seems, the Rest of thy Company in
that Nights-Revel were discovered as well as thou, yet escaped all Censure. It
looks, as if they were designedly reserved for Victims, to a more Inexorable
Revenge. And, the Event justifies this Conjecture: Since within the Circuit of
a Moon, not only they, but all the surviving Creatures of the Sultana Kiosem,
were strangled.

Therefore again I pronounce thee Happy, and doubly Blessed in being an Exile,
since thereby thou have escaped the Hands of the Executioner, and art now
living in Egypt, the most Fortunate Region on Earth. Ascribe this to thy
Propitious Destiny, and to the Favor of Solomon Kyzlir Aga: Who foreseeing the
Slaughter that would be made of that Old Queen's Servants, took this
Opportunity to accuse thee to the Grand Signior, that so he might save thy
Life. For, 'twas at his Intercession, thou were banished into this Happy
Province, which is called the Nurse of all Nations. Improve thy Exile to the
best Advantage; and from this Nurse, suck the Milk of Science with which she
has formerly Nourished the Whole Earth. Be grateful also to thy Deliverer; for,
he is a Trusty Friend, and Unchangeable, where he once places his Affection. He
had a particular Kindness for thee. From him I received the News of thy Escape;
for that is the proper Name of thy Banishment. Pour forth devout Oraisons for
his Health and Happiness: Since thou art in a Land, where the Prayers of
Mussulmans are as effectually heard at some Particular Places, as if they were
uttered at the Tomb of the Prophet.

I counsel thee, to visit the Prison of Joseph, which is in the Dungeon of the
Castle of Caire. This is a Place of great Devotion among the Faithful, and has
been so in all Ages, since the Death of that Patriarch. Moses the Prophet, of
whom it is said, that he died in the Embraces of God, made his Prayers in this
Place; and so did Aaron his Brother, when they performed those Miracles in
Egypt. Jesus the Son of Mary, visited this Place, both he and his Mother (on
whom are centered the Smiles of the Creator:) They there performed their
Devotions, when they fled from the Persecution of Herod. So did the Prophets,
and Apostles, as many as were in Egypt, with all True Believers. Nay, some of
the Infidels themselves, having heard of the Renown of this Sanctuary, made
their Addresses to Heaven there, in Time of great Distress. For, here Prayers
are infallibly heard, especially if they be said after the Sun has traversed
the Meridian; when the Wicked Demons are asleep, who walk abroad till Noon,
doing all the Mischief they can.

My Friend, when I think of the Region where thou art, I can hardly forbear
envying thee. It Is a Land of Prodigies and Miracles. It is the Support of Men,
and the Granary of the World. Those who Inhabit it, are full of Complacency and
Joy; and those who abandon it, burn with a perpetual Desire to return. Its
Rivers are Clear, and the Waters Sweet and Rich as Wine. The Eye of God is upon
it, who causes the Nile to flow at his accustomed Season, whence the Land is
made fertile beyond all the Provinces on Earth. This Nile is one of the Rivers
which God caused to descend from the Springs of Paradise, on the Wings of
Gabriel; and has hid the Place of its Descent, among the Inaccessible Heights
of Mountains.

There are many strange Things related of the Land of Alphiom, and how it was
First Manured by Joseph, being before his Time but a Fen or Marsh. The Story
also of Hagar, the Mother of all the Ismaelites, is not Unpleasant; Thou will
find it in the Chronicles of Egypt: For she was an Egyptian, of the Family of
the Coptites; and was bestowed on Sarah, the Wife of our Father Ibrahim, by
Charoba, the King of Egypt's Daughter. After she was dismissed from her Lady,
she traveled to Mecca; from whence she sent a Dispatch to the King of Egypt,
to acquaint him with her Affairs, and with the Birth of her Son Ismael,
imploring his Assistance, in Regard she was in a Land barren of all Things.
Then the King of Egypt caused a Canal to be cut from the Nile, at the Foot of
the Eastern Mountains of Egypt, to the Red Sea; and sent Vessels laden with
Corn, Fruits, and all Manner of Necessary Provisions to Hagar.

If thou addressest to the Feet of the Doctors, the Venerable Prelates of
Caire, they will inform thee of more strange Things than these. It is a Noble
Exercise, to Contemplate the Kingdom of the Heavens and the Earth; to search
into their Wonders and Prodigies; to trace the Footsteps of Ancient Nations,
and the Traditions which know no Origin.

Mehemet, I am an Exile as well as thou: Let us continue our former Friendship
in this State, and do one another all the Good Offices we can. As for the
Misfortunes of Human Life, let us bear them with an Equal Mind. For, they will
soon have an End, as well as we our selves.

May God, who in the Time of Gog and Magog, took up from the Earth the Great
Alcoran, and the Sheets of Science; the Black Stone, and the Shrine of Moses,
with the Five Rivers; have thee in his Holy Protection and Custody, at the Hour
of Evil, and at all Times.

Paris, 26th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER XIII.
To Kerker Hassan, Bassa.
THou may report it to the Divan for a certain Truth, That the Chief Mufti
of the Christians is dead: Which puts all the Courts in Europe, upon new
Strains of Policy.

He was called Innocent X. after his Assumption to the Papacy: For, his true
Name was Pamphylio. But some say, it has been a Custom for the Popes to change
their Names, ever since a certain Priest was lifted to that Dignity, who was
called Bocca de Porco, or Hogs-Face. He, ashamed of this Ignominious Name, as
soon as he sat in the Chair of Peter, assumed the Name of Sergius. Yet, all
his Successors, have not observed that Rule.

These Popes have an Authority, greater than our Principal Mufti. For, they are
obeyed by Kings and Emperors. And being esteemed little less than Gods on
Earth, they are solemnly Adored on the Day of their Coronation, by all the
Cardinals, Princes, Prelates, and Foreign Ambassadors at that Time in Rome.
And, for that End, they are seated on the Altar, which the Nazarenes call, The
Tabernacle and Habitation of their God.

If I mistake not in my Observations, these Roman Caliphs aspire at a
Sovereignty over all Kings and Princes: They would make that which they call
the Hierarchy, a Superlative Independent Monarchy, to which all the Governments
in the World, should pay Homage, and be Subject.

This puts me in Mind of a certain Preacher at Naples, who some Years ago, when
Adonai the Jew was in that City, and happened to be present in the Church,
having made a very Elaborate Speech to persuade the People, That the Priests
were Superior to Kings; at length he broke out into this Passionate
Exclamation: O ye Princes of Christendom, ye are Pharaohs, and we Priests are
your Gods; O ye Pharaohs, obey your Gods! Ye can only command the Creature, but
we make the Creator himself come down on the Altars, at our Pleasure. This
Relation I had from the Jew, in his Travels through Italy. And it is asserted
by some of their Doctors, That the Pope has not only Power to Excommunicate the
Greatest Prince on Earth, but also to pull a Saint out of Paradise, and send
him to Hell.

If they could persuade the Nazarene Princes and People to believe they have
such an Exorbitant Power, perhaps in Time they might reduce 'em to as blind a
Superstition, as the Ancient Kings of Egypt were Guilty of, who were so
besotted to their Priests; that when he whom they called the Cater, or Master
of the Celestial Influences commanded the King to Kill himself, for that it was
the Will of Heaven, the poor bigoted Monarch, durst not dispute the Orders he
had received, but in simple Obedience became his own Murderer.

Those Egyptian Priests indeed, were Masters of great Science, profound
Astrologers, Excellent Mathematicians, and perfectly skilled in the Secrets of
Natural Magic. They performed Things transcending the more Common and Obvious
Works of Nature: By which it was easy, to strike a Terror into the Hearts of
Ignorant Mortals. But, as for these Nazarene Priests, all that they can boast
of is, that they have read the Histories of Former Times, and are able to
discourse in Philosophy and other Sciences, without having the Power to work
any Prodigies: Unless thou will count it one, To keep so many Warlike Nations
in a Servile Awe of their Authority, with the bare Pretense, of turning a Piece
of Bread into a God.

Yet for all this, there are many Poor Prelates, and other Ecclesiastics, who
are invested with Empty Titles, having little or no Revenues: Among which, the
Poverty of some is so Remarkable, as to become a Proverb. Thus, it is Common in
the Mouths of the Romans to say, The Pope's Mule fares better than the Bishop
of Orvietto.

Illustrious Bassa, live thou in the Faith of a Mussulman, and the Favor of
the Grand Signior. For, in that State, thou may despise the Greatest of
these Ecclesiastic Infidels.

Paris, 13th, of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER XIV.
To the Kaimacham.
I Believe, the Secretary of the Nazarene Affairs takes me to be a Conjurer,
and thinks that I can divine of all the Changes and Alterations that happen at
the Port, or that I have some Magical Glass, which represents to me the
continued Series of remote Events, with all the Transactions of the Imperial
Court, Camp, and City: Or else he would not be so late in his Dispatches, and
send me such Imperfect News. I am forced many Times, to address my Letters by
Guess; not knowing, whether the Person to whom I write be in the same Station
he was a while ago, or whether he be among the Living, or the Dead: Whether I
should direct my Dispatches to Constantinople, or to the Elyzian Shades.

My Intelligence of the Mussulman Affairs, is many Times more oweing to the
French Merchants who trade in the Levant, or to the Expresses which come from
Ambassadors residing at Constantinople; than to that Secretary; whose Care it
ought to be, that I should be timely informed of whatever happens in the Osman
Empire.

Surely, Kisur Dramelec has some Design upon me, in being always thus tardy and
negligent. I scarce hear from him once in half a Year; whereas he is commanded
by his Superiors as well as mine, to write to me every Moon. And then, he
sends me such a Lame Account of Things, such Fragments and Scraps of News, that
his Letters need a Comment, to make 'em Intelligible.

About Four Years ago, I modestly taxed him with this Neglect, when I had
Reason to do it in my own Vindication, to Minezim Aluph, Bassa. But Kisur heard
of it, and was very Angry. He sent me a Letter, full of Invectives, which I
answered with a Kind of Indifference, mixing Raillery with my Juster
Resentments. How that worked on him, I know not; but his Reservedness ever
since, makes me conclude he studies Revenge; and that he takes this Method to
accomplish it, by keeping me as much in Ignorance, as he dares, of the Changes
and other Important Occurrences at the Mysterious Port. He knows it would be a
Crime little less than Capital, not to write to me at all: Such a wilful
Contumacy would straight proclaim him a Traitor; since, among the other
Instructions which were given him with his Commission, this Charge was none of
the least, That he should send frequent Intelligence to all the Grand Signior's
Agents, whether Public or Private, in the Courts of Nazarene Princes. He is
sensible, That such a Manifest Contempt of Supreme Authority, would absolutely
ruin him. Therefore he goes more subtly to work. For, he writes indeed, but,
very seldom. And then, with cunning Artifice, either quite conceals, or at
least disguises the most considerable Transactions, only filling up his Letters
with Trifling Stories, and Impertinent Relations, nothing to my Purpose:
Thinking by this Means, to bring upon me the Displeasure of the Grandees,
through the Mistakes I may commit, for Want of better Advertisement.

Be it how it will, I am strangely at a Loss sometimes, what to think, or how
to write to my Superiors; or what Sort of Conduct I should use in this Place,
amidst so many Various Reports as are continually spread abroad in Europe,
concerning the Affairs of the Seraglio, the Shining City, and other Parts of
the Ottoman Empire: Whilst this Kisur still delays to ascertain me of any Thing.

I have been wholly a Stranger, till within these few Days, to the Fate of the
Captain Bassa, who was strangled about a Year ago, for his Cowardice and Ill
Conduct against the Venetians. Neither knew I any Thing of the Adventure and
Flight of his Sons. I was equally Ignorant of the Succession of the Bassa of
Buda in this Important Command; and of many other changes both by Land, and Sea.

So at present, here are a Thousand Rumors stirring about one Thing or other
in the East. Some say, that Chusaein Bassa is strangled, and that the Captain
Bassa, is made Vizir Azem in his Stead. Others report, that this First Minister
was only deposed from that Supreme Dignity, the Seals being taken from him; but
that nevertheless, he still continues to be General of the Sultan's Forces in
Candia. A Third Sort affirm, that he intended to turn Christian, holding a
secret Correspondence with the Patriarch of Jerusalem, by whose Means, and a
General Revolt of the Greeks, Armenians, and other Christians under the Grand
Signior's Jurisdiction, he sought to betray the Ottoman Blood, and exalt
himself to the Empire.

I am not willing to believe, that such Monstrous Perfidy, could enter into the
Heart of that Illustrious Hero; yet know not how to contradict it, for Want of
true Advice.

It is reported also, That Signior Capello, the Venetian Bailo or Resident, at
the Happy Port, has killed himself with a Poniard: Being driven to Despair, by
his long Confinement, and the cruel Usage he had received from the Mussulmans.
God knows whether it be true or no. It would be much to my Satisfaction, to
have a particular Account of all these Things, and of whatsoever else occurs
worthy of Notice. For, how can I discharge my Trust, whilst I am thus kept in
the Dark.

They talk here of a Violent Plague that rages in Moscovy, and that above
200000 People have died of it in the City of Mosco only, besides Millions that
have been swept away in the Provinces of that Vast Empire. Those that really
know not themselves, nor are acquainted with their own Nature, will yet pretend
to penetrate into the Counsels of the Omnipotent, and pronounce this as a
Judgment on the Moscovites, for the Cruelties they have committed in Poland.
Doubtless, the Methods of Fate are Inscrutable.

In the mean While, we are plagued here with a Crew of Vagabonds, whom they
call Gypsies, or Egyptians: For, they pretend to be descended from that Place.
They swarm up and down the Country like Caterpillars, devouring the Fruits of
the Earth. They boast of a Profound Skill in Palmestry, Physiognomy, and other
Sciences, cheating People of their Money, under the Notion of telling them
their Fortunes. No Body knows from whence they come, or whither they go. For,
they are as uncertain as the Wind. A Nasty Generation, and the very Burden of
the Land. If any Creatures be obliged to them, it is the Mice and Rats, with
whom they seem to be in League. For, they Kill and Eat all the Cats they seize
on.

Illustrious Minister, I pray Heaven defend thee from all Sorts of Plagues and
Vermin, but especially from Monsters in Human Shape.

Paris, the 26th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER XV.
To the same.
AS I am alive, these Gypsies have enchanted me; I cannot put 'em out of my
Mind. And, perhaps, it will neither be impertinent nor troublesome, to give
thee a farther Information of them.

There are several Opinions concerning the Original of these Vagrants, and they
have been thought worthy to be inserted into Histories. Some say, they came out
of Tartary or Scythia, and that they first appeared in these Parts, about the
Year 1417. of the Christians Hegira. At which Time, they entered into Saxony in
Troops, having the Passport of Sigismund King of Hungary, and Son of Charles
IV. They had also the Recommendations of diverse other Princes, who looked on
them as Holy Persons or Prophets. For they pretended, that they were commanded
by God, to travel over the Whole Earth, and not to have either Houses or Lands
in their own Possession: And, that this was enjoined 'em as a Penance, to
expiate the Sin of their Ancestors; who inhabiting Egypt in the Days of Jesus,
the Son of Mary, the Christians Messiah, refused to entertain that Holy Prophet
and his Mother, when they fled from the Persecution of Herod.

Others are of Opinion, that they came first out of Persia, and are of the Race
of those who Adore the Fire. Being forced once in Seven Years, to make
Decimations of their People, and send away many Caravans, to seek their Fortune
in Foreign Countries; Persia not being able to sustain their Numerous Progeny.

A Third Sort affirm, That they are the Posterity of the Ten Jewish Tribes,
that were carried away Captives by Salamanassar, King of Assyria. No Body knows
for certain what they are, or of whence. They are of swarthy Complexions, wrapped
up in Mantles of Cotton or Wool. They speak Seven Languages, profess Three
Sciences, obey One King or General, who always travels with 'em. The Italians
call 'em Cingari, from a Word in their Language which signifies a Kind of
Waterfowl, that has no certain Nest, but is forced every Night to seek a New
Lodging: For so these Egyptians rove from Place to Place. The Germans call them
Zingener, from the Word Zindel, which is the constant Appellative of the King
of these Ramblers; as Pharaoh was of Old among the Gypsies, and Caesar among
the Romans. In many Things they resemble the Torlakins and Faquirs of the East;
boasting of extraordinary Illuminations, and a constant Familiarity with God:
Though some Learned Men among the Nazarenes, esteem 'em no better than a Crew of
Cheats and Hypocrites: Even as they do those Oriental Santones; who, they say,
under the Masque of an Uncommon Holiness, commit a Thousand Villainies.

God best knows, what Judgment is to be made either of the One or the Other.
But these Egyptians, as they call 'em, whether they are really such, or no,
have no great Marks of Sanctity, in that they are very Unclean. They seldom or
never Wash themselves, but like the Swine, wallow in all Manner of Filthiness;
eating Prohibited Meats, and having their Women in Common, which are the Two
Sources of all Impurity.

As to the Faquirs of the East, they are strict Observers of the Law of
Abstinence and Cleanness; whether they be Mussulmans, or the Gentiles of India.
And if in other Matters, they may be found faulty, it is very rare: And then
they exceed not the Character of Humanity, which thou know, is by Nature
prone to Error, and subject to a Thousand Frailties and Oversights. We are all
Men, and God does not expect our Conduct to be that of Angels. His Repose is in
himself; and if he takes any Complacency in the Things of the World, it is in
beholding every Thing act according to its Nature. The exquisite Form and
Symmetry of a Be, a Spider, or a Pismire, with the Inimitable Architecture of
the Two Former, and the Admirable Providence of the Latter, may, for ought we
know, afford him as much Delight, as the most celebrated Beauty, Strength,
Science, and Performances of Men. For, his Power and Wisdom, are Equally
manifest in All Things. Every Creature is Perfect in its Kind, only a Wicked
Man is a Blot in the Universe.

Would thou know what the Western Nazarenes are most busy about at this
Time? It Is the Election of a New Pope. He is to be chosen by the College of
Cardinals, who are Princes of the Roman Church. They are all shut up in a
Place, which they call the Conclave. This is a certain Gallery in the Palace of
the Vatican at Rome; where every Cardinal has his Cell or Apartment by himself,
having only Two Servants to attend him. The Conclave is surrounded by the
Roman Militia, to prevent all Intercourse by Letters, or other Ways, between
those without, and those within. The very Dishes which are served up at the
Tables of the Cardinals, are narrowly searched, lest any Letters should be
conveyed in them. The last Posts from Rome assure us, That there were no less
than 66 Cardinals thus shut up, when they left that City. And, there they must
remain Night and Day, without taking the fresh Air, or seeing any Body, till
they have agreed in their Election. There are Two Physicians, a Surgeon, and an
Apothecary shut up with 'em, to serve'em in Case of Sickness.

One of the Conclavists is the Cardinal de Retz, who escaped out of his Prison
in this Kingdom, and fled to Rome for Protection. From whence he sent a Letter
to the Archbishops, and other Prelates of France; which being pronounced a
Seditious Libel against the King and the Government, was in the End of the last
Moon burnt publicly by the King's Order, and all Copies of it prohibited.

The King has also sent private Instructions to the Cardinals of his Party at
Rome, to keep a strict Watch on the Conduct of de Retz, and to oppose him in
all Things.

Here is nothing but Caballing and Intrigue among these Infidels: They are good
at a Stratagem, and know better how to undermine one another, than to face
their Enemies in the open Field: Which is a Character more suitable to Women
than Men. Whereas thou know, our Hero's in the East, know no other Way to
Honor, Victory and Empire, than by downright Bravery and Resolution, subduing
all Things by the Force of their Arms. But God, when he divided the Nations of
the Earth, and separated the Sons of Noah, assigned to every one a different
Constellation, according to whose Influence, the Genius of each People is
disposed. They all obey the Dictates of their Particular Stars, and the Orders
of Eternal Destiny.

Therefore; Sage Minister, since Mars is the Planet of the Sons of Ismael, and
the Ascendant of the Ottoman Empire, there is no Need, that we should turn
Apostates from the Star of our better Fortune, to court the Glances of Mercury,
who is only the Guardian of Knaves and Cheats.

Paris, 26th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1655.
The End of the First Book.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS. VOL. V.
BOOK II.
LETTER I.
To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior.
FOrmerly I could have writ to thee with as much Freedom, as I could to Egri
Boinou, (on whom rest the Favors of God) or as I can now to Gnet Oglou, to my
Brother Pesteli Hali, or to any of my Familiar Friends. But when I consider the
Eminent Station thou possessest, in that the Health and Life of the Mighty
Emperor is now committed to thy Skill and Care, I am many Times at a Stand how
to address my self. Methinks, thou art tinctured with the Majesty of that
Personage, whose Hand thou so often have the Honor to touch, when required to
discover by the beating of his Pulse, the Interior Maladies which afflict his
Royal Soul. Yet I know thou still retainest thy Humanity, and wilt not despise
those whom thou have once thought worthy of Friendship.

Suffer me then to converse with a Philosophic Freedom, that is, in an Address
void of Formalities and Reserves.

I know it is of no Import, whether Mahmut be sick or well, provided the Grand
Signior be served. What signify the Languishing Pains, or more Acute Agonies
of a Slave, so long as he is able to carry on his Master's Interest? We are not
born for our selves only, but by the very Condition of our Nature, are obliged
to consecrate our Lives to the Service of others. It Is a Reciprocal Debt, from
which no Mortal is free. Every Man owes Something to his Relations, more to his
Friends, but most of all to the Public.

Therefore I make no Complaints of my Lot, nor murmur at the Will of Destiny. I
accuse not the Stars of my Nativity, nor tax 'em with Unkindly Aspects: But am
contended with my Fortune, be it Good or Bad, and resigned to the Pleasure of
Heaven.

As Nature has framed my Body Infirm and Weak, subject to a Thousand Maladies;
So is my Mind also harassed with Distempers which have no Number. But above
all, I labor under a Kind of Intellectual Fever, a perpetual Thirst of
Knowledge, which all the Books and Converse in the World cannot satisfy. There
is no End of my Doubts and Scruples. Every Thing appears to me as Ambiguous, as
the Answers of the Delphic Oracle. Nay, I am a perfect Riddle to my self.

Tell me, dear Hali, how I shall cure this Dropsy of the Mind, and I will not
trouble thee with the Inconsiderable Diseases of my Body. I have a high Opinion
of you Physicians: And shall put more Confidence in thy Advice, than in the
Tefta of the Mufti. Conceal not thy Art from Mahmut, who admires thee with a
Respect equal to that which he pays to the Memories of Avicen, Al' Razi, Helal,
and the Rest of those excellent Physicians, mentioned in our Arabian Histories.

And now these Ornaments of our Nation are come into my Mind, permit them to
divert me from saying or thinking any more of my self at present: For it will
be better to turn the Discourse to such Illustrious Themes. At worst, it will
be but an Innocent Digression.

In perusing the Lives of those Famous Men, I meet with some Passages which are
very Delightful. Perhaps thou have seen the same. Yet 'twill do thee no Hurt,
to call 'em again to thy Remembrance.

I have read in a certain Manuscript, penned by Ibrahim the Son of Helal, a
Renowned Physician at Badgat, this Memoir of his Father. On a certain Day, says
he, that my Father had administered Physic to the Emperor Tuzun, for which he
was presented with a Royal Vest, rewarded with Five Thousand Piasters, and by
the Emperor's Command was carried through the Streets in State, I observed that
he was Pensive amidst all those Honors, and troubled in Mind, when I thought
he had greatest Reason to rejoice. Therefore I said to him, My Father, How
comes it to pass, that you are thus dejected, at a Time when all the World
expects to see you dissolved in Pleasure? He answered, Son, He that has
bestowed these Honors on me is a Fool, and does things preposterously without
Reason. And therefore I cannot rejoice at these Untimely Favors he has showed
me, being sensible they are not the Effects of his Judgment, but of his
Ignorance. I gave him a Cathartic Potion, which worked so strongly with him,
that it excoriated his Bowels, and brought forth Blood. So that I was forced to
use a different Method, both to remove his Distemper, and stop the Violent
Flux. In the mean while, he Ignorantly believing, That the Voiding of so much
Blood, procured him the present Ease and Health he feels, therefore ordered
these Honors to be done me which thou see. Now that which saddens me, is my
Fear, lest some Time or other, he may through his Ignorance commit as great an
Error on the Contrary Side, and suspect that I have done him an Injury, when
there is no Ground for it, and so put me to Death.

Tell me, my Friend, had not this Physician Reason for his Behavior and Words?
He was a Man of Great Abilities, accomplished with diverse Sciences, and in high
Esteem with the Princes and Nobles of Arabia.

It were worth thy Pains to peruse frequently the Life of Avicen, written by
himself, wherein thou will behold the Methods he used to acquire a Profound
Skill in the Sciences: How he was at first puzzled in the Metaphysics, and was
almost driven to Despair, till a Dream unfolded to him whatsoever was
difficult. When he was at a Loss in any Disquisition, he used to frequent the
Mosques, and pour forth Devout and Fervent Oraisons to the Source of
Intellectual Lights, till the Thing was manifested to him. He sat up late
a-Nights, having a Lamp perpetually burning in his Chamber, applying himself
attentively to Books and Contemplation. This was his Course, till he was
Consummate in all the Liberal Sciences, which was in the Eighteenth Year of his
Age.

But of all the Physicians whose Names adorn our History, none seems Comparable
to Thabet Eb'n Abrahim, for his Skill in exactly Indicating the Causes of a
Distemper by the Different Measures of the Pulse. Abul Pharai, his Contemporary
and Friend, writes thus of him. On a certain Day, says he, when I was with
Thabet Eb'n Abrahim of Harrain, in the House of Abu Mohammed the Vizir, Abu
Adalla Ebno'l Hejai the Poet being there also, reached forth his Hand to
Thabet, desiring him to feel his Pulse. To whom the Physician forthwith
replied, Thou have used a Gross Diet, and been Intemperate in eating sour Milk
with Veal. The other answering, That it was true, and all the Company admiring;
Abu'l Abbas the Astrologer, also reached forth his Hand. But when Thabet had
felt his Pulse, Thou, said he, have committed an Excess in taking too much of
Cold Things; for, as I judge, thou have eat about Eleven Pomegranates.
Immediately Abu'l Abbas cried out, This is a Prophet certainly, and more than a
Physician; for he speaks the Truth to a Tittle. Every Body was astonished at
his Wondrous Knowledge, and I more than all the Rest. Wherefore, when I had him
alone, I said, My dear Thabet, The Study of Physic is Common to us both;
therefore hide nothing from me, but discover freely by what Art you were able
to tell, That the Poet eat sour Milk with Veal, and not as well with Beef or
Mutton; and that the Astrologer eat no more nor less than Eleven Pomegranates?
He answered, My Mind suggested this to me, and prompted my Tongue to utter it.
Then I desired him to show me the Scheme of his Nativity: Which he did at his
own House. And considering it attentively, I observed, That the Planet Jupiter
was Lord of the Horoscope. Then I said to him, It Is this speaks, my Dear
Friend, not you, so often as you make these Fortunate Conjectures. Thus far
Abul Pharai.

God knows, whether the Stars have any such Influence on Men in their Birth, or
no. I am not very Credulous in this Point. Nor can the Authority of the
Ancients, or the Character of the Persian and Chaldaean Magi, captivate my Mind
in an Implicit Faith of Things so liable to Doubt. Who knows what the Stars are
made of, or for what Ends they are Created? Yet I must own, that some Men seem
to be born with Inherent Faculties, which others can never acquire with all the
Art and Industry in the World. One Man is of a Poetic Constitution: Another is
Genially inclined to Physic; a Third excels in Mechanics: Every Man has his
Peculiar Gift. And yet perhaps all this while, the Stars have Nothing to do in
the Matter. However, if there be any Truth in Astrology, the Persians,
Chaldaeans, Arabians and Indians, seem to be the only Men of all Nations,
Constellated to understand this Science perfectly, One knows not what to think
amidst so many Appearances of Truth and Falsehood. Nor can our Thoughts be of
any great Import, be it how it will, in these Speculative Matters. At the Day
of Judgment we shall not be asked, What Proficiency we have made in Logic,
Metaphysics, Astronomy, or any other Science; but, Whether we have lived
according to our Nature, as Men, endu'd with Morality and Reason. In that Hour
it will more avail us, That we have thrown a Handful of Flower in Charity to a
Nest of contemptible Pismires, than that we could muster all the Hoasts of
Heaven, and call every Star by its proper Name. For, then the Constellations
themselves shall disappear, the Sun and Moon shall give no more Light, and all
the Frame of Nature shall vanish: But our Good and Bad Works shall remain for
ever, Recorded in the Archives of Eternity.

If from this Manner of Writing, thou shall conjecture I am Melancholy, and
wilt also reveal the Causes and Remedy of this Distemper, thou shall be more to
me, than a Thousand Avicen's, Helal's, Thabet's, or all the Physicians and
Astrologers of the East. For, these Kind of Thoughts, are Mournful as the
Shadow of Death.

Paris, 23d. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER II.
To Afis, Bassa.
I Know not whether thou will praise or condemn the Sentence, which the Elector
of Saxony pronounced not long ago on a Poor Fellow for killing a Deer. Yet
because there is something very Singular in it, I will relate the whole
Passage, as I received it from Nathan Ben Saddi, the Jew at Vienna.

In the Moon of Cheuval, a certain Citizen of Wittemberg, was accused before
the Elector for hunting in his Forest, and killing one of his Deer. The Duke in
a Rage, commanded him to be set upon a Stag, his Hands chained to the Horns,
and his Feet under the Belly of the Beast; ordering, that the Stag with this
Burden, should be let loose to run whither he would. The poor frightened Stag,
not being accustomed to such a Load, and terrified with the rattling of the
Chain, ran away full speed over Hills and Dales, through Thickets of Briars and
Thorns, never stopping till it had measured above Three and Thirty German
Leagues; and then, tired with so vast a Race, he fell down. At which Instant, a
Caravan was coming by that Place, out of Silesia.

The poor Wretch on the Back of the Stag, almost dead with the Pains he had
undergone, in so continued and violent a Motion, being also sorely bruised and
his Flesh torn and mangled by the Boughs of Trees, as the Stag rushed through
thick Woods; cried aloud to the Caravan, begging that some of them would in
Mercy dispatch him out of his Torments. But they, either for fear of the Duke's
Displeasure, or for other Reasons, refused him this Kindness. So that after the
Stag had rested awhile, and recovered new Spirits, he began a fresh Career;
and never ceased running, till he arrived at a certain Monastery or Convent of
Religious, where he beat against the Gate with his Horns, till some of the
Dervises opened it, and let him in. They astonished to see a Man thus pinioned
to a Stag, his Face, Arms, Legs and all his Body covered with Blood, and
himself ready to expire, immediately brought him Cordials and other
Refreshments, whilst some were employed in loosing his Chains. But being
informed by his own Mouth, how he came into this Condition, they began to think
of turning him loose again, for Fear of the Duke's Anger. However, suffering
themselves to be overcome by the Importunity of the Miserable Man, and relying
on their Ecclesiastic Privileges (for here in the West, the Convents are
generally allowed Sanctuaries for all Sorts of Offenders) they took him into
their Protection: But he expired that Night.

It is hard to determine whether the Duke, or these Derviches, were in the
Right or Wrong. The French, who of late, have by a Fashion learned to grow
Obdurate, justify the Proceedings of this Prince; saying, That Pity is a
Passion fit only for Women, Children, and Fools. They esteem it a Mark of a
Great Spirit, a Mind capable of Empire, not to be moved with the Sighs or Tears
of the Miserable; but to frown or laugh, at the Misfortunes of others. This,
they say, is the only Method to harden Men for War, Conquests, and Plunder:
Where the Victors are to cut their Way to Honor and Riches, through the Hearts
of the Vanquished, to quench the ardent Thirst of Glory with Humane Blood, and
to celebrate their Triumphs, only in the midst of horrid Massacres and
Funerals.

It Is true, these Principles and Actions are allowable in Men of the Sword,
when they fight the Battles of their King and Country, in Heat of Blood. But,
Clemency and Compassion, are Virtues becoming the Greatest Prince, or most
Valiant General, when their Enemies are reduced, by the Fortune of War, to kiss
the Dust of their Feet, and beg for Mercy: Or, when in Time of Peace, their
Subjects fall into a Crime which may admit of Indulgence. Certainly, these
Western Infidels have wrong Notions of Humanity, in asserting, That Cruelty is
either a Sign of a Noble Nature, or a Step to true Happiness: Since, the most
hard-hearted Tyrant, one Time or other, will have Need of Compassion himself;
especially in Sickness and the Agonies of Death, which perhaps prove more
tormenting to him, than to the Merciful and Generous. It is recorded of Al
Hejai Eb'n Hesha'm, a Famous Abrabian Captain, that when, in a Malignant Fever,
he called for Water to drink, and it was denied him by the Physicians, who had
Care of his Health; It is enough, said he; Rueno'ddaula, once my Lieutenant, to
whom I forgave Three Treasons, and who died a Natural Death, has refreshed me
at this Minute with a Liquor unknown: Sure, it is the Wine of Paradise. And from
that Moment he began to recover his Health, after which he lived many Years,
often rehearsing this Passage among his Familar Friends to his Last Day.

But the Infidels are either Ignorant of these Examples, or if they know 'em,
Pride will not suffer 'em to learn Morality and Justice. They are destined, the
greatest Part, to be Incredulous to the Day of Judgment. How many Prophets has
God sent into all Nations, to teach them the Right Way, and not the Way of such
with whom he is displeased; yet they will not be Converted? They look on the
Apostles and Messengers of the Eternal, with the Eyes of Swine; They grunt
under the Burden of their Sensuality, and like those Filthy Animals, return to
their Mire again. Yet, that Superlatively Merciful, winks at their Frailties,
and visits them with his Graces every Morning. But, they put their Fingers in
their Ears, and turn away in Disdain, as from a Beggar. They reject the King of
All Things, as a Fugitive and Vagabond on Earth.

From that Delectable Essence, the Odor of whose Sweetness is diffused through
the Elements, and refreshes the Minds of the True Faithful; let us by continual
Devotion and Virtue, attract Divine Tinctures, till our Hearts be all
tranform'd into Incense, and in this Aromatic Pile, our Souls expire like the
Phoenix, to revive again in the Joys of Paradise, in Amors which know no End.

Paris, 8th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER III.
To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
I Wonder at Nothing: Much less, at the Extravagant Caprices of Tyrants.
Methinks, there appears no Novelty in Modern Transactions. They are but a
Repetition of Ancient Practices, under New Forms. Of all the Events in this
Age, not one has come to my Knowledge which gives me a Surprise. Yet, I must
confess, there is Something very Singular in the Punishment the Duke of Saxony
inflicted, as thy Letter tells me, on the poor Deer-Stealer. And, if it be just
to put a Man to Death on such an Account, as the Indians hold; the Duke seems
very Ingenious and Accurate, in the Choice he made of an Executioner.

The Ancient Romans had a Law, which they called Lex Talionis. Which in all
Criminal Cases, appointed the Punishment to be in some Circumstances Adequate
to the Fault. And thou know, Moses your Lawgiver, left much the same
Statutes: Requiring the Loss of the Eye of him, who had put another Man's out;
a Tooth for a Tooth, an Arm for an Arm, and so proportionably of other
Injuries. But this Prince seems to have made a Supplement, where these Laws
appeared short; and has showed a most Exquisite Niceness of Revenge, in the
Destiny of the Unfortunate Huntsman, to cause a Stag to be, in so peculiar a
Manner, the Instrument of his Death, who had villainously murdered one of the
same Species. Doubtless, it was a Princely Freak of Justice: And had it been
done purely to avenge the Blood of the slaughtered Beast, and not in
Vindication of his own Right, I could not forbear to pronounce it a Frolic
worthy of a Hero. But, he himself is frequently guilty of the same Kind of
Murder, as are most of the Great Men in Europe, whose Tables are no other than
the Altars of Gluttony, smoking with Flesh and Blood, whilst Hecatombs of
Animals are there sacrificed to Voracious Appetites, the Idols of these Western
People.

Methinks therefore, it had been more Generous and becoming a Prince, to pardon
the Poor Fellow a Theft, which perhaps was the only Method he had to preserve
himself and his Family from starving. And for ought I know, he had as much
Right according to the Law of Nature, to kill a Stag, as the Owner has. But,
there is no Talk to be made of Right or Wrong, where Power overrules all.

India is at Present the only Public Theater of Justice toward all Living
Creatures. There, it is a Capital Crime to shed the Blood of any Animal, and
punished with Death no Iess than the Murder of a Man. The Princes and Nobles
indeed enclose Deer and other Innocent Creatures in Parks, not with a Design to
prey upon them at their Pleasure, but to defend 'em from the Violence of
others; whilst those happy Animals range and feed where they please within
those Pales, free from Peril, and never fearing any other Death, save what they
pay to Nature, when they have spun out the accustomed Term of their Life. They
also build Hospitals for a like Purpose. And are at a great Charge every Year,
to redeem a certain Number of Oxen and Cows from Slaughter. For they esteem it
a Barbarous and Inhuman Cruelty, to murder those Creatures, which are the
Nurses of our Life.

The Law of Moses, if I mistake not, obliges all of thy Nation to certain
Specific Tendernesses toward the Dumb Animals. And Eesa the Prophet, a Man of
no Obscure Extract, but of a Noted Race among the Hebrews, says He that kills
an Ox, is as if he slew a Man, and he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he
beheaded a Dog. And in another Place, the same Prophet says, in the Person of
God, To what Purpose is the Multitude of your Sacrifices to me? I am offended
with the Smoke of your Burnt-Offerings, and nauseated with the Smell of broiled
Fat. I take no Delight in the Blood of Bulls, Lambs or Goats. Who has required
these Things at your Hands? Bring no more vain Oblations, which my Soul hates.

By these Expressions one would think, the Prophet brings in God, denying that
ever he commanded any such Sacrifices or shedding of Blood, and protesting
against it, as an Abomination. Where then is the Reputation of those Writings
which go under the Name of Moses? For, in them these Bloody Victims are
expressly enjoined. God cannot be Contradictory to himself. Doubtless, a great
Part of the True Law which God gave to Moses, was lost in the Former
Captivities of your Nation, when your Cities and Provinces were quite
dispeopl'd, your Fathers led away by the Victorious Monarchs of the East, and
your choicest Memoirs Abolished. So that what remains now, is only a Collection
of Fragments patched up by Esdras, and other Industrious Scribes, to which they
gave the Specious Title of the Law of Moses, that so they might fasten the
wavering People in Obedience, to something, though of their own devising.

Nathan, I do not go about to seduce thee. Examine All Things. Believe neither
me, nor thy own Rabbi's, but trust only thy Reason, which will stand by thee
at the Day of Judgment, when all Things else shall fail.

Paris, 8th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER IV.
To Dgebe Nafir, Bassa.
THese Nazarenes, like the Followers of the Prophet, are divided into
Innumerable Sects; and so it is in all Religions. Men cannot think alike. Nature
it self delights in Variety. God has diversified the Faculties of our Souls, as
he has the Constitutions of our Bodies. The Zealot, is subject to Choler; the
Bigot, to Melancholy; the Libertine, is of a Sanguine Complexion; and as for
the Rest, they are but so many Walking, Speaking Lumps of Phlegm. This is the
Physical Division of Mortals: Under which are comprehended, the Various Tempers
which result from the different Mixture of these Four Radical Principles. And
for this, we must thank Galen and Hippocrates.

But, if we consult the Astrologers, they will assign as many different Humors
and Complexions, as there be Stars in the Heavens, at least, as there be
Constellations. They Will tell ye of the Bull and the Bear, and God knows what
Heavenly Stories. The Dragon shall spit Venom on one Man's Nativity, out of his
Mouth; and give another a poisonous Lick with his Tail. If we believe all they
say, there is not an Herb in the Field, but has its particular Star, whose
Influence causes it to grow and prosper: though Moses tells us, that all the
Vegetables appeared on the Earth, even before the Stars themselves had their
Existence in the Heavens.

But, whether there be any Truth in Astrology, or no; this is certain, that Men
differ in their Sentiments of Religion, as they do in their Faces. The
Physiognomy of Faith, is Infinitely various. One Man believes in Moses, Another
in Jesus the Son of Mary, a Third in Mahomet our Holy Lawgiver. Then, these are
subdivided into Innumerable Parties. The Jews have Seventy Eminent Religious
Factions. There are numbered Seventy and One Sects of Christians, and Seventy
Two of Mussulmans. These are all at Odds about Words and Exterior Ceremonies;
so Zealous for Charity and Peace, that they are in perpetual Wars for its Sake,
murdering one another in the Love of God: And such stout Champions for the
Truth, that they scruple not to tell Ten Thousand Lies in its Defense.

The Differences between the Greek and Armenian Nazarenes, the Nestorians and
Jacobites, with other Sects of the East, are not unknown to the Ministers of
the Port. But perhaps thou art a Stranger to the Newer Schisms of the West.

The most Eminent Division of Christendom at this Time, is into Catholics and
Protestants. The Former obey the Roman Mufti, and boast of an Uninterrupted
Series of Caliphs from Peter the Vicar of the Messiah, down to the present
Pope. The Latter are the Followers of Luther and Calvin, Men who pretended to
certain New Lights, and claimed a Right to reform the Errors of their Fathers,
in Matters of Faith and Worship. God best knows, who is in the Right or Wrong,
of these Two Parties: But, they have always been at Daggers-drawing in Defense
of their several Tenets; persecuting and massacring one another, for
Conscience Sake. Both Sides appeal to the Written Law, to Apostolical
Traditions, to the Testimony of the Ancients, the Decrees of Councils, and the
Practice of those whom they call the Primitive Church. Yet neither Part will
allow the other a Sufficient Judgment to Interpret those Memoirs of Antiquity,
nor an Authentic Power to decide Controversies of this Nature. Thus their
Disputes are like to last, till the Final Day of Decision, when all Human
Quarrels shall be determined before the Grand Tribunal.

In the mean Time they take all Advantages, to execute their Spite and Malice
on each other, under the Notion of Justice and Piety. We are daily alarmed here
with Tragical Relations of horrid Murders and Butcheries, committed on the
Protestants of Piedmont, and other Parts under the Duke of Savoy. Whilst some
say, That all these Reports are false, and the Sufferings of those People are
according to Law, the due Punishment of their Rebellious Actions.

It is not in my Power, to adjust their Differences; nor is it Material to a
Mussulman, which of them has the Law on their Side. Yet, if I were inclined to
take any Part, it should be that of the Oppressed. Cruelty I abhor: And our
Holy Prophet has forbid Force to be used in Matters of Religion, since the
Conscience is Responsible to none but God.

May that God, from whose Unity have sprung all the Different Essences in the
World, and all the Variety in Nature, give us Grace to love the Whole Creation,
and not to shed Blood unless in the Sacred Combat.

Paris, the 13th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER V.
To William Vospel, a Recluse of Austria.
I HAD concluded thee Dead, till thy Letter certify'd me to the Contrary. So
long a Silence between Friends, would put any Man upon the same Thoughts. Ten
Years have slipped away between my last to thee, and thy Answer. I hope, thou
do not measure Time, after the Rate of the Seven Sleepers. Perhaps, thou have
enjoined a Ten Years Silence and Abstinence from all Manner of Conversation, by
the Superior of thy Convent. Such Severities are not uncommon in Religious
Societies, where the main Business is, to acquire Perfection. The Armenian
Monasteries are much more Rigid, where but for One Extravagant Word, I have
known a Man's Tongue locked up, for the Space of Two and Twenty Years, under
Pain of Excommunication; and then released, only for the Sake of a most
Significant Jest, put on the Patriarch, in Mute Signs. Wit will find a Way to
vent it self, though it be at the Fingers Ends. And for ought I know, thou have
obliged thy Abbot to take off the Censure, by the like Method. There was
Abundance of Satyr in the Subsannation of the Ancient Romans; and no less
Rhetoric in the Shrugg or Grimace of the Modern Italians. The Mimicks of
Scaramouchi, are a perfect Lampoon; and Harlequin is Burlesque all over.

Thou know; I always entertain thee with one frivolous Discourse or other,
to divert thy Melancholy; and thy own Letters give me Encouragement. They seem
to be writ in a pleasant Humor. But tell me, have I guessed right at the Cause
of so tedious a Reservedness, or no? Have thou been forced all this while, to
speak with thy Hands, Feet, Nose, and the Emphatick Motions of thy Head and
Eyes? If it were so, I fancy thou were excellent Company, among thy Grave
Phlegmatic Brethren; and in a fair Way to understand the Language of the
Beasts, who by curvetting, creeping, leaping, frisking their Tails and other
Postures, express their various Passions, Desires and Necessities, as
Intelligibly to those who are used to them, as we can do by the most Elegant
Addresses in Words.

But, to be serious: If for the Sake of Virtue, this Penance be imposed on thee
by him who Presides over thy Convent, or thou have Voluntarily undertaken so
difficult a Part of Self-denial on the Score of Philosophy or Religion, thou
have approved thy self wise and brave in not flinching. A Coward in Religious
Matters, is as despicable, as in the Engagements of the World. It Is Honorable
to face Temptations, and come off with Victory.

As for what thou desire to know concerning the Sepulcher of King Childeric;
It is esteemed a Piece of great Antiquity: In Regard he was the Fourth Monarch
of France. He Reigned over the Gauls or Franks in the Year 458. Severus being
Emperor of Rome, Severinus and Dagalaiphus, Consuls. Yet in little more than
Three Years, he was deposed and banished by his Subjects, whilst one Aegidius a
Roman, was Crowned in his Stead. Neither did this Man please the People so
well, but that after some Experience of his Oppression, Avarice and other
Vices, they expelled him also, and recalled their Lawful Sovereign. For,
Aegidius had vexed them with Unreasonable Taxes, fleecing them of many
Millions, which he privately sent out of the Kingdom, disposing of this vast
Treasure at Rome, and among his Friends in other Parts, as a Support against
Future Contingencies: For, he looked for some Back-Blows of Fate. Childeric
therefore being restored to his Crown, enjoyed it till his Death; which was in
the Year 484. After whom succeeded in the Kingdom, Clodovaeus the Great, who
was the First French King that embraced Christianity.

The Time when Childeric's Tomb was first discovered, was about Two Years ago,
when the Cathedral of Tournay wanted Reparation. For, as the Laborers were
digging up the Old Charnel-House, they encountered a Long Stone; which giving
'em some Fatigue, they broke in Pieces, and found under it the Entire Skeleton
of a Man lying at Length, with Abundance of Greek Medals of Gold, and some
other Curiosities of the same Metal, among which was a Ring with this Motto,

SIGILLVM CHILDERICI REGIS. All these Relics were at first possessed by the
Canons of that Church, where they were found: Of whom they were begged by the
Archduke of Austria, who has them in his Custody. Therefore those who told
thee they are in the King of France's Hands, were misinformed themselves, or
designed to abuse thee. For, this cannot be supposed, during the present Wars
between France and Spain: When they are more ready on both Sides to plunder one
another, than to grant Civilities of this Obliging Nature.

I perceive, thou art grown a great Antiquary; and therefore in Token of my
Esteem, I have sent thee a Cabinet of such Old Things, as I have scraped
together in my Travels, and during my Residence in this City.

The Agates which thou will find in the Uppermost Drawer, may easily be dated
by their Figures, which are all after the Fashion of Gentile Rome. As for the
Shells in the Second, I leave 'em to thy own Judgment; only this I will say,
That they are not Common. The Third contains a Miscellany of several Antiques.
The Knives were used by the Ancient Roman Priests in their Sacrifices. The
Weights are at least Twelve Hundred Years Old, by the Parallels which I have
seen in the King's Library. The Rings also are of the Parthian Make: And the
Arrow to which they are fastened, retains its Oriental Venom to this Hour; as
thou will find by trying it on any Animal that deserves it. But, after all, the
Lowermost Drawer contains Nothing but Counterfeits. For, those Medals are the
Work of Parmezan, the Finest Graver in the World. If thou know not his
Character, I Will tell thee in a Word; He was Famous for Imitating so Exactly the
most Ancient Medals, that the Transcripts could not be discerned, even by the
most Skillful Artists, from the Originals.

Accept these, with the same good Will as I did, when they were presented to
me, and tell me wherein else I can gratify thy Wishes.

You Monasticks are infinitely Happy, in the Advantages of Retirement and
Tranquillity. You are free from the Cares which molest other Mortals. The Bell
rings you to Prayers, and to your Repast. You have Nothing else to regard, but
your Contemplations and Studies. Many Great Lights, have sprung from your
Various Orders. And I tell thee, Father William, the World will be
disappointed, if thou should prove a Dark-Lanthorn, and only be Wise for
thy Self.

Paris, 25th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER VI.
To the most Illustrious and Invincible Vizir Azem, at the Port.
BY the Sound which the Sun makes at his going down, I swear, I was not
mistaken in the Idea I had of thy Generosity. And, the Dispatch with which thou
have honored the Slave Mahmut, confirms me in a perfect Security of thy Favor
and Protection.

I shall with exquisite Diligence obey thy Orders. But it cannot be attempted,
without vast Sums of Money. And if I may be thought worthy to give Advice to my
Superiors, the most Effectual Way to accomplish this, will be by sending one
of the Principal Ministers to this Court, with a splendid Embassy. For, this
Young King expects very Honorable Addresses, from all that seek his more
Intimate Friendship. Therefore a Chiaus would be slighted on such an Occasion,
and mar all the Design. I would counsel, That somebody be sent, who perfectly
understands the Genius of the French, and the particular Aims of Cardinal
Mazarini.

Under the Protection of such a one, I should be able without Hazard of a
Discovery, to act all that is necessary to carry on this Design with good
Success. Here are Abundance of needy Courtiers, on whom Gold will have a
powerful Influence. But neither I in Person, nor any one whom I shall depute,
can make such Tenders, unless there were here some known Public Ambassador
from the Grand Signior, to countenance the Business. For, otherwise it will
presently be whispered, That some Private Agent lurks here Incognito. They will
start a Thousand Chimaera's of Jealousy; and so I may run the Hazard of a
Second Imprisonment, when the Cardinal shall call to mind the Occasion of my
First. All that I can then say of my being a Moldavian, will find no Credit;
and 'twill be no less than a Miracle, if they do not expose me to a Scrutiny
for the Mark of Circumcision. Which if it be found, all is betrayed and ruined.

I do not value the Punishments they will inflict on me, nor the Loss of my
Life: But I dread the more Important Consequences of such a Discovery; the
unmasking the Secrets of the Grand Signior to Infidels.

These are the Chief Reasons I have to offer in behalf of an Honorable
Embassy. As to the Person whom thou shall think fit to employ in so Glorious a
Trust, I will not presume to add any Thing to what I have said already, That he
be a Man of Experience in the French Affairs, well versed in the Knowledge of
Christian Policy, the different Interests of the Courts of Europe, and one that
exactly knows what Advantage to make of the New Pope. For, after long Debates,
the Cardinals have at last Elected one, who has assumed the Name of Alexander
VII.

It is hard to judge at his First Accession to that Sovereign Chair, what
Interest this Prelate will embrace, whether that of France or Spain: Or whether
his Conduct will be Neutral, deporting himself with an Equal Indifference to
all the Nazarene Princes, whom he calls his Sons, endeavoring to compose their
Quarrels, and unite their Forces against the Mussulmans. I tell thee, no body
can be yet assured, what the Temper of the Roman Mufti may prove. For, it is
usual for the aspiring Cardinals, to promise many Things in Hopes of the
Papacy, which they never perform, when they have once obtained that
Uncontrollable Command. Dissimulation is ranked among the Principal Virtues, in
the Court of Rome: And he that knows not how to disguise his Affections, is not
thought worthy of any Important Trust. Adonai the Jew, has lost his Liberty in
that City, for being defective in this Courtly Accomplishment. It seems, he and
some others of his Nation railed too passionately and openly, at the Idolatry
of the Romans. Yet I expect daily to hear of his Releafe; for, I understand by
a Letter from him, that he was excepted out of the Number of those, whose
Condemnation is Irrevocable.

I reproved him for his Immorality, in reflecting on the Established Religion
of the Country where he resides. But, this Kind of Arrogance, is the peculiar
Vice of the Hebrews. They despise all other People in the World: Whereas thou
know, the Impartial God respects not One Nation more than Another; For, they
are all Equally the Works of his Hands. And for ought we know, he tolerates the
Variety of Religions that are extant in the World, with the same Indifference,
as he dispenses his Common Blessings to such an Infinite Number of Men of
diverse Faces.

The Multiplicity in the Universe, exalts the Divine Unity, which is the Root
of All. And if there be Ten Thousand Myriads of Worlds, they all sprang from
One Cause, and there they end. For he is the First and Last of Every Thing.

Paris, 2d. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER VII.
To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
THE Egyptians have a Proverb, That he who thinks and speaks of God, only when
he is Melancholy, sacrifices to the Planet Pharouis or Saturn, and not to the
most High and Exalted King of All Things, who is the Fountain of Joy to Men and
Angels.

I counsel thee, not to list thy self in the Number of those who adore the
Stars, by cherishing sad Idea's of the ever Indulgent and Merciful Divinity:
Nor think thy self the less liable to this Censure, because it proceeds from a
Nation which was once at Enmity with the Sons of Jacub. Despise not the Wisdom
of that People, from whom even Moses your Lawgiver learned all his, and from
whom all Nations borrowed Improvements of Learning, if they are not indebted to
them for its First Rudiments.

By what I have said, thou will perceive, that I consult thy Happiness, and
would have thee chase away Vain Fears and Superstitious Thoughts, the mere
Product of an Ill-temper'd Spleen, which is the peculiar Malady of thy Nation.
Let thy Heart be always Cheerful; for God loves every Thing that he has made:
The Universe overflows with his Bounty. Be not too Religious, nor strain the
Faculties he has given thee for thy Support, and not for thy Bane.

I had rather hear from thee Matter of News, than these dismal Scruples about
thy Soul. If thou art not willing to embrace the Mussulman Faith, in God's Name
continue to observe the Law of Moses, and prosecute thy Affairs with Alacrity.

Thou have been very slack of late in sending me Advices of what passes at
Vienna, and other Parts of Germany. We have flying Reports here, of the Death
of Eleanora the Empress; and that on the same Day whereon she died, Leopoldus
Ignatius Josephus, the Emperor's Son, was Elected King of the Romans. I know
not how to write to the Ministers of the Port, till thou have ascertained me of
these. Things. For God's Sake, be speedy in thy Dispatches, and inform me what
is done at the Diet of Frankfort. Rowze up thy self, and banish superfluous
Cares. Remember, that as there is but One God, so there is but One Law, but One
Thing Necessary to Man; that is, To live according to Reason. This is Engraven
in every Man's Heart, and there needs no Comment to explain it. Thou art a
sufficient Lawgiver, Rabbi, Doctor, and Interpreter to thy self. Let not others
amuse thee with Fables.

I will now acquaint thee with something of Certainty. The French have gained
Landrecies, a Strong Town in Flanders. It was surrendered to them on the 22d.
of this Moon; And the next Day all the Garrison marched out, consisting of 1500
Men, besides 300 wounded.

The King is gone, upon this good News, to view and take Care of his New
Conquests. For, this is not the only Town the Spaniards have lost: They talk
of Maubeug, Bovines, and Conde; all which, according to fresh Report, are in
the Hands of the French. This Young Monarch, is strangely Fortunate.

If thou can inform me of such successful Campagnes among the People of the
North, fail not to do it in Season: For we are not placed in these Stations, to
whistle to Sheep.

Paris, 29th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER VIII.
To Mustapha Lulu Beamrilla, a Man of the Law.
I Would willingly be admitted into Paradise, as well as other Mussulmans.
Neither would I think, speak or do any Thing which might prejudice my Title,
and baulk my Pretensions to Eternal Happiness. This Desire is Natural to all
Men; And when I profess it, thou may believe me without an Oath. Yet
methinks. I would not go Hoodwinked to Heaven, but would fain enjoy the Benefit
of my Sense and Reason, in my Advances to that Region of Bliss.

I believe the Alcoran, as the Oracle of God; and it is so firmly Imprinted in
my Memory, that I could repeat it Verbatim from the Beginning to the End,
without missing a Versicle. I give an Entire Credence to the Doctrine of the
Resurrection, being Naturally desirous of Immortality: But I cannot entertain
the gross Conceit, which the greatest Part of Mussulmans have of the
Resurrection; that is, that our very Dust shall be Raised again, and Organized
into a Body. The Nazarenes are of the same Opinion. But methinks, there is no
Need of stretching and straining of Nature. Besides, this Opinion is
Inconsistent with other Fundamental Doctrines of the Mussulman Law.

We are all taught to believe, That the Souls of Just Men, Saints and Martyrs,
immediately on their Departure from the Body, ascend to Paradise. If so, then
they either live there in an Vnbodyed Estate, or they have New Bodies assigned
'em by the same Providence which gave them their Old. Be it which Way it
pleases God; It will appear a manifest Botch in the Works of the Omnipotent, an
Indecorum in Nature, to make these Souls either cast off their New Bodies at
the Day of Judgment, for the Sake of their Old Rotten Relics, after they have
enjoyed all the Ravishing Delights of Eden for so many Ages; or to stand in
Need of any Bodies at all, after they have lived so long in a Separate
Condition. There Is no Sense in it. Doubtless, this Opinion was first hatched by
those who believed the Sleep of the Soul, and held that it was Inseparable from
the Body. For then they had no other Way to comfort themselves with any
Probable Hopes of a Surviving Immortality, but by maintaining, That as the Soul
slept with the Body in the Grave, so both Soul and Body should conjointly Rise
again at the Day of Doom.

Or perhaps, this Figure of our Resurrection was inculcated, to insinuate the
Faith of an Immortal State, into the duller Minds of those, who were Incapable
of comprehending either the Pre-Existence of Souls, their Self-Subsistence
after Death, or their Translation into other Bodies.

It seems to me much more easy to believe, according to the most Obvious Works
of Nature, that after our Dissolution here, we shall either assume some Body of
Air, Fire, or other Elemental Supplement, or by Magnetic Transmigration shall
be United to some Vegetable or Animal Embryo; than to dream of Recollecting all
our Scattered Ashes together, after so many Thousands of Years, wherein they
have been dispersed, perhaps through all the Ranges of the Universe.

Surely, our Holy Lawgiver, and all the other Prophets, intended no other Thing
by the Doctrine of the Resurrection, but only to convince the World, that the
Soul was Immortal, and that consequently there would be a Reward of Good and
Bad Works after this Life. We shall live for ever, Old Lawyer: And what
signifies it, whether we have the same Bodies or others, so long as we are
Happy in any State: And if we are Metamorphos'd, we cannot fail of our
Specific Felicity, since every Creature is Happy in its Own Essence. Then let
us be Apes, Dromedaries, Camels, or any Thing but Hogs, and we shall have Bliss
enough. That Creature is the very Emblem of Uncleanness, and therefore its Life
cannot be the Object of a Mussulman's Wish. Yet we know not the Laws of our
Change, or Transmigration from this Mortal Life. For the Soul, according to
Pythagoras and the Ancients, is Capable of all Forms.

If thou wond'rest what has put me upon this Discourse, it is the Remembrance
of what I have heard thee relate of the Apparition of Dead Men's Bones in the
Cemetery of Grand Caire in Egypt, at a certain Season of the Year, when
Multitudes of People by Custom flock thither to behold this Wonderful Scene of
a Sham-Resurrection. I can give it no better Title, since in all Probability,
it is only the Effect of some Artifice used by the Christians, to procure Money
from the Admiring Crowd. And I Am confirmed in this Belief, by a Letter I
received from Mehemet the Exiled Eunuch, who now resides at Caire; and having
been curious to observe this Celebrated Miracle, among the other Rarieties of
this City, sent me such an Account of this Passage, as convinces me there is
some Cheat in it.

He tells a great many other Things of the Superstition and Ignorance of the
Egyptians, as to the Pyramids, and the supposed Spirits which guard 'em. In
all, he laments the Condition of Mortals, who have so far degenerated from
themselves, and suffered their Reason to be debauched with Fables.

Sage Mustapha, thou art of the Race of those who have preserved Science and
Philosophy. A Halo of Light invests thy Soul. Let no dark Opinion of God and
his Works, eclipse thy Intellect.

Paris, 20th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER IX.
To Solomon Kuslir Aga, Prince of the Black Eunuchs.
THY Dispatch came in a Happy Hour: Yet the Contents of it surpised me. It Is a
strange Turn of Fortune, that the Bassa of Aleppo, after so many Rebellions,
should become the Sultan's Favorite, and be invested in the Highest Dignity of
the Empire. Yet, who knows, but this may be the only Effectual Course to
reclaim him, and of an Enemy to render him a Friend? For, Ambition is a Vice so
nearly bordering on Virtue, so refined and subtle in its Complexion, that when
the Passion which cherishes it, is once gratified with its proper Object, it
soon becomes a Virtue it self, and transforms a Libertine to a Hadgi, ranking a
Man to Day among the most deserving Hero's, who but Yesterday was in the Number
of the Seditious.

Therefore, I cannot but highly applaud the Counsel of those, who persuaded the
Grand Signior to this Uncommon Choice of the Vizir Azem. The whole Empire has
languish'd for Want of a Man of Abilities in that Supreme Station, ever since
the Seal was taken from the most Illustrious Chusaein Bassa through the Malice
of his Enemies. And in this Juncture, they could not have pitched on a Man more
capable of the Charge, than this bold Bassa; who, besides his Experience in the
Wars, both by Sea and Land, is looked on as the Stoutest Man in this Age. As
for his Former Crimes, they proceeded only from his Discontent, and Thirst of
Glory, which is now sufficiently allayed by the Bounty of our Sovereign. The
Cause therefore of his Extravagances being thus seasonably removed, the Effect
will naturally cease.

But, suffer me to ask thee; Do they not resent at the Seraglio, his Approaches
to that Sanctuary of Mortals, with such a Formidable Retinue? Thou tellest me,
he is attended by Forty Thousand Men, an Equipage fit for a Sovereign Monarch.
Perhaps, it is only the Effect of his Martial Genius, and that he is willing to
appear like a Soldier. Or, it may be, he really suspected Danger, and that he
was designed for a Sacrifice: Which made him come thus guarded to the Feet of
his Master: That his Son might revenge his Death, by some desparate Attempt on
Constantinople. Be it how it pleases God, it seems, the Sultan winked at all,
and received him with such Marks of his Esteem and Affection, as are seldom
vouchsafed to Subjects. I hope, the Event will answer his Expectation. These
new Methods of Clemency may prove more successful, than the severe Conduct of
Former Times. Men of Great Souls, are sooner subdued by Favor, than Force and
Cruelty.

I am extremely obliged to thee for thy Instructions, which I shall exactly
observe, in writing to this Supreme Minister. Thou have matched my own
Thoughts, in this Advice. For, knowing that Bassa's Temper, it will be Policy,
as well as Justice, frankly to own what I have writ against him, and not stuff
my Letter with abject fawning Submissions, or sneaking Excuses. He is brave
himself, and will be pleased to see a Man resolute in his Duty.

However, let the Consequence be what it will, I must follow the Measures of my
own Integrity. There is Something so Satisfactory in Truth, and an honest blunt
Carriage, as far surpasses the little faint Pleasures of Artifice and
Dissimulation. And I should be weary of my Life, were I forced to preserve it
by such Effeminate Tricks. Yet, I must confess, it is a vast Encouragement, to
find thy Sentiments the same. What is this World, that we should be so fond of
it? Or what is the Life of Mortals, that we need be so overstudious of
prolonging the Respiration of that Breath, which may with as much Ease be all
breathed out at once, as by so many Successive Millions of Moments? For, Death
properly possesses but an Instant of Time; no more does Life. Every Gasp renews
the One, and the Last commences and finishes the Other. As to Pleasure and
Pain, we generally have an Equal Share of 'em. And it appears to me an Equal,
if not a Greater Happiness, at once to be freed for ever from the Latter, than
by such an irksom Composition to protract the Enjoyment of the Former.

Brave Solomon, when I contemplate thy Virtue, it inspires me with Courage
against the vain Mists of Fear, which the Magic of Opinion has raised before
the Eyes of Mortals. I embrace thee with an extended Soul, and wish thee the
Two Extremes of Happiness, Plenitude of Joys in this Life, and an Immortal
Series of Felicities in Paradise. Live for Ever thou Generous Son of Cham.

Paris, the 2d. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER X.
To the most Illustrious Vizir Azem, at the Port.
BY the Souls of all my Progenitors, I was glad to hear the News of thy Advance
to this Glorious Height of Power: Yet when thou were Bassa of Aleppo, and
heldest Correspondence with the Venetians, I accused thee to the Divan, doing
thereby no small Service to the Ottoman Empire: For which thou have now Reason,
in Honor, to reward me; knowing, that I prevented a great Deal of Confusion
and Blood. It will not become the First Minister, to cherish Private Revenges,
or harbor Ill Thoughts of a Faithful Slave. In discovering thy Intrigues at
that Time, I did but perform my Duty to the Grand Signior, thy Lord and mine.
Nay, for ought thou know, I was happily Instrumental in saving thy Life,
which might have been lost in the Pursuit of those Hazardous Projects thou were
then engaged in. Be it how it will, thou art now living, and Installed in the
most Illustrious Charge of the Empire. And, without Flattery I speak it, a
braver Man could not have ascended to that Dignity. May God long continue thee
in it, to the Joy and Advantage of all the Mussulmans.

All the World extol thy Valor and Boldness; especially the Nazarenes, among
whom the Bassa of Aleppo is Famous. They also highly commend thy Justice. And
thou will find in the Register, that when I acquainted my Superiors of thy
Revolt, I was not Envious in concealing thy Virtues.

Therefore I beg of thee, not to be Partial in thy Resentments; but consider
Mahmut as a Faithful Slave, who will never transgress the Commands of the
Mysterious Bench, nor suffer any Sinister Motives to bias him, though 'twere in
Favor of his own Brother. For, this is the severe Conduct that is expected of
me by my Superiors, and which thou thy self wilt require at my Hands.

But, I believe, thou need not these Addresses to move thee to Generosity.
Thy own Native Justice will suggest to thee, that I rather merit a Reward than
a Punishment, for doing my Duty, though 'twere in accusing thy self.

Confiding therefore in thy Goodness, and my own Innocence, I shall not despair
of that Protection and Favor from thee, which all thy Predecessors have
afforded me, since my Arrival at this Place. Nay, I think thy Friendship and
Esteem is rather due to me, than to a Thousand Sycophants and Flatterers.

I will, in this Confidence, write freely to thee, as I have been commanded;
and vent my Thoughts, without a Timorous Reserve. For, thou art the Just Judge
of the Judges, among the Faithful.

There is no Doubt, but thou have heard of the Duke of Lorrain, a Famous
Warrior in these Western Parts, but now a Prisoner of State in Spain. I sent
Intelligence last Year to Mustapha Berber Aga, of the Grounds and Circumstances
of this Prince's Confinement: Whereof thou can not be Ignorant. For, all my
Dispatches are made Public to the Ministers of the Blessed Port.

The Brother of that Duke immediately succeeded him, by the King of Spain's
Orders, in the Command of the Army in Flanders. They call him Duke Francis.
Every Body thought that he had consented to the Imprisonment of his Brother, as
being disgusted at his Inconstancy, Avarice, and other Vices. It was supposed
also, that his own Ambition, and Thirst of Honor, had corrupted the Fidelity
and Love he owed to the Son of his Mother; as knowing that by his Fall, he
himself should rise to the Dignity of General, which his Brother enjoyed during
his Liberty.

But now it is evident, that this Duke Francis did all along dissemble his
Resentments of his Brother's Calamity. For, he is lately Revolted from the King
of Spain, and come over to the French, with Five Thousand Horse and Foot. He
has openly declared, That he will never give Rest to his Sword, till he has
either procured his Brother's Release, or deeply revenged the Injuries have
been done him. He was received by the French King, with all imaginable
Endearments and Caresses. The whole Court are Emulous, in striving to excel
one another in the Demonstrations of their Civility and Respect to this Prince:
And they have culled out the best Quarters for his Soldiers. This Nation is
always Hospitable to Strangers; more especially to such as court their
Friendship after this Extraordinary Way, who enter into their Interests, and
engage in their Quarrels. Yet neither France, nor all the Kingdoms of Europe
together, can match the Bounty of the Munificent Port, which pardons and
receives with open Embraces her most Implacable Enemies, on their Submissions,
and Repentance.

Commander of the Mussulman Grandees, thou art but a Man, and have not exceeded
that Character, in the Worst of thy Errors. Now, thou art assumed to a Charge
which requires the Fidelity and Prudence of an Angel. If thou shall reform the
State, and restore the Mussulman Affairs to their true Luster, we shall have
Reason to contemplate thy Life in some Measure a Parallel to that of Crassus,
who was pardoned Three Treasons by Caesar, and afterward became the most Loyal
and Serviceable Man in the Roman Empire.

Paris, the 2d. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER XI.
To Mehemet, an Exiled Eunuch, at Caire in Egypt.
THOU tellest me Wonderful Things of Egypt, such as almost surpass Credit. And
I perceive thou thy self do not believe the Story of the Annual Resurrection
of Bones, which is so much talked of by Travelers. My Cousin Isouf Ridiculed
it with smart Reason; and was almost in Danger of his Life among the Bigoted
Moors and Coptites.

But I could hardly imagain there had still remained in that Region (which has
undergone so many Revolutions of Government) any Footsteps of the Primitive
Egyptians. Yet it seems, the Priests of those Early Ages were particularly
careful to transmit to Posterity, an Exact History of their Kings, with Memoirs
of their Actions, the Building of the Pyramids, the Palace of the Statues, the
Magical Mirror, the City of the Black Eagle, the Castle of Demons seated on
the Brow of the Mountain of the Moon, the Palace of Adamant, with Innumerable
other Rareties.

I tell thee, my dear Mehemet, I know not how to believe all these Romantic
Stories. It cramps my Reason to hear of a Brazen Tree, with Iron Branches, and
Versatile Hooks, to catch Liars and Cheats, and there detain 'em till they
should do Right to those whom they had Injured. Altogether as Improbable is the
Story of Gabdapharouis, the Statue set up by King Gariac.

Who can read of that Monarch's being carried in the Air by Eagles, but may as
well believe the Romantic Voyage of Domingo Gonsales to the Moon. If thou
know not that Story, I Will tell thee in short, That this was a certain
Spaniard, who in a Passage to the Indies being by Shipwreck cast ashore on the
Island of St. Helena, with a Negro his Slave, they were put to their Shifts so
far as to divide that Unpeopled and Desolate Island between 'em, out of pure
Necessity, that they might both find Provision enough to keep 'em from starving
(for it seems, there was great Scarcity of every Thing that served the Uses of
Life.)

In this Condition, Necessity, the Mother of Cunning Devices, taught them to
hold Correspondence with one another though living at Opposite Angles of the
Isle, by the Help of certain Wild Swans, which they took out of their Nests
very Young, and brought 'em up as they do Pigeons at Babylon and Aleppo, to be
Letter-Carriers.

Afterward, as the Story goes, Domingo trying several Experiments on his
Birds, and finding all Successful, at last, having got Four and Twenty of them
together, and having brought 'em up to his Lure, he ventured his Carcass with
'em in the Air, fastening 'em together with Ropes and other Materials. But the
Extravagant Animals one Day took Wing, and carried their Master to the Moon:
Where he resided a considerable Time, saw and conversed with Diverse Inhabitants
of that Neighboring Globe, visited the Courts of several Lunar Princes, and
was kindly received by 'em all, even at the Seraglio of the Chief Emperor, or
Grand Signior himself. And having been presented with Three Stones of Matchless
Virtue, and other Rich Gifts, he had his Audience of Conge, and came down to
the Earth again, where he published a Journal of his Travels, out of which I
have extracted this short Epitome; not thinking it worth the while, to trouble
thee with the Entire Relation of his Ingenious Whimsies.

Doubtless, there is Nothing so easy, as to invent new and unheard of Fables,
to amuse the Credulous World, and Captivate their Understandings. And I have
told thee this, as a Parallel to those Monstrous Figments of Egypt: Such as
that of King Gancam's being carried in a Pavillion on the Shoulders of Spirits:
His Magical Tables, and the rest of his glorious Whim-Whams. And that of the
Queen Borsa, who sat on a Fiery Throne, and lived in an Enchanted Castle,
whose Walls were full of Pipes, which conveyed to her the Addresses of all
Sorts of Plaintiffs, and her Decree and Decision of Controversies back again to
them. Such another is that of Bardesir's Silver Tower, and his sitting before
his People in the Clouds of Heaven: And Bedoura's sending an Angel, who made
such a Horrible Roaring, that it caused an Earthquake.

Who can without laughing, read the Story of the Idol of the Test, which
distinguished between Harlots and Virgins by the Touch of their Hand? Or of the
Spirits which guard the Pyramids, One like a Naked Woman, walking about in the
Open Air at Noon, and making Men run Mad for Love of her? Another in the Form
of an Old Man with a Basket on his Head, and a Censer in his Hand? A Third, of
a Black Woman, with a Monstrous Child in her Arms? There is no End of such
Fables. Neither can any Man of Reason, stoop to so much Easiness as to regard
'em. And it is a Pleasure to me, when I consider thee as a Man Actually
Satirical upon Opinions and Traditions repugnant to Sense.

Mehemet, whilst thou art in Egypt, remember that thou were born in Arabia,
where Science has flourished for these Thousand Years.

Paris, 28th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER XII.
To Zornesan Mustapha, Bassa of the Sea.
I Will not pretend to Divination, nor flatter thee with Presages of better
Fortune against the Venetians, during thy Command of the Navy, than thy
Predecessors have had. Yet I believe, thou have more Honesty and Valor than
some of them. And I Congratulate thy Rise to this Dignity.

If my Intelligence be true, a more Glorious Fleet has not sailed out of the
Ottoman Harbors, than appears now at Sea, under thy Command. May thy Success
answer the Expectation of the Mussulmans. But, I tell thee, thou have need to
look about thee; for thou will encounter a Valiant and Subtle Enemy.

These Venetians are not like the Rest of the Nazarenes, Superstitiously
devoted to the Sentiments of their Priests. That Kind of Bigottry, chains up
Men's Spirits, and renders 'em Effeminate: It blinds 'em, and robs 'em of their
Sense and Native Vigor. But these are bold, resolute People, fearing neither
Man nor the Devil. They are also well versed in Stratagems, being as Cunning as
Serpents. In fine, Venice is a Commonwealth made up of Soldiers and Statesmen:
And thou can not expect, that the Sea makes 'em degenerate. Therefore look
for Hot Entertainment, whenever thou engagest those Aboriginal Tarpawlins. I
speak not this to discourage thee, out to arm thee with due Caution. Thou
know the same God who made them, made thee and all the Men in thy Fleet.
Thou have also the Happiness to serve the most Victorious Empire in the World.
Fear nothing therefore: But when thou loosest from the Hellespont, with the
Invincible Fleet, adorned with Ensigns of High Renown, the Prosperous Streamers
of Mahomet: When thou hear the All-cheering Clarions and Tymbrels breathing
the Lofty Menaces, the Vital Airs of War; then let thy Noble Heart flourish
with brave Thoughts, and brisk Resolutions. Yet let not a false Assurance of
Victory, make thee Rash, and bereave thee of that Conduct, which is as
necessary a Qualification in a General, as Courage. Consider that the Fortune
of Battles is Uncertain: Therefore, do all Things with great Precaution. Trust
not to the Force of thy Commission, in that thou fightest for the Law and
Honor of the Prophet. But remember the Proverb of the Ancients, which says,
The Devil often carries the Standard of the Living God. There may be those in
thy Fleet, who are Treacherous, and at the Devotion of the Nazarenes. For, I
hear, that both Spahi's and Janissaries were very unwilling to embark
themselves; and God knows, how far the Venetian Gold may work on some of the
Officers. Though their Resentments seemed to be appeased by the Bounty of our
Glorious Sovereign, get the smallest Occasion may renew their Old Discontent
again, and put 'em on more dangerous Tumults at Sea, than those they were
guilty of ashore. Or at least, they will become more Remiss and Cold in the
Service of the Grand Signior.

Be it how it will, if the Navy has not good Success, the Blame of all will be
laid on thee. Pardon therefore the Freedom I take in advising thee, since it is
an Argument of my Affection and Concern for thy Honor and Safety. And no Man
can with Reason be offended at another, for warning him of Dangers. In a Word,
I wish thee the good Fortune of the English; who have lately taken an Island in
the West Indies from the Spaniards: They call it Jamaica.

It seems, the Kings of Spain had possessed this Isle from the Time of his
First Conquests in America, where his Subjects had committed horrid Cruelties
on the Natives. For which, they are now punished by that New Commonwealth, who
boast that they are established by God to reform or overturn all the Kingdoms
of Europe.

Thou have heard, I suppose, of Oliver, the Sovereign of that Nation. He
appears like another Jingiz Chan, setting up for a Prophet and Founder of a New
Empire. He has refused the Title of King, which was offered him by the English
States, with all the Ensigns of Royalty. But, he aims at a more Sublime
Character, laying the Foundation of his Hopes in a pretended Modesty, assuming
only the Style of Protector. They say, he talks of leading an Army to the
Gates of Rome, and when he has subdued the Pope, that he will march or sail to
Constantinople, and drive the Grand Signior out of his Seraglio.

I tell thee, these are not Things to be contemned or laughed at. For, this
Oliver has the Fame of a Great and Invincible General. And I can assure thee,
all the Neighboring Kings and States court his Friendship. In fine, he makes
the most Formidable Figure at present, of any Prince in these Western Parts.

If it will divert thee at Sea, to hear of the Transactions by Land, know, that
Leopoldus Ignatius Josephus, Son of the German Emperor, is Elected King of the
Romans in the Room of his deceased Brother. There is also a Diet Assembled at
Frankford, where they have too many Discords and Quarrels of their own, to have
Leisure to plot any Mischief against the Empire of True Believers. These
Infidels, in their Public Councils, are like Women Scolding away the Time,
that should be employed in Action.

There arrives daily a great Deal of News out of Sueden, Moscovy and Poland.
One Post informs us of a Plague raging at Mosco, and other Cities of that
Northern Tract: Another alarms us with Intelligence of Sieges and Plundering of
Towns, Dispeopling of Provinces, and a Deluge of Blood and Slaughter: For, the
Suedes espousing the Quarrel of the Moscovites, endeavor to make their own
Game in Poland: Many Princes and Great Men, with their Towers, Villages and
Vassals, Revolting daily from the Unfortunate Casimir, and submitting to the
Suedish Monarch.

And here in France, those that go not to the Wars, make Private Campagnes at
Home. Here Is Nothing but Duelling and Murder among Men of the Sword; Whilst the
Ecclesiastics are Combating one another with their Pens, and the Lawyers with
their Tongues.

In Suisserland, they are Mad about Religion. At Dantzick, Two Eagles were seen
Combating in the Air. And, as if all Nature were in a Ferment, the Winds have
been at Variance in the Bowels of the Earth, which has occasioned frequent
Earthquakes in the Parts of Germany. The King of Poland's Brother is dead; and
the Queen Mother of Sueden.

We must all die at the determined Hour; And there is no other Terror in Death,
but what is Created by our own Opinion, nor any greater Pain than attended our
Birth. For, at our Dissolution, every Element of which we were compounded,
takes its proper Share; and that which is Divine in Us, returns to that which
is Divine in the Universe.

Paris, 28th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER XIII.
To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Grand Signior 's Customs.
OUR Kinsman Isouf is now gone for Moscovy, having visited the most Remarkable
Places in this Kingdom. I received a Letter from him dated at Diep, a Sea-Town
over against the English Coasts. He was just going aboard, as he tells me, when
he delivered his Dispatch to the Post. God grant him a Prosperous Voyage to
that Region, and whithersoever his Genius or Fortune carry him.

I am extremely pleased with his Conversation. Whilst he was in Paris, I was
never sensible of Melancholy, unless 'twere in the Evenings, which forced us to
part Company. He has an Excellent Memory, and recounts all the Adventures of
his Life with a great deal of Ease, both to himself and his Hearers: He never
was at a Loss for Matter, or confounded one Circumstance with another; but
ranking every Thing in its due Time and Place, delivered all with a Clearness
and Grace, which affected me with singular Delight.

Besides, he has a ready Wit, lively Fancy, and Judgment enough for one of his
Years. I tell thee, the Relations he has made of his Travels, with his Regular
Deportment here in Paris, of which I have been a Witness, have Imprinted in me
such an Opinion of his Abilities, that I have trusted him with some Particular
Instructions, in order to a settled Correspondence between us, in whatsoever
Court he resides. For, in a Word, I find him Mature enough for Business of
Moment: And it is Pity his Parts should be buried without ever appearing in
Action.

If he succeeds in what I have put him upon, when he arrives at Archangel, a
Seaport of Russia, and a Place of great Commerce and Traffic; I shall have
good Reason to hope for more Important Matters, when he comes to Mosco, the
Chief City of the Men who worship the Eyes of their Emperor. And then it will
be Time to give a due Character of him to the Ministers of the Port: Wherein
thou will have many Opportunities, to perform the Office of a Kinsman and
Friend. Those of the same Blood, ought thus to serve one another with Integrity
and Affection: For, in so doing, we help our selves, strengthen the Interest of
our Family, and shall find Returns in Time of Need. As thou have received
Favor from Kerker Hassan, Bassa, on the Score of being his Countryman; so
there is greater Reason, that thou should show Kindness to Isouf, who
partakes of our Blood.

There arises a vast Complacency from doing Good Offices, though to a Stranger,
or even to an Enemy. Man is Naturally Generous; and he has debauched his Soul,
who acts contrary to this Principle. Yet the greatest Part of Men are
degenerated. They pursue Lions, Tigers, Bears, and such like Ravenous Beasts,
with Inexorable Hatred and Revenge; they bear secret Antipathies against
Spiders, Toads, Serpents, and other Venomous Creatures; and yet they are all
these Things, or worse themselves. Ever since Astraea abandoned the Earth,
there has been a strange Metamorphosis in our Race: Men have for the most Part
forsaken their Humanity, and changed Nature with the Salvages. Nay, we
transcend them in whatsoever is Cruel and Vicious. As if our Reason were given
us, only to teach us the most Refined Methods of Impiety, and to be a more
exquisite Spur to Vice.

Isouf has presented me with Solid Observations of this Kind in his Travels,
especially in Africa. He say, that Region is not more Prolifick of Strange and
Horrible Beasts, than it is of Monstrous Men, Brutes and Devils in Humane
Shape. And though he relates some Fair Things of the Indians, and other People in
Asia; yet they are intermixed with Tragical Reports, and Mournful Memoirs: Such
as stain the History of our Race, and make it evident, That it is hard to meet
with one Good Man among Ten Thousand. The whole World is overrun with
Oppression, Cruelty, Avarice, Perfidy, and Lust.

He relates strange Things of the Antiquities of Egypt. He calls it the only
Scene of Wonders and Miracles on Earth. Indeed this Country was ever Famous
among all Nations for the Wisdom and Learning of her Priests; who, in the First
Ages of the World, understood all the Secrets of the Elements, the Virtues of
Plants and Minerals, and were perfectly versed in the Science of the Stars and
Spirits, and in all Manner of Mysterious Knowledge. They were said to make
Statues and Images, that could Speak, Walk, Run, and counterfeit all Human
Actions. They were also exquisite in making Miraculous Talismans and Mirrours,
with any kind of Magical Work, whereby they kept the People, and even the
Princes in a Profound Awe and Veneration of their Prodigious Knowledge and
Power, and likewise defended their Country against all Invaders. For no sooner
did an Enemy appear with his Armies on the Frontiers of Egypt, but these
Priests had present Intimation of it by their Secret Art, even in their
Chambers, perhaps at a Hundred Leagues Distance. Then by their Enchantments,
they either caused Fire to consume them in their Camps, or turned their Swords
against each other, or sent an Army of Winged Serpents to destroy 'em. So that
for many Ages, no King ever prospered that fought against the Egyptians.

But let not thou and I, dear Brother, suffer our Reason to degenerate, by
giving Credit to Fictions and Romances, though vouched by some of our
Countrymen, such as Morat Alzeman, Eb'n Abdalhokm, and others.

He also tells many Remarkable Passages of the Pyramids of Caire, the
overflowing of the Nile, the Mummies, and other Things which I have not now
Time to rehearse; but in another Letter I will gratify thee with a more Ample
Account of his Observations.

In the mean Time, live thou to enjoy the Fruits of thy own Travels in the
East. Which if it matches not the South in Prodigies and Stupendous Inventions;
yet it surpasses both it, and all the Rest of the World, in Justice and
Morality.

Paris, 17th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1655.
LETTER XIV.
To Ismael Kaidar, Cheik, a Man of the Law.
THou have the Character and Fame of a Great Historian; a Man of Intelligence
both in the Records of Past Times, and the Transactions of the Present.
Therefore the Name of Christian late Queen of Sueden, cannot be strange to
thee. I doubt not, but thou have heard of this Princess, so celebrated
throughout the Earth for her Learning and other Noble Accomplishments; and how
she voluntarily resigned the Crown, to one of her Kinsmen. But perhaps, thou
know not the true Motives which induced her to this Royal Caprice: For, it
deserves no better Name, as thou will understand by the Sequel.

Her Father, who for his Successful Wars, and perpetual Victories was called
the Great Gustave, dying left her in the Entire Possession of his Kingdom, and
New Conquests in Germany. But during the Time of her Reign, Piementelli the
Spanish Ambassador at Stockholm, by daily conversing with this Great Queen,
used such plausible Insinuations, as prevailed on her to have a more favorable
Opinion of the Pope and his Religion, than she had before entertained: For, all
the Suedes are Educated in an Aversion for those of the Roman Faith. I need not
explain to thee, these Distinctions of Belief among the Nazarenes: Thou art
versed in their History, as well as in our own. Suffice it to say, that this
Ambassador possessed Christina with so fair an Idea of the Catholic Religion,
that she abandoned her Crown, and has ever since been a Queen-Errant, a Royal
Rambler through Europe, being resolved to make Experiment of the Generosity of
Catholic Princes, whose Virtues Piementelli had so highly extolled.

'Twou'd be a Work of Seven Moons for the most Industrious Scribe, to relate
all the Particular Magnificences, with which she has been entertained in her
Travels through Germany, Flanders, Alsace, Inspruck, Italy, and Rome, where she
now resides. Every Prince of the Roman Church, through whose Territories she
passed, was Ambitious to appear Prodigal of his Favors and Civilities to their
Illustrious Stranger: Perhaps, to evade the Lashes of her Wit, which, they say,
is very Satirical. Or, it may be, for other Reasons, more forcible and
poignant. Be it how it will, the Roman Wits have not spared her; as thou will
perceive by the Following Verses, which on the First Day of the Moon of January
were found in the Hand of Pasquin, and on the Portal of the Palace Farnese,
where she resides.

Pazza, Gobba, and Zoppa viene dal Norre,
Del Monarcha Invitto l indegna Figlia,
Mentre Pologna Gente and si' Scompiglia,
A vane Pomp Roma apre le Port:
Contra questi Applausi l'ungrida forte,
Et in basse Note l'altro bis Biglia,
Corre la Sciocca Gente, alza le ciglia,
Ride Pasquin del Papa, and della Corte.
Su su venite voi Ruffiani Snelli,
Et portate a Christina 'stravagante
Di Venere il Scettro nei Pazzarelli:
Vuol parer dotta, and e rozza Pedante,
E in Braccio a mangiator di Ravanelli
Vuol parer casta, and e Putana Errante.
I send thee these Verses in the Original, knowing thou art a Critic in the
Italian Language; besides, they will not found so well in Arabic. Thou that
have been in Rome, know what Pasquin is, and art no Stranger to the Humors
of that City.

Let not Lampoons of Morose Italians, abate thy Charity for this Renowned
Princess. But let her Extravagances be an Argument of the Greatness of her
Soul; and remember the old Roman Proverb, which says, There Is no surpassing
Genius, without some Mixture of Madness.

Paris, 30th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1656.
LETTER XV.
To the same.
HAving the Space of an Hour before the Post goes, I could not forbear to
inform thee of a New Star which lately appeared in these Parts, moving in a
direct Line from East to North. The Astronomers have made Accurate Observations
of it, and yet are at a Loss what to conclude: Some say, it is below the Moon,
others place it in the Sphere of the Fixed Stars. One will have it a Meteor, a
Second affirms it to be a Planet; whilst the Jews report every where, that it is
the Star of Jacob, and a Sign that their Messiah is at Hand.

Nathan Ben Saddi, one of that Nation at Vienna, sends me strange Stories
concerning the Prodigies which shall go before, and accompany the Appearance of
the Deliverer of Israel (as he calls him.)

He says, there shall speedily come a Sort of People from the Uttermost Parts
of the Earth, of a Black and Horrible Aspect, so that whoever shall but cast an
Eye on any of them, shall immediately die, as by the Glance of a Basilisk. For,
every one of them shall have Two Heads, and Seven Eyes, glowing and sending
forth Sparks of Fire as Poisonous as the Flashes of the Wind El-Samiel in
Arabia. They shall also be Swift as Stags. And about the same Time, an
extraordinary Heat shall flow from the Sun, which being dispersed through the
Elements shall corrupt the Air, Earth, and Waters, and infect all this Lower
World with such Pestilential Qualities, that a Million of Gentiles (for so the
Jews call all that are not of their Own Nation) shall die every Day. And Men
shall be in so great Consternation, that they shall run up and down the Streets
crying, Woe, Woe to us and our Children! They shall dig their own Graves, and go
down into them of their own Accord, expecting Death. But, that all this Time,
the Jews shall be in Safety and Health.

This Hebrew adds, That the Light of the Sun shall be totally extinguished for
the Space of Thirty Days; during which horrible Darkness, the Christians and
Mahometans, shall acknowledge their Errors, and many of them shall embrace the
Law of Moses; for which God being moved to Mercy, will restore that Planet
again to its former Brightness.

But, what he says next, is an Unhappy Presage to the Romans, whose Empire,
according to this Tradition shall be extended over all the Regions of the Earth
for the Space of Nine Moons. After which Term, God shall send the First
Messiah, the Son of Joseph, who shall gather the dispersed Tribes of Israel,
and conduct them to Jerusalem. From whence he shall issue forth, with a
Victorious Army, and lay waste the Roman Empire, sack Rome it self, and carry
away the Immense Riches of the Christians to Jerusalem; And the very Fear of
him shall reduce all Nations to his Obedience. He shall fight with Armillai
Harascha, the Antichrist of the Christians, and shall destroy Two Hundred
Thousand of Armillai's Followers; but in the End shall be slain himself, and
the Good Angels shall transport his Body to the Apartment of the Fathers.

The Jews hold, That this Armillai shall spring out of an Image of the Virgin
Mary in Rome, made of Marble, with which the most Wicked and Profligate among
Men shall be enamored, and commit the most execrable Uncleanness that can be
named. The Result of these Adulterous Congresses shall be, That the Statue by a
Supernatural Power, shall prove Impregnate, and cleaving asunder shall be
delivered of this Young Antichrist, who is to vex and persecute the Jews, and
afflict them with greater Calamities than either they or their Fathers felt
since the Beginning of the World. They shall be forced to flee into the
Deserts, and hide themselves in the Dens and Caves of the Earth, living only
on the Grass, and Herbage, with the Leaves of Trees; till the great Michael the
Archangel shall Thrice wind his Horn. Then shall the Second Messiah, the Son of
David, with Elias the Prophet appear, who shall rescue 'em out of all their
Troubles, and lead them Triumphant to Paradise.

This is the Sum of what Nathan, and all the Jews believe concerning the Last
Times, which they say are now approaching: As is evident by the Rising of this
New Star, accompanied with terrible Thunders and Lightnings. And the Chief
Patriarch or Prince of the Jews, is come from Jerusalem to Vienna, to prepare
those of his Nation in these Western Parts, for the Grand Revolutions which
they believe are ready to fall out in the World. All the Jews in that City went
out a League to meet him, with great Pomp and Solemnity.

In the mean while I hear that the Son of the late Vizir Azem, makes a
Confusion amongst you at Constantinople, and the Parts adjacent, being at the
Head of Fifty Thousand Men, on Pretense to revenge the Death of his Father. But
really to recover his Ravished Mistress, the Fair Soltana Zamiouvre, who was
forced from his Seragl' by the Grand Signior's Command. Women and Wine,
according to the Proverb of the Franks, make all the Disturbance in the World.
And without calling to Remembrance the Trojan Wars, the Unhappy Effects of
Helena's Perfidy, we may conclude, That Women are the Occasions of many
Quarrels among us.

There is a Peace lately concluded between the French and the New English
Commonwealth: By which Means, the Exiled King of the Scots, was forced to
depart from this Realm, which has been his Sanctuary for many Years. He went
away at the Beginning of the Treaty, and has wandered up and down Germany ever
since; sometimes keeping a Court like a King, at other Times living Incognito,
and very privately, with only Two or Three Attendants. That poor Prince is
very Unfortunate; yet, they say, he bears his Calamity with singular
Moderation, and a certain Royal Stiffness of Mind, which will rather break than
bend.

This Pope is a great Peacemaker, and has sent Nuntio's with Letters to all
the Princes of Christendom within the Pale of the Roman Church, earnestly
persuading them to Unity and Friendship, that so their Arms may be turned
against the Mussulmans. His Predecessor was of another Sentiment, and would not
inter-meddle in the Quarrels of any. One Day, as he was looking out of a Window
of his Palace with some Cardinals, they spied Two Men a fighting in the Street;
whereupon, they desired the Holy Father to interpose his Authority, and command
Peace. But he refused, saying, Let them fight it out, and then they will be good
Friends of Course. And turning to the Spanish Ambassador, he said, So will it
fare with your Master, and the King of France: When they have sufficiently
wearied out one another with Wars, they will gladly embrace the Proposals of
Peace.

Here is great Rejoicing for the Reconciliation newly made between the King and
his Uncle the Duke of Orleans, who have been estranged a long Time, the latter
having espoused the Prince of Conde's Cause. But now he has abandoned it, and
is come to the Court.

These Infidels are as inconstant as the Winds, which vary to all the Points of
the Compass.

Paris, the 30th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1656.
LETTER XVI.
To Solomon, his Cousin, at Scutari.
I See, thou art given over to a Spirit of Discontent. Nothing can please thee.
Thou murmurest at Providence, and castest Obloquies on the Ways of God: As if
the Order of All Things, and the Established Economy of the Universe, must be
Changed to gratify thy Humor.

Formerly, thou were troubled with dull Melancholy Thoughts about Religion: Now
thou art angry with thy Trade, and pinest that thou were not Educated in the
Academy. A Mechanic Life, thou say, is Tedious and Irksome: Besides, that
it is beneath one of thy Blood, to be always employed in making of Turbants.
Thou wishest rather to have been a Courtier, Soldier, or any Thing save what
thou art.

Cousin, let not Pride and Ambition corrupt thy Manners. Do thou not
consider, that all True Believers are obliged to exercise some Manual
Occupation, and that the Sultan himself is not exempted from this Duty? Did not
the Prophet himself practice it, and enjoin it to all his Followers? Have thou
not heard of his Words, when he said; No Man can eat any Thing sweeter in this
World, than what is acquired by his own Labor? Doubtless, all the Prophets,
and Holy Men, have gained their Bread by their Lawful Employments. Adam was a
Gardener, Abel a Shepherd, Seth a Weaver, Enoch a Tailor, Noah a Ship-wright:
Moses, Saguib, and Mahomet were Shepherds: Jesus the Son of Mary a Carpenter:
Abu-Becre, Omar, Othman, Gali, and Gabdorachaman were Merchants.

Do thou esteem thy self of better Blood than Adam, from whom thou receiv'dst
thine? For Shame prefer not thy self to Noah, the Restorer of Mankind, to Jesus
the Messiah, to Mahomet our Holy Lawgiver, and to the Rest of those Excellent
Persons, who thought it no Contempt to work at their several Trades, and eat
the Bread of their own Labors.

Besides, do thou consider the dangerous Intrigues of a Prince's Court. Art
thou sufficiently armed with Wit and Dexterity, to secure thy Station against
the Wily Trains of designing Men? I do not reproach thy Abilities: Yet I think
thou will do better in the Post allotted thee by Destiny, that is, in thy
Proper Calling; than in the perilous Condition of those who stand or fall at
the Pleasure of Others. Whereas, thou art now thy own Man, and need fear no
Tempests of State, or Frowns of thy Prince, so long as thou pursuest none but
thy private Affairs. Many Sovereign Monarchs have envied such as thee, when
they have seen, how cheerfully and quietly they passed away their Time, under
the Vmbrella of an Obscure and Private Life: Whereas, at the Court, there is
Nothing but Intriguing, Plotting, and Treachery; one Undermining another, to
make Way for their own Advance. The Court is a perfect Theater, of Fraud,
Dissimulation, Envy, Malice and a Thousand Vices, which there act their various
Parts, under the Habit and Disguise of seeming Virtues. There a Man must
flatter the Great, and speak against his own Sense, and the Truth, to procure
the Favor of some dignified Fool: Than which, Nothing is more Ignoble and Base.

This puts me in Mind of a pleasant Repartee, which Diogenes the Philosopher
gave to a Courtier. The Spark passing by Diogenes, as he sat in a Tub, Eating
of Turnips, put this Scoff upon him; Diogenes, said he, If thou would but
learn the Art of Flattery, thou need'st not sit here in a Tub, scranching of
Roots. To whom the Philosopher replied: And thou, vainglorious Man, if thou
wou'd'st but learn to live contented with my homely Fare, need'st not
condescend to the Fawning of a Spaniel.

But, Cousin, let not this Passage cause thee to emulate the Philosopher's
Manner of Life; For, he had his Vices, as well as other Men. If he was no
Flatterer, yet he was Proud and Opinionative: He laid Trains for the Applause
of Men in all his Actions, and so taught others to become Flatterers, though he
was none himself. All his pretended Humility, Mortification, and Rigor, were
but so many Decoys for Fame. Of this, Plato was sensible, who was a far more
Excellent Philosopher than he. As this Sage was one Day walking with some of
his Friends in the Fields, they showed him Diogenes standing up to the Chin in
Water, whose Superficies was frozen over, save one Hole that Diogenes had made
for himself. Puh, says Plato, don't regard him, and he will soon be out: For, had
he not seen us coming this Way, he would not have put himself to this Pain.
Another Time this Philosopher came to Plato's House: And as he walked on the
Rich Carpets with which the Floor of the Hall was covered; See, said Diogenes,
how I trample on Plato 's Pride. Yes, said Plato, but with greater Pride.

Certainly, the greatest Philosophers, Doctors, and even Saints themselves have
their Errors and Failings. Do not therefore affect to change thy Calling, for
the Life of a Student or a Contemplative Man. For, the same Discontent will
still haunt thee in that State, which makes thee so uneasy now. Thou art a
perfect Stranger to the Intolerable Anguish of Mind which afflicts Thinking
Men, and such as apply themselves to the Study of the Sciences. They labor
under a Perpetual Thirst of Knowledge; and the more they learn, the greater and
more Ardent is their Desire of farther Discoveries. So that the most
accomplished Sages, are no more satisfied with their own Acquisitions, than he
who has never meddl'd with Books.

Then, as to their Bodies, they are always vexed with one Malady or other,
proceeding from the violent Agitation of their Spirits, the Intenseness of
their Thoughts, perpetual poring upon Books, and their Sedentary Life.

In all that I have said, I do not dissuade thee from seeking after Knowledge.
I rather counsel thee to read Books, and I gave thee the same Advice in a
former Letter. But, do it with Moderation. Let not thy Studies entrench on the
Affairs of thy Calling. Read Histories, or other Tracts according to thy Fancy,
when thou have nothing else to do. But, do not follow it so close, as if thou
aspired'st to the Character of a Complete Historian, or Philosopher. Still
remember, that thou art a Turbant-Maker, and that by the Decree of Fate thou
art born for this Business. Follow it with Alacrity and Mirth. When thou art at
thy Work, 'twill be pleasant meditating on what thou have read at thy spare
Hours. Thou will find thy self much more happy, in thus mixing Studies with the
necessary Offices of thy Trade, than in abandoning thy self wholly to a
Contemplative Life. And in the Midst of thy Disgusts, thou may comfort thy
self with this Reflection, That thou art of none of the most Despicable
Callings, which serve the Necessities of Man's Body. Had thy Employment been
only to make Papouches or Sandals, which cover the Feet, it might have been an
Argument of Discontent to thee, in Regard the Foot is the most Contemptible
Member in the Body. But now thou passest thy Time in making Ornaments for the
Head, which is the Noblest Part, and Commnader of all the Rest, thou have no
Reason to repine.

If, after all, thou resolvest to change thy Course of Life, I advise thee to
turn Soldier; for, then thou must be contented and patient per-force.

Paris, 13th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1656.
LETTER XVII.
To Melec Amet.
THE Nazarenes boast much of the New Converts they have made from the Moselman
Law to the Faith of Jesus the Son of Mary. On the 23th. of the last Moon, a
Moor of Tripoli was baptized in a Church of this City; and the next Day he was
Anointed with their Chrism or Holy Oil (as they call it) which they say has a
Virtue to confirm and strengthen him in his New Religion. On the 25th. he was
clothed all in White Linen, and walked in Procession through the Streets with
Music playing before him, whilst the Ground was strewn with Flowers. When he
arrived at the Great Mosch of this City, a Priest gave him that which they
esteem the Body of the Messiah: But in Reality, is only a Wafer, with the
Figure of a Man Crucified on it. These Wafers are made and sold to the Priests
by the Common Bakers of the Town, and yet they make the Poor Ignorant People
believe, with Four Words they can change them into an Immortal God.

The Renegado* Moor appears very zealous and devout, frequenting the Temples,
and visiting all Holy Places. He walks along the Streets with Beads in his
Hands, which the People Interpret as an Argument of his Piety to the Virgin
Mary, the Mother of Jesus. For, when they pray to her, it is the Custom to
number their Oraisons on Beads. But all this while they consider not, that he
may be a Hypocrite as to their Religion, and instead of addressing his Prayers
to her, may direct them to God alone; as all the True Faithful do, who use
Beads, in rehearsing the Divine Ejaculations, as well as the Christians in
repeating their Ave Maria, which they say, was the Salutation that Gabriel gave
the Virgin, when he entered her Oratory.

Be it how it will, he gets Abundance of Money by his Devotion: For the Franks
are really very Charitable, and give plentiful Alms to the Poor. But especially
to one under his Circumstances, they are extremely Liberal, that so they may
imprint in him a more fervent Affection, and profound Reverence for their
Religion.

But he is not the only Convert they brag of. Many Captives they either
wheedle, or force to turn Christians. Thus, he that was taken at Sea by the
Ships of Malta Twelve Years ago, when it was reported through Christendom that
he was the Grand Signior's Son, is of late turned Christian and Friar, having
solemnly and in Public abjured the Mussulman Law, cursed our Holy Prophet, and
all those of his Race, with the Believers of the Alcoran. He is like to come to
great Preferments in the Roman Church. They call him the Ottoman Father; and
boast, That the True Heir of the Turkish Empire is a Christian, and in their
Custody.

Yet after all, the Proselyte of greatest Fame is Don Philippo, the Son of the
Dey of Tunis, of whom I made mention in one of my former Letters. This Prince
is now at Valentia, under the King of Spain's Jurisdiction, who allows him a
Considerable Pension, and has given him Leave to marry a Princess of that
Country, very Beautiful and Ingenious, but of a Poor Fortune. He has one Son by
her; and it is said, the King of Spain designs to set forth a Mighty Fleet of
Ships: And having furnished this Prince with all Things necessary for a Warlike
Expedition, will send him thus Equipped to claim the Government of Tunis; or in
Case of Denial, to make a Descent in that Kingdom, and fight for it. But I
believe, this will only prove a Spanish Rhodomontade; that Monarch having Work
enough cut out for him in Europe and America, by the French and English, to
divert him from any such Wild Enterprise on Africa. However it be, this Don
Philippo is much talked of in Christendom, and the Spaniards flatter themselves
with the Hopes of Conquering a Great Part of Barbary by his Means, he having
many Friends and a considerable Interest in those Parts.

Thou may acquaint the Divan, that Osmin the Dwarf is still living, and
serves the Port with a secret and untainted Zeal. Two days ago he discovered a
Cunning Practice of Cardinal Mazarini, whose Motions and Intrigues he watches
very narrowly. He assures me, That this Minister has dispatched away Two Agents
to the King of Sueden and Elector of Brandenburgh, with a Letter to each of
these Princes from the King of France; also with Blank Papers, and the King's
Seal, giving them Instructions, to fill up those Blanks and Seal them with the
King's Signet, according as they found the Treaty go forward between those
Princes. The main Design of this Trick being, to hinder them from entering into
a League against the King of Poland, by all the Artifice these Agents could
use, in exactly timeing and suiting their Counterfeit Letters, to the
Difficulties and Misunderstandings that always happen in such Treaties, that so
they may exasperate each Party against the other, as Occasion offered, without
being obliged to send to France for fresh Letters, which would breed too much
Delay, and spoil their Design.

By this thou may perceive, that Cardinal Mazarini comes not short of his
Predecessor Richlieu, in managing the Affairs of Foreign Courts. He is the very
Soul of all the Grand Business in Christendom.

A general Heart-burning has possessed the French, especially the Inhabitants
of Paris, ever since the Conclusion of the last Year, when the King issued out
certain Orders, commanding that all the Gold and Silver-Money in the Kingdom,
should be brought in to his Mint to be new Coined. The Merchants first
complained of this Edict; and then it was murmured at by all Trading People. At
Length the Parliament of Paris took it into their Consideration, and opposed
the King's Pleasure: Upon which he banished Eight of their Members, and has
several Times prohibited them to Assemble; yet they persisted to meet, till he
banished more of them: Which instead of awing them into the expected
Compliance, has but incensed 'em more: And the discontented Clergy blow up the
Coals, as do likewise the Friends of the Prince of Conde. The Parliament are
very bold and peremptory in their Proceedings, having expressly forbid the
Citizens of Paris to obey the King's Order, and decreed that Nothing shall be
done in their Assembly, till the Banished Senators be recalled.

Things being at this Pass, we expect Nothing but Insurrections, Massacres and
other Effects of Popular Fury. The Rich are laying in vast Quantities of Corn
and other Provisions, as if they expected a Siege. And the Poor fare the better
for it, whilst great Largesses are given among them by the Grandees of the
Parliament, to engage them in the Faction. Besides, thou know, the Multitude
always delights in Novelty and State-Tempests, hoping for Plunder, and to
enrich themselves by the Ruin of others.

I know not what Conduct is fittest for me to use in this Case. Whether it will
be best for me to abide in this City, or follow the Court, which is now at La
Fere in Picardy. Or Whether I should retire to some other Place, less liable to
Civil Disturbances. I wish, the Ministers of the Port would send me full
Instructions, what I ought to do in these Emergences.

From Rome we hear, that the Pope and Cardinals are in great Consternation on
some Intelligence they have received, That the English intend to make a Descent
on the Territories of the Church. That Nation is now become the Great Bugbear
of all Europe, since they have molded themselves into a Commonwealth.

Every Kingdom and Empire has a Time to rise, and another to fall. But, who can
determine the Period wherein the Ottoman Glory will decline, which is not yet
advanced to its Zenith?

Paris, 27th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1656.
LETTER XVIII.
To Sedrec Al' Giraw'n, Chief Treasurer to the Grand Signior.
THY Virtues have at Length raised thee to a Glorious Trust, the Charge of
Immense Wealth. Thou have in thy Custody, the Riches which cannot be matched in
the Universe. God inspire thee with Graces suitable to a Dignity so full of
Temptations. I hope, thou will not be affronted at my Prayer, as was thy
Predecessor Kienan Bassa, at some Counsels of like Nature, which I gave him in
a Letter. Some Men are strangely Choleric, and look on him as an Enemy who
gives them good Advice. I only warned him of the ordinary Cheats that are
practiced at Certain Times in the Treasury, which thou know to be true, as
well as I. And I tell thee farther, he himself was suspected by many in the
Seraglio, not to have been altogether exempt from Guilt.

Whether he were or not, I performed but my Duty in giving him necessary
Cautions. For, such is the Will of my Superiors, that I should not be afraid
to unravel the Secrets of those who are false to the Grand Signior. I did not
charge him with such a Crime, and therefore he had no Reason to be angry: But
some Men will pick a Quarrel with their own Shadows. In a Word, this Grandee
forgot himself.

In saying so, I do not reflect on his Original, or that he was found sleeping
on a Dunghill in Russia, a poor ragged Infant, when the Tartars took him
Captive, among many Thousands of others, in the Plunder of Tsinarow, and sold
him to the Capa Agasi, for Thirteen Piasters, by Reason of his Beauty. I do not
call to mind the Circumstances of his Youth; since it is common for the meanest
Slaves, to arrive at an Extraordinary Grandeur by their Merits, or at least
through the Favor of the Sultan.

But what I aim at is, that in his being disgusted at the Remonstrances I made
of some private and sinister Practices in the Treasury, he forgot, that he
himself is still a Slave to the Grand Signior, as well as I, and therefore not
above Instruction.

Well, it seems he is now made Captain Bassa, and thou succeedest him in the
Office of Treasurer. To him I wish all Imaginable Success and Victories at Sea,
for the Sake of our Great Master, and the Mussulman Empire: To thee, for thy
own Sake, and for my Brother's, whom I know thou will ever respect as a Friend;
I wish Increase of Riches and Honors, even as thy Merits and Services augment,
in the Esteem of the Sultan, and of all the World.

And, I tell thee, I have far livelier Hopes to see this Latter Wish take
Effect, than the Former: For, what Reason have we to expect better Luck from
the Courage or Conduct of this Ouroos Kienan, than from the brave Zornesan
Mustapha, who commanded the Fleet last Year?

This Unhappy Thought has put me into as melancholy a Humor, as Aeneas was in
when the Queen of Carthage required an Account of the Trojan Wars. For, I have
heard that Cara Mustapha, Bassa, succeeded Zornesan in the Command of the
Fleet, and in the Revolution of a Moon was made Mansoul again, for the Sake of
Kienan Bassa, or rather for the Sake of the licentious Soldiers, who it seems
command all Things. I have been informed also, of all the other Tragedies Acted
at the Seraglio, since the Second Moon of this Year. Neither are the Causes and
Origin of so much Slaughter and Bloodshed hid from me. It Is too apparent, that
there is an Universal Disorder and Corruption in the Discipline of the
Janissaries.

I formerly wrote to the Kiaya Bey on this Account. But it seems, Avarice the
Root of all Evil, had rendered him Insensible and Obdurate.

Is it not a Shame that the Pay of those who serve the Grand Signior in the
Wars, should be detained, not Three or Four Moons, but Five or Six Years, by
their corrupt Officers? They sit at home enjoying their Ease, revelling in
Taverns, and committing a Thousand Riots; whilst the others undergo numberless
Fatigues abroad, and are reduced to the extremest Necessities, not having so
much as the Vests allowed 'em by the Sultan, to cover their Nakedness! And, if
they complain of their Sufferings, instead of Redress they meet with Nothing
but Taunts and Reproaches, as if they were not worthy to eat the Sultan's Bread
and Salt, though they freely hazard their Lives for him. It is no Wonder, the
Janissaries are so unbridl'd in their Rage, after so many Provocations.

Yet, I cannot but lament the Fate of those Unfortunate Men, who were
sacrificed to the Fury of that insolent Militia: Especially, I condole the Loss
of the brave Solomon Kyzlir Aga. The Janissaries had on old Grudge against him,
ever since his hot Dispute with the Bostangi Bassa, and now they were resolved
to execute their Revenge.

As for the Kiaya Bey, it seems to be a Stroke of Divine Justice, that he who
had been the Cause of all this Mutiny, should in Remorse strangle Himself, and
so go to Hell, as an Expiation for the many Lives he had cast away.

And there is little less to be said, in Respect of the Mufti, who was the Chief
of those that betrayed their Master, Sultan Ibrahim. To tell thee my true
Resentments, I am heartily sorry for all the Rest: But to those who were
concerned in that Treason, there seems no Pity due. And the Mufti may thank God
and his good Stars, that his Life went not with the Others. They report here,
he is fled into Egypt.

But, what was that Gelep Assan, who headed this Rabble of Mutineers? I have
heard Nothing of him, before the Intelligence I received of his sudden Rise,
and equally precipitate Fall, during this Tumult. He was, I suppose, some
passionate Fool, of an ill-contriv'd Midriff, which used to make a Quarrel
between his Heart and his Spleen: And from this Intestine Broil, he habitually
learned the Way to set People together by the Ears. A popular Man, an
Incendiary, and one that knew how to wheedle the Vulgar to his own Ruin. Who
can give an Account of these Things? Or who can unravel the Web of Destiny?
Though there is nothing strange in his particular Case, yet in the General it is
prodigious, That such little Instruments should be able to give so terrible a
Shock to the Frame of an Ancient and Mighty Government!

He was a Man of no Fame or Character, and yet for the Space of Two Moons, he
may be said to command the Greatest Sovereign in the World, Sole Proprietor of
Fame and Honor. And, had he pushed on his Interest, it is not improbable, but
that he might have exalted himself above his Master, and secured his Post
against all After-claps. For, according to my Intelligence, he had during the
Sedition, heaped together prodigious Sums of Money, the Presents of Bassa's and
other Ministers of the Port, who all adored this new rising Comet, and sought
his Protection and Favor against the Barbarous Rabble. But, it seems, he was
infatuated with too much Glory, and considered not that every Body watched all
Opportunities and Occasions to ruin him: And that his very Followers, would be
the First to betray him, as soon as the Hurry of their Insurrection was over.
This generally happens to all Ringleaders of Parties. When once the Spirits of
a Faction are spent, the Lees (which consist of Regret and Confusion) are
discharged on those who first fermented them, mixed with the Revenge of the
State.

There are Abundance of Great and brave Men gone: But, the old Negidher was of
their Council, and he brought them to Ruin, as he did the Coreis of Mecca,
when they conspired against the Life of the Prophet. This Devil entered the
Temple (where they were assembled) in the Shape of an Ancient Man, decrepid and
leaning on a Crutch. And when he was commanded to withdraw, he told them, He
was a Senior, who had seen all Ages, and remarked the Occurrences of Times;
that he was expert in unfolding Secrets, and rendering Difficult Things easy.
In a Word, he used so many plausible Insinuations, that they admitted him into
their Assembly. But, none of their Counsels prosper'd.

That malicious Demon, is often present in the Cabals of Seditious Men; and
though they see him not, yet he secretly undermines their Plots, and brings 'em
to Shame and Punishment. For, he is the Spirit of Envy: And though he be himself
a Rebel, and the Ringleader of a Faction in the Kingdom of the Air; yet, such
is his spightful nature, that he seldom suffers any Rebellion to thrive on
Earth: Not for any Love that he bears to Government, but because he delights to
be active in Mischief, be it where it will; and the Guardian Spirits, will not
suffer him to mix with the established Divans of an Empire.

The All-Good God preserve thee from the Malice of Wicked Demons, who always
hover about Treasures of Gold and Silver.

Paris, 22d. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1656.
LETTER XIX.
To the same.
THE Troubles of the Sublime Port touched me so nearly, and embarked my Soul in
such a Tempest of sollicitous Thoughts and Anxieties, for the Honor and Safety
of the Osman Empire, that I had no Leisure to think of my own particular
Hazards, whilst I was writing the other Letter. Yet I have been engulph'd in
Abundance of Vexatious Circumstances and perilous Accidents.

It generally happens, that when one Misfortune befalls a Man, it brings a
Train along with it. So that at some Seasons we seem to be besieged with Evils,
or at least so closely blocked up by an Army of Calamities, that there is no
Passage left open, either for Relief or Intelligence.

So has it fared with me of late, and with Thousands of others, I doubt not, in
this Populous City. The Rebellion of the Prince of Conde, is the Occasion of
all this. For, the King having some Reasons to apprehend a secret Conspiracy of
the Prince's Friends and Well-Wishers in Paris and other Places, has caused a
very severe Scrutiny to be made of all Strangers and Sojourners. The Soubashi's
or Officers go to every House within their Precinct, taking down the Names of
all the Inhabitants in Writing, and seizing the Persons of those whom they
suspect. The Prisons are filled with People of all Ranks, and the Nobles are
sent to the Castle of the Wood of Vinciennes. It Is said, the King has a List of
many Thousands of Conde's Party in Paris, who designed on a prefixed Day to
take up Arms for that Prince, and that their Example would have been followed
all over the Kingdom.

God knows what is in the Hearts of these Infidels: I am sure, Mahmut is wholly
a Stranger to their Plots. Though last Year I received certain Instructions from
the Vizir Azem, commanding me to act secretly in the Prince of Conde's Behalf,
to abett the Faction, and use all the Endeavors and Art I could, to raise a
New Party for him among the Courtiers. But, I waved so dangerous an Employment,
by proposing to him the vast Expenses it would require, and the Necessity of
sending some Extraordinary Embassy to this Court, to countenance the Business.
To tell thee the Truth, I esteemed it a Thing Impracticable, and a mere Caprice
of that Active Bassa, who had a Natural Kindness for Rebels, and delighted to
have a Hand in difficult Undertakings, whether there was any Likelihood of
Success or not.

But, he is dead, and let that atone for all his Rebellions, when he had the
Command of Aleppo. I love not to load the departed Souls with Accusations. What
I have to say, is in my own Vindication, who could not approve his Politic
Chimaera: In Regard, had it succeeded, no Profit or Advantage would from thence
arise to the Ottoman Empire: And had it been discovered, not only I and all the
Secrets of my Commission would have lain open to the Infidels, but also it
would have been an Eternal Dishonor and Blemish to the High Resplendent Port,
to be found guilty of violating in so notorious a Manner, the Faith it had
given to the most Ancient and Puissant Monarchy among the Nazarenes.

Besides, I knew not but this Minister had a private Grudge against me, for
accusing him formerly to the Divan, when he held Correspondence with the
Venetians; and that he studied this Way to be revenged, by employing me in an
Affair, which must needs be my Ruin. However, I think I had Reason to be
Cautious, and Apprehensive of the Worst. This made me dispatch to him a Letter,
full of specious Umbrages, seeming to approve his Design, but entangling it
with such Difficulties, as would divert him from farther Thoughts of it.

Yet after all, I have been really brought into Danger, on the bare Suspicion
of being concerned on the Prince of Conde's Side: By which thou may guess at
the Consequence, had I hearkened to the Vizir's Advice.

One Morning early, the Officers appointed for this Purpose entered my Chamber:
And having demanded my Name, Business and Quality; I answered, My Name was
Titus Durlach Nieski; but that for Shortness, and to denote my Country, I was
commonly called Titus the Moldavian; and that by this Name I was well known to
Cardinal Mazarini, as I had been to his Predecessor Richlieu, and other
Courtiers of great Quality. I told 'em likewise, That I was a Clerk, who
understood some Foreign Languages, and therefore had been often employed by
those Cardinals, in translating Books out of Greek and Arabic into Latin and
French: For which Reason, being recommended by Cardinal Richlieu, I had been
introduced into the Acquaintance of several Nobles, whose Children I taught
those Languages. And that some of them had promised to make me Curate of St.
Stephen 's Church, as soon as it was Vacant.

They seemed to be very well satisfied with what I said; but told me moreover,
They had a Commission to search my Lodgings for Arms and Treasonable Papers.

It is impossible to express the Horror I was in when I saw them go roundly to
work, prying into every Corner, and searching my Trunks, Coffers and even my
Bed it self. Not that I had any Guilt upon me, of concealing either Arms or
Papers relating to this Conspiracy, but my Concern was for my Box of Letters to
the Ministers of the Port. As for Arms, they found no other but an old Sword,
which I told them I traveled with out of my own Country, and a Brace of
Pistols for the same Use, to defend me from Robbers, Assassins and other
Injuries.

These Fellows seemed mightily pleased with the Curious Workmanship of my
Weapons, surveyed them all over, and having drawn my Sword out of the Scabbard,
and made a Pass or two with it against the Wall, after the French Mode of
Fencing, they put it up again; telling me, They had no Authority to take these
Arms from me, since they were necessary for my Defense. But when they came to
my Box of Letters, and saw them written in strange Characters which none of
them could read; they began to look on one another, and change their
Countenances, as if there were some dangerous Matter contained in these Papers,
and therefore writ in Ciphers.

They went aside to one End of the Chamber, whispering together, and nodding
their Heads with all the Symptoms of Jealousy. At length, I Interrupting them,
said, You need not, Gentlemen, be concerned about those Papers. They were left
with me by a Merchant- Jew of my Acquaintance, and they are Letters of
Correspondence between him and some of his Brethren at Rome, Venice, Amsterdam,
and other Places in Europe. It Is therefore they are written in a Character
which to you appears strange, it being Hebrew, the National Language of the
Jews. They contain only Matters of Traffic, being Letters of Mart and
Exchange: For you know, the Jews are the greatest Merchants, Brokers, and
Banquiers in the World.

These Words, with some Gold which I gave them, dispersed all their Suspicions,
cleared up their cloudy Brows, and turned their Frowns into Smiles and
Complimental Addresses. They told me, I was a very honest Man, and they would
do me what Service they could. So bid me adieu.

By this thou may see the mighty Power of that Charming Metal, which
commands all Things. For, whatever I could have said without that, had been
Insignificant. But these Idolaters, melted into an Indifference at the First
Sight of the glittering Pistoles, and when I had once rendered them thus
ductile, 'twas easy to frame 'em to the most devout Appearance of Respect and
Friendship. They promised and swore, no Hurt should be done me.

But I knew the Fickleness of human Fidelity better, than to repose any great
Confidence in these Men's Words. As soon as they were gone, I conveyed my
Letters to Eliachim, who could easily conceal 'em in any private Corner of his
House: desiring him to furnish me with some Letters of Indifferent Concerns
written in Hebrew, that if these Searchers should come again, and demand a
second View of my Box, perhaps with Design to carry it to some Minister of
State, I might have those Hebrew Dispatches ready to show; which being put in
the same Box, would not be known from the other by such Ignorant Fellows, to
whom Hebrew, Arabic and Chinese were all alike, and so I should be acquitted
from all future Trouble of this Nature.

And the Event answered my Expectation. For, within Three Days, the same Men
came again with others in their Company, pretending they had fresh Warrants,
and were sworn to be Impartial. Wherefore I was forced to attend 'em, whilst
they carried both me and my Box before a Cadi or Judge, who having examined me
very strictly concerning my Name, Country, Religion, and other Matters, and
seeming well satisfied with all my Answers, at last sent for a Priest well
versed in the Hebrew Tongue, ordering him to peruse the Letters: Which when he
had done, he assured the Cadi, that there was not a Word in any of them
relating to the State, being purely Matters of Private Contracts and Bargains
between Merchant-Correspondents, with Bills of Lading, etc. So I had my Box of
Sham- Letters restored to me again, and was honorably dismissed.

Yet, though this Storm was soon blown over, I was very near running on Rocks and
Sands through the Persecution of thy Predecessor Kienan Bassa, and Kisur
Dramelec, with many others in the Seraglio: The First keeping from me the
Pension allowed by the Grand Signior; the Second either sending me no
Intelligence, or else baffling me with trifling News, nothing to the Purpose;
the Rest aspersing me to the Ministers of the Divan.

I desire thee to send me the Arrears that are behind for the Space of Nineteen
Moons, as thou will find in the Register of the Hasna. Had it not been for
Eliachim, that honest Jew, I should have been ruined in this Place for Want of
Money.

I need not say more to thee, who know that Gold is the Grand Talisman,
which works all the Miracles in the World.

Paris, 22th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1656.
The End of the Second Book.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS. VOL. V.
BOOK III.
LETTER I.
To Dgnet Oglou.
WHO can penetrate into the Mysterious Conduct of Destiny; Whether God governs
this World by the Influence of the Stars, or by the Ministry of Spirits, or by
his own Immediate Power? Or, whether All Things did not proceed from Chance,
and are still Ruled by the same? Be it how it will, there remains Something
Adorable. Even that Chance it self, supposing Epicurus's Opinion true, is
worthy of Supreme Honors and Sacrifices, which has with such Exquisite Luck,
performed all the Part of Infinite Wisdom and Forecast, in Forming and
Preserving the Universe. Were I a Disciple of that Philosopher, every Morning
when I beheld the Rising Sun, and at Midday when I saw him Climb the Meridian,
and in the Evening when he takes his Conge of this Upper World to visit our
Antipodes, would I with Profoundest Veneration cry out, O Eternal Chance? O
Omnipotent Casualty? O Incomprehensible Blindness! I adore thee, I burn Incense
to thee, and do all Things which the duller Sort of Mortals think are only due
to an All-Wise, All-Good, and an All-Mighty God. Thus would I address to that
Infinite Pell-Mell of Atoms, could I believe with Epicurus, that from such an
Unconceivable Hurly-Burly, proceeded all this Admirable Beauty and Order which
we behold.

Thou will perceive by this, that I am Religiously disposed; and rather than
not Adore some Supreme Being, I would make a Deity of that which to others is
the Fountain of Atheism. And I think there is Reason on my Side. For let this
World be produced how it will, whether by the Casual Concourse of Atoms, or by
the Deliberate Act of an Eternal Mind; Whether it be Eternally Self-Existent,
according to the Stoics, or be the Genuine Result of the Divine Idea's, as the
Platonists say; It is but Just, that we should pay the most Devout and Grateful
Acknowledgments to the Source of so many Immense Prodigies and Wonders.

But then, what shall we say for all the EVIL that appears in the World? That
there is such a Thing as EVIL, scattered up and down through all the Ranks of
Beings, and as it were blended and rivetted in their very Essences; is manifest
at First View, and every Man has his Share of this Epidemical Contagion. But
whence it proceeds, who can inform me? I am not the First that ask the
Question. Many Ages ago the Inquisitive World was busy in searching out the
Root of EVIL. And there were almost as many Opinions about it, as there were
Nations on Earth.

Some asserted, That all EVIL came out of the North: Others derive it from the
South; as if the Two Poles were the Centers and Native-Seats of this Malady of
the World. But these seem to be Men of Short Discourse and Shallow Reason,
Supinely Credulous, and willing to take up with any Thing, rather than be at
the Pains of Attentive Contemplation.

Yet this Opinion has so far prevailed in these Western Parts, that the
Nazarene Priests when they Celebrate their Mass, stand on the North Side of the
Altar at the Reading the Gospel, turning their Backs to that Quarter of the
World. And the Reason they give for this Ceremony is, because in the Written
Law it is said, Out of the North comes all EVIL. I have heard 'em seriously
maintain this Argument. But, God knows whether there be any such Place in the
Written Law, or no: Or, if there be, whether it must be taken in this Sense.
Yet I must confess, the Romans have some Reason to believe it, having
Experimentally felt a great deal of EVIL from the Northern Goths and Vandals,
who in Former Ages rushed out of their Frozen Regions, and came down like a
Torrent upon Italy and other Parts of Europe, making Havoc of all Things Civil
and Sacred. And, if this be the Ground of their Ceremony, they have greater
Reason now to change their Station, and turn their Backs to the South-East,
having been much more Fatally handled by the Victorious Mussulmans.

The Ancient Persians held, That there were Two Principles or Sources of All
Things, viz. GOOD and EVIL; and that there has been an Eternal Quarrel between
them: But in the End, they say, the GOOD shall get the Victory, and Exterminate
the EVIL. This Opinion was embraced by a Sect of Christians, whom they called
Manichees. The Founder of that Sect, was a Persian by Birth: His Name was
Manes, a very Learned Man, as the Records of the East testify: Yet the
Christians rank him among the most Pernicious Heretics. He taught, That Wine
was the Blood of Devils; And therefore forbad it to his Followers. He also
prohibited the Flesh of Animals. This he learned from the Priests of Egypt,
where he resided a considerable Time.

But to return to the Sentiments of Men concerning the Origin of EVIL. There
are some who affirm, God is the Author of it: Which is not far from Blasphemy.
Others say, That when the Devils were Exterminated from the Earth, they in
Revenge sowed the Seeds of EVIL in the Universe. But that of the Stoics seems
the most plausible to me: For they asserted, That Nothing is EVIL of it self,
but that the Contrariety which we behold in the World, is very Good, and
conduces to Establish the Order and Economy of All Things.

My dear Gnet, do not esteem me an Atheist, because of the Liberty I take in
discoursing of these Mysterious Things. There are a Sort of People here in the
West, whom they call Deists, that is, Men professing the Belief of a God,
Creator of the World, but Scepticks in all Things else. They have no Implicit
Faith in Historical Religion, but think it the Part of Men as they are endu'd
with Reason, to call in Question the Writings of Mortals like themselves,
though they had the Character of the Greatest Prophets. Thus they think it no
Sin to canvass the Books of Moses, and the Hebrew Prophets, the Gospel of Jesus
the Son of Mary, and the Alcoran of Mahomet our Holy Lawgiver: Choosing what is
Agreeable to Reason, and rejecting the Rest as Fabulous, inserted either by the
Craft of Men, or the Interloping of the Devil.

I protest, there appears to me no Reason to call these Men Atheists or
Infidels. They rather seem to deserve the Title of Philosophers, or Lovers of
Wisdom and Truth. And it is from them I have learned this Unwillingness to be
imposed on in Matters of Religion. I find them in all Things Men of great
Morality and Goodness, far exceeding the Zealots of the Age in true Virtue and
Pious Actions. But they make no Noise of what they do: And whilst only their
Human Frailties are Conspicuous to all, their Perfections lie concealed under
the Veil of an Unparalleled Modesty.

Such of Old were the Associates of Zeid Eb'n Raphaa, my Countryman. This was
a Person of an Ardent Spirit and Prodigious Understanding, Educated in the
Mussulman Law: But when he came to those Years, wherein Men usually examine the
Grounds of their Religion, he sought out the most Learned Men, and such as were
versed in all Sciences. After he had conversed some Time with 'em, and found
'em to be Persons of Integrity, as well as Men of Sense, he proposed to them
the Convenience of Frequent Clubs among themselves, where they might with an
Unrestrained Freedom, discourse of all Things; and being United in an
Inviolable Friendship, might improve one another in Knowledge and Virtue,
without regarding the Legends and Harangues of the Mollahs. This Society
composed Fifty Books of so many several Kinds of Science, and they called 'em
Echwanossapha, or the Writings of the Sincere Fraternity, concealing their
Names. They treated of Human and Divine Matters without Reserves or Caution:
Asserting, That the Mussulman Religion was Corrupted and Alienated from its
First Institution, having imbibed many Errors; and that there was no Way to
restore it to its Primitive Purity, but by joining to it the Philosophy of the
Ancients. In a Word, they endeavored to reform whatever was amiss in the
Doctrines and Manners of the Faithful, by reducing both to the Standard of
Reason.

I know not whether thou will approve or dislike their Enterprise. But I am
sure, thou art Sensible as well as I, that there are Bigots among the Followers
of the Prophet, and that these deserve Correction. The Devil will set his Foot
in the Temple of God. But do not thou follow his Steps. If thou do, He that
made the Devil, fetch thee back again.

Paris, 30th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1656.
LETTER II.
To the Nazin Eschref, or, Prince of the Emirs, at the Port.
THE Christians say, it is an Argument of God's Love when he chastises them.
Therefore they have no Reason to be peevish, or call it an Effect of his Anger,
that a dismal Plague is broke out in the Territories of the Pope, the Kingdom
of Naples, and other Parts of Italy. This Contagion rages so vehemently in
Rome, the Capital City of the Western Nazarenes, that above a Hundred Thousand
Persons of several Ranks have forsaken that Place. The Pope's Palace is shut
up, and no Access granted to any, not even to Foreign Ambassadors, without
great Precaution; and then, none of their Retinue are admitted with them.

It Is said, Seventeen Hundred die daily in that City, and Six Thousand a Day in
Naples. Nay, in some Places, the Living are scarce sufficient to bury the Dead.
The Grand Duke of Toscany, to prevent the spreading the Infection in his
Territories, has forbid all Intercourse between his Subjects and those of the
Pope, neither will he permit so much as a Nuncio to pass through his Dominions.

This Mortality has frighted Queen Christina from Rome. She has sent to desire
Passes of the Duke of Savoy and other Princes, designing for France. She is
already on her Voyage, having been presented by the Pope with Ten Thousand
Crowns, to defray the Expenses of her Travels. Here are great Preparations
making for her Reception: The King having sent Orders to all Governors of
Towns and Provinces through which she must pass, to receive and entertain her
with a Magnificence due to her Sovereign Dignity, and worthy of the French
Grandeur and Hospitality.

In the mean Time, this Court is in a sullen Humor, by Reason of a late great
Loss they have suffered at Valenciennes in Flanders. This Place was besieged by
the French, at the Beginning of the Campaign, but was relieved by the Spaniards
this Moon, who killed above a Thousand Men on the Spot, took Five Thousand
Prisoners, with all their Cannon and Baggage. Amongst the Captives of Note, is
the Marshall de Ferte Seneterre, General of the French Army. The Names of the
others are wanting. Marshall de Turenne himself very narrowly escaped, by
timely withdrawing his Brigade from the Fight: For which some stigmatize him
with Cowardice and Treachery: Whilst others affirm, he acted the Part of a
Prudent Captain, in thus Retreating, since it was impossible to restore the
Battle with any success.

From Sueden we hear, that the Elector of Brandenburgh has entered into a
League with the King of Sueden, by which both their Armies are United against
the King of Poland: and it is said, their first Design will be upon Dantzick.
That Country is in a horrid Confusion, the Nobles, Gentry, and Boores being all
in Arms, some deserting their Sovereign, others adhering to his Interest. King
Casimir, has invested Warsaw with an Army of Forty Thousand Men. In the mean
Time, the Hollanders have sent a great Fleet of Ships of War into the Baltic
Sea; but to what end, is not known; nor what Part they will take, whether the
Suedes or Poles. Yet, the Latter hope for great Assistance from them, there
having been lately some Misunderstanding between the Dutch and the Suedes. The
Moscovites also have entered Poland with a Numerous Army, and the Tartars are
coming with another to the Aid of King Casimir.

Thus is Poland become the Stage of a most Terrible War; and which Side soever
gets the Victory, that unhappy Country will be near ruined.

Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna, and a Private Agent for the Grand Signior,
sends me Word, that the Emperor of Germany has an Army of Thirty Thousand
Foot, and Twelve Thousand Horse in Silesia, who are to join with the
Moscovites, and do some considerable Action against the Suedes, whose continual
Victories and growing Greatness, gives Jealousy to these Puissant Monarchs. He
informs me farther, that the Emperor has dispatched a Courier to the Prince of
Transylvania, with Instructions and Letters, to engage him to a Neutrality.(...)

But the Young Ragotski, is as Wild as his Father, and hates to be led by the
Nose.

Thou may inform the Ministers of the Divan, that Adonai the Jew, is dead of
the Plague in Rome, having first taken Care to transmit to me all the Papers
which concern the Mysterious Port.

This Court at present is at a Place called La Fere in Picardy, a Province
bordering on Flanders. From whence there may be a more frequent Intercourse
between the King and his Camp.

Prince of the Holy Line, I have sent thee all the News that is stirring at
this Juncture, saving some trivial Matters which are not worth a Moselman's
Knowledge; much less thine, who art distinguished from the Crowd of True
Believers, by wearing the Sacred Color of the Prophet.

Paris, 30th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1656.
LETTER III.
To Melec Amet.
HERE has been a strange Accident lately, not many Leagues from Paris, which
has occasioned Various Discourses, and put the Philosophers upon a New
Scrutiny. One Morning a certain Peasant or Farmer, walking over his Lands, as
his Custom is, to number his Sheep and other Cattle, missed a Barn or
Storehouse which stood in a Field at some Distance from his Habitation.
Surpised at this, he hastened toward the Place where he saw it but the Night
before: When, to his no small Astonishment, he perceived, that not only the
Barn, but a great Part of the Field wherein it was built, was sunk into the
Earth. He immediately ran and called some of his next Neighbors to behold this
Strange Spectacle: And the Fame of it spread all over the Country. Diverse
Learned and Ingenious Persons have been there, to make Observations of this
Accident. But none dares venture near enough to the Chasme, to look down into
it; because the Earth continues breaking and falling in, which makes a Noise
like the Salvo's of the Janissaries, when the Grand Signior visits the Arsenal.

One would conclude by these Uncommon Symptoms, that the Earth grows Ancient
and Weak, that her Inward Strength and Vigor decays, and that we are every
where in Danger of being swallowed up. I have not Time to write more, it being
Midnight, and the Post ready to go.

The Almighty and All-Good God, have thee in his Holy Protection.

Paris, 30th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1656.
LETTER IV.
To Zornezan Mustapha, Beglerbeg of Erz'ram.
I Will still Congratulate thy Happiness, even in this Last Change of thy
Fortune; which, though it be a Kind of Descent from the more Lofty Stations
thou have possessed in the Osman Empire, yet it is attended with Honorable
Circumstances and an Inviolable Security. Thou art not out of the Sultan's
Favor, Banished to Egypt, and Confined to a narrow Pension during thy Life, as
has been the Fate of several Grandees: But thou art withdrawn from the
Intrigues of State, the Toils of War, and the Plots of a Courtier's Life, to
the Sweet Retirements of the Country, the Peaceable Possession of a Rich and
Fertile Province, where thou may pass thy Days in Uncontrollable Ease and
Felicity.

I am not surpised at the Fall of so many Great Men at the Port, nor do I much
regret the Death of those who were known Enemies to the Government: Yet it
troubles me to think, how the Brave and the Loyal had their Innocent Blood
mingled with that of Traitors and Villains. But, these Things are unavoidable
in Popular Insurrections, when the Sovereign is compelled to sacrifice to the
Multitude, whomsoever they require. Thus fell the Illustrious Solomon, among
the Criminal Eunuchs, though he himself was free from Stain. But he was a
Negro, and that was his Ruin. For, the Malcontents could not discern the Fair
Qualities of his Soul.

Curse on that Fool Chaban Kalfa, and double Curses on his Rampant Wife Mulkly
Kadin, who gave the First Occasions to all this Disorder and Spoil of Noble
Blood. I remember, the honest Solomon gave me once a Hint of the Feminine
Debaucheries practiced in the Queen-Mother's Apartments: But he spoke of it
with so much Modesty and Reserve, that it hardly made any Impression on me at
that Time. Otherwise I should have imparted it to the Vizir Azem, or some other
Minister of the Divan; for, so am I commanded, in Cases that touch the Honor
and Safety of the Grand Signior. And, I tell thee, this was none of the least
Importance. For, as it appears, the Women were undermining the most Sacred and
Firmly Established Government in the World. They were not contented to wallow
in their own Impious and Unnatural Delights, but would have set themselves as a
Pattern to others, and by Degrees have infected the whole Moselman Empire with
a New Species of Debauchery: Which as it began and was carried on by
Embezilling the Royal Treasures, selling of Places to Men of no Merit,
Buffoons, Pimps and Asses; so would it have ended in enervating our Militia,
corrupting all the Faithful, and laying the Empire naked to Infidels.

How many Vizirs, Caimachams, Captain-Bassa's and other Officers have we had
this Fatal Year? Among the Rest, I cannot but reflect on the Poisoning of the
Chiaux Bassa, after he was made Vizir* Azem, as a Stroke of Divine Justice, for
having embru'd his Hands in so much Noble Blood, when he enjoyed that Dignity
once before. God pursues the Cruel with Invisible Scourges.

But what was that Achmet Bassa, who took Advantage of the Sultan's Domestic
Troubles, and Foreign Wars, to disturb his Government in Asia, and raise a
Rebellion, which threatened even the Imperial City it self? By the Course of
his Fortune, it looks as if he were not contented with his Command in Asia, and
therefore took this new celebrated Method to obtain a Higher Dignity, viz. by
Rebelling against his Master: Else why was he made Bassa of the Sea, in the
Room of Ouroos Kienan? The Bassa of Aleppo first brought into Fashion this
daring Way of growing Great. And if it be thus countenanced by the Grand
Signior, in all Probability, he will have Reason to make Peace with the
Christians, that he may have Respite, and Forces to employ against his own
Subjects.

A midst all these Things, Nothing afflicts me so much, as the Horrible Loss
our Fleet has sustained at Sea. We have various Reports of this Combat, but in
general they agree, That the Moselmans have lost Seventy Two Ships, and
Galleys, with an Infinite Number of Men; That the Venetians have taken the
Isles of Tenedos and Lemnos, and that they are advancing to besiege
Constantinople. This News is a great while coming to us: So that, if it be
true, and the Venetians pursued their Victory; for ought I know, by this Time,
the Imperial City, the Refuge of the World, may be laid in Ashes.

I have often proposed the Necessity of Platforms along the Hellespont, to
guard that Important Avenue of the Sacred Port. Had they put in Practice
Mahmut's Advice, perhaps the Nazarenes would have had no Occasion for their
present Triumphs. But, now they Banquet in the open Streets; All Christendom
rings with the News of our Disgrace. The Drunkards of Europe, insult over the
Professors of Sobriety: Amidst their Bowls of Wine, they blaspheme our Prophet,
and sing in the Praise of Bacchus their God: They menace the Conquest of Asia,
and threaten to exterminate the Moselmans from the Earth.

Enraged at these Profane Boasts, I stop my Ears, and turning round in a
Divine Phrensy, I pray that God would baffle the Infidels.

Paris, 6th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1656.
LETTER V.
To the most Renowned and most Illustrious Mahomet, Vizir Azem, at the Port.
THAT Incomprehensible Majesty which has no Resemblance, at whose Pleasure all
Things are disposed and ordered in Heaven and Earth, by whose particular
Providence, for the Good of the Osman Empire, thou art exalted to this Glorious
Trust, to be Vicar of the Vicar of God; augment thy Graces and Virtues, and
bless thee with Superlative Wisdom, and perfect Tranquillity.

I renew thy Accomplished Soul, consummate in all Moral and Political Science.
Thou art the most Experienced Man in the Empire. And I ceased to condole the
late Tumults and Riots at Constantinople, though their Effects were Fatal to
some brave Men; since thou art chosen to this Dignity, from whom the whole
Empire may expect, not only a serener State of Affairs, during thy
Administration, but also a rooting up of the Causes of these Public
Distempers, and of all other Evils which infest the Monarchy designed for the
Conquest and Reformation of the whole World.

According to the Custom of the East, I approach thee not without some Present:
But pardon the Slave Mahmut, who can send thee none worthy of thy Grandeur. I
have enclosed in a Box the true Effigies of the Present King of France, with
that of his Uncle the Duke of Orleans, his Brother the Duke of Anjou, and his
Cousin the Prince of Conde; as also that of Cardinal Mazarini, and Queen
Christina of Sueden, who is now at the French Court. Accept also from an Exile,
a little Cabinet containing Twelve Watches, of so many different Contrivances,
according to the Circular Variation of the Moons in the Space of Thirty Four
Years. They are the Work of my own Hands; therefore I shall not commend 'em.
Each is wrapped up in a Piece of Silk, wherein is wrought in Arabic Letters the
Method of using it. Perhaps thou will find some Diversion in trying the
Experiments mentioned in those Tables. However, despise not this mean Testimony
of Mahmut's Respect; but consider that if I come short of the Curious Artists
in Europe, yet my Labor is passable enough for a Moselman, among whom there is
scarce another Watch-maker to be found in the World.

If thou would know the Occasion of Queen Christina's being at the French
Court: She came thither from Rome, when the last Moon was in its Wane. Her
Passage was by Sea to Marseilles, having touched at Genoua, and received
magnificent Gifts from the Republic; but they would not permit her to land,
for Fear of the Plague, which then raged in Rome, and was the Cause of her
leaving that City.

However, the French showed no such timorous Squeamishness, but received Her
and her Train with open Arms. She landed at Marseilles on the 29th. of the 7th.
Moon; and when she made her Public Entry, the Consuls of that City, with all
the Nobles met her in Coaches, the Great Guns were discharged to welcome her,
and she was caressed with all the Demonstrations of Honor that are showed to
the Queen of France her self in her Progresses.

The same Entertainment she received at Aix, Avignon, Lions, and in Fine all
along the Road to Paris, the Keys of Towns being surrendered to her (for such
was the King's Pleasure) and a Canopy of State born over her Head, when she
entered any Town, and received the Addresses and Compliments of Governors,
Prelates, and other Great Men in Authority. She was likewise Magnificently
treated by Princes and the Chief Dukes of the Realm: And on the 8th. of the
last Moon, made her Entry into this City on Horseback, apparelled like a Man:
Where having staid some Time, she departed for Compiegne, to visit the Court,
which resides there now.

It is not Supposed, she will tarry long in France, but as soon as she hears
the Plague is abated in Rome, and the Adjacent Parts, she will return thither,
to pass away the Residue of her Life, in that Nest of Princes and Prelates of
the Nazarene Belief.

A little before she left Rome, the Spaniards there had Conspired to seize on
her Person, as also on the Pope; to have Murdered the Portugal Ambassador, and
set the City on Fire. But the Plot was discovered, and the Conspirators put in
Prison: (For, the Sentence of Death is never passed in Criminal Cases among the
Nazarenes, without a Formal Trial*)

Here is a Rumor, as if a Great Fire had some Moons ago broke out in
Constantinople, and consumed much of that City. I wonder, none of my Friends,
nor any other residing there, have sent me an Account of any such Thing. Which
fills me with Hopes, that this Report is false.

From all Hands we are assured, that the Suedes and Brandenburghers have
obtained a great Victory over the Poles and Tartars at Warsaw; the Vanquished
having lost above Six Thousand Men on the Spot, with all their Ammunition and
Baggage: And unfortunate King Casimir, was forced to fly with a small Retinue
toward Hungary.

'Twas the General Expectation of Europe, that the Moscovites and Germans,
would have done something extraordinary for the Poles, and by some surprising
Action, put a check to the Suedish Successes and Triumphs. For, when the
Moscovite Ambassador was at Koningsberg, endeavoring to withdraw the Duke of
Brandenburgh from the Suedish Interest, he vomited forth terrible Menaces, in
Case they complied not with His Master's Proposals. And one Day, in a furious
Zeal, he took a large Goblet of Wine, in the Elector's Presence; and having
drank it off to the Czars Health, the Barbarian said aloud, Thus shall the
great Emperor of the Moscovites devour all that oppose him. But now it seems,
these were only Empty Bravadoes, and the Moscovites were resolved to stand by;
and see who got the better on it. The same may be said of the Emperor, and
Prince of Transylvania; so of the Danes and Hollanders, who now all declare for
the Srrongest Party.

Magnanimous Vizir, if the present Engagements and Wars in Dalmatia and Candy,
besides the Domestic Troubles of the Ottoman Empire, did not wholly employ the
Arms of the Moselmans; doubtless, 'twould be an Undertaking no less Profitable
than Glorious, to succor the distressed Casimir, turn the Tide of the Gothish
Conquests, and oblige the Poles to an Eternal Fidelity and Gratitude to the
Grand Signior.

Paris, 14th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1656.
LETTER VI.
To Abrahim Eli Zeid, Hogia, Preacher to the Seraglio.
I Have frequent Access to the King's Library: Which Favor was first granted
me by Cardinal Richlieu, who often employed me in Translating some Curious
Treatises out of Arabic into French or Latin. The French seem very fond of
Eastern Manuscripts, where ever they can meet with 'em: And they have no less
Regard for Men who are skilled in those Languages. That Minister especially,
was very Inquisitive into the Wisdom and Learning of Asia. He Monopoliz'd
Persian, Syrian and Arabic Books, and was a professed Patron of Linguists. He
coveted the Acquaintance of Strangers and Travelers, that he might by their
means Inform himself of the different Laws, Customs and Religions of Foreign
Countries; and of whatsoever was Rare and worthy of Observation, in any Part of
the World.

Hence it was, that I received Evident Marks of his Esteem, as soon as he knew
that I understood the Greek, Arabic, Hebrew, Turkish and Sclavonian Languages.
He often made use of me, as I have said, and gave me free Access to his own and
the King's Library. And though his Successor Cardinal Mazarini, is not so much
addicted to Studies of this Nature, as to the Affairs of State; yet he has
continued to me, the Privilege of visiting this Treasury of Learned Books,
where I pass many Hours.

One Day I cast my Eyes on a Manuscript Written in Arabic, and endors'd with
this Title, [ The Original Covenant of Mahomet, the Prophet of the Arabians,
with the Professors of the Faith of Jesus] and Underneath was a Latin
Inscription, signifying, That this Manuscript was found in the Convent of
Christian Friars on Mount Carmel. I have Transcribed the Contents of this
Parchment, and sent it Enclosed to thee, that thou may judge whether it be
Real or only Counterfeit. For, the Nazarenes assert it to be the True
Agreement of the Messenger of God; and therefore reproach all the Moselmans
with Disobedience to our Lawgiver, and breaking the League, Signed and Sealed
by Him whom we call the Seal of the Prophets, and Witnessed by the Four
Principal Doctors, Abu Becre, Osman, Omar and Hali.

If thou will peruse the Enclosed Paper, it will be easy to discern, Whether We
are Guilty of this Violation of Faith, or They. For, though (supposing this to
be the Real Testament of the Prophet, as is pretended) that Favorite of Heaven
grants many Articles of Peace, Assistance and Friendship, to the Followers of
Jesus, with Immunity from Taxes and Impositions, Liberty of Conscience, Freedom
of Marriages, etc. Yet it is evident, that he promised not these Things, but on
certain Conditions to be observed on the Part of the Christians; as, that None
of them should harbor, or hold Correspondence with the Enemies of the True
Believers, or Privately accommodate 'em with Arms, Horses, Money or any other
Necessaries of War: But, on the Contrary, should Hospitably receive the
Mofelmans into their Houses for Three Days, and Protect 'em from their Enemies.
If therefore, the Christians should fail in any of these Points, the Prophet
declares his Covenant to be void, and that they shall not enjoy the Indulgences
granted therein. All this, thou will see, is recommended solemnly to both
Parties, to be Religiously performed, till the Final Consummation.

Now, all the Dispute is, Whether We have First trangress'd these Articles, or
the Nazarenes? For, if it can be proved, That they are the First Aggressors,
then they have no Reason to complain of their Misfortunes, or accuse the True
Faithful of Oppression and Tyranny, as they commonly do; Since it is manifest,
that they have drawn these Evils on themselves, by their Breach of Faith, and
Infidelity, disannulling the Covenant of God and his Prophet, and forfeiting
the Benefits they might have claimed by Virtue of it. Be it how it will, the
Prophet is free from Blame: Let the Guilt rest on the Persons that were
Criminal.

I know not how it comes to pass, that the Christians of this Age, think and
speak more Reproachfully of our Holy Lawgiver, than did their Fathers, who
lived in his Time or immediately after it, and who by Consequence could better
inform themselves of the Circumstances of his Birth, Life, and Renowned
Actions. Some Ancient Writers among the Nazarenes, make Honorable Mention of
Him and his Family. They conceal not the Early Signs of his Heroic Virtue, and
the Grandeur to which he was destined. I have read in a certain Christian
Author, That when the Prophet was but Nine Years Old, under the Tuition of his
Uncle Abu Taleb, who carried his Glorious Charge along with him to Damascus,
and that whilst they were at Boz'r, a Learned Monk whose Name was Bohira, came
out of the Convent to meet them; and taking Mahomet by the Hand in the Presence
of many Christians, he said aloud, This Youth is born to accomplish Great
Things: His Fame shall be spread from East to West: For, as he drew near this
Place, I saw a bright Cloud descend and cover him. Sultan David also Prophesied
of him, in that which the Christians reckon the 50th. Psalm, and the 2d.
Versicle: Where that Divine Poet thus Sings, From Sion God has proclaimed the
Empire of Mahomet. But the Christians have Interpreted this in another Sense,
though the Original remains a standing Witness against 'em. So Moses in the
Pentateuch uttered a Mystery, when he said, God came from Sinai, he rose up
from Seir, and was manifested from Mount Paran. Intimating hereby, the Descent
of the Written Law to Moses, of the Gospel to Jesus the Son of Mary, and of the
Alcoran to Mahomet. The Messiah also said to his Disciples, If I go not away,
the Called of God will not come to You. But the Christian Interpreters wilfully
hide these Things from the Vulgar, lest their Eyes should be opened. There
appears an Obstinate Malice and Ignorance in all their Actions.

Who will not laugh at the foolish Spite of the Spaniards; who, in a certain
Town, had a Custom, as often as they entered into the Church or came out, to spit
on a Black Image of a Man sitting on an Ass, near the Gate. But a Mussulman
Ambassador coming thither from the Emperor of Morocco, and observing this
Vain Ceremony of the People, asked the King, What Person that Statue
represented? He made answer, That it was the Image of Mahomet, the Arabian
Prophet. That cannot be, replied the Ambassador, since our Prophet never rode
but on Camels: It is rather the Figure of the Messiah, who indeed is recorded
to have rode on an Ass. The King troubled at this Answer, consulted the Priests
and Learned Men, who all concluded, that the Ambassador had spoke the Truth.
And therefore, instead of offering any more Indignities to this Image, they
fell into another Extreme, and built a Chapel for it, burning Incense to the
Senseless Stock, and paying it Divine Honors. Thus they Prayed to that, which
but a little before, they had Cursed; and turned into a God, that which they
had esteemed almost as bad as the Devil. God's Curse be on the Devil, and all
his Adorers: But on the Holy Prophet, and his Followers, may Blessings shower
down, and rest till the Knot of the Spheres be dissolved.

Paris, 14th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1656.
LETTER VII.
To Murat, Bassa.
KNow for Certain, that Dom Juan de Braganza, late King of Portugal is dead. He
left this World on the 6th. of the last Moon, after he had been tormented Ten
Days with the Stone: His Queen has the Supreme Power in her Hands during her
Son's Minority, whose Name is Dom. Alphonso. This young Prince was Crowned
within a few Days after his Father's Decease, to prevent the Plots of the
Spaniards, who support a Powerful Faction in that Kingdom of Portugal, and are
not without Hopes, to reduce it again to the King of Spain's Obedience. The
World is always busy, either in recovering Old lost Interests, or seeking of
New. The Marshall de la Ferte, who was taken Prisoner by the Prince of Conde
in the Battle of Valenciennes, and having a Price set for his Ransom, had
Liberty to go whither he would on his Parole, either to bring the said Sum, or
surrender his Person, by a certain Day; finding himself flighted at the French
Court, is resolved to perform his Promise, at the prefixed Time, and go over to
the Prince of Conde's Interest, who will not fail to bestow a very Honorable
Command on a General of such Merits.

In the mean Time, the Count of Harcourt plays Tricks with his Master, and
holds private Correspondence with the German Emperor. He is a Serviceable or a
Dangerous Man, according as he is pleased or disgusted, and therefore they
court him on both Sides. He is now at Brisac in Alsace. I cannot admire a Man,
that is thus Industriously troublesome to his Prince, without any Thing of
Merit or Bravery to boast of, save his former Services in Catalonia, which have
been sufficiently repaid with Royal Condescensions and Favors. And those who
make a Parallel between his Case, and that of the Marshall de la Ferte
Seneterre, consider not, that the last fell into his Enemies Hands, only by the
Chance of War: Whereas, the other is a Wilful Apostate, if he embraces the
Emperor's Proposals, when no Necessity constrains him, and Honor flies in his
Face.

From the North we are informed, That Count Coningsmark, Generalissimo of the
Suedish Forces in Prussia, as he was sailing from Wismar, was taken Captive by
the Poles, and Imprisoned in the Castle of Weyssel-munden, near Dantzick. And
the Inhabitants of that City, missed very narrowly of taking the Queen of
Sueden herself. It Is certain, they have got a vast Booty from the Suedes,
consisting of Eighteen Chests full of Gold, with Coffers of the King's Jewels
and other Rich Things.

These, King Casimer demands for himself, with a Million of Rix-Dollars to be
paid him by the Dantzickers; requiring also, that they should furnish his Army
with all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions: Which though it be a heavy Burden,
yet those loyal Citizens think Nothing too much for their King.

The Moscovites in the 9th. Moon besieged Riga, a City belonging to the Crown
of Sueden, but have newly raised the Siege, after they had lost above Ten
Thousand Men before the Place.

This is all the News I can send thee, save that the French have taken
Valentia, a City in Italy.

I wish I may hear as prosperous Intelligence as this last from Candia, after
such Immense Charges and Slaughter. But, Victory is in the Disposal of the
Angel of Time.

Paris, 2d. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1656.
LETTER VIII.
To Hebatolla Mir Argun, Superior of the Covent of Dervishes, at Cogni in
Natolia.
IT is difficult to define the particular Temper of my Soul, when I first
received the News of thy Predecessor's Death, that Renowned and Venerable
Bedredin, who, as thy Dispatch informs me, is gone to Paradise. I was neither
in Passion, nor yet Insensible, but wholly Resigned to the Will of Heaven. I
considered his Immense Virtues, and the Course of Nature: His Wonderful Age,
and more Admirable Actions, a Life Equally measured by Hours, and Prodigies of
Piety. For, he was not in the Number of those, who let whole Days pass away,
without the least Good Work, or without leaving any Impress on the Track of
Time. I express my self according to the Vulgar Saying, [Time Passes away;]
Whereas, in my Opinion, Time stands still, and only We pass away, with all
Things subject to Motion and Change. It Is like the Mistake of those who sailing
on the Water, think the Trees and Mountains move, whilst only they themselves
are driven before the Wind: Or, like the Philosophy of those, who trusting to
their Grosser Sense, maintain, the Sun whirls daily round our World; though,
according to Reason and better Philosophy, that Globe of Light stands still,
whilst ours turns round its Axel-Tree, and so deceives our Eyes. Thus, whilst
we Mortals, glide over the uncertain Waves of Humane Life, and pass by the
Visible and Fixed Landmarks of Time, Day and Night, we imagine those
Landmarks move, and not we our selves. Whereas, Day and Night remain for Ever,
steadfast and invariable in their Successive Intervals, and only the Elements,
and Bodies Compounded of 'em, are subject to Change.

Minutes, Hours, Days and Years, are not properly the Measures of Time, but of
the Motion and Duration of all Corruptible Beings: For Time is Infinite and
beyond all Dimensions. In a Word, It Is no otherwise distinguished from
Eternity, than barely by a Name.

All that I have said on this Subject, is comprehended in the Arabian Proverb,
which says, To Morrow, is Never. Doubtless, there is no Paradox or Heresy in
saying, It Is always To Day; or that this Hour, this Minute is Eternal. And,
from this Truth sprung the Contemplation of those, who place Eternity in a
Point or Instant.

But, to return to Bedredin, that Faithful of the Faithful, may his Soul repose
in the Mercies of God, and his Memory be blessed. May Gabriel, the Friend of
the Prophet, pray for him; then Michael, Israphiel, and the Messenger of Death,
with all the Angels who made Oraisons for the Divine Favorite, after his
Translation from this Earthly State. And, when thou, and the Religious
Fraternity under thy Care, have performed the accustomed Prayers and
Expiations, for the Illustrious Prelate Deceased; there is no Question but that
he shall be in a Condition to Intercede for you, and for the whole Mussulman
Empire: For he was a perfect Saint, and the Beloved of God.

O Sage and Reverend Successor of that Holy Man, suffer me to tell thee, Thy
Name, Hebatolla [the Gift of God,] fills me with Glorious Presages of thy Life
and Administration in that Renowned College, where the Incomparable Bedredin
shined so many Years. Now he is gone to God, and to the Gardens of Eternal
Retirement, having left his Seat on Earth to thee, replenished with the Sacred
Odor of Virtue.

He was a Religious Imitator of the Prophets, and of all Holy Men in General; a
devout Admirer of the Messiah, and a Faithful Disciple of the Sent of God. Now
he is gone to sit down with them in the Chioscs of Eden, on the Banks of
Immortal Streams, the Rivers of Wine, Milk and Honey, which glide along the
Alleys of Paradise. This is the Recompense of Heroic Virtue, the Crown of Good
Works, the Bliss prepared for chaste and purified Souls, who in their
Transmigration from this Earth, carry no Stains of Vice along with 'em. For,
nothing Impure can find Admittance into that World of Glittering Essences.

O Hebatolla, what is there on this Obscure Globe, that deserves to be compared
with those Serener Joys Above; Those unsullied Pleasures; That untarnish'd
Bliss? And yet sometimes we taste strange Felicities here on Earth. But it is
only when the Gates and Casements of Paradise are open, when a Celestial Wind
transports hither the Leaves of the Trees of Eden, and perfumes the Air and
Skies with the Transcendent Odours of that Happy Region, wafting also Imperfect
Sounds, Music in soft Fragments and Eccho's, from the Quires of the Blessed.
Then it is, the Hearts of Mortals feel a secret and inexpressible Joy springing
up from the Root; This Lower World (if I may so express my self) is all
entranced with Pleasure. This happens not every Day, but only at the Seasons of
Divine Indulgence, on the Festivals of some Particular Saints, and in the Time
of the Immortal Jubilee, when God exhilarates the Universe with Uncommon
Favors, and an Infinite Largess.

As for the Rest of our Enjoyments, they are Mitigations indeed of the Pains
and Inseparable Miseries of this Mortal Life; They prevail on us to wait the
Appointed Hour of Fate, and not hurry our selves out of the World before our
Time: But, they deserve not to be placed in the Rank of true Felicities.

However, our Patience under this Fatigue of Life, our Indifference to Pleasure
and Pain, Poverty or Riches, Sickness or Health, Honor or Disgrace, with all
the other Objects of Humane Passion, will prove a singular Argument of Merit, a
prevailing Recommendation to the Life to come, and an effectual Passport to
Paradise. For he that is thus insensibly, yet willingly weaned from the Fulsom
Joys of Earth, by the very Course of Nature and Decree of Destiny, must
unavoidably ascend to a Purer Region, to a Place capable of satisfying his
Aspiring Soul. For, Nature created no Appetite, to baulk it.

This is the Life so recommended by Jesus the Son of Mary, whose Character thou
have in the Library of thy Convent. Here I send thee in a Box, that which by
all the Nazarenes is esteemed his true Effigies. I remember, I once saw another
of the same Lineaments, in the Treasury of the Grand Signior. These Pieces are
very Rare, because not copied by the Hands of Common Painters, but by the most
Celebrated Masters in Europe. And the Original Draught, they say, was made by
the Messiah himself on an Handkerchief, which he clapped to his Face, and so left
his lively Portraicture.

I cannot ascertain the Truth of this Tradition: But, in Regard this is one of
those Copies which is Closeted by the Greatest Monarchs in Christendom, I send
it to thee, as a worthy Ornament of thy Cell, without either the Peril, or
Scandal of Idolatry.

The Pious Bedredin, was Covetous of any Memoirs of the Messiah; whether
written in Hieroglyphics, or in the more usual Characters of Speech. He would
have made no more Exception at a Picture, than at a Poem, in Praise of that
Holy Prophet. And, I question not, but thou equallest him in the same
Indifference.

I could not so easily procure the true Picture of John, Surnamed the Washer;
but here I will give thee a short History of his Life. This was a Famous
Prophet, who lived in the Days of the Messiah, and was of the Race of the
Priests. His Habitation was altogether in the Desert; for, he was an Eremite,
and lived in a Cave on one of the Mountains of Judaea. Some of the Jews took
him for Elias, others for the Messiah, and a Third Sort said he was Mahomet,
whose coming was foretold in the Book of their Law, and in the Writings of
their Prophets.

But John denied that he was any of these, calling himself in Modesty, A Voice,
or Echo. His Life was very Abstemious. For, he fed only on the Tops of Plants,
and wild Honey, drinking Nothing but Water of the Fountain, which ran by the
Side of his Cave. And his Body was only covered with a Vest of Camels Hair,
using a Leathern Thong for a Girdle.

To that Solitary Residence of his, there was great Resort of People from
Jerusalem, and the Cities round about. For the Fame of his Sanctity had spread
through all Palestine and Syria.

He Washed his Disciples with his own Hands in the Waters of Jordan, from
whence he was called the Baptist, or Washer. He daily preached Repentance and
Good Works to the Incredulous Jews; and openly declared, That Jesus the Son of
Mary, was the Messiah. That Holy Prophet, it seems, was one of John's
Disciples, and had been Washed by him in the River Jordan.

In fine, after many Years of Heroic Virtue and Piety, John had his Head cut
off by the Order of Herod the Governor of Judaea, because he had reproved the
Tyrant, for marrying his Brother's Wife.

Behold, these Memoirs are the best Presents, the Poor Exiled Mahmut can send
thee, when he Congratulates thy Accession to that Holy Chair. Yet, such as
these, were more welcome to thy Predecessor, than Gifts of Silver, Gold or
Precious Stones: For, he was a diligent Collector of Choice Antiquities, and
Select Fragments of History. He was also a Liberal Patron and Encourager of
Philosophy and all Sorts of Learning. Follow thou his Example, and the True
Faithful will be eternally obliged to thee. Thou have a fair Opportunity, there
being, as I Am informed, the best Library in thy Convent, of any throughout the
Mussulman Empire. And, the Dervishes under thy Government, are Men addicted to
the Study of the Sciences. It Is Pity such Inclinations should want
Encouragement, whilst the Infidels are every where busy in Founding New
Academies, and Augmenting the Old. There is one lately erected in the Dukedom
of Cleve by the Elector of Brandenburgh, where the Oriental Languages and
Sciences are professed.

If the Nazarenes are thus Curious to pry into our Learning, why should we be
remiss in attaining the Knowledge of their Languages and Histories, since
thereby we shall be in a Condition to know their Greatest Secrets?

Sage Hebatolla, let not the Infidels have any longer Occasion to term us
Barbarous and Ignorant. But remember, that in promoting Literature, thou will
perform a meritorious Service to the Grand Signior.

Paris, 17th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1657.
LETTER IX.
To Selim Al' Mosel, Venerable Imaum of the Mosch of Sancta Sophia.
PRaise be to God, sole Lord of the Zenith and the Nadir, Possessor of Infinite
Regions, who hides the First Meridian in the Palm of his Hand! The Names of
Peru, and Mexico, are not now Foreign in the Ottoman Empire, especially to
Travelers, and Men of Science.

When our Fathers first heard of America, they had no other Way to express so
Unknown a Part of the World, than by calling it the Land of the Golden Mines,
because of the Abundance of that Metal, which was brought from thence by the
Spaniards, since their Conquests in those Parts. But now we are no Strangers to
the Geography of that Remote Continent. Commerce and Traffic, have rendered
all the Known Nations of the Earth, familiar one with another. And I remember,
when I was at Constantinople, the Names of Peru, Mexico, Florida, etc. were as
Common in the Copha Hans, as the Names of Indostan, Turquistan, Gurgistan, or
any other Province of Asia. So that a Man would have been laughed at, who in
speaking of America, shou*d have used any Circumlocutions, as to call it the
Empire of the Golden Mines, the World beyond the Great Sea, or the like.

Yet we must confess, our Knowledge in this Kind is owing to the Franks, who
sail into those far-distant Regions, and at their Return, communicate their
Intelligence and Observations to us; For else we had been yet altogether
Strangers to the History of that New World.

It was first discovered by Christopher Columbus, a Genouese, in the Year 1492.
of the Christians Hegira. This Man had a happy Genius in Contemplating the
Motion of the Sun, and the Frame of the Universe. He was no Stranger to the
Extent of our Continent, and the Situation of all its Parts. He had been often
at Sea, and seen diverse Regions; And particularly when he was in Portugal, the
most Westerly Part of Europe, he took great Delight to walk on the Shore in the
Evenings, and observe the Setting of the Sun. This Custom of his produced
various Thoughts in his Breast. But, what was of most Import, his Reason
suggested to him, That it could not consist with the Order of Nature, that the
Sun, after he left Our World, served only to give Light to the Fishes, or gild
the Waves of the Western Ocean. Therefore on good Grounds he concluded, There
must be some Unknown Land, beyond those mighty Tracts of Sea, which washed the
Western Shores of Europe and Africa.

This Thought made him uneasy, and put him upon a Resolution of attempting a
Discovery. He made Proposals to the Republic of Genoua, but was rejected. Then
he addressed himself to Henry VII. at the English Court; Where not finding
Encouragement, he went to the King of Spain; who approving his Design,
furnished him with Two Ships. He sailed on the Ocean for the Space of Two
Moons, without seeing any Land, which made his Mariners mutiny, their
Provisions falling short. They threatened to throw him overboard, if he would
not return. But he, with mild Words and strong Reasons, appeased their Fury;
promising to sail back again, if they saw not Land within Three Days. On the
Third Day, the Boy on the Main Topmast saw a Fire, and within a few Hours
afterward they came within View of Land.

When he had made his Observations, and done what was requisite in his
Circumstances, he returned to give the King of Spain an Account of his
Expedition.

After his Death, Americus Vesputius was sent to Conquer these Unknown Regions;
from whom, that whole Continent is called America; But methinks, not without
some Ingratitude to the First Discoverer.

It would be endless to recount all the particular Adventures of the Spaniards
in these Parts, with their Cruelties and Massacres: Suffice it to say, to the
Eternal Infamy of that Nation, that according to their own Writers, they
butchered in Cold Blood above Twenty Millions of the Natives, in the Space of
Twenty Years: And all this, for the Lucre of their Gold; though under the
Pretense, of propagating the Christian Religion.

I will not list my self in the Number of those who pretend to be God s Privy
Counselors, neither will I presume to descant on Things out of my Reach. But
the Spaniards have lately felt a terrible Blow in Peru; Which, if it be not a
Mark of the Wrath of Heaven, is at least a Sign, that the Earth is weary of
them, especially in those Parts, where they have stained it with so much
Innocent Blood.

The City Lima, not many Moons ago, was all swallowed up by an Earthquake; and
Calao, another City not far from it, was consumed by a Shower of Fire out of
the Clouds. Eleven Thousand Spaniards lost their Lives in this Calamity; and
the Earth devoured a Hundred Millions of Refined Silver, which the Lucre of the
Spaniards had forced out of its Bowels. All the Mountains of Potosi, from
whence they dug their choicest Metal, were levelled with the Plain, and no more
Hopes of Gold was left to their Insatiable Avarice.

I leave the Judgment of these Events to thee, who art of the Holy Line, full
of Resplendent Thoughts, Prophetic Ischarif, Consecrated Emir, Glory of the
House of Mahomet. Yet give me leave to tell thee, that this Calamity of the
Spaniards, in Part resembles the Fate of Sodom and Gomorrah, and the rest of
the Nine Cities of the Lake. The Infidels say, there were but Five. Let them
alone in their Errors; it is certain the Mussulmans have the only True History
of Former Times. Doubtless, God is severe in his Chastisements, when he is
Incensed against a Nation. Witness the People of Aad and Themod, with the Men
of the Valley of Smoke, and the City whose Inhabitants were in one Hour, all
turned into Statues of Stone, and are to be seen at this Day, as a standing
Monument of Heaven's Displeasure. Yet no Nation is ruined, till it ruin it
self, as God speaks in the Alcoran.

O Emir, in whose Veins runs the most purified Blood in the World, pray for
Mahmut, that he may never turn Apostate from God and his Prophet, nor do any
Thing which may hurry him to an Untimely Fate.

Paris, 17th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1657.
LETTER X.
To Mustapha, Bassa.
THis following Summer, if all Reports be true, is like to afford some
Campagnes of Blood. The General Discourse here is, that the Grand Signior will
speedily have an Army of Three Hundred Thousand Men in the Field: Part to act
in Dalmatia and Candy, against the Venetians; the Rest to be employed against
the Persians, the more Inveterate Enemies of the Ottoman Empire.

That saucy Ambassador, Ismael Bir Couli Can, deserved the Punishment was
Inflicted on him for his Impertinent Huff, and drawing his Sabre in Presence of
the Greatest Monarch of the World. And let it be an Eternal Precedent to the
Envoys of Foreign Princes, that they may learn a Lesson of Modesty, when they
address to the Lord of their Lords, and not by Presumption Incense the King of
the Earth.

But it is apparent, this Ambassador took Advantage of our Troubles: He swelled
with a vain and false Idea of the Persian Puissance. Besides, they say, his
Master has entered into a Solemn League with the Czar of Moscovy, against the
Shining Empire. And it is certainly known here, That Two Ambassadors are arrived
at Venice from that Potent Emperor of the North; And others are expected from
Persia, to Negotiate a Tripartite League between those Crowns and that
Republic against the Victorious Osmans. Hence I suppose it was, that the Rude
Heretic took the Boldness to commit an Action, which all the East punishes
with Death. Neither is it any Thing to the Purpose, what the Christians of
these Parts say, That the Persons of Ambassadors are Sacred: For, much more so
are the Persons of Sovereigns. And, so long as an Envoy obeys the Law of
Nations, in only delivering his Message with Respect and Civility, that Law
will protect him from all Injuries. But, if he must needs leap over his own
Fence, and instead of appearing like an Ambassador, he will act the Part of an
Assassin, a Furioso, a Contemner of Majesty, he can expect no better Treatment,
than what is due to his Audacious Insolence: He throws off with Scorn the
Protection that his Character claims, and in a mad Bravado courts the Revenge
of the State.

This Ismael has all along been counted a bold Fool, in the Court of Persia. He
has committed a Thousand wild Pranks at Ispahan, more becoming a Jester, than a
Wise Minister of State. Yet his Master still winked at his Extravagances, for
his Father's Sake, who did many Notable Services to that Crown; Among which,
his recovering Candahar from the Mogul, was none of the least: It being the
only Town, which commands the Frontiers of Persia and the Indies.

For this and other Merits, Sha Sephi preferred both him and his Son to the
most Considerable Governments and Offices in the Empire: Wherein the Old Man
acquitted himself fairly to the last. But this Young Buffoon grew unwieldy with
too Much Honor, affronted the Grandees, and played upon the King himself, for
which he had once like to have been cast to the Dogs. But, at the Intercession
of some of his few Friends, that Punishment was remitted and changed into
Exile; whilst his Enemies made Use of his Absence, to ruin him.

They were some of the Greatest Lords of the Court, who bore him a Grudge, and
they had hourly the King's Ear. Which Advantage they made Use of to insinuate
such an Ill Character of Ismael, that he knew no better Way to be handsomely
rid of him, than by sending him on this desperate Embassy to the Mysterious
Port: Choosing rather, that he should fall by the Grand Signior's Command, than
by his own, who had reaped so much Benefit from the Services of his Father.

By this thou may discern, that the King of Persia is earnestly resolved
upon War, without regarding how his Herald that proclaimed it, is received:
(For that Ambassador deserves no other Title, who comes not with the Accustomed
Presents and Supplications; but with an Address of a Harsher Style, denouncing
Enmity at his very First Approach to the Feet of the Invincible Sultan Mahomet.)

After all, it rejoices me to hear, that thou, and the other Bassa's of the
Empire, are so ready to assist our Great Master. For I am assured, that from
your Personal and Voluntary Contributions, he has received a Supply of Thirty
Millions of Aspers, besides the Constant Revenues, Customs, Tributes, and
Subsidies of the Empire. This is noised all over Christendom: Yet the Venetians
seem not much to dread the Consequences of these Vast Preparations; judging
that they will be employed elsewhere, than against any Province of their
Dominions, except in Dalmatia, where these Infidels trust to the Strength of
their Forts, and the Inaccessible Heights of Rocks.

But He that laid the Foundations of the Earth, and causes it to tremble when
He pleases; the same God formed the Lofty Mountains, and can level them with
the Plains to serve the Followers of his Prophet: Even as the Stones came
Voluntarily to salute the Divine Messenger himself: The Trees rowz'd
themselves, as out of a deep Sleep; and the Earth yielding on all Sides to the
Forcible Motion of the Inspired Roots, they walked out of their Places, and
composed an Vmbrella over the Head of Mahomet, when he was ready to faint with
the Violent Heat of the Sun.

Thus shall the Elements conspire to aid the True Believers: And when they
fight for the Alcoran against Infidels, God shall endue the Inanimate Beings
with Faith and Devotion.

Paris, the 7th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1657.
LETTER XI.
To Mehemet, an Exiled Eunuch in Egypt.
PRepare the self with a Constancy of Spirit becoming a Mussulman, when thou
shall understand, that the best Friend thou had in the World is gone to
Paradise. May God grant him the Repose of a True Believer, an Apartment of
Singular Delight. For it is the Brave Solomon I speak of, who not only deserves
thy most Grateful Vows for saving thy Life, but has done a Thousand Meritorious
Actions besides, which now crown him with Chaplets of Immortality.

I wish I could have been the Relater of better News to my banished Friend. But
perhaps thou have heard of his Death already, by some Vessels from
Constantinople, and so 'twill be Needless to say any Thing as to his Untimely
Fate, or the Tragedies of the Seraglio and Imperial City.

It seems very strange to me, and a Thing Unaccountable, that there can be no
Means found out to prevent these dangerous Insurrections of the Soldiers; and
that the most Formidable Empire on Earth, should be thus frequently shocked by
her own Subjects! Mehemet, the Things of this Present World are a Perfect
Riddle, and our Life it self is but the Shadow of a Dream. Thou have
Experienced the Inconstancy of Fortune, and that there is Nothing on Earth
deserves a Wise Man's Confidence. Therefore if I may advise thee, it shall be,
to wean thy self from the Trivial Affairs of Mortals. Let not the Natural
Fondnesses which thou may possibly have for thy former Courtly Life in the
Seraglio, return to disquiet thy Soul. A Man may be Happy any where, that knows
how to be Contented. Nature is served with a Little: And we ought to esteem our
Irregular Appetites as Foreigners. If our Fortune be not extended to the larger
Measure of our Wishes, it is easy to contract and adequate our Minds to our
Fortune.

Thou may carve to thy self various Sorts of Felicities in Egypt, and render
Caire as Pleasant to thee now, as Constantinople was formerly. Virtue makes all
Places Delightful. If thou art for an Active Life, there is Business enough in
that Populous City; and Opportunities are never wanting to a Man that is ready
to lay hold of them. Besides, it is the Popular Character of Egypt, That
whosoever dwells in it, finds an Employment suitable to his Inclination. But if
thou art Melancholy and Contemplative, in my Opinion thou could not have
chosen a Country more agreeable to such a Temper.

Were I in thy Station, I should make frequent Visits to the Pyramids, and
never be weary of searching out the Antiquity of those Admirable Structures.
There is hardly any Thing made by Human Art, which has put me upon more
Importunate Studies and Disquisitions, than the Original of these Stupendous
Fabrics. They far surpass in Grandeur and Magnificence, the most Renowned
Buildings of the Greek and Roman Empires, even in the Zenith of their most
Flourishing State. And I would fain learn, When they were First Erected, by
Whom, and for What Ends? For I cannot believe what Josephus the Jewish
Historian reports of them, That they were built in the Time of Moses their
Lawgiver, and that all those of the Hebrew Nation, amounting to some Hundreds
of Thousands, were employed as Slaves in the Work, by the King then Reigning in
Egypt.

I have perused Herodotus the Grecian, Diodorus the Sicilian, with Strabo,
Pliny, and other Writers, who have all taken great Pains to search into the
Antiquity of the Pyramids: Yet after all their Travel in Egypt, and their
Converse with the Priests of that Country, they seem to have received but small
Light in this Affair; leaving Things in Uncertainty, and not agreeing in their
Accounts. One will have 'em, to be only designed for Sepulchers of the Kings:
Another says, they were built by Joseph the Hebrew, the Vizir of Egypt, and
that they were the Granaries where he laid up Seven Years Provision of Corn,
against the Famine, which in his Days afflicted the Earth. Thus they differ in
their Sentiments. And our Countryman Ibn Abd' Alhokm declares, That when he was
in Egypt, he could not draw from any of the Priests, the least Certainty as to
the Age of these Pyramids, or their Founders. Which made him conclude, That
since there was no Memory or Footsteps of Their Original left among Men, it is
Probable they were built before the Flood.

This agrees exactly with what others of our Arabian Writers have delivered
concerning King Saurid, who Reigned in Egypt Three Hundred Years before the
Deluge. They relate strange Things of this Prince; and among the Rest, That he
dreamt, The Fixed Stars came down from Heaven to the Earth, overturning all
Things with the Violence of their Precipitate Fall. Being much troubled at this
Vision, he sent for the Priests and Sages; who when they were assembled
together in the King's Palace, Aclimon their Cater, or Prince of the
Astrologers, told the King, That a Year before, he had seen a Vision which made
a deep Impression on his Mind. For, the Celestial Orbs appeared to descend so
low as to touch the Earth, so that the Stars were mingled among Men. Then he
lift up his Hands above his Head in his Dream, to keep the Heaven from quite
oppressing Mortals with its Weight. Whilst I were in this Posture, said he,
methought I addressed my self to the Sun, beseeching the Resplendent God, to
retire with all his Glittering Train of Lights to their Ancient Stations on
High. Whereupon, the Sun made Answer, When I shall have accomplished Three
Hundred Circuits, the Heavens will return to their Proper Places.

When Aclimon had related this Vision, the King commanded the Astrologers to
erect a Scheme of the Present Configurations Above, and to tell them what they
Presaged. They did so, and all agreed, That a Deluge should First overflow the
Whole Earth, and that Afterward it should be totally destroyed by Fire.

Upon the hearing of this, they say King Saurid commanded the Pyramids to be
built; carrying all his Riches into them, with the Tables of the Mysterious
Sciences, and Laws, and whatsoever was esteemed Precious, and Worthy to be
preserved from the General Destruction. And the Annals of Egypt say, that he
commanded these Words to be Engraven on them:

I Saurid, laid the Foundation of the Pyramids, and finished them in Six Years:
Yet I Challenge any Future King, to demolish them in Six Hundred Years; Though it
be much easier to Ruin, than to Build. I covered 'em with Silks; let any Man
after me, cover 'em with Mats, if he can.

In thus asserting Saurid to be the Founder of the Pyramids, it ought to be
understood only of some of the Greatest; and that other Succeeding Princes
(perhaps after the Flood) spurred on with Emulation and Desire of Glory, built
the Rest: Which is the only Way to reconcile our Arabian Writers to Herodotus,
Diodorus and other Historians of the West, who assign Cheops or Chemnis, with
Cephren, Chabryis, and Mycerinus the Son of Chemnis, as Founders of some
Particular Pyramids. Whilst Strabo and Pliny, ascribe the Building of one to
Rhodope, a Famous Strumpet, or at least to some of her Paramours.

Doubtless, there is great Obscurity and Confusion in the Records of the
Ancients, about the Exact Time when these Illustrious Monuments were built.
Which yet is an Impregnable Argument of their Antiquity; since, when One Author
asserts this or that King to have built a Pyramid, Another demonstrates the
Contrary, by proving that that Pyramid was in Being, long before the Days of
the supposed Founder. Neither can I find any Concurrence of Authorities, so
Rational and exactly agreeing, as that of the Arabians; who all Unanimously
deliver as a certain Truth, That these Unparalleled Structures, were built
long before the Flood. All which is confirmed by the Egyptian Annals
themselves, penned by those of the Coptite Race, who descended from Coptim the
Son of Masar, the Son of Bansar, the Son of Cham, the Son of Noah; With whom
and his Family, Philemon the Good Priest made an Alliance by Marriage, and in
their Custody were the Records and Traditions of the Old World.

But if it be granted, Dear Eunuch, that those Histories are true, which relate
the Transactions of the Kings of Egypt before the Flood; what Reason have we to
call in Question the Fragments of Manethos, a Priest of Egypt; or the Genealogy
and Succession of Egyptian Monarchs delivered by Herodotus; or the
Chronological Registers of Egypt unfolded by Diodorus, which carry up the Reign
of their Kings to above a Thousand Years beyond any other the most Early Epoch
of the Creation, except that of the Assyrians, or the Interminable Ascent of
Past Ages in the Records of the Chinese and Indians?

I know not what to call it, whether the Cowardice of the Intellect, which dare
not venture to launch into so vast a Speculation; or its Sloth, which will not
take the Pains to unfold and stretch its drowzy Faculties on the most Natural
Idea in the World. It Is true indeed, we cannot without some Fatigue,
contemplate steadfastly the Eternal Existence and Duration of Things. It Is an
Immortal Thought, that can transport the Soul back through such an Infinity of
Ages. Yet the Pleasure is Agreeable to the Undertaking: Because Truth, serene
as the Mornings in Egypt, enlightens the Prospect, and tempts the Mind, if
'twere possible, to look even beyond Eternity it self: Whereas, he that only
confines his View to the Narrow Horizon of Particular Histories, is like a Man
in a Wilderness, or a low and shady Vale, where his Eye is curbed with the
Interposition of Thickets, Uneven Ground, and Envious Enclosures. For, such are
the Dark Controversies, Inextricable Difficulties, and Affected Umbrages of
most Writers, who never durst peep over the Mountains of received Opinion; or,
if they did, they fearfully or maliciously hide their Discoveries from the Rest
of Mortals. I tell thee, as God is Eternal, there cannot be assigned an Instant
of Time, wherein the World did not Exist. For, the First Matter flows as
Naturally from his Essence, as Light from the Sun,

If thou Adorest any other God but this, thou will b^ found in the Number of
Idolaters and Infidels, who pay Divine Honors to certain Mighty Angels,
Architects, as they believe, of the Universe.

They behold Houses, Castles and Great Cities built by Mortals, and at a
certain Period ruined by Fire, Water, Earthquakes, or other Accidents; Or
destroyed by the Effects of War: From hence they form a Notion, of the World's
Original and Catastrophe. They Consider the Animals, Plants and Minerals, That
every Individual perishes in Time, and that even in the Heavens there are
strong Symptoms of Corruption and Alteration. Hence they collect Arguments, to
prove the Weakness and Decay of Universal Nature, which they Vainly compare to
the Life of a Man, a Beast, or a Tree. And as these have their Appointed
Seasons of Birth, Growth, Maturity, Decay and Death; so is it with the Universe.

But all this is Sophistry; or, to speak more favorably, we ought to charge it
to the Account of short Meditation. For, though the Individuals of all Kinds are
changed, cease and disappear at their Appointed Periods; Yet the Species or
Kinds themselves remain for Ever before our Eyes. As fast as One Man dies,
Another is born; and so it is with the Brutes: And the Seasons of the Year in
their Proper Course, renew all the Vegetables. We find the Elements, the Sun,
Moon, Stars and Earth remain Unchangeable. And why then should we think, they
were not always so, and will not continue so for Ever? Or, if this be too bold
a Stretch, let us conceive them at least much more Ancient and Durable, than
they are Generally thought to be. And if these Greater Bodies shall undergo a
Change in their Outward Forms; we may yet believe their Substances will remain
for Ever.

But, whether Corporeal Beings are thus lasting or no, we have Something in us
that can never perish. Our Souls are Immortal, and need not the Embalming of
Egypt to preserve 'em from Corruption.

Therefore, Dear Mehemet, since we are Destined to live for Ever in one State
or other, let us not fear Death, which is but a Minutes Slumber, a Short
Trance, out of which we shall immediately Awake, to increase our Knowledge and
Experience of those Mysteries and Secrets in Nature, which at Present are hid
from us. In a Word, let us live like Philosophers, and then we may hope to die
with the same Equanimity of Spirit as he did, who in his last Agonies being
asked by his Friend, Where was all his Philosophy now? Answered, I am just
entering on a New Discovery concerning the Nature of Salt. And with that Word
he Expired.

Paris, 7th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1657.
LETTER XII.
To the most Venerable Musti.
IF the Public Seditions should always continue, or be as frequently Renewed
as they have lately been at Constantinople; and if their Effects shall be
Equally Fatal to the Grandees, as has been this last Horrid Mutiny of the
Soldiers; To Congratulate any Man's Rise to an Eminent Dignity, will be but to
flatter him, and Addresses of this Nature must be esteemed no better than
Mock-Compliments, Civil Insults, and Fashionable Sarcasms: Since at this Rate,
Great Honors ought to be looked on no otherwise, but as direct Advances and
nearer Approaches to Infamy, and Death; when a Man is Exalted from an Obscure
Fastness, and Hurnble Security, to the Glorious Hazard of a Precipitate Fall.

It Is therefore, when I come to kiss the Dust of thy Feet, among the Crowd of
True Believers, and to welcome thee to the most Sacred and Sublime Vicarship on
Earth; I draw near with an Indifference, suitable to a Mussulman, wishing thee
not more Joy than Safety in that Mysterious Station, but such a Temperament of
Both, as is due to thy Sanctity and Incorrupt Actions. In a Word, I wish thee a
perpetual Immunity from thy Predecessor's Temptations, and from his Crimes; and
then thou need'st not fear his Misfortune and Disgrace.

Let not what I have said, pass for an Argument of Disrespect and Undutifulness
to the Heir of Prophetic and Apostolic Revelations, the Great Patriarch of
the Faithful. I reverence both thy Office and Person: Yet am Commanded to avoid
Flattery and Partial Addresses, when I write to the Greatest Sages in the
Empire. And had not this Injunction been laid on me, my own Natural Temper
would prompt me to shun that Vice, which renders a Man so much less than
himself, by how much he exalts another above his due.

I have often proposed to thy Predecessor, the Mighty Benefit that would
redound to the whole Ottoman Empire, if Learning were more Encouraged and the
Histories of Foreign Nations were Translated into the Familiar Language of the
Mussulmans.

It is fit that those who are Destined to subdue All Things, and have already
spread their Glorious Conquest through the Greatest Part of the Earth, should
be acquainted with the Transactions of Former Times, the Wars of Illustrious
and Brave Hero's, the Rise and Fall of Ancient Kingdoms, and in General, the
most Noted Revolutions in the World. From such Records, our Generals and
Military Men may draw Examples of Fortitude and Patience, Conduct and Prudence
in all the Fatigues and Difficulties of War. Our Statesmen may Improve their
Knowledge in all the Maxims of Policy and Wisdom requisite in Time of Peace. In
fine, Men of all Conditions may learn the Precepts of Morality and Virtue.

Methinks it is Pity, that we who possess the Territories of the Ancient
Grecians, the Kingdoms of Corinth, and the Argives; the Commonwealths of
Athens, and Lacedaemon; the Empire of Macedon, and the State of the Jews;
should be Ignorant of the Laws by which these diverse Countries were of Old
Governed, and the Characters, Lives and Actions of their First Lawgivers and
Succeeding Governors.

But if thou shall determine, that the Knowledge of these Remote Affairs is
Superfluous and Unnecessary for True Believers; let 'em at least not be
Ignorant in their Own History, and the Original of their Progenitors.

It Is true, we Arabians have all a-long taken Care of Our Genealogies, every
Family and Tribe being diligent to preserve the Memory of their Ancestors; and
all concur with an Unanimous Zeal to Register the Holy Lineage of Mahomet, the
Messenger of God. So that we can from his Father Abdalla, run up in a direct
Paternal Line to Caydar, the Second Son of Ismael (on whom be the Benedictions
of God.) We are not Ignorant, how this Caydar (from whom the Noble Corei's
derive their Pedigree) First settled at Mecca, in pure Devotion to the Square
Temple, which was built by Angels: When he might as well have chosen the more
Fertile Plains of Media, Persia, and Assyria, as did his Brethren Doama, Naphis
and Redma. But he foresaw by his Skill in Astrology, that the Inhabitants of
those Regions would be Idolaters. And so it came to pass: For, they were in the
Number of those who Adored the Fire. For the same Reason he chose not for his
Seat, Armenia, though that Country be Renowned for the Resting of Noah's Ark on
Mount Geudis, and the Famous City Themanine, or the Work of Eighty, being the
First City built after the Deluge, by the Eighty who Escaped in the Ark. But
Caydar knew that the People of that Province should worship the Sun: And it was
Verified in the Posterity of his Brethren, Nabsam, and Masna. Therefore he
chose Mecca, though a Barren Country, because he knew it was the Seat
Predestined to the Elect Lineage, the Generation of Just Men and Prophets, from
whom was to spring the Light of the World, Mahomet, who in Paradise is called
Al Batrasim, and in Heaven Achmet.

Caydar was the Only Son of Ismael, who took Part with his Father, and
followed his Example, Worshipping One God, Creator of the Worlds, as he had
learned by Tradition from Abrahim the Beloved of the Eternal: Whereas Nabayath,
Abdael, Thema, and the Rest of the Twelve, either Adored the Sun, Moon and
Stars, or the Elements; except Jackour, who paid Divine Honors to the Tree
Betlemer; and Hadal and Massa, who sacrificed Beasts to the Idols Bohinun and
Alleze.

And as our Historians have been thus Particularly exact in Recording the
Affairs of the Twelve Sons of Ismael; so have they showed themselves no less
precise, in relating the Transactions of the Twelve Tribes which descended from
them, even down to the Present Age.

I do not insist on this, to teach thee something whereof thou art Ignorant;
but to put thee in Mind of the Benefit and Advantage, besides the vast Delight
which accrues to a Nation by thus preserving the Memoirs of their Ancestors. In
which, my Countrymen have exceeded the Fidelity and Care of all other People.

Had it not been for the Industry of Arabian Writers, the History of the whole
Saracen Empire, the Succession of the Caliphs, with their Wars and Conquests,
would have been either quite lost to this Age, or at least much depraved and
falsify'd by the Malice of Christian and Persian Authors, both Equally Enemies
to the Truth. By which it is Evident, that every Nation ought to Register their
own Transactions.

What therefore I chiefly aim at is, That the Glorious Osmans, who have by
their Valor entered into the Possessions and Territories of many Ancient
Nations, might also be acquainted with the Histories of those People whose
Lands they Enjoy: But, above all, I wish, that after they have found a way to
so much Wealth and Honor, they would not lose themselves, and their own
Original.

I speak of the Turks properly so called; the Descendants of the Scythians, who
by some were esteemed the most Ancient Nation on Earth; a People formed by
Nature for the Empire of the World; were never Conquered themselves, yet spread
their Victories over all Asia. They routed Zopyrio, a General of Alexander the
Great; and drove back a huffing King of Egypt, with Shame and Loss, to his own
Country. In fine, they were a People Naturally Just, Temperate, Hardy and
Endu'd with all the Excellent Qualities, which the Philosophy of the Greeks and
Romans could never Inspire into their Subjects, though they aimed at it.

These were the People, O Oracle of Believers, from whom the present Turks
descend. And is it not a Shame, that they can give no other Account of their
Ancestors, but what they borrow from the Christians, who in the mean Time
reproach the Mussulmans with Ignorance and Barbarism?

It Is for this Reason I renew the same Request to thee, which I often made to
thy Predecessor, that Learning may be encouraged. Let all the Ancient Records
and Histories of the Greeks and Romans be sought out and Translated, by Men
skillful in Languages, into the Familiar Speech of the Ottomans. Some, I know,
are already Common among the Grandees, as Herodotus, Plutarch and others; but,
let not any Credible Writer be wanting.

In doing this, thou will put a Check to the Scoffs of Infidels, augment the
Honor and Interest of the Moselmans, and leave an Immortal Name behind thee on
Earth: Which will make thy Joys in Paradise more sweet to an Infinity of Ages.

Paris, 19th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1657.
LETTER XIII.
To the Kaimacham.
ALL Europe, except the French and Suedes, hangs down the Head for the Death of
the German Emperor. He went to the Immortals, on the 2d. Day of this Moon,
after a long Fit of Sickness, and Forty Nine Years Life on Earth.

Nathan Ben Saddi, the Agent of the Port, at Vienna, informs me, That on the
same Day whereon the Emperor died, the Imperial Palace took Fire on a sudden,
and with such Impetuosity, that a great Part of it was presently consumed; and
the King of Hungary and Bohemia, the Emperor's Son, narrowly escaped with his
Life. This is esteemed a bad Omen to the Empire. And without being
Superstitious, I can assure thee, That Germany is in a very bad Condition at
this Juncture. The Electors are so divided on the Score of Religion, and their
Secular Interests and Allyances, That in all Probability, they will not with
Ease decide the Succession.

The Duke of Brandenburgh having United himself to the Suedes, will not consent
to the Installing Leopoldus Ignatius Josephus, the Emperor's Son, because that
Prince supports the Cause of the Poles, and Danes. The Palatine of Heydelberg
and Duke of Bavaria, are at odds about their Private Pretensions. The Duke of
Saxony would fain be Emperor himself, or have one at least of the Lutheran
Religion: And the Rest are so incensed against the House of Austria, that it is
thought, none but the Ecclesiastic Princes will vote for the King of Hungary
and Bohemia. So that there being no King of the Romans to claim the Succession
by the Laws of the Empire, the Throne is like to be Vacant yet a while.

Cardinal Mazarini, who watches all Opportunities to Aggrandize his Master, has
dispatched away several Couriers into Germany, to negotiate privately with the
Electors, and concert those Measures, which will be most for the Interest of
France. And I tell thee, this Minister has no small Influence on the Elector of
Colen, and Prince Palaetine of the Rhine. Besides, thou will say, he goes the
Right Way to Work, when thou shall know, that he makes Use of the French Gold
to compass his Designs.

No sooner did the News of the Emperor's Death arrive at this Court, but it
was observed the Cardinal took up a Hundred Thousand Pistoles, of the Public
Banquiers in this City. And every Body guessed how 'twou'd be disposed.

The Portugueze Ambassador at this Court, has caused Extraordinary Fireworks
to be played on the River Seyne before the Palace of the King, in Honor of his
Master's Coronation, the Young King of Portugal. But, the Spaniards are
preparing more destructive Fireworks on the Frontiers of that Kingdom, being
ready to enter it with an Army of Sixteen Thousand Men, to recover the
Portugueze Crown.

In sending thee these Intelligences, Sage Minister, I am not concerned for the
Infidels. Who dies or who lives, who rises or who falls, is all one to Mahmut,
provided the Grand Signior's Health, Life and Happiness be augmented. And this
I speak as an Arabian and True Believer.

Paris, 30th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1657.
LETTER XIV.
To Raba Mahomet, General of the Ottoman Forces, at his Camp near Adrianople.
THE Sacred Empire of True Believers, is beset at this Time with Infidels,
Rebels and Heretics. Here are many Rumors spread abroad concerning the
Persians, and the Interest they have in the Bassa and Citizens of Babylon. They
talk also, that some Malcontents design Things which ought not to be named.

God has given me Two Ears, and I hear these Discourses with both, but I
entertain them with one Unchangeable Judgment, That they are only the Whispers
of Fame, which has a Thousand Double Tongues. If it be true, that the Four
Chiauses who were dispatched to Babylon from the Grand Signior, to confirm the
Inhabitants of that City in their Allegiance, and assure them of speedy
Succors, were Murdered by the disloyal Citizens; I doubt not but it is as true,
That the Plague has consumed the Greatest Part of the Redheads in their Camp at
Aransacat. What though these Babylonian Mungrels cry, Long Live the King of
Persia! The rest of the Empire with true Zeal and Devotion, pray for the Health
and Prosperity of the Grand Signior. What though the Sultan has sworn by God and
his Throne, by the Heavens and Earth, That he will go against the Venetians in
Person! The Mufti can easily absolve him in Case of Supreme Necessity, when his
Presence is requisite against the more Accursed Kysilbaschi.

It Is probable, the Osman Monarchy may be much embarass'd by Domestic
Troubles, and Foreign Wars: Yet he that founded it, and is the Conservator of
Ages, will out of these very Distempers and Evils, produce a good Constitution
of Health in the State, and a Firmer Establishment against all Enemies.

In the mean while, the Venetians are very busy in their Levies at Home, and in
making Interests abroad. Couriers are perpetually posting up and down
Christendom, to and from that City. They would willingly have all the Business
of Europe superseded for their Sakes. Every where it is whispered, There Is some
Grand Design a foot against the Turks; but no body knows what. And I tell thee,
France, Spain, Germany, Poland, Sueden, and the Rest of the Nazarene Kingdoms,
are too much entangl'd among themselves, to have any Thoughts of meddling with
Remote Affairs.

The Poles would have had the German Emperor taken that Crown in Vassalage, on
Condition of Protecting it from the Suedes. But, whilst the Emperor was alive,
he weighed the Difficulties, and refused so Chargeable an Offer. Now, he is
lately dead, and the Empire is hardly capable to defend it self.

Differences are newly risen between the Duke of Bavaria, and the Elector
Palatine of Heydelburg; each claiming the Right to be Vicar of the Empire
during the Vacancy. And they are preparing on both Sides, to dispute the Matter
with the Sword: Whilst the King of Sueden smiles secretly at their Intestine
Quarrels, resolving to be revenged on Germany, for the Assistance they have
given to Casimir King of Poland.

At the same Time, the Danes are Arming and Equipping by Sea and Land, to
Demand Justice of the Suedes. Whilst the cunning Moscovite stands aloft,
amusing all Parties with specious Pretexts, but designing only to play his own
Game, and espouse that Quarrel, which will bring him most Booty. Prince
Ragotski, promises fair to the Suedes, but it is thought, will prove false in
the End. The Counsels of these Uncircumcised, are full of Treachery; They are
infatuated, blinded, and know not what they do.

The Case is as bad in Spain, where the King is making vast Preparations to
enter Portugal, and claim that Crown, hoping to make Advantage of their
Domestic, Factions since the Death of Dom Juan de Braganza, the late
Portuguese King: Not considering, that the French are like to find him Work
enough in Italy, Flanders and Catalonia; besides the Continual Damages he
receives by Sea from the English, and the Losses he sustains in America. I tell
thee in a Word, all Europe is at this Time in such a Hurly-Burly, that they
have no Leisure to attend our Motions in the East; every Kingdom and State
being wholly busied in their own Affairs. And Venice can rely on Nothing but
her own Strength.

Go on then Brave General of the Army destined to Chastise these Infidels; and
let nothing discourage thee, from pursuing the Aims of Honor and Religion. Let
the proud Franks know, That there is a Sword drawn in the East which will never
be put up, till it has not only cut off the Exterior Members, but even ripped up
the Bowels of the Western Empire.

The Inhabitants of Sicily are in great Consternation, by Reason of a fresh
Eruption of Fire fron Mount Aetna, or Mount Gibel, whereby the City Catanea,
and Adjacent Parts, are much in Danger, and the Ashes are scattered all over
the Island. This Mountain has at Times flamed forth in an Extraordinary Manner
from Immemorable Ages; and in all Probability, will continue to do so till the
Day of Judgment.

There is like to be a New Quarrel between France and Holland; The latter
complaining, that they have had above Three Hundred Merchant Ships taken from
'em by the French within these Seven Years. Upon which they have stopped Two
Vessels belonging to this Kingdom, and Misunderstandings increase apace between
them.

In the mean Time, the German Court is preparing to choose a New Emperor. His
Son is the Person designed for this Dignity, if the Electors do not oppose it.
His Name is Leopoldus Ignatius Josephus, King of Hungary and Bohemia. He lies
sick of a dangerous Disease, not less loathsome than the Plague.

And now I have mentioned this Scourge of God, it will not be amiss to inform
thee, that in Rome and Naples, where it has raged these Eleven Moons, and has
destroyed a Hundred and Eighty Thousand People; it is not now to be heard of:
Commerce is restored; Public Courts sit; Ambassadors have Audience; and all
Things run in their wonted Channel. Yet in Genoua, they feel it still.

The Souls of these Infidels are Infected with an Infernal Pestilence, and
therefore God rains Curses on them; whilst the Elect in all Nations, are
preserved from all Evil, being marked in the Forehead by the Angel of Health.

Paris, 15th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1657.
LETTER XV.
To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior.
I Have encountered a Passage in the History of the First Caliphs, which a
little entangles me. My Faith is disjoynted. Thou know, we Mussulmans
believe, that Abu Becre was the True Successor of the Prophet. Yet when I
consider, that he attained the Sovereignty by Surprise without the Consent of
the Mussulmans, I know not what to think of it.

After the Death of the Messenger of God, the Inhabitants of Mecca and Medina
raised a Sedition, and took up Arms, each Challenging the Right of Election to
themselves. When, to prevent the Ill Consequences of this Tumult, Abu-Becre and
Omar immediately came to them; and to end the Controversy, Omar stretching
forth his Hand to Abu-Becre, saluted him Caliph, and lifting up his Hand to
Heaven, swore Allegiance to him. Which Example suddenly prevailed on others,
and so the Tumult was appeased. Yet, Omar himself seemed to repent of what he
had done: For a while after he was heard to say, Assuredly, the Inauguration of
Abu-Becre was a Rash, Vnadvis'd Thing; God avert the Evil which may result from
it. But, let it be a Law, That if any one hereafter shall presume to do as I
have done, and swear Fealty to another without the Assent of the Mussulmans, he
shall be put to Death.

But, that which is of greatest Moment with me, is, that Ali Eb'n Abi Taleb the
Sonin-Law of the Prophet, was not present at this Election, who had as much
Right to the Caliphate, as any of them, if not more: At least he had a Right to
Vote. And when he first heard the News, he protested against what they had done
as Null and Invalid, in Regard they had not consulted him. Certainly, Ali Eb'n
Abi Taleb was a Matchless Hero, performing Miracles of Valor in Defense of the
Prophet. When he besieged Chaibar, a City of the Jews, he took the Gates of the
City from off their Hinges, and used them as his Shield. When he brandished his
Glittering Sword, he made his Enemies tremble. I will not say more in his
Praise, lest thou should conclude, I have listed my self in the Number of
the Kyzil Bashi. What I write, is only by Way of Scrutiny, being dissatisfied
about these Things.

So when Abu-Becre lay on his Deathbed, he called for Othman Eb'n Aphan the
Scribe, and bid him write as follows: In the Name of God, Gracious and
Merciful; This is the Testament of Abdollah Eb'n Abu Kohapha, when he was
arrived to the Last Hour of this World, and the First of the World to come.
Then he fell into a Trance, while Othman proceeded, and wrote the Name of Omar
Eb'no'l Chattab. Then Abu-Becre awaked; and asking Othman, Whom he had named
for his Successor; He replied, Omar. Thou have done well, said he, and
according to my Mind. Yet, if thou had named thy self, assuredly, thou art
worthy of the Honor. Thus Omar succeeded in the Caliphate, by the Private
Order of Abu-Becre, without asking the Consent of the Moselmans. It looks like
a Contrivance or Bargain between these Two at First. When Omar swore Fealty to
Abu-Becre, one would suspect he made him promise to bequeath the Caliphate to
him. Be it how it will, thou see Omar accepted the Government, on Conditions
which he himself had made Unlawful, when he prohibited any Succession that
would be made without the Consent of the Mussulmans. He was the First that was
called Amiro'lmumenin, or Commander of the Faithful.

It is reported, that when Omar was near his Death, those that stood about him
desired him to name his Successor, they themselves recommending Ali Eb'n Abi
Taleb, because of his Relation to the Prophet. But he rejected him, and
committed the Election of his Successor to Othman, Ali, Telha, Azobair, Abu
Obeid, and Saad Eb'n Abi Wakka. Abu Obeid therefore coming to Ali Eb'n Abi
Taleb, said thus to him, Art thou he to whom I may swear Fidelity, that thou will act according to the Book of God, and the Laws of his Prophet, and the
Constitutions of the Two Seniors? Ali answered, I will ever act according to
the Book of God, and the Law of his Prophet; but as to the Constitutions of the
Two Seniors, I will follow my own Counsel. Then Abu Obeid going to Othman, said
the same Words: And Othman promised to perform all that they required. So they
chose Othman to succeed Omar in the Caliphate. He was accused of too great
Partiality to those of his Blood; For he recalled Hacem Ebne'l As Eb'n Omaih,
whom the Prophet had banished. He gave him also a Hundred Thousand Aspers, and
to Abdalla Eb'n Chaled, he gave Forty Thousand. They taxed him also with Pride,
in that he sat in the Highest Seat of the Prophetic Throne, where none but
the Holy Prophet himself had ever sat: For, Abu-Becre, in Reverence to the
Messenger of God, sat One Step below it, and Omar, Two. So that the Arabians
being Incensed at Othman's Arrogance and other Vices, took up Arms, and killed
him. Then succeeded Ali.

I rehearse this History to thee, that thou may know the particular Grounds
of my Dissatisfaction, and give me thy Opinion in this Matter. For, if
Abu-Becre, Omar, and Othman, were Unlawfully lifted to the Caliphate, it
follows, that they were Usurpers, and Hali the only True Successor of the
Prophet. And, if this be granted, then we have no Reason to Curse the Persians,
who are the Followers of Hali. God knows which is in the Right, We or They. We
allare Disciples of the Prophet, and believe in the Unity of the Divine Essence.

God bless Mahomet our Lawgiver, with all those of his House. God bless
Mahomet our Glorious Sultan; In fine, God bless thee and me.

Paris, 15th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1657.
LETTER XVI.
To Cara Mustapha, Bassa.
BY the Notices which I receive from Constantinople, it appears that the Ground
of all the Public Discontents in that City, is the Venetians Conquest and
Possession of Tenedos: As if the People thought that Island would prove as
Fatal now to the Mussulmans, as it was formerly to Old Troy, when the Grecians
under the Conduct of Agamemnon, pitched their First Camp there, to recover
Helena the Fairest Woman of Greece, whom Paris the Prince of Troy had Ravished
from her Husband's Embraces.

That Rape was Fatal to the Trojans: For, after a Ten Years War, their City was
taken by Stratagem, and burnt to Ashes: Their Princes and Nobles either all
slain, or carried away Captives by the Victorious Greeks. Only Aeneas saved
his Father alive, carrying him on his Back out of the Flames, and with some
other Commanders, escaped to Sea in such Vessels as they found ready. The
History of all his Adventures, is too tedious for a Letter. Suffice it to say,
that after many Voyages from one Region to another, at last he landed in Italy,
where he and his Company settled; And from them the Venetians, with other People
of Europe, derive their Original.

It Is this make their present Possession of Tenedos, appear as an Ill Omen, in
the Eyes of the Superstitious. As if those Relics of Ancient Troy, were now
come to recove the Habitations of Fathers, and drive both Greeks and Mussulmans
out of the Empire

But, these are only Chimaera's, and Dreams; For, when a Nation is once
displanted from their Native Seat, they seldom or never take Root there again.
Besides, who knows whether the Venetians descend from Troy, or no? It Is true
indeed, if Historians speak Truth, That Aeneas sailed into Italy, Two Years
after the Burning of Troy: It Is probable also, that he built Lavinium; as Padua
is ascribed to Antenor, one of his Captains. But where is the Consequence, that
the Venetians should therefore be the Off spring of these Heroic Fugitives?
They may as well say, the French are the Posterity of the Moors, because those
Africans once seated themselves in Spain. For, just so Independent are the
States of Italy, one of another, and their Inhabitants of as different
Genealogies, as are these Two Potent Kingdoms, with the People that dwell in
them.

And now the Trojan War is in my Mind, I cannot but smile at the Egregious
Folly of Ajax, the Son of Telamon. This was a Great Commander in the Grecian
Army, a huge, brawny, Giant-like Fellow, that had performed Prodigies of
Strength and Valor in combating the Trojans, and yet at last, fell upon his
own Sword and killed himself, because he could not have his Will of Ulysses;
and all about an Old Rusty Buckler, taken from the Enemy, which Ajax claimed as
his Right, in Reward of his Meritorious Services, and the many Scars he had
received. But Ulysses overruled the Council of War, which was called on
Purpose to decide this Quarrel, and got the Shield himself. For, being a
cunning, plausible Fellow, he pleaded, That though the Courage and brave
Actions of Ajax deserved all due Honor and Acknowledgment; yet the Surprise of
Troy and ending the War, was only owing to his Wit and Contrivance, who
deluded the Trojans with a Wooden Horse, in the Belly of which lay a Detachment
of Armed Men; and these, after the Horse was admitted into the City, came out
of their Nest in the Dead of the Night, and set Fire to the Houses, opening the
Gates also to the Grecian Army.

If the Venetians could invent some such Stratagem, perhaps there would be
Danger of their taking Constantinople: But, till then, Illu strious Bassa,
there is no Reason to fear these Infidels. Besides, it will be very easy to
dispossess 'em of that Ominous Island, and so dissipate the Charm which has
bewitched the Seditious Rabble. But I would counsel, that it be attempted in
Time, before the Venetians are got into the Hellespont with their Navy: For,
there is no Success against these Infidels by Sea. That Element, it seems, is
the Wife of the Duke of Venice; being Espoused with a Ring and other Solemn
Ceremonies, on a certain Festival of the Nazarenes.

One would think also, that the English had made successful Love to the Sea;
For, their Navies are always prosperous. We have fresh News come in, of an
Encounter between them and the Spanish West India Fleet, near the Island of
Teneriff; wherein there were Seventeen of the Spanish Ships sunk and burnt, and
among them were Five great Galleons. They took from them an Immense Treasure of
Gold and Silver, with other costly Merchandise.

The French Court rejoices mightily at this Exploit; not in any Real Love to
the English, but in Hatred of the Spaniards. For, between these Two Nations,
there seems to be an Irreconcilable Antipathy. Besides, the French have Reason
of State for their Joy, being in League with the English Commonwealth.

That which renders this Victory the more Remarkable, is, that it was obtained
in a Spanish Harbor, the Port of Santa Cruz in Teneriff. Every one extols the
English Commander for a very brave Person. His Name is Blake. I am the more
Particular in this Relation, because thou art expert in Marine Affairs, having
had the Command of the Invincible Ottoman Armado.

There is a Post newly come in from Germany, who informs us, that the King of
Sueden and Prince Ragotski, have taken the strong Fort of Brzeski Litenski from
the King of Poland.

The Portuguese Ambassador at this Court, presses the King with much
Earnestness, to send Aids to his Master; in Regard the Spaniards are actually
entered into Portugal, and have taken Olivenza, a City of that Kingdom.

I formerly acquainted the Ministers of the Divan, that the King of Spain had
caused all the People of his Kingdom to be Numbered: Now I tell thee farther,
That in Order to carry on the War effectually against Portugal; this Monarch
has commanded the 5th. Man in every Family to take up Arms, and follow the
Campaign. At which Rate, they say, he will have a Hundred Thousand Men in the
Field.

In the mean time, all the Discourse here at present is, concerning the Siege
of Montmedi, a very strong Place in Flanders. It was Invested by the French
Army on the 11th. of this Moon, under the Command of Marshall de la Ferte
Seneterre.

F^ance has sent a great many Brave Generals in^o the Field this Summer; and I
perce^v^, the Bassas of the Ottoman Empire are not like to tarry at home. God
inspire thee, and thy Equals, with a Resolution which knows no Medium between
Victory and a Glorious Death.

Paris, 26th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1657.
LETTER XVII.
To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
THE Beginning of thy Letter surpised me with wonder, when I Read that a
Chiaus from the Grand Signior, the Sovereign of Sovereigns, Lord of Three
Empires, and Five and Twenty Kingdoms, should have the Dishonor, not to find
Admittance within the Walls of Vienna; and that in a Time when the Germans have
no Reason to provoke a Foreign War, being sufficiently embarrass'd with
Domestic Troubles. But, when I read farther, and perceived, That no
Ambassador, not even of the Christian Princes, has any more Privilege at this
Juncture; and that it is an Established Law of the Empire, thus to reverence
the Majesty of their deceased Sovereign, and consult the Safety of the next
Election; I ceased to resent this any longer as an Indignity to our Great
Master, and only concluded it to be some Mystery of the Austrian State.

It is an Argument of profound Respect to the Imperial Ghost, That the Churches
are all hung with Mourning, throughout the Hereditary Dominions, and that no
Music is permitted either in the Temples or elsewhere; no Jollity or Mirth,
till the Funeral Obsequies are performed, and the Body of Caesar is consigned
to the Place of its Everlasting Repose.

As to the Quarrel between the Duke of Bavaria, and Prince Palatine, about the
Vicariate; there is much to be said on both Sides: And it ought to be a Thing
Indifferent to thee and me, which of those Two gets the Victory. Yet, for the
Sake of Truth, I will tell thee in Short, what I have collected out of the
Journal of Carcoa, thy Predecessor, and out of other Memoirs, as they came to
my Hands.

It appears then, that by the Golden Bull of Charles V. this Dignity was
declared Inherent in the Palatinate Family, in Right of their Possession of
that Principality; and that it had been so for many Ages, even before there
were any Electors Established in the Empire. It Is upon this Ground the present
Elector Palatinate claims it. But on the other Side, it is as manifest, that
when Maximilian the Father of the Present Duke of Bavaria was Invested with the
Electoral Dignity, it was Inserted in the Imperial Bull, that the Vicegerency
of the Empire, during an Interregnum, should henceforth belong to that Family.
Yet, this Grant was again disannulled by the late Pacification at Munster. And
so the Business is left in Dispute between these Two Families. He of Bavaria
trusts to his Strength and Riches, being also backed by the Ecclesiastic
Princes; whilst the other only confides in the Justice of his Cause, the Right
of Unquestionable Inheritance.

Leaving therefore these Grandees to prosecute their several Claims, I Will tell
thee, what makes the freshest Noise in this City, is an Attempt which the
Prince of Conde made lately on the Town of Calais, a Seaport of this Kingdom.
He had received certain Intelligence, that the Governor had sent out the best
Part of the Garrison to fortify Ardres, a Place not far from Calais, and
supposed to be in greater Danger; Upon this News, the Prince marched with great
Expedition, designing to surprise Calais by Night. But he was discovered before
he came near them; and the Inhabitants taking up Arms, appeared on the Walls
and Ramparts to welcome him, so that he was forced to retire again with the
Loss of near a Thousand Men.

Here are Two Men come out of England, that pretend to be Prophets, foretelling
the Downfall of the Pope, whom they call Antichrist, a Beast, a Dragon, and I
know not how many other Titles. One of them is gone to Rome, to tell the Holy
Father to his Face what is like to befall him. The French Court looks upon them
as Mad Men; and no Body can esteem them better, if they go to Rome, where they
will Infallibly fall into the Hands of the Inquisition; which, thou know, is
a Hell upon Earth. Thy Brother Adonai felt the Smart of it, only for Two or
Three Words, uttered in Contempt of their Religion; And though he was not
Condemned to Death, yet he suffered a tedious Imprisonment; till at Length, the
Plague released, him both from that, and the Chains of this Mortal Life.

Nathan, if he had died by the Stroke of the Executioner, or by Fire, the
Common Death of those who rail at the Roman Faith, I could not pronounce him a
Martyr, unless it were to his own Folly and Rashness; since he was not placed
there to make Proselytes, either to the Law of Moses or Mahomet, but to
penetrate into the Secret Transactions of the Followers of Jesus.

Thy Business is the same at Vienna; pursue that with Alacrity, and God shall
protect thee from all Adversity.

Paris, 9th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year, 1657.
LETTER XVIII.
To Melec Amet.
I Welcome thy Return to the Earth again: For it appears by thy Letter, that
thou have been in the Other World. 'Twere to be wished, thou would favor the
Living, with a Journal of thy Travels and Observations among the Dead. Those
Regions of Silence, would afford Matter of Noise enough to Mortals, that are
always greedy of Foreign News. Perhaps if thou would communicate the Remarks
thou have made during that Ramble of thy Soul, we might find out some Method of
Correspondence between Our World, and that Invisible State. We might contrive a
Way to send Dispatches to our Friends, and to receive their Answers again. Or,
at least we might make some Useful Discoveries, in that Empire of Shadows.

But tell me seriously, do thou think that it was any more than a Trance or
Dream that has happened to thee? Such as frequently falls out in Melancholy
Constitutions? I once informed Cara Hali the Physician, of such an Accident as
this not far from Paris. It was of a Man that had lain Five and Thirty Hours as
Dead, in all Humane Apperance, and so given over by the Physicians: Yet after
that Period, he recovered his Senses again, and told strange Things to those
that were about him. Surely, these are but the Slumbers of the Soul; and Death
it self is but a deeper Sleep, when it causes the Dissolution of the Body.
Doubtless, Men awake again in some other Active State. For, as a Flame of Fire
is Equally disposed to embody it self in the Fat of Flesh or Fish, in Oil, Wax,
Sulphur, or any Proper Vehicle; and as soon as it is extinguished in One, will
readily translate it self successively to all the Rest, if they be within the
Sphere of its Activity (as the Western Philosophers speak:) So is the Spirit or
Flame of Life, always in a Posture of Transmigration. For ought we know, he
that is a King This Hour, may be a Peacock the Next, and within a Few Days be
served up at his Succesor's Table, as a Royal Dish.

But not to insist too much on these Secrets, I will relate to thee a Passage,
not unlike that thou have Experienced.

It is Recorded in the Writings of an Authentic Pen, the Manuscript of an
Ancient Arabian, That Al' Rashid, Emperor of the Faithful, had many Famous
Physicians about him. Among the Rest, he highly esteemed Salch Eb'n Nahali, an
Indian, for recovering one his near Kinsmen, out of such a Condition as I
suppose thou have been in. That Kinsman was very dear to the Emperor, who was
sitting at a Feast, when News was brought him that he was dead. The Emperor
extremely troubled to hear this, burst forth into Tears, and caused the Table
to be taken away. Then Jaafer Eb'n Yahya, one of his Confidents, immediately
desired that Saleh the Indian Physician, might visit the Corpse of his dead
Relation. Who went accordingly, and having felt his Pulse, and considered him
well, he returned to the Emperor, and said, Cease to mourn, my Lord, Commander
of the Faithful: For if this Man be dead, and I do not restore him to Life
again, may I be divorced from all my Wives for Ever.

He had scarce made an End of saying this, when a Second Dispatch came to the
Emperor from those who were about his Kinsman, assuring him, That he was
really departed this Life.

Then Al' Rashid began to Curse the Indians, and their Ignorance. But Saleh
persisted in his Assertion, crying out with some Vehemence, Be not Incredulous,
O Emperor of the Faithful, nor suffer thy Kinsman to be buried, till I have
been with him again: For assuredly, he is not dead. I will show you something
that is Admirable. Al Rashid pacified with these Words, took Saleh along with
him to visit the supposed dead Person.

As soon as they came into his Chamber, the Indian took a Needle, and thrust it
between the Nail and the Flesh of his Left Thumb. Then the Entranced snatched
up his Hand toward his Mouth. At which Saleh cried out, Now my Lord comfort
your self; for, dead Men use not to be sensible of Pain, After this, he blew up
a Powder into his Nose. Upon which, in a few Minutes the Patient sneez'd; and
sitting upright in his Bed, spoke to Al' Rashid, kissing also his Hand. The
Emperor asking him, How he found himself; He replied, Benefactor of Mankind, I
have been in the sweetest Sleep that ever I remember fell on me in my Life.
Only I dreamed, that a Dog came and bit me by my Left Thumb, the Pain of which
waked me. With that, he showed him the Mark of the Needle, and the Blood.
Adding, Surely it was no Dream, but a Truth; for I feel it yet. The Emperor
was extremely pleased with his Indian Physician, and did him great Honor. His
Kinsman also, whose Name was Ibrahim, lived many Years after this, and was made
Governor of Egypt, where he died and was buried.

The Eastern Physicians have been Famous in all Ages, and are now much in
Esteem among the Franks, who addict themselves to study the Sciences. Here are
some very Learned Physicians in these Parts, and not a few Ignorant ones, who
serve as Foils, to set off the Luster and Fame of the others. Every Province
and City in France, swarms with 'em: And they all find Employment either to
Kill or Cure. The Nazarenes live very Intemperately, and fall into Abundance of
Diseases, whereof the East is wholly Ignorant: Therefore it is Necessary for
'em to be well stocked with Physicians. Yet 'twas Satyrically observed by a
certain French Lord, That in a Town not far from his Palace, the Inhabitants
were all healthy long-lived Men, till a certain Emperick came and took up his
Residence there: For then they began to sicken and die apace. But this may be
an Invidious Remark. The Arabian Proverb says, No Man is a good Physician, but
he that is born such: Meaning, that some are Naturally disposed and fitted to
this Science. Indeed, I have known Admirable Cures performed by Men, who never
studied in the Academies, or could answer Three Questions in Anatomy. Nay, some
Women have a Gift of this Nature, and are very Fortunate in their Practices.
But, when all is done, the Beasts are most Happy, who are all their own
Physicians by Instinct.

Melec, I wish thee such a State of Health, as needs no Medicines. But if it be
thy Misfortune to fall into Parmenides his Indisposition, I counsel thee to
make use of the Advice given him by a Philosopher; who, when Parmenides
complained of a Pain in his Stomach, and asked his Advice, he bid him use such
and such Confections and Electuaries. The other replied, He had made Trial of
them all, and many more, yet found no Ease. Then said the Philosopher, Turn
Poet, for they Generally have Good Stomachs.

Paris, 9th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year, 1657.
LETTER XIX.
To the Kaimacham.
COuriers upon Couriers, are come to this City with the Joyful News that
Montmedi is surrendered to the French. For which, the whole Body of the
Parliament, and City of Paris, the Chancellor of the Kingdom, with Cardinal
Antonio Barberini, and all the Ecclesiastics, went to the Grand Mosch or
Temple where Te Deum was sung this Afternoon, with a Pompous Solemnity. And now
whilst I am writing, there is such a Confused Noise of Great Guns, Ringing of
Bells, and Shouts of People, That one would think it were enough to wake the
very Dead, and make them start from their Graves, to enquire what is the Matter.

The Truth of it is, this Place is counted one of the strongest in Europe; and
the Inhabitants were not Insensible of it, when they made their Conditions of
Honor with the King. And therefore we need not wonder at the Excessive Joy of
the French.

When the Keys were delivered to the King by the Deputies of the Town, one of
them in the Name of the Rest, made this following Address.

Sire, We should have had just Reason to complain of Fortune, and accuse our
selves of Cowardice, if we had surrendered this Impregnable Fortress, to the
Arms of a Prince less Glorious and Puissant than your Majesty: Since our very
Walls are of sufficient Strength to defend us, without taking up Arms, against
a Power Inferior to yours. But, in Regard it is the Will of Heaven, that we
must change our Master, we rejoice to fall into the Hands of so Invincible and
Generous a Monarch. And we hope, Sire, that your Majesty will show us the more
Favor, for having used our Utmost Efforts to conserve an Inviolate Fidelity to
the Catholic King, who but Yesterday was our Master.

This was spoken with so graceful an Action, and such a becoming Frankness,
that the King being mightily pleased with them, made them this Answer.

Yes, I shall always remember, that your Constancy deserves my Esteem. And now
considering you as my Subjects, I will bestow such Privileges on this City, as
shall oblige you to manifest no less Courage and Zeal for my Service, than you
have done for the Catholic King.

And to evidence, that he has equal Sentiments of Gratitude and Esteem for his
Officers, by whose Courage and Conduct this Important Place is come under his
Obedience; the King has bestowed the Government of it on the Lieutenant General
of his Armies, who was present at the Siege, and was shot in Seven Places of
his Body. They call him, the Marquis of Vandi. He has signalized his Valor in
Sixteen Sieges and Battles, being marked all over with Scars, the Glorious
Characteristicks of an Indefatigable and Fortunate Hero.

It is fit the Divan should be informed of all such Passages: Not to instruct
them what to do in the like Cases (for they are Perfectly Wise) but that these
Examples may be Registered, as Spurs to Virtue and Magnanimity of Spirit. For,
it cannot be supposed, that the Emperor of True Believers will come short of
these Infidel Kings, in Rewarding his Faithful and Undaunted Slaves.

Marshall de Ferte Seneterre has also had his Share in the Caresses and
Acknowledgments of the King and the whole Court.

This Success has given a great Damp to the Spaniards, who begin to retire as
fast as they can from the Neighborhood of the French Armies. On the other
Sides, these are full of Vigor and brisk Resolutions; resolving not to end the
Campaign, without some farther Attempts in Flanders.

They creep by Degrees into the very Heart of that Province, which is ever like
to be the Stage of War, so long as the King of Spain has one Town left in it.
It Is a very Rich Country, abounding in all the desirable Productions of Nature.
And the People are very Industrious, to learn and improve whatsoever is
Profitable in Art. All their Unhappiness lies in this, That they are not able
to protect themselves and subsist Independent of one or other of the
Neighboring Crowns. So that whenever those Sovereigns fall out, these Poor
People are miserably oppressed with Armies; and in this Case, their Friends
many Times give 'em as much Trouble as their Enemies. Nay, it is difficult to
determine, which are their Enemies, and which their Friends. For, to whatsoever
Master they are subject, he dreins their Coffers of Money by Taxes and
Contributions; besides the Intolerable Vexation of Quartering unruly Soldiers,
who commit a Thousand Insolences unpunished.

Poland is at this Time in as bad a Condition, between the Armies of Sueden,
Austria, Brandenburgh, Moscovy, Transylvania, and the Forces of King Casimir.

The Son of the deceased Emperor, has sent a great Army to the Aid of that
Unfortunate Monarch; and it is confirmed on all Hands, that they have laid Siege
to Cracow. Whilst his Ambassador is Negotiating with the Elector of
Brandenburgh, to draw him off from the Suedish Interest. This is like to prove
a War of long Continuance, if the Plague do not make Peace; with rages in those
Parts, and destroys many Thousands more than the Sword or Gun. The Moscovites
have Combated with this Distemper above these Two Years, the Grand Duke being
forced to fly with his Army, like Vagabonds, before this Inexorable Conqueror,
which gives no Quarter.

In the mean Time, I hear Ill News from Candia, where they say, the Moselmans
have in a Late Attempt on the City, lost above Four Thousand Men, with Thirty
Four Ensigns, and a Considerable Treasure. These Infidels have also taken and
destroyed this Summer above Thirty Ships of Barbary, and as many more of
Constantinople, Smyrna, Aleppo, Scanderoon, etc. On Board of one of which, they
seized the Yearly Revenue which comes to the Grand Signior from Scanderoon: And
out of another they have taken the Revenue of Rhodes, killed a Thousand True
Believers, took Half that Number Captives, and released Abundance of Christian
Slaves: In a Word, they have taken out of the Several Vessels which fell into
their Hands, an Immense Treasure of Silver, Gold, and Precious Stones.

These continual Successes of the Nazarenes, would tempt one to think, That
this War was Unjustly commenced by Sultan Ibrahim, and therefore Unhappily
carried on by his Glorious Successor, Sultan Mahomet. Pardon the Effect of
Melancholy, Benign Minister, if it be a Crime to think, that the Creator of All
Things is Angry with those who Violate their Solemn Word and Oath. Thou know
the whole Story of this War, and the First Occasions of it. I say no more.

They have a Proverb here in the West, That the Voice of the People, is the
Voice of God. And though I approve not the Practice of those, who make Use of
this Popular Aphorism to foment Seditions in a State; yet I cannot but own,
there is a great Deal of Reason in it, and it may be verified in the present
Circumstances of Constantinople.

Thou observest, that the Soldiers are Mutinous, and unwilling to serve any
longer in this Unfortunate War. Thou find the Merchants, and in General, all
Sorts of People discontented and Factious. The Avenues to that Sanctuary of the
World, are blocked up by the Venetians; so that neither Corn nor other
Necessary Provisions can be brought in, to supply the Wants of so many Hundred
Thousands of People. In a Word, thou see the Public Calamities have made
them almost desperate; they care not what they do. Peace with the Christians,
is the Word every where; or else each Impertinent Mechanic, will presage Ruin
to the Ottoman Empire.

May God Inspire thee and the other Ministers of the Divan, in this Calenture
of the State, to apply such Remedies, as may prevent the Inconveniences of a
Domestic War, which is always more Fatal to a Government, than a Foreign
Invasion.

Paris, 17th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1657.
LETTER XX.
To Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew at Vienna.
NOW thou give me some Solid Hopes of a Convert. Thy Letter has raised my
Expectation, since it is not penned in a Style full of Scruples and
Insignificant Doubts, which would be Endless: Nor yet does it savor of
Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, as if thou intend'st only to mock me and my Faith,
and still continue thy self an Infidel. But it abounds with very fair
Concessions, Articles of Reason and Honor on thy Side; Only expecting from me,
a True and Authentic Account of our Holy Prophet's Life, and of the Miracles
which can be produced in Confirmation of his Prophetic Office. Thou would
fain see, if any Thing happened of this Kind, to the Messenger of God, parallel
to the Stupendous Wonders which recommended Moses your Lawgiver to the World,
as the undoubted Oracle of Heaven.

I protest, there is no Fault to be found in this Demand: For it is but Reason,
that he who assumes the Character of a Prophet, should be distinguished from
Impostors by some Evident Signs and Wonders. Yet, it is needless to make an
exact Parallel, because the Occasions of Moses's Miracles, were different from
those of Mohammed, the Seal of the Prophets. Your Lawgiver had a Commission and
Power given him to work Miracles when he pleased: Whereas Ours declared, That
he was not sent to work Miracles, but to preach the Unity of the Divine
Essence, the Resurrection of the Dead, the Joys of Paradise, and the Torments
of the Damned.

Yet, lest the Unbelieving World should doubt the Truth of his Mission; From
his very Birth, his Life was graced with many Supernatural Favors. His Mother
bore him without the least Pain of Body or Mind: And as soon as he breathed the
Vital Air, he spoke with an Audible Voice, saluting his Mother, and adding, I
profess, That there is only One God, and that I am his Apostle. He was also
Circumcised by Nature, coming into the World without his Prepuce. At the same
Hour, the Devils were forbid to ascend above the Orb of the Moon: And Four
Voices were heard from the Four Corners of the Square Temple: The First saying,
Proclaim, The Truth is risen, and all Lies shall return into Hell. The Second
uttering, Now is born an Apostle of your own Nation, and the Omnipotent is with
him. The Words of the Third were, A Book full of Illustrious Light is sent to
you from God. And the Fourth Voice was heard to say, O Mahomet, we have sent
thee to be a Prophet, Apostle, and Guide to the World.

When he was about Four Years Old, accompanying the Sons of his Nurse into the
Field, the blessed Child retired into a Cave at the Foot of the Mountain Vriel
to pray: When the Archangel Gabriel appeared to him, and said, Bismillahi
rrahmani rrahimi, etc. In the Name of God, Compassionate and Merciful, O Child
greatly beloved, I am sent to displant from thy Heart, the Root of Evil; for
thy Ejaculations made the Gates of Paradise fly open. The Young Resigned one
said, The Will of thy Lord and Mine be done. Then the Angel opened his Breast
with a Razor of Adamant, and taking out his Heart, squeezed from it the Black
Contagion, which was derived from Adam: And having put the Child's Heart in his
Place again, he blessed him, and retired to the Invisibles.

From that Time the Young Favorite of Heaven, grew up and prosper'd in all
Things, having the Smiles of God and Man. He was under the Tuition of his Uncle
Abu-Taleb, who discerning the Marks of an Immense Soul in his Young Nephew, was
more Sollicitous for his Welfare, than if he had been his Son. His Fortune
being Low in the World, he had no other Way to provide for his Illustrious
Charge, than by placing him as a Factor to Chadijah, a Widow of the same Tribe
with Mahomet, which was the Noblest among the Arabians. Besides, she was very
Beautiful and Rich: And there wanted not Hopes, that in Time she might become
Mahomet's Wife.

That which chiefly encouraged 'em to this, was a Vision of Chadijah, every
where talked of in those Parts. For, she had divulged it her self, long before
Mahomet became her Servant, or his Uncle had any Thoughts of thus disposing of
him. The Sun seemed to leave his Heaven and come down to her House, from whence
he dispersed his Beams through Arabia, Egypt, Persia, and in fine, through the
Whole Earth. This Vision had made a deep Impression on the Mind of Chadijah;
and she could not rest, till she had told it to a certain Famous Sage in those
Parts, who had great Skill in Astrology and other Mysterious Sciences, and was
Celebrated for the Integrity of his Manners. As soon as he heard the Contents
of her Vision, he said, In the Name of God, O Widow, enter into thy Bath, and
prepare thy self with the Necessary Purifications: For, thou shall shortly be
married to the Greatest Prophet in the World. And when she asked the
Astrologer, What was the Country, Tribe, and Name of her next Husband? He told
her, He was an Arabian of Mecca, of the Tribe of the Corei's and that his Name
was Mahomet.

As yet, the Prophetic Widow knew Nothing of the Nephew of Abu-Taleb. But,
thou may imagine she felt strange Passions, when his Uncle afterward
recommended him to her Service; and she knew, that he was the Man in whom the
Astrologer's Character was verified, as to his Country, Tribe and Name. For,
Mahomet was the Son of Abdalla, who descended from the Bani Haschim, who were
the Noblest Family in the Tribe of the Corei's. Who can express her Sentiments,
when she saw the Beautiful Youth making his First Addresses to her as an humble
Slave, whom she believed Heaven had ordained for the Partner of her Bed? With
what a Grace and becoming Modesty, did he receive the last Instructions and
Farewell of his parting Uncle? However, she concealed her Transports, and sent
her beloved Slave with a Caravan into Syria, allowing him a Noble Pension.

In that Journey, there happened something very Remarkable in Honor of the
Admirable Young Man. For at a certain Place on the Road, as he waited on the
Captain of the Caravan to a Synagogue of the Jews, no sooner had Mahumed set
his Foot over the Threshold of the Synagogue, but all the Lamps therein were
loosened from their Chains, and fell down on the Floor. All those of thy Nation
that were present, being astonished at the Portentous Accident, fell at the
Feet of the Rabbis, desiring their Advice in this amazing Circumstance. They
having performed the accustomed Ceremonies and Expiations, answered, It is
revealed in the Traditions of the Seniors, That at what Time soever an Arabian,
called Mahomet, shall be present at our Solemnities, God shall remove the
Candlestieks out of their Place. It is therefore most certain, that such a one
is now among us; let him not escape our Hands, lest Reproach and Contempt come
on Israel. But behold, whilst they were busy in searching for the Cause of this
Prodigy, Two Angels conveyed Mahomet to Mecca, where he soon after married
Chadijah.

It were easy to recount many more Miracles in the Life of the Prophet; such as
that of the Cloud Overshadowing him, the Eagle perching on his Head when he was
asleep, the Trees and Stones proclaiming him the Apostle of God. And, if we
were to make Parallels, I think, the Stupendous Descent which the Moon made, at
the Prayer of the Divine Messenger; comes not far short of the Celebrated
Disorder on Mount Sinai, when your Law was delivered by Moses.

If thou requirest Undoubted Testimonies for the Truth of this Miracle on Our
Side, offer something that is Unquestionable on thy Own. We both equally
confide in the Different Records of our Nations, which were penned by Men as
liable to Temptations and Errors of all Sorts, as thou and I, and all that
believe what they write. Therefore, unless thou can start some more
Infallible Authority, to prove the Eternal and Universal Obligation of your
Law, than I can to the Contrary, thou lie under a manifest Disadvantage:
Since I profess with our Holy Prophet and all the Mussulmans, that the Alcoran
contains Nothing Repugnant to the Law of Moses; but is only a more Perfect and
Complete Idea of the Divine Will: And that as Moses was the Lawgiver of the
Sons of Isaac; so Mahomet was the Apostle of the Sons of Ismael, and the Seal
of all the Prophets.

Use thy own Reason; and rather be of no Religion, than in the Number of those
to whom it shall be said at the Last Day, Drink, ye Worshippers of Ozair, and
be damned for ever.

Paris, 10th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1657.
LETTER XXI.
To Dicheu Hussein, Bassa.
THere has been a mighty Quarrel of late between the French and Spanish
Ambassadors at the Hague, about Precedence. The Occasion was this. One Evening
the French Ambassador was Riding in a Coach, in a Place where the Spanish
Ambassador met him in another Coach; and both striving for the Upper Hand, they
met with their Horses Heads one against another, and so stood still. There was
presently a Tumult of People gathered about them: And the French being most
respected, many Gentlemen came in to his Side with Swords and Pistols; and all
Things seemed to portend a Combat. But, the Magistrates having Notice of this
Disturbance, sent some of the Guards to keep the Peace, and defend the
Ambassadors from any Attempts of the Rabble. In the mean while, several Great
Lords walked to and fro between the Ambassadors, proposing Expedients of
Accommodation: But it being at the very Juncture when the French Ambassador had
received the News of the Surrender of Montmedi, he would not in the least yield
to any Terms. So that at last the Spaniard was forced to drive out of the Way,
thinking it a Matter of sufficient Triumph, That he had stopped the French
Ambassador so long.

There is a Post come in from Denmark, who brings News of the Total Destruction
of Itzchow by Fire. This was a Town belonging to the Danes, and was fired by
the King of Sweden's Order. The Danes are very Unfortunate of late Years; they
make no Figure in Europe. There is a Period set to the Grandeur of every
Kingdom and State, and the Danes were once very Victorious and Formidable; but
now their Monarchy declines apace, to make Way for the Rising Luster of the
Suedes.

By Sea the Dunkirkers make a great Noise: They have lately taken from the
French, Twenty Merchant Vessels, and from the English near half that Number.
But, if they have not better Fortune than their Neighbors, the French will
take their City from them ever long. Every Campaign makes a fair Advance toward
it. I sent an Account already to the Kaimacham of the Surrender of Montmedi,
one of the most Important Places in Christendom. Now I acquaint thee, that St.
Venant, which has not so great a Character, yet Considerable enough, has
yielded upon Articles. This was done on the 28th. of the last Moon. At this
Rate, the French Priests will have little else to do, but to sing Te Deum, for
their repeated Successes and Victories.

From Portugal we hear, that that Court to secure themselves the better against
the Spaniards, have sent to implore the Assistance of Morocco and Fez: Which is
much censured among the Nazarenes. Others say, they are only Messengers, gone
to buy up all the Horses they can get in that Country.

In the mean while, the King of France is taking all the Politic Measures he
can, for the Empire of the West. His Ambassadors in Germany appear with a
Magnificent Train of Three Hundred Men, and they style their Master, His most
Christian Majesty, King of France and Navarre, Sovereign Prince in Germany and
Italy; Which last, is looked upon as a Fair Step to the Title of Emperor.

The Counsels of the German Court are not a little disturbed, to hear that our
Invincible Forces are approaching toward the Confines of Hungary. It will put
some Stop to the designed Election. Besides, they cannot agree among themselves
about a Successor.

The Queen Christina of Sueden, is come back again into this Kingdom, being
frighted out of Italy a Second Time, by the Return of the Plague.

There is a War commenced between the City of Munster and the Bishop of that
Place: So that he has laid a Formal Siege to it, and presses them very close.

All this is of no such Importance, as the News that I receive from
Constantinople; which assures me, that the Mussulmans have retaken the Isles of
Tenedos and Lemnos, though with some Loss of Men.

I wish they could as easily drive the Venetians out of the Archipelago, and
then the Imperial City would have no longer Reason to complain for Want of
Bread.

Paris, 10th. of the 9th. Moon, of the Year 1657.
LETTER XXII.
To Dgnet Oglou.
I Know not what is the Matter, but most of my Friends are of late grown strange
to me. They write but seldom, and then their Letters are full of Reserves, as
if they suspected my Integrity: Or, that because I am Commanded to inform the
Divan of all Criminal Practices, therefore they are afraid to communicate their
Sentiments with the same Freedom as formerly; though on Themes no Ways belonging
to the State, but purely Speculative, and the Common Discourse of all Sensible
Men. Are you become more Morose and Rigid at Constantinople, than you were
Twenty Years ago? In those Days, I remember it was Common in the Public
Coffee-Hans, for Mussulmans, Greeks, Curds and Franks, or Men of any other
Religion, to meet together and vent their Thoughts with Liberty: No Man being
willing to be Stigmatized with the Character of a Clown, for taking Offense at
another's Faith, though different from his own.

It was then esteemed a Point of Gallantry, to favor the Christians of all
Sects, and let 'em talk and act as they pleased, provided they Blasphemed not
God, or his Prophets. And they themselves would have Condemned any of their own
Party, who should have been Guilty of such an Immorality and Affront to the
Established Religion of the Mussulmans, and the General Sense of Mankind.

But why then is the same Liberty retrenched now, and that among Mussulmans who
are Intimate Friends? Is it not now as Lawful for us to converse with one
another by Letter or any other Way, as it was then to enter into Dialogues with
Infidels? I would not encourage or imitate the Bold and Profane Efforts of
their Wit, who deny the Being of a God, or utter Blasphemies against his
Messenger: The whole Universe is an Irrefragable Testimony of an Eternal and
Omnipotent Nature: And the Alcoran is an Evident Proof, of the Sanctity and
Indispensible Commission of Our Holy Lawgiver. But I hope it is no Crime, to
enter into Speculations of Things liable to Controversy. At least I will
venture to disclose to thee my Thoughts, who art the most Agreeable of all my
Friends. I tell thee, my dear Gnet, it appears to me Ridiculous and like the
Quarrels of Children, for Moselmans to wrangle about mere Trifles in Religion,
and that the Resigned to God should be Zealous for the Whimsies of Men. One
Party believes the Alcoran is Eternal, Another says it is Created. In my
Opinion, they are both Absurd Assertions. The First, because then it will
follow, That there are more Eternals than One, which is a fair Step to
Polytheism and Idolatry: The Second is only an Impropriety of Speech; For we do
not usually say of any Writing, That it is Created, but Penned.

I can easily believe the Manifold Descents of Gabriel from Heaven, when he
brought down the Hundred and Four Sheets of Science and Faith. But whether Adam
had only Ten of these Sheets; or One and Twenty, as some say: Or, whether his
Son Seth, had but Twenty Nine of them; or Fifty, according to Others; is not
Material, according to my Faith. It is Possible Edris had no more nor less than
Thirty, and Abrahim our Father, just Ten of these Divine Manuscripts. Of this
we are sure, That the Volume of the Law was sent to Moses, the Psalms to David,
the Gospel to Jesus the Son of Mary, and the Mighty Alcoran to Mahomet the Seal
of the Prophets.

It is as easy for me to believe the Celestial Pen with which all these
Manuscripts were written, to be of some Admirable Substance. But, why it should
be made of Pearls, rather than of Diamonds* or any other Jewels, I see no
Reason; Or, that it should be a Journey of Fifty Years, for the Swifrest Horse
in Arabia to run from one End of it to the other. Yet if I have not Faith
enough for these Things, I will not be Angry with those that have. Let every
Man enjoy his Fancy.

But I cannot be so Indifferent, when I hear Men tell me, That God has a Body
like Ours, with Eyes, Ears, Nose, Hands, Tongue, and all other Members and
Organs of Life, Sense. Speech and Morion: That he is subject to Passions of
Love, Hatred, Anger, Grief, and all the Affections that are Common to Mortals.
Yet thou know, there is a Sect of Mussulmans, who believe all this, and
preach it to others with great Assurance. What is this, but to set up an Idol,
in the Place of God? For, the Original of all Idolatry, was the Vain
Presumption of Men, who represented the Incomprehensible Divinity, under some
Common Visible Figure of Men or Beasts.

If we must assign a Body to God, it would seem more Rational to adhere to
their Opinion among the Sephatim, who say, his Body is Infinite,
Vncircumscrib'd, and beyond all Form. Neither is it of any Import, that the
Western Philosophers assert, It is of the Essence of all Bodies to be
Circumscribed and Finite: Since, though this may be readily granted true of
Particular Bodies, yet must it ever be deny*d of the Immense and Universal Body
out of which the World is Formed: Unless they will allow an Unlimited and
Interminate Unbody'd Space, which is more Unintelligible and Absurd. Doubtless,
if the Eternal Mind has a Body, it is Expanded Wide as the Endless Ether, and
Equally Present in all Places: Neither can this Body be any more Circumscribed,
Confined, or shut up in any Place, than the Light of the Sun can be Restrained
within a Room, or Separated from its Source by the drawing of a Curtain. For
all the World is Pervious to this Infinite Body, which is altogether
Indivisible into Parts, even as that which we call a Spirit. In a Word, we must
conceive it to be simple and uncompounded, the Finest and First Matter of the
Universe.

But if thou will have my Opinion, all this is Infinitely too low and narrow an
Idea of that Eternal and most Exalted Essence, that Intellectual Beauty, which
no Mortal Eye has seen, no Tongue or Pen can describe; the smallest Glimpse of
whose Ineffable Majesty, falling on the Thoughts of Holy Men and Prophets,
snatches away their Souls in Sacred Passions and Divine Exstasies, whilst their
Bodies are in the Custody of the Angel of Death. At such Times they are carried
up through the Seven Heavens, beholding all their Wonders, and the Purple Sea
which divides the First Heaven from the Second. They pass by the Orbs where
Fire, Hail, Snow and Thunder are prepared and kept as in Reservatories against
the Day of Calamity; being guarded by the Spirits of Vengeance, who are Created
to punish Infidels. Then they Ascend to the Fourth Heaven, where dwell
Innumerable Armies of Holy Ones. Next to the Fifth, where are the Angels of
Intercession. Then to the Sixth, which is the Residence of Archangels, the
Internuncio's or Messengers of the Eternal Majesty. And last of all, they are
Introduced into the Presence of the most Sublime Potentates and Principalities,
who wait before the Recess of the Creator, in the Heavens above all Heavens,
whose Height transcends the Power of Created Intellects to measure.

O Dgnet, when I have said all I can, it is nothing to the Purpose. For no Words
nor Thoughts, can reach that Infinite above all Infinity. Nothing but Pure
Unbodyed Minds, can have Access to the Skirts and Eorders of that Endless
Region of Light.

Therefore, let us not stretch our Vain Imaginations, nor greedily pry into
those Secrets, which for ever fly from Humane Thought: But keeping our selves
within the Bounds of Reason and Sobriety, let us Adore God and believe his
Prophet, Obey the Law of Cleanness and Purity, without Injuring Man or Beast;
And that is the Way, if there be any, to ascend to the Vision and Enjoyment of
that Happiness, which at Present is hid from us.

Paris, 5th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1657.
LETTER XXIII.
To the Aga of the Janissaries.
I Received the Dispatch coming from Valorous Hands, an Express perfumed with
Narcissus; full of Honorable Words, and exhibiting a Command worthy of an
Ottoman General. May the Angel of Fortitude, conduct thee in all thy
Expeditions, against Infidels, Rebels, and Heretics.

Thy Conceptions of the Present State of Europe, are very proper and lively.
Yet, in some Things, it is possible thou have been misinformed. The Affairs of
Italy are Inconsiderable, when compared with the more Important Wars of the
North. That Quarter, is at present the Theater of the most Remarkable Actions.
Yet the Campagnes in Flanders this Year, have made some Noise in the World.

But, all the Discourse at present is, of the Famous Siege and taking of
Fredericks-Ode by the Suedes. This is a Fortress belonging to the King of
Denmark, and esteemed one of the strongest in Europe. Yet it was taken by
Storm: Wherein the Danes lost Ninety Three Principal Officers, and about Three
Thousand Common Soldiers; Thirty Three Colors; Seventy Seven Great Guns of
Iron and Brass; Three Hundred and Eighty Two Barrels of Powder; Forty Thousand
Musquet-Bullets; Six Hundred Granado's; Three Thousand Pikes, and Two Thousand
Two Hundred Suits of Armor.

This Victory makes the Suedes appear Terrible to their Enemies; and they are
looked upon as the only Flourishing Nation in the North, as France is in the
West. Yet, to show that there is no Unmixed Happiness here below, their Interest
has been much lessened, by the Desertion of the Brandenburghers, who now seem
to favor the Cause of King Casimir.

That Monarch had an Interview lately with the Elector of Brandenburgh, at a
Place called Broombergh; where they embraced one another, banquetted together,
and buried all the Memoirs of Enmity in Generous Compotations: For, this is the
Way of the Northern Princes of Europe; Who live in so Cold a Climate, that
Nothing less than a Debauch with Wine, can thaw their Frozen Souls, and melt
'em into an Obliging Humor.

As for the State of England, I perceive thou know the Character of Oliver,
the New Sovereign of that Commonwealth. Yet I can inform thee, that he begins
to change his Temper. There are Persons in his Court, who give Constant
Intelligence to the King of France, of all his Secrets. And, as the Exiled King
of Scots could not snuff a Candle in a Passion, but that Usurper had Knowledge
of it; so neither can Oliver have a Dream, but some spightful Mercury carrys
the News into Foreign Countries. His Sleep is Interrupted with Fearful Visions
of Plots, and Treasons against his Life; which makes him change his Bed, Five
or Six Times a-Night. They say, he is Metamorphos'd from a Hero, to a perfect
Coward. And, this is not the Report of the Multitude, who take Things upon
Trust; but it is the Sport of the French Grandees, who wish well to the Son of
the late Murdered English King.

I must be Irregular in my Method of Writing, that I may oblige thee with
Military Remarks. A more particular Account of the Storm of Fredericks Ode, is
just come to my Hands, wherein we are assured, that it was taken at the First
Assault, which much redounds to the Honor of General Wrangle; and that the
Crown-Marshal of Denmark, with many Senators and Grandees, fell by the Edge of
the Sword; And that Two Thousand Captives were driven yoked in Couples like
Beasts, as an Augmentation of the Conquerour's Triumph.

Thou will not be displeased at the little Coherence and Order of these
Memoirs, considering that it suits well enough with the Subject: For I write a
la Campaign, as the French say, and so am obliged to entertain thee with broken
Detachments of News, from several Parts, as Occasion offers.

The Spaniards are stark Mad, for the Loss of Mardike, which was taken by the
English and French in the 9th. Moon, and all the Garrison sent Prisoners to
Calais. They swear, they will have this Important Place again, whatever it cost
'em. The Prince of Conde, lies dangerously sick of a Fever at Gaunt: Whilst Don
John of Austria, labors under a Malady of another Nature, being much
distressed for Want of Money to pay his Soldiers. This is looked upon as a very
bad Symptom, in a General of an Army.

The Great City Cracow in Poland, is surrendered by the Suedes to King Casimir.
That Monarch begins to find a Turn of his Affairs; and it is thought, he will
draw Half the Princes of Europe into a League against the King of Sueden.

It will be of no great Importance for thee to know, that the Siege of Munster
is raised, and a Peace Concluded between that City and their Bishop: Yet it is
convenient, that this should be related to the Ministers of the Divan, who are
the Judges of all Human Events. Besides, in one of my Letters, I mentioned this
Quarrel and Siege.

Illustrious Aga, I have obeyed thy Commands, in sending thee an Abstract of
all the most Remarkable Transactions in Europe, during the last Three or Four
Moons. I wish, 'twere as agreeable to any of my Friends, to send me the News of
our Armies and Navy.

But I am more obliged to Strangers and Infidels, for the Intelligence I have
of the Ottoman Affairs, than to any of the True Believers.

Brave Commander, may God preserve thee from the Common Vices of a Soldiers
Life, and make thee as Renowned as Cassim Hali, who was present in 25 pitched
Battles, received 48 Wounds, and yet lived to the 63d. Year of his Age.

Paris, 27th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1657.
The End of the Third Book
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS. VOL. V.
BOOK IV.
LETTER I.
To Cara Hali, Physician to the Grand Signior.
MOST of my Letters to the Grandees of the Port, carry News of Wars, Sieges,
and Battles among the Christians. Now I Will tell thee who art my Friend, I Am at
War with my self. One Potent Passion takes the Field against another. Opposite
Armies of Affections, are Embattel'd in my Breast: My Heart is blocked up:
Here, lies Interest Entrenched; There, Honor displays its Standard. One
Minute, Nature and Self-Preservation make a Sally; the next, they are beat back
by Generosity and Love. The Worst of it is, that these Contrary Factions in the
Soul, are so blended together by a secret Correspondence, that it is almost
Impossible to discern which is which.

Would thou know what the Meaning of this is? I Will tell thee in Brief; I Am
in a Controversy with my self, whether I Would best to die or live.

Wonder not at the Expression, as if 'twere in any Man's Power to make this
Choice; since according to the Mussulman Faith, we cannot hasten or retard the
Moments decreed by Fate. Assuredly, Predestination does not in the least
interfere with what is called Man's Free Will. Every the most Voluntary Action
of our Lives, complys as exactly with the Appointment of Eternal Destiny, as
the Accidental Fall of a Tyle from a House, or the more Regular and Constant
Descent of Rain, Snow and Hail from the Clouds. And, for ought I know, we may
as Properly call it the Free Will of a River to run toward the Sea, as for a
Man to pursue the Various Currents of his own Reason or Appetite. For so a
Fountain frequently divides it self into many Streams before it falls into the
Ocean, which is its, Center. And Man himself, notwithstanding the boasted
Freedom of his Will, is as much confined to act according to his Principles,
Prepossessions, Prejudices, Passions and Habits; as the different Rivulets
issuing from the same Spring, are restrained each within the Banks of its
Proper Channel.

But not to entertain thee with more Allegories; both thou and I, and all Men,
find our selves Violently carried away by certain Inclinations so forcible, as
no Power of our Will is able to resist: Sometimes our Love, Hate, Joy, Grief,
and so the Rest of Human Passions, are as Involuntary, as the Motions of our
Pulse. And though in the most Important Actions of our Lives, we Generally form
some Regular Design, as their Scope and Center; Yet we do many Things without
Reflection, as Musicians are said sometimes to play Excellent Tunes, without so
much as regarding or thinking what they are about. By all which it is Evident,
that our Will has little to do in the Conduct of our Lives. We, like all other
Creatures, act according to certain Secret Impulses of Nature. The very same
Faculty which we call Instinct in the Beasts, is no other than what we term
Reason, Wisdom, Knowledge, Discretion and Forecast in our selves. And I think
it is no Solecism to say, That that was a Prudent Dog, who perceiving his Master
making ready a Rope to hang him, slily slipped away, and never came near him more.

Suffer me to make yet a farther Digression, and ascribe it to Fate. For I Am on
a sudden strangely Interrupted in my Thoughts, by a most Furious Tempest; A
Medley of Hail, Rain, Lightning and Thunder: And this last, though not over-noisy
and loud, yet it was the most singularly terrifying, that ever I heard in my
Life. There is a Sort of Thunder which they call the Drum, because it
approaches near the Sound of that Warlike Instrument, making a Lively, Fierce
Rumbling in the Air, like the Beat of an Alarm. There is another more
surprising, like the Roaring of Cannons. But this had a Touch in it, of the
most Harsh, Affrighting and Irregular Noises, that ever shook the Welkin.

I was possessed with a deep Melancholy, as soon as I heard the Horrid Clatter
begin, and saw the Air darken apace, with a more than Ordinary Gloominess. Then
I felt some Religious Passions struggling with my Reason. I was full of Fears,
lest God was Angry with me, for my Counterfeited Life among the Christians: And
imagined no less, than that this Tempest was raised on Purpose to destroy me;
and make me an Example to all Mussulmans, who dare deny the Holy Prophet, to
serve the Interest of the Grand Signior, as much a Mortal as themselves. Or, at
least, I concluded I should taste my Share of the Wrath of Heaven, at this
Choleric Juncture. Nay, and all the Philosophy I could muster together, served
but to raise my dismal Expectations of the Fatal Blast. For I could not avoid
thinking, That a Wicked Man is a Magnet, which Naturally attracts the Vengeance
of Heaven: And that I being such in the Highest Degree, could not fail of
having my Soul scorched up at Once to Nothing, or Metamorphosed to a Fury
(which is Worse) by some Surprising and Inevitable Flash. For, to pass from
this Life by Lightning, Poison, or an Earthquake, are the only Deaths I fear.

I fell on my Knees and Face, addressing my self to God, with the most Humble
and Fervent Devotion I was Capable of. I made my Application also to his
Prophets. I said and did, all that I thought would procure a Respite of the
Punishment I feared. At length being tired and sick of too much Prayer, I rose
and sat down cheerfully; remembering I was a Mussulman, and resigned to the
Will of Destiny. Considering also, that I was an Arabian, of a Noble Stock; I
resolved, if I must die, to prepare my self with a Moderation worthy of my
Blood; that so I might go to the Invisibles, like the Grandson of an Emir.

Perhaps thou will impute this to Vanity: But I esteem it a Point of Justice,
for a Man to take Care, that he may live and die like himself, without
degenerating from the Virtue of his Ancestors, or bringing a Disgrace on the
Tribe to which he belongs. For, though God has Created all Men of the same Mould,
yet he has distinguished One Family from Another, by more than Specific
Characters Imprinted on them in their Nativity: And has Ennobled some Mortals
with Peculiar Qualities and Innate Perfections, which Others are wholly
Strangers to. So, there are Others Remarkable for Hereditary Vices.

Whether these Things depend on the Blood, or on the Different Circumstances of
Souls before they came into these Bodies, is a Question not soon resolved. But,
this I Am sure of, That I find in my self both some Virtues and Vices, which I
could never yet discover so Odly blended together in any other Mortal. I Am
always Campagning on the Frontiers of Good and Evil. Yet my Passions are not
Mercenary: No Price can tempt me to Treason or Perfidy. I am Master of a
certain Fastness of Spirit, which no Human Charm is able to dismantle. My
Integrity cannot be warped by Gold. And it is for this Reason, I a little value
my self. Which makes me sometimes inclined rather bravely to sally forth into
the Unknown World, than tarry in This, where I meet with Nothing but Contempt
and Disesteem from the Slaves of Him, for whose Sake I bear the Fatigue of
Life. Surely, think I, wherever it be my Lot to go, after my Escape from this
Mortal State; the Spirits of that Region will be kind to me, for the Sake of my
Incorruptible Trustiness: For, they have Intrigues as well as we; and
consequently, will be glad of Faithful Agents.

In a Word, since all my Zeal and Loyalty is thought not to merit any Reward in
this Life; I would fain try, whether at least I may not deserve to be a Ghost
of Honor; If there be any such Distinctions in that World of Spirits.

Paris, 27th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1657.
LETTER II.
To Mustapha, Bassa.
I Shall acquaint thee with a late Transaction in this Kingdom, which I believe
has but few Examples. The Kaimacham has already received a Dispatch from me,
wherein I signified the Return of Christina, Queen of Sueden into France: This
Princess since her Arrival at Fontainbleau, having discovered some Secret
Treachery in one of her Retinue, who was an Italian Marquis, pronounced a
Formal Sentence of Death on him: Which was accordingly Executed on the 10th.
Day of the 11th. Moon, by her own Officers, in a Gallery of her Palace, after
he had been warn^d of it by her Express Order, and had a Confessor sent to
him, to prepare him for Another World.

When this was done, she immediately sent a Messenger to acquaint the French
King with this Action, and the Reasons which induced her to it. Some of the
Courtiers at first persuaded him, That the Queen's Proceeding entrenched on his
Royal Prerogative, he being the sole Arbiter of Life and Death within his own
Dominions. Whereupon Monsieur de Chanut was sent to Expostulate with her. I
have formerly mentioned this Person in some of my Letters, when he was
Ambassador from this Crown to Queen Christina, then Reigning in Sueden. He is a
Gentleman of Great Abilities; and for that Reason, has been employed in the
most Difficult Negotiations, with the States of Holland and other Countries.

Yet People Censure variously; And the Case has been referred to the Doctors of
the Civil Law; who Pronounced this Sentence in her Favor, That being an
Independent Sovereign, and having the King of France 's Permission to reside in
this Realm, the Rights of Sovereignty could not be denied her over her own
Subjects: Such are to be esteemed all that are in her Service and take her Pay,
except the Subjects of the State where she resides.

The swift Execution of this Queen's Sentence on her Servant, in Part resembles
the Rigor of our Eastern Justice, which admits of no Delays in punishing
Criminal Persons, and removing Traitors out of the Way. Neither is it to be
diverted, by any Fears of After-Claps. And though these Western Monarchs
Generally put no Man to Death without a Formal Process at Law; yet sometimes
they have leaped over this Rule, and only given the Word of Command to some of
their Officers, and the Business was done: As in the Case of the Marshal d'
Ancre, and the Duke of Guize; The One falling by a Pistol-Bullet, the Other by
the Stab of a Dagger; and both in the King's own Palace, surrounded with their
Servants and Friends. And there was no other Way for the Crown of France to
secure it self from the Attempts of these dangerous Men, who were grown to such
a Height, as to Monarch it almost as much as their Masters.

Mighty Bassa, the Charms of Sovereignty are very strong, Creating Envy and
Ambition in Subjects, and Jealousy in Princes. It is not safe for an Eminent
Grandee, to appear too Popular. For he that is invested with a Diadem, can
never brook a Rival, or one whom he has Reason to suspect for such.

Paris, 2d. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1658.
LETTER III.
To Mustapha, Berber Aga.
THE Spaniards are all dissolved in Joy for the Birth of a Young Prince, and
Heir of that declining Monarchy. It Is said, that the King his Father, appointed
a Solemn Festival throughout all his Dominions, commanding his Subjects to
Celebrate it with the most Exalted Demonstrations of Joy. And on that Day, he
himself wore the Ransom of Kings in his Apparel; the very Diamonds and Pearls
in his Hat, being Valued at Three Millions of Gold. By which thou may guess
at the Rest.

He has also Communicated this Joyful News to all Christian Princes and States,
his Friends and Allies. And indeed, he has some Reason to make a Noise of this
Good Fortune, being an Old Man, and in all Men's Opinion not likely to have any
more Children.

His Ambassadors in Foreign Countries, endeavor to imitate their Prince in all
Manner of Magnificent Triumphs. And particularly from Holland we have the
following Account: That on a certain Day of the Moon of January, Don Stephano
de Gamara, the Spanish Ambassador at the Hague, caused Te Deum to be sung with
Excellent Voices and Music, whilst Fifty Pieces of Ordnance played continually.
At Night a Hundred and Fifty Pitch-Barrels were lighted on several Scaffolds in
the Streets, and all the Windows in the Hague were Illuminated with Wax-Tapers.
And these Words were seen flaming in an Artificial Fire-Work for Two Hours
together;

ParVe, at Magne PhILIppe,
Prospere Proceed, et regna.
I need not explain this Inscription to thee who art versed in the Roman
Language; and wilt find, that all the Salt of these Words lies in the Capital
Letters pointing at the Year wherein this Young Prince was born, viz. MDCLVII.
except a little Pun upon his Name, which is Philip Prosper. On each Side,
appeared the Arms of the Spanish King; and Underneath, the Golden Fleece, so
Artificially contrived, that from it sprung Fountains of diverse Kinds of Wine,
at which the Multitude drank liberally for some Hours: Whilst many new-Coin'd
Pieces of Gold and Silver, were scattered among them out of the Ambassadors
Windows. They were stamped with an Olive Tree, having this Motto on One Side,
Crescente hac, Pax aurea crescet: And on the Other Side a Hand, with this
Inscription in a Label, Dabit Populis Pacem.

The French ridicule this latter Motto, and say, The King of Spain will ever
long deserve the Title of Peacemaker, when he shall be forced to sue for it,
not being in a Condition to carry on a War.

Illustrious Officer, I know thou art well versed in the Roman Histories,
having being Educated under Achmet-Lala, who was a Learned Man. And it is
Probable, thou art no Stranger to the more Modern Relations of Europe, and the
Diverse Characters of the People that Inhabit it. Yet, give me Leave to tell
thee, That Rome in all its Victorious Bravery, never saw Firmer Soldiers in a
Battle, than the Spaniards are at this Day. But the French have Finer Wits,
more Money, and better Fortune: And it is this makes 'em insult. Besides,
Destiny overrules All Things. Every Kingdom and Empire has its Climacters,
wherein it droops, declines, and at the Grand Critical Period falls to ruin.

The Greeks had Money enough when the Great Sultan Mahomet besieged
Constantinople: But they had not Wit to use it for their own Preservation; and
so that City, the last Considerable Stake of the Empire, was lost to the
Ottomans, who soon after became Masters of all the Rest.

Thou have Wealth in Abundance, and Discretion to manage it: Slip no
Opportunities, but remember the Old Arabian Proverb, which says, God has given
whole Days to the Fortunate, but to the Unhappy he affords only some Hours.

Paris, 7th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1658.
LETTER IV.
To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Grand Signior 's Customs, at
Constantinople.
I Remember my Promise, though it be late. Thou know I have many Hindrances,
and therefore wilt not tax me with feigning an Excuse. However, thy Letter came
to me in a Good Hour, to put me in Mind of these Things, and to enquire of our
Mother's Health, who still resides in this City.

I have said Nothing of her, since my First Letter after her Arrival at Paris.
And, to tell thee the Truth, she has said Little her self; being Ignorant of
the French Tongue, and too Old to learn it. Therefore her Chief Conversation
has been with Eliachim and me, above these Three Years: For, that Jew speaks
Indifferent good Turkish and Arabic.

If thou would know how she has spent her Time, It Is divided between her
Devotions and her Needle. She lives more Recluse than a Christian Nun; seldom
or never stirring abroad, unless to take the Air of the Fields, and then shut
up in a Coach with her Maid. In a Word, her Manner of Living, is a fit Example
for the French Women: For, in all Things she observes the Laws of her
Education, and the Modest Customs of the East.

No Argument can persuade her to change her Grecian Garb, or dress her self
after the Loose Mode of Western Females. Neither Will she Eat or Drink any
where, but in the House of Eliachim, for Fear of infringing the Precepts of the
Alcoran, and disobeying the Messenger of God: For she esteems the Diet of the
Jews Pure, and free from Pollution. In her Pious and Motherly Zeal, she rebukes
me for Eating and Drinking with Infidels: And I Have Nothing to say in my
Defense, but the Necessity I lie under of preventing Suspicion, that so I may
serve the Sultan with greater Success, and that I have the Mufti's Dispensation
for this and many more Irregularities. When she hears this, she lifts up her
Eyes to Heaven, lays her Hand upon her Breast, and appears resigned: Yet shakes
her Head, and seems to pity my Case; not without some Reflections on the
Corruption of the Times, the Impiety of the Seraglio, and Want of Zeal for the
Holy Prophet.

She has her Health to a Miracle: And excepting the First Two Moons after she
came to Paris, I never heard her complain of the least Indisposition. It Is
possible, the Change of Air, with the Inconveniences of Traveling so far by
Sea and Land, might incommode her at First. She was for a while troubled with
Rheums, Obstructions, and a Dysentery: But she soon overcame these Distempers,
and has ever since been perfectly well.

We often discourse together of thee, and thy Travels in the East. Sometimes I
read Part of thy Journal to her, which affords her Infinite Delight. She
congratulates her self, and thy Good Fortune, in escaping so many Perils and
Deaths, as every where threaten a Stranger: And takes a particular Delight to
hear thy Adventures with the Indian Lady, at the Court of Raja Hulacu. Thou
may be assured, our Mother bears a Singular Affection to thee: For we never
meet, without wishing thee in our Company. She rejoices mightily, to hear of
thy Prosperity and Advancement in the Favor of the Grand Signior, and his
Principal Ministers; Wishing thee every Day a New Step of Honor and Interest.
Thou may also rest satisfied, that Mahmut comes not short of the Affection
he owes to such a Brother.

At other Times we talk of our Cousin Isouf, who is now in the Frozen Regions
of the North. His Itinerary Memoirs, are also very Pleasant; And we pass some
Hours in reading and comparing 'em with the Dispatches which I frequently
receive from Mehemet, an Exiled Eunuch in Egypt: For Isouf is more large in his
Description of that Country, and his Remarks on its Antiquities, than on any
other Part of Africa. Yet he says enough of all that Southern Quarter.

As to what I promised to inform thee, concerning the Pyramids, Mummies, and
other Singularities of Egypt; know, that our Kinsman Isouf is a great Critic,
and gives the Lie to Herodotus, Diodorus, Strabo, Pliny, and other Writers of
Greece and Rome. Neither will he consent in all things to our Arabian Histories.

He says, the Pyramids are neither so High, nor does their Basis take up so
much Ground, as is reported by the Ancients. He laughs at those who affirm,
They cast no Shadows at Noon, having experienced the Contrary when the Sun was
in Capricorn. And we may believe him in this, on good Ground: For it is
Recorded of Thales Milesius, who lived above Two Thousand Years ago, That he
took the Height of the Pyramids by their Shadows.

There are Three of these Admirable Structures not far from Caire, and about
Eighteen more in the Deserts of Libya. It is Generally supposed, That they were
built for Sepulchers of the Egyptian Kings; some of them before the Flood, the
rest after. There are not wanting Historians, who assert the Greatest of the
Pyramids to be the Tomb of Seth, the Son of Adam.

Isouf was within this Mighty Fabric, and attests, That after he and his
Company had descended and ascended through certain Galleries, they came at last
to a Square Chamber, walled about with Pure Thebaick Marble; in the Middle of
which was a Chest of the same Stone, which when struck with the Foot, sounded
like a Musical Instrument. It is believed, that in this Chest was laid the Body
of the King who built that Pyramid.

The Ancient Egyptians were of Opinion, That even after that which we call
Death, or the Separation of the Soul and Body, there were certain Arts to
retain 'em together; if not in so Strict and Intimate an Union as before, yet
in a very Familiar Correspondence for many Ages. So that the Soul should always
take Delight to hover about the Body. and to exercise its Faculties in the
Place where that was reposed.

For this Reason, in the First Place they took out the Bowels, and whatsoever
was most liable to Corruption: And having washed the Empty Belly with Wine of
Palms, mixed with Aromatic Powders, they stuffed it with Myrrh, Cassia, and
many Costly Confections; and then sowed it up. After this, they purified the
Whole Body with Nitre; And having drawn out the Brains by the Nostrils with a
Hook, they filled up the Skull with Melted Gums. And last of all, they swathed
up the Whole Body in Silk, smearing it over with Rich Mixtures of Bitumen,
Spices and Gums, and so delivered it to the Kindred to be laid up in the
Sepulcher.

These were the Preparations they made to Court the Presence of the Soul, by
rendering the Body for Ever Sweet and Incorruptible. And, that the Majesty of
Royal Ghosts might never be Interrupted or Violated by the Neighborhood of
Vulgar Spirits, or the Ruder Approach of Mortals; Kings built these Magnificent
Piles, as the Palaces of their Last Repose. It Is therefore they were Erected in
Desert and Unfrequented Places, and in such a Form as was esteemed the most
Durable, and secure from the Injuries of Time, the Assaults of the Elements,
and from the Common Fate of all Human Enterprises. Each Stone of a Prodigious
Bulk, and rivetted to the next with a Bar of Iron: Which with the Strength and
Invincible Fastness of the Cement, renders it a Thing Impossible for any one of
these Pyramids to be demolished, though all Mankind were set to work for many
Successive Generations.

Al Mamun, the Caliph of Babylon, attempted to do it, but in vain. For after he
had set his Men at Work, and been at Vast Expenses, they made but one small
Breach, so Inconsiderable, that being made Sensible it would exhaust his
Treasures to remove but the Hundredth Part of the Pyramid, he desisted, full of
Wonder at the Wisdom of the Founders.

If it be true, that the Soul may by such Allurements as these, be prevailed on
to remain with the Body in its Sepulcher, and that a Man's Future Happiness
consists in this, I should my self Admire and Imirate those Egyptian Sages. I
would in my Lifetime build me a small Mausoleum, according to my Ability, and
order in my Last Will and Testament, that my Body be Embalmed and Condited for
a Perpetual Duration. But if none of these Arts can alter the Decrees of
Destiny, or force an Immortal Spirit from Ranging where it pleases; I must
conclude with Pliny, That this Celebrated Wisdom of the Egyptians, was no other
than Glorious Folly, and all the Magnificence of their Kings in building such
Costly Sepulchers, but Royal Waste.

They themselves, in thus cautiously providing to secure the Soul's Abode with
the Body after Death, tacitly owned, That by the Course of Nature it would
immediately pass into some other. Nay, the Transmigration of Souls, was an
Established Doctrine in Egypt. How then could they be so blind as to imagine a
Dead Carcass, however Perfumed and Fenced against Corruption, was more inviting
than an Embryo formed to live? Or that it was more Elegible for the Soul to be
Imprisoned in a Dark Dungeon (for no better are the Insides of the Pyramids)
than to enjoy the Light of the Sun, Moon and Stars, and the Various Sweets of
the Elements? Brother, in my Opinion, 'twere better to be a Bird, a Worm, a
Fly, or any Living Thing, than to be thus Immured for many Ages, and have no
other Companion, but an Old Salted Mummie.

Isouf has made some Remarks on the River Nile, to which he says Egypt owes not
only its Corn and Fruits, but also the very Soil which brings 'em forth. For
every Year, at the Time of the Inundation, that River brings along with it from
Aethiopia, or some other Regions through which it passes, Abundance of Slime
and Mud, with which it covers all the Land of Egypt, leaving it behind at the
Decrease of the Waters; So that the Soil of Egypt is borrowed from other
Countries. And if this be true, for ought we know, the Place of its Situation
may be borrowed from the Sea, according to the Opinion of some Ancient
Philosophers.

Herodotus, Pliny and others, were of this Persuasion, grounding their
Conjectures on the nearer Approaches of the Continent to the Island Pharos,
from the Time of Homer, who exactly Calculated its Distance. And they
concluded, That the Immense Quantities of Slime which the Nile transports from
the Mountainous Regions of Africa, might in the Space of Two Myriads of Years,
have filled up all that Part of the Sea which is now Firm Land, and called
Egypt.

If this be true, it seems to me very strange, That the Egyptians should boast
of Greater Antiquity than any other Nation in the World, though their Country it
self be the Youngest of all the Regions on Earth, an Abortive Spot of Ground,
hatched by a River in the Depths of the Sea, and ever since cherished by that
River as by a Parent or Nurse, which ceases not to convey to it Yearly a
Convenient Proportion of Aliment, whereby the Country it self grows in Bulk,
and the Inhabitants are maintained. O Admirable Providence of Nature, who can
penetrate into thy Mysterious Conduct! O Egypt abounding in Prodigies and
Wonders! Where the Land and Water, with the other Elements, conspire to render
thee all over Miraculous.

Dear Pesteli, I am transported when I think of that Region; and could relate a
Thousand more Passages, both out of Isouf's Memoirs, and from the Mouths of
others, who have traveled thither to observe so many Miracles. But I believe,
thy Patience will be sufficiently tired with the Length of this Letter.
Besides, my Mother is just come to visit me, and desires me to recommend her
Unfeigned Affections to thee.

Be assured also, that Mahmut loves thee with the Integrity of a Man, and the
Tenderness of a Brother: And he serves thee in all Things without repining.

Paris, 17th. of the 1st. Moon, of the year 1658.
LETTER V.
To the Kaimacham.
THE Venetians are very angry for the Loss of Tenedos; and not without Reason:
For, that Island is a delicate Spot of Ground, abounding in Rich Wines, and
other Products of Nature. Besides, it commands the Avenue of the Shining City,
the Refuge of Mortals.

They variously relate the Manner of its being retaken from 'em, by the Arms
which no Earthly Power is able to resist. Endeavoring in all their Rumors, to
disguise the Truth as much as they can, and misrepresent the Bravery of the
Ottomans; That so the Actions of their own Generals, may make the Greater
Figure.

These Nazarenes have a bad Cause, and therefore are compelled to make Use of
Shifts and Equivocations to support it. They are quite degenerated from the
Integrity of the Primitive Followers of Jesus. In a Word, they make good the
Character of the Ancient Candiots; Of whom a certain Poet says, They are
thorow-pac'd Liars, Ravenous Beasts, and Gluttonous Drones.

It is believed in these Parts, That when the Venetians quitted the Island they
departed not without Revenge, setting Fire to a Mine, and blowing up several
Hundreds of Mahometans, into the Air.

However, they have for Ever Proscribed and Excommunicated Girolamo Loredan,
and Giovanni Contarini, in whose Custody the Chief Fortresses of the Island
were; accusing them of Cowardice and Treachery: Offering also Two Thousand
Sequins to any that seizes on 'em within the Dominions of Venice, and Three
thousand to him that kills 'em in another Country.

I know, it is in the Power of the All-Commanding Port to protect these Exiles,
if they are within the Territories of our Sovereign; much more, if they shelter
themselves in that Sanctuary of the Distressed. But thou, and the other Supreme
Ministers, are best able to judge whether these Infidels merit so great a
Favor.

Perhaps, their Case may be like that of Nadast, Governor of Buda, when
Solomon the Magnificent besieged that City. For Nadast was a Man of Invincible
Courage and Fidelity, but was betrayed by the Soldiers, who bound him in
Chains, and delivered up the City and Castle to the Victorious Sultan. That
brave Hero understanding their Treachery, and the Resolution of Nadast, set him
at Liberty, and presented him with Noble Gifts; but commanded the Perfidious
Garrison to be cut in Pieces: A due Reward of their Treason. For, though Princes
often make Use of Traitors to serve their own Designs; yet, when the Work is
done, they commonly pursue the Hated Instruments, with the Effects of a Just
Contempt and Indignation.

Plutarch the Greek Historian, abounds with Instances of this Nature; so does
Herodian, and other Roman Authors. But, no Example of Punishment in this Kind,
seems so Proportionate, Regular and Ingenious, as that which Brennus, King of
the Gauls, caused to be Inflicted on a Virgin of Ephesus; who, when he besieged
that City, promised to deliver it into his Hands, on Condition that his
Soldiers would bestow on her, all their Ornaments of Gold, which they had
Plundered in the Wars of Asia, and wore about them as Trophies: For, when she
had performed her Contract, the Wise General to do his Part, caused this Virgin
to sit down on the Ground; and then every Soldier in his Army casting his Plate
into her Lap, she was oppressed with the Insupportable Weight, and buried Alive
in a Heap of Gold.

I do not mention this, as if the like were due to the Venetian Captains. I
refer the Judgment of such Things to my Superiors, Ministers of the Blessed
Sanctuary of Mankind.

It Is possible, the Vizirs of the Bench thought me dead, or turned Renegado,
because they have not received any News from me these Five Moons. But I tell
thee, neither Men nor Devils can corrupt the Faith of Mahmut. By the God of my
Vows, there is not a more Trusty Man in the Universe.

All the Reason of my Silence, was the Height of the Waters, which seemed to
threaten the Earth with a Second Deluge. Germany was a Sea, and Flanders a
Lake, for above Three Moons together; so that 'twas Impossible for the Post to
travel. There were seen also strange Specter of Fire in the Air; And the
People of Brabant, were Alarmed with Uncouth Noises in the Elements.

Perhaps, Illustrious Kaimacham, these are the last Preparations, to the Grand
Cholick of Nature; when Wind, Water and Fire, shall strive to turn this World
into its Old Chaos.

Paris, 3d. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1658.
LETTER VI.
To Solomon, his Cousin, at Constantinople.
MORE Melancholy still? Will thou have no Compassion on thy Exiled Uncle, but
harangue him to Death with thy Religious Jargon? Believe me, thy Letters of
this Kind are as Irksom to me, as the Continual Din and Babbling of Boys is to a
Poor Weary Pedagogue. I forbid thee not to write to me, and that as often as
thou will: It Is a Comfort in my Banishment, to hear from those of my Blood. But
let me beg of thee, to alter both thy Theme and Style. Leave Spiritual Things
to the Mollahs and Imaums: And let thy Thoughts be taken up in Things belonging
to thy Trade. In that be as Inquisitive as thou can. Bend thy Mind wholly, to
make new Discoveries and Improvements in that; and it will turn to thy
Advantage. At thy Hours of Leisure I counsel thee to read Histories, and
sometimes go into Company: There is much to be gained by Conversing with Men of
Sense. Such will ferve as Mirrous, wherein thou may behold Humanity in its
Proper Figure, and the Deformity of that Vizard, with which Error and
Superstition disguize our Nature. They will correct thy Mistakes, without
putting thee to a Blush. Wit and Reason shall flow from their Tongues, as soft
Harmonies breathe from the Pipes of an Organ, which cheer the Spirits, and
serene the Heart that was clouded with Sadness.

The Imperial City is full of such, both Natives and Strangers. Cull them out
from the mixed Multitude, and make 'em thy Companions, without regarding the
Difference of Religion, whether they be Mussulmans, Franks, Armenians, Jews, or
others. Above all Things, shun the Society of Bigots, and number not thy self
among those who are Opinionated, because they profess the True Faith: For, what
signifies that, if their Lives be Vicious? I tell thee, they are worse than the
Infidels. Give no Heed to Fortune Tellers, and such as pretend to Astrology.
For whilst they boast of knowing other Men's Fates, they are Ignorant of their
own. And if there be any Truth in that Science, one may say, their Ignorance in
it affronts the Stars, and often provokes 'em to hasten their own Ruin. Assure
thy self, they only amuse the World with Portentous Stories, to get Fame and
Money.

Associate thy self with none but Prudent and Moderate men, whose Morals are
not leavened with a too Furious Zeal; who look not Superciliously and with
Disdain on a Frank as he walks along the Streets, much less offer him any
Indignity, when he goes about his Honest Business, under the Protection of the
Grand Signior. It becomes none but Janissaries and Ruffians, to be guilty of
these Incivilities to Strangers. The Law of Nations, and the Particular
Commands of our Holy Prophet, oblige us to treat such with all Humanity and
Tenderness. Besides, it is a Reflection on the Justice and Hospitality of the
Magnificent-Port, which is the Refuge and Sanctuary of all the Earth, that a
Stranger cannot walk the Streets in Peace. Despise no Man on the Score of his
Religion; for there are no Factions in Paradise: But consider, that whilst
Thousands of Mussulmans shall go to Hell for their Wicked Lives, so an Equal
Number of those we call Infidels, may be received into the Mansions of the
Blessed for their Virtues.

Thou seem to be much concerned for thy Soul: Thy Letter abounds with
overmuch Care in this Point. In being too sollicitous, it is Evident thy Faith
is small. Every Line is tinctured with Sad Expressions about the Perils,
Snares, Ambushes, Hooks, Gins, and I know not what other Devices the Devil has
to ruin thy Poor Soul, (as thou call'st it.) Cousin, do thou know what the
Soul is, about which thou keep'st such a Pudder? If thou do, it is more than
I do, and yet I have been searching and prying into it above these Thirty
Years; I mean, from the Time that I First began to think and consider of
Things; but am as far to seek as ever I was. Neither could all the Wise Men of
Old, the Philosophers and Sages, for ought I perceive, agree in their Verdict
about this Mysterious Thing which we all the Soul.

One will have it to be, Only the Finest Part of Matter in the Body. Another
says, It Is the Air which the Lungs suck in, and diffuse through all our
Members. A Third Sort affirm it to be, A Mixture of Air and Fire; A Fourth, Of
Earth and Water; A Fifth call it, A Complexion made up of the Four Elements, a
Kind of Quintessence, and I know not what. The Egyptians called it, A certain
Moving Number; And the Chaldeans, A Power without Form it self, yet. Imbibing
all Forms. Aristotle called it, The Perfection of a Natural Body. All these
agreed, That it was Corporeal, and as it were Extracted from Matter. The best
Definition among them is not worth an Aspre.

But there were Men of Sublime Speculations, who affirmed the Soul to be, A
Divine Substance, Independent of the Body. Of this Opinion were Zoroaster,
Hermes Trismegistus, Orpheus, Pythagoras, Plutarch, Porphyry, and Plato. This
last defined the Soul to be, A Self-Moving Essence, endu'd with Understanding.
But when they have said all, I prefer the Modesty of Cicero, Seneca, and
others, who acknowledged they were altogether Ignorant what the Soul. is.

There was no less Disagreement among the Philosophers, about the Seat of the
Soul. Hippocrates and Hierophilus placed it in the Ventricles of the Brain.
Democritus assigned it the Whole Body. Strabo was of Opinion, it resides
between the Brows; Epicurus, in the Breast. The Stoics lodged it in the Heart;
and Empedocles in the Blood. Which last seems to be the most Current Opinion of
the East to this Day: In Regard both Moses the Lawgiver of the Jews, and
Mahomet our Holy-Prophet, asserted the same, and for that Reason forbid Flesh
to be eaten with the Blood.

But be it what it will, either Corporeal or Incorporeal, a Substance or an
Accident, whether it dwell in the Head or in the Feet, Within or Without the
Body, there is no Certainty of these Things, neither can we be assured, what
will become of it after Death. Therefore it is in vain to disquiet thy self in
Search of a Mystery that is hid from Mortals. And Equally foolish it will be,
to frighten thy self with an Imagination of Hooks, Gins, and such like
Chimera's, which thou supposest the Devil is busy with to entrap thy Soul. It Is
a Wonder thou art not afraid to sleep, lest he should catch thee Napping, and
steal thy Soul from thee. I would fain know, what Sort of Tools he must use, to
take hold of a Substance more Thin and Imperceptible than a Shadow, or how he
will be able to seize and run away with a Being Active and Free as Thought?

Cousin, serve God after the Manner of thy Forefathers; love thy Friends,
pardon thy Enemies, be Just to all Men, and do no Injury to any Beast. If thou
observest this Rule, thou may defy the Devil; for thy Soul is in Safe
Custody. God is nearer to thee, than thou art to thy self. He is in the Center
of Every Thing, and is Himself the Center of All Things. In a Word, He is All
in All.

Paris, 3d. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1658.
LETTER VII.
To Afis, Bassa.
NOW the Scenes are changed in Europe. Enemies are become Friends, and those
who professed a Mutual Friendship, are at open Defiance. Constancy is a Vice in
the Politics, and a Dextrous Way of shifting from one Engagement to another;
for Interest, is esteemed the only State-Vertue.

I have already Intimated to the Divan, the War which broke out last Year
between the Suedes and Danes. The latter begun it by Solemn Proclamation,
sending a Herald at Arms to the Suedish Court, and dispatching Ambassadors to
all his Allies in Christendom, to give them an Account of his Proceedings. Now
I shall entertain thee with a short Idea of this War. By which thou will
comprehend, That the Danes are either much degenerated from the Valor of their
Ancestors, who formerly made the most terrible Figure of all the Nations in the
North: Or else, they are less obliged to Fortune, who has not favored them
with so many Successes and Triumphs of late, but rather exposed 'em to the
Insults of their Enemies, and the Contempt of all Men.

When the King of Denmark first proclaimed this War, he had a fair Advantage of
the Suedes, who at that Time were sorely entangled between the Polanders,
Germans and Moscovites, and had more Need of Helps than Hind'rances. Yet, King
Gustavus turning Part of his Forces into Holstein, Schoneland, and Juitland, he
took one Part after another, till he had overrun those Provinces in the Space
of Six Moons; And reduced the Danes to a Necessity of Composition, and that on
such Dishonorable Terms, as renders them the Scorn of the Neighboring Nations.

On the 13th. of the 3d. Moon, the Two Kings had an Interview near Copenhagen,
the Capital City of Denmark: For, so far had the Fortune of the Suedish Arms
carried their Victories. They Eat and Drank together several Times, and
Conversed privately some Hours. At last, a Firm Peace was Concluded between
them, and they concerted the Measures of a Perfect Friendship.

But, before this, the Dane had been forced to yield up Schoneland, with
Elsimberg, which commands Half the Baltic Sea. He surrendered also the
Provinces of Blakin and Halland, with a very strong Castle; the Island of
Burtholme; Ten Ships of War; and obliged himself to pay a Million of Dollars;
and to maintain Four Thousand Horse and Foot in the King of Suedeland's
Service, and give Free Quarter to all the Suedish Forces till the 5th. Moon.
These are such Dishonorable Articles, that the King of Denmark has quite lost
himself in the Esteem of all his Allies. They call him a Poor-Spirited Prince,
not Worthy of Support or Assistance.

In a Word, Serene Bassa, it is like to fare with him, as with other
Unfortunate Men, who when they are once falling, every Body will help to throw
them down. Therefore conserve thy Honors, as the only Bulwark of thy Interest
and Life.

Paris, 3d. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1658.
LETTER VIII.
To the Mufti.
BY the Faith of a True Believer, I swear, the Christians are Enemies to
themselves, if they do not embrace the Project of a certain Jesuit. They are
no Friends to their Messiah, if they reject so Regular an Idea, so Reformed a
Model of the Nazarene Empire, as this Sage has lately proposed to the Pope and
the Cardinals.

He lays his Foundation very deep, and draws his Examples from the Practice of
Peter, the Prince of the First Twelve Christian Caliphs, whom the Franks call
the Apostles of Jesus the Son of Mary. For, according to their Traditions, the
Messiah before he ascended to Heaven, left an exact Pattern of the Empire he
designed to Establish on Earth. He divided this Empire into Twelve distinct
Provinces, according to the Number of his Apostles or Vicars, assigning to each
that Quarter of the World where he was to preside, as Moses had formerly
Cantonized the Holy Region of Palestine among the Twelve Tribes, that descended
from Jacub.

But the Happy Son of Mary, being a far Greater Prophet than Moses, or any that
had gone before him; they say, he would not be content with diminutive
Territories, or Dominions disproport^ (...) his Ineffable Descent and Original.
(...) resolved on the Conques^ (...) the (...); commanding his V^^egerents
(...) d^^erse themselves through al^ Nations, ^ing to a certain Method, and
procla^ (...) Laws to every Creature on the Globe.

Venerab^^ President of the Faithful, I relate these Things, as I receive them
from the Mouths and Pens of Learned Christians, who may be presumed to know
their own History. Thou will perhaps expect to hear of Armies immediately
raised; of Camps, Battles and Sieges; of Devastations by Fire and Sword;
Storming of Cities, and Famishing of the more Impregnable Fortresses: In a
Word, I believe ^^ou look for a Relation of Campagn^^ and Victories, more
Glorious than the Achievements of the Roman Caesar's, more Fortunate than the
Successes of Alexander the Great: But, I tell thee, all the Registers and
Archives of the Primitive Christians, cannot furnish us with any Memoirs of
this Nature.

Their Gospel mentions no Warlike Undertakings, nor so much as the drawing of a
Sword by the Son of Mary, or any of his Followers, unless in a Private
Rencounter, when Peter the Lieutenant of the Messiah, enflamed with a Passion
to see his Master betrayed by Judas, his Kahya, or Tefterdar, and rudely
assaulted by Malchus, a Slave of the Jewish Mufti, the Valiant Apostle drew his
Cymetar, and cut off the Fellow's Ear.

Believe me, O Mysterious Doctor of the Mussulmans, I have perused the Four
Histories of the Life of Jesus, written by those who were Eyewitnesses of his
Actions; and I find indeed, that he once said to them of his Retinue, I come
not to send Peace on Earth, but a Sword. Yet by the Sequel it is evident, That
when he examined what Weapons his Followers had, and they told him, but Two
Swords; he seemed to be well satisfied, saying, It is enough; Though a Moment
before, he bid him among 'em that had no Sword sell his Robe and buy One.

And I have seen a Dispatch sent by Paul, one of the Primitive Christian
Caliphs, to the Nazarenes at Ephesus; wherein he counsels them, to put on
Complete Armor, as Helmet, Breast Plate, Shield, Buskins, Sword, and the Rest.

Besides these Passages, or such like, there is no Military Discourse
throughout the Book of the Gospel; much less any Relation of Battles, Sieges,
or any Martial Exploits. And the Christian Mollahs or Doctors, Interpret that
Letter of Paul in a Mystical Sense.

Will thou know then, how the Messiah and his Apostles subdued the World? I
tell thee, It was by Exemplary Virtue and Good Works, by Miracles, and Evident
Demonstrations of a Supernatural Power assisting them. For, they spoke all
Languages, yet were most of them Illiterate ^^^sons: They Cured the Deaf, the
Blind, the Lame and the Paralytick, without the Methods of Surgery or Physic.
They cast out Devils; Raised the Dead: And Finally, performed such and so many
Stupendous Actions, that the World became Captivated to their Doctrines and
Laws, and willingly submitted to a Yoke, which seemed to come from Heaven. With
Divine Eloquence, and the Dint of Irresistible Reason, Peter the Prince of the
Christian Caliphs, subdued the Minds of his Astonished Auditory, one Day in
Jerusalem; so that before the Sun went down, he gained Five Thousand
Proselytes. The Fame of these Things was soon spread through the Adjacent
Countries, and diverse Remote Provinces; and the Number of the Converts was
proportionably increased. In a Word, all that Embraced the Faith of Jesus,
surrendered both themselves and their Estates, to be entirely disposed of, at
the Pleasure of the Apostles. So great and unreserv'd an Attach had they for
the Vicars of their God.

Now the forenamed Jesuit considering these Things, and comparing the State of
those Devout Times, with the Libertinism, Divisions, Wars and General Contempt
of the Priesthood among the Christians of Succeeding Times, and especially in
this Present Age; attributes the Source of all these Evils, to the Ill Conduct
of the Apostles themselves, and their Successors in the Primitive Times, who
did not sufficiently improve the Advantages they were possessed of, when the
Pious Multitude would willingly have made 'em Lords of All Things. For, says
he, by the same Methods and Reasons might they have Claimed the Dominion over
the Estates of Kings and Emperors themselves, as over the Goods and Lands of
the Meanest Proselyte: Since they were all equally Sons of the Church, and
Subjects to the Discipline and Laws of Jesus.

This Ecclesiastic Politician therefore mightily blames Pope Sylvester, who
sat in the Chair of Peter, when Constantine the Great became a Christian,
being the First of the Roman Emperors who embraced that Faith. He accuses him,
I say, of Weakness and a Mean Spirit, for accepting of that Denation, which to
this Day is called the Patrimony of the Church, and comprehends all the
Temporal Estate the Roman Pontifs can boast of. Whereas, he ought to have
claimed an Entire Resignation of the Whole Roman Empire into his Hands, as
Supreme Vicar of God on Earth. This would have been a Pattern, says he, to all
the Kings and Princes of the Earth, who thought fit to turn Christians. And so
the Dominions of the World, had all fallen to the share of the Priests.

Neither could it appear difficult, in his Opinion, to have reduced the
Greatest Monarchs, to such a Forgetfulness and Contempt of their Royal Birth,
and all the Potent Charms of a Crown: Since the same Rhetoric which persuaded
'em to be Followers of the Messiah, would have also convinced 'em of the Vanity
of all Earthly Enjoyments; and of the Obligation they had to be Mortified, and
to pursue their Claims to Diadems of a more Exalted Degree, the Ineffable
Regalia of Paradise.

But since Things are thus in their Present State, and the Christian Princes
retain their Sovereignty, without any other Dependence on the Pope, saving in
Matters purely Religious; this Jesuit proposes, That the Roman Pontifs would
either first Reform their own Lives and Court, to the Height of that Primitive
and Apostolical Purity, which shined so eminently in the Earliest Governors of
the Church; and by that means persuade all the Monarchs in Christendom to
become their Subjects: Or else, compel them by Force to take the Order of
Priesthood, and so turn their Crowns into Mitres, their Kingdoms into
Ecclesiastic Commonwealths, where all the Public Offices of State, Seats of
Judicature, and in Fine, the Whole System of the Civil and Politic
Administration should be managed by the Priests, in a Subordinate Dependence
One of Another, according as their several Characters required. By which means,
all Christendom would be soon United into one Ecclesiastic Empire, whereof the
Pope should be the Supreme Head, in Temporals as well as Spirituals.

What I have related, is not only this Man's Private Project, but the Universal
Aim of his Whole Order. And Thousands of other Priests and Dervises, are
Caballing, in all the Courts and Countries of Europe, to bring it to pass.

Venerable Esad, if God should suffer their Contrivance to take Effect; it is
to be feared, our Wars with the Christians would be as Expensive and
Troublesome, if not more Fatal to the Mussulman Interest, than when these
Infidels, formerly laying aside their Private Feuds, banded together to Conquer
the Holy Land.

Paris, 25th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1658.
LETTER IX.
To Abdel Melec Muli Omar, President of the College of Sciences at Fez.
I Received the Packet of Venerable Import, containing Sacred Counsels and
Acceptable Intelligence; replenished with Noble Memoirs and Illustrious
Remarks, Sage Precepts, and Refined Improvemnts in Philosophy and the
Mysterious Science of Nature.

With abundance of Affection and Joy I read the Character of Musu Abu'l Yahyan,
and the Encomium of his Wisdom and Virtues. May a Constellation of such Lights
always adorn that Renowned College, and from thence disperse their Learned
Influence and Rays, not only through Africa, but over all the Earth: That Fez
may be Numbered among the Cities whose Fame is sweet; That it may be ranked
with Jerusalem the Holy, Masre the Ancient, Medina Talnabi the Chaste, and the
Salutiferous Babylon; acquiring a Peculiar Title of Honor, an Attribute worthy
of Respect, when Men shall every where call it, Fez, the Mother of Sciences.

My Soul has been very Inquisitive and Restless for many Years, and I think
this is owing to my Captivity in Palermo. For before that, whilst I lived at
Ease in the Seraglio, basking under the Warmer Influence of Royal Majesty, the
Sacred Presence of the Grand Signior, who like the Sun gives Motion, Heat and
Life to all things; I never regarded Books, or once applied my Mind to study
any Thing, but how to acquit my self in my Station, and strengthen my Interest
at the Court: Esteeming all other Learning as Barbarous, which conduced not to
this End.

Foreign Histories and Languages, were Equally Contemptible to me: I thought it
beneath a Mussulman Courtier, to give his Tongue and Mind the Fatigue of any
other Dialect, save the Persian, Arabic, and Turkish: Or to load his Memory
with the Records of other Nations, designed to be the Slaves of True Believers.

As to the Speculative Sciences, I was Naturally desirous enough of Knowledge.
But I either had not Leisure, or wanted Books and other Advantages of Study. So
that all the Knowledge I could then boast of, consisted only in some loose
Notions of Logic and Metaphysics, which I had got by reading an Old Arabic
Manuscript. And I thought my self Historian enough, after I had perused the
Annals of the Ottoman Empire, and now and then cast an Eye on the Turkish
Translation of Herodotus and Plutarch.

It Is true indeed, by Conversing frequently with the Greeks, I soon learned
their Vulgar Dialect; But this is far from the Polite Language of the Ancient
Grecians: And a Page of the Treasury, taught me the Rudiments of Sclavonian;
which afterward I learned more Perfectly, hoping it would be of some Service
to me one Time or other.

All these were very Superficial Accomplishments; yet I thought my self Happy
enough, without searching any farther. The Pleasures and Gayeties of a Courtly
Life, took from me the Edge and Gust, with which I have since pursued more
Solid Studies, and looked into the Wisdom of the Ancients.

But when once Misfortune had changed the Scene of my Life, and instead of the
Honorable Post I had in the Grand Signior's Service, Fate had rendered me a
Miserable Abject Slave in Sicily; I began to grow very Thoughtful and Pensive.
The Continual Drudgery and Labor I underwent, soon mortified my Former
Passions, and weaned me from all Hopes of Worldly Honor. And the Cruel Stripes
I daily received from that Barbarous Infidel, my Master, so broke my Spirits,
that Servitude became Familiar to me; and despairing to be Happy in this World,
I was only Ambitious to be Wise.

I grew very Contemplative: And having acquainted my self with an honest
Carpenter in the Town where we lived, who had a great many Books in's Custody,
he lent me several Choice Treatises; and I borrowed all the Hours I could from
Sleep, to peruse them with Attention and Profit. That Carpenter pitied my
Condition, and did me many Good Offices of Friendship, without other Hopes of
Reward, save what he expected from God. By his Means, I contracted a
Familiarity with Two or Three Learned Men, who spared no Pains to Instruct me
in the Roman and Ancient Greek Languages, as also in the Principles of
Philosophy. My Master often beat me for this, attributing the Neglect of his
Business, to my Bookishness (as he called it) and keeping the Priests Company.
But all his Severity, could not abate my Ardent Thirst after Knowledge. I still
continued Studying at certain Seasons, till the Happy Hour of my Redemption;
and then I frequented the Academies. Ever since which Time, I have neglected no
Opportunities of Improving my Reason^ Yet find my self at this Day, much in the
Dark. There appears no Certainty, in any Science but the Mathematics. All the
Rest are entangled with a Thousand Controversies and Riddles: Which has made me
turn Sceptick in most Things. Only I retain an Inviolable Faith for the
Alcoran, and the Book of Prophetic Doctrines and Traditions. Next to these, I
pay a Profound Respect to the Writings of Porphyry the Philosopher, who seems
to approach nearest to Reason of all the Ancient Sages. His True Name was the
same as thine [Melech] which thou know, in the Syriack signifies [King.]
Whence his Tutor Longinus taking Occasion from the Usual Color of Royal Robes,
called him Porphyrius, which in the Greek signifies, One clad in Purple. He was
born at Tire, the Metropolis of the Ancient Phoenicians. His Pedigree was
Noble, and his Education Generous. Nature also had formed him for a Sage, and
Fortune favored him with Advantages enough. For besides his First Tutor, whom
I have already mentioned (who was the Greatest Grammarian and Orator of his
Time;) Porphyry went to Rome, where he gained the Friendship of Plotinus: And
that Philosopher accomplished him in the Perfection of all Science. So that he
had Power over the Demons, and expelled the Genius Atan, which Infested
certain Baths in Rome. In a Word, his Doctrines appeared Divine, and his
Actions more than Humane. Yet he himself before his Death, published a Reverse
of his Former Writings: Which is a sufficient Argument, That there is no
Stability in the Thoughts of Mortals.

Therefore, since the Wisest of Men contradict themselves and turn Scepticks,
tell me, O Oracle of the Age, Why may not I?

Paris, 13th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1658.
LETTER X.
To Murat, Bassa.
THere has been something lately transacted between the French and the English,
which seems a Mystery. No body here understands the Meaning of it, but the very
Privado's of the Cabinet: Yet every one guesses, it is a Fetch of Mazarini's
Wit. That Minister has more Meanders in his Brains, than an Old Turkish
Gamester at Chess; who foresees no less than Nine Unavoidable Consequences,
before he makes One bold Motion: And, to be sure, the last shall be to his own
Advantage. In a Word, Dunkirk, the Strongest and most Important Sea-Town of all
the West, is surrendered by the Spaniards to the French; and by these, as an
Earnest of Friendship, is put into the Hands of the English.

The little Politicians of the City, are amazed at it; and the Greatest
Machiavils of the Court, either cannot, or will not inform 'em of the True
Secret.

You shall see Two or Three Grave Citizens, brooding Thoughts together over a
Box of Polvita, and sneezing out their Sentiments, without Reserve. Yet after
all their Wise Consult, they part as great Fools as they met, and only satisfy
themselves, with Nodding Wisdom to each other, at the last Conge; wherein is
comprehended, the Whole System of the Politics.

It was generally thought to be some Extraordinary Overture this Court would
make to the English, when a little before the Surrender of Dunkirk, the Duke of
Crequi, First Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and Monsieur Mancini, the
Cardinal's Nephew, were sent with a Splendid Retinue of French Nobles to
England. Every Body guessed, some Surprising Action would follow; and that it
must needs be a Mystery of Grand Importance, which could not be trusted to
Persons of less Note than the Two Chief Favorites of the Cardinal Minister.
And now it is come out, they know not what to make on it, Neither can I possibly
learn as yet, the true Reason of putting the English in Possession of such a
Town as this, which commands all the Northern Seas, and has cost so much Sweat
and Blood to take from the Spaniards. I have set Osmin the Dwarf to Work, and
laid Traps to get the Secret from several other Courtiers. But, I might as well
have attempted to find out the Body of Moses, which caused a Quarrel between
Michael and the Devil. Time perhaps will discover the Secret. And I dare at
present conclude, that the English are the only Nation in Europe, whose
Friendship the French think worth Courting.

The King has been very Ill of a Fever, and in great Danger of his Life: But is
now recovered again; which occasions Abundance of Real Joy among his Friends
and Loyal Subjects. As for the Rest, they know how to counterfeit.

I had almost forgot to tell thee, that the Spaniards endeavoring to relieve
Dunkirk, were encountered by the French, and Routed: About Two Thousand of
their Men being killed, and as many taken Prisoners.

Sage Bassa, the Successes of this Monarch are so Constant, that they have
given Birth to a Proverb: For when they would encourage any Man's Hopes, or
make a strong Asseveration, they usually say, As sure as the Great Lewis will
get a Town or Two in Flanders this Campaign.

Marshall Turenne is a Brave General, and the French Victories are in a great
Measure owing to his Conduct. He is very Expeditious in his Undertakings. There
were but a few Days between the Surrender of Dunkirk, and his taking of Bergen,
Furnes and Dixmude; Three strong Fortresses in Flanders. And, it is thought,
'twill not be long before he takes others.

The French King, is in a Fair Way to the Empire of the West. But this will not
be for the Interest of the Grand Signior. For, then he will have a New Enemy,
of an Old Friend, and one more Potent than he had before. Yet, Destiny
overrules All Things.

Paris, 13th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1658.
LETTER XI.
To Mahammed, the Eremit of Mount Uriel in Arabia.
I Have often troubled thee with Importunate Addresses, O Matchless Mortal;
Permit me once more to unbosom my Thoughts, as to my Confessor, or rather as to
an Oracle.

Surely, this Hour the Stars of my Nativity suffer a Mighty Change. I seem to
my self, like one newly awaked out of a deep Sleep, or from the Delusions of a
long Dream: For, so methinks, have my Past Years gone away like a Night,
wherein my Laboring Spirit has encountered with Nothing but Phantasms, Visions
and Darkness.

My Infant Days I esteem the most Happy, when my Ignorance of Vice had greater
Influence on my Actions, and preserved me more free from Blemish, than could
afterward all my Acquired Knowledge of the Precepts and Maxims of Virtue. For
no sooner was I enjoined the Study of Morality, and taught to distinguish
between Good and Evil, but my Curiosity prompted me to examine the Nature of
the Latter, more closely than by bare Speculation. I found my self more
Forcibly carried away by a Secret Pleasure, to make Experiment of what was
Forbidden, than to practice what was Commanded: So prone is Man to be jealous
of his Tutors, and to suspect those Laws as Impositions, which put a Restraint
on his Native Liberty.

Besides this, there are certain Genial Inclinations in every Mortal, which the
Youngest, and he that is in his Nonage, thinks he has as much right to gratify,
as the Wisest Senior. Nor can any Reason easily persuade him to part with this
Privilege, but under the Notion of being highly wronged; since every Man
Naturally places his Interest and Happiness, in pursuing the Motions of his own
Will.

It Is true, I never was prone to any Enormous Vices, or such as for their
Singularity, would make the most hardened Libertine blush, did he practice them
to the Knowledge of Men.

I ever had an Unconquerable Abhorrence for those Specific Acts of
Lasciviousness, which ought not to be named, and whose very Idea makes the
Thought recoil: Yet am Naturally Amorous, and cannot but pay to Beauty, the
Sentiments and Passions which are due from Platonic Love. I admire Symmetry
and Elegance, wherever I discern them; and can stand gazing whole Hours
together, on a Flower, a Tree, or a Peacock. I am Enamored with the Brightness
of the Sun; and like another Endymion, I languish for a more Intimate
Acquaintance with the Moon. The Lesser Beauties of the Night, the Stars,
inflame me with a Thousand Passions. I make my Court to the Whole Host of
Heaven, yet I hope commit no Idolatry. In fine, I am in Love with the Universe;
and die hourly, when I contemplate the Glory of that Transcendent Essence,
which is the Root and Source of All Things.

These are Passions not unbecoming a Mussulman. But I have also some Emotions
for Beautiful Women, more Violent than all the Rest, more Dangerous and Fatal.
Tell me, O Pious Sylvan, how I shall gratify my Love, without offending Virtue,
or the Gravity of a Man?

These Creatures seem to be Created for our Perplexity; since a Man can neither
well be Happy with, or without 'em. They are Perfect Riddles: And to love 'em,
or hate 'em too much, is an Equal Solecism. 'Twere a Question worthy of a
Philosopher, Whether this Sex, among all the Necessary Good Offices they do us,
were not sent into the World as Spies and Trepans, to observe our Counsels and
Actions: And by mixing Smiles with Frowns, Flatteries with Reproaches,
Sullenness with more Obliging Favors; to keep us in a Perpetual Maze and
Labyrinth, lest the Aspiring Wit of Men should, if left to themselves, attempt
something more Audacious than the Poets feign of the Sons of Titan, or the
Written Law Records of Nimrod and his Companions, who built the Tower of Babel.

But, whether they be Spies, or Faithful Assistants, Enemies or Friends, I tell
thee plainly, I have not been able to forbear Loving 'em excessively. And this
is Part of the Dream or Trance, out of which I am just now Awaked.

Another Scene, is that of Honor. This is a Phantome also, a mere Vapor, a
Shadow. I never hunted after Glory, nor courted Popular Applause. Yet being
entrusted with the Sublime Secrets, and commanded to serve the Grand Signior in
this Station, I would fain acquit my self without Disgrace. Nay, like other
Mortals in such a Post, I would willingly have the Smiles of my Sovereign, and
the Caresses of the Happy Ministers who serve him, if it shall be my Lot ever
to return to the Seraglio. Nothing appears to me more Terrible, than at such a
Time to encounter with Rugged, Furrowed Visages, or Cold and Faint Embraces of
my Fellow-Slaves.

This puts me upon a Thousand Inquietudes; makes me swear to Contradictions;
utter Lies and Blasphemies, which would turn the Devil to a Saint for Fear. In
a Word, I stumble at no Vice or Immorality, which may promote the Cause I am
engaged in. And all this for the Sake of a Fair Character at the Port: Whilst
I Am cajoling my self as well as others with a Persuasion, that it is only on the
Score of Honesty, and to acquit my self a Good Man. Thus, I pursue a Blast, a
Bubble, the Idea of Nothing, mere Vanity and an Empty Dream. And it is harder
for me to shake off this Enchantment, than that of Love.

Yet, all this while, I have not taken the French Method to gain Honor. I
never was Guilty of Oppression and Cruelty, nor bathed my Hands in Human Blood.
No Widow or Orphan mourns for what I Have taken from 'em. Nor did I ever Dragoon
any Body into Compliance with Reason. All the Parts I Have Acted in this Nature,
were Defensive; Pure Efforts of Self-Preservation: Which, thou know, is a
Principle Natural to all Men, and even to the Worms of the Earth. These Little
Reptiles, when they are trampled on, will turn again. And nothing more do I,
unless in the Sultan's Cause.

This puts me in Mind of my Integrity: For, I must tell thee my Virtues as well
as my Vices. Neither Arabia, nor all the East, have ever brought forth a Man
more true to his Trust, than Honest Loyal Mahmut. I will for ever boast of
this, in an Age so full of Treachery. This alone will carry me safe to
Paradise, in Spite of all the Mollahs. As for the Rest, they are only Venial
Sins, easily dropped off on the Bridge of Trial. And so long as no Body can say,
I Have betrayed my Master's Secrets, I Am safe as an Angel that is not obliged to
stand Sentinel at the Lowest Post of Heaven: For, there he is within Gunshot of
the Devil.

Just as I drew my Pen from that Word, a sudden Noise in the Streets called me
to the Window. Where turning my Eyes from the Earth to the Moon and Stars (for
'twas a very serene Sky) I observed a small swift Cloud to glide along from
South to North, much in Appearance like a Bale of Silk. It cleft the Element
like a Sly Arab Thief, that swims for Booty on the River Tigris. Wondering at
this, when all the Firmament was Clear, and not another Cloud above the
Horizon; I soon concluded, 'Twas the Chariot of some Airy God, a Mercury or
Messenger, sent with speedy News, to the High Lords, Commanders of the Artick
Regions; to bid 'em be upon their Guard, or some such weighty Matter. Perhaps,
thought I, a War is commenced between the Spirits of the Poles. Or, it may be,
King Aeolus has sent a Summons to the Northern Winds, being resolved to play
some Royal Pneumatick Freaks upon the Sea.

In good Earnest, it made me reflect on our Ignorance of the Laws and
Constitutions of the Elements. It put me in Mind of the Fogs and Mists, which
sometimes envelop the Globe in Darkness; on Purpose, for ought we know, to
hinder us from seeing what is transacting at such Seasons in the Higher Regions
of the Air. The Spirits of those Serener Tracts, may then be Frolicking in
Visible Forms, Celebrating Solemn Festivals, and kindling all the Meteors of
the Upper Welkin, as Natural Fireworks and Illuminations, not fit for Mortals
to behold, lest we should learn too much, and grow as Wise as they. However, it
made me very Contemplative, to see a single Solitary Cloud thus glide along the
Air: And I could have wished for Wings to pursue its Motions, because the
Appearance was not Common.

Thou that have measured the whole Frame of Nature, and taken the True
Dimensions of the World; that have penetrated into the Secrets of the Elements,
and art always busied in the most Sage and Solid Scrutinies; wilt smile at the
Vanity of Common Mortals, such as I, who when we are Unintelligible to our
selves, yet presume to comprehend the Ways of the Omnipotent, who is Perfect in
Knowledge.

As for me, who have studied in the Academies, and read Aristotle, Avicen,
Plotinus, Averroes, with other Philosophers; I esteem my self still but at the
Bottom of Plato's Cave, Conversing with Shadows, mistaken in every Thing, but
the Idea of thy Sanctity and Immense Wisdom, which is Imprinted on my Soul, as
those which the Philosophers call First Principles, because they are
Self-Evident.

I designed to have said more to thee; but a sudden Indisposition and Extreme
Faintness, has taken away my Spirits. My Limbs tremble, my Head is giddy, my
Heart fails me. In a Word, I seem like one between a Mortal and a Ghost.

Paris, 29th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1658.
LETTER XII.
To Achmet Padishani Culligiz, Bassa.
THY Sur-Name argues thee a Favorite at the Seraglio: And for that Reason, I
know, thou art accustomed to receive Infinite Submissions and Flatteries. But I
must be as blunt with thee, as I was with the New Mufti, when I Congratulated
his Accession to the Chief Patriarchate. I told that Prince of the Mussulman
Prelates, that I had no Encouragement to welcome him to a Dignity, which though
in it self Sacred and Inviolable, yet could not secure him from the
Persecutions of Popular Envy, any more than it did his Predecessor. And the
same I must say to thee.

Darnish Mehemet, Bassa, is fallen a Victim to the Rage of the Multitude; and
thou have got his Seat on the Bench. May thou enjoy it long, and never be
Mob'd out of thy Honor and Life as he was. Some Years ago, he forbad me to
write any more to him. What his Reason was, I know not, neither did I ever
enquire. However, I obeyed his Injunction; being Indifferent to whom I send my
Intelligence, provided I do the Grand Signior any Service: For, to that End am
I placed here.

Illustrious Bassa, I shall now acquaint thee with Two the most Principal
Points of News stirring in Europe. One is, the Election of Leopoldus Ignatius
Josephus, King of Hungary and Bohemia, to the German Empire. They have been
canvasing this Business Eleven Moons. And at last the Austrian Faction carried
it. This was done on the 8th. of the 7th. Moon. And he was solemnly Crowned on
the 22d. of the same. This has height'ned the Quarrel between the Duke of
Bavaria, and the Prince Palatine. The Latter was so far transported with
Passion at the Diet of Frankford, that he threw a Standish of Ink at the
Bavarian Ambassador: Which is resented as an Unpardonable Affront. And the Duke
is marching with an Army to revenge it, or demand Satisfaction. The Elector of
Mentz has denied him Passage through his Principality. And they are all like to
be embroiled in a Civil War about it. This is no bad News for the Mussulmans.

But, that which makes yet a greater Noise, is the Death of Oliver, the
Protector of the English Commonwealth; who whilst Living, was the Terror of all
Europe. The Superstitious, and such as regard Signs, say, This was presaged
Three Moons ago, when a Great Whale, Nine Times as long as a tall Man, was
taken in a River of England, near the Capital City Forty Miles from the Sea. I
know not whether these Kind of Observations are worthy of Credit. Yet, it
seems, the Annals of that Nation take Notice, That the Unusual Appearance of a
Whale so far within Land, has always Prognosticated some Mighty Change.
Perhaps, the Fate of Illustrious Personages, affects Nature with a more than
ordinary Passion, puts the Elements into a Disorder, and Inspires the Brutes
with Sympathy.

We are assured, that on the Day of this Prince's Death, and at the very Hour
of his Departure, there was so Violent a Tempest of Wind, Rain, Hail, Thunder
and Lightning, as had never been known by any Man then alive in that Nation.
Which some Interpreted to his Dishonor, as if he were a Magician, or at least
a very Wicked Man: And that this Hurricane was raised by the Devils, who
transported his Soul to Hell. Whilst others affirmed this Mixed Storm, to be
only the Sighs and Tears of Nature, the Mournful Passions of the Guardian
Spirits of England, for the Loss of so Great and Fortunate a Hero: And that the
very Inanimate Beings Condol'd his Death. As for me, I look on all these Things
as pure Accidents, the Effects of Chance. I have an Equal Opinion of another
Circumstance, much observed both by his Enemies and Friends; That he died on
the same Day, whereon he had formerly gained some Notable Victories. The One
descanting on this to his Reproach, the Other drawing from it Arguments of
Honor. It Is difficult to say any Thing of him, without appearing Partial. He
had Great Virtues, and no Less Vices. He was a Valiant General, and wise
Statesman: Yet a Traitor to his Sovereign. As for Religion, though he professed
himself a Zealot, yet it is thought, he was as Indifferent as other Princes; who
for Reasons of State, and to please their People, make a Show of Piety, but in
their Hearts Adore no other Gods but Fortune and Victory.

He was esteemed one of the Greatest Politicians of this Age; and none could
match him but Mazarini. Yet I cannot but smile when I call to Mind, how both
these Eminent Statesmen were cheated this Year, by Two or Three Fugitives.

A certain French Captain named Gentilot, that had served under the States of
Holland in the Wars, and on that Account had often passed through the Sea-Towns
in Flanders; observed a Weakness in one Part of the Walls of Ostend, by which
the Town mighty easily be surpised. At his Return to Paris, he acquainted
Cardinal Mazarini with this; and gave him so great Encouragement, that the
Cardinal resolved to try some Stratagem in Order to gain that Important Place,
without the Cost and Hazards of a Formal Siege.

To this End, he commands Gentilot to seek out some Persons fit to be engaged
in the Plot: Men of Resolution, Conduct and Secrecy. This Captain therefore
knowing Two or Three Fugitives in Paris, who were forced to fly out of Flanders
to save their Lives, having committed Murders, and other Crimes against the
Spanish Government; breaks the Business to them, promising Mountains of Gold,
if they would assist in carrying it on.

They seemed to embrace his Proposals with Abundance of Readiness, and were
introduced into the Cardinal's Cabinet. Where that Minister being satisfied in
their Characters, and the Offers they made to serve him in this Affair;
seconded the Promises which Gentilot had made 'em, with many Additional
Encouragements. In a Word, they consulted together frequently; were late every
Night in the Cardinal's Lodgings: And at last, having adjusted all the
Necessary Measures that were to be taken; the Fugitives were dispatched away
into England, with Letters from Mazarini to Oliver, the English Protector.
Wherein he acquainted him with the Design, requiring the Assistance of some
English Ships to transport Men into the Haven of Ostend.

These Agents went accordingly, but with a Resolution to put a Trick both on
the Cardinal and the Protector; and by doing their Country so Considerable a
Service as the saving this Town, to merit a Repeal of the Sentence pronounced
against 'em, that so they might return Home in Peace, and enjoy their Estates
and Native Liberty.

Oliver received 'em very kindly, and embraced the Motion with some Warmth. But
upon Second Thoughts, tried to out-bribe Mazarini, and hire these Persons for
himself. Ostend was too sweet-a Bait in his Eye, to let it so tamely fall into
the Hands of the French, for Want of a few larger Promises, and Offers of Gold.
Wherefore he plied these Agents briskly with all the Effectual Oratory he
could, to win 'em over to his own Separate Interest; engaging to bestow Great
Preferments on 'em in England, with Two Hundred Thousand Sequins, as soon as
the Business was accomplished.

The Three Flemings desired no better Sport, than thus to cajole Two the Ablest
Statesmen in Europe. They possessed Oliver with an Entire Belief of their Zeal
and Fidelity in his Service: And it was agreed on between 'em, To hold
Mazarini in Play, and that Oliver should send him an Answer, refusing to meddle
in an Intrigue which seemed to carry so little Probability of Success.

From England these Agents passed over into Zealand. It having been so
concluded before they parted from Cardinal Mazarini; that so they might there
gain more Confederates, and lay all the Necessary Trains to bring this Intrigue
to the desired Issue. But, Instead of doing either the Protector or Cardinal
Mazarini this Service, they went immediately, and revealed the whole Secret to
the Governor of Flanders.

He having duly examined all Circumstances, and being satisfied in the Truth of
their Relations, and in their Loyalty to the King of Spain; commanded them to
proceed in deluding both the French and the English, as long as they could,
with fair Hopes of accomplishing their Aims. Whilst he took Care to secure
Ostend, and other Parts of Flanders, from all Attempts of this Nature.

In fine, the Protector falling off again, being frighted by Cardinal
Mazarini's Threats, who had discovered his Underhand Dealing; these Agents
applied themselves close to the French, who were now made so much more Eager,
by Oliver's Design to Interlope 'em. They spun out the Intrigue several Moons,
brought the French King to sign Articles, and to pass his Word for the Payment
of near a Million of Gold; cajoled his General in Flanders, and at one Time
made him believe, 'Twas his Interest to lie still for Six VVeeks together, when
all the World expected he would pursue his Conquests in that Province. At
another Time, caused him to march with so much Precipitation, when the VVays
were Unpassable, that he was forced to leave most of his Cannon, and a Thousand
Wagon plunged in the deep Roads, with the Loss of Three Thousand Men, who
were either drowned or starved: And all this for the Sake of gaining Ostend.
When after all, they were not only cheated of their Hopes in that Point, but
most shamefully exposed to the Derision and Contempt of all Europe. For
Cardinal Mazarini reposed an Entire Confidence in the Fidelity of his Flemish
Agents. So that whatsoever they proposed, as an Expedient to compass the
Design, was a Law. Hence it was, that the French General in Flanders received
Express Orders to emba^e part of his Army on certain Vessels that (...) before
Dunkirk, and on a perfixed Day to sail into the Haven of Ostend, there to Land
his Men, and take Possession of the Town, in the Name of his Master: Being made
to believe, That the Gates would be opened to him, and that the Spanish
Garrison should march out in his Sight.

All this was carried on with so much Artifice and Subtle Management, that when
he entered the Haven with Ten Vessels, he thought himself secure of the Place:
Yet no sooner Landed his Men to the Number of Fifteen Hundred, but they
thund'red upon them such Volleys of Great and Small Shot from the Walls, that
Two Hundred of them fell immediately, as many threw down their Arms, and the
Citizens making a Vigorous Sally, the Rest were either Killed or taken
Prisoners, he himself not escaping that Misfortune.

By this thou may discern, how easy it is for an Agent of any Prince, to
embarass his Master's Affairs: And, that a Public Minister can never commit a
greater or more dangerous Error, than in being too Credulous.

Serene Bassa, let not Mahmut's Name sound harsh at the Port, nor his Honor be
traduced by Sycophants: Since his Loyalty is Proof against all Temptations; And
this the Ministers of the Divan know by Twenty Years Experience.

Paris, 5th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1658.
LETTER XIII.
To Pesteli Hali, his Brother, Master of the Grand Signior 's Customs at
Constantinople.
I Have received a Dispatch from our Cousin Isouf. He has been in a Cold
Region, within the Artick Circle, but now is at Stockholm in Sueden. The Parts
he has visited, are the Farthermost Tracts of our Continent to the North. They
may be called, The Territories of Night and Darkness: For they have but One Day
in a Whole Year. The Sun appears but Once above their Horizon, during his
Annual Progress through the Zodiac. Yet, he makes them amends by the long
continued Light he affords them at that Season: For, that One Day is, without
the Miracle of Joshua, prolonged the Space of Four, Five, or Six Moons,
according to the Proportionate Distance of each Country from the Pole.

Isouf relates Strange Things of those Dark Countries, and such as seem almost
to surpass Credit, were they not confirmed by very Grave and Learned Writers.
He says, that in some Parts of Norway, no Tree is to be seen, by Reason of the
Violent Force of the Winds, which blow down all before 'em, carrying away even
the Roofs of Houses, and scattering them at a great Distance. So that the
Inhabitants are forced to dwell in Dens and Caves, and burn the Bones of
Fishes, for want of better Fuel: Since it is Impossible for any Plant to grow
in those Parts. Neither can Men travel safely on Horses or a-foot, at certain
Tempestuous Seasons. For, the Wind will either throw both Horse and Man to the
Ground, or catch 'em up into the Air.

But when he describes the Horrible Coldness of these Regions, the very Idea of
it is enough to make one quake. He says, Cold is an Active Quality, and Reigns
under the North Pole, as in its Proper Kingdom or Center, from whence it darts
its Freezing Rays through the Earth. Yet, others are of Opinion, that Cold is
only a Privation of Heat, a bare Passive Disposition of the Elements; and
therefore more Sensibly felt in those Climates that are farthest from the Warm
Influences of the Sun, whose Beams give Life and Vigor to All Things. Be it how
it will, its Effects are very Remarkable in those Northern Regions.

All the Rivers, Lakes, and Seas there, are frozen up during the Winter. Men,
Horses, Wagons, Coaches, and even whole Armies pass as commonly over the Ice,
as before Ships sailed there, or as we travel over the Firm Land. And last
Winter, the Baltic Sea was the Road of Ice, over which the King of Sueden
marched with his Army of Horse and Foot into Zealand, to prosecute the War in
those Parts. They also raise Strong Forts of Snow, able to sustain the Battery
of Bullets and Engines of War, with all the Violence of the Fiercest Assaults.
They build Carvansera's on the Frozen Seas and Lakes, for the Convenience of
Travelers; and set up Branches of Firr or Juniper, as Marks to distinguish the
Holes and Fissures of the Ice, from that which is solid and secure: For there
are Highways on those Congealed Waters; and Officers appointed to survey them,
and take all Necessary Orders for the Security of Travelers. And sometimes
they fight Pitched Battles on the Frozen Element.

Our Kinsman also has made Curious Remarks on the Triumphal Obelisks, and
Funeral Monuments of Ancient Hero's among the Goths and Suedes: For those
Nations boast of Giants and Famous Warriors. These Monuments, though of Stone,
and Exquisitely Shaped, yet were never cut by the Hand of Man; but are as so
many Splinters of Rocks and Mountains, torn from the Main Body by the Violence
of Earthquakes, Thunders, or the like Motions of Nature; And falling down in
the Forms of Pyramids, and other Artificial Figures, were of Old set up by the
Graves of Giants and other Renowned Persons. Having also Inscriptions on them,
signifying the Particular Hero who there lies buried. Such as these,

I Uffo, Fighting in Defense of my Country, with my Own Hand Killed Thirty Two
Giants: And at last being Killed by the Giant Rolvo, my Body lies here.

And, I Ingolvas that Subdued all Oppressors, and defended the Poor and Weak;
Now grown Old, Poor and Weak my self; yet having my Sword girt to my Thigh, am
forced to yield to Death (who Conquers All Things) and to go down into this
Sepulcher, which I prepared for my Last Retreat.

It seems, there are Infinite Numbers of these Tombs all over the Deserts,
Mountains, and Valleys of the North. Which is an Argument, That however
Contemptible these People may seem to the True Believers; Yet they have not
been wanting in Valiant Men and Hero's. Doubtless, God has dispensed his
Virtues and Graces to Men of all Nations: He is not Partial in his Gifts. We
ought to Praise him in the Beginning and End of all Our Actions. And if we
contemplate his Honor in the Middle of our Affairs, we shall not do amiss;
Since, as he is the First and the Last of the Universe, so he is the Center of
Every Thing.

I had not these Relations only from Isouf, but out of the Historians
themselves who write of these Countries: Yet our Kinsman informs me of Some
Things, which are omitted by those Authors. Every Traveller is Singular in his
Observations: For, all Men have not the same Genius. And thy Journal of the
East, abounds with Remarks which are not common in other Writers,

Brother, if I may advise thee, it shall be, to do nothing by Imitation; but
pursue the Dictates of thy own Sense, and the Peculiar Bent of thy Soul. For
whatever is forced and affected, is Nauseous.

Paris, 16th. of the 12th. Moon, of the Year 1658.
LETTER XIV.
To Zeidi Alamanzi, a Merchant in Venice.
THE Kaimacham has informed me, that thou art appointed to succeed Adonai the
Jew, in Italy. He has also acquainted me with other Matters relating to thy
Charge. I am glad they have found out a Mussulman Capable of that Important
Trust; and that we shall not always stand in Need of Jews to serve the Grand
Signior, Emperor of the Faithful. Though some of that Nation are very Honest and
Loyal; yet it is better to be without 'em.

Thou and I, are Strangers to each other: But it is Necessary for us to be
speedily acquainted, and hold a Mutual Intimacy by Letters; that so we may
serve our Great Master, without Interfering or Clashing in our Intelligence. I
have been here these Twenty Years, and made no False Steps in my Sovereign's
Business, whatever I have done in my own: Yet have encountered a Thousand
Difficulties and Perils; suffered Imprisonment many Moons in Paris, for my
Fidelity; whilst my Enemies at Constantinople, persecuted me as a Traitor and
an Infidel.

It Is Impossible to avoid these Crosses, in the Course of Humane Life. They are
as Natural as the Wind or the Rain. All that we can do is, by a prudent and
dextrous Management of Contingences, to wind our selves out of Trouble as well
as we can. And above all, rather to be our Own Executioners, than betray the
least Secret committed to us.

I question not, but thou have had the same Instructions given thee by the
Ministers of the Happy Port. What I say, is only to confirm thee in thy
Fidelity and Care. Write to me with the same Frankness, and let Nothing make
thee reserved to thy Fellow-Slave. We are both Followers of the Prophet: We
Worship One God after the same Manner, and Equally reverence the Alcoran. We
serve One Master; and though in different Stations, yet let our Affections and
Interests be United as Friends. Let no little narrow Passions or Emulations,
corrupt our Integrity; or teach us to un-Man our selves.

I know not thy Original, whether thou art of Mohammedan or Christian Parents.
'Twould be very Obliging to send me a short History of thy Life, and how thou
learned the Italian Tongue: For without that, I judge they would not have
sent thee into that Country.

As for me, I Am an Arabian by Birth, brought up in the Seraglio; from thence
sent to Sea; there taken Captive by the Christians; sold in Sicily, where I
underwent a tedious Servitude, yet at length gained my Freedom: and having
passed through Various Fortunes, at last was sent hither, to observe the Secret
Counsels of the Christians, especially of this Court.

I now grow Old, having seen near Fifty Years. Yet though the Strength of my Body
fails, I feel not the least Decay in my Zeal for the Mussulman Faith, or my
Master's Service. I Am still Mahmut, the Loyal Slave of the Port; and thy
Friend; so long as thou art so to thy self.

Paris, 30th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1659.
LETTER XV.
To the Kaimacham.
IT rejoices me to hear, that Adonai's Place is supplied by a Mussulman, in
whom the Sublime Port may put more Confidence, than in any of Jewish Race.
'Twill be an Encouragement to the True Faithful, and a Precedent of good
Import. For, no Nation love to see their Prince bestow Offices of Trust on
Strangers, when his own People are as capable of Employment as they. It Is
Generally taken as an Affront and Contempt of their Abilities or their Virtue,
and has often produced Ill Consequences.

I deny not; but there are many Honest and Wise Men among the Hebrews, Persons
of Merit and Honor, from whom the Sultan receives no small Services. But, this
ought not to diminish the Reputation of those who are of the same Faith with
their Sovereign. Doubtless, Arabia and Turkey are not barren of Good Soldiers,
Prudent Statesmen, and Dextrous Ministers.

I know not the Character of Zeidi Alamanzi, whether he be a Natural born Turk,
a Tributary Son of a Christian, or a Voluntary Renegado. However, the Choice
that is made of him, convinces me, that the Unerring Divan esteem him a Man fit
for the Business committed to his Charge.

He ought to be perfectly skilled in Italian, or at least in some other
Language of the Nazarenes: That so he may pass the better unsuspected among the
People where he resides, who are more Jealous of Strangers, than any other
Nation in Europe. It Is a Crime thought worthy of Imprisonment, for a Venetian
to converse with a Foreigner too frequently, and in Private: For they are
afraid lest by that Means, a dangerous Correspondence should be established
betwixt some Ill-affected Subjects of that Commonwealth, and its Enemies:
Whereby their Secrets may be betrayed, and Measures taken to ruin 'em.

For this Reason also, they have forbid False Hair or Perrukes to be worn by
any in their Dominions, lest this might serve as a Disguize for Villains and
Traitors. Yet Nothing more common in France and other Countries of Europe, than
for Men to wear on their Heads, Ornaments of Women's Hair, instead of their own.

As to Religion, I believe, they will not much trouble him, being no Zealots
themselves: And provided he does but profess himself a Christian and a
Catholic, they will make no farther Inquisition.

The Italians in General, are much like the Ancient Romans in their Humor. Men
of grave Aspects, and Carriage, and much more composed in both than the French,
who appear Ridiculous through the Levity of their Discourse and Actions. The
Former abound in Sage Precepts of Morality, and Politic Aphorisms, which serve
as a Rule whereby to square the Course of their Lives: The Latter only affect
some flashy Improvements of Wit and Conversation, studying rather how to please
Women, than Men; coveting to be perfect in External Accomplishments, and the
Graces of the Body, whilst they slight the more valuable Endowments of the
Mind. In a Word, they are mere Apes, and Mimicks. On the Contrary, the Italians
are Men of an Awful and Majestic Behavior, solid Judgment, and deep Reach. If
you see them smile, you shall seldom or never hear 'em laugh: Whereas, the
Motion of a Feather will set the French a-Braying like Asses. These will
contract a Warm Friendship with any Man at first Interview, heighten it with a
Thousand Compliments, make him their Confessor, and unbosom all their Secrets.
Yet a Second Encounter shall extinguish this Passion, and a Third shall revive
it again. Whereas, those are cautious and flow in the choice of their Friends;
and when once that Knot is dissolved, it is never to be fastened there again.
They are Irreconcilable in their Hatred and Revenge.

But, there are Men to be excepted in Both Nations, who fall not under these
General Characters. France affords many Wise, and Learned Persons; and Italy,
not a few Fools and Idiots. Virtues and Vices are strangely mixed in all
People. War, Commerce and Travel, with other Humane Occurrences, alter Men's
Natural Dispositions, and give the Lie to the Exactest Observations that can be
made. Besides, Time changes all Things: And the Qualities which this Age
remarks in the Italians, may in the next be transferred to the French. For,
there is no Constancy in any Thing under the Moon.

Zeidi will find great Examples of Frugality, among the Venetians, in the
necessary Expenses of their Persons and Families; Yet Abundance of Magnificence
in whatever relates to the Public, which the Subjects of that Commonwealth
serve with open Purses, and free Hearts.

Indeed, they are not so Remarkable for their Temperance, as some other Parts
of Italy. Libertinism and Voluptuousness, reign uncontrolled in Venice* Women
and Wine, are there almost as Common, as the Elements. Yet, it is observed, that
Strangers generally debauch more with Both, than the Natives. God preserve
Zeidi from their Temptations.

If it be his Fortune, or Duty to visit Padua, he ought not to make too long an
Abode in that Nest of Philosophers and Physicians, lest they first Anatomize
his Soul, and discover the Secrets of his Commission; and then turn his Body to
a Skeleton, as they once served a Moor, whom they dissected Alive, to make
Experiment, perhaps, whether a Mahometan's Blood Circulated the same Way as a
Christians.

Those Italian Physicians, are very Cruel; and think it no Sin to try Poisons,
and other Fatal Tricks on the Poor, that so they may be the better able to keep
the Rich on the Rack at their Pleasure, and make their Market on 'em.

I know not Zeidi's appointed Station, or what Cities he is to see: But,
wherever he goes, 'twill be Necessary for him to use Abundance of Caution;
for the Italians are the closest, slyest and most Judicious People in the World.

But, I forget that he is chosen by the Divan for this Employment, to whom the
Characters of all Nations are known, and who penetrate into the most Interior
Recesses of Men's Spirits.

Therefore, I lay my Hand upon my Mouth in profound Submission, and acquiesce
to my Superiors. Still praying, That the Grand Signior may have Faithful and
Wise Ministers at Home, and no Novices for his Agents Abroad.

Paris, 3d. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1659.
LETTER XVI.
To William Vospel, a Recluse of Austria.
THere is a Street in Paris, which they call the Street of Hell. The Reason of
this Name is said to be, because at one End of it, there formerly stood an Old
House, possessed by Devils, who were so troublesome, that as the Records of
Paris affirm, an Edict of Parliament was passed, to remove all the Inhabitants
out of their Houses in that Street, and shut up the Entrance with a Wall. Since
which, these Demons were expelled by the Carthusians, who built a Monastery in
the Place. If this Story be true, it redounds much to the Reputation of that
Order, and of all you Monasticks in General, who by your Exercisons are able to
subdue the Infernal Spirit. But I have heard so many silly Tales of Houses
being haunted by Ghosts and Hobgoblins, that I know not how to give Credit to
this,

Besides, when I consider the Nature of Incorporeal Beings, it seems Rediculous
to think, that they can take Delight to play the Antiques, to frighten poor
Mortals: Or confine themselves to an Old Ruined Castle (for such was this
House) for the Sake of a Little Sport; When according to the Ancient
Philosophers, every Incorporeal Being is far more Excellent than the most
Perfect Body, and can be Every Where: Neither are they at any Time Locally
Present in Bodies, but only by a Propension or Habit are inclined to them: And
this they mean of Living Bodies. What Charm then can there be in an Old Rotten
Fabric of Stone and Wood, to allure and detain Immaterial Substances?

Certainly, the Nature of these Separate Essences, is very Remote from all
Compounded Beings. I have been often at a Loss, in Contemplating the Soul of
Man. Sometimes it seems no otherwise distinguished from the Souls of Brutes,
than by being United to a Body of Different Organs; Which causes us to show
more Evident Tokens of Reason than they, in the Faculty of Discourse, and in
our Actions. Yet when I consider more attentively the Operations of our Mind
and Intellect, I cannot but conclude, There is a vast Distinction between our
Souls, and those of the Beasts. I have with Pleasure observed the Excellency of
Humane Intellect in Madmen and Dreamers; who being come to themselves, (as we
usually say) relate many Things of which they were before Ignorant, and
comprehend Things surpassing their Former Imaginations.

It appears therefore more Rational to me, That the Soul is Everywhere and
Nowhere, as the Ancients say; Than that it is shut up and Imprisoned in the
Body, as a Wild Beast in his Den, or Liquor in a Glass. However, by an
Ineffable Production of it self, it is Present in Every Part of the Body, as
the Light of the Sun is diffused through the Air, and can as soon withdraw it
self, as that Light when interrupted by a Cloud. In a Word, I conceive the Soul
to be a very Free Agent, and that it is here, and there, and every where. It
United it self to the Body by its own Choice, and can retire again from it at
Pleasure.

One closely pursued Act of Contemplation, will at any Time carry thee or me to
the Invisibles, whenever we go resolutely about it.

Paris, 1st. of the 4th. Moon. of the Year 1659.
LETTER XVII.
To the Venerable Ibrahim, Cadilesquer of Romeli.
THere has not a Year escaped, since my Arrival at Paris, wherein I did not
send to the Ministers of the Ever Happy and Exalted Port, constant Intelligence
of Battles, Sieges, Storming of Towns, and such other Occurrences of War, as
happened between the Kingdoms of France and Spain. But now I believe, my Future
Dispatches must contain other Matters. For, in all Appearance, this War which
has lasted Four and Twenty Years, is in a fair Way to be ended. The King of
Spain grows weary of his Continual Losses in Italy, Flanders, and Catalonia:
And he of France, seems glutted with Perpetual Victories and Conquests. In a
Word, these Two Potent Monarchs laying aside their Quarrels, are making
diligent Preparations this Year for a Campaign of Friendship and Love.

They are both in Arms, yet commit no Acts of Hostility. Whilst Cardinal
Mazarini on the Part of this Crown, and Dom Louis d' Aro de Gusman, First
Minister of Spain, are gone to meet each other on the Frontiers of both
Kingdoms, as Plenipotentiaries for their Respective Masters, to concert the
Measures of a Lasting Peace, and treat of a Marriage between the King of
France, and the Infanta of Spain.

All Europe is amazed at this surprising Change. And the French and Spaniards,
who border on each other, can hardly believe their own Senses, whilst they find
a Mutual Commerce restored between their. Frontier Towns and Villages, which
had been Interrupted, ever since the Year 1635. about Sixteen Moons before I
came to this City.

But, though they are thus disposed to Peace here in the West; the Northern
Monarchs are pushing the War forward in Sueden, Denmark, and Poland, with all
Imaginable Vigor and Animosity. The coming over of the Elector of Brandenburgh
to the Danish Interest, has made a great Alteration in their Affairs. For,
whereas Fortune seemed before in all Things to favor the Suedes; now they lose
Ground, and find their Attempts Unsuccessful. Four Thousand of their Men fell
before the Walls of Copenhagen, in Three Nights and Two Days: Which caused King
Gustavus to raise the Siege. Whilst the Duke of Brandenburgh retook
Fredericks-Ode, and thereby restored to the King of Denmark, the Provinces of
Holstein, Jutland and Ditmarsen.

The Hollanders also have had a Combat with the Suedes at Sea, and sunk
Fourteen of their best Ships: Besides what they burnt and took.

These Events have stirred up several Princes to mediate a Peace. And it is not
Improbable, but in a little Time, we may see all the Christians good Friends:
And then 'twill be Time for the Mussulmans, to be upon their Guard.

As for Mahmut, he will not fail to pry into the Counsels of these Infidels;
and send timely Notices to the Port. Leaving the Rest to the Wisdom of his
Superiors, and the Pleasure of Destiny.

Paris, 29th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1659.
LETTER XVIII.
To Musu Abu'l Yahyan, Alfaqui, Professor of Theology at Fez.
THE Character, which the Great and Illustrious Abdel Melec Muli Omar,
President of Presidents, Grace and Ornament of Ancient Learning, Oracle of
Africa, and Restorer of Obsolete Truth; has given me of thy Profound Wisdom and
Science, fills me with Reverence and Sacred Love. I am ravished with Wonder and
Joy to hear, That in this Age, wherein the Mussulman Theology has suffered so
many Innovations, there yet survives a Man who dares, and is able to assert
against all Opposers, not only the Primitive and Original Truth, brought down
from Heaven by the Hand of Gabriel; but also the Real and Indubitable Sayings,
Sermons, Counfels, and Actions of the Prophet, whilst he was on Earth
conversing with Mortals, before his Transmigration to the Gardens of Eternal
Repose and Solitude. Thou art the Enoch, the Hermes Trismegistus of the Age.

I have seen many Copies of the Zune, or the Book of Doctrine; each pretending
to comprize the whole System of that Divine Philosophy and Wisdom, which dropped
from the Lips of our Incomparable and most Holy Lawgiver, and were Attested by
his Wife, the Holy Agesha, Mother of the Faithful, and by his Ten Disciples.
Yet all these various Transcripts differ, both in their Sense and Manner of
Expressions.

I have perused the Books Entitled Dahif, or Imperfect; which contain the
Memoirs of his other Wives; and the Manuscripts called Maucof, or Fragments:
Being only a Collection of some Select Sentences, Aphorisms and Parables of the
Sent of God. But these have no other Authority to back 'em, save the Credit of
some Learned Scribes, who were not familiar with the Divine Favorite, only
living in his Time, and taking Things on Report.

In fine, I have met with several Parchments of the Zaquini, or Pretended
Traditions of Abu Becre, Omar, and Othman: But these I esteem as Spurious,
Corrupted, and full of Errors.

What shall I say? The Zeal of Omar Ebn Abdi'l-Aziz, the Ninth Caliph of the
Tribe of Merwan, is not unknown to me. I am no Stranger to his singular Piety,
not to be matched among Crowned Heads: For, of him it is Recorded, That as he
descended from the Throne at the Time of his Inauguration, he gave the Robe
from his Back, as an Alms to a Poor Man; And, That during his whole Reign, he
spent but Two Piasters A Day on himself. And so great was his Resignation to
Destiny, (an Admirable Virtue in a Sovereign Emperor) that when he was on his
Bed in his last Sickness, and was counseled to take Physic, he answered, No;
if I were sure to heal my self, only by reaching my Finger to my Ear, I would
not. For, the Place to which I am going, is full of Health and Bliss.

This Caliph was a Miracle of Humility, and his Charity always kept him Poor.
Moslema Ebn Abdi'l Malec relates, That going to visit Omar on his Deathbed, he
found him lying on a Couch of Palm-Leaves, with Three or Four Skins instead of
a Pillow, his Garments on, and a foul Shirt underneath. Seeing this, Moslema
was grieved, and turning to his Sister Phatema the Empress, he said, How comes
it to pass, that the Great Lord, Commander of the Faithful, appears in so
squalid a Condition? She replied, As thou live, he has given away all that he
had, even to the very Bed that was under him, to the Poor, and only reserved
what thou see, to cover his Nakedness. Then Moslema could not refrain, but
burst forth into Tears, saying, God show thee Mercy upon Mercy, thou Royal
Saint: For, thou have pierced our Hearts with the Fear of his Divine Majesty.
This Caliph was numbered among the Saints.

He it was, that perceiving the Contradiction, and Disputes of the Mussulman's,
the Darkness and Confusion in the Various Copies of the Zune, or Book of
Doctrine; assembled a General Divan of Mollah's, and Learned Men at Damascus,
from all Parts of the Empire: Commanding that all the Manuscripts of the Zune,
which were extant, should be brought in to this Assembly, on Pain of Death to
him that should detain one. This being done, he Commanded Six of them, to be
chosen out of the Whole Number, by Vote; Men Eminent for Learning and Piety:
And that these Six should severally collect, out of all the Multitude of
Copies, each Man a Book, containing what he thought to be the most Genuine
Discourses of the Prophet, concerning this World, and that which is to come.
When this was executed according to his Will, he commanded all the Old Books to
be burned, in a Field near Damascus.

Yet, after all the Religious Care of this Holy Caliph, to restore these
Writings to their Primitive Integrity, the Mussulmans soon fell into New
Contentions, about the Sense and Interpretation of these Correct Copies of the
Zune. From whence sprang the Four Cardinal Sects, on which, all the
Innumerable, lesser and later Divisions among True Believers, are founded.

I cannot therefore but inwardly rejoice, and from my Heart highly applaud the
Method taken by those of your Renowned College, to discern the True Doctrines
and Sayings of the Holy Prophet, from those which are Supposititious, by
comparing all the Books that are extant together, and reducing Matters of
Divine Revelation to the Analogy of the Alcoran; Those of Philosophy and Moral
Regards, to the Standard of Experience and Reason: For, it is Impious to
believe, that the Divine Apostle would impose any Thing on our Faith, repugnant
to the Sense of Men, or the Express Will of Heaven. By the Soul of Pythagoras,
Mahomet said Nothing but what was Rational, and Evident to any Unprejudiced
Mind. But, the Greatest Part of these Sectaries, are besotted. They form to
themselves False Notions of God and his Prophet, and think to merit Paradise by
their Stupidity.

Reverend Alfaqui, I have much more to say to thee, and many Questions to ask;
But, Time and the Grand Signior's Service, force me to conclude abruptly,
wishing thee Perfection of Bliss.

Paris, 29th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1659. according to the Christian
Style.
The End of the Fifth Volume.

