A TRACT ON THE Sabbath Day.

Wherein the keeping of the First Day of the Week a Sabbath is justified, BY A
Divine COMMAND AND A Double EXAMPLE CONTAINED In the Old and New TESTAMENT.

With Answers to the Chiefest Objections, made by the Jewish seventh-day
Sabbatharians and others.

By ISAAC MARLOW.

London, Printed by J. A. and are to be Sold by H. Barnard at the Bible in the
Poultrey, and by Hannah Smith at the Bible in Aldersgate Street, 1693/4.

THE Authors EPISTLE.
Christian Reader,
WHEN first my Thoughts were exercised in drawing up some Reasons, to justify
our keeping the first day of the Week a Sabbath; they were only designed for
Private Use and to serve a particular Occasion, that called for them. But since
the Providence of God, has lead my Meditations farther into this Subject from
other Considerations, and by means of a Book lately Published by Mr. Tho.
Bampfield for pressing the seventh day (or Saturday) Sabbath as the Duty of all
Christians to keep Holy in Obedience to Gods command: I have Thought it needful
to present this Treatise, for the e^^ablishing of those that are unsettled in
their Minds about it, and for their Advantage who through the tolderness of
their Consciences are exposed to diverse difficulties, because they cannot see
that Liberty to be lawful, which others take in making the Jewish Sabbath a
working day.

To help therefore those sincere Christians (tho but few in number) that are
entangled with this Yoke of Bondage; I have considered diver. Authors on their
seventhday Sabbath, as besides the two Books of Mr. Edw. Stennets, Mr. H.
Soursby and Mr. M. Smiths Mr. Will. Sellers, Mr. Theophilus Brabourn, and the
aforesaid Mr. Tho. Bampfields two late Treatises, which tho I have not directed
the following Discourse in Answer to any one of them (except in some
particulars) yet the Ingenious Reader may find, I have taken Notice of the
Chiefest Grounds and Arguments for their Sabbath contained in them all. And if
the Lord will graciously bless my wellmeant endeavors for their right
Information, and hereby remove that bar between them and others, or if any
Benefit shall be received from this Improvement of my Talent, I desire He may
have the Praise to whom alone it is due. However, tho we or others may differ
in some particulars, through the various Sense we have of the Mind of God revealed
in his Word; yet as through the Grace of Christ, we abhor that which is Evil,
and cleave to that which is good, with a Holy Detesta ^n of all apparent
Transgressions of the Law, consistent with Love and Pity to men's Persons; and
as we are Children of one Father, and Coheirs of Eternal Life through Faith in
Christ that works by Love, we ought to be united in kind Affections to one
another. And were our differences managed more in Brotherly Charity, and by the
gracious Conduct of the Holy Spirit, controversial Discourses would be more
acceptable, the Reputation of Religion and our mutual Peace and Love would be
better preserved; which as I speak this more in general, than desighing any
particular Reflection on my aforesaid Brethren, so I desire always my self to
watch, and labor to abound in this Grace of Love, which is the Bond of
Perfection.

To Conclude, I have in the following Tract not only made the best Improvement
I can of several things that others have wrote before me, but as the Lord has
enlightened my Understanding, I have added such Matters, which I believe may be
useful to clear the Case in hand, hoping he will graciously Bless my Labor to
your Advantage.

I. M.

THE CONTENTS.
Sect. I. OF the use of the Word Moral, Page 1. Sect. II. Of Gods revealing the
first Sabbath to Adam, Genesis 2. 2, 3. which was then sanctified for Man, before
Israel observed their seuenth-day Sabbath in the Wilderness, and was no
Anticipation of the Order of Moses History, Page 3. Sect. III. Treats of the
Law. 1. Showing wherein the House of Israel were more concerned in Sinai's
Covenant than other Nations, Page 5. 2. That the Israelites were not absolutely
tied to stand or fall Eternally by that Covenant, without relief in Christ for
the Elect, Page. 6. 3. Of the Ten Commandments, and of their binding quality to
the Gentiles, Page 7. Sect. IV. Clears a Proposition. 1. Showing that the
Gentiles were not absolutely required to keep the whole Ceremonial Law, Page 9.
2. That there is Reason to believe, the Gentiles before the Law had some Divine
Revelation of the Will of God, how they should worship him, and that they were
required to Sacrifice slain Beasts, Page 10, 11, 12. Sect. V. In four
Paragraphs proves the Ten Commandments to be morally binding to all Nations,
Page 12, etc. Sect. VI. Treats of the Morality of the fourth Commandment,
Page 16. And of the Reasons why the Sabbath was first sanctified in the Name of
the Seventh-day, and not of the first day Sabbath, which it may be so called,
respecting its proper Nature, immediate end, and principal use first to Man,
Page 17. Sect. VII. Shows that the Jewish Sabbath is Ceremonial, and not
morally binding to all Nations. 1. Because it was a Covenant Memorial of
Isreal's Deliverance out of Egypt, Page 19. 2. Because it is abolished, Colos.
2.16, 17. Page 19. 3. From the Order and Necessity of Nature, wherein is showed
the Alterations of the accounts of Years, Page 21. And of Days, Page 23. As
also the Interruption of the orderly Course of the Day, Page 29. And the
impossibility of all Nations observing the Sabbath after the Jewish Pattern,
because in some Places, and Parts of the Year, there is no Sun-settings, nor
Sunrising for several Days and Weeks Time together, Page 31, 32, etc. Sect.
VIII. Shows that Isreal's first Sabbath in the Wilderness, was not a fixed
Pattern that all men should originally have six working days before their
Sabbath, and not their Sabbath before their six working days, Page 34. Sect.
IX. Contains some Instances of particular Cases in the New Testament, in
which we are referred to the Pattern in our first Parents, which serves to
justify our doing the like, to justify our Observation of the first day
Sabbath, Page 36. Sect. X. Explaineth the Pattern of Adams Sabbath, Page 38.
Sect. XI. Treats of the Types and Shadows that were of the Gospel first day
Sabbath under the Law, Page 40. Sect. XII. Shows that Christ arose from the
Dead on the first day of the Jewish Week, Page 42. 2. That he appeared to his
Disciples on the first day of the Week, Page 45. 3. The Apostle ordered the
Churches to make Collections for the Saints on the first day of the Week, Ibid.
And 4. He broke Bread with the Church of Troas on the first day of the Week,
who on that day came together for that end, Page 46. Whereto is added a brief
Historical account, that soon after St. John's writing, the first day of the
Week was called the Lords day in Distinction to the Jewish Sabbath, Page 47.
Sect. XIII. Shows the ancient Observation of the first day of the Week called
Sunday by the Heathens. And that there is greater Reason to believe it is
(rather than the Jewish Sabbath) the Old seventhday Sabbath from the Creation,
though neither the one nor the other can be assured of the same, Page 47. Sect.
XIV. Contains a brief Discourse, showing wherein our first day Sabbath
answers the Pattern of Adams Sabbath, better than the Jewish Sabbath does, Page
50. And also shows the time of Day when our Christian Sabbath should begin,
and the Reasons why we had no Positive Command left us in the New Testament to
observe the first day of the Week a Sabbath, Page 52, etc. With a Discourse of
the Morality of Adams Pattern, Page 56. And of Gods accepting the first of
Time, Page 58. Lastly, Answers to the Chiefest Objections made against our
keeping the first day Sabbath.
A TRACT ON THE Sabbath Day.
WHEREIN The keeping of the First Day of the Week a Sabbath is justified by an
Institution of God, and a double Example contained in the Old and New Testament.
THAT we have both a Precept and a double Example to justify the keeping of
the first day of the week, a Sabbath, I have here to produce from the Holy
Scriptures. The Precept is in the Fourth Commandment, founded on God's first
sanctifying the Sabbath Day, and we have the Example of Christ's Disciples, with
the primitive Gospel Churches in the New Testament, and of Adam to his
Posterity, all which I shall prove and explain as follows.

SECT. I.
First, That the Reader may not be under any mistake about the use I make of
the word Moral throughout this Treatise, I shall here acquaint him, that in its
self it belongs to Manners, Civility or Behavior, properly to the Actions of
Man, only as he is Man: And so by some the Moral Law is taken for the Law,
Light, or Instinct of Nature which Adam had in the State of Innocence; which
although this be true, yet I also make a larger use of the word: For as no Man
knows by Nature the extent of Adams light in all particulars, for his
Obedience when he was in Innocence, and therefore cannot describe the whole of
that Law of Nature: And as I suppose the prohibition to him not to eat of the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, will not be denied by any to have been
binding for all his posterity as Men; so we must have recourse to Divine
Revelation for the better understanding our Moral and universal Duty to God,
since the Law of Nature is so much obliterated in us through the fall. And
therefore because of the darkness and depravity of our Minds, we have the
substance of the Law of Nature given to us in written Precents, which may be
called Moral, as they are not Ceremonial, but perpetually and universally
binding to all Men for their Obedience unto God, and also Institutions by
Divine Revelation, as being now a more full discovery to us of the Mind of God
first implanted in our innocent Parents, than we retain in our Natures, or can
recover in our fall. So that when I speak of the Moral Law, or of Morality, it
must be taken as the Adjunct Matter governs it in either sense, of the Law or
Light of Nature alone in the State of Innocence, or contained in those
transcribed Precepts of the Ten Commandments, as the substance thereof in
general Heads, and in those other Precepts that morally do explain them, which
I shall only take notice of wherein I am concerned, and not collect and reserr
them all to their proper Heads. In brief, I use the word Moral in common to
those things that are of universal and perpetual Concern to all Mankind for
their Obedience to God as their Creator: For as to the case before us, seeing
its said, that God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: We cannot say
that Adam by his pure Light of Nature alone knew that it was meetest to have
but six working days, and no less, as 5, 7, or 8 together to one Sabbath, but
that from God's Example revealed to him, the light of Adams Nature told him
that it was most meet for him to divide his time like his Creator, and so it
became the Moral Duty of Men as Men to have no more nor less than six working
or common days to one Sabbath.

SECT. II.
TO proceed on the Subject Matter of this Treatise, I shall here recite the
first Foundation Scripture for keeping the seventh day Sabbath, as a boundary
to six working days, and briefly Note something of the Nature and Quality of
the Text, Genesis 2.2, 3. And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had
made: and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And
God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested
from all his work, which God created and made. It is here said, God blessed the
seventh day, and sanctified it; that is, he made it a happy and holy day, by
setting it apart from common use for Man to worship him, and he appointed it to
be a rest for Adam by Revelation, as he did that he should not eat of the Tree
of Knowledge of Good and Evil, for otherwise Adam could not by his Light of
Nature alone know the time which had passed before he was Created, nor could he
understand the Mind of God as it was in God himself, and therefore the
knowledge Adam had of God's sanctifying the seventh day Sabbath, was by
Supernatural Revelation to him.

And this I presume none will deny, for a time for Man to abstain or rest from
his own business, to exert his solemn Worship to God, is morally implanted in
the Heart of Man by Nature, and surely God did not conceal from Adam the
meetest time when he sanctified the first seventh day of the World for that
end. Besides, before that God had formed Eve, Genesis 2.7.8. -- 15.
he put Adam into the Garden of Eden to dress it, and to keep it; and therefore
Adam being appointed to do this business, he might have applied himself thereto
immediately after Eve was formed and brought to him, if he had not received the
knowledge of God's sanctifying the seventh Day, yea then it had been lawful for
him to have worked on God's Sabbath, if it had not been revealed to him.

Moreover, Our Savior puts this matter clearly out of doubt, because he
referrs the making of the Sabbath (not to the first Institution of it at the
gathering of Manna in the Wilderness, but) to the time of God's creating Man,
Mark 2.27.
saying, The Sabbath was made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath; that is,
the Sabbath was not first made, and then Man for the sake of the Sabbath, but
Man was first Created, and then the Sabbath was sanctified for his Happiness,
as the blessing of it signifies. God's bare ceasing from Work did not make it
for Man, but his Sanctifying it, or setting that time apart from the common use
of Man for the service and worship of his Creator, and then we have reason to
believe he did immediately reveal the knowledge of it to Adam, that he might
answer the design of God in sanctifying the seventh day for him, and to make it
a pattern for aster Ages.

But some have said, That the sanctifying of the seventh-day Sabbath, on which
God rested from his Work of Creation, was written by way of Anticipation of the
Order of time in Moses Sacred History, and so tho God rested the seventh day
from all his Works, yet the Sabbath was not sanctified for Man till after
Isreal's coming out of Egypt.

Answer. This is a weak and groundless Notion that some have taken up, as will
appear from the proper sense of the Text, and the Reasons following. For

1. It Is said, That on the seventh day God ended his Work which he had made:
and he rested on the seventh day from all his Work which he had made. From
whence it is plain, that God's seventh day on which he rested from his Work of
Creation, was that same seventh day on which he ended his Work, else how could
it be said he rested from his work on the seventh day, if his seventh day rest
was not immediately aster it was ended?

2. It Is said, God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in
it he had rested from all his work, which God created and made. Now what
seventh day can this be, which God blessed and sanctisied, but the same seventh
day on which he ended his Work, from which sense for any to invert the Text, is
a gross and paspable wrong to it; for God sanctified [(...)] because in [(...)]
he [had] rested from all his Work. Note it well, that seventh day in which God
[had] rested before Moses wrote this History, was the same he sanctified, that
Man should bound his six working days with a Sabbath.

3. No Anticipation is to be put upon any Text of Scripture, unless a just
necessity compel it, H. Scursby Discouise of the Sabbath, Page 23. 2^.
for otherwise the order of History may be inverted at Men's pleasures: And
therefore the reason why Anticipations are allowed in any Text of Scripture, is
because there is some necessity or other arising to preserve the verity, or
sense of Scripture; but there is no such thing to be pleaded in this case:
Therefore no Anticipation to be intruded on the Text.

4. Anticipations are only to be allowed in any Text, when either the same, or
some other Text discovers that so it is: but we presume no such thing can be
assigned relating to the thing under consideration; therefore none is here to
be admitted.

SECT. III.
HERE I come to open and explain the Law of God which commands the seventh
day to be observed; and because I find that some have taken up an Opinion, and
(I conceive for the sake of nothing else but to escape the Arguments which some
have drawn from the fourth Commandment, for keeping the Jewish seventh day
Sabbath) do assert that there is nothing of the Law as given on Mount Sinai
binding to us under the Gospel, or that nothing of it is obliging to us but
what is given forth again, and confirmed to us in the New Testament. To remove
therefore this mistake, and to demonstrate that the Ten Commandments are of
themselves binding to all both Jews and Gentiles, as a Rule of Holy Life, tho
not as a Covenant of Justification, for so they are done away in Christ, I
shall discourse the more largely of the Law of God, and the Decalogue in
general, and then of the fourth Commandment in particular. And

1. I shall here premise, Numb. 15.14, 15, 16. Ex. d. 12.43, 48 49. Deuteronomy. 5.27.
Chap. 4 37, 38. Chap. 7 6, 7, 8. Chap. 9.5. Heb. 3.1, 2.
that the House of Israel (with the Proselytes joined to them by Circumcision,
having all one Law) were peculiarly concerned in Sina^'s Covenant more than
other Nations: For God having loved their Fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, he
therefore chose their Seed aster them, and delivered them out of Egypt to
entrust them, with his Oracles and Counsels for all the World. And to this end
he renewed the Law of Nature at Mount Sinai, and directed it peculiarly unto
them, and brought them under it as a visible Covenant of Works, requiring their
perfect Obedience thereunto, and to his whole revealed Will in the Ceremonial
precepts added to it. And so the Israelites being thus separated from all
Nations, and under a special Obligation of Ceremonial and Typical service; and
having a Sacred Record of the Law of Nature, with the Promises and Prophecies
of the Messiah that was to come, ^xod. 19.6. Isa. 43.10. Heb. 9.9, 23. chapter 10.1.
transcribed by Moses and delivered to them, they became the Ministers of the
certain knowledge of them to all Nations, fa^ther witnessing to the Messiah in
the Types and Shadows of the Law, and by the writings of other Prophets that
were among them: Genesis 12.3. chap. 26.4. Galat 3.16. Zach. 10.4. Jer. 23.5, 6.
chap. 11.1. Micah 5.2. Genesis 49.10. Isa. 53. Psalm. 16.10. Psalm. 68.18. Joel
2.28, 29.
That Christ should come of the Seed of Abraham, of the Tribe of Judah, of the
House of David, and should be born in Bethlehem of Judea; that the Scepter
should not depart from Judah till Shiloh came, of his Susserings, R^surrection,
Ascension, and of the Ministration of the Spirit, etc. to point unto all the
World where and when they should look for the true Messiah, and how they should
know him when he came: So that herein the Jews were peculiarly concerned in
Sinai's Covenant, that under its Obligations, and their trust of the Oracles of
God together with it, the Messiah should be declared, and in the Typical
service of the visible Covenant of Works, they should Minister as Witnesses of
the Grace of God in Christ to the Gentile Nations.

2. But tho the Jews with the Gentile Proselytes that put themselves under
their Covenant of Works by Circumcision were under a peculiar Obligation of the
whole Mosaical L^w; yet they were not so absolutely tied up unto this Covenant
of Works, Deuteronomy. 4.13.
as to be wholly concluded by it unto their E^ernal State; for God did not
bring that People absolutely under it in all the rigor of it, according to its
whole Law and tenor, so as to stand or fall, absolutely by it Promises or
Threatenings, for the promise of Grace in Christ being given upon the first
entrance of Sin into the World, and renewed to Abraham 430 Years before the
giving of the Law to his posterity, Gal. 3.16, 17.
there was a blessed relief and Salvation provided therein for the Elect that
betook themselves unto it, and made use of it against the Curse and Threatenings
annexed to the first Covenant, broken in and by our first Parents, and to our
Personal Transgres^^ons of the Law: So that tho the Israelites were under a
special Obligation of persect Obedience to Sinai's Covenant of Works, yet there
was another Covenant before confirmed of God in Christ ministered with it and by
it, that the Elect by Faith beholding Christ as their perfect High Priest and
complete Propitiation, through the Veil and Shadowy Dispensation of the Law,
might be relieved from its Curse by Reason of its weakness, through the Flesh
that could not keep it. Romans 8.3.


3. The Decalogue or Ten Commandments, being declared with a particular
Direction unto Israel, ^^^de the O^^igation of Obedience to them as so
prom^lgated on Mount Stu^i, to belong unto them as general Heads, not only
o^t^^e Mo^d B^anches of the Law in other Precepts given by Moses, b^t also of
the Typical and Ceremonial B^anches thereof; which being appropriated and
suited only to that prelent State of the Jewish Church, did Entitle the Moral
Law particularly unto them as a Covenant of Works, which to us is only an
Ever^asting Rule, as declarative of the Will of God, and the substance of the
Law of our Creation. And therefore is any mean, that the Decalogue as given on
Mount Sinai is not binding to us, as it was (as I hinted before) directed
peculiarly to Israel as a Covenant connexed and related to the Ceremonial Law,
or as the Foundation of their Obedience to the Typical and Shadowy (as well as
other Moral Precepts and) Commandments tied to it under that Temporary
Dispensation; then we do agree, that it is not so binding to us under the
Gospel. But as the Law given to Israel on Mount Sinai, was the Substance of the
Law of Nature in our first Parents, or of Creation again renewed in Tables of
Stone, and committed to Israel as the declarative Will of God, so it was for
the use of the Gentiles also. For seeing our Sin and depravity of Nature
through the fall, does not weaken the Authority of Gods Law over us; Ephesians.
2.3. Romans 2.14, 15, 16. chap. 3.19.
and that the Gentiles as well as the Jews, before the Law was given to Israel,
were under its Obligations, as written in their Hearts by Nature, Gods
delivering a fairer Copy of it by Moses, than what remained in us since the
fall, could no ways weaken but strengthen the Obligation of it unto us all, as
being alike under it by Nature. Moreover as the Moral Law written in Tables of
Stone was the declarative Will of God, strengthening the Obligation of the same
Law written in the Heart of Man by Nature; so Christ in the Gospel does not any
ways dissolve, but much strengthens this Obligation to us all. And to this
agrees, the Assemblies, the Congregational Churches, and also the Baptists
Confession of Faith, recommended by the Messengers of, and concerned for
upwards of one hundred Baptized Congregations, denying Arminianism; wherein
Chap. 19. are the following Words: Romans 2.14, 15. Deuteronomy. 10.4. Romans 13.8, 9, 10.
James 2.8, 10, 11, 12. Matthew. 5.17, 18, 19. Romans 3.31. Heb. 2.1. 1 Cor. 9.8, 9,
10.
The same Law that was first written in the Heart of Man, continued to be a
perfect Rule of Righteousness after the fall, and was delivered by God upon
Mount Sinai, in Ten Commandments, and written in two Tables; -- the Moral Law
does for ever bind all, as well justified Persons as others, to the Obedience
thereos; -- neither does Christ in the Gospel any way dissolve, but much
strengthen this Obligation. -- Besides this Law, commonly called Moral, God was
pleased to give to the People of Israel Ceremonial Laws; -- to them also he
gave sundry Judicial Laws, which expired together with the State of that
People, not obliging any Now by Virtue of that Institution, their general
Equity only being of Moral Use. So that here is the concurring Testimony of the
three aforesaid Confessions of Faith, that the Moral Law or Ten Commandments,
does for ever bind all Persons to the Obedience thereof.

4. Romans 5.20. Chap. 7.23. Psalm. 19.7, 8. Prove. 6.23. Gal. 3.23, 24, 25.
It appears from the Holy Scripture, that one chief end of Gods giving the Law
and recording of it by Moses, was That the Offense might abound, and that Sin
by the Commandment might become exceeding Sinful. That is, the Law being a
clearer Light than what remains in our Natures since the fall, it works the
clearer and fuller Conviction of Sin upon our Minds; and so it was our
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, by she^ing us an absolute necessity of
laying hold on the Relief provided for us in him, That we might be justisied by
Eaith. And this being declared in the New Testament, as one universal end of
Gods giving the Law, it was then designed for the use of both Jews and
Gentiles. And

5. The Decalogue's peculiar Direction to Israel, was no more an Exclusion of
the Gentiles from its Moral Use and Instruction, than the Promise of the
Messiah, and Gods command that Israel should hearken unto him in all things,
had no respect unto the Gentiles: And therefore as the Gentiles came by the
certain Knowledge of the Promises and Prophecies of the Messiah, Genesis 3.15.
Chap. 49.10. Chap. 22.18. Gal. 3.8, 14, 16. Romans 4.9, 10, 11. Deuteronomy. 18.15, 19.
by the House of Abraham and the sacred Record of Moses; of the Promise made to
our first Parerts, of Jacobs Prophecy, That unto Shiloh, should the gathering
of the People be: Of the Blessing of the Gentiles, through Faith in Christ,
Abraham's Seed; and of the command of God, that Isra^^ should hearken unto him,
and his threatenings to those that ^^use to hear him: So by the same means, viz.
by the Books of Moses, whereby the Gentiles had the certain Knowledge of the
Messiah that was to come, they had also the Knowledge of the Law. And seeing
there is no Reason to think, that God designed his discovery of the Messiah,
and the Record made of him in the Books of Moses, should be only for the Use
and Benefit of the House of Israel; and that after Noah and the following
Ancient Fathers (who lived so many uundred Years to hand down the Knowledge
they had received) were Dead, and the World (as well as the Church) was more
increased, that the Gentiles should be still left without any other ground of
Faith, than at best the uncertain Traditions of their short-lived and
Idolatrous Fathers; but that these also, who had an Interest in the Messiah,
respecting the call of the Elect that were among them, should also have an
Interest in and to the Use and Benefit of all the general Promises and
Prophecies of him that were delivered to the Jews: So consequently the Law and
Matter of Instruction contained in the Legal Covenant, relating to the clearer
Convictons of Sins against the Moral Law, and to the discovery of Christ for
their Relief and Salvation from the Penalty of the Curse thereof, being
recorded together with those Promises and Prophecies of Christ, was then for
the Use and Benefit of the Gentiles also; they being by Nature brought under
the Obligation of Obedience to the Moral Law, tho they were at Liberty from
most of the Ceremonial Service of it, that was teaching and instructive to them.

SECT. IV.
HEre I shall speak to a Proposition, which is, that the Law of Nature, and the
same in the written Moral Law of Moses obliges all men to worship God (though
after what manner he is pleased to be worshipped is not perfectly known, but by
the Revelation of it to them,) and then it follows, that either the Gentiles
in the time of the Law, were bound to worship God according to the Ceremonial
Precepts of Moses, or had some other ways the Will of God revealed to them.

1. To the first, we have Reason to believe, that the Gentiles were lest to
their own Liberty, and were not absolutely required to observe the whole
Ceremonial Law of Moses: For as I cannot sind a command for it, Deuteronomy. 16.16.
Exodus 34.23.
so many Nations were at too great a distance; for all their Males according to
the Commandment, to go up three times a Year to appear before the Lord at
Jerusalem, 1 Kings 11.36. Dent. 12.5, 6, etc.
the City which he had chosen to put his Name there. Nor could some Northern
People observe their Sabbaths, according to the Precepts from Evening to
Evening, of which more hereafter; and whatever may be said for the Proselites
that dwelt in Canaan, yet those Gemtles that inhabited other Countries, could
not properly make the acknowledgement required in the Law, Deuteronomy. 2^.3, 9.
viz. That they were come unto the Country, which the Lord swear unto their
Fathers for to give them; and it was impossible for all the World to inhabit in
so small a Country as the Land of Canaan, for it could not bear them. And
therefore our present business is to consider what the Gentiles were obliged to
in Point of Worship, before and under the Dispensation of the Law of Moses.
Which

2. Seeing the Gentiles were not absolutely required to renew the Law of Nature
delivered on Mount Sinai, as a Visible and External Covenant, intailing the
Ceremonial Worship of God delivered to the Jews, but were to receive the Moral
Law on the Obligation of Nature as a Rule of Holy Life, whereby they were under
an Obligation of some Divine Worship; which forasmuch as it could not be of the
whole Ceremonial Law of Moses, and that the Light of humane Nature alone, could
not discover the Will of God for their perfect Obedience therein: We have then
Reason to believe, that the Gentiles before the Law had some Precepts of God or
Divine Revelation given to them how they should worship him; and that these
were handed down unto Posterity, I deny not: but the Light of Nature might show
them, it was their Duty to Pray and Praise God, and to Teach or Declare to one
another what they knew of him; but yet (through the Corruption and Depravity of
our Nature by the fall) we find by Experience, that notwithstanding we have the
Additional Light of the Holy Scriptures, there are different Apprehensions
amongst Men about the manner of performing these Moral Duties, and then we have
much more Reason to conclude, that the Light of Nature it self is an uncertain
Guide; and therefore it is rational to believe, that the Gentiles before and
under the Law had some Information of the Will of God concerning their Worship
of him, which was handed down from Adam, and then from Noah after the Flood,
who were both public Fathers of all Nations Jews, and Gentiles. Genesis 6.2, etc.
Levit. 18.24.
For the Scriptures show, that the Sons of God were reproved for taking Wives
of all which they chose; and that God charged the old Inhabitants of Canaan
before the Law with Sin, for those unjust Copulations forbidden in the Law; for
which the Lord cast them out of the Land before the Children of Israel (for
though he might wink at it in the Patriarks, Genesis 26.34, 3^ Chap. 28.1, 2, 8.
who to escape the wicked Idolaters of their Day, it is likely were under some
necessity of Marrying within the bounds of Consanguinity, yet had he not
revealed his Will against such Incestuous Marriages, they could not have been
charged as Sin upon them: For where there is no Law, Romans 5.1^.
there is no Transgression. And therefore we have from hence some ground to
believe, that God did not leave the old Gentiles without some discovery how he
would be also worshipped: Especially considering that Enoch was a Holy Prophet,
of whom its testified, That he pleased God; Heb. 11.5.
and that Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness to the old World; that Shem the
Son of Noah (of whom it is witnessed, that the Lord God, Genesis 9.26. compare Genesis
11. with chap. 24.67. chap. 25.7, 20. See Ainsw. on Genesis 24.62. and on chap.
14.18. 2 Pet. 2.5, 7, 8, 9.
was Shems God) was a live in Isaacs time, and is thought to be that
Melchizedeck King of Salem, and Priest of the most high God, who blessed
Abraham, and that Lot who was not concerned with Abraham in the Covenant of
Circumcision was a Godly Righteous Man, for no doubt they were true Worshippers
of God in their Families, and taught others to do the like, being great Lights
and Witnesses of the Ways and Will of God in their Generations.

Moreover, As the Law of Nature obliged the old Gentiles to Worship God, so we
find they were taught how to Exert their Obedience to it in Offering Sacrifices
unto him, which had a Tipical respect to the Sacrifice of Christ. For it is
believed, from the Coats of Skin which God made to cloth Adam and Eve, that
they were of the Beasts that God taught Adam to Sacrifice, which agrees with
what Mr. Ainsworth says on Genesis 4.3. That the Hebrew Doctors say, it is a
Tradition by the hand of all, 1 Chronicles. 21.22, 26. and 22.1. 2 Chronicles. 3.1. Genesis
22.9. Genesis 8.20.
that the place wherein David and Solomon built an Altar -- was the place where
Abraham builded an Altar and bound Isaac upon it -- and where Noah builded
after he came out of the Ark, and that was the Altar upon which Cain and Abel
offered: And on it Adam the first Man offered an Offering after he was Created.
See Dutch Annot. on Job 1.1.3. and chap. 2.11. See Mr. Caryl on Job 1. and
chap. 2.
And we find that Jobs three Friends (as it seems by the hand of Job as their
Priest, who were all four Gentiles, or separated from Abrabams Seed in the Line
of Isaac and Jacob, and were not with their Seed taken into Gods peculiar
Covenant with them) were commanded of God to offer Sacrisices: See Ainsw. on
Genesis 4.3. Job 42.8, 9. 1 Samuel 13.12. Genesis 8.20, 21. Exodus 18.1, 9. to 13. Number.
23.1. to 6 Judge. 13.17, 19 1 Chronicles. 16.1, 2, 7. Jude 14.15. 2 Pet. 2.5. 1 Pet.
3.18, 19, 20. Heb. 7.1, 6, 7. 2 Pet. 1.21.
So that sacrificing of Beasts were required of the Gentiles, and as Ainsworth
says, was used of Israel, and all Nations till the coming of Christ. And it is
evident, that the public and solemn manner of making Prayers and Supplications
to God both by the Jews and Gentiles, was with sacrifices of Beasts, and after
this manner they also offered their praises and thanksgivings. And as for
preaching, it is recorded, that Enoch prophesied, and Noah was a Preacher of
Righteousness; and the Spirit of God in him preached to the old World, and in
Melchisedeck blessed Abraham: From all which it is plainly manifest, that there
was a Revelation of the Will of God for his Worship and Service, (and also for
the sanctifying of the seventh day Sabbath, before the Ministration of Moses
Law) whereby the Gentiles were directed how to exert their particular Obedience
in answer to the general Obligation of the Light of Nature, which being more
fairly transcribed by Moses, was still the Rule of the Gentiles, obliging them
to Worship God according to the Revelation of his Will they had received before
the Law, confirmed in the Law, and to the new discovery of it afterward by the
Gospel.

SECT. V.
HEre I proceed to prove, Exodus 21.12. 16, 18, 19, 22, 23. Chap. 22.1.5.18. 19.
chapter 23.8. Levit. 20.15.16. Deuteronomy. 19.18, 19 Chap. 20.10. to 16.
That the Ten Commandments as such, are of themselves binding to all Men under
the Gospel as a Rule of Holy Life. And first, Because the Moral Expositions of
them with sundry penalties (that were not only Judaical, but are perpetual
Appendixes to the Moral Law) given and commanded in the Books of Moses, are
still to be observed, tho they are not all repeated again in the New Testament;
for else neither by the Institution of God to Noah, that whosoever sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed, can a Man's life be spared for killing
his Neighbor unawares: Nor in the sixth Command, Thou shall not kill, have we
any liberty to kill in lawful War, or Battle: Nor have we any bodily penalty
prescribed for wilful murder, nor for a Witch, nor for stealing, either in the
Ten Commandments, or in the New Testament; so that we must either in these and
other cases have respect to the Moral Expositions, and those penal Appendixes
of the Ten Commandments recorded in other places of Scripture in the Old
Testament, and consequently to the Commandments themse lves as binding to us,
or else we are left to the uncertain dictates of Nature.

2. The Ten Commandments of themselves are binding to all Men as a Rule of Holy
life, because the Explicatory precepts of the seventh Command, Thou shall not
commit Adultery, do in Levit. 18. chap. 19.29. Deuteronomy. 23.17. particularly
explain and prohibit Whoredom, Fornication and Incestnous Marriages as Moral
branches of this Law: For the Gentiles which had not the written Law, were
charged with them as immoral Evils, for which things God cast them out of the
Land of Canaan. And therefore seeing that the substance of those Explicatory
Precepts were morally binding to those Gentiles before the Law, See the
asoresaid Bapt^sts (and the other two) Confess. of Faith, where incestous
Marriages are asserted to be unlawful, and forbidden in Levit. 18. tho we find
in the N. Testament, only two of those incestous Marriages in Levit. 18. to be
forbidden. Matthew. 14.3, 4. and 1 Cor. 5.1.
and that they are generally acknowledged to be in force, tho they are not all
of them expressly repeated, distinctly forbidden, nor explained in the Ten
Commandments to be sin, neither by Jesus Christ, nor his Holy Apostles, except
two of them in the New Testament, any otherwise than their forbidding of those
Evils in general terms must have a natural reference to the particulars that
are found in the Old Testamant and included as branches of the moral law: We
may then as fairly conclude, that the seventh Commandment, and consequently the
other nine, are of themselves binding to us as well as that those explicatory
precepts or moral branches deduced from them should be still in force, without
their particular Confirmation in the New Testament.

3. The ten Commandments are of themselves binding to us: For the Apostle faith
Romans 3.9. We have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under
sin, viz. that the Gentiles that are not under the Law of Circumcision, are
notwithstanding under the Works of the Moral Law, written in their Hearts by
Nature, and the Jews are under the same Obligation transcribed on Tables of
Stone, and in other appendant Moral Precepts given to them by Moses. And the
Apostle having proved that the Gentiles that were without the Law in Tables of
stone, were under sin by the Law of Nature, Chap. 2.14, 15, 16. and the Jews by
the law of Circumcision, ver. 25. does then from Chap. 3.9. to ver. 20. treat
of all in general, and concludes that both Jews and Gentiles are all under the
Law, viz. one and the same moral Obligation, that every mouth may be stopped,
and all the world may become guilty before God. And the Apostle farther arguing
both of the Jews and Gentiles, concludes with these words, Do we then make
void the Law through faith? Chap. 3.29, 30, 31.
God forbid: yea we establish tie Law. And so does the Apostle James, who wrote
to his Brethren the Jews, that had the Faith of Jesus Christ, saying, If ye
fulfill the Royal Law according to the Scripture, James 2.8, 9. Chap. 2.1.
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, ye do well. But if ye have respect
to persons, ye commit sin, and are convinced of the law as transgressors. For
whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offends in one point, he is guilty
of all. From whence I observe, that the believing Jews were still under the
Obligation of the Moral Law as a Rule of Holy Life, which of its self, or by
its own Authority, is binding under the Gospel; for else if it had been
abrogated by the New Testament Ministration, the Apostle would not have cited
the Law of Moses out of the Old Testament as the Obligation of their Obedience,
as the Apostle farther argues in Ver. 11, 12. and exhorts them so to speak
and do, as they that shall be judged by the Law of liberty; that is as much as
to say, that they should be judged by the Law, under the relief and benefit of
the Grace of Christ in the Gospel: So then, if the believing Jews under the
Gospel are made Transgressors by the Law of Moses, (as the Apostle shows) it
is a clear Demonstration, that the Law is still of its self binding to them;
and it being the same in substance as the Law written in the Heart of Man by
Nature, (but in a fairer Copy delivered by the Jews to the Gentile Nations now
with the Gospel of Christ in the New Testament) it is also equally binding to
us as to the Jews: For if the Jews by Faith in Christ are not brought from
under the Obligation of the Moral Law, why then should the same Faith in the
Gentiles excuse them from it as a Rule.

4. Moreover, I shall farther add, that while the holy Apostles are throwing
down the Types and Shadowy Worship under that legal Dispensation, 1 Timothy 1.8.
yet they assert that the Law is good if a man use it lawfully, viz. as a
Foundation of our Worship and Obedience to God, and just behavior toward Man,
which through Gospel Grace after the measure we have received, is, or ought to be
put forth according to the several Moral branches of the Law, and the Divine
Precepts and Patterns given to us in the New Testament. And therefore, we find
the Holy Apostles, and Gospel Writers often proving and confirming the Moral
part of their Doctrine by the Law, as appears in Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3. Children
obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right. Honor thy Father and Mother,
(which is the first Commandment with promise) that it may be well with thee,
and thou may live long on the earth.

Here the Apostle confirms his Moral Doctrine to the Gentiles by the Authority
of the fifth Commandment, or first with promise; which plainly shows, that it
is of its self binding to us all under the Gospel, and he Moralizeth the
Promise by saying Earth, instead of the Land which the Lord thy God gives
thee: So that the Promise was not only to pertain to the Jews in the Land of
Canaan, but was perpetually to continue to all the Gentiles: and so we may say
in the aforesaid case of every one that killed a Man unawares, who was to flee
into the City of Refuge, and continue there until the Death of the High Priest,
Numb. 35.25.
that tho we have no such High Priest in Gospel days, yet the equity of that
Law is still in force: But to return to our present business, we may farther
find the Apostle proves the moral part of his Doctrine from the Commendments,
Exodus 20. For in Romans 13.8, 9, 10. we are exhorted to love one another, for,
says he, Love is the fulfilling of the law; and he briefly cites five of the
Ten Commandments to confirm the Duty of Love, which comprehends them all: And
in Chap. 7.7, 12. What shall we say then? is the law sin? God forbid. Nay, I
had not known sin, but by the Law: for I had not known lust, except the law had
said, Thou shall not covet -- Wherefore the law is holy, and the Commandment
holy, and just, and good. Therefore surely this Moral Precept in particular,
and others in general mentioned by the Apostle, are of themselves binding to us
as a Rule of Holy life; for whatsoever Law is morally holy, just and good, as
this particular precept is, by which the Apostle came to the knowledge of Sin,
it is perpetually and universally binding to all Men, Romans 2.14, 15.
who have the substance of it written in their Hearts by Nature: So that from
the Apostles making use of the Anthority of the Moral Law of Moses, to confirm
his Doctrine, Matthew. 5.19. James 2.8. Chap. 4.11. 1 John 3.4.
and from the Commendations of it in the New Testament, it clearly appears to
be in force unto all Men now under the Gospel. And seeing the fourth
Commandment in particular is delivered in such moral Terms, as does not of its
self bind us to the observation of the Sabbath after the Jewish Pattern, from
Evening to Evening, any more than after our Christian pattern from Morning to
Morning, which does answer that Very Precept, as well as theirs did from that
single Law; we have then no reason to exclude the fourth Commandment from the
rest of the Decalogue, but to believe it is equally Moral with the other nine,
as will appear more patticularly in the next ensuing Section.

SECT. VI.
TO proceed therefore on the fourth Commandment, I shall here recite Exodus
20.9, 10, 11. Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work; but the seventh
day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not do any work -- For
in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is,
and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and
hallowed it.

1. That this Commandment is morally binding to both Jews and Gentiles, is
evident, because it is in substance the same with God's sanctifying the seventh
day for Man, Genesis 2. And if the Sabbath be not from thence perpetually binding
to all Nations, but restrained to the posterity of the Jews, then by the same
Rule the Gentiles had no interest in the promise of the Woman's Seed, Genesis 3.15.
or the Messiah, that should bruise the Serpents Head, as then made to our
first Parents; and therefore, as I believe, it will be granted by all
Christians, that the Gentiles as well as the Jews had an interest in the first
promise as then made, viz. in the Original discovery of the Messiah, as well as
in those after promises that are the fruits and effects of it: So in like
manner we have also ground to believe, that the first sanctifying of the
Sabbath Day, was from thence (and is also from the fourth Commandment) morally
binding of its self to both Jews and Gentiles; for if we question the one, we
may also doubt of the other.

2. The End of the fourth Commandment shows it to be a Moral Precept, for a
time of rest is naturally moral, and by the example of God and his sanctifying
the seventh day to every six working days, it is also become morally and
perpetually binding for all Men to keep the seventh day Sabbath, as a boundary
to neither more nor less than six working days together; and therefore for any
to deny the same in the fourth Commandment, is in effect to deny the World
their sixed Sabbath; for tho the Gospel first day Sabbath has a new Sanctity,
yet it is founded on the old Law, and Gods sanctifying of the seventh day for
Man from the beginning; or else it is left very dubious, whether we are bound
to keep any fixed day of Rest at all; but as there is the same Moral reason for
a Sabbath as was before, so we have reason to conclude, that the same Law in
the fourth Commandment is morally binding to us all.

3. I shall offer some Reasons, for satisfaction wherefore I believe the Lord
was pleased to sanctify the Sabbath, and to deliver the fourth Command to
observe it under the name of the seventh day, rather than of the first day
Sabbath. And

1. Because although Man abstained from work on the first day after he was
completely formed, yet seeing God gave the Sanctity to the Day, for a Memorial
of his Creation, and for Man to worship him, there was reason that the day
should answer the memorial of his finishing of, and ceasing from the work of
Creation, rather than of Adams solemn entering upon his subordinate Dominion
under God, viz. in Honor to the Creator rather than to the Creature.

2. Tho Adam rested, or rather abstained from Work on God's Sabbath before he
had passed six working days, that he might perform his moral Worship to God,
(before he dressed the Garden, or meddled in his own Affairs) and praise him
for the Lordship he had received over the Creatures which God had made; and so
with respect to the chief Moral end for which the Sabbath was first made for
Man, it might have properly been called the first day Sabbath throughout all
Generations; yet seeing God had also designed the Sabbath to be a figure of a
greater rest, (in the seventh thousand years of the World, Heb. 4.3.10. Rev.
20.4, 5, 7.
as it is believed by many Christians) it therefore could not have been so
glorious a Type, if it had been delivered to us under the name of the First
day: So that the Sabbathday was appointed in the name of the seventh day, not
to deny Adam's Moral Obedience, in keeping his first day Sabbath, before his
six working days, to be a pattern to his posterity, or that Adams first Sabbath
could not properly be called afterward successively Man's first days Sabbath,
but because the seventh day of God's Rest, and so considered, as after Man's six
working days did better suit the Memorial of God's Creation and Rest, and the
Typical uses of the Sabbath day.

3. The Sabbath was commanded in the Name of the seventh day and not of the
first, because tho God abstained from Work before the Creation, yet it could
not be said he Rested, Ceased or Abstained from Work a day before a Day was
made, or there was time measured by a day. So that the necessity of Nature
placed Gods Sabbath after his Creation days, but there was not the like
necessity that Adam should have his Sabbath before his six working days; and
therefore seeing that God sanctified the seventh day, on which he ceased from
his Works of Creation with respect to Man, that Man should abstain from his
Work to Worship him, Mal. 3.6. Isal. 40.28. Heb. 13.8.
and not because that God himself had need of rest (for he faints not, nor is
weary, neither is the most high changeable or subject to accidents in his
Nature.) Then the seventh-day Sabbath bore this Name from the Necessity of
Nature in Gods Example of measuring time, more than from its proper Nature,
immediate End and principal Use to Man, for in all these respects, Adams first
Sabbath was his first days Sabbath.

4. The Sabbath was expressly sanctified in Genesis 2.2, 3. and in the fourth
Command in these Words [the] seventh day, and not [a] seventh day, to preserve
the constant Order of our six Working days together, and that men should not
choose any one day in the Week, and at their own Pleasures alter the Sabbath to
any different day, as to the first day in one Week, and the second or third,
etc. in the Weeks following: so as they keep one or a day in seven in every
Week. Moreover it is not said [a] but [the] seventh-day, to prevent Men's
Alteration of it to any other day than what we have a Pattern for in the Holy
Scriptures, that as it was to bind Adam and others after him, to the
Observation of [the] seventh-day successively after his first days Sabbath
without Alteration, so it was to oblige Israel to keep [the] seventh-day
Sabbath successively after their first Sabbath in the Wilderness without a
change, and to tie us, that forasmuch as the Jewish seventh-day Sabbath is
abrogated in the New Testament, as you may see afterward in this Treatise; and
that we have a Pattern left us to observe the first day of the Jewish Week,
that from thence we should keep our Christian Sabbath successively on [the]
seventh-day, after its first taking place by the abolishing of the Jewish
Sabbath in the New Testament without Alteration, Colos. 2.16, 17
as Adam and the Israelits did after their first days Sabbath, which if the
Sabbath in Genesis 2.2, 3. and in the fourth Command had been sanctified in the
express Words of [a] seventh-day, and not of [the] seventh-day, it might have
occasioned Doubts and Confusions about the Observation of the aforesaid several
Sabbaths, but it being expressly commanded in these Words [the seventh-day] it
does signify the Mind of God so clearly, as both to prevent such Confusions,
and yet to preserve the Moral Law in the Fourth Commandment unviolated under
the change that has been made of the Sabbath.

SECT. VII.
HEre I shall prove both from the Holy Scriptures and the Course and Necessity
of Nature, that the Jewish seventh-day Sabbath is Ceremonial, and not Morally
binding to all Nations. And

1. This appears, in that it was not only a sign to Israel, as our Gospel
Sabbath considered, as the seventh-day is to us, that in six days the Lord made
Heaven and Earth, Exodus 31.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
and on the seventh-day he rested; but it was also a Sign and a Covenant
throughout their Generations, that they should remember that Israel was a
Servant in the Land of Egypt, and that the Lord their God brought them out
thence through a Mighty hand and by a stretched out Arm; Deuteronomy. 5.15.
Therefore (says Moses) the Lord their God commanded them to keep the
Sabbath Day. So then as their Sabbath was a Sign of their deliverance out of
Egypt (with respect to their Beginning and Ending of it, from Evening to
Evening, thereby to suit their other new days Beginning from their first
Passover Evening, and so to keep that deliverance in fresher Memory) it is
Ceremonial, and cease as other Sabbaths and Memorials of that Deliverance
have done, by the coming of Jesus Christ.

2. The old Jewish seventh-day Sabbath is proved to be Ceremonial, by the
Apostles Words, Col. 2.16, 17. Let no Man therefore judge you in Meat or in
Drink, or in respect of an Holy Day, (...), in part of a Feast, or of the New
Moon, or of the Sabbath Days: Which are a shadow of things to come, but the
Body is of Christ. For as the Holy Day or Feast-days, New Moon and Sabbaths
herein mentioned, must be taken for those written by Moses and given to Israel,
because those only (and not the Heathen Idolatrous Holy Days) were given of God
as Types and Shadows of good things to come, so the Sabbath Days there
distinctly expressed from other Holy Days appointed for the Observation of
Israel, must be taken for their weekly seventh-days Sabbath, and the two Verses
plainly comprehends all their Sabbaths and Holy Days to be but Shadows of
Things to come. But (says the Text) the Body is of Christ.

Object. But some do say, the Word (...) of Sabbaths here ought to be rendered
Weeks, as the same Greek Word is rendered, John 20.19. Luke 24.1. Mark 16.2.
Matthew. 28.1.

Answer. The Word Sabbath, in Greek Sabbaton, used in those places, is not
there translated Week, for any other Reason than because it was customary to
call the days of the Week, the days of the Sabbath, as the Greek Word Sabbaton
properly signifies, but in the Text, Col. 2.16. the Word (...), of the Sabbaths
(for so it is in the Greek, and not Sabbath Days as we translate it) is not
their joined, as in those other places, to express any particular day of the
Week, but stands singly of its self for Sabbaths; and therefore can only be
understood of the Sabbath Days themselves, which the Word properly signifies,
and cannot be otherwise understood, but at least comprehensively of the
seventh-day weekly Sabbath, because other Holy or Feast-days are in the same
verse expressly named distinctly by themselves.

So then seeing the seventh-day Sabbath is included with the New Moon, and
other Holy or Feast-days, as Shadows of Gofpel things, it was also abolished
with them; and there is the like Ceremonial Reason for it, as there is for
those other Holy Days, Gal. 3. to v. 4. Chap. 4.3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 21. Chap.
5.1. to 5. Chap. 6.12, 13.
Feasts, and New Moon expressed with it; it being a Sign of Isreal's Deliverance
out of Egypt. And considering also, that the Apostle says to the Galatians
(who after they had been converted from the Idolatry of the Heathens to the
Christian Faith, desired to be under the Law, and were turning to those weak
and beggarly Elements) Ye observe Days, and Months, and Times, and Years, I am
afraid of you, least I have bestowed upon you labor in Vain. I do therefore
conclude, that the Jewish seventh-day Sabbath is abrogated with their other
Holy Days and Times. For to imagine that our Lord Jesus, who is faithful over
his own House, Heb. 3.6.
should by his Apostle so reprove the Observation of the Jewish Days and Times
in general, and Name their Sabbaths distinctly from other Holy Days, and
describe them all to be but shadows, which are to be done away and changed with
the Priesthood, Heb. 7.12.
without one word of Exception in the New Testament, to confirm the Jewish
seventh-day Sabbath for our Observation; nor to leave us one Example of any
Christian Churches Custom to meet on that day, but on the first Day of the
Week, and yet to require us to keep their Sabbath, is groundless and irrational
to believe.

3. I come to prove the Jewish seventh day Sabbath to be Ceremonial, and not
Morally binding to all Nations, from the Necessity of Nature, which renders it
impracticable in diverse Countries; and in Order thereunto, I shall first Premise
four things.

1. It was commanded Israel, that they should celebrate their Sabbaths from
Evening to Evening; Lev. 23.32.
and if after the Jewish Pattern, the Sabbath must begin and end at Evening in
every part of the World, then in some parts of it the Sabbath would begin when
it ends in other places, and so it could not be Gods design to bind all men
to keep their Sabbath at one Point of Time prefixed to the Children of Israel
in the Wilderness, or in the Land of Canaan.

2. The Mosaical seventh-day Sabbath could not be the same Successive
seventh-day Sabbath from the Creation, if this were either successively kept
before their Egyptian Bondage by the Ancient Fathers; or if these Patriarchs
began and ended their Days and Weeks successively in the same Order of Time
from the Creation. For God was pleased (to the end, as it is believed, that he
might more effectually draw his People from the Idolatry of the Heathen) to
alter the account of the beginning and ending of their days and years in sacred
things, to what it was before the Israelites were delivered out of Egypt, and
to what was afterward observed by them in Civil things, and this appears by
the Evidence of diverse Authors, and from the Testimony of the Sacred
Scriptures. And

1. We find in Scripture, that the account of the beginning and ending of the
Year was altered to the Jews at their coming out of the Land of Egypt, Exodus
12.2, 8. This Month (viz. Abib) shall be unto you the beginning of Months: it
shall be the first Month of the Year to you; Exodus chapter 13.3, 4.
which Month is partly in our March and partly in April. Thus their Sacred Year
began, but their Civil Year began after their Ingathering of the Fruits of the
Field, Exodus 23.16. Chap. 34.22. Levit. 25.89.
for then it is said to be the End of the Year in their seventh Month of Tisri
or Ethanim, partly in our September and October, for on the tenth day of this
Month was the Trumpet blown to begin their fiftieth year of Jubilee. And this
Mr. Ainsworth notes on Genesis 7.11. where he says. The second Month, to wit, of
the Year agreeable in part to that we call October. For the End and Revolution
of the Year was about the Month which we call September, Exodus 23.16. and
34.22. and so the New Year then began: This was after called the Month of
Enthanim, 1 Kings 8.2. where the Chaldee paraphraseth, that they called it of
Old the First Month, but now (says he) it is the seventh month, for the Year
changed the beginning of it Ecclesiastically, upon the coming of Israel out of
Egypt, see Euod. 12.2. and Levit. 23.39. compared with Exodus 23.16. And Mr.
Ainsworth farther says on Exodus 12.2. By Reason of this their going out of
Egypt, the Year which before began in September, Exodus 23.16. has his
beginning to the Jews Ecclesiastically in Abib, or March; but for the Jubilees,
and Civil Affairs, it began as it had done before, Levit. 25.8, 9, 10. And to
this agrees Mr. Pool's and the Dutch Annotations, on Exodus 12.2. And Mr.
Godwyn in his Moses and Aaron, page 85. 86. and Mr. Charnock in his Works, Vol.
2. page 853. says, It is probable that from the Creation the Year began in
September, the Autumnal Equinox, the Fruit being on the Trees at the Creation;
but now God orders the beginning of the Year from the time of this first
Passover -- which was in March, the Vernal Equinox. Lastly, Mr. And. Willet in
his Hexapla on Exodus 12.2. speaking of this alteration of the Year, agrees
with others, that the Jews Ecclesiastical Year began in their first Month
called Abib, and that their Civil Year began in their seventh Month; yet his
Opinion is, that this Sacred Year began in renovation of the former account
discontinued in Egypt, but he cites Josephus, to whom (says he) consents
Perertus, Simler, that the Hebrews always before this time, held the seventh
Month to be the first Month, as they did afterward for the computation of
Jubilee, and for other Civil Matters. As to Josephus, Mr. Willet gives his
sense out of his Book, in the Greek, Latin, or some other Tongue; for our late
English Translation has either from a corrupt Copy, or default in the
Translator, or Printer, an apparent Error, viz. December is put instead of
September, or as the Year began before the Israelites were delivered out of
Egypt.

2. I find there was also an alteration made of the Account of the beginning
and ending of their days, to what they were before the Israelites were
delivered out of Egypt, or before their Bondage.

1. For tho it is said, Genesis 1.2, 3, 5. That darkness was upon the face of the
deep -- And God said, Let there be-light, and there was light -- and the
evening and the morning was the first day: Yet from hence there is no
sufficient ground to conclude, Mr. Tho. Chasie in his Tract on the Sabbath, p.
4. says, The first things God made was day and night, or light and darkness --
There was in Nature before, tho not in time, a mixed or confused darkness which
Moses called (...) which Arias Montanus correcting Pagnin, translateth and
calls it Caligo; it was neither perfect day, nor perfect Night.
that the Night was created before the day: for Mr. Chasie observes, that the
Hebrew word signifies a mixed darkness, neither perfect Day, nor perfect
Night; and its rational to believe that those words In the beginning God
created the Heavens and the Earth, should be taken for God's creating the
matter of the Heavens and the Earth before their form. As its said, The Earth
was without form, and void, and darkness (or gloominess) was upon the face of
the deep: And then the light and darkness was mixed and confused together; and
so if the order of expression of Gods perfecting any piece of the Creation,
does carry any precedence in order of time, then the Daylight did Originally
go before its Night; but I conceive that neither of them was perfectly formed
before the other, for its said, ver. 4. that God divided the light from the
darkness, which plainly shows they were mixed together, and that he separated
the Day from the Night, that they should no more be mixed and confused
together, as they were before, but should be distinctly placed in the two
Hemispheres, successively to circulate round the Heavens. So that at the same
time when the Light was separated into one Hemisphere, or half part of the
Heavens, the Darkness was placed in the other, and therefore neither of them
were perfectly formed before the other in time. Its true, Isal. 45.7.
Moses was under a necessity to set either the Evening, or the Morning, or the
Light or Darkness, first in the account of the order of God's Creation, which
he wrote after the change of the account of the day: And therefore least he
should seem to dislike the Alteration which God had then but newly made, of the
beginning and euding of the account of the Natural Day for Sacred things, he
named the Evening before the Morning in the History of the Creation. But yet we
may plainly see that as the light was put (tho not precreated) before the
darkness in the account of the first days Work of Creation; and as its said,
That God made two great lights, Genesis 1.3.10.18.
the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night --
to rule over the day, and over the night, and to divide the light from the
darkness: So the light was counted afterward for the former part of the
Natural Day, which consists of a Daylight and its Night, or the revolution
of the Sun in twenty four hours time. For,

2. We find that God created the Fowls of the Air on the fifth day, and the
Beasts and Cattle, and every creeping thing of the Earth on the sixth day, and
made Adam, and put him into the Garden of Eden, and then brought them to him,
that he should give them Names, before that God had caused a deep Sleep to fall
upon him, (while he took out one of his Ribs) and formed Eve, and brought her
unto him: It is therefore rational to believe, seeing it must necessarily take
up time to name the Creatures, and that Adam could not so well behold them in
the Night as in the Day, to distinguish every little Bird, and every Fowl of
the Air, and all the Cattle, and every Beast and creeping thing from each
other, to give them proper Names, and to know them again by sight, that he was
formed in the daylight of that Hemisphere, and that he spent the remaining
part of it in that affair, and that his sleep was in the following Night, as
the most proper time for it, and then from this foot of account after Eve was
formed, at the Conclusion of the sixth days work of Creation, both Adam and Eve
first entered on God's seventh and their first day Sabbath at the beginning of
the daylight, or morning of the day, to adore and worship God. For as they had
no need of the Night to sleep in, for that they were newly made, and fresh in
the Strength and Perfection of their Nature, Genesis 1.27, 28.
and as it best became our First Parents for the Lordship they received of God
over the Creatures which he had made, immediately to Attribute their Worship to
him: So it was most proper they should have first the Daylight to behold the
Beauty of the Creation, thereby to be excited from the Objects of their Eyes,
together with the Light of their Understandings, to glorify God on the first
sanctified Day of his Rest from all his Works. So that it is Rational to
believe, that Adam began his first First Day Sabbath with the morning or
Daylight, and consequently the following working days, and Sabbath Days were
all so to begin, and successively to continue to others after him; and
according to this, its said Exodus 10.13. Chap. 13.21. Lev. 8.35. Deuteronomy. 28.66.
Job 26.10. Jer. 33.20.
in Genesis 7.4. I will cause it to rain upon the Earth forty days and forty
nights: And so in Ver. 12. Forty days and forty nights. And Moses was in the
Mount forty days and forty nights: Exodus 24.18. And in Genesis 8.6. At the end of
forty days. From which last place it is observable, as well as from many other
Scriptures, Genesis 8.10, 12 Chap. 17.12. Exodus 21.21. Numb. 14.34.
that the Day and Night together, is commonly called Day, which is the most
excellent part of that which is called the Natural Day of twenty four hours,
and therefore God might also give it the precedence, in respect to its
revolution, with its Night originally unto Man.

3. Leaving what I have already said of the beginning of the Natural Day, to
the serious Consideration of those that desire Information herein, hoping it
may be of use to them, I proceed to bring in other Scripture Evidence also, to
prove, that before the Israelites were delivered out of Egypt, or were in
bondage there, the Daylight, See Purchase Pilgrimage, Page 118. lib 2.77.
Emend. Tem. lib. 1. Ainsworth on Genesis 10.10. Ezekiel. 23.15. Dan. 1.1, 2. Ains.
Genesis 1.5. See Mr. G. Hughes Analytical Exposit. of Genesis, on Chap. 1.9. Genesis
10.8, 9, 10. Genesis 11.27, 28, 31.
and not the Night was counted for the former part of the Natural Day: As
Purchase tells us, citing Pliny, and Scal. That the Babilouians began their
Natural Day of twenty four hours at the rising of the Sun, the Egyptian and
Romish Priests at Midnight. Ainsworth and Mr. Hughes also say, that the
Chaldeans counted the beginning of the Day at San rising. Now as for Babylon,
in Hebrew Babel, the Metropolis of the Chaldeans, it was first built by Nimrod,
before Abraham and Lots time, who were Chaldeans born, and it is plain from the
Sacred Scriptures, that Lots and Abraham's Generations reckoned their Natural
days after the manner of the Chaldeans, to begin with the Daylight, and not
the Night, as appears in Genesis 19. 33, 34. And they made their Father drink Wine
that night -- and the firstborn went in and lay with her Father; and he
perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose. And it came to pass on the
morrow, that the firstborn said unto the younger, Behold, I lay yesternight
with my Father: let us make him drink Wine this night also. And in Genesis 31.26,
29, 36, 42. And Laban said to Jacob -- the God of your Father spoke unto me
yesternight -- And Jacob answered, God has seen my Afflictions, and the labor
of my hands, and rebuked thee yesternight. The Hebrew word in these three
places for yesternight, is (...) Emesh, heri, sero, Yesterday late in the
Evening, Pagnin. Praterita Nocte, last Night -- Arias Montanus, Hesterna Nocte,
Yesterdaynight. Buxtorf, Leigh. Crit. Robertson's Lex. etc. Some add Evening,
or Yester Evening, which is sometimes put for the whole Night, as in the
History of the Creation, Genesis
the Evening and the Morning is put for the Day and Night, but that the Hebrew
word Emesh does properly signify Yester-night, is farther evidenced, because
the Hebrews have another word for Yesterday, viz. (...) Temol, Exodus 5.14. 1 Samuel 20.27. 2 Samuel 15.20. Job 8.9. Psalm. 90.4. See Pagnin. Arias Montan.
Buxtorf, Leigh, Crit. etc. And the Hebrew word (...), Ghnereb, or Ereb, is
properly the Evening, and betokens the mixing of Light with Darkness after the
Sun is set: So that the word Emesh signifies, as it is rightly translated in
our English Bibles, See Ainsw. Genesis 1.5. Leigh Get.
and as Ainsworth reads it, Yester-night, or Yesterdayright, which is the
same. Moreover, this word in Genesis 19.34. cannot be otherwise understood,
without an apparent wrong to the Sacred Scripture. For it is said, Ver. 33. And
they made their Father drink Wine that night, and the firstborn went in, and
lay with her Father, viz. that same Night. -- And it came to pass on the
morrow, that the firstborn said unto the younger, Behold, I lay yesternight
with my Father; let us make him drink Wine this Night also -- And they made
their Father drink Wine that Night also. Now let it be duly considered that
the Hebrew word (...) Lailah, which is properly Night, is in the Context used
in those three places, and that the word Lailah, Night, in Ver. 33. does
undeniably confirm the word Emesh, in ver. 34. to be there put for Yesternight,
and not for Yesterday, or Yesterday Evening, because the Hebrew word Lailah,
Night, is used in the foregoing Verse, to express that same time, and [ Night]
which is called [ Yesternight.] Besides, the following words, this Night also,
does also farther imply, that the word Emesh is put for Yesternight: So that
beside the proper signification of the word, the rendering of it according to
our common English Translation, is confirmed with a threefold Evidence, viz. 1.
That the Hebrew Tongue has other words to express Yesterday and Evening. 2.
That the following Context does imply that Emesh is put for Yesternight. And 3.
That the same time called Yesternight, ver. 34. is called Night, ver. 33. So
that in Lots and Jacobs time by the Morrow next following to Yesternight, it
appears the Daylight was counted for the former part of the Natural Day.

4. This is farther evident, for when at Night they spoke of the Daylight
following, they used not to say to day, or this Day, but to Morrow, or the
Morrow after, Numb. 33.3. They departed from Rameses in the first month, Exodus
12.6, 8, 10. Dent. 10.6. Mark 14.17. Matthew. 16.20.
on the fifteenth day of the first month, on the morrow after the Passover;
which was killed on the fourteenth day at Even, and prepared at the going down
of the Sun, and was eaten within that Night, and not in the Evening, as our
Savior shows how the Passover was to be kept according to Law; for its
said, In the Evening he comes with the twelve: And when the Even was come, he
sat down with them, Matthew. 26.26. 1 Cor. 11.23.
and as they were eating it, he instituted the Holy Supper, as it is said, The
same Night in which he was betrayed: According as it was expressly commanded
that the Passover should be eaten in, or within that Night which belonged to
the fourteenth day, as they reckoned their days for Civil things; for after the
Lord had passed over the Children of Israel, and smote the firstborn of Egypt
at Midnight, Exodus 11.29, etc. 37, 38. Numb. 1.1, 2, 45, 46.
and Pharaoh and all his Servants were risen, and had called Moses and Aaron,
and bid them and the Children of Israel with their Flocks and Herds to be gone,
and 600000 Footmen, besides Women and Children could depart, tho they were in
some readiness, yet it is rational to believe, it musts needs be in the next.
Daylight; and to confirm this, we find they were expesly commanded that none
of them should go out of the Door of his house until the Morning, viz. of the
morrow after the passover Night, Exodus 12.2^.
called the fifteenth day, and therefore it did neither belong to the Passover
Night, nor the fourteenth day. But from this Passover, the account of the
Natural Day was altered, and by God's Appointment was put back a whole Night,
for the Passover was killed and prepared on the fourteenth day at Evening,
from whence the first day of unleavened Bread began, and the Feast continued
till the one and twentieth day at Evening, which is just seven days according
to the Commandment, Exodus 12.17, 18, 19. But yet observe in Levit. 23.6. and
Numb. 28.17. it is said, that on the fifteenth day is the Feast of unleavened
Bread seven days, which to reckon it to begin from the morrow, or next morning
after the Passover, as before is showed Numb. 33.3. on account of their Civil
days, like as was reckoned in Lot and Jacob's time, would come short a whole
night of the seven days appointed from the fourteenth day at Even till the one
and twentieth day at Even: And therefore I see no other way to make up the full
seven days, than to begin their fifteenth Sacred Day, at or after the Evening
and end of their Civil or common fourteenth artificial Day of Daylight, which
cuts off its following Night belonging to it, and so puts that Night to the
following Daylight, and thereby makes a new Sacred fifteenth day of the Night
of the Civil fourteenth day, and the Daylight of the Civil fifteenth Day put
together; and from thence in an orderly Succession their Sacred time was
measured for the due observing of those Feasts, Sabbaths, and Holy Days which
God commanded the Children of Israel. But for their Civil Affairs, they still
accounted their days from Morning to Morning, as in 1 Samuel 19.10. And David
fled and escaped that night. Saul also sent Messengers unto David's house, to
watch him, and to slay him in the morning: And Michal David's wife told him
saying, If thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shall be slain: from
which Scripture it plainly appears, that after that night, the nex Morning or
Daylight was accounted the Morrow, which was another Day, and not belonging to
the Night going before. And to this Mr. Tho. Godwin witnesses in his Book,
called Moses and Aaron, page 80. where he tells us, That the Jews Natural Day
was twofold: Civil, a working Day, which was destined for Civil Businesses and
Works. This (says he) began at Sunrising, and held till the next Sunrising,
Matthew. 28.1. Or Sacred, a Festival, or holy day, destined for Holy Exercises:
This began at Sunset, and continued till the next Sunset. From all which both
Sacred and Humane Evidence, I shall make this Inference, That if the Patriarchs
before and after the Flood, and the House of Israel successively had either
kept the same precise seventh day Sabbath from the Creation, or had reckoned
the time of their beginning and ending of their Days and Weeks precisely and
successively from thence, (although their Sabbath might not have been duly
observed in their bondage,) then the Jewish Sabbath from Evening to Evening,
after the Alteration of the account of the day, could not be the precise
successive seventh day from the Creation. And seeing the Scripture is silent in
fixing the Jewish seventh day, or any other Day as that precise successive
seventh day, we cannot tell which is the same successive seventh day from the
first seventh day of Rest which God Sanctified.

3. I premise, That if the Reasons I have given for Adams beginning his first
Sabbath day in the Morning with the Daylight in that Hemisphere of the Garden
of Eden, should be counted by our Opponents too weak to draw a conclusion for a
pattern to justify us in beginning our Sabbath in the Morning, and any should
still hold the keeping of the Sabbath from Evening to Evening to be
successively from the Creation, then we have this to argue against their
Opinion, That as they have no Scripture for it, so the Sun was not made till
the fourth day of the Creation; and we know not in what part of that day it was
Sunrising or Sunsetting, or Noon or Midnight in any Horizon or Hemisphere,
except we acknowledge that Adam began his first Sabbath with the Morning, and
then it follows that a little before the fourth day was ended, it was about as
much before the beginning of the fifth day with the Morning or Sunrising in
Eden, otherwise as it cannot then be known where the seventh day of God's Rest
(which had the same successive proportion of time as the six days of Creation)
was bounded with the rising and setting of the Sun, but that when God's seventh
day of Rest after his sixth day of Creation began and ended any where, it began
and ended every where at the same instant season, and it was no where then any
other than the seventh day, which began in some places at Evening, in others at
Morning, in others at Midnight, in others at Noon, and in some or other places
at all hours of the Day and Night, and the Revolution of the Light and
Darkness, was the Day which is called Natural, in distinction to that which is
by some called the Artificial Day, or Daylight only. There cannot therefore
from the first seventh day of God's Rest be any footing of account to measure
out to us the time of day for the beginning of our Day, nor consequently for
the beginning and ending of our Sabbath Day, for that it is not known to us
where the Sun was when that seventh day of God's Rest first began, unless we
give way to what has been clearly demonstrated from the Scripture, that the
Sun arose, or was about rising then to Paradise; and to believe, as there is
reason for it, that Adam had that whole Daylight sanctified which preceded the
Night of his Sabbath.

4. It is very clear that God did never design the Law and Institution of the
Sabbath to Israel in the Wilderness, to bind either Jews or Gentiles to the
observation of the precise orderly Succession of their seventh day Sabbath, as
from the Creation to the end of the World; because we find that God himself did
afterward make an interruption of the Natural Order of the account of Time,
when the Sun was brought backward ten degrees in the Dial of Ahaz, and when it
stood still in the midst of Heaver about a whole Day.

1. As to the Suns going backward ten degrees, Isai. 38.8. See his Book, Page
157.158
Mr. Weems in his Christian Synagogue, has made a draught of Ahaz Dial, and
explained the matter, telling us that that Day was prolonged twenty two hours,
reckoning the ten degrees or divisions on the Dial to be five hours backward,
and then the Suns going forward again, is 5 hours more, with twelve hours, is
twenty two hours Daylight in all.

2. It is said, Josh. 10.13. So the Sun stood still in the midst of Heaven, and
hasted not to go down about a whole day. Now if we duly consider this place,
it seems by the Suns standing still in the midst of Heaven, that it stood still
in the Meridian, or Noontide of Canaan about a whole day; and add to the time
of its standing still the half, or that part of the Day that was past before,
and that followed after, when the Sun moved forwards to its going down, and
then that Day or Daylight continued twenty four hours, or was about as long as
the Day and Night together: and so if the Jews did reckon all that large
Daylight to belong to the preceding Night, then the beginning of their next
Sabbath fell later than its usual course about twelve hours time, and if they
divided that long Daylight, and put half of it to the former, and half of it
to the following Night, then they did thereby alter the beginning of their
Natural Day for Sacred things, and reckon that last twelve hours of Daylight
for the former part of the Day belonging to the following Night, but such a
succession of days for Sacred things, was against the Command of God for the
Time and Order of beginning and ending all their Sabbaths and Holy Days. But
instead of these, if any should yet say, That when the Sun had continued in
their Hemisphere about twenty four hours time, the Natural Course of the Night
being altered, and its time spent by the long duration of that Day, God was
pleased in an instant either to pass the Sun through their Antipode Hemisphere, or
suddenly to turn it backward, and make it Sunrising to the Israelites in the
Land of Canaan.

I Answer, That if thus it was, that in an instant the Sun was passed through
their Horizon, and the Antipode Hemisphere, then they reckoned the first twelve
hours of that long Daylight of twenty four hours for one Artificial Day, or
Daylight, and the last twelve hours Day instead of Night, adding one to its
preceding Night, and the other instead of a Night to the following Daylight,
and so did bring their days into their former course again. But as this would
have been a greater Miracle than the former, which was only a stop to the
Course of Nature for a time, so there is reason to believe that if it had been
so, the Holy Ghost would have recorded it in the Scripture, and Josephus would
not have omitted the Notice of it in his History, where he speaks of this
larger Day than ordinary. And as to the last, if the Sun had been suddenly
turned backward to make it Sunrising in the Land of Canaan, then it could not
have been so properly said, that the Sun hasted not to go down about a whole
day: For if the Sun had been suddenly put backward from its place of setting to
its place of rising, then the Sun had only hasted from its standing still to
the place of its going down, and went not down, till a daylight and a
halfs-time after it stood still in the midst of Heaven, contrary to the plain
meaning of the Text. And if we say the Sun was turned backwards from the place
it stood still, or from thence was passed in an instant through their Antipode
Hemisphere to its place of rising, or which ever way we reckon from that time
the Account of the natural course of the Day and Night to settle; the Jews
could not possibly fall into their due Order of Time again, as successively
from their former Custom to begin their Sabbaths at Even, according to the Law,
unless it were settled by a greater Miracle than the standing still of the Sun.
But if we reckon, as there is the greatest Reason for it, and it is most
natural and fairly employed in the Text, that after the Sun had stood still
about a whole day, or twelve hours, it then continued its natural course to go
down, and add to it the ten hours of the Suns going backward and returning in
the Dial of Ahaz (which twenty two hours together being computed after the
Jewish Custom of some of their Days-light or Artificial-days, may make a full
day and nights time) and then the Jewish Sabbath fell later than its former
precise Order of Saccession, by near or full a whole days time. So that their
weekly seventh-day Sabbath after these Afterations of days had but about two
hours (possibly no time at all) in the time, which by an orderly Succession
should have been their Sabbath, and the other twenty two hours (and possibly
their whole Sabbath Day) was in the Time, if it had not been so interrupted of
the first day of their Week, by an orderly Succession from their first Sabbath
in the Wilderness. And therefore it is apparent, that neither the Moral Law nor
the Ceremonial Precept for their Sabbath, was designed to bind us to the
Observation of the precise successive seventh-day from the Creation; for if it
had, God would never have so interrupted the course of Nature, and his own
Design and Institution unto Men.

5. Having premised these things, I proceed to show, that the course of Nature
makes it impossible for all Nations to observe the seventh-day Sabbath after
the Jewish Pattern.

1. Sir Jonus Moor says, See his S^sem of the Ma^^maticks, Pa^^ 48.
that the Government of Wardhus is in seventy and seventy one Degrees. And
there they have the continual Presence of the Sun for many days together in the
Summer, and in the Winter they are as long without the Sun in their Horison or
Hemisphere.

2. See his Pilgrimage, Page 431, 432, 433.
Parchas gives us a large account of the Northern Parts of the World, and tells
us, that the Samoyeds about the Banks of Pechore are in Subjection to the
Moscovites, and that in the Year 1611. Josias Logan wintered at the Town of
Postozera, and there observed, that on December eleventh he could see but the
way of the Sun Beams; on the thirteenth the Beams but not the Sun: Which (it is
there said) on Christmas day he saw rising at South and by West, and setting at
South West and by South, not wholly elevated from the Horison, but all the way
the nether part of the Sun seeming just and even with it. Now this Town of
Postozera I find in Speeds Maps and Description of the World, to be but just
over the Artick Circle, which is in about sixty six Degrees and half. So that
Wardbus before mentioned, being about four Degrees nearer the Pole, has more of
the continual Presence of the Sun in Summer, and is a longer time without it in
the Winter. But to return to Purchase History, he farther tells us, that the
Hollanders in the Year 1594. sent to discover a way to Cathay and China by the
North-East, that William Barentz was the Chief Pilot for this Discovery. The
next Year the last of August, they had Speech with the Samoyeds, who know no
God. The Sun (whose Presence they are long deprived of in the Winter, which is
recompensed in their Nightless Summer) is worshipped amongst them, and when the
Sun is declining out of their sight, the Moon or North-Star is his Receiver or
Successor (if you will) in that Tribute of their Devotions. Moreover the
aforesaid Author says, that they ( viz. the Hollanders) learned of certain
Muscovites, that the Inhabitants of Nova Zemla, had neither Religion, ^or
Civility prescribed them by any Law, but worshipped the Sun, Moon, and
North-Star: And that in the Year 1596, there were sent other two Ships to
prosecute this Discovery, and after many dreadful Combats with the Ice, and
one of the Ships departing from the other, they were forced to Winter in Nova
Zemla, where they endured a continual Night of many Weeks, wherein neither the
Sun nor any of his Courtly Train, the least Rays to be the Harbingers of his
desired Presence, did present themselves to their Eyes, from the fourth of
November, till the seven and twentieth of January they saw no Sun. Our Author
farther adds in Page 740, 741. That Henry Hudson, 1607. discovered farther
North toward the Pole -- he found himself in eighty Degrees, where they felt
it hot, and drank Water to Cool their thirst, they saw Land to eighty two
Degrees and farther -- It is, says he, colder in sixty two Degrees, than in
nine or ten Degrees more northerly toward the North Eest -- hence it is, that
those parts hear (and perhaps under) the Pole are habitable; Under the Pole
there is but one day and one Nigh^ in one whol^ Yea^, for it is half a Year
Niala, and half a Year day together. In Gre^il^^d (says he) are no People. But
Green or G^oon land is another place.
the continuance of the Suns Presence in the Summer, Hearing and Warming with
lively Cherishment all Creatures; and in the Winter, by his oblique Motion,
leaving so long a Twilight; and the increased Light of the Moon, the Suns
great and diligent Lieutenant, the brightness of the Stars, and whi^eness of
the Snow, not Suffering them to be quite forlorn in darkness.

Moreover he farther says, in Page 743. (speaking of James Halls Voyages to
Groenland) that he sound their Winter Houses built with Whales-bone, covered
with Earth; and Vaults twoyards deep under the Earth, Square. -- Up within the
Land, they have a King carried on men's Shoulders. The next Year he sailed
thither the third Time, and in a fourth Voyage 1612. was slain there by a
Savage. And he tells us in his Margin, that this Voyage was written by William
Boffin. Allen Sellows of Red^iff, told me (says he) Hall was slain in seventy
six Degrees. I have given the Reader the larger account of those Northern
Parts, that he may receive the fuller Satisfaction, that there are Inhabitants
in those Countries that have several Weeks of Day together in the Summer, and
of Nights together in the Winter: and Mr. Chafie says, That in places near
either of the Poles, See his Tract on the Sabbath Page 18. and 24.
where it is commonly Daylight for many days together; from Sunsetting to
Sunsetting in those places cannot properly be termed a Day, having in it many
Revolutions of the Sun -- And in the North of Russia, and of the King of
Denmarks and -- Swedens Countries, where the Sun makes many Revolutions, at
some seasons of the Year between his Rising and Setting, Men cannot count their
Week by Horizontal days, (that is, from Sunrising to Sunrising, or from
Sunsetting to Sunsetting) but they do and have counted their Weeks by
Meridional days: Which is the time from Midnight to Midnight, or from Noon to
Noon with any People. See Mr. Chasic Page 7.9.
And therefore if the Sabbath must be kept from Evening to Evening in all the
World, after the Jewish pattern, then in some remote Northern parts their
Horizontal day from Evening to Evening in some parts of their Year is as long
as many of ours, yea many Weeks of our Days must pass before they can keep
their seventh-day Sabbath, to reckon their days from Evening to Evening, and so
for great part of their Year they cannot follow the Example of Isreal's Sabbath.

Besides, if the Moral Law be only so binding then both Men and Beasts in some
part of their Year are the more exposed to hard bondage, and the Relief and
Equity of the Law is not alike to all Nations. And therefore seeing the Jewish
Pattern cannot be binding to all Nations, to begin their Sabbath at one and the
same precise time of Day, nor can universally preserve the equal Reason or
Equity of the Law, it was not designed of God to answer the Moral Law.

SECT. VIII.
HEre I come to demonstrate from Gods first appointing the Sabbath to Israel in
the Wilderness, that we have no certain Pattern from thence, that all men
should Originally and Precisely have six working days before their Sabbath. For

1. We do not find that the Children of Israel had observed their Sabbath from
their coming out of Egypt, until they gathered Manna. We read nothing of it
before, but that when they had gathered twice as much Manna on the sixth day,
all the Rulers of the Congregation came and told Moses (which is a
Demonstration that they were ignorant of the Reason, why the People doubled
their Portion on the sixth day.) And Moses said unto them, Exodus 16.23.
This is that which the Lord has said, To Morrow is the rest of the Holy
Sabbath unto the Lord. And in ver. 25. It is called a Sabbath unto the Lord. So
that it may be computed, (...). 1. etc.
they had more than five Weeks time, besides what they had in Egypt of working
days together without a Sabbath, and then their Sabbath when it was first
commanded them was not their seventh-day, after no more than their six working
days; but may be called their first day Sabbath for setting up its Observation
to Israel in the Wilderness, and herein it did not Answer Gods Example of
creating the World in six days, and resting on the seventh-day which he then
sanctified. And a Confirmation of this may be fairly drawn from Mr. Bampfields
own Confession, who pleading for the Jewish Sabbath, in his Reply to Dr.
Wallis, page 15. says: That he sees to Reason, why a new Epoch from Exodus
16.23, 30. should be imagined, unless it be, because it is so plain a Proof of
the Israelites observing the seventh-day Sabbath before the Law of Sinai, in
Obedience to the Law, Genesis 2.2, 3. -- And if there were no New Epoch in Exodus
16. then it seems agreed that the seventh-day was never altered, and in Page
16. he also says: So I think we are thus far safe, that from Genesis 2. to Exodus
20. there was no new Epoch of days -- there was no Intermission of the days by
chance.

Now tho I differ from Mr. Bampfield, having clearly proved that the Account of
the days were altered for Ecclesiastical Things from the first Passover, yet I
shall make some use of his Words, viz. That by his thus asserting, there was no
new Epoch Exodus 16. to alter the Sabbath from the Creation, I conceive he does
consequentially Confirm what I have said, that the six days of gathering Manna,
was no Pattern to fix six working days to go Originally before the Sabbath; for
if the Israelites gathering Manna six days and resting the seventh, was no new
Epoch, notable Event or new Original for setting up their seventh-day Sabbath;
then their six days of gathering Manna could not be an Epoch, for the sixing
of their six working days Originally before their Sabbath, for if it be not an
Epoch to the one it cannot be so to the other. And if (as he says) it was no
Epoch for altering the Sabbath Day, then there was no need of it, as an Epoch
to direct them to keep the right Sabbath day; when if it were so (as he also
says) that the Israelites in Egypt were no strangers to it, and that it was
not forgotten but well known to them. And so it consequently follows from his
Assertions, that there was also no need of the Israelites gathering Manna six
days to be an Epoch to six their six working days before their Sabbath.

2. The Reason of the fourth Command to keep the seventh-day Sabbath is, For in
six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and
rested the seventh-day: Wherefore the Lord Blessed the Sabbath Day, and
Hallowed it. Now this Reason for the Observation of the Sabbath on the
seventh-day, does destroy its Moral Limitation to the seventh-day appointed to
Israel next after the sixth day on which they gathered Manna, as a Pattern
sixing their six working days before their Sabbath; because we are referred by
it to the Pattern in the beginning, when Gods seventh-day Sabbath was Man's
first day Sabbath, and not to the time of gathering Manna, nor of Isreal's
coming out of Egypt; which last appears from other places of Scripture to be
the Reason of the Ceremonial beginning and ending of their Sabbath from Evening
to Evening. It Is true, that seventh-day appointed in the Wilderness did answer
the Moral Precept of the fourth Commandment, but yet mistake me not: It is not
found to Answer it simply, because it was that very seventh-day then appointed,
or simply for that very days-sake, without regard to their Deliverance out of
Egypt; and that new Appointment (for if another seventh-day had been sixed for
their Sabbath, it had answered the command as well as that) but because that
same seventh-day was appointed to them a boundary successively before and after
their six working days, nor did this command Morally-limit them to keep the
same precise seventh-day successively from the Creation (for such a Limitation
is not in this Precept nor in any other place in the Holy Scriptures) but it
tyeth the Sabbath to the seventh-day as a boundary to their, or our, or any
Nations six working days, or to the first day before and after them, which
answers the same Law.

SECT. IX.
I Shall here Instance some particular Cases in the New Testament, in which we
are referred to the Pattern in our first Parents, which may serve as Examples
to juslifie our doing the like for the Observation of the Sabbath Day, as

1. It is said, in 1 Timothy 2.11, 12, 13. Let the Woman learn in Silence with all
Subjection. But I suffer not a Woman to (...), nor to usurp Authority over the
Man, but to be in Silence. For Adam was first formed, then Eve. And Adam was
not deceived, but the Woman being deceived was in the Transgression. And 1 Cor.
14.34. Let your Women keep Silence in the Churches: for it is not permitted
unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be under Obedience, as also says
the Law. In these two Scriptures there are two Moral Reasons given, and one
Command mentioned for Women's Subjection unto the Men. 1. Because Adam had the
Priority of being formed before Eve, and he having her Original Humane
Substance first in himself, had thereby a natural Precedence to her Free and
Voluntary Subjection. But (...) The Woman being first deceived and in the
Transgression, she fell thereby under a more absolute Law of Obedience to her
Husband, Genesis 3.16. Unto the Woman he said -- thy desire shall be to thy (or as
it is in our Margin, Subject to thy) Husband, and he shall rule over thee. Now
from hence we may clearly see, how the Apostle confirms his Doctrine from the
Order of Nature in our first Parents, and the Institution of God to them; and
if these are of Moral Use and Perpetually binding for our Obedience, then we
have Reason to believe that Gods sanctifying the first Seventh-day Sabbath, and
the Order of Adam and Eve, keeping of it before their six working days, is also
of Moral use unto us.

2. I shall show, that an express Law of Moses is not only Abrogated by the
Authority of Jesus Christ, but he justifies the doing of it by the Moral
Pattern in our first Parents, as may be seen in Mark 10.2, 3, 4. And the
Pharisees came to him, and asked him, Is it lawful for a Man to put away his
Wife? tempting him. And he answered and said unto them, What did Moses command
you? And they said, Moses suffered to write a Bill of Divorcement, and to put
her away. And Jesus answered and said unto them, For the hardness of your
Heart, he wrote you this Precept. But from the beginning of the Creation, God
made them Male and Female. For this cause shall a man leave his Father and
Mother, and cleave to his Wife; and they twain shall be one Flesh -- what
therefore God has joined together, let no man put asunder. -- And he says
unto them, whosoever shall put away his Wife (Matthew says except it be for
Fornication) and Marry another, commits Adultery against her.

1. To prevent any mistake about this Precept of Divorcement, and to confirm
what I may conclude from our Saviors Words before recited, I shall consider
the Original Transcript of it, in Deuteronomy. 24.1. When a Man has taken a Wife, and
married her, and it come to pass, that she find no favor in his Eyes, because
he has found some uncleanness (in our Margin, it is matter of Nakedness) in
her; then let him write her a Bill of Divorcement, and give it in her hand, and
send her out of his House. And here I shall note, that this matter of
Uncleanness or Nakedness, is not to be understood of Adultery or Whoredom. For
the Dutch Annotations say, that the Hebrew Word signifies Nakedness or
Scandalousness of any thing wherein the Husband takes dislike to her, except
Whoredom or Fornication. And Mr. Ainsworth says, It is any thing of Shame or
Ignominy, as the Greek translateth a Shameful (or Uncomely) thing; and he also
says, that this is thought of some not to be meant of Adultery, for which she
was to dye, if it were proved; but of some evil thing in her Conditions or
Actions which displeased her Husband. Deuteronomy. 22.22.
So the Phrase was used in Deuteronomy. 23.14. for that which was uncleanly and
unseemly.

2. The Sense of our Saviors Words clearly shows, that this Law of
Divorcement was designed for other Matters than for Whoredom or Fornication;
for our Lord [ owning Moses Precept of Sufferance] to put away their Wives,
excepts against it, unless it be in the Case of Fornication; which if it were
so limited under the Law, then Moses Sufferance was nothing but what our
Savior still allows, and Christ's Prohibition was nothing at all. This being
Premised, it now follows that our Lord makes that Adultery under the Gospel,
that was not accounted so under the Law. And from the Moral Pattern in Adam and
Eve, he Abrogateth the Use and Authority of Moses Precept, for suffering Men to
put away their Wives for smaller Causes than Fornication; and if the Pattern in
our first Parents was of such Moral use as to justify our Saviors abolishing
of a written Precept of Moses, we have then Reason also to believe that their
Example, or the Order of time of their first observing the Sabbath Day that was
sanctified for them, is of Moral use to us, we also having the Jewish Sabbath
Abrogated by Christ's Authority in the New Testament.

SECT. X.
HAving opened and explained the two Foundation Scriptures for our keeping the
Sabbath Day, and proved the fourth Commandment to be Morally binding to all
Nations; and that the Jewish Pattern for the Sabbath is only Judaical and
Ceremonial, and also that from the Israelites first observing their Sabbath in
the Wilderness, we have no certain Pattern for having six working days
Originally before our Sabbath: And having given some New Testament Instances of
diverse Cases, warranted and reformed by the Pattern in our first Parents, to
show that their Example of keeping their first Sabbath is also of Moral use to
us: I shall here speak something farther, to explain the Pattern of Adams
Sabbath, which I have already largely showed, See Page 24.
began with the Morning Daylight, as our Christian Sabbath does. And therefore
I have only here to add, That it cannot be supposed, but that seeing God rested
on the seventh day, and sanctified it for Man, that he also rested, Genesis 2.3,
15, 18. Mark 2.27
and was not allowed on that same day to dress the Garden of Eden, which was
his appointed Work in Innocence: For if Adam had liberty to dress the Garden on
the Day of God's Rest, and was bound to begin his Sabbath after his six working
days, or days wherein he might dress the Garden precisely after God's Example,
then he did keep his Sabbath on the sixth day after God's Sabbath, and not on
that seventh day successively, which God had sanctified: And if he kept no
Sabbath till the next seventh day after God's seventh day of Rest, then Adam
had seven days in which he might dress the Garden before his Sabbath; so that
Adam must either have kept another seventh day than that precise successive
seventh day which God had sanctified, viz. the sixth day from God's Sabbath, or
have seven working days before his first Sabbath, contrary to God's Example, or
else begin his Sabbath before his working days; and then it follows, that God's
seventh day Sabbath after his six days of Creation, was Man's First day Sabbath
before his six working days, and after them the same successive seventh day
next following God's seventh day Sabbath, was also Man's seventh day Sabbath
too. And so the sanctifying of the seventh day in Genesis 2. and accordingly in
the Moral Law, which was afterward given forth to Israel, was answered under
the Name either of the first or seventh day Sabbath.

And farther to explain this Matter, God's seventh day Rest after his six
Creation days, was not designed for a Pattern to Man, that he should also have
first six working days before he kept his Sabbath, for then God would either
have Created Adam with some other things in the beginning of his first days
Work, and have put him in a Capacity to do some business the six Creation days,
and then to rest the seventh day on which God rested, or else some other way
have ordered six working days Originally for Man before his Sabbath; but seeing
it was otherwise, it therefore follows, that God's seventh day Sabbath was
only a Pattern for Man's dividing and counting his time, and for bounding his
six working days, that he should not have more working days until a Sabbath,
nor be at Liberty, so often as he pleases to make any one day in seven his
weekly Sabbath, viz. to rest on the seventh day in one week, and on the sixth,
fifth, fourth, third, second, or first day in the next week after, which would
have tended to confusion: but that Man should have six working days together,
and no more, bounded before and after with a Sabbath, as it was in Adams
Pattern. And thus our Gospel first day Sabbath answers the design of God in
sanctifying and commanding the observation of the seventh day, because it is a
boundary before and after to our six working days.

Moreover, As I showed before, it could not be said that God rested [a] on the
day, or on [the first] day before the Creation, or time was measured by a Day,
and therefore the necessity of the Order of Nature placed God's Sabbath after
his six Creation days, but there was not the like necessity that the same day
of Rest which was also made Adams Sabbath, should be before his six working
days: So that it was fixed by the Lord in the Original Order of Adam and Eves
time, that we should have such a Pattern, that not only answers the principal
End of a Sabbath, but all Ends, and suiteth with the alteration of it, and with
God's Example too as after Adams six working days. And tho Adam's First Day of
Rest, or abstinence from his own Business was on God's seventh day Sabbath; yet
seeing that Man's Original Sabbath was not appointed to be kept after God's
Example of working six days first before his Sabbath, we have reason to believe
that we also are not to follow it farther than we find by the Example of our
first Parents, that he designed it should be of use to us. But that Adams
Pattern was to explain the Mind of God in sanctifying the seventh day, which I
believe cannot rationally be denied, nor that it should be of Moral use to us,
to justify our keeping of the Sabbath after the Gospel Pattern, to answer the
design of God in the Moral Precept, and in his first sanctifying of the seventh
day against this Exception, that it cannot be said to be Originally introduced
by only six working days, after God's Example of making the World, seeing our
First Parents did not follow it in this particular.

SECT. XI.
HAving thus far treated on the Sabbath Day, I shall now proceed to show, that
there is a first day to be observed holy under the Gospel, from the Types and
Shadows of it under the Law; for all the (...), and the Law, prophesied until
John, Heb. 9.23. Colos. 2.16, 17
and was a shadow of (...) my things under the Gospel: And as other things were
typed out und^^ ^he legal Administration, so also the Gospel First Day Sabbath
was typed forth under the Law; as its said, the Feast of Tabernacles, and
ingathering of the Fruits of the Land shall be for seven days unto the Lord. On
the first day shall be an holy Convocation: ye shall do no servile work
therein. Levit. 23.34. to 40.
Seven days ye shall offer an Offering made by fire unto the Lord: on the
eighth day shall be an holy Convocation unto you, and ye shall offer an
Offering made by fire unto the Lord; it is a solemn assembly, and ye shall do
no servile work therein -- on the first day shall be a Sabbath, and on the
eighth day shall be a Sabbath, Ver. 10.15.16, 21.
-- ye shall bring a sheaf of the first fruits of your harvest -- And ye shall
count unto you from the morrow after the Sabbath, from the day that ye brought
the sheaf of the wave-offering seven Sabbaths shall be complete; even unto the
morrow after the seventh Sabbath shall ye number fifty days, and ye shall offer
a new meat offering unto the Lord -- and ye shall proclaim on the self-same
day, Levit. 25.3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. etc.
that it may be an holy Convocation unto you: ye shall do no servile work
therein. -- Six years thou shall sow thy Field, and -- prane thy Vineyard, --
But in the seventh year shall be a Sabbath of rest unto the Land -- and thou
shall number seven Sabbaths of years unto the -- forty and nine years then
shall thou cause the Trumpet of the Jubilee to sound -- and ye shall hallow the
fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty throughout all the Land unto all the
Inhabitants thereof -- ye shall not sow, neither reap -- it shall be holy unto
you. That some of these days were appointed as Memorials of Isreal's coming out
of Egypt, is plainly showed in the Scriptures, and of the Jubilee, besides what
is expressed of it: Some have thought, that it was a Memorial of their rest and
first settlement in the Land of Canaan, but yet I conceive there was a farther
meaning in them, viz. as Types and Shadows of Gospel things: For the seventh
day Sabbath, tho it was first appointed for a Moral End, and to preserve the
Memorial of God's making the World in six days, and resting on the seventh,
Exodus 31.15 16, 17. Heb. 4.9. Rev. 20.4, 5, 7.
and was also afterward a sign of Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt, yet we
find the Apostle makes a farther use of it as the Foundation Type, from whence
he proves there remains a Rest to the People of God, which to answer the
Types and the Apostles reasoning in this Scripture, is taken for the seventh
thousand years of the World. So then to follow this instance, we may thus
argue, that those solemn Convocations on the legal first and eighth day, and
their fiftieth day, which if you mind the Text was a first day Sabbath, next
ensuing one of their legal Sabbaths; a plain and clear Type of our Gospel
first day Sabbath, that should commence next after one of their Jewish
Sabbaths: And so their fiftieth Year of Jubilee which followed a seventh Year
Sabbath, may figure to us, that as after seven Sabbaths of Weeks they had a
first days Sabbath, and as after the seven Sabbaths of seven years, and all
those legal and external Bondages of Persons and Things, there should come a
time of release by sound of Trumpet with a first Year Jubilee Sabbath; so after
all the bondage of the legal Administration, there should come a time of Gospel
liberty, Romans 10.18.
proclaimed by the Gospel, with a first days Gospel Sabbath. Thus you see how
these Types and Shadows under the Law does figure out our Gospel first days
Sabbath, as far, if not farther than many Types does usually suit with
Antitypes: but as they have often exceptions in their parallels, so they are
not of themselves positive Proofs but illustrations of Gospel things, which
seeing we have the Examples of the Primitive Christian Churches keeping their
Sabbath on the First day following the Jews Seventh-day Sabbath, or on the
first day of their Week, which does fairly and fully answer those Typical
Sabbaths under the Law, that are not applicable to any other Scripture observed
Times under the Gospel, nor to our Eternal Rest, for that is not doubted to be
a Rest from Labor, and a time of Liberty; nor can it be typed to us by Time,
because it is Eternal, or by an Eighth day. Seeing there is a Time or Day of
General Judgment of Wicked Men, between the seventh thousand years of the World
as some believe, and Eternal Rest, then surely the Typical first Days and Years
Sabbaths under the Law, does bare the greater Evidence to our first day Sabbath
under the Gospel: However, I have no dependence on these Shadows for the
Justification of our First days Sabbath, but on the substantial Law of God, and
Adams Pattern answering the first Sanctification of it, to which I shall here
add the Example of Christ's Disciples, and the Primitive Churches in the New
Testament.

SECT. XII.
HEre I come to demonstrate the ground we have in the New Testament for our
keeping the First day of the Week a Sabbath. And

1. I shall premise, That Christ arose from the Dead on the First day of the
Jewish Week, which is frequently called in the Greek Tongue, The one of the
Sabbaths, after their mode of Speech agreeing to the custom of the Hebrews, See
Dutch Annot. on Mat. 28.1. Luke 24.1. John 20.1. See Dutch Annot. on Genesis 1 5.
and on 1 Cor. 16.2.
who sometimes set [one] for [first] as may be seen in Genesis 1.5. Chap. 8.5.
Numb. 29.1. Dan. 9.1. So that we must read the Greek The one of the Sabbaths,
for the First day of the Week, as it is translated in our English Bibles,
agreeing to the Greek in Mark 16.9. Now when Jesus was risen early, (...), on
the first of the Sabbath, or (as it is in our English) on the first day of the
week. As Luke 18.12. I fast twice in the Sabbath, that is, twice in the Week.
And the Truth of our Translation is farther confirmed, because it is said, In
the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn, toward the first day of the week,
Luke 23 53, 54. to the end. Chap. 14.1. etc. Mark 15.42. John 19.31. Luke
24.13, 15, 21. 1 Cor. 15.4. See Mr. John Weemse his Christian Synagogue. Page
75, 81. John 19.14.
Christ arose from the dead: For he was crucified the day before the Jewish
Sabbath, and on the Sabbath its said, the Women which followed Jesus from
Galilee rested according to the Commandment, and very early on the First day of
the Week they came to Christ's Sepulcher, and he was risen, which was on the
third day after he was Crucified according to the Scriptures. Now it was the
Custom and corrupt Tradition of the Jews when the Passover Sabbath fell on the
day before their weekly seventh day Sabbath, they made but one Sabbath, and
kept their Passover on their seventh day Sabbath, as we find they did when
Christ was laid in the Grave, and therefore that Sabbath day being a double
Sabbath, was called an High Day. And the first day after, on which Christ arose
from the dead, was no Jewish Sabbath, but only the First day of their Week; for
there are two things that do evidently and clearly show, that the one of the
Sabbaths in the Greek cannot be taken for any one of the Jewish Sabbath Days,
but for the first day of their Week: First, Because that seeing Christ arose
from the Dead on the next day after the Passover Sabbath, (as it was then
corruptly observed by the Jews) and that the Passover Feast had but two
Sabbaths, viz. Exodus 12.14. to 19.
on the first and seventh day of unleavened Bread, then forasmuch as Christ lay
in the Grave their Passover Sabbath, the Day following on which he arose could
not be one of their Passover Sabbaths. Secondly, It cannot be denied but that
Christ did eat the Passover with his Disciples on the right day according to
the Commandment, which after our vulgar speech was on Thursday Night, or in the
former part of the Jews sixth day, and on Friday, or their sixth day, which was
according to the Law the first day of their Passover Sabbath, he was
crucified; and there being no other Passover Sabbath wherein the Jews were
forbidden to work till the seventh day of the Passover Feast, it must then
follow, that the Sabbath on which the Women rested, as it is said, according to
the Commandment, being the next day after the first true Passover Sabbath, was
undeniably the Jews weekly seventh day Sabbath, and the day next ensuing called
The one of the Sabbaths, and the first of the Sabbath on which Christ arose
from the dead, must of necessity be understood of the First day of the Jewish
Week after their seventh-day Sabbath, and from thence the Christians observe
their First day Sabbath wherein they solemnly worship God.

And to this I shall cite the Confession and Testimony of Mr. Theophilus
Brabourn in his Discourse upon the Sabbath day, See his Book Page: 68.
wherein he labors to justify the keeping of the seventh day, Saturday
Sabbath, says he, Remember Saturday to keep it holy, etc. Now that Sabbath day
was a proper Name of one of their Week days, is apparent to all, since they
counted all the other six days of the Week by the Sabbath day; thus the seventh
and last day of the Week they ( viz. the Jews) called Sabbath Day; the
first day of the Week, our Sunday, they called the first of the Sabbath the
second day of the Week, our Monday, they called the second of the Sabbath, our
Tuesday the third of the Sabbath, etc. So that the clear Confession of the
Saturday Sabbatharians themselves does confirm that which is undeniably
manifest in the Holy Scriptures, that the first of the Sabbath (which is so
called Mar^ 16.9. and is the same as one of the Sabbaths, in the other
Evangelists, as has been showed) is the Name of the First day of the Jewish
Week, See his Reply ^age 28.
as it is also owned by Mr. Bampfield.

2. This First day Sabbath at its first founding by the Resurrection of Christ,
tho it broke the Order of the Jewish working days among the Christians, by
taking their first day for our Sabbath, and their Sabbath into the Christians
six working or common days, yet there was no breach of the Moral Law respecting
the Order of the six working days, considered as being bounded before and after
with a Sabbath, for the Jewish Sabbath after their six working days being
followed with a New Sabbath, made two Sabbaths together, but this neither broke
the Order of the six working days before the Jewish Sabbath, nor of the six
working days after the Christian Sabbath, Luke 23.56.
nay nor before it; because we must suppose that the Christians at that time
kept both the Sabbaths, and did not reckon the Jewish Sabbath, as a common day
before the Resurrection of the Lord. So that at the first sounding of our
Christian Sabbath, it was bounded with six Jewish working days, and their
Sabbath before, and six working days with the seventh-day of Christian Sabbath
after i^, and is as much our seventh-day Sabbath after our six working days, as
Adams seventh day Sabbath was after his six working days; which Sabbath, when
it was first sounded on Gods seventh-day of Rest, was also Adams first day
Sabbath. From whence I observe, that the Christians Sabbath considered, as both
their first and seventh-day Sabbath, is like as it was in the beginning, to
which Christ refers us in other things for a Pattern to answer the Moral Law,
and to make void the Ceremonial Addition to it, as has been showed: And now
since the abolishing of all Ceremonial Things in the Law of Moses, that we have
a Pattern for the Sabbath given to us by the Practice of the Holy Apostles and
the Primitive Churches in the New Testament, appears as follows.

1. After Christ arose from the Dead, Luke 14.1.9, 10, 13, 33, 36.
on the first day of the Week, he appeared unto his Disciples and the eleven
Apostles, who were gathered together on the same day. John 10.1.19.26.
And after eight days Jesus appeared again to his Disciples that were
Assembled, which was on the next first day, being the eighth day; for it was
the custom of the Hebrews, after this manner to express this day-week, or this
day seven-night, as we have an Instance in 2 Chronicles. 10.5, 12. And he said unto
them, come again unto me after three days, and the People departed. So Jeroboam
and all the People came to Rehoboam on the third day. Which Example plainly
shows, that after three days, was on the third day; and so here in the
Evangelist after eight days, was on the eighth day, or after eight days were
come, and not after they were past on the ninth day, as it is also clearly
explained in Mark 8.31. The Son of Man must suffer -- and be killed, and after
three days rise again. For Christ arose from the Dead, not after, but on the
third day after he was Crucified. And to this present day the Hollanders in
their Vulgar Discourse, express this day Week after the same manner, saying
Over eight days; so that the Disciples were assembled also on the second first
day of the Week after the Resurrection of our Lord, who appeared to them on
that day also.

3. The Apostle ordered and appointed the Churches of the Galatians and
Corinthians, to make their Collections for the Saints on the first day of the
Week, 1 Cor. 16.12.
which business had no temporary Reason in it to limit the doing of it to that
day; and therefore it is a clear Demonstration, that it was the accustomed day
of their Assembling together to worship God, and for such Church Affairs;
otherwise it is rational to believe the Apostle would have rather left them at
Liberty to do it on any day; which Example of this Nature having something of
an Institution in it, some have thought it is a sufficient warrant of its self,
to justify our keeping of the first day of the Week a Sabbath.

4. In Acts 20.6, 7, 11. It is said, that Paul abode at Troas seven days. And
upon the first day of the Week, when the Disciples came together to break
Bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the Morrow, and continued
his Speech until Midnight. -- When he therefore was come up again, and had
broken Bread, and eaten, and talked a long while, even till break of day, so he
departed.

First, I observe from this Scripture, that Paul abode there seven days, in
which time we hear nothing of his Preaching or of the Disciples coming
together, till on the first day of the Week, which was the last of the seven
days; so that Paul came thither on the second day of the Week, and tarried till
the usual day of their Assembling together, otherwise he need not have
straightened himself for time, so as to preach till Midnight, when he was to
depart at break of day; but that it may rationally be concluded, that he could
not conveniently see the Church in a full Assembly before their usual appointed
Time on the first day of the Week.

Secondly, Then they came together to break Bread, viz to eat the Lords Supper,
for so the same Expression is universally understood in Acts 2.42. So that on
the first day of the Week, the Church of Troas Assembled to hear the Word of
God, and to solemnize the Ordinances of Jesus Christ; which pattern together
with the Example of his Disciples before mentioned (and the occasion of the
change of the Jewish Sabbath) answering the Precept of the Moral Law founded on
the first sanctifying of the Sabbath, with the Observation of the first and
seventhday Sabbath by Adam, is a sufficient warrant for the keeping of our
first day Sabbath, there being both a Precept and a double Example that
justifies our Observation of it. And this I conceive to be the same day which
St. John calls the Lords day, as Dr. Wallis shows, See his Defense of the
Christian Sabbath in Answer to Mr. Thomas Bampfield, Page 48.
that we have the more Reason so to presume, because we find it so called by
others, very soon after St. John's time -- as Ignatius, who was not only
Contemporary with him, but was a Disciple or Scholar of St. John -- now
Ignatius in his Epistle to the Magnesians, even according to the genuine
Edition published by Bishop Vsh^^ out of an Ancient Manuscript (not that which
is justly suspected to be interpolated) he does earnestly exhort them not to
Jud^^ze, but to live as Christians, -- not any longer observing the Jewish
Sabbath, but the Lords day, on which Christ our Life rose again. It is manifest
therefore (says he, as may be there further seen) that within eight or ten
Years after St. John's writing, the Lords day did not signify the Jewish
Sabbath, but the first day of the Week, on which our Savior rose again; and
that it was then observed in contradistinction to the Jewish Sabbath, -- he
also adds, the evidence of Justin Martyr, and farther says -- that Dominica or
dies Dominicus has been so used, not only by the Ancient Christian Writers,
Ignatius, Clement, Ireneus, Origin, Tertullian, etc. but by the Councils and
Church History all along. Now this Historical Testimony of Ignatius, etc. that
the Lords day was accounted from St. John's time, the first day of the Week, is
the more to be regarded; seeing Mr. Bampfield in his Reply to the Doctors Book,
does not (as I can find) in the least invalidate the Reputation, or any ways
deny the Truth of the aforesaid History.

SECT. XIII.
HEre I shall observe, that the first day Sabbath which I have been treating
of, is asserted by many Authors to be (as its Heathen Name, viz. Sunday, that
is still in Vulgar use does witness) the same successive day which the Gentiles
from great Antiquity have observed as the chief day of their Week in worship to
the Sun, See Dr. Nath. H^lmes his Essay concerning the Sabbath. Chap. 7.8, 9.
as Dr. H^lmes shows how anciently the Sun was worshipped, Jerem. 43.12, 13.
He shall break also the Images of Bethshemesh (which in our Marginal Notes is
translated the House of the Sun) that is in the Land of Egypt; and the Houses
of the Gods of the Egyptians shall he burn with Fire. And Genesis 41.45. And
^haraoh called Joseph's name Zaphnath-Paaneah: and he gave him to Wife Asenath
the Daughter of Potipherah Priest of On; which he translates from the
Septuagint, (...) the Priest of the City of the Sun. And he cites diverse
Authors, as Jo. Gr. Assyr. Monarch. idem Biblian. to show that Nimrod having
given to the Sun (his greatest God) the Name of Baal; Nim^od Genesis 10.8. was the
Father of Belus. See Mr. Tho. Chasi^ on the Sabbath, Page 29.
he afterward assumed that Name to himself. And ^elus giving to their greatest
God, the Sun, the Name of Jove (the Contract of J^l^vah) the said Belus
afterward took that Name to himself; and was called Jove Bell. I shall add,
that the S^^^, and Moon, and the Host of Heaven were worshipped by the Gentiles
before Isreal's coming out of Egypt, as seems by the strict command given to
them, and the Penalty of Death to any Man or Woman that should worship the Sun
and Moon, Deuteronomy. 17.2, See Mr. Tho. Chasie on the Sabbath. Chap. 15.
3, etc. Also Mr. Chafie proves from diverse Authors, that the Heathens did of
old Worship the Sun, and that the weekly day, to wit, the seventh-day of every
Week, with the Gentiles, which they call the day of the Sun, or Sunday, was the
very same day which we call the Lords day. Moreover Mr. Tho. Bampfield in his
Reply to Doctor Walls, page 56, 57. says, That Mr. Chafie tells us, page 40.
That to take off the Israelites from this Idolatry, (viz. of worshipping the
Sun) the Lord used this means for one, that they should not have the day of the
Sun (that is Sunday) for the day of his Worship, but the day before, (that is,
the Seventh day) which (says Mr. Bampfield) I think refers to the Time of the
sixteenth or twentieth of Exodus, which (says he) proves not only the
Observation of the seventh-day by the Israelites, but of Sunday by the
Heathens, and that very Anciently, and that continually in the Weekly
Circulation of days to this day. -- And Mr. Chafie's ninth and fifteenth
Chapters says Mr. Bampfield, I think might give satisfaction, that all Nations
of Note under Heaven worshipped the Sun, and that very anciently, as far back
at least as the Time of Moses, and that upon Sunday -- and that weekly.

Now all the Use I intend to make hereof is, that our first day Sabbath
(according to the Opinion of some Persons, and to what Mr. Bampfield approves
of in Mr. Chafie's Book) stands fairest to be the successive seventh-day
Sabbath from the Creation of the World; See Dr. H. Essay on the Sabbath. Page
78.79.82. Gen 12.8. Chap. 13.4.
as Dr. Holme^ says, We know that Idolaters were always the Apes (as Divines
call them) of true Religion. As because Abraham builded an Altar on the
Mountain near Bethel, and planted a Grove in Beersheba, and prepared all things
at Gods command to offer up his Son Isaac: Therefore Idolaters planted Groves
and worshipped in high Places their Idols, Genesis 21.33. Chap. 22.
and made their Children to pass through the Fire to them; and therefore (says
he) nothing can be more probable, than that the seventh-day with the ancient
Patria^^ks, was no other but that which afterward was the Sunday, or Day of,
or to the Sun with the (...), and from them was called Sunday by other Nations
also. To which I add, that the Astronomers say, the measure of our days, by the
Revolutions of the Sun in a whole Years time, differs between five and six
hours from the Revolutions of the Stars; which make a day every fourth or Leap
Year, and yet that the odd Minutes in which their Measure differs, being short
of a day in four Years, loses near a day in one hundred Years; and we know not
which way, or that any one Method of keeping the Account of the Age of the
World, has been constantly and successively used from the Creation thereof to
this present day; nor how much time we have lost the Knowledge of, for want of
the exact Account of the Ages of the first Patriarks, etc. unto Months and
Days, which are omitted in the Scriptures; so that we cannot tell so much as
the precise Year of the Creation of the World; as our Astronomers tell us, that
according to Verity is 0000, viz. it is not known. Collected in the (...)
Eus^^tus (...) ^^nicon, (...) 552. (...) in 1619.
And in Eusebius we have diverse Authors mentioned, that in their Account of the
Year of the World when Christ was born, they differ many hundred Years from
each other. Yet the precise Succession of Weeks of seven Days and seven Nights
bounded with as many Risings and Settings of the Sun are more eastly preserved;
and from Gods Example of six working days with a Sabbath were observed by Adam,
who at first had no other measure to mete out his Age and Time, and by Noah,
Gen 8.10, 12.
and were successively handed down by Tradition to Laban, who said to Jacob,
sulfil her Week, and so forwards unto Posterity; Genesis 29.27, (...) 28.
and this way the precise Succession of the Sabbath might possibly have been
handed down to us from the Creation. But seeing there has been an Interruption
of the orderly course of Nature, and that the Sacred Scriptures do not any ways
confirm it to us, nor six the Jewish Sabbath as that precise successive
seventh-day (but rather gives us ground to believe that if the precise
Succession of the first seventh-day Sabbath was preserved among the Gentiles in
Worship to their Idols, or to the Sun before Isreal's Deliverance out of Egypt)
that seeing God to keep those People from the Idolatry of Egypt and other
Nations, did appoint them a new beginning of their Year, and to begin their
days at Evening, which before began in the Morning: I say, this rather gives us
ground to think, that God did appoint their S^bbath to be kept on a different
day also, to what it was before: therefore we may from hence perceive, that the
neither the Jews nor do I believe the Ch^istians can justify their seventh or
first day Sabbath on this Foundation, as being the precise successive
seventh-day from the Creation, yet our first day Sabbath stands fairest for
it.

SECT. XIV.
I Shall here make some Comparisons of the Gospel first day Sabbath, with the
Pattern of Adams Sabbath; and show the disparity of the Jewish seventh-day, and
also treat of the first day Sabbaths beginning in the Morning, with some other
Matters; and then proceed to Answer the chiefest Objections I find against our
keeping the first or Lord's Day a Sabbath. And

1. Our first day Sabbath better answered the Pattern of our first Parents
keeping their Sabbath, than the Jewish Sabbath did; Genesis 1.27, 28.
for that after Eve was completely formed about the end of the sixth Creation
day, as Adam first entered upon his Subordinate Lordship, which God had given
him over the Creatures which he had made, and on his first day in the Earthly
Paradise, on his first day Sabbath: So our Lord Jesus, tho his Soul was in the
Paradise of Heaven, John 20.17.
when his Body was in the Grave, yet he was not completely there in Soul and
Body too, till he was raised on the first day of his Ascension in our Nature,
far above all Principalities and Powers, to take Possession of his purchased
Inheritance and Kingdom to be increased without end. So that herein our
first day Sabbath did Originally answer Adams first Sabbath, better than the
Jewish seventh-day did in the Wilderness.

2. As Adam and Eves Sabbath was Originally their first day Sabbath, and after
their six working days their seventh-day Sabbath too: So our Gospel Sabbath is
the Image or Likeness of it, more than the Jewish Sabbath is; for tho their
seventh-day may be called their first day Sabbath, respecting their Original
keeping it in the Wilderness; yet the Scripture does not show, that it was
their first day Sabbath, from so precise an Epoch of Time (or notable Event)
of their Deliverance out of Egypt, as our Gospel Sabbath is from the precise
Epoch of the Purchase of our Spiritual and Eternal Salvation; from whence it
is a more proper first day Sabbath, and bears a greater likeness to Adams
Pattern (which had its precise Epoch of Time) than the Jewish Sabbath does
from its Original. For tho the Jewish Sabbath, was appointed to bare the
Memorial of Isreal's Deliverance out of Egypt, yet the Scripture does not show,
that it took its Original from the Epoch of the Passover, or from the Red Sea;
but contrariwise I find, that Israel came unto the Wilderness of Sin, -- on the
fifteenth day of the second Month after their departing out of the Land of
Egypt; and the following Words are: Exodus 10.1, 2, 3, 11, 12. ^er. 5, 22, 23.
And the whole Congregation of the Children of Israel murmured against Moses
and Aaron (for Bread) -- And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying -- at Even ye
shall cat Flesh, and in the Morning ye shall be filled with Bread: Now their
first Sabbath in the Wilderness was not till the day after their sixth day of
gathering Manna, and from this account; See Mr. Weemse Christian Synagogue.
Page 9^.
if we reckon as the Jews did their Lunar Year, according to Mr. Weemse
^rogromma of the Hebrew Calendar, that the first Month Nisan (or Abib) has
thirty days, and then reckoning the fifteenth day of this Month on which they
departed out of Egypt, unto the fifteenth day of their second Month, and add
this day to their six days of gathering Manna with their first Sabbath, it
makes together thirty eight days; and so their first Sabbath fell on the third
day, after five Weeks time from their departing out of Egypt, and took not its
Original from that Epoch, nor any other precise Epoch as a first day Sabbath;
for if any should insist on their gathering Manna six days as an Epoch (which
I have showed, was not so for sixing their six working days Precisely and
Originally before their Sabbath) it would only render it a seventh-day Sabbath
Originally in the Wilderness, and so it could not answer Adams Pattern of his
first day Sabbath, nor be like it in its Epoch from the perfecting of the
first Adam, as our first day Sabbath was from its Epoch of the perfecting the
second Adam.

3. If it should be yet thought (tho there is no Reason for it) that the Jewish
Sabbath was originally sixed to the Israelites in the Wilderness, as following
their six working days: I have this to say, that if so, then Israel kept their
Sabbath therein (after a Ceremonial Precept) contrary to Adams Pattern in
keeping his first day Sabbath before his six working days; but as for our
first day Sabbath, we are justified in keeping it by the Example of Christ's
Disciples and the Primitive Churches, and the more because as it was changed
from the Jewish Sabbath, it is our first day Sabbath before our six working
days, and so it better agrees with Adams Pattern, than the Jewish Sabbath then
can do.

4. If it should be said (as I acknowledge it may) that the Jewish Sabbath may
be called their first day Sabbath, respecting their first observing it in the
Wilderness, as a boundary before and after their six working days; and so by
Imitation does answer the Pattern of Adams Sabbath: I have this to Answer, that
yet the Jewith Sabbath did not imitate Adams Pattern, as our Christian Sabbath
does in beginning it with the Morning Day light; for the Jews began their
Sabbath at Even contrary to Adams Pattern, as there is Reason from Scripture to
believe. And if it be objected, that the Pattern of Adam, respecting the
beginning of his Sab^ath in the Morning, is not plainly expressed, but drawn by
Interence from the Scripture; but the Jewish Pattern is expressly commanded, and
therefore there is better ground of the two to observe the Sabbath after the
Pattern in the Mosaical Precept. I answer,

1. It is not expressy said, that Adams first Sabbath was his first-days
Sabbath. Mark 2.27.
But yet seeing Christ has said, the Sabbath was made for Man, and that none
can deny, but that Adam was bound in Duty to God to observe Gods seventh day
Sabbath, wherein he rested from his Works of Creation, then we may insist on
the sufficiency of our Evidence for Adams beginning his Sabbath in the Morning;
it being so rationally inserred, tho it is not in Words expressed in the
Scriptures.

2. It has been showed, how our Lord made void the Mesaical Precept of
Divorcement, and justified the doing of it by the Moral Pattern in our first
Parents; though it was not by any express Word of God, nor by so clear an
evidence from Adam and Eves being one Fresh, that he nor his Posterity (but by
a special permission of God) should not put away their Wives, except for
Fornication; as there is Reason to believe that Adam began his Sabbath in the
Morning day light. And therefore, though Christ might have abolished that Precept
without setting a Moral Pattern against it, yet his justifying the doing of it
from thence, 2 Timothy 3.16.
is an Example to be of use to us in other Cases.

3. We have greater Reason to begin our Sabbath in the Morning in every
Country, where it can be so observed, after the Pattern of Adams Sabbath (and
the Reason of its change in the New Testament) though his beginning of it so is
but inferred from the Scripture, and not expressed in it, rather than to begin
it after the Jewish Precept at Evening; for were this universally binding, it
could not being a Positive Command, accommodate the Necessity of Nature, for
the different beginning and ending of the Sabbath, as the Pattern in Adam and
the New Testament Example does. And this I conceive to be one chief Reason,
that the Jewish Sabbath is abrogated, and that we have only the Pattern of
Adams Sabbath left us, by rational Inference from the Scripture; and the Reason
of the change of the Sabbath in the New Testament, for our beginning of it in
the Morning, and that we have not any command fixing of it, as it was to
Israel. For 1. That would have either bound us to the precise Point of Time of
its beginning in the Lard of Canaan, and then the Memorial of Christ's
Resurrection early in the Morning, had not been signified by its beginning in
other Nations, remote from their Borders; for in some places it must then begin
at Noon, etc. and so its daylight there had been divided, and the Service of
God distructed, and our worldly Affairs too much intruding on the meetest time
for solemn Worship. Or 2. Such a command to six the beginning of the Sabbath,
would have required it univerfally to begin in the Morning, or at the dawning
of the Day, which is inconsistent with the course of Nature for many Weeks
together in some Northern Parts of the World. And therefore, that those People
should not be obliged by any Law to keep such a Sabbath, which they are not
capable constantly to observe; God was pleased to leave only the Moral Precept
of the fourth command, founded on his first sanctifying of the Sabbath to be
binding to us all; that those Northern People should answer it, by beginning
their Sabbath with the first and seventh-day, or proportionable Division of a
day, bounding before and after their six working days, and allow it the same
Proportion of Time, and should preserve the Memorial of the Resurrection of
Christ, by observing the first day of the Week, from, and in Distinction to the
Jewish seventh-day, as near as they can to Answer the Example of the Primitive
Churches in the New Testament. And that we and all others, that have constantly
our natural days with Evenings and Mornings twenty four hours long, should
answer the same Moral Law after the Gospel Pattern, and as precisely as we can
to begin our first-days Sabbaths early, or at the dawning of the Morning in
every Nation. For if we, and all other such Nations should be tied successively
to begin our Sabbath at the very precise Point of Time, of the d^wning of the
firstday in Jerusalem, to contemporize with them in the Land of Canaan, where
our Lord before from the Dead; then they must either in other Countries Eastward
to the Sun from the Land of Canaan, begin their Christian Sabbath later in
their Daylight, or Westward from them sooner in their Night, than they should
in Judea; and so in the Compass of the whole World, Eastward or Westward, there
would be a beginning and ending of the Sabbath near a day and night, differing
in their Time of day to the dawning of the day in the Land of Canaan; and by
this means in some parts of the World, the Christian Sabbath would begin at
Noon, at Evening, and at all hours of the Day and Night; and so except in that
very spot in and about the Land of Canaan, they would lose its Memorial of
Christ's Resurrection at the Dawning of the Day. But if other Countries Eastward
and Westward from Canaan, begin as they ought their first-days Sabbath like
them at the same time of the day, then they must either begin their first day
sooner or later than the first day began in Canaan; and so in the Compass of
the World Eastward or Westward, it must begin and end in all Hours of the
Jewish seventh or second day of the Week, and in some place their first day
must be in the same time and contemporize with their seventh Or within a very
small time of it: viz. of their seventh or second-day.
or in some place with their second-day Or within a very small time of it: viz.
of their seventh or second-day.
in the Land of Canaan. And therefore seeing the Sabbath cannot be begun
universally, both at the precise Point of Time and Time of day as it should
begin in the Land of Canaan, to contemporize with them there: And considering
that Adams Sabbath was not only designed for the Moral end of Man's ab^inence
from Work, for a time of solemn Worship to God, but that it had its Memorial of
the Creation; and that the Jewish seventh-day Sabbath afterward bearing that
Memorial, was also appointed for ^loral Ends, and for a Ceremonial Memorial
that rendered it incapable of being a universal Pattern; and that the Memorial
of Christ's Purchase of our Spiritual and Eternal Salvation should be preferred
before that of Isreal's Deliverance out of Egypt, then we ought to observe our
Christan Sabbath as much as can be to Answer thereunto the end of its chinge;
which may be done by all Nations (including those Northern People) keeping
their first day Sabbath in Distinction to and from the Jewish seventh day. And
as for its beginning early in the Morning or at the dawning of the Day, the
Scriptures show that so it began in Judea, Matthew. 28.1. In the end of the
Sabbath, as it began to dawn (or as John 20.1. While it was yet dark, i. e. not
light day) toward the first day of the Week, came Mary Magdalen, and the other
Mary, to see the Sepulcher, etc. And in Mark 16.2. It Is said, they came unto
the Sepulcher at the rising of the Sun, and ver. 9. Now when Jesus was risen
early, the first day of the Week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalen, -- and
said unto her, John 20 1^.
Touch me not: for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my Brethren,
and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and
your God. And therefore seeing the Evangelists have Recorded the Time of the
dawning and Sun rising of the Day, to the History and Circumstances of Christ's
Resurrection, and that we find he was then but newly riten, because he had not
yet ascended unto the Father when Mary first saw him: We have then greater
Reason to six the beginning of our first day Sabbath in all Nations, where we
can, at the dawning of the day expressed in the Scripture, to bare the fuller
Memortal of the Resurrection of our Lord, than at any other time of the day.
And this we may strengthen from the Example of the Jews beginning their Sabbath
in the Evening, here in England and in other Nations, tho our Evenings here
differ, and in other Nations are farther from the precise Time of the Evening
in the Land of Canaan; and their Reason for it is taken from the Precept of
Moses which binds them to celebrate their Sabbaths from Evening to Evening.
Lev. 23.32. Exodus 12, 18, 19.
And therefore seeing God was pleased under the Type of the Gospel Salvation,
Church and Sabbath, to require the Memorial of that Deliverance, by beginning
their Sabbath in the Evening, as the most proper time to bear its lively
remembrance, and that from thence they conclude, it best answers the express
command of God, and his End and Design in sixing the Jewish Sabbath to begin at
Evening in the Land of Canaan, for them to begin it so in other Countries also,
rather than to begin it at the precise Point of time of its beginning in
Canaan, and differ in the Time of day, then we have Reason from the Type and
their Example to begin our first day Sabbath, rather at the dawning of the day
in all the World, where we can, than at the precise Point of Time at a
different time of day to contemporize in all places. And whatever the Jewish
Sabbatharians may invent to say from the Necessity of the Course of Nature in
those Northern (or Southern) Parts, against the beginning of our first-days
Sabbath early in the Morning, or at the dawning of the day in all other Parts
of the World; the same Arguments will equally serve against the beginning of
their Sabbath in the Evening, where it can be so observed; so that they cannot
gain the least Advantage by opposing us, in beginning our Christian Sabbath
early in the Morning, unless they can first invalid and disprove the Authority
we bring for our keeping the first day it self, that it does not answer the
Pattern of Adams Sabbath, the Moral Law in the fourth Commandment, and the
Example of Christ's Disciples, and the Primitive Churches, with all the ends of
a Sabbath, which is a task too hard for them. And seeing the Scriptures shows
by the Resurrection of our Lord, that our Sabbath should begin at the dawning
of the first day of the Week, it must consequently not end till the dawning of
the second-day. Mark 15.42. Luke 23.54. See Mr. Heemse Christ. Synagogue. Page
74. Who tells us the Jews had three Preparations to their Sabba^h Succeeding
each other.
And from the Custom of the Jews to make Preparations for their Sabbath, the
preceding Time from twelve a Clock on Saturday Night (vulgarly so called) till
the dawning of the first day, it that time be not spent in our Nights rest, it
should be employed to prepare our Minds for the Worship and Service of God on
the approaching Sabbath day.

But to proceed, That I may remove any doubts, that may yet arise about the
usefulness of the Pattern of Adams Sabbath to us under the Gospel, I shall add
something to demonstrate how far it is of a Moral Nature: for seeing I have
forborne to call it a Moral Pattern, because no one Pattern respecting the
beginning and ending of the Sabbath can be wholly alike universally so to all
Nations; I think it is therefore needful to explain the Moral use that is to be
made of Adams Sabbath, that so whatever different Apprehensions there may be
about the use of the Word Mortal ^o Adams Pattern, the thing it self may be
understood, and the Controversy may not be fomented about Words, which some
have made the Subject of much Discourse, when they have not been able to
Confute the thing that was plainly intended by them.

1. Therefore as I showed, Page 2. that from Gods sanctifying the seventh-day
for Man, the Light of Adams Nature taught him, that it was most meet to divide
his time like his Creator; and so it became the Moral Duty of Men as Men, to
have no more nor less than six working days to one Sabbath.

2. See Page 24.
I have also showed the Reason we have from Scripture to believe, that after
Adams first sleep in the Night, when the Hamane Nature was completely formed,
and Eve was brought to him at the end of the sixth Creation day, their Sabbath
began with the Morning day light of the seventh-day, and the first day after
the finishing of the Creation; which seeing the Order of Gods Working and Rest,
and the Original Moral Duty of Man (when the Humane Nature was completely
formed) to offer the first of Time to the Praise of his Creator before he
served himself, did first begin the Sabbath with the daylight unto Man; we
have then Reason to conclude, that such a Sabbath is most morally to be
observed by the World, as no other Sabbath can more universally suit with the
Course of Nature in the greatest part of it. Indeed God can by his Prerogative,
and as I have showed, did dispense with the Alteration of the Sabbath from this
first Pattern by a Law to Israel, as he did by the Precept of Divorcement
dispense with the Moral Pattern in Adam and Eve, that none should put away his
Wife for the causes allowed afterward by a Ceremonial Law; but this we find
did not at all destroy the Moral Use and Binding Quality of the Pattern in our
first Parents after Christ was come, and so it is with the first Pattern of the
Sabbath, which no doubt was binding to others after Adam, as precisely to
observe the same day, as near to the orderly Succession of the same time, as
could be, according to the allowance of the Course of Nature in every Climate
wherein they dwelt. It Is true, it may be said we cannot keep the Sabbath from
our Knowledge, that we observe the same precise Succession and Order of Time as
Adam did, and others in the first Ages did or should do in their feveral
Countries. But then as God was pleased, Exodus 13.2, 12, to 16.
insig^d of the firstborn of the Children of Israel (which were the Lords) to
require and accept of the Levites for his Service, Exodus 34.19, 20. Numb. 3.41,
to the end. Chap. 8.16, etc. Levit. 27.25, 26, etc. Chap. 22.29, 30. Deuteronomy. 12.6.
but still kept up the Memory of his Right by Causing afterward the Israelites
to acknowledge it in paying Redemption Money for their firstborn of Man, and
unclean Beasts, and did still require the firstborn of clean Beasts to be
offered to him: So likewise the Practice of Christ's Disciples and the Primitive
Churches, shows us, that the first of Time from the work of purchasing our
Redemption, bearing the Image of the first of Adams and Eves Time from the
Creation, is most acceptable to God; and after the aforesaid Example of Gods
Command and Allowance to Israel, concerning their firstborn, we should
likewise offer it as God accepts of it, instead of the same precise
Succession of Time from the Creation in Memorial thereof, and of the purchase
of Man's Salvation. And it is rational to conclude, that seeing the beginning of
the day was changed upon the account of the Type, a day might well be changed
upon the account of the Antitype. If this in the Figure was reckoned worthy of
such Note, that the account of the days beginning from the Creation with the
Daylight, most give place to the Memorial of Isreal's Deliverance out of Egypt,
so as that their days must begin at Evening, the substance of this Figure
appearing, might well be the Cause of the Change of a Day, and of a Typical
Memorial to its Spiritual and Gospel Memorial in our first-days Sabbath.

To close this Matter, seeing the Moral Law requires the seventh or first day
a boundary to our six working days, and that the Precept for the Jewish Pattern
is abtogated in the New Testament, Nature it self also taking away its binding
quality to all Nations, because it cannot accommodate its necessity; how then
can we answer the fourth Command, so well as by keeping such a Sabbath, that
every way agrees with that Moral Precept, that also suiteth with, and is
justified by the Morality of Adams Sabbath, the end of its change from the
Jewish seventh-day, and the Example of Christ's Disciples with the Primitive
Churches, which doubtless we are bound to follow in Obedience to the fourth
Command, as we observe their Examples in Obedience to other Precepts: As for
instance, laying on of Hands, for Confirmation of Elders (or Church Officers)
and consummating their Ordination, is a Divlne Rite, which is the Duty of all
Complete and Orderly Gospel Churches, Authoritatively to Practice Ordination of
Elders, being Instituted in Titus 1.5. but yet the manner of completing this
Institution is no otherwise known, nor practiced by us (as I can find) but from
the Examples of the Apostles and Primitive Churches, Acts 14.23, 26. with Chap.
13.1, 2, 3. Chap. 6.1, to 7.

Objections Answered.
Object. 1. THE Psalmist says, Psalm. 147.19, 20.
He shows his Word anto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel. He
has not dealt so with any Natton: and as for his Judgments they have not known
them.

Answer: This Scripture is no ways repugnant, to what I have said of the Use
and Benefit of the Law of Moses to the Gentiles. For we find the Israelites had
continual Wars with the Heathens round about them, and the old Inhabitants of
Canaan were not wholly subdued till Joab, David's Servant, 1 Chronicles. 11.4, etc.
Chap. 19.20.
took the Castle of Jebus, which is Jerusalem, or about the latter end of
David's days: So that till they had obtained Peace and Rest, and became in
Repute and Honor in Salomons Reign, it cannot rationally be supposed that any
Gentile Nation (for the Text excludes not single Persons) had a full and
distiuct Knowledge of Moses Law, with the Statutes and Judgments therein
contained. Nay though the Gentiles had an Interest in the Uso and Benefit of the
Law, and were to seek after the Knowledge of the Oracles of God committed to
the Jews; yet such was their hatred against them, and love to gross Idolatry,
that till about two hundred eighty Years before the Nativity of Chirst, See
Josephus Book 12. Chapter 2.
Ptolomy Philadelphus King of Egypt, had caused the Law to be translated into
Greek by the Seventy two Interpreters, it was never as I can find translated
out of the Hebrew Tongue. So that as David rightly said, that God had not dealt
so with any Nation, viz. with any other Nation besldes Israel; so as to show
them his Oracles under a peculiar Obligation in trust for others also, He
having designed to pour the Water out of Jacobs Buckets; it is likewise also
Evident, Numb. 24.7.
that no Gentile Nation then^ in David's Time had a full and distinct Knowledge
of Gods Laws, though respecting the particular Election of God among them, they
might by some means or other receive the true and saving Knowledge of the
Messiah through their converse with the Jews.

Object. 2. Some may say, the Apostle in Romans 14.5. seems to leave the
keeping of days to our own Liberty; and also in 2 Cor. 3.7, 8. Coloss. 2.14. he
seems to abolish the binding quality of the Ten Commandments, as given on
Mount Sinai, and therefore it is doubtful, whether we are under any Obligation
to keep a Sabbath or Day of Rest at all.

Answer, 1. To Romans 14.5. One Man esteems one day above another: another
esteems every day alike. Let every Man be fully persuaded in his own Mind.
Whatever some may imagine from this Scripture, yet seeing Adam in Paradise had
his Sabbath, for the solemn worship of God, Levit. 23.3.
and Israel had their Sabbath for the same end, and to rest from their work and
labor, there being still the same Moral Use and Necessity of Nature for a
Sabbath; there is Reason to believe, that such a day is to be observed as well
now, and in after Ages, as it was before. And considering the undeniable
Evidence, that has been given to prove the Decalogue to be Morally binding to
us under the Gospel, there is a necessity for the Preservation of the Concord
of Holy Writ to give such an Exposition of this Text of Scripture, as will both
suit and agree with the Letter of it and the binding quality of other
Scriptures to keep a Sabbath Day. To proceed therefore, the Apostle surely
would not have singled forth the first day of the Week (on which the Churches
were wont to have their Assemblies) as the properest time to make their
Collection for the Saints: Nor would the Apostle John have called it the Lords
day (as has been showed from History) if it had not been a sanctified day for
Holy Use, neither would the Holy Ghost have Recorded the Disciples gathering
together on the two first-days after the Resurrection of Christ, nor that the
Church of Troas came together on the first day of the Week, to solemnize the
Gospel Ordinances of Divine Worship, as the only Examples to answer the Moral
Law in the fourth Commandment. If the same Spirit of Truth in the Apostle had
here designed to make every day alike Common.

2. If the Apostle in this Scripture had so designed, he would not have cited
so many Precepts of the Ten Commandments in Chap. 13.9. of the same Epistle,
and have said of the rest of them, as binding to the Romans, to confirm his
Moral Doctrine, That if there be any other Commandment, it is briefly
comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.
And therefore seeing, he does so plainly discover the binding quality of the
Ten Commandments to the Gentile Christians; there is no Reason to conceive, he
should dissolve the Obligation of any one of them in the following Chapter;
considering that the Liberty there mentioned of esteeming or not esteeming of
Days, is not there reserred or applied, as having Retation to the Moral
Observation of the sourth Command.

3. The Apostle would not have abolished (as has been showed) the Jewish
Feasts, Holy days and Sabbaths, Colos. 2.16, 17. nor have said to the
Galatians, Ye observe Days, Gal. 4.10.
and Months, and Times, and Years. I am afraid of you, least I have bestowed
upon you labor in Vain. If he or any other by Christ's Authority, had given
absolute Liberty for Christians to observe the Jewish Holy days. And therefore
the sense of this Text, which is freest from all Exceptions; is, That the
Apostle neither gives us Liberty to slight the Observation of the seventh-day
required of us in the fourth Commandment, as the Bond of the Gospel Pattern;
nor yet does give us absolute Liberty to observe the Jewish seventh-day
Sabbath, and their other Holy Days; but he is teaching us, how we should bear
with one another in indifferent Matters, as the eating of Herbs, and esteeming
of Jewish days: That in Case a Brother should be so weak as that after he is
converted from the Jewish Religion to the Christian Faith, he should still
retain some esteem of their Holy days, yet being sound in all the Essential
Principles to Salvation, and in the constituted Order of a Regular Gospel
Church, his Communion is not to be refused; Ver. 1.
but here let the Reader well observe, that my meaning is not, that any Church
should receive such a Christian into full Communion with them at the Lords
Table, that holds and makes our first day Sabbath only as a common day to
him (for this in the Judgment of a Church according to Scripture Rule, brings
him under the guilt of Sin, and the Church should not partake of it, by their
holding such full Communion with him.) But the Apostle means, that in Case a
Converted Jew as he is there treating of, such a one as makes a difference
between Meats to be Clean and Unclean, Ver. 14 1^
if he should still esteem some of their Holy days, yet if he also keeps the
first day Sabbath Holy unto the Lord, the Church in such a Case should be
tender of grieving his weak Conscience, by Continual and Uncharitable
Disputations with him about the Matter wherein he is not clearly enlightened, so
as to give him an occasion to stumble and sall at the Offense. For seeing he
Conscientiously keeps Holy the first day Sabbath, Gal. 4.13, 15, 20, 21, 23.
for his retaining an esteem for some Jewish Holy days, (so they be kept to the
Lord in Christian Worship and not for Jewish Sacrifices or such things which
betoken Christ's not being yet come and fully exhibited in the Flesh) we are not
to deny Communion at the Lords Table with such a Brother, seeing he neither
observes the Jewish days to uphold their worship, contrary to the Prohibition
of Legal Ceremonies under the Gospel Dispensation, nor can any ways be charged
with disorders in Ordinances, or in Matters Essentially pertaining to the
Regular Constitution of a Gospel Church. And that this is the Mind of Christ in
the Text appears in two things, (1.) Because the Apostle joineth this Liberty
of Regarding, or not Regarding of days with Eating or not Eating of Meats, as
things of a like indifferent Nature; but the Keeping or not Keeping of the
Weekly Sabbath, has been fully proved to be no indisserent thing, but an
absolute Duty; and therefore it is none of the Subject Matter included in the
Apostles Words. (2.) He intended to give no Liberty to observe the Jewish days
for Legal Ceremonial Worship; for this under the Gospel would not be counted a
keeping of a day to the Lord, but not a keeping of it to him; and so as the
Apostle argues, it is not a keeping of a day at all. And thus having opened
this Scripture, and given the sense of the Apostles Words in Reconciliation to
the Authority of other Places, that are binding to us for the Observation of
the Sabbath day, I shall leave it to the serious Consideration of the Impartial
Reader.

Answer 2. To the Objection from 2 Cor. 3.7. where the Apostle says, But if
the Ministration of Death, written and ongraven in Stones was glorious, so that
the Children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the Face of Moses, for the
Glory of his Countenance, which Glory was to be done away, how shall not the
Ministration of the Spirit be rather Glorious. In Answer to this Scripture, I
shall Note, that in the preceding and following Verses, the Apostle is
signifying the different and exceeding Glory of the Ministration of the
quickening Spirit in the Gospel, to the Ministration of Death in the Law; and
he tells us, that the Glory of the Ministration of Death, had no Glory in
respect to the Ministration of Righteousness that excels it in Glory: So
that, that which was to be done away, does not appear to be the binding quality
of the Ten Commandments, as a Rule of Holy Life or the Commandments themselves,
but the Renown of their glorious manner of Ministration to Israel, (which is
incomparable to the Revelation of the Grace of God in the Gospel) with their
power of final Condemnation, to those that lay hold of, and have an Interest in
the Ministration of Righteousness by Jesus Christ.

Answer 3. To the Objection, from Coloss. 2.14. Blotting out the handwriting
of Ordinances, that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out
of the way, nailing it to his Cross: Here some may also think, the Apostle has
abolished the binding quality of the Ten Commandments: but it otherwise
appears from the Reasons following. And

1. I shall here recite the Dutch Annotations on this Scripture: say they,
Having blotted out, [that is, dashed through and expunged, or wholly razed out,
as we speak] the handwriting which was against us, [the Greek word
Cheirographon,] i. e. Handwriting, some do take here for a Writing written
with Gods own hand in Tables of Stone, as the Law of the Ten Commandments was,
Exodus 34.^. and this is by them understood of the Moral Law, or of the Ten
Commandments, which are said to be against us, in respect of their strict
requiring of perfect Obedience; or in default thereof, by Reason of its Curse,
which Christ has born for us on the Cross, and delivered us from it, Gal.
3.10, 13. But seeing the Apostle here properly sets himself against the
Observation of Circumcision and other Ceremonies, therefore this Handwriting
is here to be understood of the Law of the Ceremonies of the old Testament,
which are called, an Handwriting that was against us, because the same were as
an Engagement or Bond of Debt, whereby indeed Men daily acknowledge their
Trespasses and Debts before God, but notwithstanding were never discharged by
the outward Performance of the same, as Paul declares, Heb. 10.1. As this Word
Cheirographon or Handwriting is also taken in the Greek Text, T^b. 5.3. and
9.3. This appears also by comparing this place with Ephesians. 2.14, 15. where this
Word Handwriting in Institutions, is called the Law of Commandments in
Institutions, which Word Dogmasi, i. e. Ordinances or Institutions, is no where
in Gods Word used for the Law of the Ten Commandments, nor yet the Word
Dogmatizes, the Ver. 20. And that which is there added by Paul proves this also
clearly. For the Moral Law, properly, makes no Enmity betwixt Jews and
Gemiles, seeing that is also written in Nature, Romans 2.14. but it is only the
Ceremonial Law, by which this Difference and Enmity betwixt these Nations is
occasioned as is noted there. Neither can it be well said of the Moral Law,
That Christ has taken it away by his Death, to free us wholly from the
Observation thereof, as Paul's intent here is to prove. For although we are by
Christ delivered from the Curse and Rigid Observation of the Moral Law,
nevertheless we remain obliged to the Observation thereof, as the Rule of
Thankfulness which we owe unto God for our Deliverance.

To this I shall here add, Levit. 11. Deuteronomy. 14.21. Acts 10.12, etc. Romans 14.14.
Luke 15.2. John 4.9.
That the Ceremonial Law was against the Gentiles, as a Wall of Partition that
kept them more separated from the Jews, than under the Gospel Administration.
For

1. There was a difference in Meats that were forbidden to the Jews by the Law
of Moses, but were lawful for the Gentiles to eat, and this did occasion some
Separation of the Jews from them. Deuteronomy. 7.3. Ezra 9.1, 2, 14, etc. Chap. 10.


2. The Jews were not to take them Wives of the Heathens, nor join Affinity
with other Nations round about them.

3. Josh. 14 and 15. Levit. 25.25. Romans 9.27. Gal. 3.14, 17, 29.
The Land of Canaan was given and divided by Lot to the Children of Israel for
an Inheritance, and they were not to sell their Possessions for a longer time
than the Year of Jubilee. So that the Gentiles could not inherit the Land with
them, but were separated as Strangers and Sojourners.

4. Dent. 14.1, 2. Romans 9.4, 5.
Tho according to the Election of God in the Covenant of Grace, there were a
remnant of literal Israel saved, as the Seed of Christ; yet as they were a
Nation in the peculiar Covenant of Circumcision, they were all accounted the
Children of God above all the Nations that were upon the Earth; Isa. 56.
in so much as the Prophet shows that the Sons of the Strangers, who laid
hold on the Righteousness to be revealed, and of Gods Covenant, ( viz. of Grace
in Christ) were under such Discouragements as to say, The Lord has utterly
separated me from his People. 2 Cor. 3.13, 14, 15.
For the Law being such a Vail, that the Children of Israel coald not
steadfastly look unto the end of that which is abolished, was also a Cloud on
the Minds of the Gentiles; tho the Lord was pleased to inlighten a Remnant of
them, so as to discern his Grace in Christ through that shadowy Dispensation.
But the Knowledge of the Oracles of God, which the Elect then sought after
amongst the Jews; now since the breaking down of the middle Wall of Partition,
Math. 28.19.
is sent by Christ's Commission, and more clearly opened and revealed by the
Ministry of the Gospel to all Nations: Ephesians. 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
That the Gentiles should be fellowheirs, and of the same Body, and partakers
of the Promise in Christ by the Gospel. So that the Legal Covenant or
Handwriting of (Ceremonial) Ordinances mentioned in the Text, tho it was
neither a Bar against the Proselyting of the Gentiles, if they would to the
Jews Religion, nor did so blind their Minds, as to hinder a Remnant of them
from laying hold on Christ by Faith; yet as it added nothing simply of it self
to the Salvation of their Souls, by reason they could attain the Knowledge of
the Oracles of God, without putting themselves absolutely under the Covenant of
Circumcision, therefore it was a means to keep them out of the Visible
Church State, and was such a Wall of Partition and Vail upon their
Understandings, as in great measure did hide the Mystery of Christ: Which the
Apostle says in other Ages, was not made known unto the Sons of Men, as it is
now revealed unto his Holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit -- Whereof
(says he) I was made a Minister -- that I should preach among the Gentiles the
unsearchable Riches of Christ.

Object. 3. A Jew Traveling from Canaan Westward round the World, pieceth
every day in length, but loses in the Compass of the whole Globe a day in
Tale; so that when he comes home, the first day in Canaan is by his account
but the seventh-day; and contrariwise if he Travelleth round the World
Eastward, he loses in the length of his days, but gains a day in Tale; so
that by his account the first day in Canaan falls to be his second day at his
return; from whence some have argued, that neither a Law nor Example can bind
us universally to the Observation of any one Day, and therefore if it were
agreed amongst men, any day of the Week, or one day in seven may be made our
seventh-day Sabbath, boundary to six working days, and so would answer the
Moral Law.

Answer, 1. The Question is, Whether the Moral Law binds us to keep the
seventh-day, which men may appoint at their own pleasures, or the seventh-day
that we are directed unto in the Holy Scriptures. Phil. 3.17. 2 These. 3.9.
Surely we ought to exert our Obedience to Gods Precepts after the Examples of
those that are set forth to be an Example to us. I say not that we should
follow them in all things they ever did, but in all things they did which were
essential to answer any Moral or Gospel Precept given for our Practice, and
consequently in this particular of the first day Sabbath. For seeing the
Ceremonial Precept for the Sabbath is abroga ed, and the Course of Nature
makes it impossible to be morally binding to all Nations; we have then no
other Directions, how to answer the Moral Law, but the Gospel Pattern justified
by the Example of our first Parents; and therefore we having a positive Law to
keep the seventh-day Sabbath, we are under a necessity to make that our
Pattern. For though the Apostle did go into the Jews Synagogues, and there
pre^^^hed the Gospel on their seventh-day Sabbath, 2 Timothy 4.2.
as the meetest time to Convert both the Jews and Gentiles who assembled
together on that day: Yet we no where sind in Scripture, that the Apostles,
Disciples of Christ, and Primitive Churches did of choice set apart that day,
but the first day of the Week for Gospel Service; and this being Recorded as
the only Example of the Gospel Churches Obedience to the Moral Law, in this
particular of the Sabbath, surely it is lest for our Directions, whatever is
otherwise handed down by Humane History as the Practice of some Christians; for
the Scriptures snew, that diverse were under mistakes and errors, Acts 15.1,
etc. Gal. 2.12. Chapter 4.21. and Chapter 3
and very Subject to Judaize even in the Apostles days.

2. Mr. Chasie says, That Mr. Ironside also, from the Diversity of Meridians,
proves that one and the same day cannot be universally kept, and therefore
never commanded the whole Church. One and the same day (sath he) could not
possibly be observed a Sabbath by all the Jews, in the East parts and West
parts (...) of Judea, and in Babylon, and in Rome, by Reason of their Diversity
of Longitudes. And if it be supposed to be but two or three (...) difference of
Longitudes, yet will that difference make the days as truly to differ from
being the same, as will an hundred and three, tho it will not make them so much
to differ. But although this be true, and the Law of Moses for sixing the Jewish
Sabbath to begin at Even in the Wilderness, and in the Land of Canaan, was
never designed to bind the Israelites to that which is impossible, viz. to
begin their Sabbaths both at the same time of day, and at the precise Point of
Time to contemporize in all places where they sojourned; yet it does not from
hence follow, as some have argued, that such differences of days do free us,
from all Obligations to keep any one particular day; so that if Christians
agree upon the fourth, fifth, sixth, or any other day of the Week, to make it
the seventh-day Sabbath after our six working days, it does answer the Mind of
God in the Moral Law, as well as by keeping our first day Sabbath. For although
(as I have proved) the Jewish Sabbath being by Law to begin at Even, was
therefore never designed for a universal Pattern to all Nations; yet who will
say, that it was not a Pattern for the Jews in all places that had Evenings,
where they did sojourn, and where the days have no Evenings for many
Revolutions of the Sun, there was no Provision made for their Sabbath in the
Ceremonial Law which they were under. For God had placed Israel within other
Nations, and required all their Males three times a Year to appear before him
in Jerusalem. And therefore, Them. 16.16.
they were not to sojourn so far amongst the Heathens as those Northern (or
Southern) Parts, while they were a free and peculiar Kingdom of Priests to God.
Exodus 19.5, 6.


So then notwithstanding the Ceremonial Precept for the Sabbath was neither
designed to oblige the Heathens In those Northern Countries, if they were then
inhabited, nor could by Reason of the difference of their days accommodate the
Jews to keep their Sabbaths there: Yet if that Law was binding at all, under
the least Alteration of their Day (as I think none can doubt of that, nor
consequently that it was obliging to the Jews in other parts of the World also,
where the days differed more in Point of Time, to begin their Sabbaths at
Evening, with allowance to comply with the Necessity of the Course of Nature) I
say then, seeing that Ceremonial Precept was binding under such Alterations of
their day, it must be granted that it obliged them not to vary from one another
in the time of keeping their Sabbath, farther than the Necessity of Nature did
compel them for the beginning and ending of it at the time prefixed by the
Law. Otherwise if their Law did not so restrain them, it was of no force nor
use to them, and consequently if the Gospel Pattern for us to keep the first
day Sabbath, be any Pattern at all for us to follow, as I have showed it is, it
does then oblige us to observe it, with no farther Allowance to alter the day,
than to accommodate the Necessity of Nature in every Country where we dwell.

Object. 4. Though Gods seventh-day Sabbath, on which he rested after his six
Creation days, was Adams first day Sabbath of Abstinence from work before his
six working days; yet that was properly Gods own Sabbath on which he rested,
and not Adams, because he could not be said to rest before he had any working
days; and therefore, tho Adam abstained from work on Gods Sabbath, yet the
Moral end of Gods Example, fixed Adams first Sabbath to begin on the next
seventh day after the Sabbath on which God had rested from his Work of Creation.

Answer, 1. Adam was either allowed to dress the Garden on Gods seventh-day of
Rest, which he sanctified, and so to have seven working days, as has been
said, before he could rest on the next successive seventh-day, or have his
seventh-day rest a day before it; which I believe none will affirm, or else he
was bound in Duty to keep his Sabbath before his six working days on Gods
seventh-day of rest, and then it was Adams Sabbath also; Mark 2.27.
as Christ plainly tells us, That the Sabbath was made for Man, and not Man for
the Sabbath.

2. There is two Moral Reasons for Man to Sabbatize or keep a Sabbath. The one
is to abstain from work, that he may devote himself to Worship his Creator; the
other is to rest and refresh himself from his Toil and Labor. Now although many
Men have not toiled themselves in any Work, and so have no need of a rest to
refresh their Bodies; yet such are bound to keep the Sabbath as well as others,
in ceasing from finding their own Pleasure, and speaking their own Words, and
to Honor God on his Holy Day, Isa. 58.13. So then, though Adam and Eve had not
passed one working day, before they had Gods seventh-day Sabbath made for them;
yet it was their Moral Duty to abstain from Work, and to Dedicate that very
day, to Attribute their Praise and Worship to him. For we find by Abels
Offering the Firstlings of his Flock, Genesis 4.4.
which was afterward required of Israel with all the first Fruits of the Land
of Canaan, that the first of all our Increase is most acceptable to God; and so
by the same Rule, was the first of Time after the Creation. And when Adam was
put into the Garden of Eden, and had seen all the Cattle and Beasts of the
Field, and the Fowls of the Air; and after that had Eve brought to him, which
God had formed for a help Meet for him; and had taken a little view of the
Works of God in the Heavens, and on the Earth, and of his own Happy Estate and
Lordship over the Creatures: Then surely it was his Moral Duty, before he
served himself in any Work or Business of his own, most solemnly to Praise and
Glorify God for Creating him after his own Image, and making him Lord over all
the Earth. And this seems to have been the Work of Man and Angels, from Job
38.7. When the Morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for
Joy. For tho it may be doubted what these Morning Stars are, and how they sang;
yet the Sons of God most properly were the Angels and Man, who bear the
greatest Likeness and Image of their Creator; of those then its said they all
shouted for Joy; and I observe from the Text, that as this could not be
precisely at the same instant, when the Foundations of the Earth were laid, but
rather when the Works of Creation were finished; because neither the Natural
Stars nor Mankind were then formed: So there is no Reason to understand the
Text of any Time after the fall of Man, for then the Enmity of the Evil Angels
against God, would rather excite them to Curse, than to Rejoice and Praise him
for his Works. It Is true the Word [ all] is sometimes taken for a part, and not
the whole; but not here, for when God had finished his Work on the sixth-day,
He saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good. So that
neither Man nor Angels were then fallen, nor before this Solemn Acclamation of
Joy, for that would have been a Check unto it. Besides, we find nothing
mentioned in the Text of Redemption-Grace, but of the Works of Creation; and
therefore, we have the greatest Reason to refer it to a Time of solemnizing the
Praises of God, between the finishing of the Creation, and the Fall; and there
is Reason to believe, that so it was; for why should we imagine, that God
should Create all things very good and in Perfection, and never receive their
perfect Homage and Praise. It is therefore rational to believe, that God did
not suffer sin to Mar the Perfection of his Works, till all was sinished and
did show forth his Praise. And then if Man had a time in Persection to
solemnize the Praise of his Creator, when could it best be done, but in the
sanctified time of Abstinence from his own business? Mr. H. Soursby and Mr. M.
Smith in their Book, Page 67. say the Seventh day was a Paradise Institution.
for tho his Mind was then Pure, and served God always; yet why did God
sanctify the Sabbath for Man in Innocence (as it is confessed by our
seventh-day Sabbatharians) if it was not principally for his solemn Worship;
for tho he had work appointed in Innocence, to dress and keep the Garden of
Eden, yet it was not toilsome but delight some to him; for Adams eating his
Bread in Sorrow, and with the Sweat of his Face, came by the Curse that fell
upon him for his Sin; seeing therefore the Sabbath at its first sanctifying,
was not principally Hallowed for Man to rest and refresh his weary Body, which
became one Moral end of it through the Accident of Sin forseen by God; but that
it was first sanctified for Man to abstain from Work, most solemnly to worship
his Creator before he served in his own Affairs; and considering God himself
had no need of a Day of Rest, for he faints not, nor is weary; and so his
Declaration of it was for the Sake of Man to exert his worship to him; we may
then conclude that Adams first Sabbath was most properly fixed before his six
working days, to answer the Prime and Chief end of Hallowing of it, after such
manner as best became our first Parents in the State of Innocence.

Object. 5. But some may say, Tho by Adams first keeping his Sabbath, we have
no Example for beginning our Sabbath, originally after our six working days,
yet the six days in which Israel first gathered Manna was to settle the keeping
of their Sabbath, as after their six working days, and not before them.

Answer 1. Tho gathering Manna six days before their first Sabbath in the
Wilderness, is no where assigned as a sixing their first Sabbath, after no more
than six working days. But it rather appears, as to Man an Accidental thing:
For we find that God first gave the People Manna upon their murmuring, because
of hunger. Besides, if God had designed to six six working days before their
first Sabbath, it would better have suited such an end, for God to have
sanctified the seventh-day from their first Passover, or from the Red Sea, when
they were delivered from Pharaohs pursuing of them; but notwithstanding Israel
were freed from the fear of their Enemies, and had nothing, as I can find, to
hinder their resting on the next seventh-day after, yet if we reckon the day on
which Moses and the Children of Israel sang and danced before the Lord for Joy
of their Deliverance; and the three days they were in the Wilderness of Shur,
and after that their coming to Morah, and their Incamping after that at Elim by
the twelve Wells of Water and seventy Palm Trees, from whence they removed unto
the Wilderness of Sin, where they murmured for Bread; and also count unto the
day of their gathering Manna, we cannot rationally allow so little as seven
days time, and yet it was the seventh-day after all this, which was their first
Sabbath in the Wilderness, in which time from their coming from the Red Sea,
they might have had at least two seventh-day Sabbaths; and therefore I see no
Reason to believe, that their gathering Manna six days before their Sabbath,
was designed of God as a sixing six working days before their first Sabbath,
seeing neither the Scripture does so assign it, nor that the Lord did appoint
either the first seventh-day, after their first Passover, or after their
Deliverance from the Red Sea, to be their Sabbath; but suffered them to break
such an Order, by having more than six working days unto their first Sabbath
after their Deliverance.

2. If the Lord had designed to make the Sabbath next after the first six days
of Isreal's gathering Manna, a Pattern for all Nations to have answered the
Moral Law; in keeping the same seventh-day Sabbath precisely and successively
from that Original Point of Time, he would not have absolutely limited the
beginning and ending of it, to be observed from Evening to Evening, but would
have lest the beginning and ending thereof to other Times of the Day and Night,
as would suit with every Nation, and render them capable to answer the Moral
End and Equity of the Law.

Object. 6. The Lord on Mount Sinai made known unto Isratl his Holy Sabbath,
Nehem. 9.13, 14. and therefore his Sabbath was not altered.

Answer, The Word [ his] Holy Sabbath, no more consirmeth the Sabbath made
known to Israel, to be the precise successive seventh-day Sabbath from the
Creation, than Gods giving those people at the same Place (as it is there
expressed) right Judgments and good Statutes, etc. called in Psalm 147.19. a
showing his Word unto Jacob, his Statutis and his Judgments unto Israel: Must
be taken in a limited Sense, of the Will of God implanted in our first Parents
Nature, or delivered to them, or ^o Noah, or Abraham by Revelation, in
Distinction to and Exclusion of the Ceremonial Precepts of the Law. And
therefore, as we have no Reason, so to limit his Statutes and his Judgments, so
there is no Reason to understand [ his] Sabbaths in a limited sense of the
precise successive seventh-day from the Creation; but of his Sabbath instituted
in the Wilderness, as well as his Word, Statutes and Judgments, or whole Will
there appointed, which was not so made known before to any Nation.

Object. 7. The Sabbath was instituted and sixed to Israel in the Wilderness,
before the Law was given on Mount Sinai; and therefore it did not pertain unto
it, as a Molaical new day; but as it was sanctified from the Creation it was
then restored, and soon after repeated and consirmed again in the fourth
Commandment.

Answer 1. I have already showed, that Adams Sabbath and the days afterward,
began with the Morning daylight. And that after Isreal's departure out of
Egypt, the account of their days for their Sabbaths and Holy things, were
changed from what they were reckoned before, in Adams, Lots, Jacobs and Labans
time. So that by that account of the beginning and ending of their days, the
Jewish Sabbath could not be the precise successive seventh-day rest from the
Creation. And considering, it was never assigned in Scripture to be the same,
but rather another day, to draw the Israelites from the Idolatry of the
Heathens, who worshipped the Sun on our first day, called therefore Sunday,
which is believed to be most likely the old seventh-day from the Creation. And
also seeing, the Lord himself interrupted the orderly Course of Nature, and
consequently the precise Succession of the Jewish seventh-day Sabbath: There is
therefore no Reason to think, that the Sabbath fixed to Israel in the
Wilderness was the precise successive seventh-day from the Creation.

2. Tho the Sabbath was given to Israel before the Law was promulgated on Mount
Sinai, yet it follows not, that therefore it was that old precise seventh-day;
for if this should pass for sufficient proof thereof, then we may say the Month
of Abib, Exodus 12.2, 14, etc. Ver. 49. Chap. 13.2, 4. etc.
which was commanded to be the first Month of the Year to Israel, was counted
the first Month of the Year before: And that the Institutions for the Passover,
and the Feast of unleavened Bread: That one Law should be to him that is
homeborn, and to the Stranger that sojourned among them: That Israel should
sanctify all their firstborn of Man and unclean Beasts, as well as of clean
Beasts, that these as well as their Sabbath Day by the same rule, were all of
an ancienter date than their Deliverance out of Egypt, because they were
commanded before the Law was given on Mount Sinai.

3. From those Words, Exodus 16.27, 28. which were spoken upon the going out of
some of the People to gather Manna on their first Sabbath: Saying, How long
resuse ye to keep my Commandments and my Laws? We have no Reason to believe,
that the same duy was known to them for the Sabbath Day, before that present
time of their gathering (...), for the Laws and Comu^^ments of God are there
expressed in the Plural Number; and therefore, the Lords comp^^^^ing of Isra^^,
former disobedience, must have respect to some other Laws and Commandments made
before, Chap. 15.25, 26. and 18.15, 16. or to their Murmurings, Chap. 14.11,
12. Chap. 15.24. and 16.3, 8 and to the breach of his Law in leaving some of
the Maun^ till the Morning, vo. 19, 20. all which were before the Lord
compleined in the Text of the ^^ople, for going forth on the first Sabb^th. And
therefore, this Scripture has nothing in it, to prove that Isra^ls Sabbath in
the Wilderness was the old pre^ise successive Sabbath known to them and broken
by them before. Nor does the Cantion given in the fourth Commandment, to
[Remember] the Sabbath day to keep it Holy show the same, for so its said,
Exodus 13.3. Rem^mber this day in which ye came out from Egypt. Besides it is
said, Exodus 16.29. See for that the Lord has given you the Sabbath, (called a
Sabbath, ver. 25.) therefore he gives you on the sixth-day the Bread of two
days. Exodus 13.22.
So that by the Rulers coming before to tell Moses of the Peoples gathering the
Bread of two days, as if they knew not of the Sabbath to be the Reason of it,
till Moses told them of it in his Answer to them; wherein he first made mention
of their Sabbath, and also, because it is there said to be [given] to them, as a
day they had not known for a day of Rest before, it appears, therefore to be a
new day, but newly given, and not the old preeise successive seventh-day from
the Creation.

Object. 8. The Reason for the Sabbath in the fourth Command shows us, and
also, because it is there called, The Sabbath of the Lord thy God, therefore it
was the precise successive seventh-day from the Creation.

Answer 1. The Reason for the Sabbath in the fourth Command, is, For in six
days the Lord made Heavon and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and
rested the s^^enth-day; wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath Day, and
ballowed it. Now tho this resers us to the Pattern in the beginning, yet it
follows not, that therefore this Precept sixed the old precise successive
seventh-day to Israel. For 1. It is not assigned to be the same, nor does it
appear, that the reference was made to the first Pattern for that end. But that
as God had six Creation days together, and then his Sabbath, so after his
Example, they should also have six working days, and no more together to one
Sabbath or Lords day. For it is not ours, for common use, but to rest and
refresh our selves to worship and serve the Lord; Isa. 58.13.
and therefore it is called [his] Holy day, as other things are called [his]
that were set apart from common use to his Service; yea though they were not the
very same from the Original, Ezra 6.16, 17. Zach. 6.14. and 7.2, 3. Exodus 13.2,
12, 13, 15. Chap. 12.29, 30. ^evit. 27.8.
as 1. The new Temple builded in Ezra's time, was called the House of God, and
Temple of the Lord; tho it was not the same which Solomon builded. 2. The
firstborn among the Children of Israel, both of Men and of Beasts were
sanctified and set apart to the Lord, and are said to be his, and yet the same
in kind, was not always required of them for his Service; for though they were to
Sacrifice all the firstborn to the Lord, being Males (except the firstborn of
Man, which they redeemed) yet they were also allowed to redeem an unclean Beast
according to the Estimation of the Priest, and to be at Liberty either to
redeem an Ass with a Lamb or break his Neck. And so we sind in the Case of the
seventh-day Sabbath given to Israel in the Wilderness, Exodus 20.10. Josh.
10.13. Isa. 38.8. Chap. 58.13.
that though after our English Translation, it is said in the sourth Command to be
the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; yet nevertheless, after the Interruption of
the orderly course of the Night and Day, and consequently of the Sabbath Day
too, it was called Gods Holy Day, and therefore, we cannot say that, because
the Sabbath given to Israel in the Wilderness, is called the Sabbath of the
Lord, therefore there is ground to believe it was the same precise successive
seventh-day from the Creation.

2. Mr. Ainsworth Translateth the Hebrew Text, Exodus 16.23. To Morrow is the
Sabbatism the Sabbath of Holiness [to] Jehovah. And ver. 25. It is the Sabbath
to day [unto] Jehov^th. And L^vit. 23.3. But in the seventh shall be [a]
Sabbath of Sabbatism. And Deuteronomy. Mr. Rebertsons Gate to the Holy Tongue, Page
110. See Mr. Hughes in his Analitical Exposition.
5.13. But the seventh-day is [a] Sabbath [to] Jehovah thy God. And Exodus
20.10. But the seventh-day is [a] Sabbath [to] Jehovah thy God. Which two last
places, Ari. Montanus reads, Et die septimo Sabbathum Domino Deo ^uo. And Mr.
Will. Robertson translateth, (...) Laihovah Elobecha [to] the Lord thy God: and
Mr. Hughet, on Exodus 16.23. reads it, To Morrow is the Sabbatism, the Sabbath
of Holines^ [to] Jehovah, ver. 25. For the Sabbath [to] Jehovah is to day, and
Chap. 20.10. But the seventh-day is [a] Sabbath [to] Jehovah thy God. And Mr.
Pools Annotations reads the last place, Exodus 20.10. Or [to] the Lord, (i. e.)
Conscerated to his Use, Honor, and Service. And therefore, seeing that whith
our English Tran^lations read in the fourth Commandment, the Sabbath of the
Lord is [a] Sabbath [to] Jehovah; there is nothing that has the least
Appearance of Demonstration, that the Sabbath day instituted in the Wilderness
was the same precise successive seventh-day from the Creation.

Object. 9. It does not appear, that the Sabbath as to its first Original was
Typical, or instituted to prefigure any thing that was Future, for the Law of
it was before the sirst Promise of Christ in the state of Innocence, wherein
there was no respect unto the Mediation of Christ. And therefore the Sabbath
could not be abolished in the New Testament as a shadow of things to come.

Answer, Genesis 2.9. Prove. 3.18. Luke 23.43. Rev. 2.7. Chap. 22.2, 14.
The Tree of Life in the midst of the earthly Paradise was also before the fall
of Man, and the first Promise of Christ; and yet both of them were Types of the
Spiritual Tree of Life in the Heavenly Paradise. So that though the Tree of Life
in the Garden of Eden, and the Sabbath Originally before the fall, were not
known to Adam as Figures of Future Things in Christ; yet from the Counsel and
Foreknowledge of God, they were designed as Shadows of things to come. For in
the Covenant with his Eternal Son before the Foundation of the World, Ephel.
1.4, 11
having Chosen and Predestined a Select number of Mankind, to inherit an
Heavenly Paradise; he also disposed and ordered all things to accommodate the
Declaration of his Counsel to fallen Man, with Shadows of those Heavenly Things
that were to come. And therefore, there is no Reason to deny the day of Gods
rest from the Work of his Creation, to be more than for a Memorial of it; but
to believe it was also designed of God before the fall, to be of Typical Use to
Man, as appears, Heb. 4.

2. In Answer to this Objection, I have this farther to say, that whatever may
be thought of the Original Sabbath from the Creation; yet the Sabbath days in
Colos. 2.16. cannot be denied to be the Jewish Sabbaths, and of these the
Apostle says, they are a Shadow of things to come, but the Body is of Christ,
and therefore the shadows are done away.

Object. 10. Seeing the Jewish seventh-day Sabbath did answer the Moral Law,
and yet you say, it is abrogated under the Gospel, Colos. 2.16. Then either its
Typicah^ess or Significative Nature, as it is a Sh^^ow or was a Memerial of
Isra^h Deliverance out of Egypt, is only abolished, and not the day it self, or
else a Branch of the Moral Law it self is re^ealed.

Answer: I have showed before, that the seventh-day Sabbath must at least be
comprehended in the Prohibition of Sabbaths, as a shadow of things to come, and
have already cleared this Scripture, Colos. 2.16. from diverse Exceptions that
may seem to weaken its Authority from abrogating the Jewish Sabbath; yet
because I sind Mr. Brabourne has labored with all his might to stifle that
which I conceive is the Mind of the Holy Ghost in it, I shall therefore clear
it from other things, that may possibly puzzle the Minds of some weak
Christians. And

1. Its there said, Let no Man therefore judge you in Meat o^ in Drink, or in
respect of an Holy Day, (Gr. of a Feast) or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath
days, which are a shadow of things to come; but the Body is of Christ. Here, as
was mentioned before, Sabbaths, are distinctly expressed from the New Moon, and
Feasts, or other Jewish Holy days, that were or had also Sabbaths, and were
observed under the Law; and therefore their weekly seventh-day Sabbath must at
least be comprehended in the Word Sabbaths, and equally prohibited with the New
Moon, and other sel^ival Sabbaths that were then observed.

2. It appears, the Jewish seventh-day was a shadow of things to come, in
that it was a Sign and Memorial of Israth Deliverance out of E^ypt; for that
Deliverance with all its Memorials was a Type of our Salvation by Jesus Christ,
and o^ the Gospel Signs and Memorials of it; for its said, That all the
Prophets, (...) 11.13.
and the Law prophesud until John.

3. Though the change of the J^^ish seventh day, into the Christion sirst-day
Sabbath, (in Distinction to tiei^s,) was Typed out by the eighth or sust day,
and by the Year of J^bilee under the Law; as I have showed, yet our Clai^^ion
Salbath considered as our seventh-day to our six working days, was also
shadowed by the Jewish seventh-day Sabbath.

4. It this will not fatissie, I have also this to say, That we find nothing
applied in the New Testament, as the Antitype of the New Moon. It Is true, there
is something signisied or shadowed to us by the New Moon, Isa. 66.23. And by
the Feast of Tabernacles, Zach. 14.16. which places both relate to Christ's
Glorious Kingdom yet to come, and not to our present Gospel-day; but yet we
cannot certainly say, what the New Moon and Feast of Tabernacles does
particularly shadow to us: Howbeit from thence it is plain, that the New Moon is
a shadow of something yet to come, and seeing the Apostle says so too, and
comprehends the seventh-day Sabbath with it; we can no more deny his forbidding
all Men not to judge (or censure) the Christians for not observing the Jewish
seventh-day Sabbath, than for not observing their New Moons, and other Holy
days; and for any to except the Jewish seventh-day Sabbath out of this
Prohibition, because they sind no present Gospel Antitype shadowed by it,
expressly applied to it in the New Testament; will give equal Liberty for others
to except against the Prohibition of observing their New Moons. And therefore,
seeing those Typical days and times of the New Moon, and Feast of Tabernacles,
that were not evident shadows of present, but of suture Gospel things, are not
to be kept in our Gospel days, as Signs and Memorials of Isreal's Deliverance
out of Egypt, or for any other Reason; and yet the Record of them in Scripture
does retain their Typical and Shadowy Significations; then surely we have equal
Reason to conclude, that in Case it were granted (as it is not) that the Jewish
seventh-day Sabbath was no shadow of any present Gospel thing; yet as a Sign
and Memorial of Isreal's Deliverance out of Egypt, and also as a shadow of
suture things, it is not to be observed, though the Record of it in Scripture,
does still retain a shadowy Signification; and is so of Use to us.

5. T^^ some have sound out a more, cunning Distinction, than an Explanation of
Truth, batteen the typicalness or significative Nature of the Jewish Sabbith,
and the Sabbath or day it self; yet this cov^^ing may castly be removed, and
their mistake Corrected; for though the Pypical use o^ their Sabbath to suture
things still temaineth on sacred Record, and is not wronged by trans^erring the
same Typical Signi^ication to be born also by our actual keeping the (...)-day
Sabbath, as the seventhday Sabbath also; yet it is the Jewish seventh-day
Sabbath, the day it self that is abo^ished, as other things were, that were
Memorials of Isreal's Deliverance out of Egypt; which respecting their
seventh-day Sabbath, was in their beginning and ending of it From Evening to
Evening, to answer their new day from the Sacrisice of their first Passover,
thereby weekly (and dailytoo) to keep that deliverance in fresher Memory, and
so the significative Nature of the day respecting an actual and practical
bearing up the Memory of that Deliverance could not be removed, unless the
Sabbath day it self were altered in its beginning and ending; which was to
cease with their Churchstate, and to give way to our Gospel Memorials of the
greater deliverance, when our Spiritual Redemption and Eternal Salvation was
purchased by Jesus Christ.

6. The Jewish Sabbath its self is abrogated, without a repeal of any part of
the Moral Law, or Ten Commandments, or any Moral Branch of that Law; though the
keeping of it by the Jews did answer and fulfill it in the fourth Command. For
as I have noted, the fourth Command of its self, does not require the Sabbath
to begin and end from Evening to Evening; so it consequently follows, it does
not of its self limit the keeping of that very day; but this was done by
another Ceremonial Precept, which till it was abrogated, though it answered the
Moral Law, as being their seventh-day boundary to their six working days; yet
it does not therefore follow, that it was of its self of a Moral Nature; for
then we must also say, that all other Ceremonial Precepts are Moral, and all
the Jewish Worship is Moral; for nothing was required contrary to the Ten
Commandments, but for Isreal's putting forth their Obedience to them; which was
to be exerted according to the revealed Will of God, in all the other Appendant
both Moral and Ceremonial Precepts and Branches of the Decalogue. So that the
prohibiting of the Sabbath, according to the Jewish Pattern is no repeal of any
Part or Moral Branch of the Ten Commandments, but is only an Abrogation of a
Ceremonial Precept that pertained to it, during the shadowy Dispensation of the
Law.

Object. 11. Here I shall answer to something I find in Mr. Edward Stennet's
Book of the seventh-day Sabbath, Page 47.
concerning those Countries where they have so much day together in the Summer,
and Night together in the Winter. Says he, the Psalmist says, Psalm. 74.20.
The dark places of the Earth, are full of the Habitations of Cruelty; That is
(says he) they are the places by Divine Appointment for the cruel Wild Beasts,
and not for Man, except they will become like Beasts; for as David says, There
is no Sperch nor Language under Heaven, where the Voice of Day and Night is not
heard, Psalm. 19.2, 3. So that if there be any Speech or Language under Heaven,
that hear not the Voice of Day and Night, they are gone out of that orderly
State which they were in, in David's Time, and so ought to return again into
such Countries, where they may be in a Capacity to serve God, and live under
the means of Grace; for men ought to sorsake all that this World affords,
rather than Sin against God; and if so, then men may well forsake their dark
places, and come to the Light; for men's Habitations ought to stoop to Gods Law,
and not Gods Law to their Habitations.

Answer 1. The Psalmist faith, Psalm. 74.1^, 20, 21.
O deliver not the Soul of thy Turtle Dove unto the Multitude of the Wicked,
forget not the Congregation of thy Poor for ever. Have respect unto the
Covenant: For the dark places of the Earth are full of the Habitations of
Cruelty. O let not the oppressed return ashamed: let the Poor and Needy Praise
thy Name. This is a Prayer pleaded from the Covenant, that the oppressed Turtle
Dove, and Congregation of Gods Poor might be delivered from the wicked; for
says the Psalmist, The dark places of the Earth are full of the Habitations of
Cruelty. As if he should say, O deliver thy Poor and Needy in those places of
the Earth, that are dark with Blind and Cruel Inhabitants that oppress them;
for as there is not one Word of Wild Beasts mentioned in the Text, or any
Agreement of its connexed Matter, to imply the darkness of place to be
understood, for want of the Light of the Sun and the Natural Day: So those
Countries are no more deseribed to us, by being called dark places, than if
they were called the Light places of the Earth: Because they have the same
Proportion of Light together more than other Countries have in the Summer, as
they have of Darkness together in the Winter; and in the whole Year they have
equal Light and Darkness to other places. And therefore, as it cannot be proved
by any other Scripture, that by dark places in the Text are meant those
Countries; but that the matter connexed to the Text, implies it to and expounds
it of dark Persons, if it were granted, as it is not, that by dark places is
meant those Countries, it is sufficient to invalidate all that is there said by
Mr. Stennet against our proving that the Jewish seventh-day S^bbath from
Evening to Evening is not moral, ^^^ding to all Nations; for the ^^^^bitants
of such Countries having no Sun nor Day for several Weeks in W^^ter, not any
Night not Evening for several Weeks in Summer; they mast of Ne^^shty ^vide
their ^une, and bound their Sabb^^hs some other ways, Vz. In Summer the account
of their Time must be preserv^^, and their hight meas^ed and divided into their
hight days o^ twenty so^^ hours by their Meridian; and in Winter Ast^o^^mers
say when the Sun is absent from them for several Weeks, they may preserve the
account of Time, and Measure, and divide their Darkness into dark days of
twenty four hours by the help of the Sta^s: And by Clocks or Glasses of Sand,
as we do our hours of the Day and Night. So that, though their Sabbath may be
duly kept with the same Proportion of Time as we do in our Nation, yet seeing
it cannot there be observed after the Jewish Pattern, from Evening to Evening;
that Precept was therefore never designed for all Nations to exert their
Obedience by it to the Moral Law.

2. See Mr. Edw. Stennets Book on the seventhday, in Page 47.
I now come to speak to the other Text, Psa^m 19.2, 3. which the Author thus
cites, says he, David faith, There is no Speech, nor Language under Heaven,
where the Voice of Day and Night is not heard. But he has not dealt
ingeniously with this Scripture, so to transpose the matter in citing of it, to
make it savor his Cause, contrary to its true Order and Sense, as it lies in
the Holy Bible; for the Psalmist says, Vor. 1.2, 3. The Heavens declare the
Glory of God: and the Firmament shows his handy Work. Day unto Day m^^reth
Speech, and Night unto Night shows Knowledge. There as no Speech nor
Language, where their Voice is not heard. Their Line is gone out through all
the Earth, and their Words to the and of the World. Now let the Reader
consider, whether this place of Scripture has any thing in into his purpose;
surely if it be duly considered, it will appear strongly against him; for if
those Words, There is no Speech, nor Language where their Voice is not heard,
relate to the two preceding Verses, then we must understand them of the Voice
of Gods handiwork in the Creation, and orderly abiding of the Firmament, and
Ordinances of the Heavens, and Day and Night, or Light and Darkness, which
declare the glorious Wisdom and Power of God to every People, according to the
Situation of their Countries throughout the World; but if those Words are
expounded, as they are most prope^^; connexed to the following Verse, then the
Apos^le in Romans 10. Rom 10.15, 16 17 18. Math. 28.19.
applies them to the Preathing of the Gospel to the ends of the World, and the
Lord has promised in Isa. 66.19. (which relates to a different Time after the
sust Promulga ^on of the Gosp^^, and therefore may reach to those Blind and
^gnorant Not^here People, we are treat^^g of) that (...) es^^pe to I arshish,
Pull, and (...), etc. and to the (...) a at o^^, that have not heard of his
Name, nor seen his Glory; and the, shall declare his Glory among the Gemtles.
So that the Word of the Gospel, and consequently the Moral Law in the Old
^estament annexed to it, and consirmed by it, was to be (...) to Men's
Habitations; for though all Nations shall go up to the Mo^^^ain o^ the Lords
House, Isa. 2.3. Is^ 60.1, 2, 3, etc.
yet this shall be either their vol^^^^^, Act to (...) their Knowledge of his
ways, from the extrandinary Light that shall (...) o^ the Tribes of Israel,
when they shall be returned into their own Land, in the Time of Christ's Glo^ous
Kingdom here on E^^th, or to do subjective Homage every, car, once a year,
Zach. 14
like to the other Text, Isa. 66.23 where its (...), Teat (...) new Moon to
another, and from one Sabbath to (...), sha^ all Plesh come to norship before
me, says the Lord: And whatever is intended by this monthly worship, to be in
the suture Glotions Time of Christ's Kingdom; yet as we have nothing of it now
in the New Testament, and so this Text can no ways prove, that any Nation
should in our present day, remove their Habitations to another Country; so it
cannot be taken, that all Nations should assemble into one place, once a Month,
or every Sabbath; for thus they cannot appear before the Lord but once a year,
and I Question, if it be then required of every individual Person; but of some
of all Nations (as it cannot be monthly shictly considered) or rather of all
those Nations only that came against J^rusalem, as it is expressly said, Z^^h.
14.16. And I do not sind it otherwise, that Men should now or then remove their
Habitations into any Country, or the Land of Canaan, unto the Gospel; for as
this can never be, until it comes first into the places where they are, to
convince them and bring them over to the Obedience of it; so the end of the
Gospel for a successive Conversion of Souls, and beinging of all Nations into
Subjection to Chrills Righteous and Visible Kingdom, cannot be accomplished,
unless the Christians of those Countries remain inhabitants therein. And for
any to imagine, that God should send a Moral Pattern by an Institution to men
in general, which is impossible to be observed by all Mankind in every Country
under Heaven, without the least Exception, to accommodate the Necessity of the
Course of Nature, is both against the Nature of such a Precept, the
Righteousness of God, and the Equiey of his Law.

But to conclude this Answer, I shall make this remark on the Authors Words
before recited. That seeing, he says, That they ought to return again into
such C^umreys, where they may be in a Capacity to serve God -- for Men's
Habitations ought to stoop to Gods Law, and not Gods Law to their Habitations.
It is plain, he grants the Law for the seventh-day Sabbath, or the fourth
Command, which he Treats of, as binding us to the Observation of the Jewish
Sabbath, cannot be kept in those Countries after their Pattern from Evening to
Evening, and then it must needs be Ceremonial, and the Moral keeping of that
command, is for them and us to observe our seventh-day, after our six working
days, or our first day before them, as near as can be, to answer the Gospel
Pattern.

Object. 12. Tho the Sun stood still in Joshua's time about a whole day, and
its going backward and sorward ten Degrees or Divisions in Abaz Dial, might
lose ten hours account of Time; so that after these Interruptions of the
orderly Course of the Sun, their Sabbath began and ended near or about a whole
days time later than they should have done, if there had not been such an
Interruption in the Order of Nature; yet those longer days than ordinary were
counted but for days, and so the seventh-day was the seventh-day still
successively from their first Sabbath.

Answer, Although some have thus argued that the seventh-day was the seventh-day
still, Josh. 10.13. Isa. 38.8. See Page 29.
yet after those Interruptions of the orderly course of the Sun (if we count
its ten Degrees or Divisions of going backward, and then forward again, to be
ten hours lengthning of that day, as there is the greatest Reason to believe
that so it was) then the Jewish seventh-day Sabbath fell near or about a days
time later than their precise orderly Succession of Time would have placed it
from their first Sabbath, as was showed before. And farther, as their
seventh-day Sabbaths could not after those Interruptions he properly counted
the precise orderly successive Sabbaths from the Creation, or its Institution
in the Wilderness; so if this should be allowed as it is objected, then we may
also say (in those Northern parts, where the days are sometimes lengthened (by
the Suns continuing in their Hemisphere more than twenty four hours time) unto
Days, Weeks, and Months) that we are still to reckon them but for days,
(contrary to the Custom of those People, See Mr. T. Chasie cited, Page 33.
and the length of days, and weeks, in Gods Pattern of meafuring time,) but
after this account their days will differ in length of Time, Days, Weeks, and
Months from one another; and so, though they have the orderly Succession of the
Settings and Risings of the Sun, according to the orderly Course of Nature in
those places; yet the Jewish seventh-day Sabbath cannot possibly this way be
successively kept precisely in Proportion of Time there, like as it was in
Canaan, and other parts of the World. So that for any to argue for the precise
Succession of the Jewish seventh-day Sabbath (from their first keeping it, or
from the Creation) after those Interruptions of the orderly course of the Day,
will consequently tend to draw us into great Confusions about the Sabbath, and
to maintain that in Name which is not properly so in Nature.

Object. 13. The journeying of the two Disciples to Emmaus, Luke ^4.13.
and back again was near fifteen Miles, which is more than a Sabbath days
journey, how then could their Traveling consist with the keeping of that
first day of the Week a Sabbath?

Answer 1. We sind Christ reproved them for their unbelief, and if this will
not be allowed, as inclusive for their journeying from Jerusalem, when they
should have continued in Faith with the eleven Apostles, tha^ were there
gathered together, then I may farther add, that it cannot be proved, whether
their journey was then Lawful or Unlawful; for tho it be not lawful on the
Sabbath Day to journey at all on the account of any common or worldly Business
of our own, yet there may possibly be a Moral necessity to journey on the
Sabbath Day without Sin, as it may be for the saving a Persons Life, and
therefore, we cannot conclude, that the two Disciples sinned in Traveling on
the first Christian Sabbath, or did thereby make it a common day, unless we
knew the occasion of it.

2. Those two Disciples were not of the number of the Eleven Disciples or
Apostles of our Lord, which were themselves then but weak in Faith, and in the
Knowledge of Gospel things; and therefore it is the less to be wondered at, if
those two Disciples did not observe that day a Sabbath, when they doubted of
the occasion of it, viz. the Resurrection of Christ, till he appeared to them,
which he also did to the Eleven, Luke 24.33. Math. 28.8.
and others (who were waiting together on that day) for the Confirmation of
their Faith.

Object. 14 The Jews reckoned their days to begin at Evening, and therefore the
Church of (...), Acts 20.7. came together to break Bread on the begi^^^^ of the
first day of the Week, viz. on Saturday Night ((...) so called) after the
Jewish Sabbath was over, and the next Morning Paul did go a soot to Asses,
where he had appo^^ted his Companions to meet him with the Ship. So that Paul
and his Company traveled on the first day of the Week, and therefore though he
preached and broke Bread on it the Night before, yet he kept it not as a
Sabbath.

Answer, Its true, the Jews were appointed to keep their Sacred days from
Evening to Evening, or from Sun set to Sun set, as Mr. See his Reply to Dr.
Wallis Page 28.29,30. Josh. 10.26, 27. Prove. (...) Mark 1.32. Chap. 13.35.
Ba^pfield largely proves, that the Evening belonging to the days of the Week,
began at Sunset, and is called the twilight. And also Mose^ dated Isreal's
Deliverance out of Egypt, from the Sacrifice of the Passover at Even, at the
going doan of the Sun. But yet I have clearly proved, that the days before and
after that Deliverance, were also re^koned from Morning to Morning, as in Math.
28.1. In the and of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of
the Week. From whence its plain, that the first day of the Week on which Christ
arose from the Dead, was counted by the Evange list according to their Civil
days, not to begin till the dawning of the Day or Sunrising, and agreeable to
Mr. Bampfields Discourse against the first-days beginning at Midnight, after
the Roman account, it must necessarily follow, that the first day, Acts 20.7,
11. must be reckoned to begin with the Morning daylight. For its said, Upon
the first day of the Week, when the Disciples came together to break Bread,
Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the Morrow, and contina^d his
Speech until Midnight. -- When he therefore -- had broken Bread, and eaten, and
talked a long while, even till break of day, so he departed. And here I
observe, that the Morning in which Paul departed was the Morrow, which betokens
another day; and therefore it was no part of the first day of the Week. So that
it is not only unde^iably clear from the Text it self, that the Night in which
Paul preached, was part of the first day, belonging to the preceding daylight
joining to it; but its also evident, that the first day of the Week began in
the Morning before, and not on that Evening in which the Apostle preached; and
so it appears, that the Morrow on which Paul traveled was the second day of
the Week; and the Text clearly proves, that on the day before, being the first
day of the Week, Paul with the Church of Troas Assembled to solemnize the
Ordinances of the Gospel, as on the Sabbath day.

Object. 15. Its said, Math. 12.40. As ^onas was three days and three Nights in
the Whales belly: So shall the Sun of man be three days and three Nights in the
Heart of the Earth. And this seems to disagree with other places of Scripture
concerning the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Answer, 1. It cannot be thought, St. Matthew or the other Evangelists faw any
Discord in the Testimony they bore of Christ, or that the three Days and three
Nights expressed by our Savior, should be repugnant to the other Evangelsts
undeniable Evidence, that Christ was not in the Grave three Nights. Now to
reconcile this Difficulty, I shall cite Dr. Hammond on the Text; says he, The
way of Interpreting this place, mast be taken from a Figure, which expresses
one whole thing by two parts of it. Thus the Heavens and the Earth, in St.
Peter, 2 Pet. 3.7. signify the World -- and so Christ is said to be three Days
and three Nights in the Earth, tho the first natural Day he was not in the
Grave any part of the Night, but the latter part of the Friday, all Saturday,
and so much of Sunday as until the Sun approached their Horizon -- And as it is
practiced in the business of Circumcision, This of Circu^^ision is al^^
affirmed by Mr. W^^m^^ in his Christ S^nag. Page 114.
which was precifely observed the eighth day, if the Child were born in one
day, tho but half an hour before the end of it, that is, before the beginning
or Evening of the next, that half hour was counted for one of the eight days,
(because, say they, legal days are not accounted from Time to Time, or from
Hour to Hour, -- Thus when Luke 9.28. It Is said about eight days after, Math.
17.1. and Mark 9.2. It Is after six Days, that is, after six Days complete, the
first and the last being not complete, and so tho numbered by one, yet omitted
by two Evangelists. And accordingly the space of those very three days of
Christ's lying in the Grave until his Resurrection are, when it is Prophetically
mentioned in Hosea 6.^ said to be after two days.

2. The Dutch Annotations also say of those three Days and three Nights: For a
part of the Days is here taken whole days and nights, like that is Customary
with the Hebrews -- see Esth. 4.16. compared with Chap. 5.1. And so they take
it after the Romanists, reckoning that the days began and ended on the
Midnight, and so it falls yet clearer. To which I shall add this brief Note,
That seeing it is said, As Jonas was three Days and three Nights, etc. so Christ
should be three days and three Nights, etc. It Is thought from our Saviors
Words, that sonas was not completely three Nights in the Whales Belly, but as
Christ was in the Grave.

Object. 16. Christ's Body rested in the Grave on the Jews Sabbath, and his Soul
in Paraaice, and therefore he never intended by his Death to make it a common
work-day.

Answer, Luke 2.21. Gal. 4.4. Math. 5.17, 18.
As Christ was born a Jew and was Circumcised, and came to fulfill the whole
Law; so every Jot and Little of it was rulsilled by him; and therefore, he
always observed the Jewish Sabbath, and if his Body being in the Grave, and his
Soul in Paradise should in some Sense be taken for a rest (in Comparison of
what he labored under before for our Redemption) yet then it must be only so
considered with respect to the Law, t^^ our Justification was completely
Purchased by the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead; Romans 4.25. ^ Cor. 15.17,
18.
who was delivered (that is to be Crucisied) for our Offenses, and was raised
again for our Justification. And the Apostle also says, That if Christ be not
raised your Faith is vain; ye are yet in your Sins: Then they also that are
fallen asleep in Christ are perished. So that, tho the Vail of the Temple was
Rent at his Passion as a Sign that there was thereby a Rent made in the Types
and Shadows of Heavenly Things which was then making void, yet the Heavenly
Things themselves were not completely purchased for us until the Body of Christ
was raised for our Justification: Heb. 9.12.
And then as the Apostle says, By his own Blood he entered in once into the
Holy Place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us. Now therefore, tho
Christ's being in the Grave should be called a Comparative Rest, to what he
suffered on the Cross; yet it cannot be understood of his Ceasing from the Work
of purchasing our Redemption, until the Omnipotency of his Divine Nature was
put forth in loosing him from the Pains of Death, Heb. 2.10. Chap. 5.9. and
Chap. 11.40. Acts 2.24.
or part of the Sentence of the Law, and raising his Body to Life again, for
till then the New Creation was not perfected in the second Adam. And then on
the first day of the Week, having ceased from this Work, and so rested, it was
thereby sanctified in stead of the Jewish seventh-day Sabbath, which was then
to be abolished, as all other Legal Ceremonial Things were. And the Gospel
first and seventh day Sabbath taking its place was to answer the Moral Law, and
to bear the Type of the Rest that remains to the People of God, as also
principally the Memorial of Christ's Resurrection, and to continue our Sabbath
unto his second Personal Coming.

To close this Treatise, seeing we are obliged to keep the first day of the
Week a Sabbath or Day of Rest from our worldly Business, to worship and serve
God with all our Hearts, and with all our Minds; let all men stand in awe, and
fear to profane his Holy day, Nen. 13.17, 18. Ezekiel. 20.13. Isa. 56.2, 6, 7.
lest they bring the Wrath of the Lord upon us, as it fell on Judah and Israel
for that Transgression of the Law. And let us labor more in Love and Respect
to his Commandments, for the Blessing intailed on the due observers of it; for
its said, Blessed is the Man that does this, and the Son of Man that lays
hold on it: that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it. -- Also the Sons of the
Stranger, that join themselves to the Lord, to Serve him, and to Love the Name
of the Lord, to be his Servants, every one that keeps the Sabbath from
polluting it, and takes hold of my Covenant: Even them will I bring to my Holy
Mountain, and make them joyful in my House of Prayer. -- And if thou turn away
thy Foot from the Sabbath, (...). ^8.1.
from doing thy Pleasure on my Holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the
Holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall Honor him, not doing thine own ways,
nor finding thine own Pleasure, nor speaking thine own Words. Then shall thou
delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the High
Places of the Earth, and feed thee with the Heritage of Jacob thy Father; for
the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it. And he will surely fulfill his Promises,
Heb. 4.^. Romans 8.1^. to 2^.
and in his Time will give his chosen the great Rest that remains for them;
which is typed forth by the Legal and Gospel seventh-days Sabbaths: When the
whole Creation that groaneth and travelleth in Pain, shall be delivered from
the Bondage of Corruption into the Glorious Liberty of the Children of God.
When the whole Earth shall be at Roast and Quiet, Isa. 14.7.
and shall break forth into Singing, for the Meek shall inherit the Earth: and
shall delight themselves in the abundance of Peace. O house of Israel, Psalm
37.1^. Isa. 2.5. Heb. 4.1. Cha 3.18, 1 Eph^l. 4.1. Isa. 3.14.
come ye and let us walk in the Light of the Lord: And fear, least a Promise
being lest us of entering into his Rest, any of us should seem to come short of
it through ^^helief. And let us labor to walk more worthy of the Vocation
wherewith we are called: That so, when the Sinners in Sum shall be asraid and
seat fullness, shall surprise the Hypocrite: And Men's Hearts shall fail them,
for fear, and for looking after those Things which are coming upon the Earth;
(...) M^th. 2^. (...)
we may enter into the Chambers of God, and shat the Door about us, until the
Indignation be over-past, and be accounted worthy to escape all those things,
and to enter into the Joy of our Lord.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
There is now Printed a Book Entitled, A Treatise of the Holy Tria unity, in
two Parts: The First (...) the Deity of (...) Ch^^st and ^^e Holy Spirit, in
the Unity of ^^sence with God the (...) The Sea (...) Defense of the (...),
answers the ^^^efest Objections made against this Doctri^^. By I. M.

Chap. I. THe Case is brielly stated. Chap. II. Shows that there is but one
God, the C^^^ for and Former of all things. Chap. III. Afferteth a Plurality of
Divine Subs^^^ences. Chap. IV. Of the Father. Chap. V. Proves the Deity of our
Lord Jesus Christ. 1. By his Names. 2. That God in the Old Testament in diverse
Places is Christ in the New. 3. By seven particular Texts of Holy Scriptures.
4. That Christ pre-existed his Incarnation in his Divine Nature, and is no
Angel incarnate, but is Coeternal with the Father. 5. His Deity is proved by
his Works. And 6. By Divine Worship given to him. Chap. VI. Proves the Deity
of the Holy Ghost. 1. That he is a Divine Person. 2. His Deity is asserted from
several Texts of Scripture. 3. By his Works. 4. By Divine Worship given to him.
Chap. VII. Proves the Unity of the Holy Trinity. Chap. VIII. Contains some
Explications of the Holy Trinunity. 1. Of the Essential Being of God. 2. O^ the
Divine Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. 3. Of the
Distinctions of the Divine Nature and the Persons, and some Shadows by way of
Comparison of the incomparable and inconceivable Being of God, and of the Union
of Christ's two Natures.
PART II.
Chap. I. Answers Objections against the Scriptural Proofs of Christ's Deity.
Chap. II. Answers to Objections drawn from several Texts of Scriptures. Chap.
III. Answers to several Arguments against the Deity of Christ. Chap. IV.
Answers to several Objections against the Scriptures, that prove the Deity of
the Holy Ghost. Chap. V. Answers to some Objections drawn from diverse
Scriptures to disprove the Deity of the Holy Spirit. Chap. VI. Answers to some
Scriptures from whence our Adversaries assert that the Father only is the true
God. With a general Answer and Conclusion. Price bound one ^^^ling.

