Imprimatur,

Guil. Sill, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Dom. Feb. 16. 1676.7.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Worshipful, The Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen,
Sheriff, etc.

Of the Town and County of NEWCASTLE upon TYNE. On the 30th of January 1676.7.

At St. Nicolas their Parish Church.

BY JOHN MARCH, B. D. Vicar of Embleton in Northumberland, and Lecturer to that
Congregation.

My Son, fear thou God, and the King, and meddle not with those that are given
to change. Prove. 24. 21. And Pilate said unto them, What shall I Crucify your
King? Joh. 19. 15. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Hodgkin, for Richard Randell, and
Pet. Maplisden, Booksellers in Newcastle upon Tyne. 1677.

To the Right Worshipful, Sr^ RALPH CARR, Mayor, the Right Worshipful, Sr^
ROBERT SHAFTO, Recorder, And to the Right Worshipful, and Worshipful, the
ALDERMEN, and SHERIFF, etc. Of the Town and County of NEWCASTLE upon TYNE.
Right Worshipful and Worshipful,
YOUR commands, as they will be a just Apology for this weak discourse, so they
cannot but give it some Title to your favorable acceptance. Your Attention
spoke your Affection to it in the Preaching: and your more than ordinary
Judgments commanding it to the Press will be its best protection against those
Censures, it is now exposed to. I hope it has already received its first
Impression in the Loyal hearts of many, that heard it from the Pulpit: And I
doubt not but this publication will help to imprint it in the hearts of others,
who tho they were absent, were more concerned in the design of it. Writing,
Voces signa sunt, per quae praesentibus loquimur, inventae sunt literae, per
quas possemus and cum absentibus colloqui. Aug. de Trin. l. 15. c. 10.
says St^ Augustine, has this advantage above speech, that by it we speak as
well to the absent, as to those that are present. So that such, whose guilt
might possibly keep them this day from our public Assemblies, may by this
means be brought to a kind of Ocular confession. Our (...), advice to his Son.
late Gracious Sovereign (whose Charity was equal to the greatest ingratitude
of his enemies) is pleased to tell his Royal Son, That the most of all sides,
who did amiss in the late Rebellion, did so not out of malice, but
misinformation and misapprehension of things, and that none will prove more
Loyal subjects than those, who being made sensible of their errors and their
Princes injuries, shall feel in their own Souls most vehement motives to
repentance, and earnest desires to make some reparations for their former
defects.

That these Nullus virmagnus sine aliquo divino afflatu. Senec.
Prophetic words of our Royal Martyr, may the better attain their due
impletion, is the present design of the ensuing discourse: and will always be
(as hitherto it has been) the constant endeavor of Your known and eminent
Loyalty.

I shall not stay You longer in the Porch of a Dedication, than till I have
acknowledged to the World Your many and signal favors toward Me; which as
they command my most hearty prayers for the prosperity of this Famous Town, so
they give You an undoubted Title to the Subscription of

Right Worshipful and Worshipful, Your most obliged humble Servant and Lecturer
JOHN MARCH.

Judges 19. 30. And it was so, that all that saw it said, There was no such
thing done or seen from the day that the Children of Israel came up out of the
land of Egypt unto this day; consider of it, take advice and speak your mind.
WE may justly take up the Lamentation of the Holy Martyr Polycarp: Bone Deus,
E^seb. Histo.
in quali tempora nos reservasti! Good God, for what times of Wickedness have
thou been pleased to reserve us! Times, which have produced such horrid
Abominations, as former Ages were willingly ignorant of, and succeeding
Generations will never sufficiently abhor! We have lived to see the Christian
Calendar stained with Protestant as well as Popish Rebellions; a Thirtieth of
January made blacker than the Fifth of November. Number. 16. 41. And the next day
all the Congregation murmured against Moses and (...) the people of the Lord.
We have seen Treason made a sign of Grace: A Corah, Dathan and Abiram, once
more Canonized for Saints, and Blasphemously styled the People of the Lord. We
have seen Painted Jezebels proclaiming Fasts, that they might glut themselves
with the blood of the Innocent, and with keener Appetites devour Naboth's
Vineyard. We have heard our Steeples Ring for Victories that deserved no
Triumphs: Bella geri placuit nullos habitura Triumphos. Lucan.
our Pulpits loading innocent Majesty with direful imprecations, and sounding
forth Thanksgivings for prosperous and too successful Rebellion. Nay, we have
known this Famous Town made the Market of our King, Men of Belial, like Judas,
selling their Master, and in this at least more wicked than He, in that they
were guilty of far greater Covetousness. But tho men have committed these and
much greater Abominations, yet they are angry, if they be not styled the Godly
Party. They must still be believed to have tender Consciences, tho they have
been found harder than Adamants, far more bloody and cruel than ever Scythia
did produce. Tender Consciences indeed! that could stretch and comply with all
Interests besides that of Loyalty and the true Religion. So tender are they,
that they must not be touched tho with the most wholesome and seasonable
Reproofs. Men in these days are come to such a height of wickedness, Gal. 4.
26. Am I become your enemy because I tell you the truth?
that if you tell them the truth, you must be accounted their enemy; and tho
you reprove their Villainies with more regret than they did commit them, yet you
must pass for a Railer, and perchance for a blaspheming Rabshakeh. How unlike
are these to that Anne of Bulloigne.
famous Queen of this Nation, who charged her Chaplains not only to mind her of
her evils, but also of the very appearances of evil too? Fitter are they to be
compared to those peevish Animals in Plin. Not. History.
Pliny, who are reported to carry their Gall in their Ears; or rather unto
Matt. 7. 6.
Swine who trample upon Pearls, and delight to wallow in the Mud of their
Abominations. But the madness and frenzy of the Patient, tho it may possibly
make the Physician more Intemperans aeger crudelem facit medicom.
cruel, ought not to hinder his charitable assistance: It were no less than
cruelty at such a time to please and humor the sick party; and in such
desperate Maladies, we know it is the height of kindness to be cruel. And sure
if we may at any time be allowed to speak, we should most of all on such
occasions as these. The dumb Son of Croesus found a Tongue, when he saw a
Ruffian but attempt to kill the King his Father: Herodot. C^^o.
And can we remember the Martyrdom of our late Gracious Sovereign, the unheard
of indignities that were heaped upon Sacred Majesty, and not express our Just
and Loyal indignation? Though an Act of Indemnity may be allowed their persons,
an Act of Oblivion must never be indulged their Rebellions. We must not Levit.
19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart, thou shall in any wise
rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.
suffer Sin thus to lie upon our Neighbors. We must also wash the paint from
off the face of Jezebel, that she may not be accounted any longer a Revel. 2.
20.
Prophetess, or seduce poor ignorant people, first to applaud, and then to
commit the like horrid Abominations. The neglect of this duty was formerly
charged as a fault upon the Church of Revel. 2. 20.
Thyatira. And it would no doubt be a fault in us, since we are called not only
by providence, but also by public Authority, to solemnize this day. A Day, as
black as Hell! and such as deserves more Curses than Job or Jeremy bestowed
upon their Birth-days; for on it was Acted such a Tragedy, as was never done
nor seen in this our Israel: Let us now seriously consider it, take advice, and
freely speak our minds. For the better carrying on the design of this day, I
shall

I. Reflect a little upon the occasion of the words. II. Show how well they may
be accommodated to the present Solemnity. III. Descend to such Application as
may be fetched out of the last words of the Text, which bid us, Consider, take
advice, and speak our mind.
I. Let us reflect a little upon the occasion of these words. About the middle
of this Chapter we find a poor Levite traveling with his Concubine from
Bethlebem Judah toward the side of Mount Ephraim. He was now got as far on his
Journey as Gibeah, one of the Cities of the Levites. And here, if any where,
this poor I evite, one would think, might have promised himself kind
entertainment. But alas! the poor m^n Ver. 15.
is forced to sit down in the streets of the City; for no man offered to
receive him into his House. It seems the World at that time afforded no Vide
Bocha^t. ad loc.
Inns; and at barbarous Gibeah no Hospitality is to be expected; no good
Abraham to be found sitting at the door of his Tent, that he might espy poor
wayfaring men, and invite them to his House. But at last Ver. 16.
behold there came an Old man from his work out of the field at Even, who was
also of Mount Ephraim, and sojourned only at Gibeah, and he took pity on these
Travelers. Where by the way two reasons are remarkable, why this Old man shows
more kindness to these strangers than the rest of the City.

1. Because he was an honest man, who lived by his painful Labor, though he
was now Old; whereas the rest of the City were Otia si tollas, periere
Cupidinis arcus.
idle and Luxurious, and more at leisure to be wanton and wicked.

2. Because he was also of Mount Ephraim, and but a Sojourner at Gibeah; by
reason of his little stay at this place, he had not yet been infected with
their wickedness; and being Countryman to the Levite, he shows him more
compassion in this day of his distress: He invites therefore the Levite and his
Concubine to his House, and provides a Lodging, and all things necessary for
them. But they are no sooner got into the Old man's House; but the men of the
City, Sons of Belial, beset it round, beat at the door, and demand the
strangers. They had before it seems espied them in the streets; and had been
all this while making a party, and entering into a League and Combination to
commit some Villainy upon these passengers: And when they had gathered such a
strength, and made such a body as was able to accomplish their wicked design;
we find the Levites Concubine barbarously Murdered. v. 26. And in the words
foregoing my Text, her body is divided into Twelve pieces, and sent into all
the Coasts of Israel; And it was so, that all that saw it, said, There was no
such thing done or seen before in Israel; consider of it, take advice, and
speak your minds. And thus I have shown you the occasion of the words, I
proceed now to the

II. Particular, which was to show how they may be accommodated to the present
Solemnity. Though I dare not pretend so much skill in Holy Writ, as that I am
able to suit a Text of Scripture, exactly to every Text of Providence. Though I
am not able with some of our Sterries Sermon to the Parliament, etc. 1649.
late Divines, or the famous Brightman in Apocal.
Commentator on The Book of the Revelations, to show you most of the Members of
both Houses of Parliament, and the great ones of the Nation, marked out and
pointed at in the Holy Scriptures; yet this I dare boldly affirm, that,
excepting only the Crucifixion of our Savior; there is not any wickedness
recorded in the Bible, that can parallel this days Murder. And though the Text
I have chosen run as high or higher than any I know; yet upon serious
examination we shall find it fall short of this days Tragedy; and that whether
we consider the Prologue, or preparations to it, or the Catastrophe and horrid
fact it self.

1. Let us consider the Prologue and preparations that were used to accomplish
this horrid design. The Text as you have heard, presents us with Sons of
Belial, making parties and joining into bodies to perpetrate their wickedness.
And does not this day present us with combinations of a far more direful Nature
and Consequence? with men entering into Solemn Leagues and Covenants; and
binding themselves by the most Sacred Oaths, to accomplish a Reformation, far
more abominable than any thing attempted at this time by these Monsters of
Gibeah? as will be made clearer than the Sun, by these following considerations.

1. Let us consider what it was these men Covenanted and Combined to do, even
to destroy Episcopacy both Root and Branch: We find not in the New Testament
any settled Church, wherein this Government of Episcopacy was not established
by the Apostles. The Churches of Ephesus and Crete had Timothy and Titus for
their Bishops, as does appear not only from the Inscriptions of these So
Tertullian calls them, Quia de statu Ecclesiastico composit^e^. Adv. Marcion.
l. 5.
Hierarchical Epistles, but also from the best Leontius Bishop of Magnesia
declared the same in the General Council of Chalcedon, Act. 11. (...), etc.
that from Timothy to that time, there had been 27 Bishops successively in the
Church of Ephesus. Eusebius. l. 3. cap. 4. Reckons Timothy the first Bishop of
Ephesus, and Titus of Crete. The same is asserted by Chrysostom, Hom. 15. in 1 Timothy 5. 19. And by Hierom in Catalog. Script. Eccles. Besides many more cited
by Scultetus, obser. in Tit. cap. 8. Quid quod de Timothei and Titi, Episcopatu
non solum Eusebius, Chrysostomus, etc. sed etiam vetastiss^mi quiqu^, etc.
Antiquity. The Seven Churches of Asia had their respective Angels, which are
only other Names for Bishops, Ambros. in 1 Cor. 11. 10. tells us, That the
Bishops are in this place called Angels, as it is also taught in the Revelation
of St. John. See also Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c. 15. Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
as the most Authentic and Classical Authors do inform us. If we descend to
the following Centuries of the Church, we shall find Ignatius, Cyprian, Basil,
Chrysostom, Augustine, and many more brave Martyrs and Confessors invested with
Episcopal Dignity. There is not one Council or Father that does not bear
testimony to this truth: insomuch that Blondel. Apol.
Blondel one of the fiercest Adversaries of Episcopacy is forced to acknowledge,
That this Form of Government has flourished in the Church of God for more than
Fifteen hundred years. And the Learned Heyl, Life of Archbishop La^d.
Falkland, tho no sworn Friend to Bishops, did yet so much right to his own
Learning and Conscience, as to declare in the Long Parliament, That we have the
same Universal uninterrupted tradition for Episcopacy, that we have for the
Sacred Oracles of the Bible. I have the rather insisted on this Argument drawn
from Tradition, because the glorious Martyr of this day did formerly in this
Town press it on See His Majesty's Letters to Mr. Henderson.
Mr. Henderson with so much Majesty and Success, that had he been as great a
Conqueror in the Field, as he was at this time in his Prison; we had not
needed so many tears to wash away the stain of this Day's guilt. Since
therefore Episcopacy is warranted by Scripture, confirmed by Councils, owned by
so many Confessors and Martyrs, and, which is more, sealed by the blood of this
Days Martyr, who as he lived so he dyed a Defender of this Faith, I think I may
without offense take up the words of the Judicious Calvin, which use not at
other times to be ungrateful to our Adversaries, Nullo Calvini Epistol. ad
Cardinal. Sadolet.
non anathemate dignos arbitror qui se Episcopis libentissimi non submittant.
Which words cannot be translated into milder English than this, I think them,
says he, worthy of all the Anathema's or Curses of Heaven who do not willingly
submit to Episcopal Jurisdiction.

Having premised these things in favor of Episcopacy, if we now reflect a
little upon the Text, we shall find the Covenanters of Benjamin much
out-strip'd by the Covenanters of Britain: and these Monsters of Gibeah, as
great as they were, but pigmies in wickedness, if compared to the Giants of
this dismal day. For these men of Gibeah assault but one V. 22.
house, and demand but one single Levite for a Sacrifice to their fury. Whereas
our Modern Furies invade Three Kingdoms, with 1 Kings. 18. 13.
Jezebel they seek to destroy the whole Tribe of Levi, and extirpate the most
ancient Government of the Church, root and branch.

Martial. Epi^^.
Non gaudet tenui sanguine tanta sitis. Not the blood of an Archbishop or one
single Levite, but the blood of an Foulis Hist. of our pretended Saints.
hundred thousand Souls has scarcely satiated the thirst of their cursed zeal;
so that now we have more right than the men of Israel had to use the words of
the Text, and say, That there was never any such thing done or seen in Israel
as we have seen done this day.

2. Let us consider the Circumstances both Parties lay under, and we shall find
the wickedness of the Text much outdone by the wickedness of the day.
Episcopacy had not only flourished in the Church of God for so many Centuries
as you have heard, but was also established in this Kingdom by no fewer than
Ibia.
Thirty two Acts of Parliament, so that none of these Covenanters who were of
any note, whether Clergy or Laity, but stood obliged by many Oaths to maintain
that Form of Government, which was thus established by the Laws of the Land. To
enter therefore into a League, and solemnly conspire the overthrow thereof,
must render them guilty of horrid perjury. A Sin so heinous in it self, as that
it puts a cheat both on God and Man, and therefore was anciently accounted by
the Diod. Sicul. de Reb. Antiq. l. 1. c. 3.
Egyptians a double offense. As Aristophanes tells us, the wisest Heathens
judged it worthy to be punished by a Aristoph. de fulmine (...).
Thunderbolt from Heaven: and the Prophet Zachary has threatened as many Woes,
as his flying Roll could contain, against such as swear falsely Zach. 5 4.
by the Name of the Lord. And I the rather propose this Sin of Perjury as
matter of this Days Lamentation, because our late Gracious Sovereign thought
fit to brand the Covenant by Proclamation for a Traitorous and Seditious
Combination, and that not only against his own most Royal Person, but also
against the Established Religion and Laws of the Realm. But these men who could
act quite contrary to Magna Charta, who could make themselves Popes, and
dispense with their own Oaths, knew also how to despise the express Commands of
a Royal Proclamation. Nay to such a degree of Impudence did these furious
zealots at last arrive, as to term his Majesty's Proclamation Jo. Vicar's Gods
Ark. p. 91.
a Satanical Slander, a most impious and audacious Paper, Atheistical boldness,
impious and Platonical pleasure. Thus these bold Rebels more wicked than the
barbarous Scythians, did contorquere peccata, twist sin with sin, till at last
they made the Sin of this Day thicker than the largest Cartrope. And sure the
men of Gibeah must now yield the right hand of fellowship to these Modern
Rebels; for they had Judge. 19. 1.
at this time no King in Israel whom they could contemn, no Royal Proclamations
to withstand, no Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, or Canonical obedience to
violate; and therefore we have too much cause to take up the words of the Text,
and say, that There was no such thing done or seen in Israel, as we have seen
done this day.

3. Consider that their black and bloody designs were varnished with the
colors of Piety and Religion, and we shall find the men of Gibeah much
outdone by the Villains of this Day. It is the highest degree of Hellish
Policy to make Religion a stalking horse for Rebellion: and entitle Heaven to
all the wickedness we design. You may never expect (says our (...), to the
Prince of Wales.
Blessed Martyr to his Son) less of Loyalty, Justice and Humanity, than from
those that engage in a religious Rebellion; their interest is always made
God's under the color of Piety. Ambitious Policies do thus march not only with
greatest security, but also applause as to the popularity. You may hear from
them Jacob's voice, but you shall find at last they have Esau's hands. Thus
Absalom pretended a solemn 2 Samuel 15. 7, 10.
Vow at Hebron, when he raised Rebellion against the King his Father. Thus 2
Kings. 10.
Jehu destroys Ahab's posterity out of a counterfeit zeal for the glory of God,
while he intended chiefly the Establishment of his Throne. These holy Cheats
may seem the original of our late hypocritical Transactions: For we have known
men, that carried the hearts of Jews, and the demure looks of Pharisees; Their
language was smoother Psalm 55. 21.
than butter, but war was in their hearts: their words were softer than oil,
and yet were they drawn swords. What more pretended than a glorious
Reformation, when nothing intended but the subversion of the Church? They
stamped on their Coin, God with us, while nothing but Rebellion was stamped on
their hearts. With hands and eyes lift up to Heaven they swear to defend the
King and his Crown, and yet drew Swords and shot hot Bullets against his
Person. But sure to swear thus with hands lift up to Heaven, is without a
metaphor to sin with a high hand. The men of Gibeah wanted their Machiavel to
teach them these black Arts: they durst not make so bold with an holy God, or
call down Heaven to be a vizor for Hell. Judge. 19. 22.
With blunt simplicity they come and demand the Levite, and tell their errand
in plain terms, that they designed to humble him. If they must be Villains,
Religion shall not share in the shame: And though God will be judge, yet they
dare not make him a party in their wickedness. What now does hinder, but that
since our Covenanteers themselves have told us in the Fuller's Church Hist.
Preface to their Covenant, that we read not either in Divine or Humane
Histories the like Oath extant in any Age as to the matter, persons, and other
circumstances thereof; I say what now does hinder, but that we may lawfully say
after them in the words of my Text, that There was never any such thing done or
seen in Israel, as we have seen done this day.

Thus we have heard the Prologue, and seen the preparations that were made to
carry on this black design. I shall now proceed unto the Catastrophe or horrid
fact it self: and here we shall find that the monstrous Rebels of this day have
not only outdone the men of Gibeah, but have in some sort even outdone
themselves.

The Text and the Day do both present us with the Sin of Murder: a sin indeed
of the first magnitude, such as raseth the very Image of God, and stabs the
Almighty as it were in Effigy. This Sin derives its pedigree from cursed Cain;
occasioned the first penal Genesis 9. 6.
Statute that ever was made since the Fall of Adam, and has put Heaven to the
expense of more Miracles to see it punished, than all the Sins recorded in the
Bible. But as Murder in it self is no ordinary Sin, so the Murder of the day is
no ordinary Murder, as will appear, if we consider

1. The Person that was Murdered. 2. The persons that Murdered him. 3. The
manner of the Murder.
1. Let us consider the Person that was Murdered. He was a King, who, as he had
the blood of all the Princes of Christendom running in his Veins, so he had
more than all their Virtues shining in his Soul. As Saul overlooked the rest of
the Israelites by the stature of his body: so this mighty Monarch overtop'd all
other Princes by the size and stature of his Mind. His Intellectuals were
enriched with such natural and improved Indowments, that Plat. l. 6. de Repub.
Plato might now have obtained his wish, and seen Learning and Philosophy
seated on the Throne. The Character which Is. Casaub. Epist ad Reg. Jacob.
Casaubon once bestowed upon the Father, seemed with his Crown to descend upon
the Son; for he was truly Nobilium Doctissimus, and Doctorum Nobilissimus, of
all Nobles the most Learned, and of all Learned Men the most Noble. Thus
excellent were his Intellectual Indowments, and not to be exceeded but by those
of his Morals. For he was more Chaste than Scipio, more Valiant than Caesar; nor
did he yield in Temperance to the severest Stoic. He was so free from Tyranny,
that he never entertained jealousy; so far from severity, as that he could
embrace the very basest of his Subjects. His Justice, Clemency, and Goodness
were great to such a proportion, that his Subjects had no fairer Pattern to
imitate, and even Virtue her self might have been Ex quo virtutem discere virtu
posset. Beza in Epitaph. Amici.
taught by him. And as he was thus admirable for a Man; so he was much more
Excellent, if we consider him as a Christian. His Graces like his Person were
truly Royal. He was like David, a Man after Gods own heart, wise like Solomon,
and Patient like Job: For his Zeal he was a Josias; a Moses for his Meekness:
and tho none deserved less to endure the Cross, yet none knew better to wear it
above the Crown. In his Devotions he was constant, regular, and Seraphick: In
his Love to the Protestant Religion so firm and valiant, as that he durst own
it in Spain, and dye its Martyr in England. He was the truest Defender of the
Faith, that ever swayed the Scepter; for when he could no longer support it by
his Arms, he would assert it by his Pen, and durst at last seal it with his
Blood. In a word, he was a King, a Christian, nay more, a Protestant, and
perchance the very best of men. And can we now find words enough to express the
horrors of this Hellish Murder? We should in some sort seem guilty of it our
selves, should we think it but parallel to the Murder of the Text. For these
men of Gibeah, as wicked as they were, slew no other than a private person, nay
one that was a Judge. 19. 27.
Concubine, and who might have seemed to have fallen a just sacrifice to
punishment, had Law and not Lust been the Author of it. But we lament this day
the Murder of no private person, but a Prince: no Malefactor but a Martyr; nay
one who trod so near the Footsteps of his Savior, that Providence has been
pleased to draw a more honorable parallel, by appointing the Passion of our
Savior as the fittest Lessons for this Days Martyrdom. And sure now we may
boldly take up the words of the Text, and say, that There was no such thing
done or seen in Israel, as we have seen done this day.

2. Consider the persons that Murdered him, and we shall still find the
wickedness of the day much surpassing the wickedness of the Text. The Text and
the Day run parallel indeed thus far, that they were both private persons that
committed these Murders, they had no power of life or death, but usurped that
Romans 12. 19. and 13. 4.
vengeance whose execution belongs only to God and his Vicegerents. But tho
they run parallel thus far, as to other Circumstances they are vastly
different. For the Men of Gibeah murder only a Stranger, one that was at most
but their Equal, and to whom they stood obliged by no bonds of Religion,
Gratitude or Subjection: But the Bloody Murderers of this Day slew no Stranger,
but the Father of their Country: not their Equal but their Superior; nay one
who had clothed them with Scarlet and other delights: one who had put ornaments
of Gold upon their apparel, and whom by many Oaths, even by their Solemn League
and Covenant, they were bound to defend. For Subjects therefore who stood
obliged by all these Circumstances of Religion, Gratitude and Subjection, to
imbrue their hands in the Blood of their Sovereign, makes the Sin of this Day a
Crimson and a Scarlet Sin. They can expect no City of Refuge, the Horns of the
Altar will push away these Parricides. There is therefore a vast difference
between the Text and the Day; so great indeed, that if the men of Gibeah, like
Cain deserve to be avenged sevenfold, these of this Day like Lamech, truly
seventy and seven fold, nay more, in as much as we are told that the Life of a
King is more worth than Ten thousand of his Subjects. 2 Samuel 18. 3.
We may therefore claim a right to the words of the Text and say, There was
never any such thing done or seen in Israel, as we have seen done this day.

3. Let us consider the manner of this Bloody Murder, and we shall still find
the wickedness of the Day surpassing the wickedness of the Text. The men of
Gibeah committed their Murder in a secret corner of the World, they chose also
the silence and darkness of the Judge. 19. 22.
night: But this was a public Tragedy, the Sun and the World were made
spectators of their audacious Villainy. Here was no less than a Pageantry of
Justice, a High Court of Judicature with all its Formalities erected; as if it
had not been enough to have abused the name of Religion before, but the name of
Justice too must suffer with their King. Many Kings indeed have dyed by the
Sword, the Dagger, and the Pistol, many by Poisons and other Instruments of
clandestine revenge. But never any did thus mock God, defy Heaven, and stain
the very light of the Sun, whilst they kill their King by the Executioner's Ax,
upon a public Scaffold, and in the front of that Palace, where he used to give
audience to the greatest Ambassadors. By such aggravations of villainous
impudence as these the Rebels of this Day do not only surpass the Monsters of
Gibeah, but all the Fauxes and Ravilliac's in the World, and commit snch a
thing as was never done or seen in Israel.

There is one Circumstance still remaining in the Text, which must be
dispatched before I come to Application, and it is the Levite's dividing the
carcass of his Concubine, and sending her by piecemeal to the Twelve Tribes of
Israel; a Barbarous Act indeed, as being against both the Deuteronomy. 21. 23.
Law of God, and the Laws of Nations, Contra publica communiaque humanitatis
and honestatis jura, quae saevire in mortua corpora prohibent. Ma^venda.
which have always commanded due honor and respect to be performed to the
Bodies of the dead. But in this dreadful Circumstance too we shall find the
Wickedness of the Text exceeded by the Villainy of the Day. It was not enough
for the Miscreants of this Day to offer all these Indignities we have heard, to
Sacred Innocent Majesty: but their rage does prove more cruel than death: these
Vipers tear in pieces the very Bowels of their Prince, and make the Carcass of
their Sovereign sensible of their fury. But alas, their Lyncean Malice found
not the least tincture of any noisome Disease, his Body was pure and innocent
as Heaven, and fit to be the Mansion of so chaste a Soul. Had the inhumane
Tyrant, who made the search, been but half so chaste himself, his carcass had
never stunk almost as bad as does his memory, it had not killed those
Physicians that imbalm'd it; and if the Spices of Arabia had not prevented
farther mischief, the noisome vapors of his body had perhaps committed as many
Murders as his Sword. But this their unparalled Wickedness does far exceed
the wickedness of the Text. For the Levite's action, though Barbarous in it
self, was capable of excuse from its intended design: This horrid Segnius
irritant animos demissa per aurem quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus.
Horat.
Spectacle was prepared chiefly to incense the wrath of the Tribes, not so much
to the dishonor of his Concubine, as to raise the spirits of the Israelites to
revenge her death. But these Prodigies of wickedness intended only to expose
Innocent Majesty, to murder his good Name, as well as his Person, and by an
unheard of piece of Cruelty destroy the Saint as well as the King. And since
these things are so, if we now have any breath left that is not wholly stopped by
grief and sorrow, we cannot but cry out in the words of the Text, that There
was never any such thing done or seen in Israel, as we have seen done this day.
And thus I have dispatched the second Particular; I shall now descend to the
Application, which is hinted in the last words of the Text, Consider of it,
take advice, and speak your minds.

Application.
I. Consider and lament the deep stain the Christian and Protestant Religion
has received by this Days Bloody Murder. It was the Glory and Brag of the
Primitive Christians, That they could never be branded for Christiani nunquam
Albiniani, nunquam Nigriani, nunquam Cassiani. T^tull. ad Scap. c. 2.
Traitors, or condemned for Rebels. Their Religion allowed them not to fight
against their Princes, but according to St. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. Oramus pro omnibus
Imperatoribus, vitam illis prolixam, imperium securam, domum tutam, exercitus
fortes, Senatum fidelem, populum probum, orbem quietum, and qu^cunque bominis
and Caesaris vota sunt. Tertull. Apolog.
Paul's Exhortation they offered up their Prayers for the very worst of
Tyrants. But alas! the Beauty of Israel has been slain this day, and that upon
our High Places by the hands of Protestants themselves. 2 Samuel 1. 20.
O tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the Streets of Askelon, lest the
Daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the Daughters of the Uncircumcised
triumph! Alas! what sport has this Scandal already made to the Adversaries of
our Church? How have these Simeon's and Levi's made our Church to stink amongst
the Canaanites and the Perizzites? The Calumnies which were formerly cast on
the Episcopal Clergy See Parson 's 3 Conversions, And Sir Edw. Sandys Europ.
Spec.
by Martin-Mar-Prelate and other Dissenters amongst us, were reported by our
Adversaries for undoubted truths, were believed at Rome and insisted on by the
Papists to the disgrace of our Church: What advantages then will they make of
this Days Tragedy? How will they serve up the Head of our late Gracious
Sovereign (as the Baptist's head in a Charger) at all their Festivals. The
Papists alone had for many Ages the Monopoly of Murdering Princes, of raising
Rebellions under the color of Religion, and Canonizing for Saints Beckets,
Garnets, and the most prodigious Traitors: But that they have now any pretense
of discharging part of this guilt upon Protestants themselves, ought to be
matter of Lamentation to us: and could we command all the tears of a Jeremy,
they would hardly suffice to wash away the stain of this Days guilt. But as we
have too much cause to bewail, that the Papists have got some Protestants
amongst us to be fratres in malo, Brethren in such horrid wickednesses with
themselves; so we must withal Quis tui^rit G^acchos, etc.
tell them, That the Church of England is no more concerned in this Barbarous
Fact, than any State is in the Crimes of those Malefactors who suffer daily by
the Sword of Justice: for the persons that were the Actors of this horrid
Tragedy, were such as disowned the Loyal Communion of our Church, and His
Majesty's Proclamation.
were as far from being True English Protestants, as they were from being True
and Loyal Subjects. But it were well if the Romanists could as easily vindicate
themselves, as they can find fault with others: The World needs not be
informed, that their Church allows Subjects to take up-Arms against their
Princes, since they have owned this horrid doctrine by four Council. Lattran. 3.
and 4. Council. Lugdun. 1. Council. Constant.
of their most Eminent Councils; and wrote the Canons of their Church (like the
Laws of Draco) in the Royal Blood of many Kings and Emperors. Does not their
famous Cardinal Bellarm. de Pontif. Romans
proclaim unto the World, That Christ has left power to the Pope to dispose of
all Crowns and Scepters, and that Sovereign Princes once blasted by the
Thunderbolts of their Church, may be lawfully Deposed and Murdered by their
Subjects? And lest the Catholics of this Island should not understand their
duty to the Pope, he is pleased to make a particular instance in the King of
England. Now how much the Catholics of this Nation have been influenced by
such abominable doctrines as these, I wish we had learned otherwise than from
this Days Barbarous and Bloody Regicide. For let the Papists wipe their mouths
as clean as they can, our late Gracious Sovereign, who had too much reason to
know it, has declared in his See the Kings Works.
Answer to the Parliament, That there were three Papists in the Parliaments
Army for one that was in his; and when the Independent Faction polluted the
Scaffold with Royal Blood, more than forty Prynne's Brief necessary Vindicat.
p. 45. And Foulis's Histor. of pretended Saints.
Priests and Jesuits (and they seldom want other company) were seen on
horseback flourishing their Swords near unto the Scaffold. But though the
Papists have little reason to upbraid Protestants in general for the
misdemeanors of some few, yet for the fuller Vindication of the Protestant
Religion, let every true Son of our Church for ever abominate the memory of
these Monsters, and most solemnly detest their Principles, who have thus opened
the mouths of our Adversaries against us, and do still keep many good
well-meaning Christians from the Communion of the Quod si me conjectura non
fallit, totius Reformationis pars integerrima est Anglia. Ubi cum studio
veritatis viget studium Antiquitatis, quam certi homines dum spernunt in
laqucos se induunt, etc. Is. Casaub. Epist. 40. ad Salmas.
best of Churches.

II. Take advice; and

1. Beware that none betray thee unto wickedness by the fair pretenses and
colors of Region. Our Blessed Savior has told us, That the Luke 11. 18.
Pharisees, a Puritanical Sect amongst the Jews, were wont to fast and pray,
and that long enough too, when they intended to devour Widows houses, and
caress themselves with the tears of Orphans. And I wish sad Experience had not
informed us this day, That Treason may be more commodiously hatched in a
Conventicle, than in Fauxe's Cellar: and that Rebellion may thrive better in
the hands of pretended Saints, than in the hands of the most wretched and
debauched Catilines. Let thy credulous zeal therefore beware of such Wolves as
come in Sheeps clothing: Genesis 49. 6, 7.
O my Soul, come not thou into their Secret: unto their Assembly or The Hebrew
(...) signifies a Religious Meeting or Congregation. Schindler.
Conventicle, mine honor be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a
man, nay more, a King. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their
wrath, for it was so cruel, as that they Murdered Three Kingdoms at a blow.

2. Let us all encourage, to the utmost of our power, Substantial Virtue, and
Loyal Godliness. If the very shadow of Religion, like St. Peter's in the Acts,
could work such wonders: if the colors of Virtue could manage a War with too
much success against a Potent Monarch: what will the power of Godliness, what
will solid and loyal Piety be able to do? It is a true Observation of the
Ancient Comedian, Plaut. Amphit.
Sat habet favitorum semper, qui recfte facit. True Virtue seldom wants Friends
and Abettors: And the Wisest of Men has told us, Prove. 16. 12.
That a Kingdom never stands upon a surer Basis, than when it is established in
Truth and Righteousness. Did our Adversaries therefore win the day, and prosper
for a while, by their frequenting Ordinances, observing Sabbaths, and punishing
Swearers and Drunkards? Let us outlive and out do their very hypocrisy; let
our righteousness exceed the righteousness of these Scribes and Pharisees. Let
us own God's Ordinances in truth and sincerity: Let our Churchwardens,
Constables and other Officers secure our Sabbaths from open prophanations: and
let Drunkards and Swearers know, that there are still Laws against them. If we
thus encourage Virtue and Piety, I am sure we shall either soon defeat our
Enemies, or at least with more comfort yield to their prevailing faction. But
if we will still continue our league with Sin, we shall find our Debaucheries
the greatest Traitors in the Kingdom. Flor^s.
Vitiis nostris fortes fiunt hosts, says the Ancient Historian, Our Vices
will encourage and strengthen our Enemies, and weaken the best Cause, that we
can adhere to. We may truly say of our late Gracious Sovereign, what was
formerly said of Julius (...) in (...)
Caesar, That he received more Wounds from his Friends, than from his Enemies.
How many were there of the King's Party that had nothing to boast of but the
empty character of Loyalty, and under that skreen did more mischief to his
Cause than all the Zealots, that most furiously opposed it? Their scandalous
Lives alienated the Subjects hearts from their most Pious Prince, made ignorant
people believe the Master could not be righteous, who entertained such
profligate Servants; nor that Cause be Gods, whose defenders carried themselves
no better than Devils. And as our debaucheries will thus expose us to our
Enemies, so they will at last arm Heaven against us too; they will in the end
kindle the fury of an holy God, cause him to gird his Sword upon his thigh, and
once more 1 Samuel 1^ 25.
destroy both us and our King.

Lastly, Let us freely speak our Minds, whether all possible Merentur quidem
cerebrosi illi (meaning cross-grained Puritans) gla dio ultore coerceri.
Calvin. Epistol. ad Protector. Angliae.
endeavors ought not be used to prevent the like enormities for the future.
The Canaanite is still in the Land, men sworn like the Jews to destroy our
Paul's, and totally subvert the Ancient Government of our Church. Ut Horat.
teipsum serves, non expergisceris? Shall we not then awake to secure our
throats? I speak to those that are wise, and shall say no more than this, That
whosoever he be, whether Magistrate or Minister, that does so far prefer his
own private interest before the public, as to hoise up Sails to a little
stinking popular breath, he will soon make shipwreck of Faith and a good
Conscience. Now the Mighty God of Jacob who gives Salvation unto Princes,
defend our present Sovereign from these Sons of Violence, who would Mich. 3. 10.
build Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity. To which God, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, be all Praise and Glory now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

