THE VANITY, Mischief and Danger Of Continuing CEREMONIES IN THE Worship of God.

Humbly Proposed to the Present Convocation.

By P. M. A Minister of the Church of England.

Philip. 4.5. Let your Moderation be known unto all men. The Lord is at hand.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Rich. Baldwin in the Great Old Baily,
near the Black Bull. 1690.

THE Publisher to the Reader.
THese Papers were sent hither by a Reverend Divine of the Church of England,
that resides in the Country. The Reader will easily perceive by the perusal of
'em, that all our Clergy there, are not of the same mind with those whom Vox
Cleri represents. And had the several Dioceses sent us up Proctors for the
Clergy of the same Excellent Principles, and Healing Temper with this Author,
to have seconded our Reverend Bishops in those good dispositions to
Accommodation, which they seem to have brought with 'em, we might have had some
better hopes of seeing an happy End put to those sad Divisions which have so
long sullied the Honor, and weakened the Interest of the Protestant Religion
amongst us. But yet we would not willingly despair of the Lower House of
Convocation. We know not but the opportunity and leisure which this short
Interval gives 'em for converse, and calmer Thoughts, may do something to allay
their Heats, and mellow their Judgments, and sweeten their Humor against the
next Meeting. And the little peevishness, wherewith I doubt not some of the
Clergy that continue disaffected to the present Government, have leavened 'em,
may soon wear off when they come to understand things better. But if
notwithstanding the fair Advantages put into our hands to lay the Foundation of
a Lasting Union by reforming Abuses, and removing the Obstacles of it, if
notwithstanding all the weighty Arguments that should at this time urge us to
it, we are deaf to all seasonable Counsels of Peace, what can we expect but
that Almighty God will bring us into new Dangers, to cement our Affections, and
send our Enemies to be our Peacemakers?

The Vanity, Mischief and Danger of continuing Ceremonies in the Worship of God.
To the Reverend Clergy of the Church of England.
My Reverend Fathers and Brethren;
IT is the wonder and grief of all good English Protestants, that such an
unaccountable frenzy should possess and hurry some hot Clergy men amongst us,
with a blind zeal against the good Proposals of Peace prepared by the Kings
Commissioners in the Jerusalem Chamber. They make a tragical outcry as if the
Church were to be undone, when there is no danger of parting with any thing but
what may well be spared; nothing is intended but the removal of the brambles
that have rent and torn her. Some do think that amongst the invisible
inhabitants of the world there are ludicrous Spirits of an inferior rank, and
that these play the little tricks in disturbed houses. Some such ludicrous
Spirits act these men, who have a long time haunted and vexed the Church (the
house of God) with the Pother they have made for Annis and Cummin, and have
made little reckoning of weightier matters. For trifles they labor all they
can to heighten amongst people an unseasonable and dangerous sourness and
peevishness. When a Popish Prince ascended the Throne, they endeavored to make
us believe that we were happy, that James the Just never broke his word, and
now they set all their creatures on work, to inflame people with animosities
and jealousies of the Churches danger; when our gracious Josiah labors to
enlarge the interest, and to increase the beauty and glory of our Church. And
this he does in such a method, as may expiate former miscarriages, and deliver
us from the reproach of the late wasting persecutions.

First, He gives a Commission to some of our Reverend Fathers and Divines to
prepare things for peace; then he calls a Convocation to consider those things,
and recommend them to the Parliament. He puts it in our own power, in a great
measure, to heal the great breaches, and repair the lamentable ruins and
desolations, that have been made by some amongst us.

To be a little more particular, because this matter lays the greatest
difficulties in our way of Peace, and renders our present case most perplexed;
Let all our Reverend, Pious and Learned Churchmen weigh well the manifold
considerations that oblige them, by all means to endeavor, that the evil
temper of some amongst us may not prevail. I. The Honor of the Clergy is
concerned. II. It is a vain thing to attempt the continuance of Ceremonies.
III. It is unreasonable. IV. The manifold mischiefs of impositions. V. Our
danger present and future.

England, if Ceremonies are now continued in the Worship of God. In the time of
our affliction we did talk of Prayers and Tears, as the only weapons of
Christians; this will be looked upon as hypocritical canting, if we labor to
continue the instruments of persecution. We have promised to come to a temper
toward Dissenters; how infamous shall we be if we violate a promise so
publicly given when under the rod? We have lost many opportunities of Peace,
we have now a Glorious opportunity, and many engagements upon us to improve it.
Shall an evil Spirit still prevail among us to the defeating all the designs of
Providence, Bishop Burnets Exhortation to Peace and Union, page 12.
and the crossing of all attempts for Peace and Union? So that neither the
error that all men seemed to confess, nor the promises, which were then
generally made, neither our late distress, nor our present dangers, can bring
us to a sound mind, or to a calm temper, that in this our day we may know the
things that belong to our Peace.

There have been condescensions toward Papists, as in the Litany and the 28th
Article; and shall we be stiff only toward those of our own Communion, who
have subscribed the Doctrine of our Church? It will be thought that we bear a
secret dislike to pious Protestants, if we can yield to the enemies of our
Religion, and not to them. We shall load our selves with the crime of
ingratitude toward Christ our Sovereign, and Dissenters. We thank God for our
Redemption by Jesus Christ, believing that he has bought us with his blood;
and shall we continue stumbling blocks to keep many pious Pastors from feeding
his Lambs for whom he laid down his life? Our gracious Sovereign has been
indefatigable in his labors for our deliverance from Popery and Arbitrary
power; he has saved our Church and State, our Religion, Laws, Liberties,
Estates and our lives; and how great will be our ingratitude and folly, if we
continue obstinate for the retaining those things, that let in upon us the
dangers from which we are so lately delivered, and do now hinder his Majesty's
peaceable Government, and obstruct his acting according to his glorious
ambition, that designs chiefly the relief of the oppressed, and the advancement
of the Protestant Interest at home and abroad? Let it not give offense, if I
say that we shall be ungrateful toward Dissenters. They were steady for the
preservation of the Church of England in the day of our distress, against the
taking away of the Test and the Penal Laws by which they had smarted so much.
There were more of our own Communion, than of theirs, that revolted from us and
turned against the Laws. And now they have an Indulgence by Law, they are
contented with the liberty of serving God according to their conscience; and
trouble not the Government with Petitions for more, neither have they given any
indication of envying us the honors and Profits we enjoy. How shall we give an
account to God and Man for all the evils that may be occasioned by our
obstinacy? Mankind may justly abhor us, if we perversely shake the foundations
of the Peace and Happiness of our Country for things of no value. The word
Schism has been a long time by some of us flung about at random; but now
people will know on whom to charge it. The meetings of the Dissenters are as
legal as ours. None are by the Law of God or man obliged to hold Communion with
us upon the present terms. If we by continuing them drive people from us, the
Schism will lodge at our doors, and we shall be the Schismatics. They that for
Rites labor to keep up our animosities, justify the late violences, Bishop
Burnets Exhortation to Peace and Union, Page 27.
and make themselves guilty of all the Persecutions of former times. Men may be
still Persecutors, though they are not able to persecute any longer, according to
our Saviors charging the guilt of intended sins on those who never acted them.
And God may charge upon them all the blood that has been shed from the
foundation of the World, from the blood of Abel unto the blood of those
glorious champions for our Religion and Laws, Essex, Russel, Sidney, Cornish,
etc. Verily I say unto you it shall be required of this Generation, Luke 11.51.
They who approved of and rejoiced in the murder of these men of honor, may
have their hands full of blood in the sight of God,

Bridgman, the Lord Chief Justice Hales, and Bishop Wilkins, it was objected
the concessions would tempt those of our own Communion to forsake us and go
over to the Church of Rome. Whatever strength there was in that Objection then,
it signifies little now, Popery having appeared since in its true colors. We
need not fear the losing of any, except them, who corrupted the Victuals, and
put Garbage into the Vessels of Beer for the Navy, who hindered the relief of
Derry till many 1000s died for want, and are the cause that no more of Ireland
is recovered, who by manifold treachenies have obstructed affairs of greatest
moment in England and Scotland. We may also lose some of the Devil Tavern club;
it were better for us to be rid of them than to be betrayed by them in
Protestant vizors. As for the debauches, if many or all of them depart from us,
the loss will not be so great as the mischief they do us by pretending to be of
our Communion. Let them declare themselves Fanatics, Papists, any thing,
rather than members of the Church of England. Dr. Sharps Sermon before the
Commons, April 11. 1679.
It would perhaps be more desirable to live in a mean, low, afflicted
condition without such Company, than to govern the World with it. There is
great danger now of losing multitudes to the Dissenters by the continuance of
Ceremonies. Your coercive power is gone. I can heartily say with his Lordship
Bishop Burnet; God be thanked for it, that there is an end put to all
Persecution in matters of Conscience; Exhort to Peace and Union. p. 27.
and that the first and chief Right of Humane Nature of following the dictates
of Conscience in the service of God, is secured to all men amongst us; and that
we are freed, I hope, for ever, of all the remnants of the worst part of Popery
that we had too long retained; I mean, the Spirit of Persecution.

The Act of Indulgence sets all men at liberty, and it comes not long after a
very fierce Persecution, which will increase the number of Distenters more than
ever. The barbarity of that Persecution; the wickedness of the instruments, it
being carried on by perjured Informers, and debauched Juries; the dangerous
design of it, to fright the Dissenters, or by Excommunication to disable them
from assisting the sober party of our Church in choosing good Members of
Parliament, and honest Officers in London and other Corporations, for the
Preservation of our Religion and Laws: these and other aggravations of that
cruel storm with the continuance of Ceremonies that then armed furies against
us and our brethren, will breed a mighty prejudice in people against us, as a
most odious and contemptible generation of men, if after so many miseries and
confusions, we do for trifles, expose all the Interests of our Country into
the greatest dangers imaginable.

We can impose these things upon none but the Ministers and their Clarks. An
unseasonable peevishness for them, will make many detest our foolish
superstition, and forsake our Assemblies. There is no keeping up their honor,
except we blind the people, which is now impossible. For if we neglect
Preaching seriously, the Dissenters will do it for us, and in 7 years their
Preachers may be increased ten to one for what they are now. Our own Clergy who
have a Zeal for the glory of God and the good of Souls, cannot avoid promoting
the work. Many of them submit not to Ceremonies out of choice, but as a burden
from which they would gladly be delivered. If they did speak out, it would be
as Erasmus did of wealth: non magis ambio opes quam elumbis equus graves
sarcinas: They are to them but as the heavy load on the Carriers staggering
Horse. As Knowledge increases, Zeal for Ceremonies will grow more and more
ridiculous.

It is the hope of many good and learned men, that the time is at hand, when
God will deliver his Church for ever from the darkness of the Kingdom of
Antichrist, and that the Nations will cast away all things that have been
instruments of advancing his tyranny and superstition. Surely that glorious day
will open men's eyes. I have faith to believe that England will not be blind,
when other nations see. Dr. Stilling. Iren. p. 121.
God will one day convince men that the Union of the Church lies more in the
Unity of Faith and Affection than in the Uniformity of doubtful Rites and
Ceremonies.

It is the condescension of the Government, that the desired Union is proposed
to the Clergy, the Legislative Power may do it without us. The Lords, the
Knights of the Shires and the Burgesses, know who are fit in their several
Counties to be Counselors of Peace, and Healers of our Breaches, and if we are
unwilling to be Peacemakers, they may (if they please) make a Law that the
Members of both Houses shall in their several Counties choose three or four
Divines to sit in Convocation to offer unto them what may settle the peace of
our Church. In the act of Indulgence, the King, Lords and Commons have acted
like good Pastors that are careful of the Flock* I wish our Convocation follow
their good example. If we will not do our parts, we have no reason to think
that the Nobles and Gentlemen will sacrifice all their Interests to our
fondness of continuing snares among the people. If a combustion should happen
we shall in the issue lose more than is now desired. A Ceremonial War has been
once fatal to Clergymen; another will strike home.

The Church would lose nothing tho all its Ceremonies were laid aside. The
beauty and excellency of it, is not at all advanced by a luggage of
Impositions. They are no more an Ornament to the Church, than the Chains of a
Galley or Prison, are Ornaments to the poor man that is laden with them. The
Church is the spouse of Christ, her Glory consists in a conformity to him her
Head and Bridegroom, in holiness and love; and not in such geere, Rev. 17.1, 2.
as is common to the great Whore who has made the inhabitants of the earth
drunk with the wine of her fornication. I dare affirm (says Mr. Bold) that if
the Rites and Ceremonies now in use in the Church of England, Plea for
Moderation, P. 11, 12.
should be altered, some changed, and some laid wholly aside, by the same
authority which did at first enjoin them, the Church of England would still be
as impregnable a Bulwark against Popery, as now she is. And I am fully
satisfied there is no man will deny this, unless he be either a real Papist, or
an ignorant superstitious fool.

After all the endeavors of our Bigots, neither these things nor they that
labor to support them will ever be valued by them that are seriously pious in
our own Communion. All the art and power in the world cannot make trifles in
the Worship of God seem matters of importance to them that relish Heavenly
things. What Trumpery are Habits, various Gestures and Postures to a man that
is swallowed up in the contemplation of the infinite Majesty of the Glorious
God? or that is lost in the ravishing admiration of his goodness and love? or
that is sunk into the lowest abasements and self-abhorrence for his sins? Such
a soul may be loaded with human Inventions, but he can never look upon them as
ornaments or helps unto devotion. On the contrary he may count himself mocked,
and reckon those imposed fooleries no better than the fools caps and coats
which Persecutors did put on the Saints of God, when they led them to the stake
to be sacrificed in the flames. They may be valued by formal, dead Christians;
but the spiritually minded will look on them as toys fit only to adom
Hypocrites.

Which may seem strange (says Dr. Stillingfleet) the things that men can least
bear with one another in, are matters of Liberty; Iren. Page 38.
and those things men have divided most upon, have been matters of Uniformity;
and wherein they have differed most have been pretended things of Indifferency.
Nothing but what is necessary should be imposed as Terms of Communion.

What possible reason can be given why such things should not be sufficient for
Communion with a Church which are sufficient for Salvation? Ib. Pref. 8.
and certainly those things are sufficient for that which are laid down as the
necessary duties of Christianity by our Lord and Savior in his Word.

The practice of the Reformers of the Church from Popery is a good pattern for
us to follow. Ib. Page 121. 122.
Such was the prudence and temper of the French Churches, in the composing
their public Forms of Brayer, that they were so far from inserting any thing
controversial into them, that the Papists themselves would use them, and
inserted them into their own Prayer book. The same temper was used by our
Reformers in the composing our Liturgy, in reference to the Papists, to whom
they had then an especial eye, etc. And certainly those holy men, who did seek
by any means to draw in others, at such a distance from their principles as the
Papists were, did never intend by what they did for that end, to exclude any
tender consciences from their Communion. That which they laid as a bait for
them, was never intended by them as a hook for those of their own profession.
But the same reason which at that time made them yield so far to them, would
now have persuaded them to alter and lay aside those things which yield matter
of offense to any of the same profession with themselves. So far Dr. Still.

By the letters, Dr. Eurnets Letters, Page 46. etc.
(he means of our reformers to Bullinger) of which I read the Originals, it
appears that the Bishops preserved the ancient Habits rather in compliance with
the Queens inclinations than out of any liking they had to them; So far were
they from liking them, that they plainly expressed their dislike of them. Jewel
in a Let. Feb. 8. 1566. wishes that the Vestments together with all the other
remnants of Popery might be thrown both out of their Churches, and out of the
minds of the people, and laments the Queens fixedness to them: So that she
would suffer no change to be made. And Jan. 1566. Sands writes to the same
purpose. Contenditur de vestibus Papisticis utendis vel non utendis; dabit deus
his quoque finem. Horn Jul. 16. 1565. writes of the Act concerning Habits with
great regret, and expresses some hopes that it might be repealed, next Session
of Parliament, if the Popish party did not hinder it, and he seems to stand in
doubt whether he should conform himself to it or not, upon which he desires
Bullingers advice. And in many letters wrote on the Subject it is asserted,
that both Cranmer and Ridley intended to procure an Act for abolishing the
Habits, etc. Grindal Aug. 27. 1566. Writes that all the Bishops who had been
beyond Sea, had at their return dealt with the Queen to let the matter of the
Habits fall: But she was so prepossessed, that tho they had all endeavored to
divert her from prosecuting the matter, she continued still inflexible. This
had made them resolve to submit to the Laws, and to wait for a fit opportunity
to reverse them. Cox in one of his Letters, laments the aversion that they
found in the Parliament to all the propositions that were made for the
reformation of abuses.

It seems that these things were then established by Parliament against the
minds of the Clergy; they may now by the same Authority be taken away, though
some among us are against it, and care as little for the Peace and Prosperity
of the Church, as the Harlot for the Child which she would have divided alive.
They are such Pastors, as she was a Mother.

The example of the Primitive Church will condemn our stifness for Indifferent
things. Dr. Stillingfleets Iren. Page 122. 68.
Certainly the Primitive Church that did not charge men's Faith with such a load
of Articles, as now in these latter Ages men are charged with, would much less
burden men with imposing doubtful practices upon them as the Ground of Church
Communion. Ib. Pref. Page 10, 11.
There is nothing the Primitive Church deserves greater imitation by us in,
than that admirable temper, moderation and condescension which was used in it,
toward all the members of it. It was never thought worth the while to make any
standing Laws for Rites and Customs that had no other Original but Tradition,
much less to suspend men her Communion for not observing them. This admirable
temper in the Primitive Church might be largely cleared from that liberty they
allowed freely to Dissenters from them in matters of Practice and Opinion: As
might be cleared from Cyprian, Austin, Jerome, etc.

Were there in the Primitive times many hundreds of men duly qualified for the
Ministry, Mr. Gorber of Church.-Unity, Page 49.
kept out of the Church for their Nonconformity to some Opinions, Forms, and
Ceremonies, of the truth or lawfulness whereof, the Dissenters were wholly
dissatisfied, and which the Imposers judged to be but things in themselves
indifferent?

The Apostles did not at all favor the imposing humor. The Holy Ghost and the
Apostles were only for requiting necessary things: Acts 15.28.
It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us to lay upon you no greater him then
than those necessary things. How strangely has the Christian. World been since
altered? It has seemed good to men to impose unnecessary things as terms of
Communion: But it does now Here appear that this practice seems good to the
Holy Ghost. The whole course of Scripture is contrary hereunto. Let every man
be fully persuaded in his own mind. Romans ^ 4.5.
This is not considered; for doubting consciences are not at all relieved, they
must conform or else be excluded from Communion with our Church in the
Ordinances of Christ. No man put a stumbling block or an accasion to fall in
his brothers way. Romans 14.13.19.23.
Follow after things which make for Peace and things wherewith one may edify
another. He that doubts is damned. How little have Souls been valued by
Imposers? When ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak
consciences, 1 Cor. 8.12.
ye sin against Christ. Imposers do not only wound the Consciences of the weak,
but they offend their head Jesus Christ, who is also the Judge of the World and
takes notice of the injuries done to his flock. Ezekiel. 34.3, 4.
Ye feed not the Flock. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye
healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken,
neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye
sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them.
Paul was a great Governor in the Church, yet he was so Far from using his
Authority to the distress of conscience; that rather than offend a weak
brother, 1 Cor. 8.13.
he would abridge himself of his liberty as a private Christian. Wherefore if
meat make my Brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the World stands,
lest I make my Brother to offend. Phil. 2.21.
We have little reason to hope for this blessed temper amongst us, while men
seek them own, and not the things of Jesus Christ.

Pandora's box, come unspeakably short in number of the real mischiefs from
Impositions. Dr. Stillingfleets Iren. Pref. 9.
Without all controversy the main inlet of all the distractions, Confusions and
Divisions in the Christian World, has been by adding other conditions of
Church Communion than Christ has made.

If any man of common sense will but open his eyes and consider, he may see
plainly enough, that all the public miseries of mankind in Christendom, from
the exorbitances of Popes and the violences of Tyrants, owe their Original to
the Spirit of Imposition in matters of Worship. For if people were well
instructed in the true knowledge of God and their Duty to their Neighbor, and
were not muffled in ignorance to maintain the Pride and Laziness of Churchmen,
they would not so readily serve the Ambition of Princes, in invading the Rights
of their Subjects at home; and laying waste the Dominions of their Neighbors
abroad. The mischiefs I am speaking of, are innumerable, some of them are
reduceable to these six heads. I. Mischiefs to the Church. II. To the State
III. To Souls. IV. To Piety V. Mischiefs in promoting a mighty increase of
Profaneness and all kind of wickedness. VI. Hindering a World of good.

France, Orange, Piedmont, the Palatinate, Ireland, etc. Of the judgments of
God that threaten other Churches, of the plagues that may hang over our heads
to chastise us for our crying abominations. What unthinking creatures are
these? Yet they are good Sons of the Church, zealous for its* Ceremonies, not a
pin must be pulled out, tho innumerable tender Consciences are wounded by them.
They cry the Church of England, the Church of England, and are not mindful of
the common danger from the Roman Gulf, that gapes to swallow down all. Such
vanity of mind does zeal for trifles infect men with.

The zealots for these things, did so far labor against the preservation of
our Religion, when the exclusion of a Popish Successor was endeavored, that I
have often heard good men say, that if Popery came in, it would enter at the
Church door; God be praised, they were deceived, but it is no thanks to these
obstinate sticklers, who brought the Church to the very brink of run, and now
raise a clamor of its danger, Bishop Burnets Exhortation to Peace and Vaion,
Page 14.
when every thing that has been endeavored must prove its strength as well as
its glory; if we are so happy as to weigh all in even Balances. Churches will
thrive better with the naked simplicity of the Gospel, than the mock decency of
Theatrical Ornaments, which are good for nothing but to maintain Formality,
Dissension, Pride and Tyranny. The glory of the Church consists in a lively
Faith, and sincere love of the members of it; these are not advanced, but
hindered by imposing as Terms of Communion little things, the lawfulness of
which is doubted by many good Christians. But when only necessaries are
required, the Peace and Unity of the faithful is not in great danger, tho some
dissent. For such things will be more easily known and submitted to by the
greatest number of sincere Christians. When necessary things are only enjoined,
Mr. Corbets Kingdom of God. Page 74.
their weight and truth will soon be known, and owned of all honest minds, or
at least are most likely so to be; and much sooner and easier than the weight,
and truth of little doubtful things; and by this means they would more easily
move with joint consent in one godly order, the matters of their difference
being before hand taken out of the way.

Impositions do narrow and weaken the foundation of a Church. They are means of
excluding multitudes of pious, peaceable and useful members from the Communion
of it. The making of unnecessary terms of Communion, which to doubting
consciences are unlawful, weakens the interest of true piety in the Church, by
keeping out abundance of sincere Christians. A corrupt party may by this means
be only taken into her bosom, and advanced to high power, all the rest
rejected, if not persecuted. The late times gave us a deplorable instance
hereof: for tho there was a sober party in the Church, yet it could do nothing
against a malignant Faction that had gotten all under foot; First the
Dissenters, then the sober Conformists, labored under a load of reproaches,
and misrepresentations, as disaffected to the Government. All being graspt by
such hands, the issue was like to be the ruin of Christianity among us, if God
had not been merciful to the Church in so great a danger. The interest of a
Church should be as large and wide as is consistent with the terms of the
Gospel: None that profess Christianity, and live unblameably should be excluded.

The Scripture is our only guide of Unity: Uniformity is deformity and
confusion, when men appoint other terms of Ministerial Service, and Church
Communion, than are prescribed in Gods Word. The imposers are guilty of the
Rents and Schisms caused by such Impositions. Where inventions false or useless
are made the necessary Symbols of Religion, Corbets Kingdom of God. Page 88.
there a Sectarian Interest bears Sway, and the gaining of the Secular Power
will not wipe off the blot of such a party. The name of Sectary may fit proud
Usurpers as well as blind Zealots. The removal of Impositions may be a means to
extinguish Schism, and to prevent it for ever, or at least to free the Fathers
of the Church from the imputation of it. To load our public Forms, Hales of
Schism. Page 8.
with private fancies upon which we differ, is the most Sovereign way to
perpetuate Schism to the worlds end. Prayer, Confession, thanksgiving, reading
of the Scriptures in the plainest and simplest manner were matter enough to
furnish out a sufficient Liturgy, tho nothing either of private opinion, or of
Church Pomp, of Garments or prescribed Gestures, etc. did interpose it self.
Dr. Stilling-fleets Iren. Page 122.
'Were there a Spirit of mutual condescension (as in the Primitive Church) our
breaches as to these things might be soon closed up, and the voice of Schism be
heard amongst us no more.

God, for the carnal state of Christians in the reformed Churches has, let
loose the last and sharpest Persecution from Antichrist upon them, by this
severe Providence intending to deliver his Spiritual worshippers from the
Tyranny of Superstitious Formalists, who by the desolations of other Churches
are admonished to be wise, lest they bring some great evil upon their own
heads. Gods work shall go on, whatever difficulties lie in the way; it may be
delayed, but it shall not be defeated. The Israelites had a forty years
prorogation of their happiness, the Rebels were all to die in the wilderness.
The good things intended for the Church may be deferred till the removal of the
carcases of the Sottish murmurers against our Royal Moses, and the blind
Zealots who are unworthy to see the glory that is at hand. The Roman Pharaoh
shall no more plant the Tabernacles of his Palace between the seas in the
glorious holy Mountain. There may be very humbling disappointments of the hopes
of the faithful: God does wisely suffer these variations in the Church, for the
trial of his Servants, and to show the necessity of the continual influences of
his holy Spirit to raise and keep up our Souls above the animal life.

etc. since the dissolution of the Oxford Parliament. Add hereunto the late
violences upon men's Bodies and Estates by unreasonable Prosecutions; Fining,
Excommunicating, Imprisoning peaceable, diligent Christians, who desired to
live according to Gods Word, and did nothing to the disturbance of the
Government. Yet many are so far bewitched into a fondness for these remainders
of our former slavery, that they had rather sacrifice all to Popery and
Arbitrary Power, than quit a few trifles which for 130 years have been matters
of contention and vexation in the Church, and do at this day shake the
foundations of the Protestant Interest. Dr. Stilling. Iren. p. 123.
It cannot but be looked on as a token of Gods severe displeasure against us,
if any tho unreasonable Proposals between us and the Papists, should meet with
such entertainment among many, and yet any fair offers of union and
accommodation among our selves be so coldly embraced and entertained.

In the late times, when our Parliaments struggled with Arbitrary Power for the
preservation of our Religion and Laws, though the noble Peers spoke never so good
reason in matters of the greatest importance, yet two or three Bishops always
voted against them. They were then called the dead weight. If it be said, that
they were overawed by Sovereign Command; it is not so now. The hinderers of
our happiness (our present sticklers for Ceremonies) have all the encouragement
in the World from the King, Lords and Commons. The eyes of the people are upon
us expecting that we should act like good Pastors, healing the breaches and
laboring in our stations to secure the public Peace. If we now disappoint the
just expectations of wise and good men of all ranks, we may necessitate the
Government to take other measures for the preservation of the Peace, and the
satisfaction of an awakened people.

The good temper, wisdom, diligence, faithfulness and courage of Gods Servants
have been useful to mankind. But a carnal Faction of Christians being hurried
by a mad zeal for little things, have oppressed these benefactors, stained the
glory of the Nation, beaten down the rents of lands, discouraged diligence,
destroyed Trade, and brought the most illustrious Island in the World to a low
state. Nothing can recover a languishing people, Corbet. Kingdom of God p. 123.
but the reviving of true Piety. Wherever it roots and spreads, it makes no
small part of the prudence, courage, industry and frugality, and by consequence
of the wealth and strength of a Nation. There is no aggregation of men in the
World wherein appears more of that which is good and profitable to men, than is
found where the influence of this profession becomes predominant, whether in a
Nation or Kingdom, or City, or Family.

The spirit of this profession being sober, solid and serious, is happy in
disposing toward the attainment of much perfection in all profitable science,
page 145,
and especially toward that which is most excellent and useful in humane
affairs, to wit, solid and deep judgment. In this respect the children of true
Wisdom stand upon the vantage ground, etc.

The continuance of Ceremonies may nurse up a generation of Vipers to act over
again the same cruelties, and to drive us back again into the miseries and
confusions from which we are so lately delivered. If God for our sins should
give us up into their hands, they will make sure work, and leave nothing to be
done by those that come after them. A relapse in the state, is as dangerous as
in the body natural.

It is the highest usurpation to rob men of the Liberty of their judgments. Dr.
Stilling. Iren. page 118, 119.
A man has not power over his own, much less can others have it. If every
private person must judge what is lawful, and what not, which is commanded (as
when all is said, every man will be his own judge in this case, in things
concerning his own welfare) then he is no further bound to obey than he judges
the thing to be lawful which is commanded.

What hinders Governors from removing those things, which they own to be in
their own nature Indifferent? Is not the peace of weak Consciences infinitely
to be preferred before unnecessary Impositions? Blessed is he that considers
the Poor. Psalm. 41.1.
Surely much more blessed are they, that compassionately consider the burdens
and oppressions of grieved souls. They that regard Conscience in themselves,
will value the interests of Conscience in others. It is no commendation in
Pastors to imitate the Egyptian Taskmasters, who made the lives of Gods people
bitter through hard bondage; all the service wherein they made them serve was
with rigor. Exodus 1.14.
The Ministers of the Gospel of peace, should not be rigorous toward their
people. Thou shall not rule over him with rigor, Lev. 25.43.
but shall fear thy God. By the Antithesis it appears, that where the fear of
God is, there will not be in Pastors rigor and severity toward their flocks
for small matters.

Christ will have us show our love to him in feeding his Lambs; this must be
done with fitting food: impositions are Briers and Thorns; our fierce Bigots
would still teach their people, as Gideon did the men of Succoth, Judge. 8.
with Briers and Thorns. This is much more easy to Loyterers than the drudgery
of Preaching, which one called the Mechanical part of the Office of a Minister,
saying, he would not much trouble himself with it. The neglect of this in many
places, shows, that there are more of his mind. What a zeal is there in many
for shadows? And how are precious Souls carelessly left by them at random, when
they thus despise and neglect the Preaching of the Gospel, which is the power
of God unto Salvation?

The little things imposed are a means of depriving the Church of the service
of many useful Ministers that are apt to teach, and would be glad to give the
bread of life to those Souls, that are by drones left in the broad way to
destruction. The making unnecessary terms of Ministerial service which Christ
never enjoined, is an Invasion of his Kingly Office. Some have been zealous for
Prerogative when it was heavier than the loins of all the Kings since the
conquest; but they make light of usurping the Rights of the King of Kings.
Christ commands his Ministers to Preach, and qualifies them for that service:
No, say some, they shall not Preach, except they will wear the surplice. He
bids them baptize: No, they shall not, if they will not sign with the Cross.
St. Paul says, Woe is unto me if I Preach not the Gospel, and Christ says,
Feed my Lambs: no, it is no matter, if you will not do it upon terms, devised
by us. The want of these excluded Pastors weakens the hands of those pious
Ministers that do conform. The crying necessities of Souls will find work
enough for us and them too; if every one of us had the zeal and abilities of
the Apostle Paul. The humane measures for Ministers may chance to admit some
bad men into the Church; and is very likely to shut out abundance of able
Pastors, whose Consciences doubt of the lawfulness of complying with terms not
injoined by Christ.

Instead of keeping out burning and shining lights, we had need trim some of
our own, that give but a faint light, if any at all. We have some unsavory
Salt, Mat. 5 13.
it concerns us to remove it to its due place, and admit that which has too
long been kept out of doors, to the great disservice of God and the Church. If
we will not see some disorders that are among us and reform them; the members
of both Houses of Parliament see them in their several Counties, and there is
hope that they will find a remedy. In the mean time the people see them, and
there is in them such a hunger after Gods Word, that in some dark neglected
corners of the land, they go in great numbers to hear a Nonconformist, and are
glad if he visit them once a month. But above all God sees what is amiss
amongst us, and if we do not our duty, he will find a Besom to cleanse his
house, Isa. 14.24. Mal. 2.9.
and make them contemptible and base before all the People, that have been
partial in his Law.

When I have pleaded with a Reverend Divine in the behalf of excluded
Ministers, and endeavored to represent to him some of the manifold mischiefs
to Souls by our rigor in imposing unnecessary terms; I have been put off with
an (...), Let all things be done decently. 1 Cor. 14.40.
Will the violent wresting that Text in the defense of men's Inventions, cover
the guilt of destroying innumerable Souls, one of which is worth more than the
whole World, and their ruin may be for want of the labors of those able
Ministers whom we exclude for toys? Is the blood of Christ and of Souls so
vile, as to be set to Sale for Stubble and Straw? These things would be most
contemptible, if we had the same value for Souls that Christ had, when he
counted the whole World too light to be put in the balance against one Soul,
Mar. 8.36.
and when he laid down his life to redeem us from the wrath to come. We may by
our rigidness drive many from our Communion into the dark Sectarian paths, in
which they may perish: but how shall we repair the mischief that we have done?
Tho we pour from our Eyes Rivers of Tears, or from our Veins Seas of Blood, we
can never recover one lost soul. The redemption of their Soul is precious,
Psalm. 49.8.
and it cease for ever.

IV. Mischief's to Piety. The most learned Divines and the wisest Statesmen in
the World are but bunglers when they take upon them to add unto Gods Worship
what he has not appointed. Human Institutions are but like clouts with which
Chips are dressed up into Babies for Children to play with. With these inventions
Heathens and Atheists are habited like Christians for the service of the Devil,
to corrupt and destroy true Christianity. The World has a long time groaned
under them, it is high time for people to be Wise. Mankind has for many Ages
been possessed and tormented with a furious Spirit, the Devil of Imposition, it
will never be well till this Spirit is cast out. Piety may now as well live and
flourish without our ceremonies, as it did mount without them above Idolatry,
and conquered the World. It may be raised unto a new life from its decay,
caused by a long and heavy oppression under a load of humane Inventions. True
Piety has been hid in Corners; remove stumbling blocks, and it will come forth
and appear in public with all its beauty and glory. Dr. Stilling. Iren. Page
121.
Allowing a liberty for matters of Indifferency, and bearing with the weak who
cannot bear things which others account lawful, we might indeed be restored to
a primitive luster far sooner, than by furbishing up some antiquated
Ceremonies, which can derive their Pedigree no higher, than from some ancient
Custom and Tradition.

Ceremonies in Worship corrupt peoples minds with vanity, make them light and
trifling in the weighty concerns of God and their Souls. Pomp and Train of
Ceremonies retained, will be apt to take up the heart of such as are busied in
them, Corbets Kingdom of God. Page 103.
and corrupt the worship of God, and make it a dead work and carnal service,
and so the Spirit and Power of Godliness will decay and die amongst people by
this means. Many think they have done much if they have exactly conformed to
Rites and Ceremonies. Such are apt to forget the awe and dread they should have
in the Worship of the Divine Majesty. They are so careful of outward Postures
and Habits, that they mind not the bringing of their Souls unto God, in whose
service all the faculties should be engaged. What are all the inventions of men
to our converse with an infinite glorious Spirit? We cannot approach unto him
but with our Spirits. The use of Ceremonies tends to the oppression of the life
and power of Christianity. They are like painted windows, which may make a
gaudy show, but they much lessen the light; or like Garments clogged with Snow
or Ice, they may load a man, but not warm him. The use of them wastes sincere
Piety. The pressing of them is the cramming of Christians with Stubble and
Straw, and will sooner choke than nourish true Piety and Charity. They when
multiplied, strangely eat out the Heart, Heat, Life and Vigor of Christianity.
The carnal part of the world is easily engaged for them against holiness, Dr.
Scilling, Iren. Page 67.
and to such a degree, that serious Piety has been scorned and scoffed at, not
only by the Mobile, but by higher ranks, not excepting the Tribe in the long
robe, when engaged to be Advocates for Impositions; witness Samuel Oxons Books
of Ecclesiast. Pol. and of Loyalty. The use of Ceremonies has so blinded men
that multitudes have been enraged with a mad spirit against the life of
Religion. There has been for a long time amongst us, a bitter hatred of
serious Christians that endeavored to be pure in heart; such have been
reproached with the name of Puritans. Mat. 5.8.
Piety has been scorned, vilified and persecuted under the notion of
Puritanism.

There is no doubt but this Church (tho its Government and constitution be so
pure, Mr. Bolde's Sermon against Persecution. Page 14.15.
Justifiable and consonant to Apostolical Practice) would suffer very much,
should but the almost Ordinary Miscarriages of a great number who pretend to
the Clergy be exposed to Public View with an account of the encouragement they
meet with, or at least how free they are from Threats and Molestations; while
others who live better Lives, and are more constant and diligent Preachers, and
do express on all occasions more of that charity and forbearance toward all
men which Christianity does so much commend and enforce, are frowned upon, and
left open to the rage and fury of besotted, frantic and debauched Bigots.

With such as these if any man press for Regeneration, Dr. Wallis Sermons to
the University on John 3.3. page 41.
Sanctification and a Holy Life, he was to pass heretofore for a Puritan; then,
for a Roundhead; now, for a damned Fanatic: Nor shall he escape this censure,
tho never so great a Churchman, and do exactly conform to the Church, as now
by Law established; For it is Holiness they hate more than Nonconformity.

The rage and cruelty of our furious Bigots, was lately grown bigger and taller
than ever; they had quite trampled under foot the Dissenters, and began a wild
Cariere against Piety and Sobriety in their own Body; they spared neither
Nobles, nor Gentlemen, nor Clergy: all good men in their communion had been
ground to powder, if the ascent of the late King to the Throne, had not put a
stop to their madness. The Church may be improved in Piety by that storm, but
it is no thanks to those furious debauchees. When God lets loose evil men upon
his Flock, it is not to gratify their ravenous lust, but to make his sheep
love his fold, and keep to the pastures which he appoints them. Persecutors are
Gods scullions to scour his vessels of Honor for the Kingdom of Glory.

The removal of Ceremonies will take away the vizour with which Formalists,
Hypocrites, Wicked and Profane men do cover themselves. When Religion is
stripped of these things, and nothing enjoined but what is plainly commanded by
God, they only will be counted Pious who live according to the Doctrine of the
Gospel: Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremongers and such like will be known to be
what they are, a mere herd of Bruits. The aim of Pastors (it is hoped) will
then be to promote a spiritual worship; that in all the duties of piety the
hearts of the people may be engaged. The souls sincere return and resignation
to God in every service is the top-stone of holiness. God being a Spirit, we
cannot converse with him but by our Spirits. To worship God in the spirit etc.
as it is most agreeable to the nature of the Divine Majesty, Corbet's Kingdom
of God, Page 21.
which is worshipped, and best fitted to glorify him as God indeed; so it is
also most efficacious to make the worshippers more knowing in Religion, more
holy and heavenly in Spirit and Conversation, and every way more perfect in
things pertaining to life and Godliness.

Ministers will have something else to do than to preach against
Non-conformists: we may expect that their great design will then be to
endeavor to promote the Glory of God, to convince men of a future state, to
advance holiness, sobriety, peace and useful diligence in the world. These
things will come home to the faculties of considering men, and they will think
that their Teachers are in good earnest, when they are Zealous for things
wherein the interest of their own souls is concerned.

Bishop Patrick gives excellent advice to Minssters in two Particulars. Divine
Arithmetic page 72. 73.
I. Let us be much in private prayer. Our time is short as well as other men's,
and many times shorter, though our account be greater; therefore let us spend
much time with God, as we endeavor to spend it all for him. Let not a crowd of
thoughts in our Studies, nor a crowd of company, thrust God away from our
Souls, but let them frequently retire unto him as the fountain of all light and
good. Prayer before our studies is the Key to unlock the secrets of God, and
prayer afterward is the turning of the Key to lock them safe into our hearts.
Prayer sharpens our appetite after truth; and when we have found it, it sets an
edge upon the truth, and makes it more cutting and penetrating into the heart.
II Let us look to our ends in our work. Without this our labor would be in
vain. Let us believe our selves what we speak, and then we should mind the
Glory of God, and not our selves. Alas! what is the applause of men when we are
gone, but like a sound in a dead man's ear? And what is it when we are alive,
but an empty breath that is lost sooner than got, and is got oftentimes by
idleness sooner than taking pains? etc. Let the good of men therefore, and the
Glory of God be the mark at which we aim: And the Lord in Heaven hear our
Prayers, and bless our Preaching. If all our Clergy by what Titles or Dignities
soever distinguished did truly follow this advice, there would be no Zealots
among us for Impositions, the destroyers of Piety and Charity.





The Ordinance of Preaching. The constant, serious, diligent performing of
this, would spread knowledge amongst the people to the prejudice of human
Impositions in Divine Worship. They would see what light things they are in the
service of God. Preaching has therefore been struck at under pretense of
promoting Prayer as the chief work of a Minister. Dr. Holdsworth takes notice
of it, and on the contrary maintains at large this Thesis: Prae dicatio verbi
Dei opus est and ordine primum, and maxim proprium, Praelect. Theolog. in Mat.
13.52. Lect. 3. page 19.
and long praecipuum, inter omnia Curae Pastoralis exercitia; ad quod sua
studia and animum, and se totum, and imprimis, and maxim, and saepissime
appellere debeat etc. Yet some have been so fierce against preaching Gods Word,
that Lectures have been diligently suppressed. Prayers have been much advanced
above Preaching as that which might be spared if the others were read. Let us
hear another Dr. concerning this abuse, and the Practice of the Church in the
primitive times: Dr. Stilling. Iren. page 333.
Men that were employed in the Church then, did not consult for their Ease or
Honor, and thought it not enough for them to sit still and bid others work,
but they were of Paul's mind, necessity was laid upon them, yea, woe was unto
them if they Preached not the Gospel. 1 Cor. 9.16,
Public Prayers were not then looked on as the more Principal end of Christian
Assemblies than Preaching etc. Were the Apostles Commissioned by Christ to go
Pray, or Preach? and what is it wherein the Ministers of the Gospel succeed the
Apostles? Is it in the office of Praying, or Preaching? etc. Are Ministers in
their Ordination sent forth to be readers of Public Prayers, or to be
dispensers of Gods Holy Word, page 334.
etc. This is one of the unhappy consequences which follows men's judging of the
service of God, rather by the Practices of the Church, when it came to enjoy
ease and plenty, than by the ways and Practices of the first and purest
Apostolical times, etc. People need as much instruction as ever, and so much
the more in that they are apt to think now the name of Christians will carry
them to Heaven, etc. Men must be beat off from more things which they are apt
to trust to for Salvation now, than in those times: men could not think so much
then, that diligence in Public Assemblies, and attendance at Public Prayers,
was the main Religion. Few would profess Christianity in those times, but such
as were resolved beforehand rather to let go their lives than their Profession:
but the more Profess it now, without understanding the terms of Salvation by
it; page 335.
the greater necessity of Preaching to instruct men in it.

The Lords day has met with many and great Enemies among the Ritualists. This
is a gracious injunction and gift of infinite Wisdom and Goodness, necessary
for us to rescue our Souls from Levity of mind, carnal affections and worldly
cares, and to feed, nourish and strengthen them with Spiritual Meditations and
Heavenly Joys. They that seriously endeavor to converse with God and their own
Souls, know the truth hereof: But Formalists are ignorant of the Divine life,
to them the Sabbath is a burden, Amo. 8.5.
they say, When will it be gone? Pleading some years since with a grave
Ceremonious Don of our Church for the sanctifying of the Lords day, by spending
it in Religious exercises, he was so far from understanding me, that his return
was, Shall a man be a whole day on the rack? Such a mystery is the Spiritual
life to a man that spends his Zeal on Rites and Ceremonies. To ease such animal
men from the rack, a book for sports on the Lords day was injoined Ministers to
read in the time of Divine Service. Here we may wonder at the Fantastical
humor of a sort of men, they persecuted the people for working in their lawful
callings on the Festival days; and silenced conscientious Ministers for not
reading a book for sports on Gods Day. It was pretended in that sportful book,
that the superstitious observation of the Lords day, did render his Majesty's
Subjects unfit for his Service in the Wars. But what kind of Fighters those
sportmongers on Gods day were, the event showed not long after. Jer. 44.21.
Did not the Lord remember them, and came it not into his mind? The Lords day
duly observed is a mighty instrument for the promoting the Life of Godliness in
the Souls of Christians. The serious observation of this begets in people
another Spirit than is in Christians of other Reformed Churches. They are much
more above the carnal World, than most of them, and than any that slight that
day in our own.

The Scripture has its share of contempt from Ceremonialists; of the truth
hereof the Impositions of Rome are a full proof. We need not go so far: For
other Imposers are guilty of the same in a lower degree, while they enjoin on:
Ministers and People terms of Communion not warranted by the Word of God. And
this is the worse, because when Scripture is urged, foolish preciseness and
impertinency has been charged on them, that have pleaded against such
unscriptural Impositions.

Our holy Religion has been mightily exposed to the scorn of evil men, when
they see pretenders to it spend all their zeal on little things. Force and
Rigorous Impositions, make men suspect the weight of the thing it self, Dr.
Stilling. Iren. Pref. page 11.
when such force is used to make it enter. When people are very earnest for
trifles, as if the whole weight of Religion depended on them, some may be
tempted to suspect that all is but a cheat, a trick of cunning Churchmen to
form people to serve their purposes; especially, when one that has written
books for Conformity shall say, that is the best Body of Divinity, that enables
a man to keep a Coach and six Horses.

Our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ who has suffered so much for
sinners, suffers again by the mockery of Ceremonies without the heart. All the
pomp of them is to him a Crown of Thorns, if persecutors for them wound the
weak consciences of his members. One may conform to the use of the transient
sign of the Cross, and Scoff at the knowledge of Christ; a book so called,
Parker of Religion and Loyalty Par. I. Page 28, 29. Lon. 1684.
ridicules the Title it bears. Another is much more bold, takes upon him to
dethrone the King of Kings, and set him at the footstool of Crowned dust. It is
but a crude expression (not to call it profane, because it is so common by
customary mistake) to affirm that Kings are Supreme Governors under Christ.
They are and ever were so under God, but so as to be Superior to Christ, as
Christ is head of his Church within their Dominions.

little (as the Apostle says) yet it serves to silence natural conscience, and
to represent men to imposing Governors as good members of the Church. This is
all that sensual men look for, and if they obtain this, they let loose the
reins to all excess of riot. How much did sensuality increase, when it was
connived at (if not encouraged) and tender conscience, as the only bugbear,
was every where hunted with a full cry? People are regardless of the power of
Christianity, when they find that their Superiors are contented with a
conformity to the externals of it. The most vicious people cry, The Temple of
the Lord, the Church of England, to cover their Immoralities. Away then with
these mighty Engines of mischief: Let us all chiefly mind and pursue those
things which tend most to the promoting the work of Regeneration in the world.
If this course be taken, Hypocrites will lose their advantages of seeming
religious by zeal for those things wherein Religion does not consist, Corbets
Kingdom of God, Pa. 74.
and carnal designs and interests that now rend the Churches, and trouble all
things, would be defeated and abandoned. Of all things that should most be
regarded which qualifieth for heaven; Mat. 5.8.
that is holiness.

Without it there is no entering into that glorious Kingdom. Ephesians. 5.5. Heb.
12.14.
Holiness not only prepares for eternal life, but is greatly advantageous to
the Church in this World. Wheresoever it is, it invigorates others of this
fellowship that are near it, Ibid. Page 130.
and it commands awe and reverence from all-men.



Burnet in relation to England charge this upon the long and fierce contests
among us about things which we all confess are indifferent in their own nature.
Exhortati^n to Peace and Union, Page 13.
There may yet be expected a further reformation of Churches to a higher degree
of purity to the advancement of the power of Godliness. In the Reformation in
the last Century the Pope was driven hence in such haste that he left some of
his toys behind him. These have continued too long amongst us, to the great
disturbance of the Church, and oppression of serious Piety. God by the late
advances of Popery among us, has showed us what it is, that both it, and all
things that belong to it may be abhorred by us, and rejected with indignation.
He herein deals with us as he did with the Israelites; Mic. 4.10.
Thou shall go even to Babylon, there shall thou be delivered. They were
delivered from Babylon the most potent Tyranny on Earth in those times, and
they were purged from Idolatry in Babylon, the Fountain and Nursery of Idolatry
then in the World. For they never revolted again to Images after their return
from Captivity. But they were afterward guilty of our error, doting on humane
Impositions, they set up Traditions by which they made void the Commandments of
God. In the first Reformation we were cleansed from Idolatry, in the next I
hope we shall go a step further. The case of the Jews and Babylon may have a
resemblance to the Church and Spiritual Babylon now. The Church is prevailing,
tho she lately seemed to languish. Her struglings under the renewed assaults of
Antichrist tend to her higher advancement. We have been in such danger of
destruction by Popery and Arbitrary Power, that our ruin seemed unavoidable.
God has wonderfully rescued us from all the Plagues that seemed to hang over
our heads: We should therefore cast off all those things, that by wounding weak
consciences may have provoked him to set darkness in our paths, and by dividing
us did help to bind us as slaves under the most cruel Tyranny. God may intend
this reformation among us, by the glorious revolution he has wrought, by our
Gracious Sovereign, by which the tide of the last persecution from Antichrist
seems to be turned, and the Church to be upon the rising ground. Let us then
retain nothing that may hinder the good work of God among us. That persecution
(says the Learned Mr. Charnock) which, Vol. 2. on Psalm. 87.5. Page 27.
I suppose, remains yet to be acted, and which will be the smartest, shall be
succeeded by the clearest eruption of Gospellight, wherein the Gospel shall
recover its Ancient and Primitive Glory. If he does suffer enemies to prevail,
they shall be but as whisks to brush off the dust, Ibid. on Exo. 15.9, 10. P.
52. Ibid. on Psa. 87.5. P. 39.
wisps of Straw to cleanse the filthy pot. Before the Philadelphian State
(which it is likely we are not far from) there will be a combat wherein the
Church is to bear a signal Testimony to the truths of Christ in the way of a
conflict, Rev. 3.5. The glorious State of the Church at the resurrection of the
witnesses, shall be preceded by such a calamity as shall be the terror of the
Godly, and the triumph of an enemy devoted to a sudden and unexpected
destruction, Rev. 11.9, 10, 11, 12.

His going forth is prepared as the morning, Hos. 6.3. Vol. 2. ^^ Psalm. 87.5.
Page 31.
His appearance for and in his Church, is as certain as the dawning of the
morning light at the appointed hour: All the Clouds which threaten a perpetual
night, cannot hinder it, all the workers of darkness cannot prevent it; this
morning will dawn whether they will or no. There shall be a perpetuity in this
Spiritual State; Ib. Page 40.
only between the beginning and completing it, Satan shall be let loose: but
for a little season, Rev. 20.3. And after this the Church shall not have one
blow more from Hell; but the Devil must for ever give over nibbling at her
heel.

Let us not fight against God. Act. 23.9.
All dividing terms of Communion or of the exercise of the Ministry, are the
things to be removed in order to a more perfect reformation of the Church, and
to make way for a more holy and blessed State of Piety and Love, which may be
at hand, if by our perverseness we do not put away this happiness from us. God
is doing this work in the world; it shall go on, tho we perish by our foolish
obstinacy. 5.39.
If it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest happily ye be found even to fight
against God. All wise and good men amongst the Clergy and People, desire the
taking away the instruments of our confusions. None at this time can have a
zeal for these things, except such, who either know not how to appear religious
without a dress of trifles, or they have such a secret reserve for the late
Kings Interest, that they had rather have an Army of French Dragoons, Irish
Cutthroats and barbarous Highlanders, in the bowels of this Kingdom, than see
us strengthened by an Universal affection to our gracious Sovereign, and United
in Love and Charity one toward another.

Ceremonies have been the Clokes of Impiety and Miliciousness: If these are
continued it will be exceeding difficult to purge out vice, which will shelter
it self under them. People are prone to be fond of their own Idols, there will
be more regard had for conformity to them, than care of reformation. Tho our
Pious Fathers are never so zealous against sin, the Underofficers will indulge
the Sons of Eli. Bold. Plea for moderation, Page 41.
A Register, when told that a person presented was one of us, he will swear and
be drunk as well as the best of us; called the Churchwarden, and chid him very
sharply, telling him he was a most impudent and villainous rake-hell, in that he
durst adventure to present so worthy a Gentleman as that was. We are all apt to
look on the faults of our own party with a favorable eye. Debauchery came in
with Ceremonies, we shall be happy if they fall together. Righteousness
exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people, Prove. 14.34.



Israelites in the wilderness. They were the Rod of God, and directed them to
the Brazen Serpent, a Type of him who was to be the healer of the Nations. Our
Bigots are for continuing these tormentors amongst us, but provide nothing to
heal the wounds they make; they will not (as one said) part with a rag to bind
up the bleeding wounds of the Church. The Sons of Zerviah cry, The Church of
England, the Church of England, and do most endanger it by laboring the
preservation of these tools of dissension, hindering our joining together in the
Service of God with one heart and one Soul, and uniting to defend the King and
Kingdom against the common Enemy. Love is the bond of perfection, and would
make us mighty against all that hate us, if these Incendiaries did not raise
jealousies of the Churches danger, it may be with a design to maintain a
faction among us to make an after-game for the late King.

If we review the method taken, the design of and the use that has been made
of the re-establishment of Ceremonies, we shall plainly see the wild fire that
is in the present zeal of our hot-spurs. Soon after the Restoration, the
enemies of Piety, and Virtue resolved to continue the division between the two
most potent Interests of the Protestants in England; to further this a
sham-plot was cast upon the Presbyterians in several Counties; this was so
improved in Parliament that Penal Laws were easily obtained to inslave and
destroy the Dissenters. And when those Laws did not sufficiently purge Pious
Ministers out of the Church, Clifford (a Papist) moved that they might be
stabbed with an Oath, which ran like Wild fire amongst the Pensioners, and so
the renunciation of the Covenant was enacted into a Law, which turned out some
that in their Judgments were for a Liturgy and Episcopal Government. The
gaining of this point was of so great importance to the designs of the Popish
Cabal, that the Parliaments could never obtain the removing of our differences
by a Legal Indulgence. When the Parliament voted that the prosecution of
Dissenters was a grievance, and dangerous to the Kingdom, they were sent home
to hear a Libel read against them in the Churches and the fire of persecution
raged more than ever. The Court would never part with these bombs that were
made to Sacrifice both parties to the rage of the Popish Conspirators. First,
The Dissenters were worried and wasted by the most violent Persecutions,
inflamed by the secret enemies of Religion, and promoted by debauched and
perjured Informers. Then in the Church, the most Pious and Sober members of it
were prosecuted as disaffected to the Government. The conspirators who were
against a Legal indulgence, could afford an Indulgence against Law, and that
was never thought of, but when the Protestant Interest was to pay very dear for
it. There were but two Declarations of Indulgence: One, when the Dutch were to
be robbed of a vast treasure in their Smyrna Fleet, and a War to be made for the
destruction of the Protestant States of Holland; the other was designed to
choke the whole body of the Church of England Clergy, who for not reading it in
their Churches were to be Sacrificed to Moloch by Jefferies and his brethren of
the Inquisition. Our Bigots must have gone to pot with the rest if God had not
inspired our Gracious Sovereign to expose himself between us and danger, and
yet some of these men do murmur at the happiness they enjoy by his goodness and
courage.

Now, if after we have been all thus well banged by these tools some will have
them, and they must not be abolish't; pray let them be left indifferent; Let
him that would have a Maypole, have one; and he that would have none, let him
not be obliged to play with a post, a post that has almost beaten out his
brains.

Love can never flourish in the Church, if Impositions the matter of contention
and divisions in it are continued. The heartburnings and Schisms caused by
them, are chargeable upon the imposers, who will not suffer Christians to enjoy
the Ordinances upon the terms appointed by our Lord. Ecclesiastical Superiors
are as much concerned to take heed of Schismatical Impositions, Corbet, Kingdom
of God. Page 73.
as the people are to shun Schismatical recusancy and disobedience.

England does not depend on the continuance of Ceremonies, we shall gain much
more upon the People by casting them away. They value us only for Piety,
Sobriety and Diligence; and where there are such as the Prophet describes, they
flock to the Assemblies of Dissenters: Isa. 56, 10, 11, 12.
they value not their Conformity if they are Drones, or do not Preach seriously
and profitably.

Is it worth the while to continue the things that have driven multitudes from
our Communion, and deprived us of many advantages of being useful for the good
of their Souls? Let us lay aside all stumbling blocks, and labor to the utmost
of our power to promote sound knowledge in all our several Stations; this will
engage and fix the love of the People on us. When the public order thoroughly
promotes the means of sound knowledge, Corbet, Kingdom of God. Page 164.
and encourages real Godliness, it satisfies the minds of them who justly
expect in a Gospel Church and Ministry more than an outward Form, even the
manifestation of Truth and Spiritual Light, Life and Power; and it prevents
their wandering to seek after it in the devious paths of Sectaries.



Thus I have mustered six Regiments of mischiefs from our Ceremonies; many more
might be drawn forth; but I think here is enough to give us a warm alarm, if we
are not so far blinded as not to see the true Interest of Christianity, and of
Souls; and laid in such a deep sleep of carnal security, that nothing, will
awaken us.

Let me turn from the warm men to the Pious and Learned Pastors of the Church.

O my Reverend Fathers, and Brethren, The Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen
thereof; 2 Kings 2.12.
it depends much on your pious Counsels to calm the storms that rage in some
men's minds, to heal our breaches, and by a Union of all good Protestants to
make us a terror to our Enemies. Let me speak unto you in the words that
Nehemiah put up unto God: Let not all the trouble seem little that has come
upon us, on our Kings, on our Princes, and on our Priests, Neh. 9.32.
and on our Prophets, and on our Fathers, and on all the People of this
Monarchy, since a furious Persecution begun for Ceremonies, set all the three
Kingdoms in a flame, watered the Fields with Blood, laid many Families and
Houses in ruin, and ended in the Tragical death of Charles the first.

The return of these instruments of mischief with Charles the second, set on
foot another Persecution which provoked God to fling us into the hands of a
Popish Prince, who brought us so near to destruction, that we were as a
Sacrifice bound on the Altar, ready for the fatal stroke; and as the Apostle
said of his danger in a tempest, all hope that we should be saved was then
taken away. But God, Acts 27.20.
(whose Infinite Wisdom is never at a loss to find a way of redemption in the
greatest extremity, and whose arm is never shortened that it cannot save)
appeared for us when all help failed, he raised up the righteous man from the
East, drove away our Enemies before him, Isa. 41.2.
as Dust and Stubble is driven away by a Whirlwind. We for what we brought
upon our selves, by our Zeal for little things, may be said to have sold our
selves for naught, 52.3.
yet God Redeemed us without Money: Our rescue from a Wilderness of Confusion,
and from the House of Bondage, did not put us to the hundredth part of the
charge that our controverted Ceremonies have cost us. Ezra. 9.13, 14.
And now, after all that is come upon us for our rigor toward tender
Consciences, seeing God has punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and
has given us such deliverance as this: should we again break his Commandments,
and put any stumbling block or occasion to fall in our brothers way? Romans 14.13.
Would not he be angry with us till he has consumed us, so that there should
be no remnant nor escaping? God who for us Commanded deliverance from the East;
can give long wings to destruction from the West, that it shall overtake us
suddenly when we think least of it. May not judgments hang over our heads, for
the murmurings of some amongst us, and the coldness of others toward the
healing proposals of Peace among Protestants? Is not Ireland all on fire? Are
there not Enemies armed in Scotland? And tho they are now inconsiderable, may
not God for our Sins increase their Power, and let them into England, to turn
the point of his avenging Sword against our doors? He needs not winds to
transport Executioners of his wrath, nor long Marches of Forces to bring
Destruction upon us, he can raise up Enemies from among our selves, that shall
do his strange work effectually. If we consider our want of bowels of
compassion toward Souls driven from our Communion by Impositions, we have
reason to wonder at the mercy of God in restraining the secret rage of all men
round about us, that they do not in a furious fit cut us in pieces. What a
tempestuous, unruly Sea is the wickedness of all mankind, and what a mighty
power is it which binds up the rage of so many Devils in flesh? Ephesians. 2.2.
The Devil works in the Children of Disobedience. All men would be such
Children if Divine Grace did not make the difference: if it were not for some
Principles in the Conscience, and external impediments, all Nations would be
mad. The whole Body of mankind is a great Regiment of French Dragoons. France
in its present desolations is a Paradise to what it would be, if God did not
restrain the remainder of wrath. Psa. 70.10.
Instead of devouring Gods Lambs only, they would be Lions and Tigers to one
another, filling that Country with Blood and Carcases. And that Kingdom in such
confusions would be a Picture of what the whole World would be, if wickedness
were every where let loose. The Massacres and Cruelties of any age or place are
not to be thought strange: but it is a wonder that all times are not
sanguinary, and that all Countries are not filled with Garments rouled in
Blood. Dare we be hard toward our Brethren in a World full of furies, that can
only be restrained by the Power of God, whom we provoke by offending the weak?
The nearer we are to him in profession, the more dreadful will his wrath be
upon us for our Sins. How did his anger burn against Israel? He did let loose
Wild Beasts of Prey to Worry his peculiar People, and to devour the Children of
his Friend, suffered the Wild Boar to wasie the Vineyard which his right hand
had planted. Psalm 80.13, 14, 15. Amos 3.2.
Judgment is swift and heavy upon the Sinners in Sion. You only have I known of
all the Families of the Earth, therefore I will punish you for all your
iniquities. He is more severe toward his own People for sin, than others that
know him not. When he visits the World with his Judgments the first strokes
fall upon his Church. The Cup of his fury that was to go round all Nations,
began at Jerusalem. Jer. 25.15, etc.
We who serve in the Sanctuary are more in danger of Plagues for our
Maladministration, than other men that are more remote. The men with
slaughter-weapons in their hands were Commanded to begin at the Sanctuary. God
can provide slaughter-men and slaughter-weapons for us, if we will not be
merciful to Conscience. He shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed
no mercy. Jam. 2.13. 1 Per. 4 17. Ps. 79.2, 3
The time is come that judgment must begin at the House of God. How terrible
has this been in former times? The dead Bodies of thy Servants have they given
to be meat to the Fouls of the Heaven, the Flesh of thy Saints unto the Beasts
of the Earth. Their Blood have they shed like Water round about Jerusalem.

If we would avoid all the Plagues that attend Oppressors and Persecutors of
Conscience, we must cast away all Impositions, and give the best encouragement
to them who labor most to maintain the power of Godliness in themselves and
others. Those who agree with us in all the Substantials of Religion, and add no
dangerous or destructive Tenet to these, Bold of Persecutior, Page 20.
who are holy, sober chaste temperate, righteous, compassionate and merciful,
and who no way endeavor to disturb the public Peace, but are vigorous
Protestants, and resolute opposers of the common enemies of our Religion, and
Civil Rights, they ought (especially considering our present circumstances) to
be so far from being Persecuted and Oppressed, as to have all the encouragement
and countenance that pious Christians, and Loyal Subjects can claim and
deserve. If you thus support Piety, and relieve tender Consciences, you shall
be blessed and honored, and your flocks shall flourish under your conduct:
Clergy and People shall be an ornament and strength one to another. If you undo
the heavy burdens, Isa. 58.6.
and let the oppressed (grieved Consciences) go free, and break every yoke of
needless Impositions: Then shall your light break forth as the morning, 8 11.12.
and the glory of the Lord shall be your rere-ward. He shall guide you
continually, and satisfy your Souls. And you shall be called the repairers of
the breach, and restorers of paths to dwell in.

When you chiefly mind the Glory of God and the good of souls, all your enemies
shall fall into contempt, and God shall bring forth your Righteousness as the
light, Psa. 37.6.
notwithstanding all the obloquy cast upon you by evil men. Your Enemies shall
be like chaff driven away. They are but like the small Particles of dust which
continually beat upon us, and are not felt nor discerned but in the Sun beams.
Millions of these are continually agitated about us by the Air in motion; The
most enraged Enemies of our Church are but breathing dust moved by the breath
of Life, which is but a vapor. Jan. 4.14.
The whole rabble of Antichristian furies now in combination against us in
England, Scotland and Ireland, are but Gods Prisoners in Chains; if he suffer
them to rattle their fetters about the ears of the faithful, yet they shall
never be able wholly to destroy them: The gates of Hell shall not prevail
against the Church. Ma. 16.18.
The head of the Church, is the Judge of the World, he will not suffer his
Jail-birds to triumph over his Body.

I have done with the fourth consideration, the manifold mischiefs of these
Impositions. I have been long wading through them; but the grief of innumerable
tender consciences under the weight of them, has been longer and very
deplorable. Length here cannot be avoided: these little things have caused so
many mischiefs, that it is very difficult to speak little of them. I shall now
proceed to the last consideration and conclude.



I. Our present danger. This may be set forth in three Particulars.

I. The continuance of these things will bring upon us the contempt and hatred
of the People. Multitudes in City and Country have a Prejudice against us for
the late miscarriages of some, and the unseasonable stiffness of others for the
things that divide and weaken us, when it concerns us all to be united as one
man against the common Enemy. If this temper should prevail, we shall be
abhorred by all men, for exposing the public happiness to the danger of Ruin,
only for things of no value, and which we acknowledge to be in their own nature
Indifferent. Bold. Plea for Moderation, Page 5.
It is high high time to leave off insisting on little Punctilio's of Honor;
we ought duly to weigh our circumstances, and the nature of the things we
contend about, and if our dangers be unmeasurably great, and the things we
differ about such as will not bear so great a weight, as the loss of our
Religion and all our Rights, we must yield something on either side, and that
side must be willing to part with most, that can do it with greatest ease, and
most innocence. The Dissenters doubt of the Lawfulness of some of our terms of
Communion, and therefore cannot yield to us; but we may with ease and innocence
condescend to them in quiting Impositions not appointed by God.

Small differences must give place to the greater Points, Bishop Burnets
Exhortation to Peace and Union, Page 11.
in which we are at one; for all that act otherwise show clearly, that tho they
do not think it decent to speak out what they think, yet in their hearts they
undervalue the Common Interest of the Protestant Religion in which we agree;
but set a real value upon indifferent matters, and are acted by the heats and
animosities of a Party, to which all other things give place.

Our Brethren have according to the Act of Indulgence subscribed our Doctrine,
and thereby are incorporated into the Church of England. The People see by
this, that they agree with us in the Substantials of our Religion, and they may
account us guilty of Peev ishness and Malice if we continue those little things
as terms of Communion which we know they cannot comply with. And to do this
after our acknowledgements in distress, and a promise of coming to a due temper
may make them abhor us as Enemies to our Country. Tho some of our make-bats,
who do wholly employ their Talents to widen our differences, Bold Plea for
Moderation. page 6.
do pretend to the Church of England, I am verily persuaded they are either
Real Papists, or very mischievous Instruments in Popish hands, to effect and
bring about the common Ruin of Protestants. It cannot be with a good design,
that at this time of day, they are Zealous for things that they know will
continue a great division amongst us. It is not to be doubted, but that the
crossness and secret Practices of some Clergymen and Priest-ridden Gentlemen:
have obstructed affairs in Parliament, hindered the relief of Derry to the loss
of many Thousand Gallant men: Ireland had been in a fair way of recovery, and
the Rebellion in Scotland had not come to such a head but for such tools. Some
of our Guides are more unkind to England than Foreigners. The Dutch to
purchase our liberty, besides the charge of 600000 l. ventured a great fleet
and a considerable Army, when they might have wanted it themselves: but some
among us will not part with a few trifles to save Church and State. Will not
such folly and madness bring upon us the contempt and hatred of all men, and
make the wise and the good ashamed to own us? The Clergy counting them to be
20000 (which is much too large a reckoning, there not being 10000 Parishes in
England) are but the 250th part of the Nation, supposing the People to be but 5
Millions: and shall 249 souls be exposed to all kind of dangers and miseries
for the mad humor of one man? All the pious, sober and moderate Clergymen are
for a Union: the rest are some of them Dignified Drones, these fear contempt if
more diligent laborers are admitted into the Church; some are learned, but are
inflamed with a Pharisaical Zeal for the form of Godliness, denying the Power
thereof; some are debauched, and fear the severe correction that is due unto
them; Some are departed from our Doctrine, and fear (here the shoe pincheth)
that their errors will be exposed by the accession of such an Orthodox Interest
as the Body of the Presbyterians who are firm to the Doctrine of the Church of
England. Some are so sottish, that they act their part very ill, and would be
undone if their tools were taken away: all our sticklers, are Tantivees for
their own humors, and care not what becomes of our Religion, Laws and
Liberties. Many of these are the Disciples of Old Roger, helped to cry him up,
and maintain him as a great Pillar of the Church: with him they Rejoiced in the
Invasions that were made upon our Rights, and the Barbarous executions of
Protestant Noblemen and Gentlemen in the late times of P^^ery and Arbitrary
Popery.

If the Sword should be drawn again in England, how severely will this
unmercifulness of Clergymen be revenged upon them, as the cause of all our
miseries, by their perverseness for toys? Such troublers of our Israel, may
expect nothing less than a total extirpation, and that the people will make
sure work with a sort of men, that are not content to have once imbroiled the
three Kingdoms in a bloody War for indifferent things, but do now take the same
methods for the same vanities to make us pass through all those calamities
again.

Dr. Moor Divine Dialognes. page 161.
Pope Julius in seven years was the occasion of the Slaughter of 200000
Christians. The Massacre in France in three months cut off a 100000. P.
Perionius avers that in the Persecution of the Albingenses and Waldenses
1000000 lost their lives. From the beginning of the Jesuits till 1580 that is,
thirty or forty years, 900000 perished, says Balduinus, The Duke of Alva by
the hangman put to death 36000. Vergerius affirms that the Inquisition in 30
years destroyed 150000. To all this I may add the Irish Rebellion in which were
destroyed 300000, as the Lord Orery reports in a Paper printed in the Reign of
Charles II.

Tho some new-fashioned Divines have represented Popery in favorable Colors,
and endeavored to clear the Pope from the old charge of being Antichrist; for
the baffling of such flattering Doctors, comes the late (and I hope the last
persecution from Antichrist) Dragon Persecution in France, Orange and Savoy.
This has outdone all Persecutions both Pagan and Papal that ever were in the
World. No Persecution, no nor all the persecutions together contained in them
all the barbarities of this. Never any raged to such a high degree of subtilty,
malice and cruelty; in this have suffered above 150000, who would heartily have
chosen to change a miserable life for death: but life was c^^^inued; to load it
with longer miseries, and death was denied, as a favor too great for them.
Innumerable were the violences that were committed on the Souls, Bodies, and
Estates of Protestants.

They grieved the modest Souls of virtuous Women and Maids by hanging them up
naked by their feet, or by their armpits, thus exposing them to public view.
In Parents they tormented their bowels of natural affection: They bound mothers
(that gave suck) unto posts, and let their infants lie in their sight several
days, languishing, Crying, Moaning, Gasping for Life; and even dying for Hunger
and Thirst, Swearing to them they should not give Suck till they abjured. The
new art of waging War against the reason of Christians is a Devilism never
practiced before: they poured Wine down their throats till the fumes overcame
their reason; to destroy their reason for want of sleep, they Tickled, Lashed,
Flung them about, threw buckets of water on their faces, made a continual noise
upon kettles over their heads and tormented them a 1000 ways. By this many were
distracted, and others became mopish and stupid.

All the tragical methods of that persecution, had before this been acted again
in England; if God had not in mercy sent our Gracious Sovereign to save us from
the Lions mouth. Let us remember and consider what has been done upon others,
and let their sufferings be a warning to us, that we give no advantage to our
enemies, by continuing any of the instruments that divided and weakened us,
brought upon us our late confusions and still threaten us with danger. A
relapse would be a greater evil, than any we have yet had a prospect of: The
cruelty of Popery against Heretics would be raised to a higher degree than
ever, by an infatiable thirst of revenge upon us for our insolency in throwing
off our Fetters and Chains. All that has been acted under Paganism and Popery,
will be unspeakably short of what we must feel, if we return again to the house
of Bondage. Our task will be doubled and trebled, the Fiery Furnace shall be
heated seven times hotter than ever, and seventy times too if they can do it.

If after all that we have seen and feared, and others have sadly felt, any
amongst us resolve still to stickle for their Toys, it may be said of them as
of the Caldeans: Jer. 50.38.
They are mad upon their Idols.

What mean ye that beat my people to pieces? Isa. 3.15,
But he will thunder in his Judgments against them that break his flock to
pieces, scattering them from the Communion of his Church by unnecessary
impositions.

Tho by the Act of Indulgence the instruments of Persecution are struck out of
the hands of Persecutors, yet we may be still guilty of Persecution, if we
continue those things that armed evil men against his people, and do still
drive his Lambs from their Pastures, and the punishment of persecution may
overtake us. The black-horses, the instruments of the execution of Gods anger,
Charnock Vol. 2. on Exodus 15.9, 10. page 50.
were sent toward Babylon, where his people were in Captivity, Zech. 6.6.
Their's was only a bodily Captivity, their consciences were free. Are not Gods
people now in Spiritual Captivity, when they must not enjoy his Ordinances with
us, but upon terms they cannot conform to and he never appointed? Have not we
reason to expect that the black horses should be let loose to run swiftly and
furiously upon us? By endeavoring to continue our stubble we may be opposers
of God in the great work that he seems to be doing for his Church: the
advancement of it to a purer and more glorious State. It may be observed that
generally a glorious state in the Church has followed her greatest straits. In
Egypt when the task was doubled and straw denied, Deuteronomy. 4.34.
Moses was sent, and God delivered his people by signs, and wonders, and great
terrors. The Jews were without Urim and Thummin, without the Spirit of
Prophesy, when Christ came in the flesh to work Redemption. How low was the
infant Church when Christ was in the Grave, his disciples all scattered? How
black the hour, and great the Power of Darkness, when the Sun was darkened and
the earth trembled? This was followed with the accomplishment of the great
Prophecy that Japhet should dwell in the Tents of Sem; Gen 9.27.
delivered by Noah about two thousand years before, fulfilled in the raising of
a Gentile Church. The Church was more glorious after the Parisian Massacre, the
persecution in the Netherlands and the Marian Flames in England. Hamans Plot to
destroy all the Jews, caused great mourning, and Fasting, Esth. 4.3.8.16.
and Weeping amongst them: But the plotter is hanged on his own Gallows; and
the Jews had Light, and Joy and honor. We have reason to hope, that after the
late Plot for the Extirpation of the Northern Heresy, and the great Extremity
this Church was reduced to, she shall now be more beautiful and glorious than
ever, if the peevishness of some does not cause a delay of this happiness. The
sharpest pangs precede deliverance; it was so when Christ came in the flesh,
Charnock, Vol. 2. on Exodus 15.9, 10. page 46.
it will be so at every new rising of Christ in the Spirit. If people did look
before them, and consider the Providence of God, and tendency of things, they
would be more indifferent toward Indifferent things; the Divine Power and
Jealousy would cool their blind Zeal for such matters, they would be afraid to
oppose his work, lest he send upon them that Woe that is denounced against them
that presume to strive with their Maker. It is a dangerous thing to be found
fighters against God. Isa. 45.9.
Gods Counsel must stand, Fulfilling of Scripture Part. 3. considerations anent
Popery, p. ult.
Oh! At what a rate do these now run in the way of his wrath and vengeance, and
to be partakers of the same plagues with Antichrist, who yet will not cease,
for giving their power to support that accursed and falling interest! This is
not at all to be accounted strange, that men should walk contrary to God, and
oppose him; there were always such as did set themselves against his work in
the World, and there are now Children of Belial (all zealous for Ceremonies to
a man) that murmur against their own happiness bestowed upon them by God in
bringing about the most wonderful revolution that ever was. We have the less
reason to admire this stubbornness in man, because the Devil, a subtle Spirit,
and knows that his opposing God will increase his future misery, ^et he is so
blinded with malice that he always wageth War against his Creator and Judge.
Charnock, Vol. 2. on Ps. 87.5. p. 26.
It is an astonishment, that the Devil after so long an experience should be
such a fool as to engage in new attempts when he has found so little Success
in the former, and has had so many ages to witness the baffles he has
received; what a fool is he to think that the defender of the Church should be
conquered by a revolted angel, that lies under an everlasting curse? This
should make us all to suspect our selves, when we are warm for things that are
not appointed by God, and are stumbling blocks to many pious Christians: It is
much better to fear to offend the weak, than to run rashly on, lest we be found
to walk contrary unto God, and provoke him to walk contrary unto us. He has
many plagues for them that do so: After many Judgments, Lev. 26.18
he tells the Israelites that he will punish them seven times more for their
sins. And if they still walk contrary unto him, he says again: I will bring
seven times more Plagues upon you, 21.
according to your sins. The like also, v. 24. 27.
And if yet they walk contrary unto him: he says: I will walk contrary unto
you in fury; and I, even I, 28.
will chastise you seven times for your sins. Here are 28 degrees of punishment
which number he can mount much higher for the Chastisement of them, who after
manifold experience of our Confusions and miseries occasioned by quarrels about
trifles, will yet for them walk contrary unto him. There have been innumerable
Judgments executed in the world, and Judgments recorded in the Word of God, and
there are also unwritten plagues reserved for his obstinate enemies: Every
Sickness, Deuteronomy. 28.61.
and every Plague which is not written in the Book of this Law, them will the
Lord bring upon thee, until thou be destroyed. But if after many methods of
severity people will continue perverse, Ezekiel. 38.18. Isa. 4^.3. Am. 4.11, 12.
his fury shall come up in his face; he will take vengeance, and will not meet
them as a man, but as a God. Yet ye have not returned unto me, says the Lord.
Therefore thus will I do unto Israel: and because I will do this unto thee,
prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.

the sign of the Son of man shall appear in heaven. Mat* 24 30. Ac^. 26.13.
His glory at midday was unto Paul a light from heaven above the brightness of
the Sun. That sign may be such a glory filling the whole World with the
brightness thereof, every where seen by amazed mankind. He who has created the
glorious body of the Sun, which is 139 (some say 166) times bigger than this
Globe in which we live, can spread a more Glorious Light over this point of
earth or particle of dust, for so it is if compared with the vast extent of the
Heavens. Whatever that sign shall be, it is like it shall be visible to all,
not only to the righteous for their comfort, but also to the wicked for their
terror. Mat. 24.30. Genesis 49.5.
It is said that all the tribes of the Earth shall then mourn. They of the
Tribe of Levi who are for instruments of Cruelty shall have their share in the
mourning. What trembling will seize upon them, 1 These. 1.16, 17.
when the mighty blast of Gods Trumpet shall awake all the Sleepers in the
dust, them that have not lodged six days in the Grave, 1 Cor 15.52.
and the Sleepers of 6000 years. His power shall raise all the dead, and change
the living in a moment, in the twinkling of an Eye. An universal flame shall
embrace the heavens and the earth (the God of our proud and covetous
Formalists,) melt the frozen World in the Laodicean State. 2 Pet. 3.10.
The Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt
up. Rev. 20.12.
The dead small and great shall stand before God to be judged according to
their works. Then mocking Ishmaels that have scoffed at the pure in heart as
Puritans, Precise Fools, and Melancholy dull Souls; shall take the Fools cap
unto themselves, and they repenting, Wisd. 5*
and groaning for anguish of Spirit, shall say within themselves, This was he
whom we had sometimes in derision, and a proverb of reproach. We fools
accounted his life madness; and his end to be without honor. How is he numbered
among the Children of God, and his Lot is among the Saints!

Some among us are angry with Calvin for calling humane rites tolerables
ineptias. Epist. Anglis Fran^^ford. p. 98.
They will not at the great day be such unto rigorous Imposers, who made them
terms of Communion. How will you at that day lift up your faces before your
Master and your Judge, when he shall demand of you, What is become of those his
Lambs which you drove into the Wilderness by needless Impositions? He requires
you to pray unto the Lord of the harvest, that he would fend forth more
laborers into his harvest, and you keep away many worthy laborers from his
work, because they cannot comply with terms that he never appointed. We may
think it a light matter to offend weak Christians, but it will not be always
so: Woe unto the World because of offenses: Mat. 18.7.
For it must needs be that offenses come: but woe unto that man by whom the
offense comes. Offenses will hereafter be as heavy to the Imposers of humane
inventions, as they are now to the weak. The punishment of them that offend one
of Christ's little ones will be more dreadful than being cast into the Sea with
a millstone about the neck. Luke 17.2.
If, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, shall be the lightest punishment inflicted on them that feed
not the hungry, and do not cloth the naked; how deep will their lodging be in
the lake of Fire and Brimstone, who lay Stumbling Blocks before multitudes of
Souls to their so great Scandal, that they forsake the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ? how terrible will it be to be punished with everlasting destruction, 2
These. 1.9.
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power? This will be
heavier than many Milstones: For all the works and Mountains in the world will
be light in comparison of the weight of the wrath of the Lamb. The ravening
Wolves that have worried Christ's Flock, the great Clerks that have troubled
Church and State with their stiffness for very little things, the mighty
Nimrods that have desolated the earth, shall in vain cry for a covering to the
frighted and flying Mountains, and the molten Rocks, that could not save
themselves from the power of the Judge, who made the Heaven to depart as a
scroll when it is rolled together. Rev. 6.14, 15, 16, 17.
And the Kings of the Earth; and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
Captains, etc. hid themselves in the Dens and in the Rocks of the Mountains;
and said to the Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of
him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; the great day
of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?

FINIS.

