THE PURITY OF Gospel Communion, OR Grounds and Reasons FOR SEPARATION From
Persons of Corrupt Manners, etc.
WHen the Lord of old brought up the Children of Israel out of the Land of
Egypt, he separated them from other Nations, to be his People in a peculiar
Covenant; and by his Laws he sanctified them from all Uncleanness; Lev. 11.25.
Lev. 5.2, 3. Chapter 11.24, etc. Numb. 19.11, 13. Deuteronomy. 23.10, to 19.
insomuch that whosoever bore the Carcass of any unclean Beast, he was to wash his
Clothes and be unclean until the Even. And whosoever touched the Body of a Dead
Man, and purified not himself, he defiled the Tabernacle of the Lord; and that
Soal was to be cut off from Israel, because the Water of Separation was not
sprinkled upon him. Exodus 12.19. Lev. 22.3, to 8. Numb. 15.30, 31.
And whosoever eat the Passover with unleavened Bread, or went unto the Holy
things, having his uncleanness upon him; that Soul was to be cut off from the
Congregation of Israel, and from the presence of the Lord. And the Soul that
despised the Word of the Lord, and brake his Commandments, that Soul was
utterly to be cut off, and his Iniquity should be upon him. Now those
Separations and these, and many other legal cleansings were shadows of Gospel
things, whereby the Purity of the New Testament Church was set forth. And to
the end it should be a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9.
an Holy Nation, a peculiar People to show forth the Praises of him, who has
called us out of darkness into his mavelous Light. He has left us Holy Laws
for the Government of his Church, 1 Cor. 5.6, 7. Gal. 5.9.
and for the purging out of the old leaven of Unrighteousness, for a little
leaven leaveneth the whole Lump, as it consequently follows; that such who bear
with Sin in one, cannot avoid bearing it in another; and by opening of this
Sluice, a Flood of Sin and Iniquity will quickly sweep away the beauty of a
Gospel Church; and turn the noble Vine that was planted wholly a right seed,
Jer. 2.21.
into the degenerate plant of a strange Vine, to the dishonor of God, the
reproach of true Religion, the stumbling of weak Christians and the hardening of
one another in their Sins, and Disobedience against the most Sovereign Majesty
of Heaven and Earth. To prevent which evils, I shall therefore Treat of the way
and means appointed by Christ, who loved the Church, Ephesians. 1.4. Chapter 5.25, 26,
27. Tit. 2.14.
and gave himself for it: That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of Water, by the Word. That he might present it to himself a glorious
Church; not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that we should be
holy, and without blame before him in Love. And in order thereunto, I shall
here Premise, that forasmuch as the Church of Christ is said to be the pillar
and ground of Truth, And that it is Gods building: 1 Timothy 3.15. 1 Cor. 3.9.
Heb. 8.5. 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22. Chapter 4.4, 5. Judge 20.
It cannot be so, unless it be erected according to the Pattern showed in the
Holy Mount and recorded for the Example of after Ages. That every stone should
be a lively Stone by Regeneration, built up together a spiritual house in one
most Holy Faith; for as there is one Body and one Spirit, so there is one
Faith: And it is the Duty of every Christian to help build up Gods spiritual
Temple, according to the pure Primitive and Apostolical Pattern, and to this
end they should come out from among them and be separate, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17.
and join themselves to such a Congregation of Believers, where they may
continue together in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, (though not personally
with them) and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers. For the Church of Christ
should not be a mixed Building (though on Christ the true Foundation) as the
Apostle warns us saying, Ye are Gods building, 1 Cor. 3.9, 10, 11.
according to the Grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise
Master Builder, I have laid the Foundation, and another builds thereon, but
let every Man take heed how he builds thereupon; for other Foundation can no
man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Now if any man build upon
this Foundation, Gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble: Every man's
work shall be made manifest -- and the fire shall try every man's work, of what
sort it is. If any man's work abide which he has built thereupon, he shall
receive a reward. If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss. So
that the Gospel Church is not to be formed of such mixed and combustible matter
as men please, Rev. 1.20. 1 Pet. 1.7. Exodus 25.81. Rev. 3.18.
but of pure Gold, yea of such as is tried in the Fire. But to proceed,

First, I shall prove, that it is the Duty of a Church of Christ to withdraw
their Communion from, yea, and to purge out those Persons that are (without
Repentance for it) guilty of corrupt Manners or evil Actions; 1 Cor. 5.1, to 6.
1 Timothy 1.20.
and that not only for committing the grosser sort of Sins, as Fornication or
incestuous Marriages, Blasphemy or other notorious Evil, but for smaller
offenses. And first our Lord has commanded us saying, Math. 18.15, 16, 17.
If thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between
thee and him alone: If he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother. But if
he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the Mouth
of two or three Witnesses every Word may be established. And if he shall
neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church: but if he neglect to hear the
Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man and a Publican. To which I shall
only here say, that as this trespass mentioned in the Text, must be some breach
of the Moral Law, Mat. 7.12
in not doing to others, as we would that others should do to us; because it is
a trespass against a Brother: So it is plain, that for such a cause of doing
wrong, if satisfaction be not given by Repentance, the offender should be unto
us as an Heathen Man and a Publican, with whom it was not lawful to hold any
Church Communion, unless they were converted.

2. It is said, 2 These. 3.6. Now we command you, Brethren, in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks
disorderly, and not after the Traditions which he received of us. Here we have
a general command to withdraw from all disorderly Persons, which because I
design to open it more at large in some following part of this Treatise, I
shall at present only note this Scripture, as a positive Law to preserve the
Purity of Church Communion, and the Words of our Lord before recited are for
the same end, Math. 18 15, etc.
though they more particularly respect corrupt Manners, or immoral Wrongs and
offenses of Brethren against Brethren; comprehending a Prohibition of lesser as
well as grosser Evils, as appears from the Authority of other Scriptures, Exodus
23.1. Thou shall not raise a false report, put not thine hand with the Wicked
to be an unrighteous Witness. Psalm. 15.2, 3.
And David shows us, who shall abide in the Lords Tabernacle, and who shall
dwell in his Holy Hill: He that walks uprightly -- he that backbiteth not
with his Tongue, nor does evil to his Neighbor, nor takes up a reproach
against his Neighbor, etc. And Psalm 101.5. Whosoever privily slandereth his
Neighbor, him will I cut off. And the Apostle says, Romans 3.8. And not rather
as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say, let us do evil,
that good may come? whose Damnation is Just. And in 2 These. 3.11, to 15. we are
commanded to have no company with such, as through Idleness eat not their own
Bread, but are busy Bodies. And 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Purge out therefore the old
leaven, that ye may be a new Lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ our
Passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us keep the Feast, not with old
leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness: And ver. 11. He
says, I have written unto you, not to keep Company, if any man that is called
a Brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a railer, or a
drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one not to eat. And in Gal. 5.19, 20,
21. See also 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. 1 Timothy 1.9, 10. Col. 3.9.
Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery,
fornication, uneleanness, laseiviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders,
drunkenness, revellings and such like, (as all liars, Rev. 21.8.) of the which
I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do
such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And then surely none of
those evils (though of the lesser sort of them) when known to us should be
suffered in the Communion of a Gospel Church. And in Math. 7.12. Therefore all
things whatsoever, ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them:
for this is the Law and the Prophets. So that whatsoever wrong is done to any
contrary to this general precept, it is a breach of the Moral Law, Math. 19.19.
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. And therefore such Offenders should
not (without Repentance for their Sin) be suffered in our Holy Communion at the
Lords Table.

But some may think that all those particular evils, in Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. come
not under the Cognizance and Judgment of the Church for excluding of those who
are guilty of them from Communion. To which I shall briefly say, That though
there may be some kind of immoral Variance, Emulation, Wrath and Strife, that
may not arise to so high an offense, if they be only sudden passions that are
soon over, yet where there is a sixed Variance between Brethren, that shows it
self to proceed from immorality; Or Emulation from a striving to exceed in
Envy, or Disdain, or in Wrong to another; or malicious anger without a cause,
there we have ground for Exclusion from Communion, as our Savior says, Mat.
5.22, to 25.
Whosoever is angry with his Brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the
Judgment. -- Therefore if thou bring thy Gift to the altar, and there
remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee; leave there thy Gift
before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then
come and offer thy Gift. These Words (notwithstanding there are some old
Testament Terms used) were spoken for Direction to us under the Gospel, for
Christ in this Sermon was Gospelizing the Law. And therefore I gather from
them, that in Case a Person trespasseth against his Brother, he should not
offer his spiritual Gift in public Church Worship, till he has reconciled
himself to him; and then it consequently follows, that the same trespass which
debars him from offering his Gift upon the Altar, whatever is meant by it, does
also debar him from his full Communion at the Lords Table. And seeing from this
Scripture, he ought of himself to forbear his Communion, till he be reconciled;
there is likewise Reason for the offended Brother or the Church if the Case be
known to it, to forbear his Communion with him or withdraw it from him, till he
gives satisfaction by Repentance for the same immoral Trespass, which forfeits
his present Privilege to Minister in public Church Worship, does also forfeit
his Privilege of Commuion with it at the Lords Table. Moreover it is worth our
Observation, that the Word [Therefore] if thou bring thy Gift to the Altar,
refers the Reason of this Exclusion from Communion, to the Evils in the
foregoing Verse as the cause thereof, which is for being Angry with a Brother
without a cause, for saying to his Brother Raca, that is, dull, blockish, See
Dutch Annot.
or vain, or thou fool, in disdain, reproach and envy. So that as on the one
hand we are forbidden on forfeiture of our Church Communion, to cast contempt
reproach and scorn upon any Brother, for his weakness in the Faith, or for his
natural Infirmities, and to bear a sixed anger without a cause: So on the other
side, nothing is here intended by our Savior, to forbid an intelligible
expressing of our Detestation and Abhorrence of that which is Evil as we are
commanded, Romans 12.9. 2 Cor. 7.11. Chapter 10.6.
and as also we are allowed to use a holy Indignation and Revenge against all
disobedience, yet so as to consist with Love and Pity to Men's Persons.

3. Under this Head of Diseourse concerning corrupt Manners or evil Actions, we
may bring many other particular Cases, for which Offenders ought to be
withdrawn from, and without Repentance for their Sin, they should not be
suffered in the Communion of the Visible Church of Christ. As 1. For breaking
the Christian Sabbath in disobedience to the Fourth Commandment, and the
Example of Christ's Apostles, and the Primitive Churches. 2. Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 5.
For being disobedient to Parents and Masters in Lawful and Reasonable things.
3. For a Rebellious breaking Covenant with a Church of Christ, when it is not
in Case of Conscience, of Moral Necessity, nor of real Expediency. 4. For
taking the Holy Name of the Lord our God in vain. Gal. 5.19, 21. 2 Timothy 3.2, to
6.
5. For Lasciviousness (mentioned before) which is Lecherousness or Wantonness
in Behavior, and for many other Sins, some of which are particularly
expressed, and others are included under the general Head of Trespasses against
the Moral Law.

Secondly, It is the Duty of Christians to withdraw their Communion in Church
Fellowship from all those that hold erroneous Doctrine in or against Matters of
Faith Essential to Salvation. For

1. 2 Timothy 2, 22.
We are commanded to follow Righteonsness, Faith, Charity, Peace with them that
call on the Name of the Lord out of a pure Heart; but such as Err in
fundamentals of Salvation, thereby declare their Hearts to be unwashed with
Regeneration, and the Renewings of the Holy Ghost, and therefore we should not
hold our Communion with such at the Lords Table.

2. It farther appears to be the Duty of Christians to separate themselves from
the Communion of all those that hold such Erroneous Doctrine, Col. 2.20.
Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the World; why, as
though living in the World, are ye subject to Ordinances. Touch not, taste not,
handle not; (which all are to perish with the using) after the Commandments and
Doctrines of Men; which things have indeed a show of Wisdom in Will Worship and
Humility, and neglecting of the Body, not in any Honor, to the satisfying of
the Flesh. Here I shall observe, that the Apostle having in the foregoing part
of this Chapter, warned the Colossians against the Traditions of Men, and the
Rudiments of the World, viz. to beware of Philosophy and vain Deceit of the
Jewish Ceremonies, and other voluntary Worship and Humility; he delivers them a
general command, that they should not Touch, Taste, nor Handle, viz. no ways to
meddle with that which others perish with the using after the Commandments and
Doctrines of Men, though others use them; yet we are strictly prohibited in the
least to Touch or Taste of their practical Ordinances, or of their Doctrines,
for these also are there forbidden, because the command has a reference to the
Rudiments of the World, Ver. 20.
which signifies the first Teaching or Instruction, a beginning a Principle,
and has respect to Matters of Faith. Ver. 3. to 10.
Seeing therefore we are forbidden to Touch, Taste or Handle the Commandments
and Doctrines of Men; then surely we ought not to be in full Communion at the
Lords Table, with Persons that hold such Erroneous Principles; for our
Assenting to their right of Communion with us, is an owning their Principles as
truly fundamental to Salvation; and so we either virtually deny our own to be
such, or confound the true Profession of our Faith to the hazard of Men's Souls;
or else admit of Persons to partake of the Holy Supper, that apparently have no
right to it, for want of those Gospel Principles that are essential to their
visible Interest, in the Obedience, Sufferings, and Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, either of which is a Sin.

3. It appears from Gal. 1.6, 7, 8. that we should not hold Communion at the
Lords Table, with Persons that hold such erroneous Principles; for the Apostle
says, I marvel, that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the
Grace of Christ, unto another Gospel: Which is not another, but there be some
that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. But though we, or an
Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed: And in the following Verse, he repeats
it over again; and in Chap. 5.12. he says, I would they were even cut off
which trouble you. Now if we duly search after the Cause of this censure, we
may plainly see that it was not for bringing in of another Gospel; but as the
Apostle says, because there were some that troubled the Church of Galatia with
perverting the. Gal. 6.12. Chap. 5.3.
Gospel of Christ, by constraining them to be circumcised; and so to become
Debtors to do the whole Law. And we find by the Apostles Discourse, that they
sought to be justified by the Works of the Law, Chap. 2, etc.
as Chap. 2.16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the Works of the Law,
but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ; that
we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works of the Law:
for by the Works of the Law shall no Flesh be justified. And Chap. 4.21. Tell
me, ye that desire to be under the Law, do ye not hear the Law? So that the
perverting of the Gospel before mentioned, was by bringing in of the Works of
the Law for Justification; and this we find was made a Matter of Separation,
the Apostle wishing the Persons even cut off or accursed, that so troubled the
Church of Christ, which to apply to some in our present day, I shall here note,
that although those Jewish Christians that held it needful to be circumcised, and
so endeavored to bring the Gentiles under the Law for Justification to Eternal
Life, did it in a Mcsaical formal way, which Christians now repugn, by denying
that formal Obligation to keep the old Law; yet as their Principles oblige them
to seek for Justification by works of Obedience to a new Law under the Gospel,
which they have no Power in themselves to perform, their Principle with the
case of the Church of Galatia, respecting the effect, is in substance the same;
and therefore there is Reason founded on Scripture for us to withdraw or remove
our Communion from all Persons that are leavened with the works of the Law for
Justification; whether it be under the form of the Law or of the Gospel
Administration: Gal. 5.9. 1 Cor. 5.8.
For that being called Leaven, seeing Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us,
we are commanded (though on a different occasion) to keep the Feast not with old
leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the
unleavened Bread of of Sincerity and Truth. Observe it well, we are here
forbidden to eat the Christian Passover or Lords Supper with the old leaven,
etc. and are commanded to keep it with Truth. And therefore we should not have
Communion in that Ordinance with fundamental Errors in the Christian Faith.

4. The Apostle says, Romans 16.17. Now I beseech you, Brethren, Mark them which
cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have Learned;
and avoid them. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5.
And Paul commanded Timothy to withdraw from such as taught otherwise, and
consented not to wholesome Words, even the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, etc. And we are exhorted
earnestly to contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints:
Jude 3. Phil. 1.27.
And to stand fast in one Spirit, with one Mind, striving together for the
Faith of the Gospel; and therefore we are not to unite our selves into one Body
with Persons, that err from the true Faith; for as two cannot walk together
except they be agreed, Amos 3.3.
so if we are not united in one Faith, we shall quickly be contending and
striving with each other, and not together for the Faith of the Gospel.

5. It is said by way of Politive Command, A Man that is an Heretic, Tit.
3.10, 11.
after the first and second Admonition, reject: Knowing that he that is such,
is subverted, and sins, being condemned of himself. Now an Heritick is one
that stisly maintains false opinions against the Scriptures, in matters of
Faith fundamental to Salvation; which though we should be tender of judging such
Christians to be Heretics, as there is Reason to hope have more the show in
weak expressions of some such like salse Principles, than a being under the
Power and Conduct of them; seeing the Scripture says, Jude 22.
we should of some have Compassion, making a difference; and others save with
fear pulling them out of the Fire, hating even the garment spotted by the
Flesh. Yet our Charitable Thoughts of such Christians, while they are under
their cloudy Profession of such Errors (though crowded amongst other Truths,
whereby they are the more concealed) are no warrant nor allowance for us to
hold Communion with them, till we can plainly see them delivered from those
Errors, seeing they are clearly prohibited in the Scriptures.

Thirdly, It is the Duty of Christians to withdraw their Communion from all
disorderly Persons in false Worship, or in corrupt Administrations of
Gospel Ordinances. And

1. Our Lord says, The hour comes, John 4.23, 24.
and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and
in Truth: For the Father seeks such to worship him. God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. From hence I observe,
that true Worshippers must worship the Father both in Spirit and in Truth,
otherwise therwise they are not true Worshippers: And then if we find by the
Word of Truth (as we are commanded to try the Spirits, whither they are of God)
that they are such who separate themselves, 1 John 4.1. Jude 19.
sensual, having not the Spirit, or that do not worship in Truth, but with
erroneous Matter, or in a false Manner: I say, then we should withdraw our
Communion from such, as disorderly Persons in Divine Worship: Mat. 15.9.
And our Lord also tells us, that in vain they do worship him, teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men. So that to keep our selves from the Guilt of
vain Worship, we should not by our selves, Isa. 29.19.
nor with any others worship God after the Commandment of Men, but according to
Gospel-Institutions.

2. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11.2. I praise you, Brethren, that you remember
me in all things, and keep the Ordinances, as I delivered them to you: On this
Text Mr. Will. Kissin notes, See his Book called A Sober Discourse of right to
Church Communion, in his Presace.
That our Translation of the Greek Word (...) (rendering it Ordinances) is
excepted against by some Papists -- who would have it translated (Traditions)
to countenance the Romish Opinion; to which (says he) shall be opposed, that
the Greek Word signifies indeed Tradition, that is in English, a Delivery,
viz. of Doctrines, Ordinances, Instructions, or Institutions, 2 These. 2.15. by
those Evangelical Preachers to their Auditors, which is nothing else but the
Doctrine of the Gospel first preached, and afterward committed to writing by
the Evangelists and Apostles, as standing Records to future Ages so that any
Traditions, besides what is written, are justly to be excepted against, and (in
matters relating to Divine Worship) to be esteemed Apocryphal. Now as the
aforesaid Author says, What was praiseworthy in those Primitive Christians,
to whom the Apostle Paul writes, -- can be no blemish, but really a Duty in
other Christians in after times, to imitate. To which I add, That to corrupt
the worship of God with men's Traditions, contrary to the Apostolical Pattern,
is a Sin and Disorder to be purged out by the Church of Christ; as farther
appears in the next Section.

3. It Is said, 2 These. 3.6. Now we command you, Brethren, in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks
disorderly, and not after the Tradition which he received of us.

1. This general Command to the Church of the Thessalonians, appears from the
following Verses, to be occasioned from some particular disorders that were
amongst them, (as Ver. 11, 12, 14, 15. For even when we were with you, this we
commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat. For we hear
that there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but
are busy bodies. Now them that are such we command, and exhort by our Lord
Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own Bread. -- And if
any Man obey not our Word by this Epistle, note that Man, and have no Company
with him, that he may be ashamed. Yet count him not as an Enemy, but admonish
him as a Brother.) But yet this instance lest us on sacred Record, may give us
light into other Cases; for seeing we are commanded to withdraw our Communion,
so as to have no Company with such a disorderly Brother, that through Idleness
(when he may have work) eats not his own Bread, and is a busy body (who may
have this to plead against such an Act of the Church, that he has not stolen
nor defrauded any, but gets his Meat from House to: House amongst his
Christian Friends) then there is ground and command for us to withdraw our
selves from all those that offend in other things of the like Nature, and that
are guilty of frand or deceit and wrong to any Person. And that this command in
Ver. 6. is general, including all disorders in Manners, Doctrine, and false
Worship, and so is a Confirmation of all I have said before for proof thereof,
appears as follows.

1. Because in Ver. 7, 8. there is a plain Intimation, that the command, Ver.
6. To withdraw from every Brother that walks disorderly, does respect other
disorders besides the particular Case of eating other Men's Bread for naught.
For the Apostle says, Ver. 7, 8. Your selves know how ye ought to follow us:
for we behaved not our selves disorderly among you, neither did we eat any Man's
Bread for naught. Observe the Word [Neither] imports a different disorder to
what he employed before in Opposition to his Example: So that to me it is plain,
that the command in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, was to withdraw from
those disorders that were contrary to the Apostles examples, and which were not
after the Tradition which they received of them, and therefore it is a general
command, as was said before.

2. I shall give a brief Citation, of what is said on the same Text in a Book
entitled, Asober Discourse of Right to Church Communion, in Page 5. it is said,
Written by Mr. Will. Kiffin.
quoting 2 These. 3.6. Now we command you Brethren, in the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks
disorderly, and not after the Tradition which he received of us. Which last
Phrase (...) (the Word [Paradosis] signifiing not only Doctrine delivered,
Math. 15.2, 3. but also a Command, Ordinance or Institution, as before, 2 These.
2.15.) plainly makes out, that they were not only to withdraw from Persons of
disorderly Conversation, or defective in Morals, but also from such as were
corrupt in Doctrine, or disorderly in their Gospel Administrations, that being
as great a Violation of Gospel Order, and as pernicious to Christians as
Immorality: Which must be granted, or else there is no Authority given to the
Church to deal with Members of corrupt Principles, etc.

Now this Command (says he) being general, includes all disorders of any kind,
in Manners, Doctrine, or Practice, and is a sufficient warrant (were there no
more) for our Obedience, to exclude such as disorderly practice the Ordinance
of Baptism, from our immediate Communion at the Lords Table, though not from our
Love and Affections.

Having hitherto been discovering the Scripture Grounds of Separation from
Church Communion with all disorderly Persons, in Manners, Doctrine, false
Worship or irregular Administrations of Gospel Ordinances, I shall now proceed
as follows: 1. To Answer the chiefest Objections I find against such Gospel
Separation. 2. To give a particular Instance of some confused Matter about
Communion, already Printed amongst us with several Queries thereupon. 3. I
shall present my humble Advice to some of our Baptized Churches. And 4. I shall
leave some few things to the serious Consideration of those that have received
a Gracious Discovery of the Love and Favor of God unto their Souls, or that
have good Hope through Grace of Eternal Life; and yet are walking at large out of
the Communion of a Gospel Church: As also an Exhortation in another Case
concerning Gospel Communion.


Lastly in a Postscript, I have showed, that it is the Duty of all true
Believers in Order to Church Communion, to subject themselves to the Ordinance
of Water Baptism, and have also discoursed against excess of apparel, and then
made a general Conclusion of this Treatise.

Objections Answered.
I. Object. Rev. Chap. 2. Chap. 3.
None of the seven Churches of Asia in the Epistles, to them were commanded to
withdraw their Communion, or separate themselves from any of those Persons
among them, which the Holy Ghost charged with Evil. And therefore neither
Churches from any of their Members, nor any Members from their Churches, should
separate themselves from one another full Communion at the Lords Table, unless
it be for gross and scandalous Evils.

Answer: If this Argument holds good and warrantable for Persons and Churches
to keep their Communion at the Lords Table, under the Guilt and Non-repentance
of lesser Evils; it will also justify such Communion with those that are
guilty of grosser Sins. For the Church of Pergamos had them that held the
Doctrine of Balaam, Chapter 2.14.
who taught Balak to cast a stumbling block before the Children of Israel, to
eat things sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit Fornication. And this was also
the Sin of the Church in Thyatira, Ver. 24, 25.
to whom its said, That unto the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not this
Doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Stan, as they speak, I will
put upon you none other burden. But that which you have already hold fast till
I come. And therefore, seeing the Church of Thyratira suffered that Woman
Jezebel to seduce the Servants of Christ, Ver. 20.
to commit Fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to Idols (which must be
meant in honor to them, 1 Cor. 8.9, 10. Chapter 10.27, 28, 29.
for otherwise Meats sacrificed to Idols were not unlawful to eat, though
sometimes not expedient for the sake of weak Brethren) then surely the rest
that escaped those Pollutions, and had no other burden put upon them, than to
hold fast that they had already, cannot rationally be thought then to be in the
same Communion with those Idolaters and Fornicators, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
for such have no Inheritance in the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 5.2, 4, 5.
Besides, we have an Instance of a Fornicator that was separated from the
Church, or delivered up unto Satan. So that though there is no express command in
the Epistles to those seven Churches of Asia, for withdrawing their Communion
from any evils mentioned therein; yet doubtless it was their Duty from other
Precepts then written, to cast out those that were guilty of such notorious
Sins, as were in some of those Churches: And those Christians of Thyatira,
which the Holy Ghost commended, that were in the same City with those that were
reproved (and perhaps originally in full Communion together in one Body) it is
rational to believe were separated from their Communion, for Dr. Hammond in his
Margin reads in Ver. 24. thus: But unto [you, I say the rest] in Thyatira, etc.
for the Kings, M. S. reads it so (...). See also the Bibles Printed by the
Deputies of Chris. Barker, 1599. and by Robert Barker, 1607. Chapter 2.2.
, which imports another distinct Church or People in that City. And the Reason
why Christ threatened those defiled Christians, which were the Church to whom
the Epistle was primarily directed, was because they suffered those evils, when
they should have purged out such Offenders, as the Church of Ephesus did, for
what else can be meant by those Words: I know thy Works -- how thou can not
bear them which are Evil: and thou have tried them, which say they are
Apostles, and are not; and have found them liars, who were therefore doubtless
rejected from their Communion. But if any say, that these Words, thou can not
bear them which are evil, have only respect to the following Words. And thou
have tried them, which say they are Apostles, and are not; and have found them
liars: I have this to Answer, 1. That if it were so, yet it shows that this
Church did not bear with such Liars in their Communion, otherwise they could
not be properly commended for not bearing with them. 2. The Word [and] thou
have tried them, etc. implies a particular different thing, or other Persons
to those preceding Words in general: And how thou can not bear them which are
evil; like as we find in the same Verse, that the Word [and] thy Labor, [and]
thy Patience, denotes different things to each other, and particulars of the
general Word (I know thy) [Works.] So that the Text does clearly demonstrate,
that the Church of Ephesus did neither bear those that were Evil, nor those
false Apostles in their Communion, which Exposition is confirmed by the Dutch
Annotations on those Words, and how thou can not bear them which are evil,
that is, say they, such as are scandalous in Life and Doctrine. Thus their
Zealis commended here in the Evercise of Ecclesiastical Discipline. So that the
aforesaid Objection, That none of the seven Churches of Asia, were commanded in
their Epistles to separate themselves from any of those Persons, which the Holy
Ghost charged with evil, is invalid. And considering also, that his silence may
be improved (if we give ear to such a groundless Argument) for holding
Communion with grosser as well as lesser Sins; we have Reason to believe, that
some of those Churches and Christians, that were concerned in those Epistles
(from the Authority of some other part of the Holy Scriptures) did separate
themselves from those offenders, that by the Laws of Christ they were not to
bear in their Communion. And that those Churches, who suffered themselves to be
polluted, through the neglect of their Duty in bearing with those evils they
should have purged out, did thereby bring themselves under the anger and
displeasure of God for it, as appears in their Epistles.

II. Object. Is from Phil. 3.15, 16. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect,
be thus minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal
even this unto you. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk
by the same Rule, let us mind the same Thing. That these Words give no
allowance for any to hold a corrupt Communion, is very plain, because the
Apostle is not here arguing to prove the Resurrection of the Dead, or any
fundamental Article of our Faith, or on any essential part of Divine Worship,
or of such practical Obedience, as that the failure thereof is to be noted as
disorderly walking: But he is Treating in the preceding Verses, that he had not
attained, but was following after the Resurrection-state of Perfection, and of
his pressing toward the Mark, for the Prize of the high Calling of God in
Christ Jesus; and then it follows, Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be
thus minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even
this unto you. As if he should fay, Let us therefore, as many as be [perfect]
that is, 1 Cor. 3.1. 1 John 2.14. Heb. 5.12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. 2.6.
as are not [babes] in Christ, that have need of [Milk] but are [strong Men] of
[full Age] [skilful] in the Word of Righteousness, who by Reason of use have
their Senses exercised to discern both good and evil. Perfect, 2 Timothy 3.17.
Col. 4.12. Jam. 3.2. Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
thoroughly surnished unto all good Works. Perfect and complete in all the Will
of God. To be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and
length, and depth, and height; and to know the Love of Christ, which passes
Knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God. Now consider,
that as we cannot know that which passes Knowledge, but as the Apostle says,
we know in part, 1 Cor. 13.12.
and as none but Christ was ever filled with all the fullness of the Perfection
of God; but of the Knowledge of his Will, and Love to us in all its parts
necessary to a Holy Life of Faith, the true Worship of God and Eternal Life: So
if any came short of this kind of Perfection, the Apostle told them, God should
reveal even this unto them. And therefore the Text does not any ways prohibit a
Separation from such aforesaid Errors, that are noted in Holy Writ, as
disorders in Manners, Doctrine or Worship. But it contains a comfortable
Promise to those that are rather free from them; that though they are weak in
Faith, and Babes in the Knowledge of Christ, yet sincerely minding the some
things which according to Rule they have attained to, and laboring to grow in
Grace, 2 Pet. 3.18.
and in the Knowledge of Christ, they shall have in due Season a more full
discovery of that perfect Love, 1 John 4.12, 18.
which casts out fear, and of the Will of God in the Revelation of the
Gospel, and shall be built up in their most Holy Faith from a babe-like-state
to a perfect Man in Christ Jesus, in some Scripture Sense. So that there is
nothing in the Text, that implies a Prohibition of Separation in the aforesaid
Cases of corrupt Manners, Erroneous, Doctrine, false Worship, or irregular
Administrations of Gospel Ordinances.

III. Object. Is from, 1 Pet. 4.8. and Math. 18.21, 22. And above all things
have fervent Charity among your selves: for Charity shall cover a Multitude of
Sins. And Peter said, Lord, How often shall my Brother Sin against me; and I
forgive him? till seven times? Jesus said unto him, I say not unto thee; until
seven times: but, until seventy times seven; from which Scriptures, some may
think that Christians should bear with Sins in Communion with one another, and
cover them all in Love.

Answer, Our Lord himself shows plainly us, what is meant by those Scriptures,
Luke 17.3. Take heed to your selves: If thy Brother trespass against thee,
rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him. And if he trespass against thee
seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I
repent, thou shall forgive him. From whence it appears, 1. That we are to
rebuke our Brother for his Trespass. 2. To forgive him, but mind it well, it
must be if he return and repents; he must turn again as well as say he
repents; and so though Charity should cover a multitude of Sins, that are
turned from and repented of, yet it should cover none from the Church which
ought to come under her Cognizance, for our Charity should consist with our
Obedience to the Procepts of Christ.

IV. Object. It is said, Rebuke not an Elder, and therefore there should be a
difference between dealing with an Elder of a Church and a private Member, for
Sin.

Answer, 1 Timothy 4.12.
The Apostle Paul in this Epistle to Timothy, says, Let no Man despise thy
Youth. And in Chap. 5.1, 2. he exhorts him saying, Rebuke not an Elder, but
entreat him as a Father, and the younger Men as Brethren; the Elder Women as
Mothers, the younger as Sisters with all Purity. And Chap. 3.14, 15. These
things write I unto thee, -- that thou may know how thou ought to behave
thy self in the House of God. In these Scriptures the Apostle instructed
Timothy, that young Servant of Christ, and in him others, how they should
behave themselves, in reproving not only Elders, but younger Brethren and
Sisters; that as an Elder Bishop or Pastor, which is the same in Office, Tir.
1.7.
should not be [soon angry] so Timothy, and others should not in an angry
Spirit, rebuke either Elders or younger Brethren and Sisters, but rather
reprove them by entreaties. It Is true, it is also said, Let the Elders that Rule
well, be counted worthy of double Honor: But yet by Sin, they may lose and
justly forfeit their double and single Honor too; Ver. 19.20, 21.
for its said, Against an Elder receive not an. Accusation, but before (or as
it is in our Margin under) two or three witnesses. Them that Sin rebuke before
all, that others also may fear: I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Elect Angels, that thou observe these things without preferring
one before another, doing nothing by partiality. So that it seems to be
employed, that the Christians in those Primitive times were so zealous to
preserve the Reputation of the Gospel Ministry, and the Purity of their
Communion; as that they were ready to receive an Accusation against an Elder
sooner, and on lesser evidence than against a private Member; insomuch as the
Apostle thought it needful, to charge them not to receive an Accusation against
an Elder, under the legal Evidence of two or three Witnesses. Moreover, we see
how strictly the Apostle charged Timothy, that he should not use partiality in
any Case of Sin, to prefer one before another, whether Elders (as there were
sometimes several in one Church) or private Members; Tit. 1.5. Act. 20.17. Gal.
2.11, 14.
but them that sinned should be rebuked before all, i. e. those whose Sins
could not be privately covered for want of their Repentance, they whoever they
were should be rebuked before all, viz. so as the rebuke should reach as openly
as the Sins were known, and that others might also fear. And therefore, there
is not the least Reason from Scripture, for any to imagine that an Elders Sin
should be more favorably dealt with than a private Members, or that there is a
different Rule for judging of them; but that the Precepts of Christ for purging
out the Leaven of Unrighteousness, are to all alike; Ephesians. 6.9. Col. 3.25. Lev.
10.1, 2. Deuteronomy. 1.17.
for as the Lord respects no Man's Person, no not for Office-sake: So he has
commanded us, saying, Ye shall not respect Persons in Judgment.

V. Object. We ought not to leave a Church, till Christ be departed from it.

Answer 1. If this be true, then no Baptized Congregation should receive a
Member from our Brethrens Communion of the Independent Churches: For who can
say that Christ has left them, so as not to succeed their Ministry with true
Conversion of Souls, and so as not to give something of his gracious presence
to them and others, that are sound in the fundamental Principles to Salvation;
who truly fear the Lord and sincerely obey him according to their Light, though
the Mist of Men's Traditions may not be clearly wiped from off their Eyes. I
think none can be so uncharitable and censorious as to affirm it: But yet we
may safely say, the more we come up in our Obedience to the perfect Rule of
Christ, the greater our Peace and Comfort shall be, and the more or the
presence of God, we shall enjoy in the gracious discoveries of his Eternal Love
unto our Souls.

2. If Christ has not left our aforesaid Brethren (and others that are not of
our Communion) without some gracious Manifestations of his Presence among them.
And if therefore, according to the Objection, their Members ought not to leave
their Churches, do not then those Baptists which plead this Argument for a
mixed Communion among themselves, and yet receive the Members of those
Independent Churches, condemn themselves thereby; as Countenancers, Abetters
and Receivers of disorderly Persons, and as such, who according to this
Objection, have little or nothing more to say for their Separation, and keeping
up a distinct Church State from them, then for a private and worldly Interest.
And therefore away with such Pretensions for they are but a shame to us.

3. If we ought not to leave a Church, 'till Christ is departed from it, it
must be meant, either of a partial or total departure: If it be understood of
Christ's Partial departing from a Church, we must either allow it lawful for a
Member to leave his present Communion, when Christ has in part forsaken that
Church, so as for their Declension of Spirit they are suffered to fall into
such corrupt Manners, erroneous Doctrine, false Worship, or irregular
Practices, which the Lord has commanded to be purged out from among them; or
else that the Church it self has Power to prescribe Limits of Communion,
according as she shall judge, (without regard to the written Precepts of
Christ) that his presence does bound it. But as I believe, no Baptized Churches
will open their Mouths in favor of such an absolute Authority within
themselves, for that we own the Scriptures to be our Rule; so it cannot be
denied, but that it is lawful for Members to remove their Communion to a Church
which is more Pure, for the same causes; as a Church should withdraw their
Communion from a single Member, if for any cause at all. But if they mean, that
we should not separate from a Church, till Christ is wholly departed from it;
then it may be also argued, that a Church should not withdraw their Communion
from a Member, till Christ be wholly departed from him. Besides, if a single
Member should not depart from a Church, till Christ be wholly departed from it,
then the Question is, Whether Christ may be said totally to depart from a
Church, till at least it is manifest, that she is absolutely apostatized in her
Spirit from some one Article of our Christian Faith, which is essential to
Salvation; and if till then it be unlawful for single Persons to separate their
Communion from a Church of Christ, than if their Church worshippeth God in a
false manner, so it be not in fundamentals of Salvation, and makes void a
Commandment of God through Men's Traditions, and are corrupted in their Morals,
they must still hold their Communion with such a People; and it is hard to tell
how far a Church may be guilty of these Evils, and not loose the Essentials to
Salvation. But if such a corrupt Communion ought to be held, rather than a
Persons Separation from it should be allowed lawful, the consequents of it
naturally tends to the overthrow and Extirpation of our Baptized Churches; for
then what Obligation of Conscience is there for Baptized Believers to set up by
themselves such a Church State, which is despised and rendered obnoxious to many
Christians, and which is accompanied with diverse discouragements and outward
disadvantages more than others. Besides, unless it be lawful for a Member, or
the smaller number of a Church, to separate from their corrupt Communion, many
Christians cannot reform nor worship God with the Church, or in the
Administration of all Gospel Ordinances, according to their Consciences; for
generally Reformers are the fewest number, and if these should continue in
their irregular Communion, their Light will be hid and smoothered in the crowd
of corrupt Professors, and rather put under a Bushel than on a Gospel
Candlestick, Mat. 5.14, 15, 16.
to shine more clearly to those that are round about them.

VI. Object. We are (say some Persons) for Charity and Union, and therefore we
are for Communion at the Lord's Table with Christians, as such: If we believe
them to be but real Christians, we ought to hold our Communion with them.

Answer 1. To our Brethren of the Congregational or Independent Churches of
whom some have argued with me after the Nature of this Objection, as if we were
too strait in our Charity, for not holding Communion with them. To whom I have
this to say: 1. That I think we may fairly gather from what they have published
(with their Confession of Faith) of the Institution and Order of Churches, that
they do not admit any unbaptized Christians to their Communion at the Lord's
Table, for in Article the seventh, speaking of a particular Church gathered and
completed according to the Mind of Christ. In Article the eighth, they say,
The Members of those Churches are Saints by Calling, visibly manifesting and
evidencing -- their Obedience unto that call of Christ, who being further known
to each other by their Confession of the Faith, wrought in them by the Power of
God -- do willingly Consent to walk together, according to the appointment of
Christ, giving up themselves to the Lord, and to one another, by the Will of
God, in professed Subjection to the Ordinances of the Gospel. So then, if the
Members of a complete Church do willingly consent to walk together in professed
Subjection to the Ordinances of the Gospel, none that do not subject themselves
to the Ordinance of Baptism in their Sense can be orderly admitted by them, as
completely quallified to their full Communion; and so if they will not hold
Communion with such unbaptized Persons, they do not hold it, as some of them
pretend, with Christians merely as such; but only with such Christians, which
are qualified with Water Baptism to receive the Lords Supper.

But 2. If they own, that our baptizing Persons on Confession of Faith, by way
of dipping, is also right Baptism according to Gospel-Rule: and so for this
Reason, they can freely hold their Communion with us. Yet this is no Corrector,
that their Charity is more universal then ours, because then they receive us
not merely on the account of their Charity, but as Christians sitly qualified
with Water Baptism. But the Case is different, respecting us, for seeing we
deny their Infant-sprinkling to be true Baptism, or to be of God; and so they
being to us as unbaptized Persons; our having sull Communion with them, would
be not only contrary to the Light of our own Consciences, but witnessed against
by their practice of sprinkling for Baptism, as a qualification to full
Communion. And therefore, we have equal Reason to say, that our refusing
Church Communion with them, is not for want of Charity toward them as
Christians, any more then it is for want of it in themselves to other
Christians, that are not sprinkled or any ways baptized; if they refuse
Communion with them, as some have done in their private Conference, according
to what is gathered as their Mind in Print before. So that I see no Reason, why
our Brethren should in the least be offended at us, for keeping our selves from
their Communion, when otherwise, so far as I can perceive, their Practice, as
well as our own Consciences would condemn us for so doing.

3. Our aforesaid Brethren of the Independent Churches (however some of their
Members have in their private Converse reflected on us) have fairly granted,
See their 28 Article of the Institution of Churches at the end of the
Congregational Confession of Faith.
that a Person where he cannot continue in any Church without his Sin, may
depart from the Communion of one Church to another. For they say, Persons that
are joined in Church Fellowship, ought not lightly or without just cause to
withdraw themselves from the Communion of the Church whereunto they are so
joined: Nevertheless, where any Person cannot continue in any Church without
his Sin, either for want of the Administration of any Ordinances instituted by
Christ, or by his being deprived of his due Privileges, or compelled to any
thing in Practice not warranted by the Word, or in case of Persecution, or upon
the account of Convenience of Habitation, he consulting with the Church, or the
Officer, or Officers thereof, may peaceably depart from the Communion of the
Church wherewith he has so walked, to join himself with some other Church,
where he may enjoy the Ordinances in the Purity of the same, for his
Edification and Consolation.

Now seeing they grant, that we may leave our Communion with a Church, to join
our selves with some other Church, where we may enjoy the Ordinances in the
Purity of the same; then none of them ought to blame us, for not holding our
full Communion with them; as if they were the standard of Truth, who we believe
are not in the complete Order and true Administration of all Gospel Ordinances.
Seeing we walk by their Rule of Communion according to our Consciences, though we
have not the same Light to walk with them.

2. For any of our Baptized Brethren to plead for mixed Communion, from the
Obligation of universal Charity, for Christians as they are such, does rather
betray their want of real Love; Gal. 5.22. 1 John 4.19.
for that is a Fruit of the Holy Spirit, flowing first from the Faith we have
in the Love of God to us; which is the cause of Love in us to him, 1 John 5.1.
and so to our Brethren which are begotten of him; and then our universal Love
to Christians depending on our Love to God, it must consist with sincere
Obedience to his Will, so far as we are enlightened. For this is the Love of
God, Joh. 14.21, 23. 1 John 5.2, 3.
that we keep his Commandments; and his Commandments are not grievous. And by
this we know that we Love the Children of God, when we Love God and keep his
Commandments. And therefore, whatsoever Love is pretended, which is
inconsistent with sincere Obedience to Christ, it is rather to be suspected than
counted real. But in Charity I must conclude, it is not for want of Love to the
Institutions of Christ, but for want of Light that you plead for Communion at
the Lords Table with unbaptized Christians. However you do thereby virtually
deny your own Baptism to be essentially necessary to a regular Gospel Church,
and make void that Holy Ordinance of Christ, which in Obedience to him you have
subjected to. Besides, why may you not then also say, that you ought in Charity
to Christians, merely as such, (although they be not yet baptized,) to call any
gifted Christian to administer the Ordinances of Preaching, Prayer, and
breaking Bread in the Church; and in Charity to those Members that walk
disorderly, and break the Commandments of Christ, forbear the Execution of his
Ordinance of withdrawing your Church Communion from them, because you believe
them still to be real Christians; as if we could not Love Men's Persons, unless
we favor their Sins, and thereby perhaps through the neglect of our Duty to
them, harden their Hearts therein: And so under the Notion of Christian
Charity, the true Order of a Gospel Church may be quite destroyed.

VII. Object. But some may think, I open the door of the Church too wide, and
give too great encouragement for Persons to wander from Church to Church, or to
leave their present Communion to imbody themselves into a distinct Church State.

Answer 1. The same causes as will justify a single Persons removing his
Communion to another Church, will also justisie a Parties Separation to sit
down by themselves in a Church State; otherwise there is no erecting of
Reformed Churches to be allowed, where there was none before: Which if it be
there lawful to reform, as surely it cannot be denied, there is neither
Scripture nor Reason, as I can find, to debar a reforming party from settling
themselves in the Order of a Regular Gospel Church, where there is one already,
if they find it expedient for them.

But 2. To prevent such misapprehensions of giving Church Members too great a
Liberty. I shall here remind the Reader, that if he duly considers, what I
have said in this small Discourse, he will not find the least allowance for
Persons to remove their Communion out of Novelty, or merely for their
Pleasures-sake, or for Trivial Matters and Pretenses; for herein the Church is
bound (in faithfulness to Christ, and the Souls that are under her special
care) to use the means directed to in the Scripture, for preserving her mutual
Peace and Welfare. But for real Conscience Sake, Separation should be allowed
to keep themselves pure from corrupt and sinful Manners, Erroneous Doctrines in
essentials to Salvation, and from false Worship and irregular Ordinances; and
unless there be a Moral Necessity, or a real Expediency for it, no Separation
else is lawful; for every Member is (or should be) in Covenant with the Church,
to walk in the ways of the Lord together with them. But yet when a Church of
Christ shall alter in any part of their Faith or Practice essential to a
regular Church, the Members thereof are free from their former Covenant: Not
simply, because the Church has broken the Conditions of it; (for that were to
acknowledge her Members to be under an absolute tie, while she makes no
Alteration of her Faith and Practice.) For as none of our Churches in
Covenanting with their Members, by giving them the right hand of fellowship,
does intend thereby absolutely to bind themselves from any future Alteration of
their Faith or Practice, if in Conscience they should be otherwise informed; so
the like Liberty is but equitable for the Members to have, and therefore, as
there is the same Reason for it, so it ought to be equally taken for granted in
their Covenanting with the Church, that each Member in Covenant has an equal
Reservation of Liberty of Conscience to the Church, and neither side ought to
impose on each other, for that is a making themselves the perfect standard of
Religion, like the Church of Rome.

3. 2 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3.
The Apostle Peter exhorts the Elders to take the oversight of the Flock, Not
by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready Mind.
[Neither as being Lords over Gods Heritage, but being ensamples to the Flock.]
And Paul says, That to spare you, I came not as yet unto Corinth. 2 Cor. 1.23,
24. 1 Timothy 6.2, 5. 2 Timothy 2.22. Chap. 3.5.
Not for that we have Dominion over your Faith, but are helpers of your Joy.
And Timothy was commanded as a single Person, to withdraw himself from those
Professors of Religion, that were corrupt in Doctrine.

Now if the Apostles, who were the infallible Penmen of sacred Scripture,
disclaimed Lordship over the Saints, and Dominion over their Faith, Why should
any hold such Principles, as will naturally assume such a regal Power over the
Consciences of their Brethren, as tends to enthral them in diverse troubles;
when they go about to remove their Communion from them for Conscience Sake,
considering also they themselves are but lately delivered from the Yoke of
Persecution? And for such who make it their frequent Practice to receive
Members, that remove for Conscience Sake from other Congregations (that are
true Churches of Christ, as to their visible Matter, and part of their Form,)
to hold such Principles as will deny their own Members Liberty of Conscience,
without their Censures, Snares or Inthralments to frighten their weak Brethren
to continue in their Communion against the Light which they have received, is
consequently assuming such an Arbitrary Dominion over their Faith and
Consciences which neither God nor Nature has given to them, and is not
Consonant to the Law, for doing to others as they would have others do to them
in the like Case. And to speak the plain Truth of such a Principle and
Practice, it is no better then claiming a right of Imposition on the
Consciences of their Brethren, and a holding fast all they have, and all they
can so get right or wrong.

And therefore seeing, the Light of Scripture and Reason with common Equity, is
repugnant to such an Arbitrary Dominion over the Faith and Consciences of the
Saints, and that this Principle of denying a single Member his Liberty of
Communion according to his Light, is also a bar to Religious Reformation: I
conceive none should go about to hinder a single Persons removing from them for
Conscience Sake any other ways, than by Arguments from the Scriptures for the
Regularity of their Communion; and if herein they cannot satisfy his Mind, I
believe the Church should do no more, then (if they please) to enter him in
their Book departed from them, for the cause for which he leaves them, for as
much as his Principles are not opposite to any of their Essentials of
Communion. And in Case they were, yet if he holds no Error in fundamentals to
Salvation, it better suits with the Grace of Love and universal Charity to one
another, to let him peaceably remove his Communion, than by a harsh and sower
Spirit, to widen the Differences that are between Saints and Saints, and to
fright a weak and tender Conscience with the Censure of a Church; which if it
be not according to Christ's Institutions, it is neither bound in Heaven, nor
should it be binding on our Consciences. But if a single Member should alter in
his Faith or Practice, from any of his Church Essentials of Communion, and yet
seek to continue in the same Church, then to prevent the spreading of his
Leaven to the Pollution of the Body, or their being defiled with his Error by
Participation in full Communion with him, they have ground on Non-repentance to
withdraw from him; and if he persisteth in such an Error, to purge him out
from their Communion. But to conclude the aforesaid Objection: What spiritual
Comfort can any have in Church Communion, where there is not an agreement in
the Essentials thereof? does not the sweetest Communion depend on the greatest
Union in Faith and Practice? why then should any Christians be kept in Bondage,
and be deprived of the chiefest ends of Church Communion, which are to glorify
God in the purest worship they can attain to the Knowledge and Practice of, and
to enjoy the comfortable Communion of Saints in the Unity of Faith and of the
Spirit, which is the bond of Peace?

Secondly, I shall present you with a particular instance of the confused
Matter which is already Printed among us, in Mr. Keaches Book, entitled the
Breach Repaired, and of several Queries made upon it in my Reply to him, with
some Additions to them. To proceed therefore, I shall premise some particular
things in Mr. Keaches Gold Refined, or Treatise of Baptism, Page 181, 182.
where he says thus, Let me conclude all with one Use of Caution to my
Brethren, that are Baptized as Believers, and yet take Liberty to walk in
Communion with such Churches as dissent from them, in respect of this
Ordinance, and sprinkle Babes. I am more concerned about you than any other
People, because you seem to pull down with one Hand that which you build with
the other -- ought you not to follow the best and highest Reformation, and
clearest discovery of God, and to be in the most perfect and complete Order of
the Gospel, you are able to arrive to the Knowledge of -- is not Truth and
Righteousness to be joined with Peace and Love? Nay, and does not my Love run
out to our Brethren, in a cleaner Channel than yours. And in his Treatise of
Laying on of Hands, Page 99. he has these Words. Can we comfortably have
Communion with such that oppose a Holy Oracle, or Command of God? -- Ought not
Communion to flow from Christian Union, especially in all fundamental
Principles of Church-Constitution? Ought we not in these things to be agreed,
before we can in an orderly way sit down together?

But notwithstanding Mr. Benjamin Keach thus refuses Communion with those that
are not under Believers-Baptism, See my Ep. to my Reply to Mr. Keach's Breach
Repaired, p. 10, etc.
and laying on of Hands, yet in his general Epistle to his (pretended) Answer
to my Appendix, Page 9. he says; We do not say our dissatisfied Brethren shall
sing with us, or we will have no fellowship with them: No, God forbid we should
impose on their Consciences: We do not look upon Singing, etc. an Essential of
Communion; it is not for the being, but for the Comfort and well being of the
Church. To which I there Reply to Mr. Keach, Let me ask you in your own Words,
See his darkness, etc. Vanquished or Truth in its Primitive Purity, p. 96.
Why should you have a greater esteem for one than for another Institution? If
it be as you say, that your way of Singing is a Gospel-Ordinance, for the
Practice of the Church: Is there any Church Ordinance of Divine Worship, that
is not essential to her orderly being, as well as for her Comfort and well
Being? Who gave you Power to dispense with any one Ordinance more than others?
And in Page 13. of my Epistle, I farther tell Mr. Keach, that there are diverse
things that I and others cannot reconcile to the Word of God, and his confused
Principles of Communion, some of which I offer to his Consideration by way of
Query.

1. Whether it be lawful for a Christian to withdraw (or remove) his Communion
at the Lords Table, from a Church that practices any one Ordinance of Divine
Worship, or of Church-Constitution, in a false Manner, to join with a Church
that is more pure? And whether it is his Duty, if enlightened therein, so to do?

2. Whether there is any Liberty given in the Word of God, for a Christian to
have Communion with a Church that practices any one Ordinance of
Gospel Worship, or of Church-Constitution, in a false Manner, more than of any
other such Ordinances so performed? and if there be, which it is, or which they
are, and where the allowance is given?

3. Whether thanking and praising of God, be as much an Ordinance, and of as
high a Nature, as Prayer to him?

4. Whether [the Mode of Singing] the Praises of God, be also as much an
Ordinance, and of as high a Nature, as Prayer?

5. Why it is not as unlawful to have Communion with a Church that practices
Singing the Praises of God in a false Manner, as with a Church that performs
Prayer in a false Manner?

6. Seeing you have made a Common Praise-Book (so I call it) wherein you say is
contained some hundred of Sacred Hymns, out of which as I hear, is sometimes
read and sang an Hymn in your Congregation for public Worship: So if another
Ministering Brother of your own or of another Congregation, in full Communion
with you at the Lords Table, should also make prestinted set Forms of Prayer,
and read them, or say them in the Church for public Worship; I Query, Whether
you would nevertheless hold and continue your full Communion with such a Person
or Church as so uses such humane prestinted Forms of Prayer?

7. Whether it be not a worshipping of God in a false Manner, and so unlawful,
and a Sin for any of our Brethren alone by themselves, to pray in their own or
another set humane prestinted form of Words, and if it can be proved against
him, that he uses such private Prayers; Whether the Church should still hold
their full Communion with him, without Repentance for it?

8. Whether it be not unlawful for any of our Churches to hold full Communion
with a Brother at the Lords Table, who sometimes uses to pray with another
different People, in a false Manner, in a set humane prestinted form of Words;
and if this be unlawful, whether it is not equally unlawful for a Church to
hold such Communion with a Brother, who though he cannot practice Singing the
Praises of God in as false a Manner in his own Church, yet he sometimes as
falsely sings in other Congregations?

9. Whether [the Mode of Singing] an Hymn is a piece of Worship, Essential to
the Regular and Complete Administration of the Lords Supper? If our Singers
deny this, why do so many of them make such a stir about it, and commend that
practice of Singing, See the Reply to Mr. Steed's Epist. page 8.40, 41, 45, 47,
49.
as they boldly say, from the Example of Christ and his Disciples, as a perfect
Pattern and Rule for us to follow? And if they believe in their Consciences,
that [the Mode of Singing] an Hymn is so Essential to that Ordinance; How can
any of those Gospel Ministers, as I have heard say, administer the Lords Supper
without it, and contrary to the Light of their own Consciences dispense with
that which belongs, as they believe, to Christ's Ordinance, as if they choose to
please Men rather than God in his Worship?

I have added the more Queries, because such stating of the matter diverse ways,
will lay a greater Necessity on any who may pretend to answer them, either to
discover the Discord and Confusion of their Principles of Communion, and the
natural tendency of them, or to unmasque the farther designs of those that are
apostatizing from the true Worship of God.

Thirdly, I shall here humbly present my Advice to some of our Baptized
Churches. And

1. To those whose sixed Pastors and Ministers differ from their Churches in
some Principles, Essential either to the true Manner of praising God in public
Worship, or to the Regular Constitution of a Gospel Church, my humble Advice to
you, is. That notwithstanding, if they rightly administer all
Gospel Ordinances, according to the Principles of their Churches, for the
present necessity, you continue as you are: And as their Office is to watch
over you in the Lord, Heb. 13.17. 1 These. 5.12.
so your Duty is to obey them so far as they rule by the Laws of Christ; and to
continue your Affections, and abound in Love to them and all the Saints. But
yet if they put such different and erroneous Principles in practice, and
thereby interrupt the pure Communion of their Churches, contrary to their Faith
and settled Order, or go about to disturb your Peace with any of them; then as
ye are bound to follow your Pastors and Ministers, only so far as they are
followers of Christ and his Apostles, 1 Cor. 11.1. Phil. 3.17.
so it is your Duty to use all Diligence to preserve the Peace and right
Constitution of your Churches against their Innovations; and rather than to
have your Communion corrupted by them, you are to part with them and all things
else, though never so near and dear to you.

2. To those Churches which are destitute of a settled Pastor: I shall offer
this to your serious Consideration, That it is a weak Imagination to think that
honest and sincere hearted Ministers, though naturally of a mild and peaceable
Temper, will not labor to promote the practice of those things in their
Churches, which they believe to be the Will of God, for if they are faithful
Men they will do it in Obedience to Christ's Commission; wherein they are
required to teach all Nations whatsoever he has commanded them. Math. 28.20.
And therefore if you expect that such a Minister as you design to call to
settle with you, will not for the sake of some in the Church who differ from
him, declare and promote according to his Conscience, the practice of all
things which God requires, you have equal Reason to expect that for the sake of
those Persons, he will not be faithful to his Principles; and then how can any
think he will be faithful to his Church, or any thing else he takes in hand,
any farther than it suits with his private interest; so that whatever Love,
Peace and Union, a Church may propose to themselves, under the care of such a
fixed Pastor as differs in his Principles from it, in any Essentials of a
Regular Church. viz. Either in Doctrinals to Salvation, Practicals in Divine
Worship, or in Administrations of Gospel Ordinances, such a Church does only
delude themselves with an Expectation of that which they lay a Foundation to
destroy; for if such a Pastor be faithful to his Principles (it being
irrational to conceive that a whole Church will be for altering their former
Settlement of Communion) they will then find that his differing Principles will
breed Division among them, and so destroy the bond of Peace and Love, which
they promised to themselves from the peaceable Temper of such a Pastor: And
instead thereof, those faithful Members that are still for their former
Settlement, may fall into a Labyrinth of Troubles; and if they are the smaller
part of the Church, the others will be apt to count them the disturbers of its
Peace; and perhaps when it is too late to recover the Truth and Purity of
Gospel Worship and Communion that was once among them, they will mourn under
their Troubles and Temptations, and for their weakness in choosing or accepting
of such a Pastor, as thereby to betray the Trust committed to them by Jesus
Christ, so far as to loose of those things he has wrought among them, insomuch
as respecting their public Trust of the Gospel, 2 John 8.
as Members of a visible Church of Christ, they will come so short of holding
fast that which they have received, Rev. 3.11.
that no Man take their Crown, as that they cannot give so good an account of
their Stewardship, as that evil Servant did, Math. 25, 25, 26.
who rendered again what he had received of his Lord.

Therefore knowing the aptness of many People to follow others Examples, from
their Affections to them, more than from the real Judgment and Understanding
they have of their Principles; and considering the experience some have had of
the restless endeavors of their Ministers, to leaven their Churches with those
Principles wherein they differ from them; and the Obligation of Conscience they
are under, according to their Light, to declare the whole Counsel of God to the
People under their care; Acts 20.26, 27.
I conclude it highly concerns those Churches that have yet their choice to
make for the Ministration of Gospel Ordinances, to seek for such Persons as are
one with them in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of
Gospel-Institutions. For whatsoever Affections you may have to any Person, yet
above all things you ought to be faithful to the Truth, as ye have received it
in your Consciences, and not by any means to be led aside to betray the Purity
of the Gospel committed to your Trust, so far as to putit into the Power of any
Person to be continually working (perhaps while you and others are lulled
asleep in the pretended Bed of Charity) the overthrow and confusion of any
essential part of the Religion you profess. Besides, a Pastor should be
qualified, according to the Word of God, which says, A Bishop must be
blameless, as the Steward of God -- holding fast the faithful Word, as he has
been taught, that he may be able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and to
convince the gainsayers. Tit. 1.7, 9, etc.
For there are many unruly, and vain-talkers, and Deceivers, especially they of
the Circumcision: Whose Mouths must be stopped. Now consider, that one great
qualification of an Elder, is to be able to stop the Mouths of Gainsayers. And
therefore none who differ from their Church in any essential Principles of her
Communion, are fit for the Office of an Elder in it, for such a one in the
Matters of difference, is principled rather to gainsay the Church, than other
Persons that oppose the Faith or Practice of it.

Moreover the Zeal of others, which are for the common way of Singing, should
provoke us to promote the pure Interest of Christ among our Churches, for they
have used diligence to improve the Benesit of the public Fund, for Learning of
such young Brethren the Knowledge of the Tongues, the better to sit them for
the Gospel Ministry; who have sucked in that apostatizing Principle of Singing,
and I have been told that some of them have gone to School to learn it by Art
in and about Bristol, or the Western parts of this Land, and if I am not
misinformed, there were eight in number for common set form singing, two of
which were advanced by more private means, then the public Fund; and Mr. Keach
has pleaded so much for Art in Divine Worship, See his Book entitled, the
Breach Repaired in Gods Worship, Page 183, 184.
that if the Spirit of the Lord does not lift up a spiritual standard against
it, we may fear the increase of Artificial Worship in our Churches; for he
says, There is I must 'tell you, an Art in speaking; and no Man but has need
to learn, and be instructed to speak as he ought -- especially when he speaks
about Divine Things. -- Also there is an Art in preaching; and all young Men
when they begin to take upon them that work, need Instruction how to handle a
Doctrine. And (says he) so I may say in Praying too. So that we see, how
naturally the Art of singing, which he is there pleading for, does draw Men in
to plead for an Art in Praying too. And as I have said in my Reply to him, See
my Book, Page 18.
is not this a forward step (for him or others that may (if the Lord of his
Mercy does not prevent) hereafter build upon this Foundation,) to bring into
use a prestinted Form of Prayer for Gospel Worship; for if Nature and Grace may
and ought to be improved by Art, to express the Matter of our Prayers to God;
what Art can he mean, or can any others think is best for Prayer, than to use
an Artificial Form of Words? I mention these things to show the danger that we
are in of loosing the true spiritual Worship of God, by the apostatizing of
some in our Profession to the Error of prestinted Forms of Singing. And if we
do not encourage such gracious Brethren, as may be found among us better
principled (whether with or without the Knowldge of other Tongues) to improve
their Gifts, which through the Blessing of God may be fit for the public
Service of our Churches, many of them are like to crumble away for want of
Ministers suitable to their Principles; and those others, which have been
advanced to the Ministry by the public Fund, will have the greater opportunity
through the necessities of our Churches to infect our Profession with their
Error of common set form Singing (and I fear with mixed Communion too, which
seem like twins to go hand in hand together.) As for their [Mode] of of
Singing, I have largely showed, that which was never answered by any of them,
and plainly proved in my Reply to Mr. Benjamin Keaches Book of Singing,
Entitled the Breach Repaired, etc. That we have no Command nor Example, neither
under the Law, nor under the Gospel for the Ministers, and all the People to
sing with united Voices together in the settled worship of God in his Church.
And that his common way of Singing, is not that Mode of spiritual singing which
was used in the Apostles time, nor is it the natural, but an Artificial Mode of
Worship: And also that we have not the least ground to conclude, that Christ
and his Disciples at or after the Lords Supper did sing the Hymn or Praise,
which they gave to God, for those Texts, Math. 26.30. Mark 14.26. and Acts
16.25. are not rightly translated in our last Bibles, which are witnessed
against by many of our old English Bibles, and many learned Authors, as I have
abundantly showed in my aforesaid Reply to Mr. Keach. But to return. It is
therefore high time for all that have any Love for the Truth and Purity of
Gospel Worship, to awake out of sleep; for the necessities of many Churches
call upon us earnestly to seek the Lord by Humiliations, Fastings and Prayers;
that he would graciously raise up Ministers, not only sound in the Faith, but
in all their Principles of Divine Worship, in the Spirit of Love and Meekness.
And though we may find some of our Ministers, and other Brethren, that are for
the new Modelling of our Churches with their formal Worship, and mixed
Communion to decline this Work with us, by Reason their different Principles
cannot join with our particular Requests relating thereunto; yet this should in
no wise hinder our People from flocking together, and crying fervently to the
Lord for the pourings forth of the Holy Spirit (according to his promise) to
bear a lively Testimony against all unrighteousness and false worship, Isa.
44.3, to 6. Chapter 59.21. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. Isa. 59.19, 20, 21. Jer. 3.15.
and to give us Pastors according to his heart, which shall feed his People
with Knowledge and Understanding, even such as shall worship him in Spirit and
Truth, without any mixture of humane Forms and mere Inventions of men. For if
instead of sound Elders we should have only those for the public service of
God that are for a piece of false worship and mixed communion, what else can be
expected from new Converts and those who join themselves to our Churches, but
that through Love and Affections to their Ministers they will suck in their
Erroneous Principles, as sad Experience has showed, and so in time will
overturn the former order and settlement of our Churches, and put back that
blessed Reformation which God has wrought among us, and which many precious
Saints have suffered for, that the Purity of the Gospel (which some are now
betraying) might be handed down to future ages.

Fourthly, I shall leave a few things to the serious consideration of those who
have received the manifestation of the special Grace of God in Christ to their
souls, through faith which works by love, and yet are walking at large in
neglect of his holy Ordinances, as if they were left to Christians liberty to
obey or reject them at their pleasures. Let me ask a few Questions for thee to
answer in thine own Conscience, Romans 2.15, 16.
which shall either accuse or else excuse thee in the day when God shall judge
the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel. Why art thou
partial in Gods laws or in Christ's institutions, Mal. 2.9.
so as to pick and choose which of them thou will obey? Remember, Psalm. 119.6.
David says, Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy
Commandments. Will thou partake of the Benefit of the public Prayers of the
Saints, and of the Ministration of the Gospel of Christ in his Church, and not
put to thy helping hand to support it in the World, and to convey it down to
future ages? what had become of thy precious soul, and many thousands more, if
our late Reformers had bin of thy Mind? how should the true worship of God have
bin maintained, and how little preaching should we have in our present day, if
Christians did not imbody themselves into Societies to encourage the Gospel
Ministers? for where can their light best appear if not on a Gospel
Candlestick? No marvel, Soul, if thou have not peace of Conscience and strength
of Grace against the power of Sins and Temptations, if thy feet are not found
in the ways of Christ, whose ways are ways of pleasantness, Prove. 3.17. Chapter
10.29. Isa. 64.5.
and all his paths are peace and strength to the upright. There God has said he
meets his people that remember him in his ways, and Christ has much intailed
his gracious presence on the faithful obedience of his Saints. He that has my
Commandments, Joh. 14.21.
and keeps them, he it is that loves we: And he that loves me shall be
loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him. --
If a man love me, he will keep my words: And my Father will love him; and we
will come unto him, and make our abode with him. And therefore the more
obedient a Soul is, the more of Christ's fullness he shall receive, John 1.16.
and Grace for Grace.

But 2. If thou stand off from Church Communion, because thou think thy
self unworthy of it, or unmeet for it, or till thou have a special inspiration
to thrust thee forth in thy duty; my Answer is, that in this snare I was
entangled my self for diverse years, but at last I was satisfied in my
Conscience; that seeing I had true saving Faith and Light in Gospel Ordinances,
my personal unworthiness through the infirmity of Nature was no sufficient
Ground for me to neglect the Institutions of Christ, and that I could not
rationally expect any extraordinary motions to do that which the Word of God
did plainly express to be my Duty. Besides, for Christians to wait for a more
than ordinary impulse of Spirit, to thrust them forth in their Duty, when
clearly expressed in the Holy Scriptures, is through weakness of Faith, a Tempting
God to confirm his written Will by extraordinary Inspiration, which is a Sin,
Math. 4.7.

Moreover, I shall farther remove this objection from 1 Cor. 11.27. Whosoever
shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be
guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. This unworthiness cannot respect our
natural infirmities, for then the best of men would be excluded from that
Ordinance; but the unworthiness there mentioned is described to us in the same
Chapter to be, Divisions and Drunkeness, See ver. 18.20, 21, 22, 33.
and such like Disorders as should not be suffered in a Gospel Church, or that
show they despise the Church of God. And therefore Christians having light in
Gospel Ordinances, though they are but weak in Faith and Babes in Christ, and
have not yet attained to the Faith of Assurance of their Election, 2 Pet. 1.10.
or to the clear witnessings of the Spirit of God with their Spirits, Romans 8.16.
that they are the Children of God, yet having the true Faith of cleaving to
Christ with full purpose of heart, and of reliance on his death and merits for
Salvation and eternal life, those have a right to full Communion with the
Church, at the Lords Table and we are bound to receive them, Romans 14.1.
but not to doubtful Disputations: But.

If thou art one within the visible pale of the Church, and such a wonderful
and horrible thing is therein, or shall happen, as was in Israel, though in a
different manner, the Prophets prophesied falsely, Jere. 5.31.
and the Priests bear Rule by their means, and the people loved to have it so.
As the Lord said to them, so will I say to thee, if then thou art of their
Spirit, what will thou do in the end thereof, when the Lord shall visit for
these things? can thou bear, yea like and plead for an Alteration in thy
Church-Constitution, or in Gods worship, because thy Pastor will have it so.
Take heed lest thou give ground to say of thee as it was said to Israel: Isa.
3.12. Chapter 9.16.
O my People, they which lead thee, cause thee to err, and destroy the way of
thy paths. -- and they that are led of them are destroyed. 1 Cor. 10.22.
Brethren, beware lest ye provoke, the Lord to Jealousy! are ye stronger than
he? Deuteronomy. 12.32.
has he not said, what things soever I command you, observe to do it? Thou
shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it. And have we not diverse instances
of his sore Displeasure for breaking his Rule of Worship, as in Nadab and
Abihu, Lev. 7.11, to 19.
who for offering of strange fire, died before the Lord? And might not some
have thought it a small matter to have eaten of the Peace or Thank-offering
after the first day, or of the Vow-offering, if any of it had been left on the
third day, but we see how great an offense it was to make so small an Addition
to Gods Ordinance, as that it should not be accepted, neither should it be
imputed to him that offered it: It should be an Abomination, and that soul
should bear his iniquity. Moreover, we read how the Lord smote above fifty
thousand of the men of Beth-she-mesh for but looking into his Ark, and how
Vzzah lost his life for touching the Ark of God, 2 Samuel 6.6. 1 Samuel 6.19. 2
Chr. 26.16.
because they sought him not after the due manner: And how Vzziah the King for
meddling with Gods Ordinance, and burning incense before the Lord, 1 Chr. 15.13.
contrary to his revealed Will, was smote with leprosy unto his dying Day. And
Christ tells us, Mat. 159.
that in vain they do worship him teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of
Men. Therefore to the Law and to the Testimony: Isa. 8.20.
If they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in
them, Joh. 4.24.
and let us keep the Commandments of God and worship him in Spirit and in
Truth, 1 Timothy 4 8.
for Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the Life that
now is, and of that which is to come.

Postscript.
AFter I had penned the preceding Treatise, meeting with some other Motives, I
thought it necessary to add a brief Discourse on two particular Cases: The
First to show, that it is the Duty of Gospel Ministers and all true Believers,
in Order to Church Communion, to subject themselves to the Ordinance of
Water Baptism. The Second is against Excess in Apparel. And First, I shall
premise some few things that are worth our Observation which I find in Mr.
William Kiffins Book, Entitled A Sober Discourse of Right to Church Communion:
Where in his Epistle he says, The sense I have of my own weakness and
inability, would have been a Bar to me to appear in this public way, did I not
see a necessity lying upon me for the Truths sake, and the sakes of many, by
reason of some that have lately risen up to weaken, if not make void that great
Ordinance of Baptism, by endeavoring to maintain, that all Persons that
believe, although they never did, nor do practice the same, may partake of the
Ordinance of the Lords Supper, and all other Gospel instituted Duties: A
Notion, not only contrary to the primitive Pattern, but the constant Practice
of all that ever prosessed the Christian Religion, or that own the Scriptures
to be the Rule of Faith and Practice. And speaking somewhat of the like nature
in p. 3. he also says, We shall therefore direct this Discourse to our
dissenting Brethren, of the baptized way only. And in page 13, 14. he argues,
saying, If unbaptized Persons may be admitted to all Church Privileges, does
not such a Practice plainly suppose that it is unnecessary? -- The Baptists (if
once such a Belief prevails) would be easily tempted to lay aside that
reproachful Practice. -- And challenge their Church Communion by Virtue of
their Faith only; and such as baptize Infants would be satisfied to discontinue
the Practice, when once they are persuaded, that their Children may be regular
Church Members without it; -- and by consequence be in a likely condition to
loose one of the Sacraments, which would easily make way for the loss of the
other, both having an equal sanction in Scripture; and the Arguments that
disanul the one, will destroy the other, and consequently all Ordinances, and
Modes of Worship, and lastly, Religion it self. And in page 118. In answer to
an Objection, he says, This Objection supposes things very dangerous. As, that
holiness without Baptism invests a right to other Ghurch-Ordinances, which is
not to be supposed, for Christ the Lamb of God was holy in the highest degree,
and in him was found no sin, yet he was baptized before he entered upon his
public Ministry, which is a most illustrious Example, and the Pattern which
the Saints followed; for in a word, the great Apostle Paul and all those
primitive Saints recorded by the Spirit to be Believers, and therefore holy;
were nevertheless Baptized, which might have been forborne, but that it was an
indispensable Duty.

And Secondly, It seems strange to me, that any professing Obedience to
Gospel Ordinances should so far countenance others in the neglect of a positive
Institution of Christ, as to plead for Church Communion with Christians,
without Baptism, when our Lord has plainly commanded his Apostles and
Ministers to the end of the World saying, Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, Math. 28.19, 20.
Baptizing them, -- teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you: And (...), I am with you always even unto the end of the World.
For seeing the Disciples of Christ were commanded to Baptize as well as to
Preach, and to teach others successively to do the same; It is undeniably
clear, if Scripture and Reason may take Place, that the Gospel Ministers ought
to Baptize those that obey their Doctrine; Acts a. 38, 41.
as Peter said, Repent, and be baptized every one of you -- then they that
gladly received his Word, were Baptized; and the same day there were added unto
them about three thousand Souls. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles
Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayer. Here we find
those new Converts were commanded every of one them to be Baptized, and this
way they were added to the Primitive Church of Christ at Jerusalem; which was
the Pattern for all Gospel-Churches to follow in after Ages. For there were the
twelve Apostles, who were endowed with the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy
Spirit, to show us the perfect pattern of Gods House: And this was the Church
that said, It seems good to the Holy Ghost, Acts 15.22, 28.
and to us, to lay upon you no greater Burden then these necessary things; and
from this Pattern (given as it were in the Mount of God) we find Baptism was
commanded as the entering Ordinance into Church Communion, or upon Confession of
Faith before it; for baptized Believers (though the true visible matter of a
Gospel Church) were not always immediately formed into a Gospel Church Order,
for this was sometimes a work of time, as we have an Instance, how Paul
baptized the twelve Disciples at Ephesus, and went into the Synagogue, Acts
19.1, to 10.
and spoke boldly for the space of three Months, before he separated the
Disciples from the Multitude.

Moreover, we have several other Precepts and Examples, that do confirm the
Ordinance of Baptism, immediately to follow Conversion and Faith in Christ:
Acts 8.35, to 39.
As when Philip Preached unto the Eunuch, and he believed, he was immediately
Baptized. And when Cornelius and his Friends were Converted, Act. 10.44, 48.
Act. 16.14, 15, 32, 33. Chapter 18.8.
Peter commanded them to be Baptized: And so we find Lydia and her Household,
and the Jailer and his Household were Baptized, immediately after their
Conversion. And all these instances plainly show, that Water Baptism was
administered to Converted Believers, before they were in Church Order to receive
the Ordinance of the Lords Supper; and it is called a putting on Christ, viz. by
a visible Profession; and signifies our dying unto Sin, Gal. 3.27. Col. 2.12.
Romans 6.3, to 7. Joh. 3 3.5. Mark 16.15, 16.
and living in newness of Life unto God: As also our being born of the Spirit;
and all these denote Baptism to be the first visible Sign of a Believer in
Christ, and it is appointed to accompany the Preaching of the Gospel, as a
Christian Badge on all that shall believe. And it was called a
Foundation-Principle, viz. of a visible Church State, Act. 2.38, 41. Chapter 8.12.
Chapter 18.8.
the matter whereof was, and still should be baptized Believers. And there
being not the least instance in the New Testament, of any one Person that was
ever added to a Gospel Church without Water Baptism, nor that any Gospel Church
was ever gathered, but of baptized Believers; to exclude it as no entering
Ordinance into Church Communion, against so many clear Commands and Examples on
Sacred Record; which shows it is immediately to follow believing in Christ,
will lay a Foundation to deny all Gospel Ordinances, and the Holy Scriptures
themselves to be of use to us, to discover the Truth of Gospel Worship and
Obedience.

I. Object. Is from Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in the Faith receive you.

Answer, To this Scripture Mr. Will. Kiffin in his aforesaid Sober Discourse,
says, The weakness spoken of in the Text, has Relation only to those Mistakes
that did attend some of them, touching a Liberty of eating, or not eating of
Meats, or the keeping or not keeping of Days, which were things in themselves
of an indifferent Nature, the doing or not doing of which was not Sin, as the
Apostle in that Chapter plainly shows; and has no Relation to the Order of
Worship prescribed by Christ, much less to the Practice, or not Practice of
Ordinances, for then the meaning of the Apostle should be, if they did
Practice, or not Practice, it was all one, there was no Sin in the Matter. --
But to bring this Text, to prove a lawfulness of receiving any that are
Christians, although never so ignorant of the Ordinances, and instituted Worship
of Christ, and the Order prescribed by him, is to wring Blood out of it, and
not that precious Truth that is manifested by it.

II. Object. Is from 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one Spirit are we all Baptized into
one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be Bond or Free, and have
been all made to drink into one Spirit. Here is (say some) a Baptism mentioned,
by which they are brought, or initiated into this Body, viz. the Church; Ver.
28.
but say they, it is the Baptism of the Spirit, and not of Water.

Answer, That which is called the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, Acts 1.5. Chapter 2.12
were those extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Spirit which Christ had promised
his Disciples they should receive not many days hence, and was fulsilled on the
day of Pentecost, Acts 10.44, 45, 46
and given to others afterward. And we no where find the common Gifts and
Graces of the Holy Spirit, called Baptism: And therefore this Baptism in the
Text (having some Relation to these excellent Gifts, as appears in the
preceding Verses) it must be understood either only of those extraordinary
Gifts of the Spirit in the Ministry, whereby the Primitive Gospel Ministers
were qualified, to break down the middle Wall of Partition, and unite all, both
Jews and Gentiles, Bond and Free, that were Effectually called, into one Body
or visible Church State; or rather thus, that the Apostle speaks of the
Gentiles with himself, and other Jews, that through the extraordinary
Ministration of the Spirit were baptized with Water Baptism into one Body. For
seeing it cannot rationally be supposed, that those of the Church of Corinth to
whom the Apostle could not speak as unto Spiritual, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2.
but as unto Carnal, even as unto Babes in Christ: Or that every individual
Believer included in the Text, was Baptized [with] the Spirit, but as its said
[by] the Spirit, as the efficient cause. It then follows, that the Baptism in
the Text, must be taken for Water Baptism; considering also, 1 Cor. 12.1.
that those Brethren the Apostle wrote unto with himself and other Jews, are
said in the Text in Distinction to Baptism, to have been all made to drink into
one Spirit; which Expression is far short of being all personally baptized with
the Baptism of the Spirit; and therefore to me it clearly appears, that the
Baptism spoken of in the Objection, must be taken for Water Baptism as its
said, Act. 18.8.
that when the Corinthians had the Gospel preached to them, many of them
hearing believed and were Baptized, viz. not many of the Church then already
formed into an orderly Church State, Ver. 10. 1 Cor. 3 6, 10. Chapter 1.12.
but many of the People of that City Believed and were Baptized, and so the
Apostle laid the Foundation of the Church of Corinth, and planted the same,
which Apollo watered.

III. Object. The Apostle Paul says, That Christ sent him not to Baptize, but
to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.17.

Answer, The Apostle Paul was Baptized himself, Ephesians. 4.4, 5.
and he tells us, that there is one Body, one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, viz. one Water Baptism, because it is here distinguished from the
Spirit, as pertaining to the Body, or dwelling in its Gifts and Graces in the
Church. And he also instructed the twelve Disciples at Ephesus to be Baptized,
Acts 19.3, 4.
though they were Baptized before with John's Baptism. And he Baptized Crispus and
Gaius, and the Household of Stephanus, so that if he were not sent to Baptize, 1
Cor. 1.14, 16.
he acted beyond his particular Commission, and had not so much Authority as
other Gospel Ministers received from the general Commission given to them; and
therefore the Apostles meaning is, That though his Commission to Preach and
Baptize was as large as others, yet his work was not so much actually to
Baptize and spend his time in that Service, as to preach the Gospel, he being
extraordinarily Gifted thereunto; for he was counted the chief Speaker, Acts
14.12.
and those Ministers that were his Companions being qualified to Baptize, were
doubtless helpful to him in that Service; for when he preached to the
Corinthians, it is said (not only Crispus, and all his House believed, but)
many of the Corinthians believed and were baptized. So that Paul's Expression,
that he was not sent to Baptize, is to be expounded as its said of Christ, Joh.
4.1, 2.
that though he made and haptized more Disciples than John, yet Jesus himself
baptized not, but his Disciples, and as when Peter had preached there were
other Gospel Ministers with him, who did Baptize, otherwise Peter himself could
not have baptized in one day about three thousand Souls. And so we find, Acts
2.41.
that Paul had Silas and Timotheus with him at Corinth, when so many of them
were Baptized, and that as a Son with the Father, so had Timothy served with
him in the Gospel. And therefore the Text being fairly and most properly thus
expounded, the aforesaid Objection is invalid, and cannot prove an Admission to
Church Communion, without the Ordinance of Water Baptism.

IV. Object. Gal. 3.27. As many of you as have been Baptized into Christ, have
put on Christ: From whence it has been said that some of the Members of those
Churches, were not Baptized.

Answer, To explain the Mind of the Holy Ghost, I shall here recite the
preceding Words, Ver. 26. For ye are all the Children of God by Faith in
Christ Jesus; and then it follows, Ver. 27. For as many of you as have been
Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. From whence I observe, that the Word
[all] ver. 26. is in ver. 28. put for the same Persons to show there is no
Distinctions of Acceptance of Persons, in Christ Jesus, whether Jews or Greeks,
Bond or Free, Male or Female, all are one, and by Faith in Christ are alike,
the adopted Children of God, and so the Word [all] must be understood in ver.
26. as having Relation to ver. 28. and not of every individual Member of those
Churches of Galatia, for who can think they were all, viz. every individual
Person of them really the Children of God, seeing they were so far Apostatized,
as that the Apostle said he was afraid of them, least he had bestowed on them
labor in vain. And then, Chapter 4.11.
if the Word [all] must be restrained to all those only, or to so many as were
the Children of God by true Faith in Christ, it is put for no more than the
Word [many] viz. for so many or all of them, as had received both the inward
Grace, as well as the outward putting on the visible Profession of it by
Water Baptism. And the like instance we have that the Word [all] is restrained
[to many] Romans 5.18. compared with ver. 19. And therefore the aforesaid
Scripture can be no Proof that any Persons were admitted into Church Communion
without Water Baptism.

And farther to clear this Objection, from Romans 6.3. There is this to say, that
that Epistle was written to all that were in Rome, beloved of God, called to be
Saints, which comprehends a Direction of that Epistle, Romans 16.5, 14, 15.
not only to one or more particular Churches in the Order of the Gospel, but to
all the Saints in Rome, beloved and called of God, whether within, or for want
of time and growth of Grace and Knowledge, were then waiting on the Ministry of
the Gospel for farther Light, without the Pale of the Visible Church; and
therefore the Apostle might properly say, that so many of us, viz. of all those
Saints in general, as were gathered into a Church State, and baptized into
Jesus Christ were baptized into his Death, Ver. 4, 5.
viz. into the likeness of his Death by Water Baptism; and thus the Word [many]
may be taken in its most proper Sense, without the least implication that
unbaptized Christians were admitted to full Communion with the Church at the
Lords Table.

V. Object. The Church in the Wilderness received Members the way which was not
prescribed, but directly against the revealed Mind of God, yet stood a true
Church and their Members true Members. For this Church had Circumcision for
their entering Ordinance, Genesis 17.13, 14. Exo. 12.
and the uncircumcised were utterly forbidden to eat the Passover, yet this
Church received Members without and otherwise than by this entering Ordinance,
they also admitted them to the Passover so long as forty Years without it.

Answer, It is expressly said, That all the People (viz. the Males) that came
out (of Egypt) were Circumcised, Josh. 5.4, to 8. Exodus 14.10, 11, 12.
but all the People that were born in the Wilderness by the way, as they came
forth out of Egypt, them they had not circumcised. -- because they had not
circumcised them by the way. From whence I observe, that seeing the Children of
Israel were not Circumcised by the way, and yet that all were Circumcised that
came out of Egypt, it must needs follow, that they were Circumcised in Egypt,
as the Lord commanded Moses, Exodus 12.48, to 52. which though it is there
rehearsed, after the account of the Destruction of the firstborn of Egypt,
etc. yet Circumcision was commanded before, as appears by the two last verses
of that Chapter. Genesis 17.9, 10.
And so it was from its first Institution to Abraham, again renewed by Moses,
as an entering Ordinance into a Visible Church State, and the Privileges
thereof; but the occasion of the disuse of this Ordinance afterward in the
Wilderness, not being expressed as I can find in any part of the Scriptures, we
must conclude, that as God never approved of the Wilful neglect of the least of
his Commandments, and seeing he again commanded Israel to be Circumcised, when
they were entering in to possess the promised Land of Canaan, we have not the
least encouragement from Isreal's Example of Disobedience in the Wilderness
(which is so much in general, 1 Cor. 10. Heb. 3.8, etc.
as well as in some particulars complained of in the Holy Scriptures) nor from
Gods renewing his Command to Israel for Circumcision, to Countenance the
neglect of any Gospel Ordinance, but contrariwise in Case of any Declension
among Believers, to stir up one another to a Reformation, according to the
Institutions of Christ, and the Primitive Pattern of Gods spiritual House on
Sacred Record.

VI. Object. It is farther said, that Aaron let the offering for Sin be burnt,
Lev. 10. Chapter 6.26.
that should have indeed been eaten; yet because he could not do it to his
Edification, Moses was Content.

Answer, Moses was content not simply, because Aaron had done contrary to the
Commandment, but because Aaron had such things befallen him that day, as that
it would not have been accepted of God for him to eat the Offering, as we find
by Aarons Answer to Moses, Lev. 10.19. And this being on the extraordinary
occasion of Aarons loosing his two Sons, Lev. 10.1.
Nadab and Abihu, who died before the Lord for Offering of strange Fire; it is
most likely, either this Sin of his House, or thereby was occasioned some
unholiness, or some other uncleanness happened to Aaron (though it is not
particularly expressed) as did by Law prevent him from eating of the Holy
Sacrifice, Lev. 6.18, 27. And so it is under the Administration of the Gospel,
that in case of Sin, or any Uncleanness, prohibited the Communion of the Church
by the Laws of Christ, the Offender (until there be Repentance to take it off)
ought not to partake of the Holy Supper, though it be commanded as a
Gospel-Ordinance; yea, a whole Church may suspend it for a season, rather then
to partake of it with such evils as are prohibited their Communion by the Laws
of Christ; and who will say, that such a Suspension of the Ordinance will be
charged as her Sin, if she be necessitated thereunto, for want of a Person or
Ministering Brother gifted and qualified for that Service. And therefore from
what has been here said, we may conclude, that the aforesaid Old Testament
Cases have no. Example in them, as shadows to justify any Believers admittance
into Church Communion without Water Baptism; but that those and all other
Scriptures must be expounded, so as to preserve the Concord of Sacred Writ with
the plain and positive Institutions of Christ and his Apostles, and their
Examples with the Primitive Churches, who clearly witness to the Ordinance of
Water Baptism preceding Church Communion.

Against Excess in Apparel.
THat Ornaments of Apparel in a Scripture Sense may be allowed, so far as they
suit and rather tend to the Credit and Reputation of the Gospel, and that a
difference in Apparel is not unlawful, according to the State and Circumstances
of the Saints, is not denied. But yet whatever Ornaments are inconsistent with
Modesty, Gravity and Sobriety, and are a scandal to Religion, ought to be cast
off, as being a defilement to Believers, and an Abominaton in the sight of God,
Isa. 3.16. Zeph. 1.8.
who reproved and brought his Scourge upon the Daughters of Zion, for the
Bravery, Haughtiness and Pride of their Attire, and by the Prophet has said,
he would punish all such as were clothed with strange Apparel. And the Apostle
says, I will therefore that -- Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, 1 Timothy 2.8, 9.
with Shame-facedness and Sobriety; not with Broidered Hair, or Gold, or
Pearls, or costly Array; but (which becomes Women professing Godliness) with
good works. -- And whose adorning, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5.
let it not be the outward adorning, of Plating the Hair, and of Wearing of
Gold, or of putting on of Apparel; but the Ornantent of a meek and quiet
Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great Price: For after this manner in
the old time, the Holy Women also who trusted in God adorned themselves. -- And
does not even Nature it self teach you, 1 Cor. 11.14.
that if a Man have long Hair, it is a shame unto him. And we are not to be
conformed to this World, Romans 12.2, 17. 2 Cor. 8.21. 1 Pet. 1.14.
but we are commanded to provide things honest in the sight of all Men; and as
obedient Children, not fashioning your selves according to the former Lusts, in
your Ignorance: But as he which has called you is Holy, so be ye Holy in all
Manner of Conversation; 1 Cor. 10.32.
and to give none offense, neither to the Jews nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God. But as the Apostle says, whatsoever things are true, Phil. 4.8.
honest, just, pure, lovely, of good report, if there be any Virtue, and if
there be any Praise, think on these things. Now from these Scriptures, we may
conclude, that though our present excessive fashions are not all expressly
forbidden, yet if any kind of adornings are prohibited, and if those Texts were
written for our Instruction, as I think none can doubt thereof, or be so bold
to deny it, that have any Sense of true Religion; then surely they require all
the Saints, both Men and Women, at least to abstain from all those excesses in
Apparel which are not of good report among sober Men, and whoever puts on
such Attire or Ornaments of Apparel, as are not of good honest and modest
report, they are guilty of breaking the Commandments of Christ, and so are to
be dealt withal by the Church as disorderly Persons, who bring a scandal upon
their Holy Profession.

Besides, it is not only a grief for sober Christians to see such Pride of
Spirit appearing in their Communion, but its also a stumbling to others which
are well inclined, to walk in the ways of the Lord with them, as I have found
by my own experience: For when I was first awakened to seek the Lord, and the
good of my Soul, the extravagant Dresses of some Professors among whom I heard
the Gospel preached, occasioned me to think there was the less Religion in
them, and that they looked not as if they were Christ's People; and for this
cause alone (I having then no Light in Gospel Ordinances of Communion) I
departed to another Church, which appeared more like sober Christians, and
there I have continued about five and twenty years. And considering the
Scripture says, the Lord hates a proud look -- And God resists the proud,
Prove. 6.16, 17. Jam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. Math. 16.24. Romans 6.4.
but gives Grace unto the Humble: And that the Commandments of Christ require
our Conformity in all things suitable to his Name and Truth, and those Holy and
Self-denying Principles we profess, how can such excesses in Apparel which even
gives their Profession the Lie, consist with their sincere Obedience to him?
Jam. 2.18.
How do they show their Holy Faith therein by their Works, but rather as it is
said of her that lives in Pleasure, that she is dead while she lives. Gal.
6.7.
Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he
also reap. For he that sows to his Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption:
but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life Everlasting.

To conclude, our Baptized Churches that are for particular Election and final
Perseverance in the same Faith and Order of the Gospel in full Communion
together; they (nor many others) have not any Reason to reflect on the true
design of this Treatise, or on the Matters contained therein, as any ways
tending to the Interruption of our Peace, on the settled Principles of our
Churches, but to the purging out the leaven of unrighteousness, that may be
found among them; nor can any Person in our Communion appear against the plain
Contents of this Treatise, but they must at the same time appear for and
Countenance such sinful Manners, Erroneous Doctrine, false Worship, and corrupt
Administration of Gospel Ordinances, as the Word of God, and the general
Profession of our Churches does plainly witness against; and consequently they
will apparently show themselves opposers of Reformation, or such as labor to
weaken and confound the Baptist Churches and our pure Religion. Yea farther, if
corrupt Manners which is manifestly sinful by the Moral Law of God, or such
Erroneous Doctrine, false Worship, or irregular Administrations of Gospel
Ordinances as are prohibited our Communion by the Holy Scriptures, should be
knowingly suffered therein, it is a visible Mark of Degeneration; and thereby
the Church partakes of the Sins of particular Members, Lev. 19.17. Thou shall
not hate thy Brother in thine Heart, thou shall in any wise rebuket thy
Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him: Or as it is in our Margin, that thou
bare not Sin for him. And Paul says to Timothy, Lay Hands suddenly on no Man,
1 Timothy 5.22.
neither be partakers of other Men's Sins, keep thy self Pure. Besides, it is
showed before, what warrant and command we have in the New Testament, for
withdrawing our Communion in the aforesaid Cases of Sin, and from disorderly
Persons: And therefore when a Church persisteth in a wilful neglect of this
Duty, she brings her self under the guilt of Sin for breaking of Christ's
Commandment; but in Case this were faithfully performed, yet the Church should
still endeavor, 2 These. 3.14, 15. Tit. 3.10.
by due admonishing of such Offenders, to reduce them to their Obedience; and
if no Repentance be found, Gal. 5.12. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 1 Timothy 1.20.
she ought to proceed to a farther Act of Authority, and cut them wholly off
from her fellowship.

But if any plead, that so strict a Discipline, as has been argued for in this
Treatise, cannot be duly observed without indangering their Church State: It
deserves our Noting, either as a Carnal Reflection on the Holy and Righteous
Precepts of Christ, and on his Wisdom, as not prescribing such Laws which
conduces most to the Glory of God, and the good of his People here on Earth;
or it is a sign that such a Church has been so long in the neglect of their
Duty toward Christ and one another; and are so far degenerated in their
Spirits, as that they seem to be past recovery: And if this be the State of
some, who perhaps may have as high a Conceit of themselves as the Church of the
Laodiceans had, and say, Rev. 3.17, 18, 19.
I am Rich, and increased with Goods, and have need of nothing; and know not
that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; Christ
counsels such to buy of him Gold tried in the Fire, that thou may be
rich, and white Raiment, that thou may be Clothed, and that the shame of
thy Nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine Eyes with Eye Salve, that thou
may see. And says our Lord, As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: Be
zealous therefore and repent; least he come and fight against thee with the
Sword of his Mouth. Behold, Rev. 2.16.
(says he) I stand at the Door and knock: If any Man hear my Voice, and open
the Door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Be not
afraid therefore to go about this good work of Reformation, do thy Duty and
leave the success to God, whose Blessing you may expect, and whose awful
presence may so far attend the Authority of Christ by which you Act, as to stop
the Mouth of carnal Reasonings; insomuch that instead of indangering the loss
of your Church State, Math. 16.18. Jam. 4.8, 9, 10.
you may rather expect, and find the Lord will strengthen, establish and settle
it on the Rock of Ages, against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail.

To close, Although I have used the Word [withdraw] in the Case of a Private
Members removing Communion from a Church, which may not be done in so solemn a
Manner as when a Church withdraws her Communion from a Member; (because this is
done by an Act of Duty and Authority given to the Body, and the other is done
as an Act of Liberty and Duty pertaining to a Member, and warranted by the
Scriptures, as has been showed;) yet the Word withdraw, being it self of a
harmless and indifferent Signification, it cannot be excepted against; unless
it be for want of other Matters to Cavil at: However I have also this to say
that the Word [with-draw] was thought proper to be used in the same Case in the
Congregationals twenty eighth Article of the Institution of Churches before
recited.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THere is Published by the same Author, a Book Entitled, Truth soberly
Defended, in a serious Reply to Mr. B. Keach's Book called, The Breach Repaired
in Gods Worship, etc. As also a Vindication of a Book, Entitled, Prelimited
Forms of Praising God, vocally Sung by all the Church together, proved to be no
Gospel-Ordinance; with a Narrative, wherein is detected Mr. Keach's Abuses,
under the Hands of several Elders and other Brethren. By Isaac Marlow, Price
Bound 1 s.

There is likewise Published, a Treatise of the Holy Trin unity, Asserting the
Deity of Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit in the Unity of Essence with God the
Father. By I Marlow, Price Bound 9 d.

Moreover there is Published, A Tract on the Sabbath day, wherein the keeping
of the First Day of the Week a Sabbath is justified, by a Divine Command and a
Double Example, contained in the Old and New Testament, etc. By Isaac Marlow,
Price 1 s.


