A Commentary, OR EXPOSITION Upon the Prophecy of Habakkuk: Together with
many useful and very seasonable OBSERVATIONS. Delivered in sundry Sermons,
preached in the Church of St. James Garlick-hith LONDON, many years since;

By EDWARD MARBURY, the then Rector of the said Church.

Psalm. 101. v. 1. I will sing of mercy and judgment, unto thee O Lord will I
sing. Isa. 8. v. 17. I will wait upon the Lord, that hides his face from the
house of Jacob, and I will look for him. Isa. 26. v. 9. When thy judgments are
in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness, Verse 20.
Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee;
hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be
overpast. London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Octavian Pullen, and are to be
sold at his shop at the sign of the Rose in Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, Dr. Henry King, L. BISHOP OF CHICHESTER.
TO THE MUCH HONORED, Sr. Rich: Hubbard OF LANGLEY, IN THE COUNTY OF MIDDLESEX
KNIGHT. JOHN DVTTON OF SHERBOURNE IN THE COUNTY OF GLOUCESTER Esquire JOHN MILLINGTON
of LANGLEY aforesaid Esquire TOGETHER With their worthy Consorts, three gracious
Sisters and Branches of that Noble Family of Dr. KING, late L. BISHOP of LONDON.

And to the Religious and Virtuous Gentlewoman Mrs. MARY KING, the late Wife of
Dr. JOHN KING.

EDWARD MARBVRY their poor Kinsman and Servant, does, by many relations and
engagements, being thereunto obliged; Together with his best wishes, humbly
Present, Devote and Dedicate this his COMMENTARY; Presuming upon their
favorable acceptance and protection thereof.

An Alphabetical TABLE of the principal heads contained in this precedent
Commentary.
The Contents thereof in the first and second Chapters.
A.
ADam's sin did not violate God's glory so much as the woman's. page 298 Adrian
the sixth his allegory. 35. applied. page 36 A good conscience declares a man's
faith to himself, 225. and a godly conversation to others. page 226 All evil
actions are justly judged by the intentions of their agents, but good actions
are not so. page 75 All injuries we do to our brethren, are done with God's
privity, 76. and so are all treasons and conspiracies. page 120 All Churches
wherein Christians meet to call upon God, are Temples of Gods presence. page
341 All excess in drinking is drunkenness. page 306 Alexander excused by his
flatterers for killing of Clitus. page 324 Ambition is an inordinate desire of
honor. page 271 Ambition came in with sin, and cannot be without sin. page 273
Ambition puts us out of the way of life. page 275 Ambition is painful. page 286
Ancientnesse of writing. page 151 As personal sins have personal chastisements,
so epidemical sins have popular punishments. page 64
B.
BAbylon taken by storm on a day of feasting. page 249 Better apta then alta
sapere. page 157 Beholding without regarding, is but a kind of gazing. page 53
Behold, a word to move attention. page 184 Benefits of the righteousness of
Faith. page 198 Blood-guiltinesse consists not in bloodshedding only page 278
Boldness in sinning. page 24
C.
CAlvin's judgment of Habakkuk. page 117 Cautions to order and regulate our
judgment and life concerning righteousness. page 200 Charity is the bond of
peace, only to the children of peace. page 129 Christ took the burden of our
sins upon him. page 5 Christ took upon him our infirmities, but not our sinful
ones. page 48 Christian charity and common justice, great props of a
Commonwealth. page 37 Committers of sin, are of two sorts. page 283 Complaint
is a part of prayer, 31. the reasons thereof. page 32 Confession threefold.
page 193 Contempt of the Law brings in licentiousness, and custom of sinning.
page 28 Contempt is a provocation which moves God to severe judgments. page 72
Contempt is most grievous to man's generous nature Corruption of justice a
dangerous sign of a drooping Commonwealth. 45. Reasons for it. page 43
Covetousness is an inordinate desire of the wealth of this world. page 275
Covetousness is Ambitions handmaid page 275 Covetousness a fruitful sin,
Usury, Rapine, Fraud, Bribes, and Cimony are its daughters. page 276 Cry of
blood. page 12 Cry of a Prophet is a loud cry. page 13 Cruelty manifold. page
278 Cruelty is a companion of Ambition and Covetousness. page 278
D.
DEsire is the whetstone of prayer. page 178 Despisers punished with scorn and
contempt. page 78 Devil, author of Idolatry, temptor to it, and promoter of
it. page 93 Distrust in God, the mother sin of all evil ways. page 267 Di^ers
ways to spend the time well. page 180 Doctrine of faith most necessary to
salvation, page 205 Drunkards the pictures of proud men. page 242 Drunkenness
a horrible sin, confessed by all men to be a sin. page 305 Drunken men
mentioned in Scripture, page 305 Drunken men cannot pray as they ought. page
310 Drunkenness a disease of former ages, but now grown epidemical. page 313
Duties to be performed in the Church. page 345
E.
EAstern winds most unwholesome in Judea. page 58 Every man's mind is himself. 77
Eternity of God. page 103 Every sin is a trespass against God. page 103
Expostulations and contestations with God in our prayers are lawful 46.
Objection against it, and solution of the objection, 47. Reasons for
confirmation thereof. page 51
F.
FAith defined. page 206 Faith's greatness and its effects. page 20^ Faith,
how it may be gotten, 208. How proved, 225. How preserved, 228. How used. page
229 Faith useful in the natural life, 230 In the spiritual life, 234. And in
the eternal life. ibid. Faith useful both in prosperity and adversity. page
233 Faith not rightly grounded is presumption. page 109 Fear mingled with faith
is no sin. page 48 and 49 Few seek the true use of riches. page 261
G.
GIving of alms does not purify ill gotten goods page 292 God's wrath and
judgments are a burden to him, and so is his word threatening judgment. page 8
God's wrath and judgments are a burden to the Prophet that utters them in
respest of his fidelity to him that sends him, 9. And in respect of his zeal,
ibid. And in respect of his compassion. page 10 God's wrath and judgments are a
burden to the people to whom they are sent, both to the penitent, 10. and to
the impenitent. page 11 God's servants fight against sin by prayer. page 14 God
s Ministers may by their prayers awake God's judgments against unrepenting
sinners. page 15 God sometimes suspends the success of his servants prayers.
page 20 God does himself take notice of the peoples sins, and acquainteth his
Prophets and Ministers therewith. page 21 God does hear the complaints of such
as have just cause to complain of violence, to execute his judgments upon them
that offend, 59. Reasons thereof, page 60, 61, 62 God's justice does not spare
his own people, if they do provoke him. page 63 God's promises made to Israel
were all limited with condition of their obedience 63. and 77. and so are all
God's promises to his children page 78 God can make good use of the vices of
men, and make wicked men serve for instruments of his will. page 66 God is
author of all actions, but not of the evil of them. page 73 God fore-knoweth
the sins of men. page 86 Gods certain knowledge of our evils will bring forth a
certain judgment to punish them. page 89 Gods love to his Church is eternal as
himself is. page 95 God is sooner stirred to mercy then provoked to anger. page
100 God loves to be solicited for mercy. page 101 God is eternal in himself,
in his Essence, and eternal in Providence in respect of his Creatures. page 104
Ged is holy, therefore the punishments of his Church are for its correction
only. page 105 Gods children in afflictions are not discouraged in their faith
of Gods mercy. page 107 God is author of punishment. page 108 Gods eyes are
pure. page 110 God is a sincere searcher and punisher of sin, and his justice
and truth cannot fail. page 113 God will have his Church taught his ways in all
ages thereof. page 154 Gods promises run in semine. page 154 God signifies his
will in diverse ways, p. 167. and his will is twofold. page 169 God takes
offense at such as are lifted up. page 188 God is the author of faith. page 208
Gods care and providence stoopeth so low as to the regard of our cattle. page
325 God is to be worshipped outwardly as well as inwardly. p. 335. and 344 God
is glorified in the shame of the proud. page 280 God brings all the labors
of the ungodly to loss and vanity, yet the ungodly perceive it not. page 289
God walks with the righteous, and contrary to the unrighteous. page 291 God
is glorious and jealous of his glory. page 296 Gods creatures and his word are
two books, wherein his wisdom is set forth to the soul. page 301 God punishes
sin by sin. page 321 Godliness has the promises of this life and of the life
to come. page 42 Good covetousness. 263. Evil covetousness is joined with
ambition. page 264 Greatness and power are fearful to the common man, yet he
will search into the actions of the highest. page 262 Grief mingled with faith
is no sin. page 49
H.
HAbakkuk signifies an embracer, a wrastler. 2. The time of his prophecy is
not expressed. page 2. Hatred a cause of contention. page 26 Hearing the word
profits naught without faith. page 209 Hearing and understanding the word is a
means to increase faith. page 209 Hearers ought to pray for their teachers. page
144 Heathens gods not jealous of their glory. page 299 He that wills the same
thing as God wills, and does the same thing God would have done, sins,
unless he does it in the same manner, and for the same end which God
projecteth. page 76 How far we may complain to God against our brethren. page 15
How God is said to have eyes and other parts of a man's body. page 111 and how he
is said to see, hear, etc. page 73. chapter 3 How God is said to repent. page 165 How
Gods righteousness is revealed in the Gospel. page 237 How drunken folks are
said to discover their nakedness. page 314 How man ought to carry himself in
his dominion over beasts.
I.
IDolatry defined and described. page 328 Idolatry a grievous sin. page 329
Idolatry amongst Christians. page 330 Idolatry in the Church of Rome in
worshipping the consecrated Host. page 333 If to omit a duty be a sin, the
committing of a contrary evil must needs be abominable. page 312 Ill-gotten
goods bring such a sin upon a man, as cannot be purged but by repentance and
restitution. page 293 If we find in our selves an elevation above our pitch, it
is a certain Symptom of a diseased soul. page 191 Image Worship crept into the
Church of Rome by little and little. page 332 Imprecations forbidden. page 17
Infirmities of Gods servants twofold. page 48 Inordinate zeal, what it is. page
53 Iniquity knows no measure. page 84 In all our considerations of the
carriage of things under the Government of Gods Providence, howsoever the
effects may seem strange to us, we must not question either the Wisdom,
Justice or Goodness of God. page 117 In the Church of God there will always be
some will argue against God. page 147 Inconveniences of Rapine. page 277
Ingredients of a saving faith by a dissection of the word Fides. page 187 It
was no small part of Christ's Passion to be scorned and derided of his enemies.
page 258 It is a singular wisdom to use the fullness of prosperity well. 83.
and a great measure of grace is required thereto. page 84 Judgment begins at
the house of God. page 65. and 179. chapter 3 Just man defined. page 185
Justification by faith only. page 237
K.
KEeping silence, a sign of reverence and submission. page 327 Knowledge of
Gods glory an excellent knowledge. 300. and the pursuit of this knowledge is a
labor which well rewards it self. page 301
M
MAlice may be in looking into the vices of brethren, though it pretended
desire of Reformation. page 21 Man is mutable; God unchangably just. page 78
Man in mercy comes nearest Gods image. page 99 Man's state in his innocence.
page 213 Man is but earth, and gold but clay. page 248 Men and Angels have
their Eternity from God. page 103 Means to get an upright soul. page 192 Mercy
the soul of the world. page 100 Ministers may in general reprove sin, but not
particularize any man. page 54 Ministers ought to be first Seers and then
Speakers. page 139 Ministers must not only watch, but also give warning. page
142 Ministers must maintain Gods cause against all contradictions. page 143
Ministers ought to open to the Church of God the whole Council of God. page
156 Ministers have a necessity laid upon them to preach the word. page 211
N.
NO man simpliciter Atheos, but acknowledges some divine ruling power. page
89. and 328 and 80. chapter 3 No man would do service where nothing is to be gained
by it. page 329 No inherent holiness in Churches. page 339 Not that as we
have, but what we dispose of makes us friends in the day of the Lord. Nothing
ought to be so dear to us as the glory of God. page 300
O.
OCcasion of offense to be avoided. page 33 Oracles ceased at Christ's coming.
page 175 Original sin what it is. page 216 Outward things unsanctified to the
Owner, have no power to establish the heart. page 84 Out of natural and moral
ways of life there is a wisdom of God to be learned. page 123 Overcharge of
the heart with drink, is drunkenness. page 306
P.
PApists idolaters. page 331 People without a Ruler are unhappy. page 114 and
124 Prayer ought to be fervent and continual. 18. as well in zeal of Gods glory
as for our own necessities. page 19 Prayer what it is. page 31 Prayer is a help
to him that prays, a sacrifice to God, a scourge to the devil and his agents.
page 183 Prayer, the Word and the Sacraments are means to preserve faith. page
228 Preparation required in those who go to Church. page 344 Pride a cause of
strife. page 25 Pride consists in three things. In thinking too well of our
selves, contemptibly of others, boasting and glorying in vain ostentation. page
240 Pride is the ground of insatiablenesse. page 241 Pride, the ruin of
Charity, Justice, Temperance and Religion. page 243 Proofs of a sincere faith.
page 227 Prosperity of this world fills the hearts of men with pride, and vain
estimation of themselves. page 131 Proud men resemble death and hell. page 243
Punishment in its nature is evil, yet God may work good out of it. page 69
Punishment of Idolatry. page 334 Punishments of Pride, 247. Just Reprehension,
155. Derision, 257 Spoil and destruction. page 262 Punishments of Ambition,
279. They consult shame to their own house, Ibid. Sin against their own souls,
283. Labor in vain, and without success. page 286 Punishments of
drunkenness, 315. Who will punish it; God, 316 how he will punish it, 319. Why
he will punish it. page 324
Q.
OVantity of the fault, is the measure of the judgment. page 5
R.
REasons why Ambition makes men unhappy. Page 274 Religion contemned is a sign
of a diseased and desperate state, 38 Reasons thereof. Ibid. Riligion is the
knot of true Union, that knitteth us to God, and uniteth us to one another.
Page 78. Religion has the bowels of compassion, and they have no Religion that
have no mercy. Page 99 Religion the best bond of brotherhood. Page 129 Remedy
for man's fall, 222. Which is Christ. Page 223 Remedies against drunkenness.
Page 308
S.
Satan suggesteth that the way of righteousness is painful. page 287 Satan's
chiefest temptation, is by blemishing of Gods glory. page 296 Seekers of strife
condemned. page 25 Service performed to God without zeal, is without life. page
51 Shame rather hardens then reformeth a sinner. page 16 Sincere Faith cannot
be lost. page 228 Sharp and satyricall tartness not always unlawful. page
259 Sin is a burden to God, 3. To men, 4. And awakes Gods vengeance. Ibid.
Sins seen in others, moves man to a loathing of sin, and to charity. page 68
Sin is like Leaven, a little sowreth the whole lump. page 204 and 283 Sins of
Omission, 218. Of evil motion, 219. Of evil affection, and of evil action. page
220 Sins grow in clusters, and one sin begets another, 265. Examples
thereof. page 266 Sins committed against the Law of God, are done against the
committers souls. page 283 Souls in heaven wait upon the performance of Gods
Promises page 178 Stephens prayer at his death a means of Paul's conversion.
page 102 Suggestions to sin lay their foundation upon some unworthy opinion of
God. page 298
T.
Tears of bitterness are the blood of the Soul. page 285 Teaching by familiar
resemblances is much used in both Testaments. page 123 Temples not built in 200
years after Christ. page 336 Temples and Churches necessary. page 337 Temporal
things can afford no true content. page 39 There is no peace to a wicked man.
page 6 The sound of Gods Word preached cannot be truly heard by us, unless he
open our hearts. page ^2 The soul of prayer is the holy zeal of him that
prays. page 22 Three special benefits of a godly life. page 40. and 41 The
Chaldeans raised by God against the Jews. page 56 They who are sealed with the
Spirit of Promise have their infirmities, lapses, and relapses; yet sin not to
death. page 64 They who fulfilling the Will of God which they know not, do
fulfill their own will which they aim at, are not rewarded, but rather
punished for it. page 74. and 75 The way to avoid contempt, is humility. page
81 There is such a concatenation of duties of Religion, and Justice, that he
that offends in one, breaks the chain. page 267 The fear of the wicked
shall come upon himself. page 280 The house of the righteous shall stand. page
281 The Elect sin against their own souls in regard of the fault, 283 and also
in regard of the punishment. page 284 The delivery of Gods Church, and his
vengeance upon her enemies, gives honor to the Name of God upon earth. page
294 The sting of the first sin. page 297 The knowledge of Gods glory consists
in the true consideration of his justice and mercy* page 299 Though the Church
of God live under the cross for a time; it shall not be always so. page 82
Those whom God uses as his rods are limited. page 83 To know the glory of God
here on earth, we must observe the course of his judgments. page 302 To make
others drunk, is a more grievous sin then drunkenness. page 310
U.
VAnity of Idolatry. page 326 Uncharitableness corrupts a Commonwealth, and
makes all Gods servants complain. page 34 Ungodly men outrageous, when they
find a way open to their violence. page 125 Ungodly men have no bowels. page
136 Unrighteous men's labors described. page 287 Voluntary and involuntary
drunkenness. page 318
W.
WAnt of zeal a sin. page 52 Want of Faith the true cause of Idolatry. page
90 Way to Hell all down hill, yet very uneasy, 286. And that is gotten by it,
is but mere vanity. page 283 We ought to avoid causes of complaint. page 34 We
ought not to limit God to a set time for our deliverance, nor to any set means,
nor measure of affliction. page 107 We must not think long to tarry Gods
leisure, 173. to avoid these two evils. Of murmuring against God, or seeking
unlawful means to accomplish our desires. page 178 We ought not be too busy
to search into the ways of God, to know things to come. page 174 We must
believe Gods Promises whatsoever appearances do put in to persuade us to the
contrary. page 175 Where God is. page 336 Whatsoever God has decreed or
spoken, shall certainly take effect in the appointed time. page 160 What duty
is owing to him. page 336 Where Religion is despised, the courts of Justice
must needs be corrupt, 28. and power and authority degenerate into tyranny, and
oppression. page 29 When God undertaketh a work, he accommodateth all fit means
(though he need none) for a full execution. page 71 When we pray that Gods Will
may be done, we must also pray that it may be done for the same cause. page 77
Whenever God punishes, there is a fault deserving that punishment, 253.
Objections to the contrary answered. page 254 When God puts his hand to
spoiling the oppressor, he will spoil him in all that he trusted in. page 263
Whom God pardons, Satan tempts most. page 87 Whosoever gives divine
Worship to a creature, is an Idolater. page 91 Wicked men have no peace. page
84 Wicked men rejoice at the Churches sorrow. page 128 Woe to the man which
gathers not his own. page 275 Written Scripture sufficient for salvation.
page 153
Z
Zeal against crying sins of the time, is discreet, and necessary page 52
The Contents of the third Chapter.
A Double plainness of Scripture, Rational, and Spiritual. page 77
Afflictions of this life cannot separate the society of the Faithful. page 5
Afflictions of the Church are such a deading to it, that unless it were
quickened with sou^^ beams of grace, it would be a burden to it more then it
could bear. page 41 Affection of love most vehement in a woman. page 94 All
Gods favors to men, proceed from his love toward such as are thankful for
them. page 69 As God brought Israel into the land of Canaan by the sword, so by
the sword he drives them out. page 144
C
CAtesbie's speech concerning the Gunpowder treason page 89 Christ descended
into hell. page 78 Christ was always before the Gospel, and even from the
beginning of the world, the hope of all the ends of the world. page 150 Church
music ancient, and of holy use. page 22 Comfort in afflictions, grows out of
a right understanding of the Will and purpose of God therein. page 43
Commination of Gods judgments, makes the Church of God to fear page 174
Consideration of former mercies strengthens faith in present troubles. page 50.
and 68 Cushan is Aethiopia, so called from Cush the son of Cham. page 80 Cyrus
angry with the River Gyndes. page 103
D.
David's Psalms a common storehouse of good learning. page 195 Description of
Repentance. page 1^5 Distressing of the poor, a grievous and provoking sin.
page 159
E
EVery child of God, and member of the Church, ought to pray for the whole
body of the Church. page 34
F.
FAith in Christ takes away the horror of the terror of the Lord page 82
Faithful men who worship God with fear and trembling, how they ought to be
taught. page 33 Fear is a proper passion of a true Believer, and is inseperably
joined with saving Faith. page 28 Figurative speeches are in use in Scripture.
page 72
G.
GOD is not so glorious in any thing that he has wrought, as in his Church.
page 38 God will not suffer us to be tempted further then he thinks fit. page
41 God is armed with instruments of vengeance to punish sin. page 57 God never
had mercy enough to swallow or consume either his justice or his truth. page 60
God is glorious in Heaven and in Earth. page 61 God never lays his rod upon
those creatures which he has ordained for the service of man, but to punish
man, 102. For he has no quarrel to them. page 103 God must have the glory of
his own great works. page 104 God is without variableness or alteration. page
113 God sometimes declares his power openly, to the comfort of his Church and
terror of its enemies. page 115 God is above all second causes. page 133 God
has taken upon himself the care of the preservation of his Church, 151.
Therefore we need seek no further for it. page 153 God in his judgment makes
the ungodly rods to punish one another. page 155 God in Christ is the rest of
his Church. page 158 God never forsakes us, till we forsake him. page 185 God
punishes one evil nation by another. page 87 God is the strength of his
Church, 214. both in that we are, and in that we do, and in that we suffer.
page 215 God is the restorer of his Church, and will renew the face and glory of
it. page 222 Gods word must minister matter to our prayers. page 25 Gods Church
is Gods work both in respect of its calling, 37. and of his perpetual presence
in it. page 38 Gods mercy and our obedience are motives of re-establishing his
protection upon his Church. page 55 God's secrets revealed only to them that
fear him. page 75 God's power showed in the terror of the wicked proves, that
there is a God. page 80 God's promises are either for this life, or for the
life to come. page 124 God's extraordinary mercies must be often remembered.
page 166 God's mercy in giving, must not destroy his justice in punishing of
evil doers. page 186 Good use is to be made of some temptations.
H.
Horns in Scripture signify strength. page 49 How God was said to have
divided the Land of Canaan amongst the children of Israel. page 63 and 73 How
many ways spiritual enemies assault the Church. page 205 How many ways men
abuse their strength. page 216
I.
JErusalem and the Temple shall lie desolate until the second coming of
Christ. page 68 Jewish Feasts were instituted for remembrances of favors
received from God. page 166 In the last calling of the Jews, their
Commonwealth shall be restored. page 66 In reading of holy Scripture we ought
carefully to observe what is spoken literally, and what figuratively. 74. and
not to make figures where none are. 77. Nor understand that literally which is
figurative. page 79 In all wars, God is Lord of Hosts, and General of the
armies that fight his quarrels. 143. and he orders all wars. page 144
Jotham's Parable. page 188 Joy dilateth the heart. page 195 Joys of the
ungodly compared to a candle. page 205 Israel a type of Gods Church on earth.
page 99.
L.
LAnd of Canaan, not above 300 miles in length, and 100 in breadth, 173. The
fruitfulness of it shown. ibid. Logic and Rethorick requisite and necessary
in a Minister. page 76
M.
MAnna and Water out of the Rock were types of our Lords Supper, and the
children of Isreal's passage through the red Sea a type of Baptism. page 168
Matter of thankesgiving, is an acknowledgment of all benefits. page 68 Mercy is
the most glorious attribute that God has. page 46 Miseries of afflicted men,
make them forget comforts. page 44 Monarchy of the Assyrians lasted 1300
years. page 250 Moses charged by Heathens to be a Magician. page 97 and 105
Motives inducing us to bless those that persecute us, and pray for those that
hate us. page 70
N.
NO lesson so hard for a child of God to take out, as to take up Christ's
Cross. page 41 No counsel or strength can prevail against God, 65. nor any
prescription. ibid. No Oratory nor eloquence comparable to the holy elocution
of Scripture page 75
O.
OBjections against Church music answered, page 13 Obedience to God assures
and gains all good things to us. page 180 Overweening of our fellow creatures
is and has been a cause of Idolatry. page 134
P.
POetry ancient and of use in the Church. page 10 Polygamy unlawful. page 108
Prayer a faithful messenger, page 43 Prayer has the same force now as it had
in former times. page 141 Praising of God in Hymns and Songs ancient and much
used in the Church. Profane men's hearts are hardened with custom of sinning.
page 31 Profane and carnal men how they ought to be taught. page 30 Prophets,
Apostles, and Ministers of the Word, are the fittest Persons to be used for
direction of devotion. page 7
R.
REading of Scripture good to make us understand what the Lord has done in
former ages. page 105 Religion in the Head is speculation, in the Heart
affection, in the Hand action. page 169 Rich men's duties to the poor. page 161
S.
SAlvation is a work of power, 210. of glory. Ibid. Of mercy, page 211
Salvation only of God. page 229 Satan's Suggestions that God is merciful,
animates sinners to do evil. page 58 Satan is but Gods instrument in afflicting
of the Church. page 84 Selah what it signifies. page 49 Self conceited men,
how they ought to be taught. page 32 Self-opinion is a kind of spiritual
drunkenness. page 32 Set-prayers both lawful and necessary to be used. page 6
Senseless and livelesse creatures are subject to Gods will page 119 and 133
Sigionoth what it signifies. page 2 Signs of true spiritual joy. page 201 and
203 Six Signs of ensuing judgment. page 146 Sin is that which parts God and
us. page 146 Sometimes God takes away from his children their feeling of his
love, and of the joy of the Holy Ghost. page 56
T.
TEmporal things have but a resemblance of good and evil, spiritual favors are
real. Page 202 Thanksgiving ought to be joined with Prayer. Page 106
Thanksgiving is a work of Justice, which puts us in mind of our unablenesse to
requite God, and of our unworthiness. Page 69 The Contemplation of Gods
justice in punishing the sins of his Church, of his vengeance in revenging the
quarrels of it, of his mercy, in his mercy, in healing the wounds of it, give
the faithful occasion to resort to God by prayer. Page 3 The Churches Plea in
affliction is for mercy. Page 45 The Church of God has a special interest in
the power and protection of God. Page 54 The best form of thanksgiving is that
which makes particular commemoration of Gods mercies. Page 68 The sense of
Scripture is the soul thereof. Page 76 The welfare of the Church, is the grief
and vexation of her enemies. Page 82 The truth of God is a good ground, because
the word of God is a sure word. Page 112 The devil knew where Moses was buried.
Page 137 The effectual fevrent prayer of a righteous man prevails much. Page
139 The poor are under Gods protection and his own flesh. Page 160 The very
Elect are shaken with fear. Page 177 The law shows us how much we are in Gods
debt. Page 178 The same hand that put the children of Israel in possession of
the land of Canaan, put them out again. Page 186 The Chaldaeans armies the
Troops of God. Page 186 The Saints of God have their sorrows on earth, yet they
always rejoice in the Lord. Page 202 The general apprehension of Gods mercy in
Christ, will not justify a man in the sight of God. Page 207 The Lord will
loose the bonds of his Church, and give her deliverance out of her troubles.
Page 220 They that joy in the Lord, rest in the Lord, and rejoice in nothing
otherwise then as a means to serve the Lord. 200 and because God is Lord. Page
201 Three notes of a lawful promise and oath. Page 115
VAin repetitions not to be used in Prayer. Page 33
W
WE ought to give the whole glory and praise for all good to God. 70. And
thanks to creatures as ministers and instruments of God. Page 71 We must search
out and confess the true cause of all the good that God does to us. Page 107
What use may be made of David's Psalms, in our frequent reading and meditation
of them. Page 19 What is meant by the works of God. Page 19 What is meant by
the midst of years. Page 21 Whether we ought to swear at all. Page 114 Whether
every oath ought to be kept. Page 115 Wheresoever there is Election there is
Unction. page 130 and 154 Where God loves a People, his favor runs in a
full stream in the channel of his Church. Page 138 Where there is the true joy
of the Holy Ghost, no temporal affliction can extinguish or eclipse it. Page
195
X
Xerxes angry with the sea, causes it to be beater with stripes. page 102
FINIS.
A Commentary OR, EXPOSITION UPON The Prophecy of HABAKKVK.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. The Burden which HABAKKUK the Prophet did see.
THis first verse tells us what we shall find in the ensuing Prophecy; and it
opens to us three things which give light to that which follows.

1. The Minister of God in this Prophecy, 1. By his name. Habakkuk. 2. By his
Function: the Prophet.
2. The manner how he came by it: Vision, 3. The matter of it: the Burden.
1. Of the Minister, First of his name.

The name Habakkuk is rendered by Philo the Jew amplexans embracing, so does
Pagnine give it; our English a wrastler: for they that wrestle do embrace and
hold fast one the other; a name well expressing the office and employment of
this Prophet, who wrastled with the sinners of those times, and their horrible
iniquities to cast them. 1. But as God wrastled with Jacob that he might leave
behind him a blessing. His tribe Dorothaeus says, was Simeon; I know not upon
what information, for the silence of the holy Scripture does argue it to be
conjectural.

Concerning the time when he prophesied, it is not particularly expressed, but it
appears to be before the deportation into Babylon, for the Chaldeans invasion
is here threatened, and therefore Junius thinks him contemporary with Jeremiah,
and refers his Prophecy to the end of Josias his Government. Others after
the Hebrews refer it is the ^^me of King Manasseh.

Master Calvin very truly affirms it before the time of Zedekiah.

Arias Montanus gives a probable conjecture, by comparing that which is said, 2
Reg. 21.12. Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel, behold I am bringing
forth an evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that whosoever hears of it, both his
ears shall tingle.

That in the eleventh verse it is said, Because Manasseh King of Judah has done
these abominations, and has done wickedly above all that the Amorites did,
which were before him, and has also made Judah to sin with his idols.

And this Commination is almost in the same words in the fifth verse of this
chapter.

Saint Hierome, in his Prologue to this Prophet says, that he is called a
wrastler quia certamen ingreditur cum deo, because he wrastled with God. Nullus
enim Prophetarum ausus est tam audaci voce Deum ad disceptationem justitiae
provocare, none durst so boldly provoke God to vindicate his Justice, as it
appears v. 2.

But he does violate the text of Canonical Scripture and History to verify
that Apocrypha tale of Habakkuks bringing food to Daniel by miracle, which
destroys the truth of the history, to make faith of a Legend.

For either there must be two Habakkuks, or this one must live, as Arias
Montanus does cast it up, three hundred years, if he lived to feed Daniel in
the Captivity, a long time of life then, or this must prophecy before he was
born Bellarmine has found out two Daniels, one the Prophet of the tribe of
Judah, and another of the tribe of Levi, that heard the cause of Susanna; and
Ribera a Jesuit two Habakkuks.

But we lose time in this question, for they that have not the light in the
word, do go in the dark, and they that go in the dark, know not whither they go.

The best use of this is to limit our search to the holy Canonical Scripture*
and to take all our light from thence; so shall we not go astray.

2. The function of this man is set down in the name. Of a Prophet, that is, a
man enlightened by divine Revelation, to understand the will of God in some
things, and appointed to declare the same.

Secondly, the manner how he came to it: Vision, that is, divine Revelation,
assuring him of the truth of Gods will so fully as if he had seen the same with
his eyes accomplished.

De his consule conciones super Obadiam Thirdly, the matter of the Prophecy,
the Burden. In which two questions are moved.

1. Why this Prophecy is called a Burden. 2. Whose burden this is.
To the first it is called a burden in respect

1. Of the sin here punished, which is onus a burden. 2. Of the punishment
here threatened; that is onus. 3. Of the Word of God threatening: that is onus.
1. Peccatum onus, Sina burden. 1 Deo to God. 2. Hominibus to men.


1. Onus deo, A burden to God.

God complains of the sins of his People, that they are a burden to him.

Behold I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheavs.

The very service that these sinners do seem to perform to God, is a burden to
him as he complains; Your new Moons, your appointed feasts, my soul hates:
they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them. Hierom.
Laboravi sustinens, So the Prophet Malachie complains.

Ye have wearied the Lord with your words: Mal. 3.^7.
yet ye say, wherein have we wearied him? When ye say, every one that does
evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delights in them or where is
the God of judgment? Three things weary God.

1. When we multiply our own sins. 2. When we tender God service continuing in
sin. 3. When we justify sinners, and flatter them in their sins, as though God
had accepted them.
2. Peccatum onus est hominibus, Sin is a burden to men.

Christ calls none to him but such as are weary of this our-then of sin to
such he promises refreshing.

Ask the first sinners if they found not their sin their burden, when they hid
themselves from the presence of God.

Ask the first murderer, if any place were safe for him, who thought and said
that whosoever met him would kill him.

They that think that Lamech killed Cain, read the text: occidi hominem in vulnus
meum.

Ask Joseph's brethren, when they saw their sad constraint in Egypt, both at
their first coming to buy corn, and after the death of their father, if the
trespass against their brother Joseph did not lie heavy upon them.

Ask the tender conscience of any of Gods children, if any weight or burden be
like unto that of the body of sin, and if he do not cry with Paul, Quis
liberabit me? Who shall deliver me.

Till we come to this, to feel the burden of sin, and to be weary of it, we
are the sons of wrath, and every man may call himself (...), A wretched man.

Here is pride and vanity clothing of us, here is gluttony and drunkenness
feeding of us, here is the mouth full of evil words, the hands of violence or
bribes, giving or taking; the day, the night, the year, spent in pleasure and
recreations; Gods Sabbath is neglected, Gods Word not regarded, he time served,
the humors of sinful men observed, and when these things are no burden to the
bearers thereof, there is wrath gone forth from the Lord against them: and if
timely repentance do not stand in the gap, it will break in upon them that do
such things, like a flood, and no man shall escape that is pursued by this
judgment.

Let me therefore entreat you to hear a word of exhortation, Give not the
members of your bodies servants to sin.

Give not; for indeed, what have you to give, seeing you brought nothing with
you into the world? and what have ye that you have not received? or if you
will needs be giving, hands off give not the members of your body, for your
body is the temple of the Holy Ghost, or should be, if you would give so
comfortable a guest welcome; or if you will give your bodies away, do them not
the wrong to put them out to service; for they are bought with a price, the
dearest pennyworth that was ever bought; their liberty cost the binding, their
sanitie the breaking, their ease the smart and aching, their life the death of
the holiest body that ever lived upon earth.

Or if you will needs give your body a servant, let it not be to sin, for that
is ponderous in the weight noysom in the stinch, bitter in the smart; the
burden of sin is the wrath of God.

Here let me awake your thankful hearts to an acknowledging consideration of
that great redemption performed by Jesus Christ to his Church, who came to take
this burden upon him, and to ease us of it; Agnus qui tollit peccata, the Lamb
that takes away sins from us, that he might wash us in his blood: upon himself
he bore our infirmities, and God made the iniquity of us all to meet on him.

He did not rob us as Israel did the Egyptians, of our jewels of silver, and
jewels of gold; he only took our infirmities and our sins from us; and whereas
once we might have said with Cassiodore,

Quantitas delicti mensura est repudii, the quantity of the fault is the
measure of the judgment; for by our sins we might have taken measure of the
wrath and judgment of God; now there is an uns^aled height, an unsounded depth,
and unbounded breadth of love which has said to the Church of the whole burden
of sin, Cantantes ut eamus, ego hoc te fasce levabo, let us sing as we go, I
will ease thee of this burden.

2 The punishment here threatened is a burden to man. 1. Homini.


Issacher under his double burden, says; that rest is good, he found rest
amongst his burdens.

But there is no peace to the wicked man; a sinner that has any sense of sin
will say as David, Non est pax ossibus meis propter peccatum; There is no rest
in my bones, because of my sin, he was so overcharged with the fear of Gods
judgments, that sometimes he doubted that God had forgotten to be merciful,
and that he would be no more entreated.

Who can stand in thy sight when thou art angry?

I can tell you who could not stand; not the Angels that kept not their first
estate, heaven; was too hot for them, God cast them down, ejecit, conjecit,
dejecit, rejecit, subjecit; and that anger is yet their burden and shall be
for ever.

The first tenants of Paradise could not; they fled from the face of God, and
the curse of God lay heavy upon them.

Cain confessed, his punishment more then he could bear; the old World all but
eight persons sunk under this wrath, and were drowned in the great deep.

The transgressing Cities suffered the consuming and tormenting flames of fire
and brimstone.

The very earth trembled and shoke, Psalm. 18.
the foundations also of the mountains moved and quaked, because he was angry;
smoke went out at his nosthrils, and consuming fire out of his mouth.

Beloved, let me tell you what I fear; never any times did more put almighty
God to it to reveal his anger from heaven, and to rain down burdens upon the
sons of men; for the clearer the light of the Gospel shines, the more his
expectation is of walking in the light; but our knowledge is rather floating in
the brain then working in the obedience of our life.

Christ says, It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of the
Lord, then for those of that generation to whom the light appeared in his
Ministry so clear and glorious; and yet they love darkness better then light,
because their works were; evil. Great is the weight of a millstone hanged about
our neck, and we cast therewith into the bottom of the sea: yet the burden
of Gods wrath he says, is much heavier then that.

And yet we make no care nor conscience, and live without fear of this anger;
we do this and that great wickedness, and sin against God, and provoke him to
anger with our actions and inventions, as if the Lord saw not this, as if there
were no knowledge in the most High;

As if he could not pluck his hand out of his bosom; as if we had stolen away
his sword, and his quiver full of deadly arrows.

I beseech you my brethren; do not so wickedly; your oaths and blsalphemies,
your pride and vanities, your cruelty and oppressions, your frauds and
circumventions, your abuse of Gods good creatures in excess and wantonness,
they are all gone up to heaven, and awake vengeance and chaleng the God of
mercy to declare his justice.

Does not some part of the Church now in the Palatinate and in Bohemia groan
under the burden of war, wherein the goods, the liberties, the lives of men,
Christian men, professors of the same faith, with us do lie at the stake, and
blood touches blood.

Does not our neighbor Church in France tremble for fear of a new massacre?
has not the sword of violence tasted already of Protestant blood? do not the
Jesuits the incendiaries of the Christian world, blow the coal and incense the
King thereof to grassation and destruction of all that have not the mark of
the beast, either openly in their foreheads or secretly in their hands? and
dare we anger our God who gives us the early and the latter rain, who crowns
our land with peace, and the daughter of peace plenty!

Shall we flatter our selves, and say that although we do wickedly, this
burden shall not fall upon us? let us pray for them, and amend our own lives,
and sin no more least some worse judgment do fall upon us; for we shall else
find too late that the wrath and judgment of God is too heavy a burden for
us to bear.

2 The wrath and judgments of God, they are a burden to God, 2. Deo.
he professes it.

As I live says the Lord, I delight not in the death of a sinner: he calls
upon his Israel, why will ye perish O house of Israel?

When he punished his people, how heavy was the burden of their punishment
upon him?

He smarted under his own rod; the burdens that he put upon his people wearied
him.

Why should you be stricken any more? Isay. 1.5.
The whole head is sick and the whole heart is faint?

From the soal of the foot to the head, there is no soundness in it, etc.

Truly God does bear with us in a double sense; for he does forbear our
punishment in expectation of our amendment, and he does suffer with us in our
sufferings; he is our father and every stripe he lays on us smarteth upon him.

O greive not the Spirit of God by whom you are sealed up to the day of your
redemption.

3 The word of God threatening sin is a burden.

1. To God. 2. To the Prophet. 3. To the People.
It is a burden to God to threaten judgment, 1 Deo.
he loves to speak us fair, and to speak and treat kindly with us, to draw us
with the cords of men, and with the bands of love, to be as one that takes off
the yoke; for he knows whereof we be made, for he made us and not we our
selves: he will allure and persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem.

If Adam do transgress his one commandment given to him in Paradise, he
tarrieth expecting when Adam will come to him to acknowledge his fault, and
cast himself at his feet to seek mercy; if Adam will not, he will come to him;
but it shall be the cool of the day first, and he will call him to account, but
yet so fatherly that he cannot execute the law without preaching the Gospel; he
cannot banish him the earthly Paradise til he have opened to him an heavenly.

He cannot threaten till he have promised; he cannot punish till he have
pardoned.

3 This is a burden to the Prophet, and that two ways. 2 Prophetae.


1. In respect of his fidelity to him that sends him. 2. In respect of his
zeal. 3. In respect of his charity and compassion to them to whom he is sent.
1. In respect of his fidelity.

It is a burden to him to keep in the word of this Prophecy, he cannot conceal
it.

When Jeremy found the people incorrigible, and that the word of God in his
Ministry was despised and made his reproach.

Then I said I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name:
Jer. 20.9.
but his word was in my heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was
weary with forbearing, and I could not stay.

Some carnal men do confess that it is true that we must preach the judgments
of God against sin, that is our trade; but let children fear those bugbears,
they know as well as we can tell them that God is merciful, and his mercy is
above all his works.

It is true that we must preach judgment against sin, for we have fear of the
burden of all those sins of others which we reprove not, to fall upon our
selves.

If thou give him not warning, his blood will I require at thy hands.

Therefore this word of excommunication, Ezekiel. 3 18.
is our burden and we must not conceal it.

2. In respect of his zeal.

For the Prophets of the Lord and his holy Ministers, beholding the sins which
they do daily reprove to come up so fast, as though they had never laid the axe
of Gods judgment against the root of that corrupt tree; the zeal of Gods glory
so stirs them that they cannot hold ^ut they must strike with the sword of
the Spirit, they must lift up their voices like trumpets, they must tell the
house of Jacob their sins.

Jeremy does express this to the life.

Therefore I am full of the fury of the Lord, Jer. 6.11.
I am weary with holding in, I will pour it out upon the children abroad, etc.

Let not the sensual and carnal man call our threatenings of sin our own
ravings, and railings: and our comminations of judgment, the intemperate issue
of our own choler. Jeremy calls it The fury of the Lord.

And so long as we reprove justly, and mingle none of our own heat with the
fire of Gods altar, we shall kindle a fire in the bones of the sinner which
shall give him no rest, but his conscience shall say to him as Nathan said to
David. Thou art the man.

3. In respect of his compassion.

Do not think that it is any joy to us to reprove or to threaten, St. Paul is
loath to use the rod. Jonah will rather run away from God then he will carry
the news to Niniveh that it must be destroyed.

Many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping.

We shall find as soon as we are past this first verse, that this Prophet did
feel the burden which he did see; and the grief he took for them, turned his
Harp into mourning, and his Organes into the voice of them that weep; every
tender heart avoydeth being a messenger of evil news, but their feet be
beautiful that bring glad tidings, tidings of peace.

3. The word of threatening is a burden to the people to whom it is sent. 1.
Judaeis, non Chaldaeis.

1. To the Penitent. 2. To the Impenitent.
1. To the Penitent; it is an heavy burden to them to think how they have
provoked God to anger, and have drawn out his sword against themselves.

They that truly fear God, when they hear their sins threatened, do retire
themselves into their chambers, they weep and deplore their iniquities.
Hezekiah hearing the Prophet threatening his life

He turned himself to the wall, Isa. 38.2, 3.
he prayed to the Lord; and Hezekiah wept sore.

Never think that you hear the threatenings of God with any profit till you feel
the burden of them oppressing, and the edge of them drawing blood on you.
Lachrymae be sanguis animae.

The Lion roareth, and all the beasts of the forest do tremble: a tender son
that has done a fault, and hears his father threatening to punish him,
finds that threatening so great a burden to him, that he can give himself no
rest till he have recovered his fathers favor.

2. The very Impenitent who have any sense of the terror of the Lord, feel
Gods threatenings heavy: it will make Ahab that sold himself to do wickedness,
put on sackcloath, and crown his head with ashes and go mourning, if he hear
that Gods anger is stirred to bring evil upon his house.

Even Absolon an ungratious son is impatient of living out of his fathers
presence; and he sets Joabs corn on fire for neglecting the mediation which
might bring him to his fathers face.

Esau will seek his fathers blessing with tears; and what would not Balaam give
that he might die the death of the righteous? Surely God is a consuming fire,
and if coals of this fire are kindled in the bosom of the impenitent, and
their damnation does not sleep, but is awake in them, in the accusation of
their guilty consciences to begin their hell even here on earth.

Hab. 1.2. O Lord, how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear; even cry out
unto thee of violence, and thou will not save?
Here this Habakkuk, this Wrastler does begin his wrestling: for what is this
whole Chapter but a serious Expostulation and complaint? wherein the Prophet,

1. Contesteth with God himself. verse. 2.3, 4. 2. He brings in God denoucing
his own intended judgments against Judah and Jerusalem. verse. 5.6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11. 3. He returns again to expostulate with God. verse. 12.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
1. He contesteth with God. Wherein

1. He chalengeth him for not hearing his prayer. verse. 2. 2. For showing to
him the sins of the people. v. 3.4.
In the first observe.

1. What the Prophet did, 1. He cried, 2. He cried long, 3. He cried to him.
2. What cause he had. Of violence 3. What success. 1. Thou will not hear. 2.
Thou will not save.

To give some light to that which follows, let me first admonish you that it
may well be gathered, by the title that is here given to Habakkuk the Prophet,
that he was sent by Almighty God to preach to the Jews to reclaim them from
their evil ways, and to still the noise of their crying sins: and prevailing
nothing with them, to bring them to repentance, he prays and cries to
Almighty God for his judgment upon this People, to punish their many sins: and
God not hearing him, nor giving way to his anger to correct them, the Prophet
moved with the zeal of Gods glory, wrastleth with God, and contendeth with him
for his rod upon them.

1. What the Prophet did.

1. I cry, he lifts up his voice against this People his brethren; for it is
twice expressed. 1. He cries; then he resumeth it, he says, he cries out; this
is a thing that God does use to take special notice of, expectavi Justitiam and
ecce clamor.

It is said of Abel, that being dead he spoke; Moses says, it was
voxsanguinis, a voice of blood, and God said that voice cried to him out of the
earth for vengeance.

The Cry of a Prophet one of Gods Secretaries, to whom he reveals his will;
one of Gods Chaplains, to whom he commits the Ministry of the Revelation of
his will; one of Gods Saviors, to whom he commits the office of saving his
People; the crying, the vociferation of one of Gods Seers, who cries not out of
passion or humane perturbation, but from a secret inspiration illuminating him
and showing him things to come;

One of Gods holy ones whom the zeal of Gods glory does inflame with this
earnestness, the grief of man's rebellion does provoke to that loudness. Such
a cry cannot spend it self all into air and Sun, and perish with the noise
it makes.

2. He was no Son of thunder to make some sudden rattling noise, and then
cease. He cried loud, he cried long, How long shall I cry? if the weakness of
his voice could not penet rate the ear of God vi by force, here was saepe
cadendo, by often falling. So David got an hoarsenesse in throat with crying
loud and long to the Lord; and our Savior has commanded that kind of
importunity in Prayer, and the Prophet will give God no rest till he hear and
answer; for the Prayer of the just, if it be fervent, prevails with God:
zeal is an holy fire, the flame of it ascends to heaven, and penetrateth all
the passages till it come to God. Cold and perfunctory devotions intermitted
and given over, do not prevail with God; they please him best that use most
violence, for the kingdom of heaven suffers violence.

3. Unto thee; he directs his prayers aright; for Baals Priests may cry from
morning to night, and may cut and lance their flesh, and make many signs of
zeal and earnest importunity without success, because their God hears not,
his eyes see not, his ears hear not, his hands handle not, there is no breath
in his mouth to give them answer.

But the cry of the Prophet went up to God, who beholds ungodliness and
wrong, that he may take the matter into his own hand.

Thus far we have seen what the Apostle did. 1. He cried. 2. He cried loud.
3. To God.


2. What cause had he to cry.

For violence; this is fully and largely expressed in the second part of his
contestation with God, ver. 3, 4.

I therefore only observe here two things.

1. That he complained not without great provocation, for violence was Gods own
complaint and quarrel against the old world. The earth is full of violence,
Genesis 6.13
and behold I will destroy them with the earth.

It was Gods quarrel against Edom, for thy violence against thy brother Jacob,
shame shall cover thee, Obad. 10.
and thou shall be cut off for ever.

2. We consider where this violence was; not of Esau against Jacob, but of
Jacob against Jacob, as Isaiah describes it:

Every man eating the flesh of his own arm, Manasseh Ephraim, and Ephraim
Manasseh, Isa. 9. ult.
and both of them against Judah.

Civil and Domestic wars in the bosom of the Church, grievances and
vexations one of another: these differences it is likely that the Prophets had
labored to compound, and used all means to settle Peace there, but it
appears that they prevailed not, therefore he complains.

3. With what Success.

1. Thou will not hear; the Cry of the Prophet was to awaken the Justice of
God, to chasten his People for this violence; for so desperate was the disease
of the Church, that they needed the sharpest Physic to heal it, even the rod
of God to correct them.

Yet God is so slow to wrath, and so long-suffering, that he would not hearken
to the voice of his Prophets as yet, to pull his hand out of his bosom, though
they said with David, It is time for thee Lord to put to thine hand.

2. Thou will not save. 1. Thou will not succor them that suffer violence
against the hand of their oppressors; as his not hearing is to be imputed to
his mercy and patience, so his not saving is to be imputed either to his
wisdom, putting his children to the trial of their faith by afflictions; or
to his Justice, making one of them who have corrupted their ways a rod to
scourge the other, neither of them being as yet worth the saving, till he had
humbled them.

The text thus cleared, the doctrines which grow upon this stem and first
branch of the Prophets contestation are these.

1. That the weapons wherewith the holy servants of God do fight against sin
are their Prayers to God. 2. That one necessary ingredient in our Prayers is
earnestness and importunity. 3. That the zeal of Gods glory, and the love of
Peace, cannot dispense with tumule and combustion in the Church of God. 4. That
God sometimes suspendeth the desired success of the earnest Prayers of his
most faithful servants, when they do pray according to his will, and does not
hear them by and by.
Of the first of these first.

1. Doctr. The weapons wherewith the holy servants of God do fight against sin,
is their Prayers.

I find that this People, to whom God had sent his Prophets rising early and
sending them, were grown incorrigible: and therefore even the Prophets that
loved them, and wished them well, having no other way to reform them, were now
put to it to pray against their violence to God. They that had wont to stand in
the gap, to turn away ingruent judgments, do take such offense at their
ungodliness, that they are put to it to pray to God against them.

Thus Joseph carried the evil report of his brethren to his father, and made
them to be shent, wherein he did a brotherly office to seek their Reformation.

The spleen of Habakkuk is not against the Persons of his brethren, they are
not so much as named here: he cries out of violence. And so Saint Paul says.
The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness and
ungodliness of men.

David did thus in a case of violence. Psalm. 109.3, 4.


They compassed me about with words of hatred, and fought against me without
cause.

For my love they are mine adversaries, but I give my self unto Prayer: Ego
oro.

Quaere. How does it stand with the rules of charity to complain to God of our
brethren, and to stir up his indignation against them?

Sol. I confess that this asks an especial tenderness in the servants of
God; for to begin here without using other means to reclaim our offending
brother, may shake the walls of our charity, and may accuse us of want of
love; therefore all those ways of charity must be first tried, as to admonish
privately; or not speeding so, join another with thy self in the private
chiding of his sin; after failing, to communicate the matter to the Church.
If all these supports which we do owe to our brother will not keep him up, then
let him be as an heathen, and then is David's Prayer in season.

Let the heathen know that they are but men.

But in my text here was the body of the Church diseased; the members and parts
of the body in arms one against another, only some few of Gods holy servants
lived with grief in their righteous souls, to behold the ungodly conversation
of men nefariously wicked and careless of religion; therefore what other way
was left them, but that of David? I will yet pray against their wickedness;
take away their ungodliness and thou shall find none.

The Prophets and Seers of former times, have had special Revelations of the
Will of God, concerning the ungodly of the earth, whereby they might as boldly
use imprecation as deprecation or supplication.

We that come short of their measure of the spirit: must not dare to go to the
farthest extent of their liberty in Prayer, to pray against our brethren; only
thus far we may with Habakkuk, cry out unto God and make our moan to him for
violence.

1. Committing our cause, and the care of our safety unto him, as to a faithful
Creator, and so the care and safety of our brethren.

2. Desiring God to bring to an end the wickedness of the ungodly, and to
finish their sins.

This serves,

1 To settle faith in God, and to seek our repose only in him in all cross
opposals, because he is the sun and shield, and there is no rest but in him;
he only over-ruleth all, and evacuateth the counsels, and frustrateth the works
of wicked men. He only shall bring it to pass.

2. This serves to reprove the means that are in use amongst us to reform
sin as we pretend, but they are unlawful and ungodly.

1. By public blazing and detecting of offenders, to put them to open shame in
the world; for the loss of a good name does more often harden a sinner, and
cause impenitency then reclaim him: for what has he to boast that has lost
the good opinion of men? love covers a multitude of sins, and therefore
that is an evil tongue that is the trumpet of another shame. It is charity to
make the best of every thing. 2. The same offense is committed in private
whispers and secret detractions, and the fault is aggravated by concealing our
selves, as unwilling to justify our accusations. 3. By cursing and bitter
calling upon God for his vengeance on them that offend, if the offense touch
us, or our friends; for God knows without us who to manage his judgments, and
cursing it, returns and smarteth at home. For the Apostle says it twice.
Bless, Curse not. 4. By public plays and interludes, to represent the vices
of the time, which though it were the practice of the heathen, which knew not
God but afar off, yet in Christian-states it is no way tolerable nor
justifyable; to act the parts of evil doers, since the Apostle says it is a
shame to name them, much more to act and personate them. 5. By private
conceived libels, after divulged by secret passage from pocket to pocket, from
one bosom to another, for which the devisers thereof have no warrant, and to
which they have no calling. 6. By Satyrs and Poetical declamations; for who
has sent these into the world, to convince the world? is it not to put the
spirit of God out of office, who is sent to convince the world of sin? And
who but the Lords Prophets have warrant to lift up their voices like Trumpets,
to tell the house of Jacob their sins? Every Emperique man may not profess
and practice Physic. There is a College of soule-Physicians, who have a
calling to this purpose, and are sent to heal the soars of the People, 1. By
their diligent preaching of the World of God to them. 2. By drawing against
them, and exercising upon them the sword of Ecclesiastical discipline. 3. By
continual prayer unto God to give end to their sins, whereby they do
trespass God and good men.

3. This serves to discourage men from doing evil; for fear of offending the
Prophets and Ministers of the Lord, whose righteous souls cannot but be vexed
to see their good seed cast away upon barren, stony or thorny ground.

For howsoever basely and unworthily we be deemed, if the incorrigible iniquity
of men do put us to it to move. Almighty God, by our earnest prayers against
them they shall find that as Job can do his friends good by his intercession,
because he is a Prophet, so the Lords Ministers may awake judgment against
such as go on still in their wickedness, and will not be reformed.

2. Doctr. Our Prayers must be importunate.

The Prophet cried, yea he cried out to the Lord. This importunity is expressed
two ways.

1. In the ardency and zeal of his Prayer, it was not oration a Prayer, but
vociferatio a crying. 2. In the continuance of time. How long.
Thus must we pray with fervor of spirit; our tongue is the piece of Ordnance,
our Prayer is the shot, the zeal of our heart is the powder that discharges
it; and according to the strength of the charge, such is the flight of the shot.

Niniveh cries mightily to God. Christ our Savior cried earnestly to his
father, Jou. 3.8.
yea with strong crying and tears.

Solomon spread his arms abroad; the Publicane beat his breast; Christ fell on
the ground; David said, My sighing is not hid from thee. Psalm. 38.9
The Israelites weeping is thus described, They drew water and poured it out
before the Lord.

The Holy Ghost does not furnish us so much with words and phrases in Prayer,
as with sighs and groans which cannot be exprost.

Paul prayed three times against Satan's Angel. Abraham moved God six times for
Sodom. Nehemiah had so spent himself in watching and prayer for his People,
that the King observed his countenance changed.

Beloved, it is not Prayers by number and tale, as in the Romish Church: nor
Prayers by rote, or by the ear perfunctoriously vented in the Church, and for
custom said over at home.

It is not much babbling and multiplicitie of Petitions, or vain repetitions
that will send up our Prayers to heaven.

Though you stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; Isay 1.
and though you make many Prayers I will not hear you.

The Pharisees wanted powder to their shot, for they prayed in their
Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, but as God says, Quis
requisivit ista, Who required these things?

The soul that actuateth and animateth Prayer, is fervor spiritus: the holy
zeal of him that prays.

2. Duration of time is another testimony of zealous importunity, when our
prayer is not a passion, but a deliberate and constant earnestness, holding
out as the Apostle says, Pray continually; not as the Euchites, to do nothing
else: but to entertain all occasions to confer with God, and to prostrate our
suites before him.

Christ spent a whole night together often in prayer; Dan. 10.
David day and night. Daniel 21, days together during the time that he ate no
pleasant bread, and was in heaviness.

Jonah three days and three nights in the belly of the Whale, made it his
Oratory and Chapel from whence he prayed to the Lord.

If our soar run, so long we can pray whilst we smart; or if our
necessities do press us to importunity, we can hold out long for our selves.

But in my Text the cause is Gods; zeal and Gods glory cannot contain it self
in the cause of God; 3. Doctr.
the Lords people do break his Law and will not be reformed; the Prophet of the
Lord cannot stand and look on as in the next verse he does, and see the glory
of God thus suffer, but he must awake in the cause of God to bring him to
correction.

So David. Rise Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, let them that hate
thee fly before thee.

And thus for Gods glory sake we may with reservation of those that do belong
to the election of grace, pray to God earnestly for the confusion of all Sions
enemies, and of all that would feign see Jerusalem the true Church of God in
the dust.

Shall our servencie and heat be only for our selves? if it be the grant of our
requests does quench it, and puts us to silence: but if the glory of God be
that we seek and aim at, the more God hears our prayers, and grants our
requests the more he enflameth our zeal, and even as it were transformes us
into prayer.

and what better motive can we give of Christ's so frequent so durant prayers
then this: I know that thou hear me always.

Now because long and frequent prayers are a weariness to the flesh, the flesh
is no good friend to this exercise; and we do find our selves in no exercise of
Religion more tempted then in this; for this cause watching, and fasting are so
often joined with prayer, as the best means to disable the rebel flesh from
resisting.

Doctr. God sometimes suspendeth the success of the prayers of his servants.

There is a case wherein God will not hear at all, though Moses, Samuel, Noah,
Daniel, Job do pray to him.

In some cases God will hear, but not yet; for he that keeps the times and
seasons in his own power, knows best when it is fittest for him to hear.

And that was the case of this prayer. God did 1. give them yet more time to
repent and seek his face that he might preserve them, and sent his Prophets to
them to reclaim them.

2. He did expect if not the conversion of them by fair means, then that after
the full taste of the fruits of his patience, they might by the rod be brought
to him, when he should change his righthand. Mutatio dexterae.

3. Or he did expect the filling up of the measure of their sins, that they
might have no plea to excuse their ungraciousnesse.

4. He forbore to stir up the Prophet so much the more to this importunity,
that it might be seen that not only their sins, but the Prophets prayers had
awaked vengeance.

5. To declare how acceptable a sacrifice prayer is, he will delay us that we
may pray, for with such sacrifices God is pleased; but if we withdraw our
selves, Gods soul will have no pleasure in us.

Let no man think the worse of this holy service of God, because he presently
feels not the success thereof: but as the woman of Canaan would not be put
off by the Disciples or by Christ himself; Math. 15.22.
so that both her request was granted, and her faith commended.

If we remember our Saviors limitation, all will be well. Eather if thou will;
let us set those bounds to our prayers?

1. What thou will: 2. In what measure: 3. When thou will: 4. In what manner,
sicut tu vis; As thou will.
Verse. 3. Why do thou show me iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance?
for spoiling, and violence are before me: and there are that raise up strife
and contention. 4. Therefore the Law is slacked, and judgment does never go
forth, for the wicked does compass about the righteous: therefore wrong
judgment proceeds.
2. HE contesteth with God for showing to him the sins of the people. verse. 3,
4.

For the opening of that Text

Why do thou show me iniquity?]

1. That it is not his own curious search to look into his brethren; I do not
say so scrutinously as the Hypocrite in the Gospel, who with a beam in his own
eye could yet discern a moat in his brothers eye: no not to behold their
gross iniquity. He did not look upon his brethren like an informer to see what
fault he could find in them to complain of: he had something else to do; he
says that God showed him the iniquity of his brethren. So he freeth himself of
suspicion of malice and evil affection to his brethren.

For there may be malice in looking into the vices of brethren, though it
pretend desire of Reformation.

2. This clears the Prophet that he is not as one of them, no partner with
them in their iniquity, seeing they that live in the society of evil practice,
and do not communicate with the evil in evil, cannot behold the evil, the
object is too near them or gone out of sight.

3. It shows that God does not only himself take notice of the evils that men
do, but he acquainteth his Prophets and Ministers therewith, which he does to
that end that he may prove their fidelity to him, whether they will discharge
their duty to him, and their people to whom they are sent, in telling the house
of Jacob their sins, and in laboring to bring them to the knowledge thereof
that they may repent.

It follows! Thou do cause me to behold grievance. Psalm 51.8.
Wherein he resurmeth what he has spoken before, and rhethorically amplifieth
it: for it is one thing to show, another to cause him to behold. This is an
effectual demonstration, as the Prophet David does pray, Make me to hear joy
and gladness.

God has sent his Gospel which is the voice of joy in the tabernacles of the
righteous all the world over; have they not heard?

Their sound is gone out into all the world, and their word to the ends of the
earth.

But that is not enough, except God do cause us to hear the same.

We preach this Gospel of peace, and we show unto men their righteousness,
that is Viam Iustitiae, how they may be justified in the sight of God: We
declare unto men their sins, and show them how the Law of God is broken; but if
God do not cause our hearts to behold this, if God do not turn their eyes into
themselves, and into their own ways to see them* we spend our strength in
vain; the scorner goes away from Church, and wipeth his mouth as the harlot
in the Proverbs, and says, this is nothing to me, because God does not make
his heart smite him for it. God does not cause him to behold: God does not open
our eyes to see our sins for our selves only that we may declare them, but for
you that we may give you warning of the anger to come.

And what did God show him?

1. Iniquity, that is the unjust dealing of the people one with another, as it
after follows. 2. Greivance, either the Greivance which that unrighteousness
does bring upon their brethren, or the greivance wherewith the righteous soul
of the Prophet is vexed day by day, in seeing and hearing the evil conversation
of them to whom he is sent.
For spoiling and violence are before me.

1. Here is Spoiling, that is robbing one another, invading one another goods
and lands, and that done in the commonwealth of the Jews: where God himself
was so careful to establish the right of propriety in several, that he divided
the land himself, to every Tribe their part, and by a judicial Law set every
man his bounds, and taught every man to be content with his own.

The commonwealth cannot long last in prosperity where this spoiling is in
practice, whether it be by corruption of the Magistrate stopping the course of
justice, or by the covetousness of the private man taking advantages to make
his brother a prey.

This is commonly the worm of peace; for when external wars do cease, then
internal digladiations do commonly succeed; then wit and policy and power do
put themselves to it to see what they can get; and this is a sin which God
takes notice of, and which he declares to his Prophets that they may reprove
it.

2. Here is Violence also added; for where by fraud, and circumvention, and
secret conveyance the spoiling cannot be wrought, there like the Priests
servant that came for flesh for the Priest, they will take by strong hand and
by violence that which they would have.

This is commonly the war between the superior and inferior, between the
strong and the weak; for the weakest here go to the wall.

These be signs of a drooping and decaying commonwealth, when cruelty and
violence is its own carver, and the poor have their faces ground between the
tearing milstones of oppression: when the poor flock pines and starves with
hunger. When,

Alienas oves custos bis mulget in hora.

For they be called filii alieni, strange children that do oppress their
brethren. When things are not carried by the Law of Justice, but by the power
of violence.

And the commonwealth of the Jews were even sick to the death of this
disease, at this time when Habakkuk prophesied; for shortly after followed
their deportation, and the destruction of Jerusalem, and desolation of the
Temple.

Let all the Kingdoms of the world take warning by this fearful example, and
let not private persons transgressing in this kind, forget what the Lord did
to this people.

3. The Prophet adds Before me: wherein he declares a double boldness of
these sinners.

1. That they professed their opposition, and cared not who saw it; for the
holy men of God search not so deep into the manners of men to seek out their
faults; neither do they profess themselves students in the affairs of the
commonwealth as to observe how things are carried; but if God declare it to
them, and cause them to behold it, and if the workers of this wickedness be so
bold and open that they care not who see it, this does prove the sin deeply
rooted and high-grown in amongst them.

2. It proves their boldness in sinning, that they durst commit those crying
sins before the Prophet the messenger of God sent of purpose to reprove them,
and coming from Almighty God to dissuade them from it.

Sin at first is bashful and modest, and does fear the sight of any good
man. Seneca the learned Preacher thought it a good thing to keep in unruly
desires, and any intemperancy in young men.

Prodest sine dubio custodem sibi imposuisse and habere quem respicias: And to
live

Tanquam sub alicujus boni viri semper praesentis oculis.

But when men grow to that height of sinning, that they dare commit their
iniquities in the sight of God, and men; in the sight of the Minister that
carries the sword of Gods Spirit, the word of God to reprove it and threaten
it, or in the sight of the Magistrate that carries the sword of God to punish
it, then to use the Apostles word, Sin is out of measure sinful.

Such are they that swear and blaspheme the name of God, that talk scurrilously
and leudly, that deprave their brethren maliciously, that drink drunk even
before us the Ministers of Gods word, as if God had sent us to bid them sin on,
and as if we had no commission to find fault out of the Pulpit.

They save their own stakes by confining us to the Pulpit, and shutting up our
power there; for there they know we may not tax personally, and they think
themselves free enough if we smite at sin only in general terms; for such
reproves have no edge but what parricular application does give them, and
therein they are wise enough to favor themselves.

It is not nothing that the Prophet does say that this spoiling and violence
was done before him; for his words of reproof will prove them guilty of wilful
transgression and contempt of the divine Majesty, as it presently follows.

And he will be both a fearful imprecator against them as he proves in this
Chapter, to call down Gods judgments upon them; and he will be a full witness
to testify against them before God.

And there are that raise up strife and contention.

This is a further complaint of the Prophet against this people that they are
so far from peace, that they do pick quarrels one with another, and make
matter of strife and contention.

This is contrary to the Apostles precept.

If it be possible, as much as in you is, Romans 12.
have peace with all men.

There be some of that froward nature, and wrangling disposition that cannot
contain themselves within the bounds of peace, but they must be ever searching
where they may find fault, thinking it best fishing in troubled waters.

You see that God takes notice of such unquiet persons, and detecteth them to
his Prophets that they may chide them for it as the Apostle says,

Now I beseech you brethren mark them which cause divisions and offenses. You
see God marketh them, Romans 16.17.
for it is one of the six things which God abhorres, him that sows discord
among brethren. Pro. 6.19.


There is great cause why God should abhor such as stir up strife.

1. Because God is called the God of peace, and his Gospel is called the Gospel
of peace, and his natural Son became Pax nostra, our peace; and his adopted
Sons be children of peace.

Therefore those sons of thunder, those boystrous and tumultuous natures must
needs be abominable to him whose ways be viae pacis, the ways of peace; for
contraries do expel one the other.

Contention does derive it self from two very offensive corruptions in men
which are abominable to God, as Solomon shows.

1. Only by pride comes contention; Pro. 13.12
and indeed they that think themselves wiser then their brethren, and overween
the graces of God in themselves, and think themselves worthy to sit at the
helm and to direct all, if they cannot have their own wills in every thing,
then they quarrel, and contend with all that oppose them.

The proud man God resists, for he encrocheth upon his soveraingty; therefore
David says that God abhors him.

2. Hatred stirs up strife; Prove. 10.12.
that is another corruption in man which God cannot dispense with, because he
is charity; and only he which dwells in charity, dwells in God, and God in
him.

There be many distastes and dislikes that do grow even amongst friends,
because we either want the wisdom to know, or the patience to consider when
time is, that there can be no peace between us except we can bear with one
another, and forgive one another some infirmities, which the Apostle calls
bearing one another burdens.

It is not that sin of infirmity in our nature that is here complained of,
but when men be so perverse and unquiet that they will stir up strife and
contention; as David complains, They stir up strife all the day long.

And when there is not only contention, as in those that secretly work one
against another, but there is Jurgium a chiding and scolding too; and that they
go so far in it, that when the Prophet speaks to them of peace, they
prepare themselves to battle; this is hostility to peace.

Here all those that disquiet the peace of their brethren, by secret whispers
and by open detractions; and all those that molest one another in needless
suits of law, all talebearers that carry fire about them to inflame a brother
against a brother, do see who takes notice of them; even God himself; and they
make the Prophets and Ministers of God like Joseph to carry their evil report
to their father: and to complain of them as enemies unto peace;

All those that when a contention is laid asleep, do awak it with new
suggestions, and stir it up a fresh, and put fewel^o it to inflame it; all
which proceeds from an evil root of bitterness in us, and witnesses against
us that surely the fear of God and the love of brethren is not in that place.

The Apostle tells us, That if we be led by the Spirit of God, we are the
sons of God. But it is clear that contention and strife and debate are fruits
of the flesh, and declare us to be carnal; and flesh and blood cannot inherit
the Kingdom of heaven.

Those contentions do make us unfit for the service of God, and to perform all
Christian offices to one another; and God seeing it for the good of his people,
he detecteth it to his Prophets of purpose, that they may seek Reformation
thereof. But these did strive even with the Prophets.

How far this unquietness did stretch in this people, the next words declare;

Therefore the Law is slacked.

By the Law here he means the Law of God that labefactata est, is weakened; or
as others read it, lacerata est, is torn in pieces; others, dissolvitur, is
dissolved, that is the Law of peace and charity; for the whole sum of the Law
is love; that is broken, and no man makes conscience thereof, or cares to be
rued by it: here observe

1. This goes near the heart of Gods Prophet, when he se^th that God is no
more set by, and his Law no better regarded; so does the Prophet complain, I
beheld the transgrtssours, Ps. 119.158
and was grieved because they kept not thy word; this complaint then was no
humane perturbation, but a sad compaint for the injury done to Almighty God in
his Law.

And herein we show our zeal of Gods glory when we are moved and troubled at
the contempt of his Law; for commonly we are full of hear and provocation in
personal injuries when our selves are touched: but we are too cold in the
quarrel of God.

The holy Psalmist cries out, Away from me all ye that work iniquitiy, for I
will keep the Commandments of my God. This is to be angry without sin, when we
are provoked against them that violate the holy Law of God.

2. Note how licentiousness was overgrown in this people, and to what an
height there sin was come up; when the Law of God which was by God given to
them, deposited with them, given with such a charge of keeping it, with such
terrible threatenings of all declining from it, given with such promises annexed
to the keeping of it, was now neglected; the lanthorn and light to their feet
put out of purpose because they love darkness more then light.

These two things mutuo se generant, do mutually beget each other. For from the
contempt of the Law of God does arise licentiousness and custom of sinning,
and from that licentiousness does grow a further contempt of the Law.

When men live out of the aw of Gods Commandments, and will not be kept within
the bounds and limits which the Law of God ^oth set them, there can be no hope
of their conversion, their estate is desperate the Prophet must repair to God,
this is Dignus vindice nodus.

It is time for thee Lord to put to thine hand, for they have destroyed thy
Laws.

Judgment does never go forth.]

1. Some understand this of the impurity of those wicked men, that God does see
their violence, and how his Law is broken, and yet he keeps in his judgment,
and does not punish the transgressors, which makes them to sin boldly; for
because sentence is not speedily executed against the wicked, the heart of the
children of men is wholly set in them to do evil.

In which sense the Prophet does chaleng God of remissness in execution of his
judgment, and quickneth him by this complaint.

2. Others do understand these words of the corruption of all judicial
authority amongst them; for where the Law God of fails, and is not regarded,
there can be no seat of Justice; no man can expect that judgment should come
from thence: expectavi judicium and excce clamor, there is the stool of
wickedness.

And that sense does best agree with this place and the coherence of the Text:
For where Religion is despised, the courts of Justice must needs be corrupt.
Justice is either turned into wormwood if the Judge be incensed and carry a
spleen; for if the Judge be servile and live in fear of some great power, he
must take his directions from them, and he must decree as he is commanded;

Or if he be covetous, justice is a prize, then win it and wear it.

Or if he be partial, as the parties are befriended, so the cause is ended.

So that judgment that is upright and uncorrupted judgment, never goes out;
and so the best causes speed worst.

You see here was great cause of complaint, when there was neither Religion nor
Justice left in that land. It follows,

The wicked does compass about the righteous; Psalm 12.8.
so David complained, The wicked walk on every side. And again,

Be not far from me, for trouble is near; for there is none to help. Psalm. 22.
He complains of the ungodly, and calls them Bulls, and Lions; strong
Bulls; ravening and roaring Lions.

Dogs have compassed me.

Where the law of God is neglected, authority and power degenerateth into
oppression and tyranny; Verse. 16.
men lay aside humanity, and are transformed into brute beasts that have no
understanding.

There is nothing more dangerous then to be an honest man, and one that fears
God and makes conscience of his ways, amongst the wicked; They came about me
like bees.

As the Sodomites came about Lot; and they cry, down with them down with them,
and let them never rise again. The Prophet Isay describes it well;

And Judgment is turned away backward, Isa. 59.14.
and Justice stands a far off; for truth is fallen in the streets, and
equity cannot enter.

Yea truth fails, and he that departs from evil, Verse. 15.
makes himself a prey: and the Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there
was no judgment.

Christ told us long ago in his disciples; If you were of the world, the world
would love you; for the world loves all her own, but because you are not of the
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.

You see how they compass about the just men in whom any Religion appears or
any care of a good conscience, or any fire of holy zeal; the wicked come about
such to quench this fire, and beset such round about that they may not escape
them.

Let Lot say to the Sodomites, I pray you brethren do not so wickedly, Genesis 19 9
they will press upon him, and threaten him. Now will we deal worse with thee
then with them; then they pressed to break the door.

Therefore wrong judgment proceeds.]

Because things are carried by the licentious and unbridled will of power,
without Religion or conscience of Equity, therefore there is wrong judgment. I
understand the Prophet thus;

That private injuries and oppressions between man and man were frequent, and
the wicked used all means to molest the just; and when they did fly for remedy
to the courts of Justice, they were also so corrupt, and did so favor the
cause of the wicked, that there they had wrong judgment.

The Judges and Magistrates that should execute the judgments of God upon the
wicked, and should deliver the oppressed out of the hands of the oppressor,
they were guilty

1. Of favoring and animating and abetting the wicked in their ungodliness
which they should have punished, for which also they were ordained. 2. Of
unjust judgment, punishing where they should spare, and oppressiing whom they
should defend.
Here was a corrupt commonwealth, and this was the grief of the Prophet, and
he had no remedy but to put the scrole of their sins and to spread it before
the Lord; and in the behalf of the oppressed to appeal from the courts of men
to the tribunal of God.

The words thus opened, and the sense cleared, let us consider this text

1. In the total sum: it is a very serious complaint of the Prophet to God.
2. In the particulars of which he complains.
He complains of two things.

1. Of the corruption of the state of the commonwealth of the Jews. 3. Of
Gods declaring the same corruption to him.
The corruption is expressed in three things.

1. In the Conversation. 2. In the Religion. 3. In the Justice of that Nation.
1. In the total: the Prophet does complain to God seriously, and out of a
greived heart of the people.

(Complaint is a part of Prayer.) Prayer is a pouring forth of the heart to
God, wherein we prostrate all our desires to God, and crave his help.

Sometimes we call to remembrance the mercies of God, and sum up his
benefits, which though it be joined with prayer, and does pass under the name
of prayer, yet is it rather a special and distinct part of Gods worship in it
self, then properly any member or part of prayer.

Sometimes we beg of God supply of our wants, and that we call Petition.

Sometimes we plead the cause of our brethren and beg for them* that is
Intercession.

Sometimes we pray against judgment and sin, and that is Deprecation.

Sometimes we have cause to complain to God of the sins and transgressions of
our brethren, when either the honor of God, or the peace of brethren is
violated: so here; this is Imprecation.

For when we see that the outward means of reclaiming men from giving offense
to God, to the Church and to Christian Religion, do not work effectually to
reform them; yet we must not forsake the cause of God so, but make our
complaint unto him, and put the matter into his hand.

Thus when there was a council held against the Apostles; Act. 4.
and therein consultation for the quenching of the light of the Gospel then
beginning to shine more clearly, Verse. 17.
Peter and John went aside from the council, dismissed with a straight and
severe charge to speak no more in that name.

They came to their brethren and informed them of these things; and They lifted
up their voice to God with one accord. Verse. 24.


In that prayer they complain of their enemies. 1. For that which they had done
already: For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus whom thou have anointed,
both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, and the Gentiles were gathered together.

2. For that which they meant to do.

And now Lord behold their threatenings.

This also is twice included in the Lords Prayer; for when we desire that the
Kingdom of God may come, we do complain of the enemies of that Kingdom, and
desire God to arise and scatter them, and defeat all their designs against the
same.

And when we pray not to be led into tempation, but to be delivered from evils,
we do secretly complain of all those evils which Satan and his wicked
instruments do plot against the body of the Church, or any particular members
thereof.

1. The reason is because vengeance belongs to God, and we must remember of
what spirit we are, and must not take the quarrel of God into our hands, but
leave it to God to see and require.

2. Because the times and seasons are only in his power, and we must leave it
to his wise Justice to take the fit time for the conversion or confusion of his
enemies, in the mean time resting our selves on his sure Protection and
faithful care of us,

3 Because we may have enemies for the present, who may come to a sight and
sense of their sins, and may by our complaint of them to God, receive his
saving mercy to reconcile them to the Church, as he did Saul at the Prayer of
Saint Stephen, who shortly after became an Apostle, and proved a chosen
Instrument of Gods Glory.

4. We must complain of these things to declare our zeal of Gods Glory, and our
holy impatience to see his Commandments despised of men.

5. To show our charity to our brethren, who do suffer by this cruel and wicked
world, whose estates we pity, and we go to God as a common father to us all,
to take the matter into his own hands.

From whence we conclude that it ever ought to be a part of our Prayer, to call
upon the name of God by way of complaint of the iniquity of the times in which
we do live, that God may give an end to it, and that it may not prevail against
his Church, least the enemies thereof do grow too proud.

This manner of complaining and calling upon God for Justice against the
ungodly does not die with us here; the separated souls parted from earth, and
from their bodies do retain it.

I saw under the Altar the souls of them that were slain for the Word of God,
and for the Testimony which they held. Rev 6.9.


And they cried with a loud voice, saying, how long O Lord, and holy and true,
Verse. 10.
do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth.

This doctrine yields this fruit of application to our profit.

1. If we ought to complain to God of the wickedness of our brethren, when
they do grow incorrigible, it is a fair warning to us to walk warily and with a
good conscience before God and man; and that in two respects.

1. That we do not offend our brethren by any means, least we give them
occasion to complain to God of us. It is a dangerous thing to give occasion of
offense to any of those little ones that trust in God, and woe be to them that
give the offense.

It is the praise of Zachary and Elizabeth: Luc. 1.6.
that they were (...).

The Apostle does require this of the Philippians (...). Sine quenela, sine
cornibus, of (...). Phil. 2.15
Conqueror.

You shall find it a great contentment in your heart, and peace in your bones
all your life through, but especially upon your deathbed, when you can comfort
your selves with this, that your brethren with whom you have lived, have had no
cause to complain of you. But it will be an ornament to your memory, and a
second life to your good name when you are departed hence.

Let no man neglect the complaints of his brethren, especially of Gods
Ministers; for where they be just they have swift passage and easy admittance,
and most gracious auditors.

2. That we do not so defile our selves with our sins, that we may complain,
and God will not hear us: for there be many more that complain and are not
heard, then of those that plain and have audience and redress. For this is
much more anger* then holy zeal.

They had need be very innocent that complain of others. Turpe est authori cum
culpa redarguit ipsum.

2. This teaches us by all means to seek the Reformation one of another; for
if by our good council, or by our good example, or by brotherly reproves, or
by the mediation of friends, or by the sharp coercion of the Laws, we cannot
destroy sin in them; yet we must not give them over, we must complain to God
of them, and leave them to his justice.

2. Let us now review the particulars of the Prophets complaint.

1. Of the corruption of the state of the commonwealth of the Jews, and
therein,

I. Of their corrupt conversation, generally expressed in these words

Greivance, Spoiling, Violence, Strife, and Contentions; all of them against
the Law of the second Table, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

The sin of uncharitableness corrupts a commonwealth,

1. Greivance: If you do any thing, or say any thing whereby you do greive our
brother and alienate his affection from us. 2. Spoiling: If we by any means
hurt him in his maintenance, either by taking from him that which he does
possess, or by preventing him in that which he should possess by withholding
from him the wages of his labor, or by denying the labourer work whereby he
should live, or by undervaluing his labor to make it unsufficient to support
him: or by bringing up an evil report of him, or by any alienation of his
friends from him. 3. Violence: Using strong hand to any of these purposes,
which is called sinning with an high hand and a stife neck, abusing power and
place to oppression and wrong. 4. Strife: Disquieting our brethrens peace. 5.
Jurgium: Provoking them with proud and imperious speeches.
These sins corrupt a commonwealth, and overthrow charity, and greive all such
as fear God.

1. Because they impeach the authority and power of God, who has reserved to
himself the dispensation of his own gifts here; for the earth is the Lords, and
all that therein is, and he has given it to the sons of men; whatsoever
either honor or wealth any man possesses, which is not of his gift, that is
atcheived by unlawful means, it has not his blessing, and it is held by
intrusion and usurpation.

He has not put man into the world as he did the people of Israel into Canaan
to be his own carver, and to take what he can get by strength or policy; they
had warrant for what they did there, we have a law of restraint to confine us
to lawful ways and means of living: therefore all such violence as invadeth
the goods of our brethren is a wrong to him who opens his hand and fills
with plenty, and does not bid us arise kill and eat, and get what we can, no
matter how.

2. This uncharitable practice does destroy society, for seeing God for peace
sake, has made a difference between men on earth, some superior, others
inferior: some rich, some poor, that there might be a need of one another, to
maintain the state of a commonwealth; all they that ingrosse to their own
heap, and do only study themselves and their own houses; they corrupt and
destroy that common society which ought to be in the members of the body.

I read that Pope Adrian the sixth, a monkish man, demanded once of John of
Sarisbury his countryman what opinion the world had of the Church of Rome.

He answered that.

The Church of Rome which should be a mother, was now become a stepmother, and
gathered and got all from her own children.

The Pope replied with a tale.

All the parts of the body did conspire against the stomach, and thought much
to labor for that, whereupon they resolved to feed it no longer: but within
few days, there grew such a general decay in the state of all the parts of
the body, that at last finding their error, they labored as before for the
stomach, and found then that that maintained them all.

The Popes application was, that the Pope is the stomach in the body of the
Church; and that though all the members of the body do feed him, yet he
gathers not for himself but for the whole body.

It is true, that the father of a Commonwealth is the stomach, from whence all
the body as from the root deriveth sap, and nutriment, and therefore all must
labor for him:

But one body must have but one stomach; and therefore when every man shall rob
and spoil and swallow up what he can, the body must needs perish.

Again, where that one stomach is good, the body thrives, for that has not
only an appetitive faculty to desire food, and receptive to entertain it, and a
retentive to keep it, but a digestive also to distribute it into all the parts
of the body.

But if the stomach be appetitive, and rapine, and devour all, as in some
disease, Caninus appetitus, which is a greedy devourer; or if it be retentive
and will part with nothing, but is the hell and grave of all that it receives,
as in covetousness; or if it be defective in the retentive faculty, and cast
up all, as in prodigality and waste:

Or if it be ill affected in the digestive faculty, that it feeds nothing but
ill humors, to overthrow the contemperament of the complexions; That is

If it feed the sanguine only, and so maintain all kind of wantonness, pride
and vanity.

If it feed only choler, and so support tyranny and violence.

Or if it support only Melancholy, it feeds sullen and busy projecting wit.

Or if it feed fleame, it sustaineth idleness; if it do not nourish the
temperament of these humors in the body, it feeds diseases and destroys
the body.

Thus was the Commonwealth of the Jews at this time diseased, and only the
choler was fed, which brought forth greivance, spoiling, violence, strife: So
riches became the faculties of evil doing, and power was the mother and nurse
of violence.

Our lesson therefore is, in which we live: and would have the body thrive, of
which we are members, we must observe the laws of Christian charity, and
common-justice.

Justitia tua suum cuique tribuit: charitas tua tuum, we must do all men right
and know our own from another man's, and we must distribute to the necessities
of our brethren, that there be no complaining in our streets; the elder must
labor by good council and good examples to support the younger: the younger
by their strength and labor to give subvention and help to the elder; each to
know their own, and to think nothing theirs which is not lawfully gotten.

Let us remember the severe prohibition of the Law, which not only binds our
hearts and affections, saying; Thou shall not steal, nec actu, nec affectu,
neither in act nor in desire; but it restrains our very first thoughts and
motions of the mind: Thou shall not covet any that is thy neighbors.

Let us remember how much violence and spoiling, and greivance and strife
displeases God, and let our brother dwell in peace by us; let us not so much
as look upon our brethren with an evil eye to envy their thriving, or with a
covetous desire to enrich our selves with their spoils

We see the danger of this Commonwealth of the Jews because of their
oppression, and we see the remedy-here used to complain thereof to God;
therefore if we with Solomon, Turn and consider all the oppressions that are
wrought under the Sun, Eccles. 4.1.
and behold the tears of the oppressed, and none comfort them, and the
strength is of the hand that oppresses them, and none comfort them:

I know no remedy that we have but our prayer to God; for he only is the refuge
of the afflicted.

If the Minister complain that he cannot be entertained to execute the Priests
office without Simoniacall contracts, or being in the execution of the same
cannot keep the tithes and profits of his place from spoil and depredation.

If the Soldier complain that in time of peace, he is despised;

If the Merchant be hindered in his commerce; the husbandman over-racked in his
rent, the labourer either not found work, or not paid their wages.

If the common man be exhausted by impositions, and exactions, and the rich man
milked by borrowings.

Whilst the most idle and uprofitable mothes of the commonwealth, and the rust
of peace does devour all, and build their nests on high full of the spoils of
their brethren;

These things tells us, that they that are dead in the Lord are happy, as
Solomon says; they hear not the voice of the oppressor, and they shall not
see the evil which this crying sin shall bring upon the living: For you shall
see that God hears the complaints of his holy ones and visits the land that
transgresses in these things.

The corruption of Religion, even the contempt thereof, is complained of: The
Law of God slacked, weakened, despised.

Doctr. It is a diseased and a desperate state where Religion is contemned, and
where the Law of God is not cared for.

1. The cause is,

If thou consent and obey, Isa. 1.19.
thou shall eat the good things of the land.

But if ye refuse and rebel, Verse. 20.
ye shall be devoured with the sword.

Moses repeating the Law of the ten Commandments to the people, Deuteronomy. 5.2.
calls it the Covenant which the Lord made with them in Horeb, and the
conditions of the Covenant were these,

Ye shall observe to do therefore as the Lord your God has commanded you,
Verse. 32.
you shall not turn aside to the right hand, nor to the left;

You shall walk in all the ways which the Lord your God has commanded you,
Verse. 33.
that ye may live, and that it may be well with you, and that ye may prolong
your days in the land which ye shall possess.

The very introduction into the Law: I am the Lord thy God which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage; shows why God
delivers us from the hands of our enemies, that we may serve him, and that we
may thrive and prosper in his service.

Therefore, where the Law is slacked, and Religion set at naught, the despisers
thereof have no lawful interest in any thing that they possess: but are
intruders and usurpers and such as encroach upon Gods rights without any plea
of right; they are robbers of the just to whom the earth is given, and with
whom only the Covenant of God is made.

The Psalmist says? Blessed are the undefiled in the way, Psalm. 119.1.
who walk in the way of the Lord. The idle speculations of secular wise men,
and the corrupt affections of carnal men, have sought felicity in other ways,
but have not found it. The way of Religion, and keeping the Law of God, never
failed any man; for though the faithful man be not justified by his obedience
and keeping of the Law, yet the faith of the man is so justified, as St. James
says, show me thy faith by thy works.

The way of temporal fullness ^ath mis^led many, and corrupted the very Jews,
of Gods people; for why did they oppress and spoil, and greive, and contend
with their brethren, but to mend their own heap? and riches are not but for use.

By riches they might have their hearts desire in any thing here below, they
might buy it out.

Every one observes the way of his time; if he see that there be no way of
rising or thriving in the world, but by such a mediation, the whole address is
that way, and that means is wholly studied.

If a man see that there is nothing to be had without money, for money any thing,
then money is his whole study: quaerenda pecunia primum.

And sure if men did see that nothing but virtue and Religion and the fear of
God did prefer men, and sufficient worth for the place that they seek, men
would study virtue and honesty, and all those parts which might make them
worthy of what they seek.

But it is no matter, let the men of this world share amongst them things
temporal, and let them break and slack the Law of God to humor the present
times, as those Jews at this time did of who the Prophet does complain; I will
give them sauce to their meat: For three things well considered will call us
away from these temporal desires, and make us despise the world.

1. Though one man had all that this world affords delightful, yet all this
could not satisfy his unbounded desire, he could not take use of it all, he
should have but the beholding of some of it with his eye, and that the least
part of the whole.

2. All these things could not give rest and peace to the conscience, or heal
the diseased soul, or comfort at the dying hour: they cannot stand in the gap
to turn away the judgment of God, they cannot so much as cure the headache, or
the toothach, or any disease of the body.

When our sins be ripe and ready for the gathering, all the wealth of the world
cannot keep out the sickle of vengeance.

3. None of all this sublunary happiness can extend it self to eternity; we
brought it not with us, and we must leave it behind us, and as Zophar said,

He that has swallowed down riches shall vomit them up again; Job 20.15
God shall cast them out of his belly.

Neither do all men tarry till they die to lay down these things; we have heard
with our ears, and seen in our own times, how some have outlived great
honors, and seen them conferred upon others: we have seen great esteemed rich
men break, and their Poverty come upon them like an armed man.

On the contrary, the man that keeps the Law of God with his whole heart, and
does his best to walk conscionably before God and man, that man has three
benefits, which would encourage any man to embrace the law of God with
obedience, and they are the three things in this life, most of all to be
desired 1. Safety from evils. 2. Comfort within himself. 3. Estimation abroad.


1. Safety.

The greatest danger that the just man fears in this life is the wrath of
God; for all other evils be the exercise of his virtue; that evil of Gods
displeasure is the wound of the soul, for there is no peace where God is angry,
but only the terror of the Lord. From this, he that keeps the law of God is
safe; for he knows that whom God loves once, he loves for ever, and the
grace of Election cannot be lost.

He may chasten such with the rods of men, but his mercy he cannot utterly take
away; for the foundation of the Lord is sealed with this seal, the Lord
knows who are his.

Whom he knows he electeth, he predestinates, be calls, he justifies, he
sanctifies, he glorifieth. They cannot sin unto death.

He will cover them under his wings, and they shall be safe under his feathers.

2. Comfort within himself.

This comes from a pure fountain of grace, the Spirit of God witnessing to our
Spirit that we are the Sons of God, and then the answer of a good conscience to
that Spirit, which has this effect, that the more we do see and feel the
failling of all our temporal comforts, the more we cleave to God, and seek our
comfort in him.

3. Estimation abroad.

1. They are dear to God, who loves them, and declares them heirs of his
promises. 2. They are dear to the Son of God, he bought them with a price,
and he though it well bestowed on them, he gave them his word in the Holy Ghost
to abide with them for ever, and he is gone to prepare a place for them. 3.
They are dear to the Angels of God, they pitch their tents about them living,
and minister unto them, and when they die they carry their souls into Abraham's
bosom. 4. They are dear to their mother the Church of God, who says to them
as Solomon's mother, What my son? What the son of my womb? What the son
of my vows? And she is ready to tender her children to God, saying, Lo here am
I and the children which thou have given me. Prove. 31.2
5. They that live in the obedience of the law of God have the testimony of the
wicked, for they cannot complain of them: if they do them wrong, they suffer it
without seeking revenge: if they need the help of the godly, they give it them
without respect of Persons; if they be sick, the faithful pray for them; if
they do evil, they reprove them friendly; And when they die, they will rather
cast the care of their estates and children upon such as fear God, then upon
other men whom they have loved more for their similitude of manners.
And note this, they that walk severely in the obedience of Gods law, are at
the most taxed but for hypocrisy, which shows that even the world cannot
blame them, if they be sincere, and truly and really answerable to their
outward Profession.

To all this we may add as the full comfort of all, that Godliness has the
promises of this life and the life to come.

1. Of this life, we hold that which we possess in a good right* by our
obedience to the law of God, and we have Gods word and promise for it, that
nothing shall be taken from us, if that we do enjoy here but for our greater
good.

2. Of the life to come* that is double.

1. Here In our good name. In our Posterity a sure house.
2. Hereafter, in glory, fullness of joy.
I do not doubt but God has wrought that sad effect, by the plentiful Ministry
of his Word in our Church, that he has many holy souls here amongst us, which
hold the Commandments of God more dear then all that they possess, or that the
world has to give them, and for their sakes God is merciful to our land, and
gives us that peace and plenty which many of our neighbor Churches do want.

And if God should shut up these in the chambers of death, the candle of the
wicked would be soon put out.

But we cannot but see that Papists do grow both more and more bold then they
have been, whence they have their encouragement, God best knows.

We see that Schismatics and Separatists are increased, and much of the
knowledge that is gotten turns into swelling and pride, and contention.

We see that the Sabbath of God is most neglected, even of those that owe God
most service, for the abundance of things temporal; we see that profit, and
pleasure, and company, and custom of sinning, has brought the law of God into
contempt, with such as are profane.

Let such see and consider how God dealt with his own People in such a case, as
the next part of this chapter shows, and let them fear.

For us let us know that in keeping of the Law of God there is great reward,
and let us learn to love this law, and put our whole strength to the keeping
of it, that we may live. And this

1. In sincerity, not with eye-service to be seen of men against hypocrisy. 2.
In zeal and fervency of spirit, his word in our hearts must be as a burning
fire, Ier. 20.9.
against cold and perfunctorious Profession, which is the general disease of
Professors. 3. With perseverance to the end without any intermission or
cessation against Apostasy and backsliding; even as our great example did,
who was obedient to the death, even he bowed down his head and gave up the
Ghost. This, and nothing else does make this life peace, and the next life
glory: This is the old and good way, walk in it, and you shall find rest for
your souls.
3. The corruption of Justice is another of the Prophets complaints.

Doctr. Corruption of Justice is a dangerous sign of a drooping Commonwealth.

The Magistrate sits in the place of God,

If either there be no Magistrate, as when there was no King in Israel, the
People did what seemed good in their own eyes. Then every man is his own
judge, and the stronger prevail against the weaker.

Or if the Magistrate be corrupt there goes forth wrong judgment, and good
causes have unequal hearings, and right takes no place. Solon in the Athenian,
Cl^o.
and Lycurgus in the Lacedemonian Commonwealth, got them honor in the books
of time for their Justice, and Herodotus reports, that amongst the Medes,
when they yet had no King, Deioces being but a private man, by com-promising
contentions betwixt man and man justly and equally, got that reputation amongst
the People, that in short time all the causes of the country were referred to
his hearing, which got him such a name of doing justice, that when they found
it necessary to put themselves under the Government of a King; they found no
man so fit to invest in that honor as Deioces, and they with one censent chose
him to be their King.

And Solomon says, Prove. 16.12.
The Throne is establisted by righteousness.

Therefore where justice fails, Gods Ordinance is made an instrument of
cruelty, and the Kings Throne is set on a slippery place, as we find it
exemplified in this Kingdom of the Jews, whereof Zephaniah complains, Her
Princes within her are roaring L^ons, Zeph. 3.3
her ^udges are evening Wolves.

And Mica. They build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity. Mic. 3 10


The Heads thereof judge for reward. Werse 12.


Therefore shall Sion for your sakes be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall
become heaps, and the mountain of the house, as the high places of the forest.

For God cannot long endure that his sword shall he drawn against his People,
and that his gods (for he gives Judges his own title) should become lions, and
bears, and bulls, and wolves, and devils, amongst the sheep of his pasture.

He did the Government then a great honor, who bore in his shield the picture
of Justice, having in one hand the sword; in the other the states, with this
word.

Dum illa evincam.

But when Tribunalia may be called Tributalia, where Judgment is given
according to the gifts and rewards that are given, or where corrupt affection
serves its own turn any way from the way of Justice.

God sees it, and is angry that there is no judgment, and qui videt requiret.

2. Corruption of Justice is a sign of a drooping Commonwealth, because it not
only is contrary to Religion,

For as Lactant. says well.

Radix Justitiae and omne fundamentum; Devin Instit.
aequitatis est illud, vide ne facias ulli quod pati nolis. This Counsel is
good.

Transfer in alterius personam quod de te sentis; and in tuam quod de altero
judicas.

And if this law of nature must bind all men to do Instice one to another, much
more must it oblige those to whom the office of administration of justice is
committed, let them make it their own case, and so no wrong judgment shall go
forth.

For this same Jus natural is the fountain of all justice, which Religion has
so enlightened, that God having planted true Religion in his Church, the Prophet
says He looked for judgment.

The proper application of this text, is to the Magistrate, Isay 5.7.
to admonish him to execute the judgments of God justly,

But I have none such in this audience to admonish, and therefore I omit that
exhortation as unproper for this hearing.

For us, if we hear the cry and complaint of our brethren,

I exhort therefore that first (...) Supplications, Prayers, 1 Timothy 2.1
Intercessions, and giving of thanks (...) made for all men.

2. For Kings, and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

3. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.

Insurrection against the Magistrate, and deposition of Kings, and violence
offered to their Persons even unto death, is a Presbyterian doctrine. Buchanan
the Scottish Chronicler our Kings first Schoolmaster in his book de jure regni,
was the first broacher hereof; who makes Kings to derive their authority from
the People, and gives power to the People to take away the same if he govern
not justly.

Against this we have Gods own word, saying, Touch not mine anointed, where he
calls Kings his anointed by a special title, not given to any other Persons,
but such as exercise regal Authority all the Scripture through; And if they may
not be touched, much less may they be deposed or their Persons violated.

And this title is not only given to David but to Cyrus. Thus says the Lord,
Isay 43.1. Lib. 5.
to Cyrus mine anointed. For as Ireneus says,

Inde illis potestas unde Cyrus. For so the Apostle, The powers that be are
ordained of God.

Therefore the Presbytery and Papacy like Herod and Pilate, are friends to do a
shrewd turn, when they both put power on the People to right themselves against
Kings that do not execute judgment.

The Apostle is a better guide, he bids pray for them, and if you consider what
Kings then reigned, you will say there could not be worse.

I must therefore with the Apostle admonish, let every soul submit it self;
Let no man, let not a confederacy of men seditiously and maliciously advance
themselves against the Lords anointed: hand off, offer him violence: use not
the tongue to curse him: use not the pen against him to libel him: Curse him
not in thy heart, touch him no noxious and offensive way: and if subordinate
Magistrates do let wrong judgment proceed, appeal from them to him that
sits on the Throne of Justice, who does drive away all evil with his eye.

If he will not do thee right, go in the Prophet Habakkuks way, wrestle with
God by thy prayers, and make thy complaint to him. He hears the complaint of
the poor.

2. He complains and chideth with God for showing him all this iniquity and
violence. Vid. sup. p. 36. Doctr.
From whence we are taught,

It is lawful in our Prayers to expostulate and contest with God.

Habakkuk goes far in this you have heard. Jerome says, Nullus Prophetarum
ausus est, tam audaci voce Deum provocare.

Yet we shall find that others have gone very far this way, David for one.

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping
me, Psalm. 22.1.
and from the words of my roaring?

O my God, I cry in the day, but thou hear me not, and in the night season I
am not silent. And he professes it.

I will say unto God, Psalm. 42.9.
My rock, why have thou forgotten me? why go I a mourning, because of the
oppression of the enemy?

David is very frequent in these expostulations, so is holy Job, so is Jeremie,
and both these are very much overgone in passion, and therefore examples rather
of weakness, which we must decline, then rules of direction to imitate.

St. Paul does give us good warrant for this wrestling with God, it is his very
phrase: Romans 15.30.
Now I beseech you brethren for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love
of the Spirit: that ye strive together with me in your prayers to God. He uses
a word that signeth such striving as is in trying of mastery, who shall have
the best.

And Jacob is a type hereof who wrestled with the Angel till the break of the
day, and though he got a lamenesse by striving with his over-match, yet would
he not let him go till he had gotten a blessing.

Representing the fervent petitioners that come to God in the name of Christ,
as the woman of Canaan did for her daughter, neither the Disciples nor Christ
could make her turn aside or be silent.

But here is a Quaere: for the Apostle does say; Romans 9.20
O man who art thou that replyest against God? When once God has declared
himself in any thing, how da^e we call him to account, and ask him a reason
for any thing he does?

And again the Prophet Isay says, Isa. 45.9.
Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker.

Further, is it not contrary to that petition in the Lords Prayer? Fiat
voluntas tua: For does not the Prophet declare here a dislike of that which God
did, as seeming to wish it had been otherwise, when he asks, why do thou
show me iniquity, and make me to behold violence.

The best way to clear this doubt, Sol.
is to behold this passion in some chosen servant of God, and see what he makes
of it; we will take David for our example, and let us hear him first
complaining, and then answering for himself, his complaint is passionate.

Will the Lord cast off for ever? Psalm. 77.7.
and will he be favorable no more?

Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Verse. 8
does his promise fail for evermore?

Has God forgotten to be gracious? Verse. 8.
has he in anger shut up his tender mercies?

He recovereth himself, saying,

And I said, Verse. 10.
this is mine infirmity: but I will remember the years of the right hand of the
most high.

Surely there be infirmities in the Saints of God, and this expostulation with
God is an effect of infirmity: Yet shall you see that this does no way weaken
the doctrine before delivered, that it is lawful to expostulate with God in
our prayers.

The infirmities of Gods servants are of two sorts: 1. Natural: 2. Sinful.


We must so destinguish, for when Christ took our nature into the unity of his
person; with it he took upon him all our infirmities, but not our sinful ones.
For he was like man in all things but sin.

Three especially are noted in the story of the Gospel; that is to say,

Sorrow: Fear: Anger:

1. Sorrow, for he wept and mourned. 2. Fear, for he was heard in that he
feared. 3. Anger, for he did often chide, and reprove,
These affections be natural, and so long as they be affections, they are
without blame when they exubrate, and grow into perturbations, then they are
faulty. For there is (...) which is the inclination: and there is (...) which
is the inflammation of nature.

God who in creation gave these affections to nature, has not denied us the
use of them; yea he has ordained them as excellent helps for his work of grace
in us.

Therefore we find fear mingled with faith to keep it from swelling into
presumption, that fear is not a sin in the Elect, as some weak consciences
ignorantly mistake it; but it is Cos fidei, the whetstone of faith to give it
the more edge.

As in that complaint of David, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.
Where the first part of that complaint is vox fidei, the voice of faith, My God
my God: the second is vox timoris, the voice of fear, quare me direliquisti:
and we say, fear is a good keeper, it makes us lay so much the faster hold on
God by faith; Yea it is a warning to us to avoid any thing that may do us hurt.

The wiseman fears and departs from evil. Pro. 14.16


Sometimes we find fear mingled with joy; as for example;

When the Lord brought again the captivity of Sion, Ps. 126.1.
we were like them that dream.

They were overcome with joy for their deliverance and restitution, and yet
they felt withal a fear, that it was too good to be true, and doubted that it
was but a dream.

We do not receive any good news but before the hearing of it we fear; Luke
1.13.
the Angel that appeared to Zecharie the Priest found him afraid.

The Angel that came to the Virgin Mary found her afraid; so did he that
brought the news of the birth of Christ to the shepherds: for all men know
that we have no cause to expect any news from heaven, we are so evil and
sinful.

And although the comforts of God do remove that fear for a time, yet God would
not have it quite extinguished in us: for the Prophet bids us, Serve the
Lord with fear, Psalm. 2.11.
and rejoice with trembling. And the Apostle does bid us too, workout our
salvation with fear and tembling.

Sometimes grief is mingled with faith, as in the poor man in the Gospel of
whom Christ said, Do thou believe? he answered first with his tears, then
with his words saying; Lord, I believe, help thou my unbeleefe.

So in the Publicane beating his breast, and saying; Lord, be merciful to me a
sinner.

Sometimes indignation is mingled with faith, as in all the imprecations of the
Prophet, which as they are Prophecies and so proceed from the Spirit of God: so
are they passions in these holy men, and are vented with that indignation, of
which the Prophet says, Be angry and sin not: and which the same Prophet
justifies, Shall not I hate them O Lord which hate thee?

And this holy indignation you see in the very separate souls.

They cry with a loud voice, how long Lord do thou not judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth? Rev. 6.10.
Tantaen animis caelestibus ira!

To come now to the point in question.

This zeal of the Prophet is not a dislike of, or an opposition to the will of
God, by way of contradiction; but a dislike of the thing done according to the
express will of God, wherein the Prophet does not offend.

The example of our Savior Christ is full, and gives testimony to this truth:
for coming of purpose to lay down his life for his Church, and knowing it to be
his Fathers will that he should so do; yet in the garden he three times prayed,
that if it were possible that cup might pass from him; he did not resist the
Will of God, for to that he submitted himself; but he distiked that which he
was to suffer according to that Will.

The reason is, because it was evil and a punishment, and he who taught us to
pray, libera nos a malo, Deliver us from evil, did so himself.

So though he knew the Will of God to be peremptory for the destruction of
Jerusalem and the rejection of the Jews, he sorrowed and wept for the same:
which showed his dislike of the thing decreed, though he approved the decree it
self and resisted it not.

Sorrow is a grief taken by a natural dislike of that for which we greive.

When our parents, wives, children, or friends die, we greive; the Apostle does
not forbid that affection, he limiteth and regulateth it; he would not have us
sorrow as men without hope.

And when he took on him our natural infirmities and affections, he did not so
undertake them to remove them from us, or to extinguish them in us, but to
correct and temper them. As St. Cyrill says: ut sic natura nostra reformaretur
ad melius, that so our nature might be bettered.

In this very example in my Text of the Prophets dislike that God should show
him this iniquity and violence of the Jews, which was a grief and a burden to
him to see; remember what is said of Lot by St Peter.

For that righteous man dwelling among them, 2 Pet. 2.8.
vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds.

Here was not only an holy grief for, but an holy indignation against the sight
of these things which God showed him, and that in the righteous soul of a
righteous man.

I conclude this point as before with David's words, I deny not that this was
the Prophets infirmity; I deny it to be his iniquity, it was no sin in him.
And I again urge my former point of Doctrine, it is lawful for the holy
servants of God to expostulate and contest with God in their prayers.

1. Because hereby we declare our dislike of those things against which we
contest,

So when the Prophet complains often of Gods long-suffering toward the
wicked, he shows it to be an offense to the children of God, that the enemies
of God should be so long forborne.

And when he awaketh God, up Lord why sleep thou, and stireth him to revenge
of his own cause, therein he declares his zeal of the glory of God, of which
he must be careful especially.

2. This public expostulation used in this case to awake the justice of God
against the wicked,

3. This expostulation of the just does declare that their yiedling to the Will
of God in these things which they do without offense to Gods dislike, 3 Reas.
is not out of natural principles and reasons incident to humanity, but from a
supernatural dedition and yielding of themselves to the transcendent Will of
God whereby they do approve even what they do dislike, because they find the
Will of God that way.

The profit which we may make of this point is,

1. To teach us zeal in the cause of God; for there is no life in the service
that we perform to God without zeal; there is not only the Spirit of God
required in us, but fervency of the Spirit by the Apostle; and that the same
Apostle calls the Spirit dwelling in us plentifully, and in another place:
The Spirit sanctifying us throughout.

This giving our bow the full bent, that it may have the full strength, and
this to be drawn home, when we send our prayers up to heaven that they may
reach the mark, this is So run that ye may obtain: It is called striving to
the mark;

Zeal only used in matters of form and ceremony, and in outward things, makes
us like Agrippa almost Christians; but zeal against the evil life and crying
sins of the time is discreet and necessary; for these do hack and hew the bough
we stand upon, these under-dig the ground we walk upon.

These put it to an if: Si filius dei es, if thou be the Son of God. Let them
that love righteousness and peace be troubled at these things, and quench this
common fire first, that is the Apostles method.

For having taught the doctrine of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and of
holy preparation to the communicants, he concludes,

And the rest will I set in order when I come, 1 Cor. 11.34.
(...). First he directed them in the prayers of piety; he reserveth the (...)
the order till his coming to them, showing that he had Apostolical power for
that; but that must be done after this.

In Religion, that is now the double complaint,

1. Of want of zeal where it most should be. 2. Of inordinate zeal in other
things.
The want of zeal in many Professors of Religion, is such as that both
Popery, and Anabaptistrie, and other schismatic and sectarious professors
are suffered to grow up together with the profession of the Gospel, which could
not be if we had zeal proportionable to our knowledge: such as was in David,
All false ways Iutterly abhor.

We see also great corruptions in manners which holy zeal might soon eat out,
and without which Religion may bring us to Church, and to the Font, and to the
Lords Table, and may rank us with outward professors: but till we grow to such
an hatred of sin, as the very patience and forbearance of God toward those that
do abominably, and will not be reformed, does disquiet and greive us, and make
us complain, we fail and come short of duty to God.

2. Another complaint of the Church, is of inordinate zeal. Which is,

1. Either in Persons without a lawful calling, seeking to reform things
amiss. 2. Or in respect of the things; when men carried with the strong
current of opinion, find fault where no fault is, or make the fault greater
then it is. 3. Or in respect of times, when men prevent the time, and
exasperate the judgments of God, and provoke his justice against their
brethren, before they have done all that can be done by the spirit of
meekness. 4. Or in respect of time when they express their zeal. First,
against those things that may with least hurt to the Church be forborne, till
more concerning affairs of the Church be advisedly thought upon. 5. Or in
respect of the measure of zeal, if it be more or less then the cause of God
requires. 6. In respect of the mixture of it, if it be commeded with any of
our own corrupt and furious perturbations.
2. Seeing therefore we may make so boldwith God as the Prophet here does; we
are to be taught that God is so slow in the execution of his judgments, even
upon them that do ill, that till he find that his patience is a burden to his
Church, and till he be even chidden to it by his faithful ones, he cannot
strike.

Wherefore we must both stir up our selves and our brethren to a serious
consideration of this goodness of God, and that which the Apostle does call
The riches of his patience, that we despise it not, that we spend not such
riches unthriftily, but bestow it upon our repentance, and making our peace
with God.

3. Seeing we may thus call God to account, as the Prophet here does, and chide
his remissness, let us not take it ill at the hands of God if he chide us for
our sins, which do well deserve it, and he contest with us for our neglect of
our duties, either to him or our brethren.

4. Seeing we have so good warrant for it, when we see any unremedied evils
which do threaten ruin to our Church or Commonwealth, which perchance the
Minister may be forbidden to reprove or to disswades, uch as these in my text.
Violence and oppression, corruption of Religion, and corruption of Courts of
Justice, which the Minister in general terms may reprove, but he must not with
Nathan say tu es homo, thou art the man, to any delinquent in any of these
kinds.

This then is the remedy, we may go to God himself, and chide with him for it,
without any fear of scandalum magnatum, and in holy indignation and zeal of
Gods glory, laying aside our own corrupt passions, we may call him to account
for showing us and making us to see such things.

And I do not doubt but we shall have as good success as this Prophet had, as
the next section of this chapter does declare.

Verse. 5. Be hold ye among the heathen, and regard and wonder marvellously:
for I will work a work in your days, which you will not believe though it be
told you. 6. For lo I raise up the Chaldeans that bitter and hasty Nation,
which shall march through the breadth of the land to possess the dwelling
places that are not theirs. 7. They are terrible and dreadful, their judgment
and their dignity shall proceed of themselves. 8. Their horses also are swifter
then the Leopards, and more fierce then the evening Wolves: and their horsemen
shall spread themselves, and their horsemen shall come from far, they shall
fly as the Eagle that hastes to eat. 9. They shall come all for violence,
their faces shall sup up as the East Wind, and they gather the captivity as the
sand. 10. And they shall scoff at the Kings, and the Princes shall be a scorn
unto them: they shall deride every strong hold, for they shall heap dust and
take it. 11 Then shall his mind change, and he shall pass over, and offend,
imputing this his power unto his God.
THese words are the second section of this chapter, and do contain Gods own
answer to the former complaint of the Prophet, wherein God declares how he
will be avenged on his own People, for the oppression and violence which they
have used, for the corruption in manners, in religion, and in the
administration of Justice.

Let us begin at the words, Verse 5.
and search the will of God revealed therein.

Behold ye among the heathen, and regard, and wonder marvellously]

Here is God himself speaking to his sinful people the Jews, and awaking them
to behold the anger to come.

Here is first the roaring of the Lion, Cap. 1.2.
as in Amos. The Lord will roar from Sion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem.

This is the thunder: the thunderbolt does after follow.

1. He bids them behold, that is, to take this threatening of Gods judgment,
and to spread it before their eyes, and to peruse the sad contents thereof. 2.
Behold ye among the heathen] He turns their eyes to the heathen, whom God
will now make their sharp schoolmasters to instruct them; for seeing they will
learn nothing by the ministry of his Prophets, whom he has sent to them to
chide them, and guide them; and seeing they are not moved with the lamentable
complaints of their brethren, groaning under their oppressions, and grievances,
and injustice: now he bids them to look among the heathen, as to the quarter
from whence the following tempest is like to arise: for by them God intends
to punish the Jews. 3. He adds Regard, for beholding without regarding, and
taking the matter into due and serious consideration is but gazing.
As the Apostle presses an exhortation. Consider what I say.

God had sent his Prophets to instruct them, and they heard them, but regarded
them not. Now he will not be so neglected.

4. He adds, and wonder maxveilously, attoniti este and obstupescite. Here he
prepares their expectation for some extraordinary judgment; this is that
which the Apostle does call Terror domini, and ira ventura, the terror of the
Lord, and the wrath to come.

5. He adds in general terms the matter of their fear and consternation. For,

1. There is a work to be done. 2. God himself professes to be the worker. 3.
The time is at hand; in your days. 4. The wonder is, that though God himself
foretell them thereof, Non credetis, you will not believe.
The work to be done is. verse. 6.

God threatens to raise up the Chaldeans against the Jews; he calls them a
bitter and an hasty nation; those shall go all the land over, and drive out or
destroy the Jews, and take possession of their land.

Chaldaea lay from Jerusalem North; it was a mighty Kingdom; and the chief City
thereof was Babylon; Nebuchadnezzar was King thereof; they are to be stirred up
by God himself, who, as you heard out of Obadiah, does use to punish one Nation
by another, and sometimes his Church by the Heathen.

He gave Israel the promised land upon condition of their obedience to his Law;
and now finding them rebellious, he gives away their land to the heathen; and
as before he drove out the posterity of Canaan to plant Israel there, now he
will remove them, and give their land to the Chaldeans.

God is very terrible in his threatenings; for a great part of the Chapter is
spent as you see in description of that Nation of the Chaldeans, to fill them
full of horror.

1. For the people of that land, Verse. 6.
he calls them Bitter and hasty.

Bitter in the execution of that wrath whereof God had made them his Ministers,
and hasty in the speed thereof; for the wicked are limited, and if God stayed
them not, they would soon swallow up the Church of God; but when God enlarges
them and suffers them for the sins of the Church to break in upon them, they
will come in like a flood that overfloweth and breakketh the banks, and cover
all with inundation.

2. They are described to be terrible, Verse. 7.
and dreadful, and therein he declares that he will put the Jews out of
heart, that they shall have no courage to resist this invasion; for God will
smite them with fear of the adversary power, which fear in them shall open the
enemy an easy way to victory.

3. He proves this; for he says, Their judgment and their dignity shall come
of themselves.

His meaning is, that God will not restrain them, but give the Jews into their
hands and leave the Chaldeans to be both judges and executioners in their own
cause, and to follow the leading of their own will: no Law of God shall awe
them, no law of nature, or nations shall limit them, their own will shall carry
them to give judgment upon the Jews, and to get them dignity and honor over
them.

The reason why God will put them into so merciless hands, is given by the
Prophet Jeremy.

For the Jews have said to Jeremy: As for the word that thou have spoken to us
in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee; Jer. 44.16.


But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own mouth.
Verse. 17.


For this wilful stubbornness God does now purpose to put them into the power
of such as shall be as wilful as they, whose judgment by which they shall
judge the Jews, and whose dignity by which they shall exalt themselves, shall
follow their own will.

He proceeds to show what preparation they have for war, and therein first of
their horses, Verse. 8.
in which kind of strength some put their trust as, David says,

Some put their trust in chariots, and some in horses.

These horses of the Chaldeans he does make terrible, in 2. things.

1. They are swifter then the Leopards; he compares them not with the Roebuck
and the Hind so much mentioned in Scripture for speed, nor with the Hare whose
speed is to save themselves; but with the Leopards persecuting with swiftness
the beasts on which they prey, as he adds, 2. They are feircer then the
evening wolves; those wolves whose hunger not only leads them out to seek
prey, but such is their cruelty that they will destroy whole flocks if they
can.
The Chaldeans did breed horses for the war, whose speed and fierceness is
such, that as Jeremy says, describing the turning of men to their own ill
ways, it was like as an horse rusheth into the battle.

Yet this were no great terror, but that it follows, their riders shall be
such as shall put them to it.

1. They shall spread themselves: for they were to pass throughout the breadth
of the country; that there will be no escaping then by resistance. 2. They
shall come from far, to set up the army, so that they shall be terrible in
their number. 3. they shall fly as the Eagle that hastes to eat; no man shall
escape them by flight, all shall be a prey.
He proceeds to describe the easy victory that the Chaldeans shall have of
the Jews. Verse. 9.


They shall come all for violence. Tota gens ad rapinam veniet: not ad pugnam,
but ad praedam; The whole Nations shall come to spoil, not to fight, but to
prey.

Their faces shall sup up the East Wind, the East Wind it seems was the most
unwholesome breath of heaven upon that land, within short time withered and
destroyed the fruits of the earth, and the hopes of the Spring: The Lord says,
that the faces of the Chaldeans, the very sight of them shall be as banefull,
and as unresistible as the East wind.

They shall gather the Captivity as the sand: 1. They shall gather together the
people of that land to carry them away into captivity, with no more pain then
one would take up his vessel full of sand out of the heap, or they shall carry
multitudes of the Jews into captivity without number as the sand.

They shall scoff at the Kings, Verse. 10.
and the Princes shall be a scorn unto them:]

Either he means that he shall make nothing of the power of any Kings, either
in the land against which he comes, or amongst their confederates; but shall
laugh them to scorn that come to help the Jews, as his vassals.

Or he shall easily subdue them, and lead them in triumph whethersoever he
goes, and proudly insult over them.

Some extend it so far as that the Chaldean conqueror shall make Kings his
jesters, and parasites, and make himself sport with them.

And whereas the strong holds and castles are wont to be a terror to the
invador, the Chaldeans shall deride every strong hold.

For they shall heap dust and take it: i.e. They shall raise up of the earth
near unto their strong holds, such fortifications as shall defend them, and
offend the enemy, the very earth of the Jews shall they use against the Jews to
overcome them.

Then shall his mind change, and he shall pass over. Verse. 11.
These words do declare that the Chaldeans, full of victories, and full of pride
after this great conquest, shall change their mind, and pass over to some
other quest of glory, bigge-swolne with their former prevailings; And he
shows how these enemies of the Jews shall run themselves upon the just
displeasure of God, who stirred them up to this war.

He shall offend imputing this his power unto his God. From hence comes the
ruin of the Chaldeans, for being puffed up and proud of their victories, they
shall not acknowledge the great God of heaven the God of their war, or esteem
themselves his agents to chasten the Jews, but shall give the glory of their
conquest to their own Idol god.

Now in these words thus interpreted, observe 1. The Total. 2. The Particulars.


1. The Total, is the answer of God to the grievous complaint and
expostulation of the Prophet.

2. The Particulars are two. 1. The Judgment threatened. 2. The executioners of
this Judgment very fully and Rhethorically described.


1. The Total, God answers the Prophets complaint, Yeildeth this Doctrine,
that

God does hear the complaints of such as have just cause to complain of
violence,

The story of holy Scripture is full of examples of this truth. Cain for Abel:
vox sanguinis, the voice of blood.

The whole old world was punished with a general inundation for the cruelty
that was upon the earth; their violence made the Lord repent that he made them.

You have heard out of Obadiah, how the cruelty of Edom was intolerable, and
God heard the cry of the Church and delivered them, and punished Edom with
desolation.

And when Israel was in the land of Egypt, in the house of bondage, God says,

I have seen, Acts 7 34.
I have seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt, and I have heard
their groaning and am come down to deliver them.

Even Israel his own people is not spared, Sion his holy mountain, Jerusalem
his holy City, is punished for oppression. He does this

First, Injuriam.
as Tertull. Si apud deum deposueris injuriam, ipse ultor est: si damnum,
restitutor est.

Therefore let not the oppressed wrong their own cause with vexing, James tells
us that. The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God. Jam. 1.20.


Let them not vent their spleen in bitter cursings and execrations which be the
voice and language of impatience and impiety, and turn upon us, and all to
tear us.

But let them seriously complain to God, and he will hear them, and do them
right.

Let them tarry the Lords good leisure, and they shall see that he will take
the matter into his own hand.

1. Either he will take the oppressed out of the world, and give them rest from
their labors, and lay them in the beds of ease, and lock them in the chambers
of peace till all storms be over, and then he will say, Return ye sons of
Adam. 2. Or he will change the heart of the oppressors, and for stony hearts,
give them hearts of flesh, and fill them with compassion and tenderness. 3. Or
he will restrain the power of the wicked against his chosen, and suffer no man
to do them wrong, but will reprove even Kings for their sakes: the rage of man
will he restrain. 4. Or he will give the oppressed such a measure of patience
and charity as he shall bear injuries without murmuring, and bless them that
hate and persecute him. 5. Or he will pour forth his wrath upon the oppressor,
and let him feel the weight of his hand; either upon his body by inflicting
diseases upon it: or upon his mind, by the troubles of an unquiet conscience;
Or upon his family by cursing the fruit of his loins, that they shall be his
sorrows by taking ill ways,

Or upon his estate by cursing all his gatherings, that though all the streams
of profit run every way into his bags, nothing shall make him rich, like
the Caspian sea into which many rivers do pour in water continually, yet is it
never the fuller; rather like the lean kine never the fatter;

Or upon his life, by taking him out of the world, and thereby giving occasion
to the afflicted to rejoice.

Therefore art thou afflicted? pray and complain, and expostulate with God, for
he will hear thee.

2. God hears the complaint of the just against the oppressors for his names
sake, David urges him.

Hear me O God for thy names sake. For it touches God in honor when his
faithful servants do appeal from the school of unrighteousness where they are
oppressed, to the tribunal of his judgment, where they should be releived, and
cannot be heard.

You remember when Christ was on the cross, and his enemies had their cruel
hearts desire against him, they contented not themselves to be cruel and
scornful to him, but they blasphemed also the name of God saying,

He trusted in God, let him deliver him now if he will have him. Mat. 27 43
The very theives that were fastened then to the cross on either hand of him,
cast that in his teeth.

When the wicked prevail against the just, the next word is, Where is now their
God?

Let us then know the name of God is himself, He will not hold him guiltless
that takes his Name in vain.

Therefore in all greivances let us say with David: Our help is in the Name of
the Lord, who has made Heaven and Earth.

It is our comfort in trouble that we do suffer together with the name of God,
and if we do lay fast hold on that, we shall be delivered together with it; we
may well cast our trust upon that name, for, in hoc vinces, in this thou shall
overcome, is the Motto and word thereof, it is a strong tower to all that trust
in it.

3. God will hear the complaints of the just, I will not leave thee nor forsake
thee. And he has said

He shall call upon me and I will hear him, I am with him in trouble, I will
deliver him and he shall glorify me.

And David says. He will not suffer his truth to fail. We have more then his
promise, we have his oath against the ungodly.

I have sworn in my wrath that they shall not enter into my rest. Ps. 95.11.


Let us build then upon this promise, for God is faithful that has promised;
The violent and the oppressor has part in the wrath of God, as he says;

And I will come near to you in judgment, Mal. 3.5.
and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the
adulterers, and against false swearers, and against them that oppress the
hireling in his wages, and the fatherless, and the widow, and that turn aside
the stranger from his right, and that fear not me, says the Lord of hosts.

Here is Gods threatening against two of the sins of this People, violence and
the want of the fear of the Lord, whereby the law is slacked.

And for corruption of Justice, they that turn judgment into wormwood have
their doom. Judgment without mercy shall be showed to them that have no mercy.

Let us not therefore fear them, or be troubled at them that go in these
wicked ways; for the Judge of all the world will do justly.

The cry of the oppressed shall prevail against them. He also will hear their
cry and will help them.

The Lord is King, the earth may be glad thereof, and the multitude of the
Islands may rejoice; for he is known by executing judgment; he is the husband of
the widow, and the father of the fatherless. The poor commits his cause
unto him, for he relieveth the oppressed.

2. The particulars of this judgment threatened, contain two things, 1. The
Judgment threatened. 2. The Executioners thereof.


1. The judgment threatened is, that he will punish them by the conquering hand
of the heathen. This calls to our remembrance diverse points of doctrine
delivered out of the prophecy of Oba^iah.

1. That the decrees of Gods judgments upon the wicked are constant and
unchangeable. 2. That God uses war as one of his rods to punish sin. 3. That
all wars are ordained by God; for he stirs up this war against the Jews.
4. That God punishes one evil Nation by another. 5. That God gives warning of
his judgments to those whom he fore knows to be such as they will take no
warning to amend. 6. That God requiteth sinners in the same kind in which they
offend. The Jews sin was violence, and violence is their punishment. 7. That
the judgment of God upon the wicked and unmerciful, shall be without all mercy.
The point that I will now add,

All the promises that God made to Israel are limited by the condition of their
obedience, and the law given to them is called the Lords Covenant, because all
those promises did follow the obedience of that law; otherwise God stood free
to withdraw his mercy from them.

So Moses. The Lord made a Covenant with us in Horeb. The Covenant is, 1 Pet.
2.5.


You shall walk in all the ways which the Lord your God commanded you, that
ye may live, and that it may go well with you, Verse. 33.
and that ye may prolong your days in the land which ye shall possess.

God himself confesses, Psalm. 89.3.
I have made a Covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant;

Thy Throne will I establish for ever, Verse. 4.
and build up thy Throne to all Generations.

But yet with condition of obedience, for

If his children forsake my law, Verse. 30. Verse 31. Verse. 32.
and walk not in my judgments:

If they break my statutes and keep not my Commandments:

Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with
stripes.

So that no promise or oath of God does give Privilege or immunity to any to
offend the law of God.

And such is the equal Justice of God, that David though a man after Gods
heart, although a servant of Gods finding, a king of Gods own anointing, does
confess,

If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.

Moses, his sister Miriam must be a Leper, and shut out of the Camp for
murmuring.

Moses and Aaron shall not go into the promised land for their want of sure
trust in God.

For God is no accepter of Persons.

Those who are sealed with the spirit of promise,

For some water will serve them to wash them if they be taken in time: for some
that have taken rust with Gods long forbearance, and their own custom of
sinning, fire is necessary to burn out their dross.

But none escape; of this all are Partakers; and as personal sins have personal
chastisements, so epidemical sins have popular punishments; when a
Commonwealth is diseased, what though it be a People as Israel whom God has
chosen out of all the nations of the world, what though he have rooted out the
heathen to plant them in, although he have given them a land flowing with mi^k
and honey, settled the Priesthood and his Worship, given them his Word,
continued them in peace many generations.

Yet if they shall use violence and oppression: if they shall break the Law of
God, and corrupt the seat of judgment;

The Lord will see it, and be angry; and Noah, Daniel and Job, shall not keep
out judgment: rather the complaints of the just shall help to hasten the coming
of wrath against that land.

We have heard also that judgment begins at the house of God. 1 Pet. 4.17


When God sent destroyers into Jerusalem, their Commission was, Slay utterly
old and young, both maids and the children, Ezech 9.6
and the women, and begin at my Sanctuary.

We may say that England has been for many years, since the restitution of our
Religion, Gods pleasant plant:

He has spoken the word, and we have had multitude of Preachers, Religion and
all kind of learning; all Mercature has flourished, and we have traded to the
ends of the world; Mechanical and manual arts have come up to their full
growth, we may say, Non fecit Deus taliter, we have peace now with all the
world at least in show and pretense.

Let not these favors of God swell us, and make us presume in our hearts, that
our God cannot be lost to us, to encourage sin; if the sins of the Jews be
found amongst us, violence, contempt of Religion, and corruption of Justice.
God will do a thing in our days, which he that hears will not believe by
reason of our long rest.

All the favors of God came in with true Religion; and the contempt thereof
will carry them out again; for God is no accepter of Persons as we are Angli, if
we were Angeli, he would cast us out of our heaven upon earth, and give our
land to strangers that shall punish us, and make them that hate us to be lords
over us.

2. The executioners of this judgment; wherein observe, 1. By whom God will
punish. 2. How far the punishment shall extend. 3. What shall become of them
whom God does use as his rods in this execution.


1. By whom? by the Chaldaeans; These are described, 1. By their own fitness
for their design. 2. By their Praparation to accomplish it. 3. By their
intention in it.


2. How far the punishment shall extend, 1. To a full Conquest. 2. To a proud
triumph.


3. What shall become of them. 1. They shall change their mind. 2. They shall
offend in imputing their victories to their own idols.


1. By whom God shall punish the Jews.

1. Of their fitness for this execution, they are described to us by these
notations.

1. They are bitter. 2. They are hasty. 3. They are dreadful. 4. They are
wilful.
1. Bitter in their harsh and cruel natures. 2. Hasty in their participation
and speed. 3. Dreadful in their power and strength. 4. Wilful in taking their
own ways; for their judgment and dignity proceeds from themselves.
To be bitter and slow gives warning to resist, and affords the benefits of
time, a great friend to defense.

To be bitter, and hasty, and weak, is but a lightning, a flash and away.

To be bitter and hasty are dreadful; but to admit advice gives time of
breathing: but when the nature is inflamed with bitterness, and the action is
accelerated with haste, and fortified with strength, and followed with
wilfulness, this makes up a full danger, especially where God sets such a
work.

These be evil affections in this People, and prove their minds set upon
mischief; yet God makes rods of these twigges, and whips of these cords to
punish the sins of his own People.

The point of doctrine here is,

That God can make good use of the vices of men, Augustine, Deus bonus utitur
malis necessariis been. Civ. dei 18


So Mr. Calvin judiciously observes in the text, Hec quidem non fuerunt
laudanda in Chaldaeis, amarulentia and furor; sed potest deus haec vitia
convertere in optimum finem St. Augustine treating of the prosemination of the
Gospel, and the quick spreading thereof, has two chap^ers to our purpose. cap.
50.


In the 50. he shows. Per passiones praedicantium illustrior facta est
Praedicatio, by the sufferings of Preachers preaching is made the more famous.

In the 51. Per dissentiones hareticorum fides Catholica roboratur, by the
dissentions of heretics the Catholic faith is strengthened.

He is so full to this purpose, to show what good God works out of evil, that I
cannot suppress his words.

Inimici ecclesiae quolibet errore caecentur, si accipiunt potestatem,
Corporaliter affligendi exercent ejus patientiam.

Si tantummodo male sentiendo adversantur exercent ejus sapientiam.

Vt diligantur, exercent ejus benevolentiam. But when the Church of God grows
foul, and when People of God forsake God, and go in their own ways, then God
uses the wicked ad vindictam; then as David says, the wicked are the sword of
the Lord. Ps. 17.13.


And that is the reason why God does suffer so many evils in the world, because
they be his rods to chasten evil.

Even in this example, Jeremy the Prophet of the Lord does threaten the same
judgment.

The Chaldaeans shall fight against this city, and take it; and burn it with
fire. Jer. 37.8.


Thus says the Lord, deceive not your selves, saying, the Chaldaeans shall
depart from us, for they shall not depart.

For though you had smitten the whole army of the Chaldaeans that fight against
you, and there remained but wounded men amongst them, yet they should rise up,
every man in his tent and burn the city with fire.

Thus God does, Cap. 1.
because he will declare his own perfection of wisdom and goodness, that he
can work good out of evil, and dispose the very vices of men to good.

And thus the examples of foul sins in our brethren, do move us,

1. To a loathing thereof; as we read, the Lacedaemonians would make their
slaves drunk, and then show them to their children to make them loath
drunkenness; and all that have the fear of God, when they see and hear the
evil conversation, and evil and profane words of the wicked, they behold in
them the ugly face of sin, and are touched at the heart with a detestation of
the same.

2. They move us to charity.

1. Charitas incipiens at our selves to take warning by their example, that we
when we see a thief, do not turn to him, nor be Partakers with the adulterers.

To make us set a guard upon our whole life, a zealous purpose to eschew evil.

To use the means for our preservation from evil, which are hearing, and
meditation in the law of God, and frequent and fervent Prayer.

2. Charitas proficiens, to pray God for our brethren, that he would direct
their paths, forgive their sins, and mend their lives, and preserve others from
being corrupted by their evil example.

2. God brings forth the effects of his own good will,

God declares himself King and supreme Lord of the earth herein; David says,
fecit quicquid voluit, he has done what ever he will. He will not let either
the sinner that acts, or Satan that suggesteth evil, to have the managing
thereof; for howsoever it seems that they serve their own turns therein, he
will dispose their evil to his own proper ends, and they shall unwillingly work
for him, though both the bent of the suggestion of Satan, and the promise of
the intention of the sinner, and the fuel of the affection, and the whole
force of the action be diverted against him. So Joseph's brethren full of envy
to him sold him into Egypt.

What a charity did God work out of it? so the Jews for envy pursued Christ to
the Cross; all the godly fare the better for the good which was effected by it.

Israel is here punished by the Chaldaeans, and God makes use of these briars
and thorns to prick and goare his People: he suffers them to be carried into
captivity.

All the force of Satan and his instruments, prevail no farther against the
Church, then for correction and burning out the dross, God does still do all
things for the best.

The consideration where of serves,

1. To pacify us against evils, Resist not evil, let it have its course, and
expect Gods end in at.

You see how much Habakkuk was troubled at the sins of the Jews; how he did
even chide with God for his patience and remissness toward them; you see from
thence it is a burden to man to bear the impieties of their brethren, and to
behold their uncharitableness: and therefore it is lawful to complain to God
of such, and to awake his justice against them.

And here in Gods answer, you see that God can make use of men of evil natures
and ungodly lips to execute his will.

Observe the faults of these Chaldaeans,

1. Idolatrous; therefore Religion, and the whole worship of God, and the house
of his worship, and the Priests and the Ministers of it were like to pay for it.

Woeful is that state that gives any way to idolatry to enter into it; for
Amaziah cannot endure Amos to prophecy near the King.

2. Fierce and cruel, and therefore no mercy to be expected where they may use
the sword.

3. Proud and imperious; so that to serve them was the basest vassalage that
might be. Such a nation as this will always make a good sharp rod, to scourge
the Church when it rebelleth against God.

And let that Land into which such a nation does come, either in a storm by
force, or in a calm by treaty to have power therein, persuade it self, that
God ows it a whipping, and will not be long in debt.

But in all fears, and smart, let the comfort of this doctrine season our
hearts, that God does use the evils that be in men well, and all things shall
come to the best to them that fear God.

Let us remember our lesson, let us live in the learning and practice of it,
fear God and keep his Commandments, and let Satan do his worst, and let the
Catholic Bishop and the Chaldaeans his idolatrous, cruel and proud sons, use
either their wit or strength against us; si Deus pro nobis, if God be for us,
all is well.

These thorns shall bear us grapes, and these thistles figs; We had need to
consider that in all machinations and actions of m^s chief against the Church
there is also the right hand of the most high, dextera excelsi: let us take
heed that we do not sin too boldly with that. Rather let us await the good
issue that his holy will shall produce; for all things do work together for our
good, if we do fear and serve him.

2. This serves to soften that hard Doctrine of our Saviors, to bless those
that curse and persecute us, and to pray for those that hate us, to love our
enemies; for seeing all their actions be governed and disposed by the
providence of God, who loves us so well, that he spared not his own Son but
gave him unto death for us, we may promise our selves good out of all evils
that they imagine of execute against us.

There be two things which must be considered in our enemies, to quicken this
charity.

1. The person of our enemy which teareth (though much defaced) the image of
God, and is the same nature with us; flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone,
which we must not hate nor wish ill to. 2. The employment of God in his actions
which do offend us; for we see that God stirs him and setreth him awork, and
manageth the whole operation to his own purpose;
Therefore think not our Saviors Precept an hard saying, who commands
charity even to an enemy, and love to such as hate us.

For even in the injuries they do to their brethren, they do service to God.

Yet is not God author of the evil done, but of the good exracted out of that
evil, and applied to the benefit of his Church.

2. Their preparation to accomplish this Will of God;

1. In their own persons. 1. Terrible. 2. Wilful.
2. In their military forces.
1. Their horses. 1. Feirce. 2. Speedy.
2. Their riders. 1. Numerous. 2. Speedy. 3. Cruel.

1. For their own persons, no doubt but they should bring with them all the
appearance of danger and horror that might be, that God might cast the fear of
them upon the Jews; that is number, choice of soldiers, strength of arms.

2. For the forces here named, horses trained up to the field, flesht in blood
with horsemen to manage that fierceness to the destruction of the Jew;

This is their preparation, wherein we are taught that

When God undertaketh to do a work, he accommodateth all fit means for a full
execution.

You all know that God has no need of means to execute his Will, his Will is a
law to his creature; Yet he chooses in his great wisdom by visible and
sensible means to chasten the rebellion of the Jews, that his ways may be know
upon earth, even the ways of his judgments that the earth may stand in awe of
him.

God would have his Church know, that if he once take displeasure against them;
he has the command of armies to fight against them; for he is LORD of Hoasts.

Men partners with them of the same nature, shall be fearful and terrible to
them, they shall lay aside all humanity, and shall arm themselves with malice
and cruelty to destroy them; they shaall see that God can put metal into them,
and into their horses, and make all their military provisions mortal to destroy
them: for who is so great a God as our God.

Edom had made peace as you heard out of Obadiah, with his neighbor nations,
yet the men of his confederacy put a wound under him.

Let us not trust our peace with all the world, especially with them whose
religion is a warrant to them to break with us when they see an advantage.

Let us make and keep peace with our God, and put our sins to silence which cry
out for judgments against us; for if he be on our side, we need not fear the
arm of flesh: the horse and the rider too will fall, and fail, as in the
example of Israel, he has a red sea, a judgment of vengeance to follow them:
one shall chase a thousand.

A thousand shall fall on thy side, and ten thousand at thy right band, but
shall not come near thee.

There is, Psalm. 91.7.
there can be no danger to them that have the God of Jacob for their refuge.

When armies fight his battles, they are terrible and dreadful; when he is on
our side, there are more with us then against us.

The name of the Chaldaeans, their fierceness, their hasty violence, their
number, their horses, their riders, their whole Preparation for war, do all
borrow terror from ego excitabo, I will stir up; it is God that sets them a
work, which puts this metal into them.

Let me learn of the Apostle Saint Paul to apply this terror, to the common
use of all those that are despisers of the threatenings of God.

Beware therefore least that come upon you which is spoken of by the Prophets.
Acts 13.40.


And there he cites these words, ver. 5. I will do a work in your days, which
ye will not believe, etc. whereby he shows.

1. That the Provocation which moves God to this severe judgment is contempt;
therefore Saint Paul says, Hear ye despisers, for it was spoken at first to
such as did slack the law of God, and had no awe or reverence of his
threatenings and judgments.

2. That this was no singular judgment proper to that nation of the lews, but
common to his People all the world over; for God seeing Religion contemned, and
Justice corrupted, that neither a Christian, nor a moral conversation is
regarded, he will find Chaldaeans more fierce and hasty and violent nations, to
overrun and destroy such a People.

Our sins are the edge and point of their weapons.

3. The intention of the Chaldaeans.

God works as he professes, in this invasion, and his end is, to punish the
over-growing sins of the Jews, the Chaldaeans they work, their end is spoil and
enlargement of their dominion.

God for his own end gives way to them and suffers, that is not all, he
works with them and accomplish their desire.

The Papist and the Anabaptist do both charge the Protestant Church that we
maintain God to be the Author of sin.

Campian says, for us, Volens, Suggerens, Efficiens, Jubens, Operans, and in
hoc impiorum scelerata consilium gubernans. And this is one of our paradoxes.

Cardinal Bellarmine does maintain, that all evils are done on earth, only
permittente deo by Gods permission. Our answer is,

That in all sinful actions, two things are to be considered, as Aquinas well
teaches.

1. Ipsa actio, the action. 2. Vitium actionis, the fault of the action.
We confess that God is vilens, suggerens, efficiens, jubens, operans, and
gubernans in action, for omnis actio quatenus actio est bona; for deus omnia
operatur. In him we live and move, and without his power no action can be
performed.

It is blasphemy to say or think that any thing is, or can be done against the
will, or without the power of God, or that God does lend his power to any
against himself, and his Will, for that destroys the Omnipotent Providence
of God.

But for the evil that is in a wicked action, that deriveth it felf from the
corrupt root of man's sinful nature.

Saint Augustine handling this point does thus exemplify it.

Qum pater tradiderit filium, and dominus corpus suum, Epl. 48. ad vincent.
and Judas dominum cur in hac traditione deus justus est, and homoreus, nisi
quia in re una quam fecerunt causa non una est ob quam fecerunt?

In the example in my text God himself has cleared this truth. For here are
the Chaldaeans.

1. Out of a natural fierceness of evil nature, apt to do mischief, and hasty
to execute it. 2. Out of a covetous desire to enrich themselves, making no
conscience to invade the goods of their neighbors. 3. Out of an ambitious and
proud desire, longing to possess a land that is not theirs.
Does God approve these unchristian desires in this idolatrous and wicked
nation?

We say and believe that God hates wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with
him.

Yet for the action of violence. God sees his people of the Jews for contempt
of Religion, and for corruption of Justice, and for violence to one another
worthy of punishment, he holds them worthy to be punished with violence, and
therefore he stirs up a violent nation against them.

He sees that they live by oppression, and therefore he sends oppressors to
strip them out of all.

He sees that they live in unbridled licentiousness, and therefore he takes
away their liberty and sends them into captivity; he finds them unworthy of
the land which he gave them, and therefore he gives it away to strangers, and
puts their enemies into possession thereof.

Consider all this as malum panis, the evil of punishment, and so God is
Author, Suggestor, and operator herein.

But consider how the Chaldaeans work in this affair, and God himself
acquitteth himself in this text, and puts it off upon them.

Their judgment and their dignity shall proceed from themselves. That which
they seek is a project of their own, Verse 7.
they know not what God would have done, and as they advise not with him, nor
understand that he stirs them, they acknowledge nothing to him, as it
follows, for they thank their own god for the victory.

You do now see Gods good end, and their evil, and in this one action; and
Saint Augustine says, Deus quasdam voluntates suas utique bonas implet, per
malorum hominum voluntates malas. Vide Whitak. contra Camp. ratione 8.

From hence it comes that they, which fulfilling the Will of God, which they
know not, do fulfill their own Will, which they aim at, have no reward of their
service, but rather are after punished for the same, as Hugo de Sancto victore,
says.

Quoniam non sua voluntate, De Sacramenti Ps. 4. c. 15.
ad implendam dei voluntatem dirigunt, sed occulta ipsius dispositione.

And thus does Master Calvin teach men, in those places which Campiarae does
slanderously traduce to this paradox, that God is author of sin.

The title is Deum ite impiorum opera iti, and animos flectere ad exequenda sua
judicia ut purus ipse ab omni labe maneat. 1, Inst. 18.


It suffices that we see the intention of the Chaldaeans evil, for that
condemns them, and his judgment upon them, which follows in this chapter,
does prove, that their intention make their whole service corrupt, so that
though it pleased God that evil was done against the Jews, they did not please
God that did execute the same.

The rule is true, that all evil actions are justly judged by the intentions of
their Agents, good actions are not so.

For every good intention will not justify an action to be lawful: as in
Rebecca and Jacob her son, it was a good intention to seek the blessing which
God had decreed, but the act whereby it was attained, was merely unlawful.

But an evil intention is sufficient to corrupt any action, though it carry
never so specious a show of good.

Jacobs sons went about a good action, to draw the Shechemites into a
conformity with the Hebrews in Religion, the intention of the Shechemites,
which made them embrace the motion, was the enriching of themselves by this
correspondencie, the intention of Jacobs sons was to betray them to death,
and God punished them both the Shechemites with death, the sons of Jacob with
their fathers curse.

And the Chaldaeans punished the Jews, and sought therein the glory of God
only, and gave him the praise of their victory, of whom they borrowed the power
of their strength they had been blameless; but their hands concurred with the
just will of God, their hearts did not, yet God is just in employing them.

The rule therefore is, that he that wills the same thing which God wills,
and does the same thing which God would have done sins, except he wills
and does the same thing, in the same matter and for the same end which God
projecteth. Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus, arm your
selves with the same mind.

That mind is an armor against the wrath of God; 1. Pet. 4.1.
we know we cannot displease him, so long as there is an harmony of our mind
with his; that mind is an armor against the revenge of men, for if we be
abundant always in the work of the Lord, we know that our labor is not, Ephesians.
4.23.
cannot be in vain in the Lord; for we must be renewed in the spirit of our
mind, we must not be like the axe and hammer in the hand of the artificer,
which knows not who uses it; nor what he does, nor why; we are living
instruments, and our minds must set our hands awork, we must know what we do,
for whom and why, or else our work is against our selves.

We do nothing, but as God does guide the hand, so he frames the heart and
affections to it, if he do not also enlighten our understandings, and apply our
minds to it, we are carried as bruit beasts, we are not led as men.

So then I leave those Chaldaeans, though the armies of God at this time, and
doing the will of God ignorantly, yet for the corruption of their intention
culpable, and in as ill case as they whom they persecute and overcome.

All the injuries that we do by word or deed to our brethren, they are done
with Gods privity,

Let us not so much consider what good God does work out of us to them, as what
evil breeds in our heart, and so no thank to Joseph's brethren that he is the
second man in Egypt.

All the fat of the land of Goshen and the sweet exchang of their pinching
famine for a swelling plenty, will not still the clamorous accusing voice of
their guilty conscience, for the sin of their evil intention against their
brother; for as soon as their father died, their fear revived, they doubted
that Joseph would revenge that fault.

The old word was animus cujusque, is est quisque, every man's mind is himself,
and so when David says of the just man: the floods of many waters shall not
come near him: it is expounded it shall not come so high as his mind to the
disquieting thereof: it shall not come so high as his faith to the weakening
thereof.

Remember this when you pray, fiat voluntas tua, thy will be done; that you
desire of God not only a correspondence with his hand, that you may do that
which he would have done, but correspondence of Will that you may do it for the
same cause.

2. How far the punishment shall extend.

1. To a full Conquest. 2. To a proud triumph. Divis. p. 78

The full Conquest is set forth, verse. 6.

They shall march through the breadth of your land to possess the dwelling
places that are not theirs. v 9.

They shall come all for violence, and shall gather together the captivity as
the sand.

Wherein is described a full possession of the land of the Jews, and a
deportation of the people, a loss even of the birthright and the blessing.

The land of Canaan is called the land of promise, for God promised it to
Abraham, and swore to him that his seed should inherit it, but by way of
Covenant which had reference to their obedience of the law of God, for so Moses
forewarned them.

If thou forget the Lord thy God, etc.

I testify unto you this day, ye shall surely perish, Deuteronomy. 8.19.
as the nations which the Lord destroys before you; so ye shall perish,
because ye would not be obedient unto the voice of the Lord your God.

And Moses says unto them. Behold I set before you this day, Deuteronomy. 11.26.
a blessing and a curse.

Blessing, if you obey the Commandments of the Lord, etc.

And the curse, if you will not obey.

Now God is free of his promise and oath that he made to them, for they have
disobeyed him, they have corrupted their ways, they have contemned and slacked
the Law of God, therefore they have forfeited their estate in that good land,
and their persons stand obliged to the punishment of their disobedience.

The lesson is,

For man is mutable. Abraham. Israel the posterity of Abraham is no more to him
then the posterity of Canaan who had his fathers curse, except that Israel do
serve him better then they do. He has told them so by Moses, for seeing there
was no merit in them to deserve his love at first, and no means for them to
continue his love, but their obedience, that failing, they are to him as
heathens.

Christ teaches us, that if any be wilful, and will not obey the Church, he
must be to us as an Heathen and a Publicane, we can never excommunicate such ex
communione charitatis, out of the communion of charity, for as much as in us
lies we must have peace with all men, and we must never hide our selves from
our own flesh, and we must do good unto all men, but we may, we must exclude
them, ex Communione Ecclesia, from the Communion of the Church, we must not
admit them to our Congregations, nor esteem them members of the Church till
they be reconciled.

Religion is the knot of true union that knitteth us to God, that uniteth us to
one another, that once dissolved, farewell fair weather, we must turn all into
chiding and reproof, and as the Apostle says, come to them with the rod. We
must complain of them to God, and awake his Justice upon them. So that if we
would keep our land from invasion and depopulation, our persons from captivity
and deportation, our goods from direption and deprecation, let us serve the
Lord in fear and obedience, in holiness and righteousness before him all the
days of our lives.

2. The punishment shall extend to a proud triumph, which is expressed. v. 10.
They shall scoff at the Kings, and the Princes shall be a scorn to them, and
they shall deride every strong hold.

This is another of Gods rods: Obadiah: Behold I have made thee small, Verse. 2.
thou art greatly despised.

Therefore Saint Paul repeating this prophecy, does by way of exposition, to
show to whom this judgment does belong, say, Behold ye despisers, and wonder,
and vanish away, Acts 13.40.
for behold ye amongst the heathen.

This is Gods own word, He that despises me shall be dspised. Yea, as the
Psalmist says, He pours contempt upon Princes.

Two things that are most privileged from contempt shall here suffer it.

1. The Majesty of Kings. 2. The strength of fortifications.
But when the supreme Majesty of God is offended and despised, these cannot
escape both destruction and contempt.

This the generous nature of man does more fear then any temporal evil: let me
ache, and smart, and lose all, but let me not be despised.

When the Jews began after the captivity, to build again the walls of the city,
they had strong opposition by their enemies, Tobiah and Sanballat, and others,
who labored to hinder the building all they could. But when they despised the
Jews, and scorned their work, Nehemiah took it to heart, and grew very earnest
with God in complaint against them. For,

Sanballat mocked the Jews, and said before his brethren and the army of
Samaria Nehem. 4.1.


What do these weak Jews? will they fortify themselves? will they sacrifice?
will they finish it in a day? will they make the stones whole again out of the
heaps of dust, seeing they are burnt?

And Tobiah the Ammonite was beside him, and said, although they build, yet if
a fox go up, he shall even break down their strong wall.

This sends Nehemiah to God, saying, Hear O God, (we are despised) and turn
their shame upon their own head. This heavy judgment shall God inflict upon the
Jews.

The reason is,

When God tried Job with all kind of corporal and temporal calamities in the
agony and smart of his passion, he looks back to the former mercies of God;
wherein I observe, that he gives the first place of his temporal happiness to
that respect that was given to him.

When I went out to the gate through the City, Job 29.7.
when I prepared my seat in the street,

The young men saw me, Verse 8.
and hid themselves, and the aged arose and stood up.

The Princes refrained talking, Verse 9.
and laid their hand on their mouth.

The Nobles held their peace, Verse. 10.
and their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth.

When the ear heard me, Verse. 11.
then it blessed me, and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me.

But in the next chapter recounting the miseries which had come upon him, he
gives the first place to contempt.

But now they that are younger then I have me in derision, Job 30.1.
whose fathers I would have disdained to sit with the dogs of my flock.

They were children of fools, Verse 8.
children of base men; they were viler then the earth.

And now I am their song, Verse 9.
I am their byword.

They abhor me, Verse 10.
and fly far from me, and spare not to spit in my face. Read on at leisure.

But thus did the Jews abuse Christ: Is not this the Carpenter? And after they
put on him a purple garment, and put a Reed in his hand, and crowned him with
thorns, and saluted him scornfully, King of the Jews.

They spit on his face, and even hanging on the Cross of pain and shame, they
laughed him to scorn.

Some refer the non sicut to this especially. Have ye no regard all ye that
pass by the way, consider and behold if ever there were sorrow like my sorrow
which was done to me: Lam. 1.12
For the grief of contempt must needs be the greatest humiliation, because of
the eminency and excellency of his person.

And for Christian Religion in the Primitive times of the Church, the common
evil opinion of it was that, it was Heresy; but the learned Grecians did call
preaching foolishness, ubi sapiens? ubi scriba?

The way to avoid this contempt, is humility,

Discite a me quia mitis and humilis.

This is the virtue, and he the only teacher of it, the best example of it, the
fullest reward of it.

You heard from Obadiah to Edom,

The pride of thy heart has deceived thee: Verse. 3.


The pride of life is the Queen of vices, as you heard then, it trespasseth the
Majesty of God, it turned Angels into devils, and cast man out of Paradise.
Hugo. Superbia mihi deum aufert.

Humility does make us think reverently of God, and charitably of our brethren,
and worst of our selves. Saint Paul, of whom I am chief.

Humility makes us think all the least favors of God too good for us, and so
joyneth contentedness with godliness.

Contempt cannot smart upon the humble in respect of themselves, but in respect
of God who is despised in them; study and pray to God for this grace; this
keeps peace in the Church, and quietness in our common conversation; for only
of pride comes contention. Let me once say with Jacob,

I am not worthy of the least of thy mercies, and we shall value the very
crummes that fall from the childrens table, the least of Gods favors will be
sweet to us, and God shall be praised for them.

And with such as be of a contrite and lowly spirit God will dwell, God
himself boweth the heavens, and comes down to such to visit them, at que
humiles habitare casas. Behold I stand at the door and knock. Not at the door
of the proud, for their self-love keeps him out.

The humble man is the Lords temple, and he says, Here will I dwell, for I
have a delight therein; I will satisfy their poor with bread, the holy ones
shall rejoice and sing: I took David from the sheepfolds, there will I make
the horn of David to flourish, I have ordained a lanthorn for mine anointed.

Ver. 11. Then shall his mind change, and he shall pass over, and offend,
imputing this his power unto his god.
3. WHat shall become of the Chaldaeans thus victorious.

1. They shall change their mind. 2. They shall pass over. 3. They shall
offend. 4. Their fault.
1. They shall change their mind.

The prosperous and victorious success of the Chaldaean, shall so infatuate
the Chaldaean, that he shall be transported with the pride thereof, and God
shall give end unto his violence; God shall change his mind for their sakes
whom he reserveth as his remnant amongst the Jews.

The rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous.

He guides the hearts of all men like rivers of waters, which way he pleases.

It is a doctrine which I lately taught out of Obadiah. Though the Church of
God do live under the Cross for a time, it shall not be always so: for as here
it is declared, Their mind shall change that afflict her.

1. Because Gods quarrel is not against the Persons of men, but against their
sins; therefore he punishes non ad vindictam, but ad emendationem vitae, and
it is no pleasure to God to punish his children, therefore he will not always
punish, because afflictions are of excellent force to bring forth in his
children 1. Contrition. 2. Supplication.
2. He will not always punish, least the extreme passions of his servants
should breed in them a doubt of his love, and so weaken their faith. 3, Least
the righteous should put forth his hand unto sin. 4. Least the enemies of his
Church should grow too insolent.
Further we are taught, 2 Doct.
that those whom God uses as his rods are limited; when they have executed his
will they shall then change their minds: the mind of the Chaldaean was cruelty,
and oppression, and covetousness, and ambition; this victory shall change
their mind into pride and insolency, so that as the wise man says, The
prosperity of fools shall destroy them.

It is a true laying for the most part, that as the good, so the blood rises;
men of low degree, when they rise to high places, men of poor estate when they
grow to plenty, even nations, when they overflow their own banks, and overrun
others, do change their minds, they have not the same hearts and affections
that they had.

It is a singular wisdom to use the fullness of prosperity well.

The Paradise of God did not content our first Parents, the forbidden fruit
seemed to Evah the fairest fruit of the garden, that changed her mind from the
obedience of the law of God, to be both a Praevaricatour and a tempter.

The sons of God living in prosperity in the favor of God, set their eyes on
the daughters of men, and because they looked fair like Eves apple, they
changed their mind from living under the religious awe of God, to take them
wives by whom the service of God was corrupted: for they that marry with
tempters and take them into their bosoms, either presume too much on their own
strength, and they tempt God therein: or else they change their minds and
religions with them.

Can a man carry fire in his bosom and not be burnt? or walk upon burning
coals and not be scorched? The Author of the book of Wisdom says well of the
righteous, That he is speedily taken away, least wickedness should alter his
understanding, Wisd. 4.11
or deceit beguile his soul.

There is a great measure of grace needful to him that would use prosperity
well; he must not be wicked; for where the good spirit of God is wanting, there
is nothing but unstayednesse and inconstancy; but David prays, Establish thou
me with thy free spirit.

David's victories and peace and prosperity, did change his mind, he grew
wanton, and to hide that, cruel, and to live in that sin of uncleanness,
irreligious till God sent Nathan to him.

Ezekiah having rest, changed his mind, and proud of his treasures, showed them
to his own disadvantage, and provoked Gods anger against him.

Experience shows us how the world, and the wealth and honors thereof do
corrupt men of good minds before, and changes their understandings, that Demas
will forsake Paul, whom he has long served; and some disciples will no longer
walk with Christ.

The cause hereof is because outward things unsanctified to the owner and user
thereof,

Because there is no peace with the wicked man,

Because iniquity knows no measure, Virtutisque viam deserit arduae: Their
mirth is madness, their music vanity: so their sorrow is sullenness and
discontent: Conquered, they are base, and lick the dust from the enemies foot:
Conquering, they are proud, and tyrannize over them whom they have subdued.

Thus the mind of the wicked changes in them.

The profit that we may make of this point is great.

1. It discourageth us from greedy seeking of temporal prosperity, because it
has this danger in it to change our minds, and to shift us from vice to vice:
wherefore it is a good petition in our holy Letany: Prove. 30.9
In all time of our wealth good Lord deliver us. and that of Agur,

Give me not riches least I be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord?

2. It comfort the oppressed that their oppressors are not always of the
same mind, but they may have hope of fairer weather in the greatest storms
that do arise, because the minds of their enemies shall change, as David says,

He made them that led them away captive to pity them, for God has a power in
this change, which is mutatio dextrae excelsi.

2. They shall pass over them.



God only knows how far he would have his judgment to pass; the Chaldaeans
do transgress and pass over this measure, whereby they grow intolerable, and
their malice punishable.

pertransibunt may be referred to their own short domination; for the
Chaldaeans were a few years after conquered by the Medes and Persians, as the
learned Jesuit Ribera observes.

And we find that Nebuchadnezzar the King of the Chaldaeans felt the smart of
this prophecy in his own Person.

For he changed his mind and passed over when he became as a brute beast, and
was driven from men, Dan. 4.33.
and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till
his hairs were grown like Eagles feathers, and his nails like birds claws.

Thus he that passed the bounds of Justice in the oppression of the Jews, and
the bounds of modesty in the pride of his victories, is changed in his
understanding, and passes the bounds of common humanity.

All this proves that Gods employing the wicked to punish others does not move
them nor derive the favors of God upon them, they cannot keep within any
compass.

1. If pertransibit, pass over, do signify a further quest of glory, we are
taught hence, that the ungodly are insatiable in their desires, nothing will
content them, every victory encourages to a new war, as we find in all
examples of the greatest monarchies of the world, till their own weight ruin
them.

2. As this passing over does signify their going beyond their bounds, we are
taught, that they whom God employeth without their knowledge and Privity, do
only seek their own ends, neither is God in all their ways.

3. As this passing over signifies the short joy of their victory, so it
teaches that an ungodly man can never be an happy man, nor a sinful man a wise
man; for in short time he will lose that what he has unjustly gotten; for
though God intended the taking away of the Jews land from them, he intended it
but for a time; he meant the Jews a sharp chastisement, not an eradication.

I understand those words of a cessation from any further prosecution of this
war against the Jews, for he shall carry away some captive into his own land,
and the meaner sort he shall leave behind to husband Judaea, and so shall cease.

And this does strengthen our former doctrine, that those whom God uses as
instruments of his Justice, shall at length desist, God will not suffer them
beyond his decreed time.

3. They shall offend.

Let no man mistake this place, as if God did lay upon them a necessity of
offense; but he does out of his Prescience foretell that they will offend God,
as with all their other sins, so particularly with this their service done to
him.

They are stirred up to this war by God,



He foreknew the fall of Adam, and provided a remedy for it in his eternal
counsel.

He foreknew the sins of the old world, and provided a judgment to punish them.

He foreknew the sins of his Israel, and therefore he made all his promises
conditional, and referred them to their obedience.

He foreknew the trespass of Judas, the cruelty of the Jews, the injustice of
the Romans against his son, and he made his death medicinal and cordial for
his Church, and a ruin to the enemies thereof; the same stone which was the
corner stone of the Church, was a rock of offense to her enemies.

This is the ground of Gods Justice against the Chaldaeans in the next section
of this chapter; for foreseeing how they would offend, He did also fore-decree
how he would punish them.

He is called (...) a seer, for all things are manifest in his sight: the eye
of the Lord is over all the world, he sees both the good and the bad.

God foreseeth offenses before they be come into the hearts of men, as Christ
knew Judas would be a ^raitour before Judas knew it himself; 2 Reg. 13.8.
and God by his Prophet told Hazael how cruel he should be, before Hazael was
King, and when Hazael though such wickedness could not have bred in him. Am I
a dog that I should do this great thing?

And Christ told Peter that he would deny him, when Peter protested against it
very strongly.

1. Because he knows the heart in which sin breeds, and knows how apt it
is to conceive sin. He knows whereof we be made. 2. He foreseeth the
temptations wherewith man shall be tempted. 3. He knows what measure of
strength and virtue is gone out from him to man, to enable him against these
temptations.


And if God foresee offenses to come, much more does he remember sins past, and
observe sins present.

2. Let this stir us up to the fear of the Lord, which is a continual
putting of us into the presence of God, and fills us with fervent prayers to
God to keep us from sin, either from the desire of it, or from the committing
of it, or from the punishment of it, by giving us strength to resist sin
tempting us, or at least to hate the evil which we do against the law of our
mind, transported by the law of our members: or to give us the grace of
repentance, that we may turn to him, and break off our sins by righteousness
and godly life.

This is that petition in our Lords Prayer, Lead us not into temptation.

Which petition follows that former, forgive us our trespasses; for whom God
pardons, them Satan tempts most, both because he despighteth God, and
because relapse into sins once pardoned is a double danger.

And he prays God not to lead him into the temptation, because we must not
only remember with grief the sins we have committed, but we must consider with
fear what sins our infirmities may fall into.

Into which God leads us, by withdrawing his grace from us, or from which he
keeps and preserves us by his assisting grace.

The foresight of God is in respect of himself and his own perfect knowledge
infallible and certain; that will come to pass which he foreseeth, and this is
his wisdom; though man have a free will to do evil, yet he knows how far
this his free will shall mislead him.

And for that cause he has set such a guard of Angels about the just, to keep
them in all their ways that they fall not, to take them up again when they
fall, and he has given his word and lanthorn to their feet to guide and direct
their paths.

Yet we may say that this foresight of God may be in respect of the means
conditional, and so God may foresee such an event upon some secret condition,
which yet by means may be prevented, and not succeed.

A great example hereof in David's story.

He hears that the Philistims do rob Keilah, David goes against the
Philistims, 1 Samuel 23.
and overcomes, and saves the men of Keilah.

Saul hearing of it, arms his forces to surprise Keilah secretly.

David asks of God; Verse. 12.
Will the men of Keilah deliver me and my men into the hand of Saul?

The Lord said, They will deliver thee up?

Here God foresaw a sin in the men of Keilah which was never committed, but
Saul had sent, and God knew the corruption of the heart of those men, and gave
warning.

Here his foresight in respect of himself was certain, which was, that David
should take this warning to escape.

But in respect of the success it was conditional, because it has reference
to the means of evasion.

So God foresaw the death of Ezechiah by his conditional will deferred; but by
his revealed will present: and his revealed will does not always make necessity
of event, but sometimes it is a warning to escape it.

Thus God foreseeth the spawning of sin in man's life, in the seed or root
thereof, which is lust, yet he reveileth means to keep the just from falling
into these sins.

But for the wicked, he leaves them to the stream and current of their own
free will, and leads them into temptation. For temptation is their punishment.

This may stir us up to husband the means of grace, to the best advantage of
our souls to keep us undefiled in the way, that iniquity may not have dominion
over us.

For Gods certain knowledge of our evils, will bring forth a certain judgment
to punish them.

4. Wherein he shall offend, imputing this his power to his God.

The Chaldaeans were not without their God; Nebuchadnezzar their King had made
them a god of the best metal, and had set it up in the plain of Durah in the
Province of Babel, and called all the People in his Dominions to worship the
god which Nebuchadnezzar the King had set up.

This god must have the glory of the Chaldaeans Conquest; and what greater
dishonor can they do to the living God, then to give his glory to livelesse
and senseless stocks?

1. Yet it appears, that those People, although they knew not the true God,
yet they had a knowledge of the Divinity; and so we do hold, that no man is
simpliciter Atheos, that is, without knowledge or acknowledgment of some divine
power ruling and governing all things.

For this is the finger of God, in the heart of the natural man, who though he
do not perceive qua D^i, the things of God, yet he perceives quod Deus, that
there is a God.

2. It appears that they did confess a debt of glory due to the Deity;
whatsoever they would think worthy to be esteemed their God, they would think
it worthy of all ascriptions of honor and glory; which is another truth of the
law of God written in the heart of every man, and it is a good principle of
nature, it is a lineament of the image of God in man.

3. It also appears that they believed the ordinance and moderation of great
affairs to depend on the power and strength of their god, because they give him
the honor of this victory; for his power, the power which he calls his, he
confesses to be borrowed for he imputes it to his God, which also is another
beam and ray of heavenly light.

But the Lord says here, they shall offend herein, for Gods glory is given
away from him, and horrible idolatry is committed.

This light of nature does serve to convince the Chaldaeans that
Nebuchadnezzars golden image is not, cannot be god, for that is fixed, it
moves not, what wealth it has in the matter is the Kings gift, what
proportion or form it has in the fabric and form of it, it has from the
hand of the workman.

But beloved, let me lay open to you the true cause of all idolatry, not only
that of the heathen, but even that of them that call themselves Christians: it
is want of faith.

For seeing God is an invisible essence, and they are loath to worship what they
cannot see, and they walk by sense and not by faith, the invisible Deity is by
them worshipped in some visible form, and I cannot judge more hardly against
them then that

They have too much weakness in their understanding to make it necessary that
their God must be visible: yet not so much weakness of sense as to judge that
Idol to be God which is of their own making.

But see how God punishes them; for seeing they will not worship a God whom
they cannot see, he leaves them to worship that which they can see to be no
god.

Yet give me leave to commend the Chaldae an for one thing; he does not assume
the glory of this victory to himself, and he finds the honor of it above
humane nature.

Therein teaching us to give the glory of all our good successes to him whom we
know and believe to be our God, and not to over-ween our selves herein; for
before this chapter shall pass us, we shall find that the Chaldaean will
learn to be his own God, and thank himself for his victories, as it follows,
ver. 26.

Therefore they sacrifice to their net; For, Nemo subito fit pessimus.

Yet some Interpreters applying this to Nebuchadnezzar, do think, that this
imputing of the power to his god, was assuming of it to himself, and that he
was his own god: as we read of Alexander, that after his many victories, he was
so full of himself as to suffer himself to be flattered with that high
appellation.

And Daniels story shows the pride of Nebuchadnezzar high grown; and this
sacrificing to their own net, which follows does favor this exposition.

When I put these things together, they shall offend, imputing this their
strength to their God. I find here, 1. Idolatry, imputing this to his God. 2.
That idolatry is an offense to God.


1. Idolatry.

That the Chaldaean is justly charged with idolatry, here I thus show. Dr.
Raynold. de Idol. Whosoever gives Divine Worship to a creature is an Idolater.
Lib. 2.1.1


Quisquis creaturae divinum cultum exhibet idolatra est, at Chaldaeus hoc
facit; but the Chaldaean does so, Ergo

The first Proposition is cleared, Major.
for whatsoever is honored with the honor of God, is put into the place of
God, against that law non habebis Deos alienos, Thou shall have no other gods.

That the Chaldaean is thus guilty, the text convinces him; he imputes the
force of his war and victory to his god. This is Deus alienus, this is an
idol.

It is the proper honor to the true God to be custos hominum the Preserver of
men: to be Dominus exercituum the Lord of Hosts. This honor the Chaldaean
gave to his God.

When Rachel said to Jacob, Give me children or else I die, Jacob was very
angry with her whom he loved dearly, that she should despoil God of his due
glory, and seek it from a creature. Genesis 30.2.
And he answered, Am I instead of God?

For Plato an heathen Philosopher did confess, quamvis in mortali animante
fiat, res tamen divina est Praegnatio, In Sympos.
and ab immortalibus est.

So when the King of Syria wrote to the king of Israel in the behalf of Naaman
the leper, that he might be cured of his leprosy, the King of Israel rent his
clothes at that idolatrous demand, and said, Am I a god to kill and give life?
so that the honor of God given away from him to any creature is the setting up
of an idol in the place of God.

The Nicene Synod did condemn the Arrians of idolatry, because they denied the
Divinity of Christ, and yet acknowledged divine worship to him.

And because Nestorius did affirm Christ to be mere man, and not God, both the
Ephesian and Nicene Synods condemned them of Anthropolatry.

We do usually offend too much in our ascriptions to the means of any good to
us, wherein we wrong Gods glory if we look not up to him as the supreme Agent
working in that means.

Thus in the Church of Rome, Angels by God employed for the service of man, by
the over-doing thankfulness of man were honored with the honor due to him
that sent them.

Those that leave the service of God, and study men, and apply themselves
wholly to their humors, to better their estates, do set up new and strange
gods against the true God, and give his glory to creatures, and make their
means their idols, do commit idolatry, and break the first great Commandment
of the Law.

The Romanists cannot clear themselves of this trespass, though Bellarmine
their Champion do his best to excuse it.

He distinguishes between images, which he calls veras rerum similitudines,
the true similitudes of things: but he calls idols false Representations of
things that are not.

But not to trouble our selves to examine his frivolous distinction, the image
it self of a true thing subsisting, is a creature; and to give that, the
honor due only to God, is gross idolatry; for example, that in their Roman
Breviary which is directed to the Cross, be it not to the image and
representation of the Cross before their eyes, but in it to the Cross it
self, is it not idolatry? O Crux ave spes unica, hoc passionis tempore auge
piis justitiam, reisque dona veniam.

2. This text charge them that they offend, whereby it appears that
idolatry is an offense; you see how high it reaches even to the ungodding of
the Almighty, and we shall shortly see how sore it smarteth upon the offenders.

1. The devil is the Author of idolatry; Moses secretly to prevent idolatry,
the devil would have discovered the place to move the People to idolatry; that
was the strife which Saint Jude mentions between Michael the Archangel and
the devil about the body of Moses, wherein the Archangel prevailed against
him. 2. The devil is a great tempter to idolatry; Matthew. 4.
for he assaulted Christ so; si procidens adoraveris me, if thou will fall down
and worship me. 3. The devil is the chief Agent in the Ministry of the
idolatrous Priests, Baals Prophets, four hundred of them at once. 1 Reg. 22.22.

The promise of Satan is that which he professed to Christ, to draw men from the
worship of God to worship him; and there is no mean: all worshippers that do
not worship the true God worship Satan; so the Chaldaean imputes their force
to Satan; for he that is not with him is against him.

The use of this point is taught by the Apostle Saint John, 1 John 5.21.
Babes keep your selves from idols, give not the glory of God to creatures.

It is an admirable thing in the whole course of the story of Israel, and after
of the Jews; Moses could tell them; for what Nation is there so great? Who has
God so nigh unto them, Deuteronomy. 4.7.
as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for?

Yet was idolatry their national sin, although upon all occasions they might
advise with God, though they had the pillar of fire, the pillar of cloud, the
Arc, the Law, the Priesthood, the Temple, and all the oracles of God committed
to them.

Therefore no wonder if the Chaldaean who had none of this did commit idolatry.

These are examples for us; and because we have no fear but of the idolatry of
the Church of Rome, we must take warning to keep our selves from their idols
and their idolatry.

This we understand is now the study and care of the religious Patriots in the
honorable and high Court of Parliament; let us join with them in our Prayers
to God for the rooting out of the Romish Religion; let us give God our hearty
thanks, that he works by his spirit such zeal of the glory of his truth in
the godly faithful hearts of the Commons of this land, to stir and rowze up
themselves in a matter so much concerning the honor of our God as this does.

For who delivered us from the Spanish violence in 88? And who delivered us
from the bloody powder treason in An. 1605? If the gods that our enemies serve,
could have prevailed against our God, had we not been as Sodom and as Gomorrah?

Therefore let us pray God to preserve us from idols, and from them that love
and serve them, of whom I may say truly with David,

The words of their mouths are smoother then butter, but war is in their
heart: Ps. 55.21.
Their words are softer then oil, yet are they drawn swords.

There can be no hope that those men which will rob God of his glory and give
it away to creatures, will ever be true to us.

Let every one in the zeal of Gods glory show and profess his hatred to
idolatry, and his love of the true Worship of God; and as they need the sword
of the Lord, and of Gideon, so let us cry, The sword of the Lord, his word in
the mouths of his faithful Ministers, and the sword of Gideon: the sword of the
religious Court of Parliament against them.

Verse. 12. Art thou not from everlasting, O Lord, my God, my holy one? we shall
not dye O Lord my God, thou have ordained them for judgment, and O mighty God,
thou have establisted them for correction, 13. Thou art of purer eyes then to
behold evil, and can not look on iniquity; wherefore look thou upon them
that deal treacherously? and hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the
man that is more righteous then he? 14. And make men as the fishes of the
sea, and as the creeping things that have no ruler over them. 15. They take up
all of them with the angle, they catch them in their net, and gather them in
their dragge, therefore they rejoice and are glad. 16. Therefore they sacrifice
unto their net, and burn incense unto their dragge, because by them their
portion is fat, and their meat plenteous. 17. Shall they therefore empty their
net, and not spare continually to slay the nations?
AFter God has denounced his judgment upon the Jews, contained in the former
Section, now the Prophet begins a new wrestling with God, in the behalf of
the afflicted members of his Church.

The Prophets speech is addressed to God himself, wherein he first ascribes to
God Eternity, Art not thou from everlasting O Lord my God? He ascribes to him
Holiness, My holy One.

And this Pronoune possessive My, does lay hold upon a special interest that
Habakkuk by faith claims in God.

From which consideration he draws this cheerful Conclusion: We shall not die
O Lord, speaking of himself and of the afflicted in the Church of the Jews,
that though God had threatened such an invasion by the hand and power of the
Chaldaeans, yet shall it not proceed to their ruin. God will keep his Church;
there is a remnant that God will save from the stormy wind, and the tempest,
as David says, the flood of many waters shall not come near them. This faith
he builds upon a good foundation; For 1. From the eternity of God, he may
conclude, that the love wherewith he loves his Church is an eternal love, and
therefore not to be subject to the power of time. 2. From the holiness of God,
he may conclude that all the faithful Jews being an holy seed shall have his
favor.


Against this it may be objected that God has revealed himself to the
contrary, for he has before threatened to raise up the Chaldaeans, a fierce and
terrible nation, that shall go through the breadth of the land, and shall run
like an Eagle and an evening wolf only for prey.

What hope then can there be against these?

The Prophet answers that objection.

Thou have ordained them for judgment; and mighty God, thou have established
them for correction.

That is, God by his might has armed them against the Jews to execute his
judgment on them, and for castigation and correction of them, Verse. 13.
not for eradication.

He proceeds then to expostulate and dispute with God concerning this
judgment to be executed upon the Jews by the Chaldaeans;

Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity]

This is a further Confession of the holiness of God, to whom he attributes
pure eyes, such as cannot behold evil, and look upon iniquity, because that
holiness cannot approve ill, and that justice cannot wink at it and leave it
unpunished.

Otherwise, videre malum non est malum, to see evil is not evil; Gods general
view of all things, does set his eye upon the good and evil.

So the Sun shines upon the just and the unjust, but God is a God that loves
not iniquity, neither shall evil dwell with him: he abhors all them that work
wickedness; David says, His soul abhors them. So that the Prophet here
acquitteth God from any hand in the evil of these Chaldaeans, although he
stirs them up against the Jews; he is wise to use them as instruments of
correction: but he is too pure and holy to be Partaker in their sins.

From hence grows the Expostulation following, Seeing thou art so pure and
holy that thou abhorrest evil, and hate all the workers of iniquity;

Why do thou look upon them that deal treacherously?

Why do thou O holy and just God, look on, whilst the Chadaean betrayeth thy
People? Mr. Calvin reads Transgressores. Montanus Praevaricatores. Jun.
Perfidos, whom the Kings Bible follows.

This the Prophet Isaiah calls a grievous vision. The treacherous dealer
deals treacherously, Isa. 21.2.
and the spoiler spoileth.

For the Chaldaean did invade the Jew, both cunningly by treason, and violently
by force.

He urges God further, Why hold thou thy tongue when the wicked man, that
is, the Chaldaean, an idolater and a bloody man, devoureth the man that is more
righteous then he: that is, devoureth the Jew, who as bad as he is, is a better
man and more righteous then the Chaldaean.

He wondreth at the softness and forbearance of God, that can see and be
silent to behold so much iniquity.

He proceeds in his complaint: Verse. 14.
Thou make man as the fishes in the sea, where the great ones do prey upon
the small ones, and as the creeping things that have no ruler over them, and
therefore feed upon one another, who have no law to awe them, but quo quis est
valentior, eo violentior, so the Jews are to the Chaldaeans a prey.

But the words following do show another thing intended, not a reference of
these creatures one to another, but all of them to the fisherman; so the sense
is, thou seem to esteem the Jew no more then thou do the fishes on the
sea, or the creeping things on the earth. For it follows,

They take up all of them with the angle, Verse. 15.
they catch them in their net, and gather them in their dragge.

The Chaldaeans are the Fishermen, the Jews the fishes; and for these they have,

1, The Angle, whereby is meant their fishing for a single Person. 2. Their
net, let fall to catch more. 3. Their dragge for whole sholes of fish; so that
here is no evasion; he that escapes the angle shall fall into the net; or if
he escape the net, the drag shall sweep him away and bring him to the shore.
So that he reby all way of evasion seems stopped against the Jew, he is put
into the hand and power of the Chaldaean, as a draught of fish into the hand of
the Fisherman.

And all this while the Fisherman thinks he does no man wrong, as the Poet
says,

Nec patitur Tyrrhenum crescere piscem.

For the fish of the sea is esteemed his that can catch him: so shall the
Chaldaean fish Jud^a, as if the Jews were fishes, not men, and as if there were
no Providence to take care of them, no owner to call them his.

Therefore they rejoice and are glad.

There is no compassion in them of chaldaea toward the Jew, but as the
Fisherman rejoices in his draught of fishes, and never looks upon them* with
any pity of their lives, but is glad that he has gotten them: So shall the
Chaldaean be glad when the Jews are in his net, that he may carry them into
captivity.

This victory does not only make the Chaldaean glad, but he is proud too and
boasts in his own strength, and attributes his prevailings to his own power,
as it follows.

Therefore they sacrifice unto their net, Verse. 16.
and burn incense unto their dragge: that is, they do thank their own arm, and
armies for their victories, and as Job says, They kiss their own hands,
because thereby they come to have a fat portion and plenty of meat, so that
they give no glory to God; yea, before the Prophet says from the mouth of God,
that they would ascribe the prosperity of their wars to their god; i.e. to
their idol, now they will grow so proud, that they will thank their own wit and
power for all.

The Prophet concludes with a passionate expostulation: Shall they therefore
empty their net and not spare continually to slay the Nations? Verse. 17.


Seeing they are a People so lawless, so merciless, so proud, O Lord will thou give way to them still, and shall they possess all that they catch, which
he calls, emptying of their net, and shall they not spare continually to slay
the nations? Shall they pass thus from nation to nation, and shall they still
conquer? is all fish that comes into their net?

De verborum interpretatione bactenus.

In the further handling of this section, I observe as in the former, two
things.

1. The sum and contents of the whole section. 2. The parts thereof.
1. The sum hereof is this: whereas the Prophet at first beholding the sins
of the Jews, was moved with an holy indignation against them, and with zeal of
Gods glory which turned him into a chiding expostulation with God, for bearing
so much with them, and therefore did stir up God to judgment to chasten them
in the first section of this chapter.

Now that God has answered him in the second, with declaration of his purpose
to punish the iniquities of the Jews by the Chaldaeans, whom God would stir
up to fight against them, and to prevail: Now in this third section, the
Prophet is as much troubled and grieved at their punishment, as he was before
at their sin.

Now he chides as fast, and disputes as hotly against the remissness and
patience of God toward the Chaldaean, as he did before toward the Jew.

Before he pleaded the cause of the glory of Gods Justice, in punishing the
iniquity of the Jews; now he pleads the glory of Gods mercy in sparing them.

The first part was imprecation, this deprecation. And herein the Prophet does
declare his mixed affection to the Jews; for out of his hatred to their sins he
desired their correction; but now out of his love to their Persons, he prays
against their punishment, so far that it may be moderate, as in Ieremies
Prayer.

Correct us O Lord, yet in thy judgment, not in thy fury lest we be consumed
and brought to nothing. Which teaches us that.

Religion has the bowels of compassion;

This is given us in precept with a sicut: Luke 6.36
Be ye merciful as your heavenly father is merciful: there is nothing wherein
the image of our God does more shine in man, then his mercy, because that is
the heavenly nature; the wisdom of God is too high for us, the power of God
too great for us, the justice of God too strict for us; all these virtues of
the Godhead be out of the reach of our imitation.

The furthest that our Savior goes in the pattern and president of wisdom,
is est ote prudentes ut serpents, Wisdom.
Be ye wise as serpents. In innocence, Innocents ut columba be ye innocent as
doves, it is not estote prudentes ut pater vester, Be ye wise as your heavenly
father.

Concerning fortitude. The mother of Samuel says, Fortitude.
Non est fortis sicut deus. Sicut leo, Solomon has it: siout quorcus, Amos
has it.

Concerning Justice, let us take the righteous men at their best, Justice.
and then Iustus fulgebunt ut sol, the righteous shall shine as the Sun; but to
misericordes ut pater vester. We must strive to imitate him in mercy, that is,
the divine nature, because it is super omni^ operadei above all the works of
God, and that is the humane nature also, because it is called Humanity, and
therefore wel-becometh the man of God.

2. There is nothing that every one of us does more stand in need of then
mercy, anima mundi, the soul of the world, it is the juncture of every limb
thereof: it is the garment that hides our nakedness; it is the grave, the
sea, that burieth, that swalloweth all our reputed sins; it is the taylour to
our backs, the cater to our bellies, the soul that quickneth us, the strength
that supporteth us, the grace that saves us, the power that raises us, the
glory that crowns us.

And they that show no mercy, shall have none.

3. The consideration of our own infirmities does plead for our mercy to our
delinquent brother, Ga. 6.1.
and to pull them out of the fire least we also be tempted: for we have many
suits to God for pardon of our own sins; and therefore by the law of Justice
let us do as we would be done to, that is, solicit the favor of God for our
brethren; and although the zeal of Gods glory do put us to it to pray for
their correction; that they may be amended, yet considering how bitter the
medicine is that heals sin, let us entreat the Physician to look but on the
corrupt humors in the body of the Church to purge them, to take no more blood
from the body thereof then may stand with the health of the body.

4. It is a more easy suit to obtain the mercy of God, oleum supernatat vino,
the oil swims above the wine. Christ his son the character of his fathers
glory, of his mercy, the true coppie of that sicut Pater vester qui est
incaelis, as Our father which is in heaven;

Of whom Saint Augustine sweetly commenting upon his pater ignosce eis, father
forgive them, says, De utilet. paen* l. 1.
he left them not quojusque ejus jam sanguinem possent bibere credentes quem
fuderant saevientes, they know how to drink believing, the blood which they
shed raging, which is called in the Psalmist Multitudo dulcedinis.

Saint Hilary upon the Parable of the parable in the vineyard says,

Ad spem omne tempus est liberum, In Ps. 129
and mercedem non operis sed misericor diae undecimae horae operarii
consequuntur.

God loves to be solicited for mercy.

4. Because in the contrary Jonah had a chiding from God himself, Niniveh.

Wherein God himself pleaded the cause of his own mercy, and justified his
suspense of the threatened judgment against Johan, etc.

David had good cause to choose to fall into the hands of God, rather then into
the hands of men, for with God there is mercy. And had Niniveh been in the hand
of Jonah, their fasting with sackcloth and repenting, should not have cleared
nor calmed the storm threatened.

God said, in Niniveh there were more then six score thousand Persons that knew
not the right hand from the left: there were a great many more in the nation of
the Jews, many also that served God with a true heart, many that was not yet
com to the height of sinning, of whom there was hope: many that had drunk deep
already to the Cup of affliction by the sins of others who had thereby provoked
God.

Therefore Habakkuk could do no less then stand in the gap now, and keep out
some of this wrath.

To make use of this doctrine,

Put on therefore (as the Elect of God, holy and beloved. Col. 3.12*
) bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering.

Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have aquarrell
against any man, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

And above all things put on charity with the bond of perfectness.

As it is a welcome suit to God, when out of a zeal to his glory you do call
upon him for his judgments, to chasten the overgrown sins of the time in
which ye live: so it is a pleasing intercession which solliciteth for mercy in
Justice: for the pure justice of God will endure an allay of mercy, and we
shall have the better interest in his favor, by how much the more we desire
more sharers in it.

There be good Authors of opinion, that the Prayer of Stephen, Father forgive
them, was no weak means of the Conversion of Saul, who was one of his
Persecutors.

The point is moderation, that neither we should so favor high-grown sinners
as not to complain to God of them, nor yet so delight in their punishment, as
not to pray against the whole and full displeasure of God: that neither the
zeal of Gods glory do extinguish Christian compassion, nor the tenderness of
pity quench the zeal of Gods glory, but that at once we do show our obedience
to the whole law, that he that loves God may love his neighbor also.

God himself directed Abimilech to Abraham to pray for him, and the friends of
Job to use Jobs intercession, because he loves to be entreated to show mercy.

And the rich man in hell would not have his brethren come to that place of
torment.

Complain then, that is holy passion; but beg easy punishment, that is
charitable compassion: the children of God have as many tears to shed for the
punishment of their brethren, as for their sins.

2. The Parts are two, 1. The Prophets resolution concerning the Church and
Commonwealth of the Jews. 2. The Prophets dispute with God.


The first contains an argument.

1. The Antecedent: Thou art from everlasting O Lord, my God, my holy One. 2.
The Conclusion; Therefore we shall not die O Lord: thou have ordained them for
judgment, O mighty God, thou have established them for correction.
The Proposition: That God is eternal and holy, needs no proof to such as know
God; both are clearly maintained through the whole body of Scripture.

1. The Eternity of God.

And Abraham planted a grove in Beer-sheba, Genesis 21.33. Ps. 90.2.
and called there on the name of the Lord, the everlasting God.

Moses, Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the
earth and the world: even from everlasting to everlasting thou art our God.

Saint Paul, Romans 16.26.
speaking of the mystery of the Gospel long kept secret; but now is made
manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the Commandment
of the everlasting God made known to all nations.

Have thou not known? Isa. 40.28.
have thou not heard that the everlasting God the Lord; the Creator of the end
of the earth, faints not? etc.

Plato defined God to be aeterna men's sibi ad omnem felicitatem sufficiens,
sum bona, and omnis boni efficient in natura.

Neither can we rest in the search of causes, till we come to one supreme
eternal cause of all things, the Alpha and Omega of other things, of himself
without Alpha or Omega.

2. The Conclusion from hence issuing, is: Therefore we shall not die, says
Habakkuk.

For as God is eternal in himself, so is he to his Church, and from the
eternity of God does the eternity of Angels and men derive it self, for
eternity cannot flow from any thing that is not it self eternal; and we know
that the nature of Angels and men is eternal, both of them being by the eternal
God created to abide for ever: the elect Angels and men in eternal glory, the
reprobate Angels and men in eternal shame and pain.

Yet is the judgment of the reprobate in Scripture called by the names of
Death, Destruction, Perishing, because these be titles of the greatest horror
and dismay, that the heart of man can conceive.

Now we have two hopes built upon this foundation of Gods eternity, non
moriemur.

1. Temporal, that God will still reserve a remnant of the Jews to return again
to the possession of their fathers, and to build again the City and the temple,
and to renew the face of a Church and Commonwealth: so, non moriemur hoc est
omnes, we shall not die, that is not all.

2. Eternal, That God will not utterly cast off his People from his favor, but
that although he scourge them with the rods of men, even to a temporal loss of
their land, their liberty, and their lives, yet non moriemur, we shall not lose
our interest in his promise of a better life.

So that the Prophet does teach us the right use of the doctrine of Gods
eternity, to assure us against all temporal and eternal evils.

And this does Moses conclude for this Antecedent, Before the mountains were
brought forth, Ps. 90.2.
or ever thou had formed the earth, and the world: even from everlasting to
everlasting thou art our God.

Thou turnest man to destruction, Verse. 3.
again thou say return ye sons of Adam.

From the power of Gods Eternity, there is a return for the sons of Adam, as
David says, Thou renuest the face of the earth. Non moriemur, death our last
enemy shall be destroyed and perish, we shall be translated from death to life;
this is clear: because God has in eternal wisdom, appointed an eternal
redemption for some to an eternal inheritance of eternal glory.

This eternity of God is two fold.

1. Eternitas essentiae, Eternity of Essence in himself.

1. Eternitas Providentiae, Eternity of Providence, in respect of his creatures.

From the first we conclude the second for if God be in his own nature eternal,
he has also an eternal Providence, by which he governs all things: his word
by which he governs is also eternal in the heavens.

Saint Augustine proves this point of Gods eternity thus, Quaest. 83 l. c. 19.
Quod incommutabile aeternum est.

That he proves; Quod semperest ejusdem modi est incommutabile.

Such is our God without variableness or shadow of change, and therefore
eternal.

And whereas from this eternity our Prophet does conclude Non moriemur, Saint
Augustine does therefore call our eternity immortalitatem, rather then
aeternitatem.

Anteced-Consequent.
2. Another Argument is here enforced,

Thou art holy. Therefore this punishment of the Jews by the Chaldaeans, is for
their correction only.

Of the Antecedent.

God is holy. The Quiristers of heaven do attribute it to God three times; in
some Greek Copies we read it three times three; nine times (...) holy,

The song of Moses is sung in heaven, and that says, Who shall not fear thee
O Lord, and glorify thy name? Rev. 15.4
for thou only art holy?

The Seraphims say each one to another. Isa. 6.3.


Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory.

It was his law.

1. For his Godhead, that none other but he should be called God or esteemed.
2. For his Worship, not to be given to creatures. 3. For his name, not to be
taken in vain. 4. For his Sabbath to be kept holy.
And it is our first petition sanctificetur nomen, Hallowed be thy name, and
for our conformity with him.

For I am the Lord your God, ye shall therefore sanctify your selves, Levit.
11.44.
and ye shall be holy, for I am holy. So there is 1. Sanctitas increata, an
increate holiness in God.

2. Creata, Created in man, as a beam of that heavenly light, a stream of that
full fountain in our God.

This uncreated holiness which is the attribute of God, is the absolute
perfection of Gods nature and attributes, his full goodness, not only that
wherein he is good in himself, but in his operations also.

2. The Consequent.

From hence the Prophet concludes, that God cannot do more to his Church then
correct it; he cannot utterly destroy it, because he is holy, so is his Church;
his correction of the Elect is only a fire to purge out their dross, which
will go out of it self, when the combustible matter is spent. Hear God
himself.

I am the Lord, the Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King; Isa. 43.15.


This People have I formed for my self, Verse. 21.
they shall show forth my praise.

I but our sins spoil all. He adds,

I, Verse. 25.
even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will
not remember thy sins.

The Church of God is semen sanctum, an holy seed; God cannot forsake it, he is
Sanctus Creator an holy Creator, and he is Sanctus Redemptor, an holy Redeemer
of it, as the holy text styles him.

You see here, Applicat.
that as Christ says, This is life eternal to know thee.

Let us study God and his attributes; for from thence we derive whatsoever we
are or have, they are our light of direction, our staff of supportation.

From the wisdom of God we have all intellectual illumination.

From the Justice of God, all our integrity.

From the Holiness of God, all our Sanctification.

From the Eternity of God, our immortality.

From the Omnipotency of God, our strength.

And as by our faith we cleave to him, so we are made Partakers of the divine
nature.

The juice of this text, is the Prophets faith, which from the Holiness and
Eternity of God does resolve

That this judgment of God, Obadiah.

Though God afflicts his Church, yet he loves her still.

This persuasion of deliverance from evils is found in natural men, but either
it is grounded upon an opinion that they have of fortune such; make chance
their God; or it is built upon the consideration of the vicissitude of things
which makes sundry mutations.

Informs hyems reducit

Jupiter; Hor. Car. 2. Od. 10.
idem,

Summovet; non se male nunc, and olim sic erit. God sends fowl weather and
fair, if it be ill now with us, it will not be so hereafter.

This is but cold comfort, to hope only in the change of times, and so to look
for better days.

Some acknowledge a Deity and ascribe all alterations to that, not knowing the
true God, as Aeneas comforted his company,

Durate and vesmet rebus servate secundis.

Continue and reserve your selves for better times.

Dabit Deus his quoque finem, God will put an end to these your sufferings,

But that which comfort the Saints of God in afflictions is their faith in
the Eternity and Holiness of God, from whence they gather assurance that they
shall not miscarry under the rod of God; he is eternal; therefore they shall
not perish; he is holy, therefore he will but correct, not destroy; and hereof
they make this use;

1. They do not limit God to a set time when he shall deliver them: so Daniel
waited for the deliverance of Israel from Babylon seventy years: The Church
waited till the fullness of time for the promised Messiah.

2. They do not limit God to any set means of deliverance. Mordecai did see
that the preferment of Hester was a likely means to save the Jews from the fury
of the decree which Haman had procured against them, and he puts her to it,
to use her mediation with the King for it, but he builded not his hopes in that
means; for he said to her,

If thou altogether hold thy Peace at this time, Esth. 4.14.
then shall there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another
place.

The promise made to Abraham, concerning his seed was in nature despaired by
the old age of Abraham and Sarah, yet was not Abraham out of hope: but when
Isaac the son of Promise was come, God afterward commanded him to be offered
in sacrifice, yet did not that weaken the faith of Abraham; for he built upon
the word of the promise, and not upon the possibility of the means. For he that
promised was faithful.

3. They do not limit God to the measure of affliction; for they know that
whatsoever the judgment be which God inflicteth upon his Church, it cannot
exceed a fatherly correction. So Job, Though he kill me yet will I trust in
him. Job 13.15.


4. They are not discouraged in the faith of Gods mercy, though they feel the
contrary, and therefore being in one contrary they do believe another.

Thus even when they feel the burden of their sins, they believe their
justification; for the heavy-laden seek Christ for case.

When they feel misery, they believe blessedneesse, for they know, Blessed are
they that mourn.

When they feel correction they believe, for he chasteneth every son whom he
receives.

When they feel themselves forsaken of God, they believe themselves interested
in his favor, as David and Christ: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me;
Both forsaken in respect of their feeling, neither in respect of their faith.

5. They by faith are ever in the Presence of God: Ps. 16.8.
so David, I have set God always before me, for he is at my right hand,
therefore I shall not be moved.

So it is said of Moses being in danger in Egypt, Heb. 1^.27.
By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King; for he endured
as seeing him who is invisible.

Thus strongly do they build, whose foundation is not laid it any possibility
of their own merits to deserve deliverance, and of their own wit and cunning to
decline evils, or of their own strength and power to resist them, or evade
them, or the vicissitude of things to change them, but trust in the living God,
and make him their hiding place.

Whereas the Prophet says, God had ordained the Chaldeans for judgment, that
is, for the execution of his judgment, and has established them for
correction, Docemur we are taught, That God is the Author of punishment, God
himself assumeth it to himself.

Shall there be evil in a city, Amos. 3.6.
and the Lord has not done it? Malum poenae the evil of punishment.

So Moses, Ps. 90.7.
For we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled.

So David. Ps. 39.11
When thou with rebuke do correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty to
consume away like a moth.

1. Because every sin is a trespass against God, as David, Tibi, tibi, soli
peccavi, Against thee only have I sinned; for every sin is (...) a
transgression of the Law, and therein God is offended and he is a jealous God,
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children.

The trespasses against our brethren in the breach of the second Table, be
immediate sins against God. For as when the plate is not cut for the mint, to
clippe it is no breach of the law, but when it has the stamp impressed, and is
coin, then to clippe or wash, it is treason, not for the matter, but because
of the stamp.

So the matter of our brethren is but earth, and the violation of it is but the
defacing of earth: but bearing the image of God in it, it is a trespass
against him whose image is therein insculped, to wrong it.

2. Because every punishment, as it is poena a punishment, vindicta a revenge,
and God lays claim to that by Prerogative, vindicta mea my revenge; no man
can take the sword out of his hand: it is virga tua, says David, thy rod.

3. Because none but God can search the heart where sin breeds, Augustine,
Quod pateris medicina est, non paena, that thou suffer is thy medicine, not
thy punishment. He only knows how to temper the medicine for the health of
the Patient, for he knows whereof we be made, he only can work good out of
evil.

4. Because there is none but God that does whatsoever he will, none but he can
ordain or establish judgment: Iudicia dei the Judgments of God; in that cruel
execution done upon Christ in our flesh, Acts 2.23.
as there were the wicked hands of the Jews and the Romans, so there was the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God.

1. Let us not therefore sin against God, Joseph, and say, How then shall I
do this great wickedness and so sin against God? For our God is a consuming
fire, And

It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

2. Let us not fret at the means ordained by God for our correction remembering
that God has established them for our chastisement: Psalm. 39 9.
but let us rather say with David, obmutui and non aperii os meum quia tu
domine fecisti: I was dumb, etc. because thou Lord have done it: let us know
and confess who it is that smites us, and say, Thou have smitten me and thou will heal me.

3. Let us remember when God takes off his hand and restores us again to the
cheerful light of his countenance, to sin no more, least some more heavy
judgment fall upon us.

Let us with David remember the vows which we made to God in our affliction,
and spend the time of our so journing here in fear.

4. Lastly, 2 Cor. 1.9.
as the Apostle says; for God comfort us in all our tribulations, that we
may be able to comfort them which be in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith
our selves are comforted of God: so as Christ said to Peter, when we our selves
are converted we shall strengthen the brethren, and the God of Peace and all
Consolation shall give unto us the blessing of his Peace.

2. The Prophets dispute with God.

The Prophet seems amazed at the course of Gods proceeding against the Jews
by the Chaldaeans. And the remain of this chapter does contain his
expostulation with God; wherein

1. He lays a ground of this Argument, The eyes of God are pure. 2. He
questioneth God how these inconveniences following are born withal by him,
which are these.
Grievances.

1. How God should look on whilst men deal treacherously v. 13. 2. How God
should hold his tongue whilst the wicked devoureth the man that is more
righteous then he, verse. 13. 3. How God can expose the Jews his People as a
prey to the Chaldaeans, ver. 14. And thou make men as the fishes of the sea,
and as the creeping things that have no Ruler, From which liberty given to them.

They break forth into all extremes of cruelty, ver. 15. They take up all with
their Angle, they catch them in their net, and gather them in their dragge.

4. They insult over the conquered, ver. 15. They rejoice and are glad. They
commit self-idolatry, ver. 16.

Therefore they sacrifice to their net, and burn incense to their dragge,
because by them their portion is made fat, and their meat plenteous.

5. How God can so long dispense with the enemies of his Church, and whether he
will so forsake them, ver. 17. Shall they therefore empty their net, and not
spare continually to slay the nations?


1. Of the ground of his contestation, Thou art of pure eyes, This phrase is
according to the capacity of humane understanding, and it is doubly figurative,

1. In that eyes are attributed to God. 2. In that they are said to be pure.
1. It is a thing frequent in Scripture to give the parts of a man's body to
God, the eye, the ear, the hand, the heart, the foot, the bowels, the arm,
the face, the back-parts; whereupon certain heretics literally understanding
those phrases, have believed and taught that God is like to man in shape of
body, and that the image wherein God made man, was corporeal. These heretics
are called Anthropomorphites, because they ascribed to God the image and
corporeal likeness of man.

Whom some ignorant Persons have used to point in the representation of a grave
old man, against the clear text of Scripture and warrant of truth.

Of this I will only tell you what Saint. Augustine writing to Fortunatianus a
bishop concerning the judgment of another Bishop, Epl. 1.11.
who maintained this heresy, says,

The text of Scripture attributing the parts of humane bodies to God, must not
be literally understood; for then we must allow God also to have bodily wings,
for we read also often of the wings and feathers of God.

But says he, as by the wings of God, we do understand divine Protection: sic
cum audimus manus operationem: pedes praesentiam: oculos visionem: faciem
justitiam: brachium potentiam: So by hands divine operation, by feet Presence,
by eye vision, by face Justice, by hands divine Power.

And to show that neque solus, neither alone, nec prior, nor first he is of
this opinion, he cites Saint Hierome, Saint Gregory, Nazianzen, St. Ambrose,
St. Athanasius, all of the same judgment.

And surely because this error is yet in the minds of many simple and ignorant
people of the world, it will be fit that you do learn that when you do either
give thanks to God, or pray, or think on God, you do not conceive him in your
thoughts in any such manner, but as he has revealed himself to us in his word;
God is a spirit eternal, immortal, invisible, infinite in Wisdom, Justice,
Holiness, Power, Mercy, Goodness, Seeing and foreseeing all things, doing
whatsoever he will in heaven and in earth, and in all deep places, governing
all things by the word of his power.

Moses who searched as deep into this sacred and secret mystery of God, found
that the face of God, that is, his heavenly nature could not be seen, only his
back-parts, that is, the effects of his attributes might be seen.

No doubt God took that occasion in Moses to teach the Church, how they should
conceive him in their thoughts.

Thou shall see my back-parts. Ex 33.23.


Gregor. Nyslene. We must follow after God, for he goes before us, and guides
us, as David. He teaches the way that we should choose.

Qui autem sequitur, non faciem sed tergum aspicit, Procopius. Invisibilia dei
videntur ex creatione.

For we must remember how tender God was of appearing in any form, which might
have been represented in picture or sculpture for fear of idolatry.

Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves, (for ye saw no manner of
similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Hored, Deuteronomy. 4.15.
out of the midst of the fire.)

Least ye corrupt your selves, Verse. 16.
and make you a graven image the similitude of any figure, etc.

Neither is it necessary for adoration, that we do assign any set figure to
God in our thoughts, seeing every one of us does believe that he has a living
soul in him, whereby all the parts of the body are both directed and enabled
in their several offices, yet no man can conceive any set form or similitude
whereunto it may be resembled.

2. Another figurative speech here is, where the Prophet calls these eyes of
God pure eyes; for wickedness and evil cannot defile the sight: it is said of
the fair eye of heaven, that it shines upon the just and unjust.

And David says; that God sees all the thoughts of man's heart, why he then
sees much vanity and much iniquity.

But those are called pure eyes which do behold nothing that is evil, to
approve it in it self, to abet it in our brother, to imitate it in our selves,
and in this sense the eyes of God are said to be pure, that is, abhorring sin.

Again, the Purity of Gods eyes does import the clear judgment of God, which is
of such penetration as nothing can conceal it self from him, in which sense
David says,

The Lord is in his holy Temple, the Lords Throne is in heaven: Ps. 11.14.
his eyes behold, his eye lids try the children of men; upon which words Saint
Augustine says, that there is apertio and opertio oculorum dei, an opening and
a covering of Gods eyes.

He is said to see with his eyes, when he declares himself to see and take
notice of any thing: but he does try with his eyelids, when he makes as
though he slept and considered not, winking for a time at the iniquities of men.

Our lesson from this double figure of speech, is,

That God is a severe searcher and punisher of sin; he tries the hearts and
r^ins: for punishment, judgment begins at his own house: this certain rule of
truth we must lay hold and believe, that the Justice and truth of God cannot
fail, the whole course of Scripture, the experience of all times does make this
good.

The sin of the Angels that kept not their first estate, was soon found out and
punished; the first news we hear of them was that one of them was a tempter,
and deceived our first Parents.

There was a light shining in darkness, which the darkness comprehended not.
The Manichees seeing the devil went so early against God, thought and taught
that there were two principia, two beginnings, one good God the Author of all
good, another evil God the Author of all evil, not knowing the fall of the
Angels, and the mischief that they attempted against God after their fall.

But they were the first example of the severe vengeance of God. Of whom Saint
Jude says,

And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, Jude 6.
he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of
the last day.

And for our first Parents, the pure eyes of God saw their nakedness after
their fall, and came himself into the garden in the cool of the day and
convinced the Delinquents, and examined the fault, and gave judgment against
them all, and presently executed that judgment.

The Cain when his sin was yet but in the bud, at the first putting forth
thereof, in the casting down of his countenance, was called to account for it,
God disputing the matter with him, and after when he came to the execution of
his abominable wickedness, God again well examined the evidence, convicted the
Prisoner, and brought him to confession of his fault, and banished him from his
presence.

In all these examples God was a speedy and a severe Judge, as was fit for
terror in the beginning; but after he grew more remiss, and as the Apostle
says,

The long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the Ark was a
preparing; 1 Pet. 3.20
So that God declared himself patient and long-suffering, who had before showed
and revealed his severe Justice, that the terror of his righteousness might
discourage sin, and yet his gentle forbearance might invite to repentance.

Therefore throughout the whole course of holy Scripture, we have examples of
both sorts, both of quick vengeance and of favorable sufferance, that God may
be known both to be just and merciful. The reason whereof is,

1. That the danger might breed terror; for who can promise himself mercy,
when our just God may and does take such quick vengeance? Remember Lots wife,
that she was Lots wife whom God favored, that the Angel pulled her out of
Sodom to hasten her from their judgment, that her offense was no more then
looking back, whether out of curiosity to see what God would do to Sodom, or
out of unbelief doubting the truth of the threatening, or out of love to the
place, or to some persons left behind to the woe, she was made an example of
present calamity and turned into a pillar of salt.

Therefore remember Lots wife for terror, to strike fear in thee that thou sin
not, least thou be smitten so soon as thou have offended; this to prevent sin.

2. That such as sin and find not the present wrath of God avenging sin, may
make use of that patience of God to repent, least a lingering judgment be but
the whetting of a sword to a sharper cutting when it comes.

For the remissness of God does not proceed from any respect of Persons, nor
from a liking of any kind of sin, but out of free and undeserved favor, and
for the glory of his own mercy, that he may be feared.

Who knows the mind of the Lord, Corah, or the lying of Ananias and Saphirah.

Therefore our care must be to keep our heart with all diligence from conceiving
sin, to take heed to our ways that we offend not in our tongue, to take heed to
our foot, to our hand that they act not sin, ever remembering that God is a
jealous God, and that loves not iniquity, and that he has pure eyes which
cannot behold evil to allow thereof.

Herein the example of Christ is good, Ps. 16.8s
I have set the Lord always before me; for godly fear does put God always in
sight of us, and of all our ways.

Let us set our selves always in the sight of God, and answer every temptation
to sin with this answer, Thou O Lord art of purer eyes then to behold evil.

For therefore has God so clearly revealed his Majesty, Power and Justice to
the sons of men, Ex. 20.20
That his fear may be before your eyes that you sin not.

The King on earth chaseth away all evil with his eye, because men fear the
wrath of a King as the roaring of a lion: and shall the pure eyes of God,
seeing all our ways, being about our path, and about our bed, understanding our
thoughts long before nothing awe us! Christ says, Fear not them that can kill
the body, and can do nothing more, but fear him that can cast both body and
soul into hell fire.

This God that has this power over the work of his own hands, as he has pure
eyes from whose sight nothing can hide or conceal it self: so he has a right
hand, inveniet dextra ejus inimicos ejus, his right hand will find out his
enemies, yea strong is his arm, and the sword that he wieldeth is sharp; for
David says, he has whetted it of purpose to cut off from the earth the
ungodly thereof: he has also a bow and that is bent, he has a quiver and
that is full of deadly arrows; and howsoever we shall slight him, our God is a
consuming fire; to the Elect he is ignis in rubo, a fire in the bush, burning
but not consuming; but to the ungodly that make no conscience of sin, he is
ignis devorans, a fire devouring, as David says.

The flame shall burn up the ungodly.

The crying sins of our times, injustice in the Courts of judgment, contempt
of Religion, oppression of the poor, breach of the Sabbath, profane swearing,
beastly drunkenness, abom^nable wantonness, contentions and such like, do
give evidence against us, that there is no fear of God before our eyes, that we
fear not the Presence of God, we regard not his pure eyes.

We would have cured Babel of those diseases, and she is not healed; the Word
which is the proper Physic for these maladies is either not heard with
attention, or not kept with retention; we mingle it not with faith, when we
hear it, so that we heap up wrath against the day of wrath: my brethren, do not
so wickedly, sin not against God, sin not against your own souls, for so Moses
calls Korah and his company, Number. 16.38.
he calls them sinners against their own souls, and that are ensamples recorded
for the perpetual use of the Church, even for them upon whom the ends of the
world shall come.

When the judgment of Korah and his company was in sight, it is said,

All Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of them: Number. 16.34.
for they said, least the earth swallow us up also.

These Records of former times are kept for us that we might always have them
in sight, that we might make it our own case, and fear before the Lord, and
fly from the tents of such wicked persons, who make no conscience of the pure
eyes of God beholding all their ways, least we perish with them.

2. Upon this ground he does dispute; for seeing he resolves that God is most
just, and there can be no shadow of changing in him, he enquireth of him how it
comes to pass, that so many evils be suffered in the world, in the eye and
sight of God.

From whence we are taught that in all our considerations of the carriage of
things under the government of Gods Providence,

Let us resolve on that, and we may safely sit down and wonder at the effects
of his will; for David says, Tu facis mirabilia solus, Thou alone do
wonders. And Augustine says, that God does manage things Judicio saepe arcano
sed semper justo, often by secret, but always by just judgment.

And upon this holy resolution of the Prophet, which gives God his due and no
way does tax him, but pronounces him to be himself,

I dare not receive the judgment of Mr. Calvin upon this passage, because I am
persuaded that he is too harsh in his censure of this Prophet, and yet I find
it so much against his will to find fault, that he does what he can again, when
he has wounded him to heal him again.

I honor the memory of Mr. Calvin, as of a clear light set up in the Church of
God, and am as unwilling to tax him, as I find him unwilling to tax the
Prophet, and therefore I wish his Reader to read him out upon this place, and
he shall find that it is not motus violentus, but trepidationis, not a violent,
but a trembling motion that carries him. For

1. He says, descendit ad humanos affect us he descends to humane
affections, so he may do and yet not offend.

2. He adds, ostendit se quodammodo vacillare, he shows himself somewhat
wavering; that cannot be defended; for the motto of a just man is semper idem,
always the same; and it is the ungodly man who is unstable in all his ways; his
heart is not established.

3. But he smites home when he says, verum quidem est, secundam partem versus
affinem esse blasphemiae, the second part of the verse to be near a kin to
blasphemy; quia obmurmurat and insimulat deum unimiae tarditatis, because he
murmured and accused God of too much slacknesse.

Yet Mr. Calvin heals him again; pardon him in this; for he was in Angusto in
a strait, jealous of having the honor of God touched by the Prophet, and yet
tender of any touch of the charity that he did owe to the Prophet, and
therefore having delared his holy love to God, he does his best to excuse the
Prophet, saying of him, fraenum sibi injicit and occurrit mature. Se temperat
ut praeveniat nimium fervorem, he tempers himself that he might allay this too
great heat.

And in the end he confesses, quia non potest se expedire rebus tam confusis,
disceptat potius secum quam cum deo, because he could not get out of this maze,
that he reasoned with himself rather then God.

For my opinion I acquit the Prophet from any suspicion of inordinate affection
in this his complaint, so long as he does do God the right to acknowledge him
both eternal and equal; I wonder not if he, and all that consider him aright
in his ways, be swallowed up in the depth of admiration of them.

Let any man observe that which follows in the Prophets complaint, and he
shall see great cause of wonder; but whenever such occasion is offered to us
to behold the like, let us do our God the right to confess him holy and just,
and to resolve that which way soever things go, there can be no fault in him:
therefore let us say with David,

Domine, tu justus es, and justa sunt judicia tua, thou art just, and thy
judgments are just.

It is a good saying of old Eli the Priest, Ps. 3.18.
when Samuel told him of the judgments of God upon his house, It is the Lord,
let him do what seems him good.

Yet is it not unlawful for the children of God reverently to consider the ways
of God; yea it is a work for the Sabbath, to take the works of God into regard.

O Lord, how great are thy works and thy thoughts are very deep. Ps. 92.5.


A brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this.

It argues a great defect in judgment, when we shall think a thought which
may derogate any thing from the glory of our God; for it is true, fecit
quicquid voluit, he has done whatever he would; so it is true omnia been
fecit, he has done all things well, and we say truly of him, He has done all
things for the best; for so he does even then when his ways do cross ours, and
when those things that he does do seem to us and to our reason as most opposite.

To help which our weakness we are taught to pray, fiat voluntas tua, thy will
be done.

Let us come then to a view of the particulars which the Prophet recounteth,
which God does behold and not yet punish.

And herein we shall find the Prophet an Orator setting forth the iniquity of
the times, and the miseries of the Church then, so as we may say his heart has
indicted a good matter, and his tongue is the Pen of a ready Writer.

Here be the Prophets grievances.

1. The first is treason, Wherefore look thou upon them that deal
treacherously? Mr. Calvin renders it, quare aspicis transgressores? and so does
the Geneva translation render it: Why look thou upon the transgressors?

But that is somewhat too large, for that includes all sorts of sinners.

Jun. Cur intuereris perfidos? so the Chaldaeans, of whom the Prophet
complains, here are set forth as you heard by the Prophet Isay.

Dolus an virtus, quis in host requirat? Isa. 12.2.


Treason is not wrought by a professed enemy in times of open war, and
proclaimed defiance, neither do we call the secret practices of enemies working
underhand by the name of treason, they are military stratagems; but it is
called treason, when by corrupting some of the opposite side, the enemy does
take advantage.

And this is commonly one of the mines which is carried under the states of
great Kingdoms, to destroy them and blow them up.

And the Author and Finisher of our salvation, though he was assaulted by
professed war of the chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, yet he was put into
their hand at last by treason; one of his own twelve betrayed him.

And it is the chief use of the new order of Jesuits in foreign States to
corrupt the affections of subjects, ut prodant, that they may betray.

This is a great grievance; for treasons be commonly carried with great
secrecy; yet the Prophet says, that God looks on, he beholden all the
conveyances both of Projection and Execution; and that is it which amazeth the
Prophet, that God who loves not treason, should look on and behold it in all
the ingresse and progress of it, and not stop it.

Beloved, we have a lesson from hence.

The Lord sees treason.

Not only the great treasons wrought against States and Kingdoms, but the
particular falsehoods in common friendship: the private insidiations for the
goods, the chastity, the good name, the life of our neighbors.

It is not any negligence in Gods government of the world or any oversight, or
any forgetfulness, or any approbation of evil, that does keep God so quiet,
that he sits in heaven, he keeps Israel, and he neither slumbreth nor
sleeps.

Yet he looks on, while thieves come in the night, and break open a way into
men's houses, gather together and rifle, and carry away their goods.

He sees whilst the secret enemy watches his brother upon the way, or goes
forth with him as Abel did with Cain: God knew that Abel was to be killed that
day.

When Joab and Amasa met, God saw it a death, he knew that embracing would
prove a stab.

Sometimes God does detect and defeat these treasons betimes, sometimes he
lets them go on to the very moment of execution, yet then he disappointeth
them: but sometimes he looks on, and sees them performed and hinders them
not.

This is that which the Prophet would fain know why God that loves no evil,
and has power at hand to prevent it, does look on and see it done; for amongst
us, quinon vetat peccare cum licet jubet: he that when he may, hinders not a
fault, commands it; and for man it is a true rule, that all the evil which we
might have hindered and did not, shall be put upon our account.

This rule holds indeed with us, but God is not so limited; he makes both evil
creatures, that is devils and wicked men, to be his servants to do his will,
and he makes the very sins of men rods to scourge both themselves that commit
them and others.

2. The second grievance of the Prophet.

The wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous then he, and God holds
his tongue. That is, the Chaldaean who worshippeth strange gods, devoureth the
Jews the Posterity of Abraham, who though they be much too blame, yet they are
more righteous then Chaldaeans, and God sees and says nothing whilst the
Chaldaeans does spoil Israel.

This indeed is a great grievance to behold the afflictions of the Church, and
the power of the wicked against them; it was that which put David into an
extreme ecstasy for the time, and till he went to the house of God, and was
there taught the end of such men as hurt their betters, his foot had well nigh
slipped.

Our experience shows us much more for the wicked sons of Belial, the moths
of our Commonwealth, the rust of our peace, how have they fed upon the far of
the land, and by fair pretexts of common good, even devoured the Commonwealth,
and made more righteous men then they their prey, assaulting their goods, their
liberty, and peace of life, disturbing their honest callings with inhonest
encroachments, to the great prejudice of the State?

And God held his tongue, many years although he saw it; but now he has set
open the eyes of the politic body to detect them, and he has opened the mouth
of that body to accuse and to condemn them.

David says, It is a Proverb of the Ancients, 1 Samuel 24.13.
Wickedness proceeds from the wicked.

This is wickedness in a grown degree; for the godly be the holy ones of God,
and God says, nolite tangere, touch not, they do not only tangere, but angere,
yea devorare justiores se, devour juster then they.

There is a natural antipathy between the seed of the woman and the seed of the
serpent; sinners cannot abide them that carry any face or show of Religion, or
the worship of God; hating and touching and biting will not serve nor satisfy
they must devour and destroy.

Solomon says, The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel, viscera crudelia,
Prove. 12.10.
cruel bowels:

The wicked is ever the devourer; observe it as a fure rule; that Church or
that Commonwealth which devoureth and maintains slaughter and effusion of
blood, is the Synagogue of the wicked.

The true Church is no smiter, no traitor, no plotter, no abettor of invasions;
it was ever true Arma Ecclesiae preces and lachrymae, the weapons of the Church
are prayers and tears.

The Church of Rome, the mother of murders, and nest wherein treasons breed,
the nurse of Jesuits, the incendiaries of Christendom, the mint of facinerous
Machinations, the Cathedral and dogmatical defenders of the lawfulness of any
thing that is done for their own good, has discovered her self to be
Antichristian by this infallible mark of cruelty; She is a devourer.

It is the Religion of Rome that armed the Spaniards against Queen Elizabeth
and her land in 88. the blessing of the Pope, and the curse of God was upon
that enterprise.

For they came to devour them that were then more righteous then they.

It is the Religion of Rome that dug the vault, that hired, that fraighted
the Cellar under the Parliament house to blow up all; os sepulchri, the mouth
of the grave, os inferni, the mouth of hell; the mouth of Rome shall gape and
swallow with the best of them.

Surely this is a great grievance and vexation of spirit here on earth, to see
the worst sort of men prevailing, and better then they swallowed up.

This is also aggravated in the manner of it, which is fully and rhetorically
amplified by the Prophet.

3. The next grievance amplified by a comparison, which is double, verse. 14.

1. They are compared to the fish of the sea. 2. To creeping things which have
no Governor.
In the first resemblance he insisteth, ver. 15.

The Chaldaeans are the Fishermen, the Jews the Fish as you have heard: and
these Fishermen use 1. The Angle, 2. The net, 3. The dragge, which shows a
full devouring, as in Isay,


I will sweep it with the besome of destruction says the Lord of Hosts. Is.
14.22.


Compare this text with that of Joel.

That which the Palmer-worm has left, has the Locust eaten; Joel 2.4.
and that which the Locust has left, has the Canker-worm eaten; and that
which the Canker-worm has left, the Gaterpillar has eaten. For what the Angle
leaves, the net takes; and what escapes the net, the drag does sweep it up.
Observe here with me

1. This manner of teaching by familiar resemblances is much used in both
Testaments,

And may we not justly charge the Church of Rome with cruelty to her children,
that when the spirit of God has so labored in both the Testaments to open
himself to the understanding of the simple; the Oracle of Trent shall put out
the candle, and turn men to seek the way of life darkling, without the light of
the Word, which they shall not be suffered to read, for fear of understanding
by it their impostures.

It can be no good Religion, wherein they that know the least, and believe the
most, are made to believe they are in the best case.

2. I find here that there is a wisdom of God to be learned out of the
natural and moral ways of life;

When we see dogs pursuing an Hare, or a Deer, thus do the projectures of our
time hunt the Commonwealth.

When we see Fishermen cast in their nets; thus do the oppressors of their
brethren; all is fish that comes into their net.

A wise and sober judgment may make good use of all that his eye sees, to
behold therein either the goodness of God to man or or the good or evil that
comes from one man to another.

3. In that he does use two comparisons and resemblances to fishes on the sea,

And the Prophet is very near touched with the calamities of his brethren, that
which way soever he looks, he beholds some representation of their woe.

It is the manner of grief to take all occasions to figure and represent to it
self its own sorrow.

4. Where he resembles them to creeping things which have no ruler over them,

Two things do aggravate the calamity represented thereby.

1. That which God brought upon Edom, I have made thee small; for these
creeping things of the earth are of small strength, and are subject to the foot
of man and beast to tread on them: thus God has made the Jews the very earth
for their enemies to go over them; and this is the punishment of their pride;
for Pride must have a fall and these towering fouls of the air must be turned
into creeping worms of the earth. 2. They have no ruler over them, this is here
set forth as a point of especial note to express the unhapinesse of a People
to be without a ruler; and therefore Anabaptists are wise politicians, that
would have no Magistrate, but the punishment of the Jews is just that they
should be without a ruler;
Because they did so much abuse Authority and rule, that the very Seat of
judgment were corrupted; the wicked is Plaintiff, and the godly defendant.
The wicked compasses about the righteous, therefore wrong judgment proceeds.

Better no rulers at all then such as David describes, Thou see a thief and
thou consentest with him: a Companion of thieves whose Justice is like that on
Sarisbury plain, Deliver thy purse. Perchance on both sides.

But rule and Magistracy is the ordinance of God, as St. Paul teaches, and God
by his subordinate rulers on earth, carries a sword, and not in vain, without
this, as when there was no King in Israel, every man does what seems good in
his own eyes; Which does utterly destroy the body, not only disfigure the face
of a Commonwealth.

5. Observe also here the outrage of the ungodly when they find any way open
for their violence;

Here is Angle and Net and Dragge, as before, The wicked compasses about the
righteous; which way shall the righteous escape? As if aman did fly from a
Lion, and a Bear met him, or went into an house and leaned his hand on a wall
and a Serpent bit him: Amos 5 19
This made David so earnest with God not to fall into the hands of man.

There is nothing more cruel then a multitude of ungodly men that have no fear
of God before their eyes.

Certum est insilvis inter spelaea ferarum malle pati; the teeth of these dogs,
the horns of these bulls of Basan, the horns of these Unicornes, the tusks of
these wild Boars, the paws of these Lions and Bears are mentioned in Scripture
often to express the the fury and outrage of the wicked,

As Edom cried in the day of Jerusalem, Raze it. Ps. 11.3.
If the foundation be destroyed, what can the righteous do?

Judge now is it not a great grievance to see and feel the force and fury of
the wicked carry all before them, and neither their own conscience, nor the
laws of men restrain them, and God sit still, look on and hold his peace; this
is that which grieves the Prophet to the heart. But God that sees it has pure
eyes, and has a right hand that will find out all his enemies.

Amos will tell us that God has his Angle too, and his Net, and his Dragge.

I saw the Lord standing upon the Altar, Amos 9.1.
and he said,

I will slay the last of them with the sword: he that flees of them shall not
fly away; and he that escapes of them shall not be delivered.

Though they dig into hell, there shall my hand take them, though they climb up
into heaven, thence will I bring them down.

And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search, and take
them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the
sea, thence will I command the Serpent and he shall bite them.

And though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence will I command
the sword and it shall slay them: I will set mine eyes upon them for evil and
not for good.

Let us not be discouraged; for the Wiseman says comfortably to us;

If thou see the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of judgment
and justice in a Province, Eccl. 5.8.
marvel not at the matter; for he that is higher then the highest regards,
and there be higher then they.

Our Commonwealth grew foul, the hand of the oppressor was stretched out, and
they that pretended to be the Physicians of the diseases of this State, gave it
a potion of deadly wine, that it grew sick and drawing on even to death, the
hearts of true Patriots failed them.

The poor cried out; the rich could not say of that which he possessed Haec mea
sunt, these are mine; seats of justice, instead of judgment yielded wormwood,
and ecce clamor, and behold a cry, even the loud voice of grievances.

But God awaked as one out of sleep; and what the angle of the Magistrate and
the net of the King could not take, the drag of the Parliament is now cast out
to fetch it in; and we have gracious promises that we shall see Religion better
established, and Justice better administered, the moths that fretted our
garments destroyed, the Caterpillar, the Canker-worm, and the Palmerworme, the
Projectors of our times that devoured the fruits of the earth, and drew the
breasts of the Commonwealth dry into their own vessels, both detected and
punished; yea that we shall see Jerusalem in prosperity all our days; it is the
music of the voices of both Houses of the Parliament, and he that is rector
Chori, the Mr. of the Quire, does set for them both,

Let Peace be within thy walls, and plenteousnesse within thy Palaces.

This fills our mouths with laughter, and our tongues with singing. The Keeper
of Israel is awake, and has not been an idle Spectator of those tragedies that
have been acted here amongst us; he has but tarried a time, till the
abominable wickedness of the sons of Belial was found worthy to be punished.

One note more remains. The Prophet does find that all this evil does not
come upon the Jews by chance, Satan, or the proud covertous cruelty of the
Chaldaeans; for he faith to God,

Thou make men as the fishes of the sea.

Here is the hand of God, and the counsel of God in all this.

And God takes it upon himself, as you have heard before.

Behold ye among the heathen, Verse. 5.
and regard and wonder marveilously, For I will work a work in your days which
you will not believe.

Lo, I raise up the Chaldaeans, etc.

For though sin brought in punishment, Verse. 6.
yet Gods Justice is the Author of all evils of this kind, and the inflicter of
punishment.

Tu domine fecisti, says the Psalmist, Thou Lord have done it,

And I have taught you that the wisdom and goodness of God can make use of
evil men for the correction of his Church;

They be ingredients in the dose, that God gives to his diseased People to
purge them.

Therefore let not our hearts fret at those rods which have no strength to use
themselves, but rather stoop to the right hand of God, who manageth them for
our castigation.

We have no fence against these judgments, but a good conscience endeavoring
to serve God sincerely; for that either diverteth the judgment, that the Sun
shall not smite us by day, nor the Moon by night; or it makes us able to bear
it, as from the hand of a Father that cannot find in his heart to hurt us.

You heard the faith of this Prophet concerning this point: we shall not die.

Thou have ordained them for judgment, thou have established them for
correction.

Only let not us be incorrigible, nor faint when we are rebuked; for he
chasteneth every son that he receives.

The fourth grievance is the pride and vainglory of the proud Chaldeans,
expressed in two things

1. In the joy of their victories, They rejoice and are glad 2. In their
attribution of this glory to themselves, which is self-idolatry.
1. They rejoice and are glad.

The enemies of the Church have their time to laugh, the Wiseman calls it the
candle of the wicked, it lights them for a time; it is unius diei hilariis
insania, they dance to the pipe, and drink their wine in bowls, they eat of
the fat, and they remember not the affliction of Joseph to pity it, they
remember it to result over Joseph.

The King and Haman sat drinking together when the Edict was gone forth for
the destruction of the Jews, Hest. 3.15.
and then the City Shushan was perplexed.

The grief of the Church is the joy of the ungodly. It is David's complaint, Yea
they opened their mouth wide against me, and said, Ps. 35.21.
Aha, our eye has seen it.

They have David's deprecation. Let them not say in their hearts, Verse. 25.
Ah, so would we have it; let them not say we have swallowed them up.

They have David's imprecation.

Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion that rejoice at mine hurt; Verse.
26.
let them be clothed with shame and dishonor, that magnify themselves against
me.

He was in the very passion of this Prophet for this. Lord, how long will thou
look on?

Saint Augustine upon these words says, Verse. 17.
Quod capiti, hoc corpori, what was to the head, that to the body; for thus did
the Jews rejoice in the Cross of Christ, they had their will of him: it is
vox capitis, the voice of the head,

But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together against
me. Verse. 15.


Saint Augustines comfort against this calamity is,

Quicquid faciunt, Christus in caelo est; honoravit ille p^nam suam, jam crucem
suam in omnium frontibus fixit, which has reference to the signing with the
sign of the Cross in the Baptism of Christians then in the use of the Church.

The reason of this joy in the wicked at the sorrows of the Church is, David's
complaint,

For mine enemies speak against me, Ps. 71.10.
and they that lay wait for my soul take counsel together,

Saying, God has forsaken him, persecute and take him, for there is none to
deliver him

For they measure the light of Gods countenance according to the scantling of
outward prosperity.

2. The wicked want the unity of the spirit,

I am sure this is a true Rule in Divinity, whatsoever humane policy have to
say against it.

Christ foretold his Disciples, in the world ye shall have affliction.

These things I command you that ye love one another. Joh. 15.17. Verse. 18.
Verse. 19.


If the world hate you, ye know it hated me before it hated you.

If ye were of the world, the world would love his own.

Charity is the bond of peace only to the children of peace; and they that in
Religion do stand in terms of contradiction, it is not possible to fit them
with a girdle.

This point is thus made profitable to us.

1. For our selves, seeing Religion is the best bond of brotherhood, Patria
omnes in se charitates complexa est. the love of charity comprehends all love;
for we know that we have had many unnatural fugitives which have abandoned
their Country, and plotted treasons abroad against it, and have returned full
of foreign venom and poison to corrupt the affections of the natural subjects
of their Sovereign with hatred of Religion and peace.

That is only true of Religion, for that so sweetneth the affections of men,
that as they are content to do any thing they can one for another; so they can
be content to endure any thing one for another, to bear for one another
sakes, and to put up at one another hands many things; to forgive not seven
times, but seventy times seven times.

For the true Church, as Bernard says, does suspendere verbera, producere
ubera, hide the rod, and lay forth the breasts.

2. For our children we must instruct them betimes in the knowledge and fear of
God, that they may learn the doctrines of piety and charity, and may be taught
to be members one of another.

3. This fetteth a mark upon the enemies of God; because where there is strife
and envying, where there is hatred and malice, are not they carnal?

If it be our duty to rejoice with them that rejoice, and to weep with them
that weep; they belong not to the fold of Christ, that rejoice at the weeping,
or weep at the rejoicing of their brethren.

4. This declares the vanity of the joy of the world; for seeing their
rejoicing is evil, it cannot be long lived; and therefore it is said, that the
candle of the wicked shall be put out; but the joy of the elect shall no man
take from them.

Therefore woe to them that laugh here for their Harp shall be turned into
mourning, and their Organs into the voice of them that weep, but blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted* and the time shall come when they
shall rejoice over them who have joyed at their pains; and rejoice over her O
heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, Pro. 18.20
for God has avenged you on her.

2. They attribute the glory of the conquest to themselves, they understand not
who raised them up against the Jews who gave them strength to fight, and who
gave them victory; therefore they burn incense to their own nets, and kiss
their own hands, and thank themselves for all.

Here is the growth of iniquity; for first they exercise all cruel inhumanity
against the Jews, then they rejoice over them, and then does their sin grow
out of measure sinful; for they forbear not to provoke God himself by their
pride of heart, robbing him of the glory of his own work, and ascribing it to
themselves.

This even the light of nature has detected to be most injurious to God, and
most dangerous to men, for they that have any natural notion of the Deity, know
that the whole glory of all achievements belongs to that supreme power which
rules all.

In the great consultation wherein Xerxes made a Proposition of war against
Greece, having a special grudge at the Athenians, Herod. 1.7. Polyrrima


Mardonius was an earnest perswader to the attempt; but Artabanus the son of
Histaspes, the Uncle of Xerxes the King, a grave, aged man, dissuaded it.

His great argument was drawn from a consideration of the danger of greatness
to which the King his Nephew aspired to be Lord of all, and urges that old
observation which Horace the Poet since used, Feriuntque summos fulmina montes,
the ligtning strikes the highest tops his rule is

Gaudet Deus eminentissima quaeque de primere, quia Deus neminem alium quam
seipsum sinit magnifice de se sentire.

The point here noteable, is,

The prosperity of this world does fill the hearts of men with pride and vain
estimation of themselves.

At the first when things succeeded well with the Chaldean, he gave the honor
thereof to his Idol god, as you have heard; but now he takes it all upon
himself; his own net, that is, his wit and strength has done all, and he is
now his own god.

The Wiseman says, The prosperity of fools shall destroy them. Prove. 1.42


They that worship strange gods, and do ascribe all their fair betydings to
them, do commit Idolatry, and sin grievously; yet these do confess a Deity,
and acknowledge the power, though not the person of God in supreme agencie; but
they that assume all to themselves, deny a Deity, or disable it, so as that
they may work without any borrowed help from thence.

So that the greatest Idolatry that is, or can be committed, is that pride of
heart which assumeth to it self the glory of prosperous success.

And let men take heed of this temptation, Prove 30.8 9.
for it is flattering and fair-spoken, and our corrupt nature is very prone to
give it entertainment; this is one of the two things that Agur the son of Jakeh
did pray against;

Remove far from me vanity and lies: this opinion of our selves is well termed
vanity; for nothing can be more empty and void then it is; and it is as well
called lies; for nothing can be more untrue then that we should be able as of
our selves to do any thing for our selves.

The danger, Least if I be full, I deny thee, and say, who is the Lord?

Here be two things in the Chaldaeans, which Job does protest against, and
imprecate himself if he be guilty of either of them.

The former evil, Job 31.29
If I rejoiced at the destruction of them that hated me.

And this, Verse 27.
If my heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand

This also were an iniquity to be punished by the judge, Verse. 28.
for I should have denied that God that is above.

It is Saint Gregory's note upon that text. Per manum operatio, per os locutio
designatur; manum ergo osculatur ore suo, qui laudat quod facit, and testimonio
propriae locutionis soli virtutem tribuit operis.

Let us remember our Sicut in coelo, as in heaven. For in heaven the twenty
four Ellers cast their Crowns before the Throne; Rev. 4.10.
which as Saint Gregory says, is,

Certaminum suorum victorias non sibi tribuere, sed authori, ut ad illum
referant gloriam laudis, a quo se sciunt accepisse vires certaminis.

To arrogate to our selves Gods glory, this is Jobs judgment is iniquitas
maxima, the greatest iniquity: for peccatum ex infirmitate spem non perdit, sin
of infirmity loses not hope, but presumption destroys hope utterly, and so
faith also, for faith is the ground of things hoped for.

Against this let us hear the Apostle: Let us not be desirous of vainglory.
Gal. 5.26.


This is that dangerous sin of pride, which does put our selves into the
place and room of God, and usurpeth his rights.

Our Savior has sufficiently discouraged this sin in a few words to such as
do rightly understand him; for when the disciples returned to him, Luke 10 17
and said, Lord, the devils are subject to us through thy name, Christ answered,

I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Greg. Vt in discipulis suis
elationem premeret: Verse. 18.
judicium ruinae retulit, quod ipse magister elationis accepit.

The very way to begin the true worship and service of God in us, is to put off
our selves by an humble and true Confession, that of our selves we areable for
no good work; I do not say to demerit God, but not to do our selves any good;
the wisdom that guides us is from above, the strength that enableth, us is
dextra excelsi, the right hand of the most High; this shows which way the glory
and praise of all must go.

Considering then the fault of these Chaldaeans in this vanity of boasting
themselves:

1. Let us come to decline it as a disease. 2. Let us embrace the remedies
thereof.
1. Decline it.

1. Because it trespasseth that same primum and magnum mandatum, the first and
great Commandment; for it robs God of his glory, and assumeth it to our
selves; and God has sworn that he will not admit any Partner or sharer with
him in glory. 2. It connumerateth us with the children of Satan, for he is the
father of all the sons of Pride. 3. It exterminates charity; for it makes a
man's own will the rule of his actions, and not the will of God: which makes us
the Praevaricators of the second like Commandment to the first, diliges
proximum sicut teipsum, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. 4. It makes
us liable to the severest vengeance of God, for God resists the proud; and if
they perish whom God does not assist, what hope can they have whom God does
resist? 5. It strippeth us out of all those graces and common favors of the
Holy Ghost which we have; for when God sees that we employ his talent to our
own advantage, he will surely take it from us, seeing he took from him that
employed not his talent to his advantage; for it is a greater sin to be a false
then to be an idle servant. 6. There is no vice that becomes a man worser then
self-opinion; we esteem one poor and proud very odious, and such are they that
ascribe any thing to themselves; because we are not able of our selves, to
think, to move, to live, to subsist, without our God. 7. There is no vice that
pleases Satan better then self-confidence; for that quitteth Gods part in us,
and separateth us from God, which is all that Satan seeks; for then he has
sure possession, and all that he holds is in peace. 8. A proud man that
ascribes all to himself must needs be unthankful. I may stir up all the
inconveniences of self-opinion, with this; for it is an old truth, Ingratum
sidixeris, omnia dixeris, Say he is unthankful and you have said all: this is a
full imputation, and Saint Bernard says Ingratitudo est ventus urens, siccans,
sibirorem misericordiae, fluenta gratiae.
2. The Remedies.

These we may reduce to these few.

1. A frequent and serious consideration of our selves, what we were by
Creation what we are by our sal, for so we shall find how poor and impotent we
are in our selves, how we have no strength to do any thing, but we are debtors
to God for all, all that we have is borrowings; quid habes o homo quod non
accepisti? We have lost the freedom of our Will to any thing that is good: we
do carry about us legem membrorum, corpus peccati, so that our strength is
weakness, our wisdom is folly, our friendship with the world enmity with God.
2. The clearest mirror to behold our selves in, is the Holy Word of God, which
reports to us the story of our Creation, and of our Fall; which opens and
reveals God to us, in his Justice, and Holiness, and Wisdom, and Power,
and Mercy. 3. Let us set God always before us, and the nearer we approach to
him, the more shall we perceive whereof we are made, and we shall then remember
that we are but dust. We shall perceiv wherefore we are made, namely to live in
the obedience and service of our Maker, to bestow all our time constantly
therein, even to the end, to glorify God in our bodies and in our souls.

We shall see how unable we are to perform any part of this duty without God and
how we stand obnoxious to the curse of the law, for either omitting the duties
which we should perform or committing any thing against that just law. What
have we then to be proud of, seeing, in him, and for him, and by him are all
things?

4. Let us often revolve and recount the good favors of God to us, and
remember all his benefits, and consider what he has done for us and we shall
find that there is a full stream of favor coming toward us, whether we sleep
or awake, whether we drink of that brook in the way or not,
The Apostle joyneth two Precepts together, which do sweetly serve to exercise
a Godly and Christian life. Pray continually: in all things give thanks; which
do show that all good gifts come from above to us, and therefore all our holy
duties must direct themselves that way; and as our help comes from those hills,
so our eyes must be ever to those hills.

It is not bread that man does live by, but by every word that proceeds from
the mouth of God: it is not the letter of the Word that quickens us, but the
spirit.

Our whole help is in the name of the Lord who has made heaven and earth;
Hallowed be that name: we are his People and the Sheep of his Pasture.

Let us go into his gates with Thanksgiving, and into his Courts with praise;
let us be thankful to him and speak good of his name. Let us do this
faithfully, and we shall see it is no thank to our own net, or drag, that our
portion is fat and our meat plenteous.

For none but he fills the hungry with good things; Peter and his company,
though they had their nets, and fished all night, yet they caught nothing: when
at Christ's word they let fall their net and made a great draught, they knew
whom to thank for it.

A domino factum est hoc, this is the Lords doing. Is the voice of the Church;
therefore non nobis, non nobis, twice he puts it from our selves, sed nomini
tuo da gloriam. Not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory.

5. Grievance. Ver. 17. Shall they therefore empty their net, and not spare
continually to slay the nations?

He continues his former figurative manner of speech, and presses his
grievance, shall those fishing Chaldaeans when they have filled their net with
fish, empty it, and return to another fishing? will it hold out, that they
shall go from nation to nation, and make all theirs as they go?

The grievance is, that the Prophet does not see any end of their cruel
perfecutions as yet; for the lingering afflictions which gather increase of
strength by time, do threaten final ruin, whereas violent extremities spend
themselves into vanity and nothing.

2. Things are here feared.

1. The hurt that they may do, if they may fill and empty, and fill again their
net as often as they will. 2. The pride of heart, that they may gather by the
vainglory of their Conquests. The point here confiderable, is,
The ungodly man has no bowels.

Cain must kill Abel his own natural brother, and Judas must betray innocent
blood.

They that be once flesh't in the blood of men, can make no spare thereof:
there is oculus in sceptro, but not oculus in gladio, an eye in the Scepter,
not in the sword.

Agags sword made many women childlesse.

The growing Monarchies ruined all before them as they went, and overflowed all
as a deluge; nations and kingdoms that prevented not sacking and destruction
with timely dedition, perished before them.

But it is a sign of an unestablish't state, when the foundation thereof is
laid in blood: and such as must be watered in blood to make them grow, shall
have an informer against them; vox sanguinis fratris tui clamat de terra, the
voice of thy brother cries from the earth.

This makes all that love the gates of Sion, and take pleasure in the
prosperity of our Jerusalem, to give God no rest in their earnest devotions,
praying him not to deliver our Church into the hands of Papists, because it is
a bloody Religion, such as does hazard Princes more then common men; which does
bear them out in murders, and legitimateth Massacres for the safety and
increase of their Church.

2. It is wisdom out of the present state of things to forecast what may come
hereafter, as the Prophet does; the Chaldaeans must come and invade the land,
they shall fill their net with fish. God has spoken it, it is like to be a
merry time with them, they shall rejoice and be glad.

They are like to grow very proud upon it, sacrificabunt lagenae suae, etc.
They shall sacrifice to their net.

But shall this conquest so flesh them, that they shall empty their nets, and
fish again amongst the nations, and not cease to shed blood.

Ezcchiah has the name of a good King; he prayed to God, Let there be Peace,
or as the Kings Pible reads; is it not not good that there be Peace and Truth
in my days?

But careful Princes will look beyond their own days, and fit their designs to
the good of Posterity.

Present evils being in their growth threaten furture dangers, and we say of
them as our Savior does, These are but the beginnings of sorrows, and there is
fear that there will be semper deterior posterior dies, the latter times will
be the worser. The best remedy is to awake the tender love of God to his
Church, with an expostulation; Shall they do this O Lord? Thy will be done.

Shall they do it continually? will thou suffer it? when the time is come he
will have mercy.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. I will stand upon the watch, and set me upon the Tower, and will
watch to see what he will say unto me, and what I shall answer when I an
reproved.
IN this Chapter God answers all the Prophets grievances, and it contains
two parts.

1. The Prophets attendance upon God for his answer, verse. 1. 2. The Lords
answer in the rest of the chapter.
In the first,

The Prophet having disputed with God, and as his name imports, having
wrastled with him, does resolve,

I will stand upon the watch, and set me upon the tower, alluding to the
military practice of soldiers, who appoint some in some eminent place to
observe the enemy, and to give timely warning of their doings.

And seeing God has declared himself an enemy to the Jews, by all those evils
which he has threatened to bring upon them, the Prophet watches him, and
attends to receive further advertisement from himself, concerning his purpose
toward them.

I will watch to see what he will say unto me; for the secrets of the Lord are
revealed unto them that fear him: And God spoke in the mouth of all the
Prophets, which have been since the world began.

Neither does the Prophet attend God out of a curiosity, scire ut sciat, to
know only, as Bern. speaks, but that he may know what to answer for God when he
is reproved, or as the Margent says much better, when he is argued with, and
others come to dispute with him upon those grievances, as he has done with
God; for you must understand, that in all the former complaints this Prophet
has not argued as a particular man, but as undertaking the cause of the
Church, and sustaining the Persons of all his afflicted brethren, for whose
sakes, that he may satisfy them, and for Gods sake whose Minister he is, that
he may know how to maintain to them the cause of Gods Wisdom and Justice, he
does now attend Gods answer.

By this standing upon the watch and upon the tower, in this place is meant the
Prophets attending upon a further Revelation of the Will of God concerning
these grievances, because in those times God did speak to his Prophets by
visions, and dreams, and secret inspirations.

And holy men then had access to him immediately, whereby they knew the mind of
God, and yet did communicate to them his counsels.

Yet so as he put them to it to await his good leisure, and to expect his
answer. So David in his own case, I will hear what the Lord God will say unto
me.

These words do well express the whole duty of a faithful Prophet, and Minister
of the Word, consisting of two parts.

1. His information of himself, implet cisternam he fills the Cistern. 2. His
instruction of others, for then he will turn the Cock.
In the first observe, 1. His wisdom: he will borrow all his light from the
Sun. What he will say unto me. 2. His vigilance, I will stand upon the watch:
3. His patient expectation: I will set me upon the tower. 4. His holy care, to
see what will be said to him.


1. His Wisdom.

He will take his information from the mouth of God; teaching us,

That the faithful Minister of God must speak only in the Lords message; he
must see before he say;

This is our wisdom and understanding, to take our light from the father of
lights, to gather our wisdom from him that is wisest, Whose foolishness is
wiser then man, as the Apostle tells us.

1. Because of our nature which is corrupt, Nathan who encouraged David in his
purpose of building a Temple, which in his humane reason seemed a good
intention, and David a fit person to undertake it.

But God directed him to repeal that Commission, and to assign that work to
Solomon David's son.

2. Because we are Ambassadors from God;

1. This as it is a direction to us to limit our Ministry, 2. So it is a rule
for you to whom we are sent, to receive or refuse our Ministry, accordingly as
you shall justify our Preachings by the Will of God, revealed in the sacred
Canon of Scripture; searching the Scriptures as the men of Berea did, whether
those things which we teach be so or not.
And if any shall in the name of God broach or vent the doctrines of men, you
may say to him as Nehemiah did to Sanballat

There are no such things as thou say, but thou feinest them out of thine own
heart. Nehem. 6.8.


But take heed you exceed not this example of Nehemiah; for he did not charge
Sanballat thus, till he perceived that God had not sent him, but that he
pronounced this prophecy.

For many hearers are so seasoned with prejudice against their Teachers, that
if any thing sound not to the just tune of their own fancies, they will
suddenly quarrel it. Yet as Gamaliel says, If the Counsel be of God, it will
stand, whosoever oppose it.

3. This reproves those forward intruders into the Lords harvest, who come
unsent, and bring not their Sickle with them, they will work without tools, and
they will teach before they have learnt.

Like the foolish Virgins, they would spend of the wise Virgins oil, they do
sapere ex Commentario, and take their Sermons upon trust, harkening what God
has said to others, and not tarrying till God speak to them.

It is no wonder if these Merchants do break who set up without a stock: they
be but broken Cisterns, though some water run through them they hold none.

The faithful Minister must not only observe quid dicit dominus what the Lord
says, but quid dicit mihi, what he says to me: he must have the warrant of
his own mission from a special illumination of his own understanding, or else
his Trumpet will never give a certain sound.

4. This binds the hearer to affection.

For if the spirit speaks to the Churches, then qui habet aures audiendi
audiat; he that has ears let him hear: Est Deus in nobis, God is in us; they
do not flatter us as they did Herod, and we shall never die of the worms for
receiving that testimony of our Ministry, if we deal faithfully, that say of
our preaching; The voice of God and not of man; for Saint Paul testifies of
the Thessalonians;

For this cause also thank we God; 1 These. 2.13.
because when ye received the Word of God which ye heard of us, ye received
it not as the Word of men, but as it is in truth the Word of God, which
effectually works also on you that believe.

Beloved, it is true that we that are now the witnesses of God, have not that
open access to him, that the Prophet had to receive immediate instructions
from his own mouth: But Christ says,

Sicut misit me Pater: it a and ego mitto vos, as the Eather sent me, so send I
you.

And he tells his Father how he has provided for his Church till his second
coming.

I have given them the word which thou gave me, John. 17.8
and they have received them; and having so done, he said unto them, Ite and
docete, Go and teach.

When thou come then to Church, and hear Moses and the Prophets, and the
Psalms, which was the Manna wherewith God fed the fathers before the incarnation
of Christ, when the Veil of the Temple was up: remember what Abraham said to
the rich man, Habent Mosen and Prophetas, audiant eos. They have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them; that is the way to keep out of hell.

When thou hear the voice of the Son of God in the Gospel, the Veil of
the Temple being torn from the top to the bottom, Christ now reveiled to thee
with open face,

Take heed thou despise not him that speaks to thee in the Ministry of a
mortal man: this is a treasure which is brought unto you in earthen vessels;
value the vessels at their own worth in themselves, but yet regard them above
their worth for their use, for they bring you the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge;

Enough to make you wise unto salvation, sufficient to beget faith in you, by
which you may overcome the world; enough to make you perfect, thoroughly perfect
to all good works.

This is done by our Ministry, if you will hear God in us; and what would you
desire more then to be taught how to become wise and honest? for such are not
afraid of the Parliament: and say with Saint Paul,

With me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, 1 Cor. 4.3.
or of man's judgment.

2. The vigilance of the Prophet; I will stand upon the watch. Amongst the
great titles of honor and service that are given to the Ministers of the Word
in Scripture this is one, they are called Watchmen; It is Gods word to
Ezechiel, Ezekiel 3.17.

Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore
hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me, which is repeated in
the same words, chapt. 33.7. as the Margent of the Kings Bible directs you.

This correspondence must be between God and his Minister; for if God do make
us watchmen over the house of Israel, then with Habakkuk we must stand upon the
watch.

Let not us plead the trust of God committed to us, except we can plead our
faithfulness in the discharge of that trust.

This is indeed an honor done to the Prophets and Ministers of the Church, to
commit the Church of God to our care; but the burden of this care to keep
watch is exceeding great.

A necessity is laid upon me, and woe be to me if I preach not the Gospel.

Here be two things in this office.

1. To watch, 2. To give warning.
1. Some can watch, but they can give no warning. Ministers of good and
preaching lives, but not apt to teach, which Saint Paul requires in his
Ministers. Of whom Saint Hierome says, Innocens sine Sermon Conversatio,
quantum prodest exemplo, tantum nocet silentio.

2. Some will sometimes give warning, but they cannot always watch. Preach
learnedly when they preach, but they have not learnt out all their lesson of
the Apostle: Cave tibi and doctrina: in his Persta (...) Continue in these
things, it requires incumbency as the Law calls it.

3. But if we will do our duties; we must do both; some would fain do both, and
cannot get a watchmans place, there is none void. For be the People never so
empty, yet Ecclesia est plena, the Church is full.

All is not well that way; the Church complains; and they that have labored
abundantly, to enable themselves for this watch, are too much searched, and
examined too narrowly for their gifts.

Others have a watch, but they do not with the Prophet stand upon it; either
they sit at ease, or they sleep it out soundly: this Prophet promises to stand
in readiness for action and execution of his charge.

Beloved, many will not believe it, but we feel it, if we make conscience of
our duties in our calling that our vocation is laborious; this watching in all
weathers, and this robbing of our temples of their timely rest, to attend the
watch over your souls, as those that must give an account to God for our selves
and for you, is an honorable burden, (...), Who is sufficient?

1. Vigilat hostis, The enemy watches, he compasses the earth to and again,
he goes about like a roaring Lion; he is ever either reaching out an Apple of
temptation, as to Eve; or stretching our an arm of provocation, as to the
blessed Virgin: gladius pertransibit animam tuam.

We must keep you waking, that he bring not upon you the spirit of slumber; we
must awake you, if you sleep in sin, that he surpize you not.

Custos Israelis non dormit, the keeper of Israel slumbreth not. Alexander lies
down to sleep without fear, because he leaves Parmenio his faithful counselor
waking. David will lay him down in peace, and take his rest, seeing God does
make him dwell in safety.

Dominus dat dilectis suis somnum.

Yet let us observe two things concerning our sleep, for the Apostle says,
Therefore let us not sleep as do others. (...), 1 These. 5.6.
as unbeleevers. Lyranus, qui sunt increduli; (...), such as are left out of
the Church, and out of Gods fold to the world, let us not sleep so: how then?

1. Before our sleep let us take David's example for our Donec until. I will not
give sleep to mine eyes, nor slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a
place for the Lord; that is, Ps. 132.4, 5. Isa. 66.
says Augustine Donec inveniam locum Deo meo in me, till I find a place for
God in me; for God does delight to dwell with the humble, and such as are of a
contrite heart.

And Christ says, Behold, I stand at the door and knock; if any man open to
me, I will come into him.

In the letter, David swears to take no rest till he have found out a place
for the building of the Temple; that was David's care.

This is our Donec, until; till we have done our especial service to God,
which concerns us in our Calling; let us not think of sleep till we have
consecrated our selves as temples for the Holy Ghost to dwell in.

2. Let us in sleep take the example of the Church, I sleep, but my heart
waketh, it is the voice of my beloved, saying, open to me. Cant. 5.2.


That is, let our sleep be moderate, so sanctified by our prayer, that we may
say with the Church. Cant. 3.1.
By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves.

Thus does the faithful Watchman of Israel take heed to himself and to his
doctrine; to himself and to his flock, as the Shepherds to whom the Angel
appeared, giving them notice of the birth of Christ: They kept watch by night
because of their flock.

Blessed is that servant, whom the Master when he comes shall find so doing.

3. His patient expectation. I will set me upon the tower, and will watch to
see.

God does not always reveal himself and his will to his Minister, he must
tarry Gods leisure and wait his times.

Sometimes God does withdraw his light from the Minister, for the punishment of
the people, and will not let him see a danger that is coming that he may
chasten the sins of his people with the rods of men.

Sometime he does shut up the door of utterance, and will not let them give
warning of the wrath to come to punish their sin.

Therefore Saint Paul wills the Ephesians, Praying always, with all manner of
supplication for all men, Ephesians 6.18, 19.
and for me that utterance may be given me.

Beloved, we watch for you, we pray for you, we preach to you; whilst we stand
upon these towers to give you warning pray you for us that God would be pleased
to make us sufficient for this holy service.

When Paul and Silas went to preach, Acts 15 40
They were commended of the brethren to the grace of God; pray the Lord of the
harvest, ut mittat operarios, that he would send forth laborers.

We do not stand upon these Towers to keep watch for our selves only, but for
you; and whenever we come into a Pulpit, your thoughts must be ready to say
to us as Cornelius did to Peter, Now therefore we are all here present before
God to hear all things that are commanded thee of God. Act. 10 33


The care imposed on us is greater then the care of the King and the
Magistrate; To which of them has he said at any time feed my sheep, feed my
lambs?

Obey them that have the rule over you, Heb. 13.17.
and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls* as those that must give
account.

Wonder not at our infirmities, and do not make the worst of our weakness; for
we stand upon the Tower, and suffer many a blast which comes not near you.

No sort of men lie so open to Satan's force and fury as we do; he vexes us
with all his storms.

When Joshua stood before the Angel of the Lord to receive his Commission,
Satan stood at his right hand to resist him.

He desired to winnow Peter. Zech. 3.1.


God sent the angel of Satan to buffet Paul: When Christ lived a private life,
little is said of him: but so soon as he was baptized, and entered into the
execution of his ministry, he was tempted of Satan in the wilderness forty
days together.

It was the policy of the King of Aram to bend all his forces against the
Captains of the Lords Army. 1 Reg. 22.31.


We are not able of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, all our
sufficiency is of God who has made us able Ministers. 2 Cor. 3.5.6.


Therefore whilst we attend the opening to us of the whole counsel of God, we
have great need of your prayers, that we faint not in our expectation, that we
shrink not in the execution of our duty.

For through God only we are mighty.

I conclude this point in the Apostles words of exhortation, 2 Cor. 10.4.
seeing we stand upon the Tower and keep watch, till God will put a word into
our mouths;

You also helping together by prayer for us, 2 Cor. 1.11,
that for the gift bestowed upon us, by the means of many persons, thanks may
be given by many on our behalf.

The Apostle does confess that our gifts are bestowed on us by the means of
many persons, by the prayers and supplications of many of Gods good servants.

Therefore that we may stand it out in all weathers, that we be not idle and
drowsy in our watch, that we may be full of the strength of God to do the work
of Evangelists, pray you to God without ceasing for us.

For we have many discouragements, and standing so high upon the Tower, we have
many eyes upon us; and Satan on our right hand to resist us, and the world on
the left hand to tempt us; and the great difficulty of our service and
employment in the Church to dishearten us: yet audiam quid loquatur Deus, yet I
will hear what God will say to me.

4, His holy care in his office,

It is not to study what his own brains will suggest, ^ut to hear what God will
say to him: for this is

Dignus vindice nodus, a knot worth the loosing. Many observing the state of
the Church, and seeing the best men on earth suffer most, and possess least;
and beholding the wicked and ungodly gather all, live in peace of the world, in
fullness, heaping up riches, rising to honors, and having the monopoly of this
life present, have staggered in the faith of Gods providence.

David's feet upon this slippery ground had well-nigh slipped, and there were some
that professed it

It is in vain to serve God; Mal. 3.14.15.
and what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinance?

And now we call the proud happy, yea they that work wickedness are set up,
yea they that tempt God are delivered.

Therefore it is high time for the Prophet to seek his information and light
from God himself.

The light of humane reason cannot penetrate this thick cloud, David confesses
so much, the sweet singer of Israel could not hit upon this tune, for he saw
how prosperously every thing succeeded with the ungodly of the earth.

When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me,

Until I went to the Sanctuary of God: Ps. 73.16. Verse. 17.
then understood I their end.

Which teaches us in these great deeps of the wisdom of God, not to resolve
any thing out of humane reason, but to consult God himself, and to hearken what
he will say to the matter, to speak after him, and follow him.

Our experience tells us that there has been much opposition, much injustice
here in our land, that the Commonwealth groaned under the burden thereof.

The ways of God are not like our ways; did not God see this? did not the cry
of the poor and the oppressed go up to him, even to his ears? is he not come
down to visit the transgressors, and to take the matter into his own audience;
even now in the cool of the day he is come at last to keep a Sessions, and to
search Jerusalem with a candle and lanthorn; now his eyelids do begin to try
the sons of men, and the joyful Church and Commonwealth cry to him, saying,

Gird thy sword upon thy thigh O most mighty, Ps. 45 3.
with thy glory and thy majesty,

And in thy Majesty ride prosperously, Verse. 4.
because of truth and meekness and righteousness, and thy right hand shall
teach thee terrible things.

2. His instruction of others.

He will not only hearken to satisfy himself, but he will furnish himself
from the mouth of God with answers, to satisfy them that shall dispute and
argue with him against the Providence of God.

That is the use of our study and labor in our Ministry.

1. To teach the truth, 2. To convince contradictors.
This second part of our duty the Prophet had now special use of; for the
Church foreseeing the fearful judgments of God upon the Jews, did argue the
matter with the Prophet, and all those former grievances they objected as
arguments against Gods Government of his Church.

The Prophet holds the foundation, and seeks to inform himself, how he may
be able to maintain the same against opposition and strife of tongues.

Docemur, We are taught.

In the Church of God there will be ever some that will argue and dispute
against God.

1. Because men are first taught by the wisdom of the world,

This proceeds from our original pravity of nature, corrupt in the first
derivance from our Parents, which albeit it has the seasoning of the Law of
God written in the heart, yet the law of the members, which is contrary to the
law of God, does prevail against that law, and leads us captive unto sin.

2. Because as the Apostle says* for who has known the mind of the Lord?
David in this very case; Romans 11.34
for he confesses that the prosperity of the wicked troubled him, till he went
into the house of God; there he learned the mind of God, and then he was well
satisfied.

Even this Prophet knew not how to answer them that would argue with him
against God, till he had called to account and disputed the matter with him.

3. Because the Apostle says of the Elect, For we walk by faith, and not by
sight. 2 Cor. 5.7


Now in many of Gods chosen the sight and sense is full, the faith is weak and
imperfect, and when we come to hear of the equal Justice of God in punishing
sinners, and feel the smart of his rod upon the Church, it is an hard matter to
assure the heart by believing against that which is suffered in feeling.

4. Because Solomon says, Eccl. 7.29
God has made man upright, but they have sought many inventions: for surely,
the equal and constant ways of God, are suspected by the unequal and inconstant
inventions of men, who in favor of themselves, spare not to cast the
afflictions of the Church rather upon the will of God, of which they are not
able to give the reason, then upon the evil deservings of their own sins.

1. The Minister must learn of the Prophet, He will not suffer his truth to
fail.

We need not strain our selves much for this; for wisdom will be justified of
her children, and he whom we defend against the calumniations of profane, or
against the distrustfulnesse of the ignorant and weak, will fill our mouths
with arguments in his own defense.

Job says to his friends, Job. 13.7.
Will ye speak wickedly of God, and talk deceitfully for him? The Cause of God
is an upright Cause; we shall not need to be put to our shifts, to defend him
against the dispute and arguing of men.

Its enough that we rest in this principle of undeniable truth, Surely God is
just, and there is no unrighteousnes with him; as Abraham,

That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the
wicked, Genesis 18.25.
and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee? shall
not the judge of all the earth do right.

2. The People that are our hearers are taught to hearken to the voice of our
message, and to learn this lesson of the Justice,

It is a malicious suggestion when Satan shall belly us to God, as he did Job,
when he said Job served not God for nothing; but there is no great danger in
it, Ioh. 2.25.
for he knows Satan to be a liar and a murderer; and he needs not that any
should testify of man: for he knows what is in man.

Evah, You shall not die at all. Secondly, David, setting some awork to tell
him, Non est tibi salus in deo tuo, there is no help for thee in thy God.
Thirdly, or shall tax to us the Government of God, as if he were either
negligent of the affairs of the sons of men, or ignorant altogether of the
sufferings of his Church, or partial in administration of Justice, or directly
unjust in suffering his own servants to be oppressed with the injuries of men.

The Minister must diligently preach, the hearer must reverently hear, and
faithfully believe the truth concerning the Providence of God, or else all
Religion will sink and want foundation.

Verse. 2. And the Lord answered me, and said, Write the vision, and make it
plain upon Tables, that he may run that reads it. 3. For the vision is yet
for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie: though it
tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry.
HEre begins the second part of the chapt. which contains the Lords answer to
the Prophets expostulation. Containing, 1. A Direction to the Prophet, ver. 2,
3. 2. A Declaration of his holy will in the general administration of Justice.


1. Concerning the Direction given to the Prophet.

And the Lord answered me and said] For the manner how God maintained
intelligence with his holy Prophets, we are not very particularly informed; we
find inspiration, and revelation, and ision mentioned; he that made the light
that is in us, and gave us our understanding can best make his ways known to
his holy ones; and as I do not think that Habakkuks contestation with God was
verbal and vocal, but rather a wrestling and striving of his spirit and inward
man: neither do I think this answer of God was audidle, presented to the ear,
but by some secret divine illumination suggested.

And where he says, The Lord answered and said.

These phrases do express so plain an answer, as is made in conference between
man and man.

Write the vision] That is, set down in writing my answer. It is our manner for
the better preservation of such things as we would not forget, to set them down
in writing.

But because this request of the Prophets does concern others that he may
inform them, God adds, Make it plain upon Tables that he may run that reads
it.

That is, write my answer in a Table in great Characters, that though a man be
in haste and run by, yet he may read as he runs, showing that he was
desirous to satisfy all such as the Prophet spoke of before, who should argue
against him.

As out manner is to fix public Proclamations and Edicts on walls* or on Posts
in ways of common passage, that any Passenger may take notice thereof seeing it
concerns every one: to that the Lord alludeth in this place, giving the
Prophet great charge for the declaration of his holy will in this great matter;
so to express it, that every one of his People may receive information
thereof, Vult aperta esse verba, and aperte scribi, says St. Hierom.

For the vision is yet for an appointed time]

The time is not yet fulfilled for the execution of the Will of God; but it is
in the holy wisdom and purpose of God determined when it shall be fulfilled.

At the end it shall speak and not lie] That is, in the time prefixed by
Almighty God it shall take effect, and the counsel and decree of God shall be
executed: For God that has promised cannot lie.

The answer of God is full as it after will appear, and does not only clear the
Justice of God in the present cause of the oppressed Jews against the
Chaldaeans, but it makes a further and more general overture of Gods decree,
against all unrighteousness and ungodliness of men, so that this Prophecy
shall not only comfort that Church and those times, but it is directed to the
perpetual use of the Church in all the ages thereof. He therefore adds,
Though it tarry wait for it, do not think by any importunity to draw down the
judgments of God upon the ungodly, or to hasten the deliverance of the Church;
God does all things tempore suo in his time, and the servants of God must tarry
his leisure.

Because it will surely come it will not tarry] He gives assurance of the
complement of his Will in the proper and prestitute season thereof, which
nothing shall then hinder.

The parts of this text, containing Gods direction given to his holy Prophet,
are three.

1. The care that God takes for the publishing of his Will to the Church, verse.
2. 2. The assurance that he gives of the performance thereof in the time by him
appointed; 3. The patient expectation which he commands for the performance
thereof.
1. The law that he takes for publishing it.

The Prophet must not only hear God speak, the Seer must not only behold the
vision, but he must write the same: litera scripta manet, the written letter
abides.

I will not stand to search how ancient writing is, wherein some have lost time
and labor.

I know that many do make God the first immediate Author of it, and do affirm
that the first Scripture that ever was, was Gods writing of the law in two
Tables, Exodus 32.

But because I find in Exodus 24 that Moses wrote all the word of the Lord,
Josephus does report a tradition of the Hebrews for writing and graving before
the flood; I hold it probable that both Scripture and Sculpture are as ancient
as the old world.

I will not question Josephus his Record of the two pillars, erected before the
flood, engraven for the use of posterity, with some memorable things to
continue in succeeding ages, whereof one remained in Syria in his own time.

It is frequent in Scripture to express a perpetuity of record by writing. In
the case of Amalek,

Write this for a memorial in a book. Ex. 17.14.


Job. O that my words were now written, that they were printed in a book, Job.
19 23


Graven with an iron pen, Verse. 24.
in lead and in the ink for ever!

Isay the Prophet. I heard a voice from heaven, saying to me write, all flesh
is grass.

Ioh. Audivi vocem dicentem, Beati mortui. I heard a voice from heaven saying,
Blessed are the dead.

Beloved thus have we the light that shines upon the Church, and guides our
feet in the ways of peace by writing; for all Scripture is given by
inspiration: holy men wrote as they were inspired.

It was given to them by inspiration to know the will of God, they impart it to
the Church of God by writing, and that boundeth and limiteth us, (...).

Thus has God revealed himself to his Church, 1. Cor, 4.6.
both sufficiently, that we need no more knowledge for eternal life, then what
is contained in Scripture, and so clearly that the word gives understanding to
the simple.

And as this word from the immediate mouth of God, does warrant this particular
prophecy, so does the Apostle say of all the body of Canonical Scripture, that
all Scripture is given by inspiration: and Gods care is double.

1. That it be written to continue. 2. That it be written plain to be read.
1. It must be written that it may remain. 1. Written
For in the old world, because of the long life of the fathers, the oracles of
God were committed to them, without any mention of writing, because they were
both wise and faithful in the custody and transmission of them; For Adam
himself living nine hundred and thirty years to teach his children; had under
his teaching.

Seth, Enosh, Kenan, Mahalaleel, Iarod, Henoch, Methusalah, and Lamech the
father of Noah.

And Noah lived with Abraham 57 years.

But after the flood when the Church in the posterity of Jacob increased, and
no doubt had many corruptions by dwelling in Egypt; then was Moses appointed
both to be the deliverer of the People of Israel from Egypt, and to be the
Penman of God, to write those things which God would have to remain in the
Church for all succeeding times, and after him successively holy men wrote as
they were inspired.

And a better Argument we cannot give for the danger of unwritten traditions,
which the Church of Rome does so much commend even above Scripture, then this.

God saw that men had corrupted their ways, and he found the imaginations of
men's hearts only evil continually, and that the Church was a very few:
therefore he stirred up Noah to be a Preacher of righteousness in whom the
light of truth was preserved; he destroyed the old sinful world, and by Noah
and Sem; he began a new Church to the restored world.

Yet after Noah's death the worship of strange gods were brought in; so that to
heal this grief, and to prevent the danger of traditions, God caused the Word
to be written by holy men, for the perpetual use of his Church, whose books
were faithfully preserved in all ages thereof.

Then came the Son of God, and he left his spirit in the Church, to lead the
Church into all truth, by which spirit the New Testament was endited and
written.

So that now all things necessary to salvation are so clearly revealed, that
traditions of men have no necessary use in the Church, in the substance of true
Religion: for that which is written is sufficient.

The Church of Rome denies the sufficiency of Scripture. Many of their great
learned men write both basely and blasphemously thereof.

But they are not agreed upon the point: for.

Scotus, Gerson, Oecam. Cameracensis, Waldensis, Vincentius Lerinensis, do all
confess what we teach of the sufficiency of Scripture, as the learned Deane of
Gloucester, Dr. Field l. 3. de Eccoles, c. 7. has fairly cited them.

And Dr. White in his way of the Church, adds Tho. Aquinas, Antoninus
Archbishop of Florence, Durandus Alliaco a Cardinal, Conradus Clingius.

Peresius Divinity Reader at Barcilena in Spain, and Cardinal Bellarmine: Of
whom Possevinus writes, that he is one of the two that have won the Garland.
De verbo Dei l. 1. c. 2.

Sacra Scriptura regulae credendi certissima and tutissima est: Per corporales
literas quas cerneremus and legeremus, erudire not voluit Deus.

Writing against Swenck field and the Libertines; this is a legal witness. Pro
Orthodoxo heretici testimonium valeat.

I know to whom I speak, and therefore I forbear the Polemical bands of
arguments to and fro upon this question, which in print and in English is so
fully and learnedly debated.

Our lesson is, seeing Gods care of his Church, for the instruction thereof is
here expressed, in commanding his revealed will to be written, that

God would have his Church to be taught his ways in all the ages thereof.

1. Because the ways of God,

By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, Isa. 53.11.
per scientiam, qua scitur.

Therefore David's Prayer is, That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving
health among all nations.

2. Because the promise of God does run in semine,

I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. Our children are the Lords
inheritance: his care extends so far.

That ye may live, Deuteronomy. 5.33
and that it may be well with you, and that you may prolong your days. But that
is not all.

That it may be well with them and their children for ever. Verse. 29.


3. For his own sake, God against such as either ignorantly through unbelief,
or maliciously and blasphemously shall dispute and argue against God, for
therefore God does condescend to this Apology of himself, that he may instruct
his Church how to plead the cause of his Justice against all strife of tongues,
that the name of God be not evil-spoken of.

To make profit of this point.

1. Herein let us consider what the Lord has done for our souls; for he has
given us two means to communicate to us his holy will, hearing and reading; and
he has used to this purpose both the voice and the pen of holy men; for he
spoke by the mouth of all the holy Prophets since the world began, and holy men
wrote as his spirit directed them.

Let him that has ears to hear, hear quid Spiritus, Ps. 34.16. Mat. 24.15.
and seek ye out the book of the Lord and read: but then add this caution;
Who so reads let him understand. It was Philips question, sed intelligis quod
legis?

Seeing God has written to us, Augnstiue says.

Quae de illa Civitate unde peregrinamur venerunt nobis literae, ipsae sunt
Scripturae.

It was St. Gregory's complaint of Theodorus, In Ps. 90.2
that he was so over-busied with secular cares. Regist. 4.84.


Et quotidie legere negligit verba redemptoris sui; quid est autem Scriptura
sacra, nisi quaedam epistola Omnipotentis dei, ad venturam suam.

It is a question in our times whether printing has done more hurt or good;
for Satan finding this a means to keep things alive in the world, has employed
the Press in all sorts of heresies, in all sorts of idle and lascivious, false
and dicterious, slanderous and biasphemous books.

The remedy is to refrain such readings, and as Dr. Reynold tells Heart his
adversary, that he has no book allowed him to read but the Bible.

It is likely then that he is perfect in that book, and that Physicians do well
when they find their Patient surfeited with too much variety of meat: to
confine him to some one wholesome diet.

So shall we do well to limit our selves to the reading of Gods letter, and
know his mind; for he is wisest, and the wisdom that we shall gather from
thence is wisdom from above, it is able to make us wise unto salvation, as
the Apostle says.

3. Seeing God teaches us by Scripture, David says in one Psalm,

In God will I praise his Word, Ps. 56.4.
verse. 10. twice. He had reason for it: For thy Word has quickened me.

This word is now written; Ps. 119.50.
and whatsoever things are written, they are written for our learning, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, Romans 15.4.
might have hope.

It was Christ's shield by which he bore off the fiery darts of Satan discharged
against him in the wilderness, Scriptum est, it is written; they that know not
the Scriptures know not the Power of God: this is a sure word, because it is
upon record from the Spirit of God, the charter of our heavenly inheritance.

2. It must be written plain, so that not only he that comes of purpose may
read it, but even he that comes along by it may read it as he goes.

When we come to examine this writing, we shall find it to contain the sum
and abridgment of the whole Bible, and all that is written may be referred to
it.

From this no man may be excluded, none forbidden to read it, it must be set
forth to public view, and put into the common eye.

This shows us that are the Ministers of the Word what our work is,



And seeing the Apostle says, God would have all men to be saved, and come to
the knowledge of his truth; that is, saved by coming to that knowledge: we must
be faithful, we must hide none of this light from men.

Christ gave a full Commission to his Apostles, go ye into all the world,
preach ye to every creature.

Saint Paul says, woe is me if I preach not.

2. Because there is a natural blindness in man,

3. We must consider the true end why God gave his word,

The word was given to profit with all, for so says God; Is. 55.10.
as the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not thither,
but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth, and bud, etc.

So shall my word be that goes forth from my mouth, Verse. 11.
it shall not return unto me void.

It does no good on stony ground, where it is not received in, nor where it is
kept off from falling upon any ground.

It must be our care to see that the seed be good, and fit for the ground where
it is sown, that it may come up again in fruit.

And because some have weak eyes, we must write very plain characters; and
because some have running and gadding wits, we must write so as they that run
may read.

This teaches the minister to have a special regard of his audience that they
may profit by his ministry; what the good and perfect will of God is.

Words thus spoken do more good as the Apostle says in the Church then 100
spoken in strange tongues.

Saint Bernard says, that it is better apta then alta sapere. Christ our
Master that set us awork, and whose (...) we are, told his Disciples Multa
habeo vobis dicere, Job. 16.12
sed nunc non potestis portare, I have many things to say, Ezech. 47 3, 4 etc.
but you cannot bear them now. It must be our discretion to let our preachings
run like the waters in Ezekiel, which were at first going into them up to the
ancles, then to the knees, then they rose up to the loins, then they grew fit
only for good swimmers.

And it must be your discretion that are hearers of our preachings, to remember
your own measure, and Christ's rule, qui potest capere capiat; let no man (...)
be over-wise, nor exercise himself in things too high for him; let not such as
be mere waders adventure to swim in deeps, but content themselves in those
sholes where they may have sure footing, till God the giver of wisdom do
reveal more to them.

They preach most profitably to a mixed auditory consisting off several
scantings of understanding, who serve them all as Joseph's brethren were served
in Pharaohs house,

The eldest according to his age, Genesis 43.33.
and the youngest according to his youth.

That the weakest understanding may gain some light, the weak understanding may
gain more light; the good understanding may better it self, and the best may
not think the time lost. To make rough things plain, and to write in a full
hand and a legible character.

This is Gods own manner of teaching, Isa. 48.17.
as he says, I am the Lord thy God, which teaches thee to profit, which
leads thee by the way that thou should go. 1 Cor. 7.53.
And Saint Paul says, This I speak unto you for your own profit.

2. transitu, in passing by.

Belshazzar was a runner, for being amongst his cups, and drinking in the
vessels of Gods house amongst his Princes and Concubines, and praising his own
Idol-gods, he saw an handwriting upon the wall, it was so fairly written, that
he could not but read it; and it was so full of terror, that though he had all
the means to move delight before him, Dan. 5.6
yet The Kings countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that
the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another.

The messengers whom the Chief Priests sent to entangle Christ in his words,
were runners; they came with purpose to do Christ wrong, but his preaching was
like a table so fairly written, that they could not but read; and they
returned, saying, Never man spoke like that man.

If they that run from the word may be taken thus with a glance upon it, you
may soon conceive what effect it may work in those that run to it, that are
swift to hear, that hunger and thirst after righteousness; If they that hear
or read the word immediately, aliud agentes, may perceive the mind of the Lord
by the plain opening thereof: much more they that come of purpose and run to
it, that come with appetite and desire after it, with delight in it, with
purpose to profit by it, and with due Preparation of the heart by earnest
Prayer, for the holy blessing of God upon the Ministry, and hearing of it;
therefore quid Scriptum est? quomodo legis? what is written? how read thou?

2. The assurance that he gives of the performance of his purpose in due time.

The Vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not
lie. Next verse.

It will surely come, it will not tarry.

This is Rhetorically set down; For 1. Here is veritas decreti, the truth of
the decree: The Vision is yet for an appointed time. 2. Here is veritas verbi,
the truth of the word: it shall speak, it shall not lie. 3. Here is veritas
facti, the truth of the deed: It will surely come, it will not tarry.


1. Decretum, the Decree.

The Vision is here put for the thing seen, as you have heard, and that is the
declaration of Gods just judgment in the cause of his Church against the
Chaldaeans; for he says the time is appointed, meaning in his own holy and
fixed decree which is unchangeable.

2. Verbum, the Word.

God will speak his mind by this Vision, and declare what he intends against
the Chaldeans, and therein he will deal truly and faithfully; for he is truth,
he cannot lie.

For these be two Premises or Antecedents to one conclusion, for we may
conclude both ways.

1. The Decree of God is past: Ergo veniet, non tardabit, he shall come, he
will not tarry. 2. The Word of God is past: Ergo.
From thence we are taught,

That whatsoever God has decreed or spoken, shall certainly take effect in the
appointed time.

The holy word of Scripture confirms this: Indeed who should alter Gods
decrees? for he himself will not, I may say truly he cannot change them; for
the Apostle says, he works all things after the council of his will. Ephesians.
1.11.


And the Will of God is himself.

And he cannot deny him self. 2 Timothy 2.13


Neither can he repent, as Samuel told Saul,

The strength of Israel will not lie nor repent, 1 Samuel 15.29.
for he is not a man that he should repent.

And if God himself be without variableness and shadow of change, his Will
being established by his counsel and wisdom, we may be sure that there is no
power beneath him that can swerve him from his own ways: for the wiseman says;

There is no wisdom nor understanding, Pro. 21.30
nor counsel against the LORD.

One reason may serve of this Doctrine.

God is equal, infinite in his wisdom, justice and mercy; to conceive him
infinite in power to do whatsoever he will, and not infinite in wisdom to
decree whatsoever he will do, were to make him a Tyrant, not a King; but David
says; The Lord is King, and we do ascribe it to him, Tuum est regnum and
potentia, thine is the Kingdom and power: for power without equal proportion
of wisdom, must needs degenerate into cruelty.

This wisdom foreseeth all things that shall be, this wisdom decrees all
things that he will do, which his power after in the times appointed, does
perform, and bring to act.

Against this Doctrine is Objected.

1. Why then do so many texts of Scripture tell us that God repents.

Sometimes he repents of the good that he has done: for to make man upon the
earth was a good work, yet it is said

And it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, Genesis 6 6.
and it greived him at his heart.

So to make Saul King over Israel was a good work, for it was his own choice,
yet himself says, It repents me that I have set up Saul to be King. 1 Samuel
15.11.


Sometime God is said to repent of the evil that he has done; malum poenae,
the evil of punishment is there to be understood. So after the great plague
when David had made a fault in numbering the people,

When the Angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, the Lord
repented him of the evil, 2 Samuel 24.16.
and said to the Angel, It is enough, stay thy hand.

And concerning his Word, we have frequent examples in Scripture of events
contrary to the letter of his Word. For example,

His word was to Hezekiah by Isaiah, set thy house in order, for thou shall
dye, non vives.

Yet Hezekiah did live 15 years after that; his word was to Nineveh by Jonah,
40 days and Niniveh shall be destroyed; yet yet it fell not out so, and the
story says, God repented of the evil that he had said that he would do to
them. Joh. 3.10.


To all we answer. Sol.


1. That the Will of God, that is, his counsel decreeing what he will do, is
constantly the same and unchangeable, as we have taught. 2. Where it is in
Scripture charged upon God that he does repent, we say with Chrysostom. it is
verbum parvitati nostrae accommodatum, a word accommodated to our weakness.
Hom. 22. in Genesis

For we are said to repent when we change our minds; now the God of wisdom and
power never changes his mind, but sometimes he does change his operations;
there is not mutatio mentis, but mutatio dextrae Exclesi, as St. Aug. Paenitudo
dei est mutandorum immutabilis ratio; by which he without changing of his own
decree, makes alterations in the disposition of things mutable.

This for want of understanding in us to comprehend the ways of God, is called
repentance and grief in God: but as Aug. says,

Non est perturbatio, sed judicium quo irrogatur poena; as Saint Paul. I speak
after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of your flesh. 3. I approve
that received distinction of the Will of God.

1. Voluntas signi, of the Sign. 2. Voluntas beneplaciti, of his good
Pleasure.
1. God does reveal his ways to the sons of men, and shows them what he would
have them do, and opens to them the knowledge, and tendereth to them the use
of fit means to perform that which he would have them, and so it is said he
would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of his Truth.

According to this revealed Will of God, he does offer mercy to all, and he
does withal threaten judgment to such as forsake their own mercy, as Jonah
says.

And when he sees cause to call in either his mercy from them that abuse it,
or to stop the course of his justice to them whom correction does amend, then
we say he repents him of that which he has either promised or threatened: for
clearing whereof understand.

That God never changes in promise, or in threatening* but only in things
concerning this life; as in all the examples repeated, all those promises and
threatenings be used as motives to induce obedience, and therefore they are not
absolute but conditional.

For it is no good argument to persuade a man to be Religions, and to fear God,
abstaining from all the pleasing delights of the world, to promise him his
hearts desire, if he know that that promise does bind God, that whatsoever he
do, he shall be partaker of the promise.

And it is no inducement to dissuade sin by the commination of judgment, if the
judgment must of necessity be inflicted.

Therefore this revealed Will of God is conditional, and has reference to our
obedience, and faith, and good life, and use of the means ordained by God and
tendered to us.

This is the rule of life, and by this Will is the Church of God governed; for
by this he does reveal himself, both in his word, and in his permissions, and
in his operations.

1. God signifies his Will by his Word; for that does declare in precepts,
prohibitions and examples, what God would have to be done, what not to be done;
it reveals both rewards and punishments; and it uses both promises, and
threatenings.

2. God signifies his Will by permissions, because he declares thereby, that
what he suffers to be done that he wills to be effected.

3. By operations; for what God does, he does according to his Will.

2. Voluntas beneplaciti, is the secret Will of God reserved in himself, in
wi^ch

1. There is consilium, the wisdom of God foreseeing what is to be done, 2.
There is decretum determining it; and herein the counsel of God is not the
rule of his Will; for there is nothing in God above his Will: but wiling all
things to be thus as he has decreed, he foreseeth in wisdom what he wills;
and therefore the rule is not with God,
This is good, therefore I decree it; but this I decree, therefore it is good.

Now sometimes there seems to be an opposition between these two Wills of God,
which is thus reconciled.

The Will of God is revealed to man

1. Either for necessary and absolute obedience, as in the whole moral Law of
God. 2. For probation and trial; as in the commandment given to Abraham to
offer up Isaak, wherein God concealed his secret Will which was to preserve
Isaak: and concealed the purpose of his commandments which was to try the says
of Abraham.
So on the contrary; he sent to Pharaoh commanding him to let Israel go, yet it
was not his secret will that Israel should go yet: but the commandment was
given to convince Pharaoh of hardnesle of heart; and as in Abraham the
commandment did cause him to declare his faith; so in Pharaoh did it convince
him of rebellion to the Will of God.

So all our preaching, wherein we persuade repentance and promise life eternal,
it serves to direct all that look for salvation in the way of life: and it
serves to convince the world of unrighteousness if they obey not.

The answer then is, that whatsoever God wills and decrees voluntate
beneplaciti, by the will of good pleasure does take effect: What God wills
voluntate signi by the Will signified, not always.

Reply. How then shall I know what to do, seeing the signifying Will of God is
my rule, and that seems uncertain, and not agreeable to the secret Will of
Gods good pleasure?

Sol. Do as Abraham did; prepare to offer thy son; do as thou art commanded,
leave the event and the disposition of thy obedience to God, who will further
reveal himself unto thee.

Do as Hezechiah did, set thine house in order, yet use the means by repentance
and Prayer to prolong thy life.

Do as the Ninivites did, fast and repent, and call upon. the name of the Lord,
and try him, as the Prophet says, Whether h^ will show thee mercy or not.

But to bring this home to my text, when God pronounces the Decree of
Judgment against the enemies of the Church, and promise^h mercy to his Church,
believe him in both; for neither can Gods enemies repent to change the course
of his Justice, neither can his Church sin unto death, that he should take
his mercy utterly from it.

So then the Argument holds strong, God has said and decreed what he will do
against these Chaldaeans, what for his Church; therefore it shall come to pass.

Quest. But if this be true,

To this our answer is, that this cannot discourage Prayer, because the decree
is past and unchangable; this is the proper foundation of Prayer; for the
Apostle says;

And this is the confidence that we have in him, 1 John 5.14.
that if we ask any thing according to his Will, he hears us.

So that it is a necessary knowledge before we undertake to pray, to know what
is that good, that acceptable and perfect Will of God.

For we not only lose our labor, but we do also offend God, if we ask any
thing against or beside his Will: therefore that we might not run into the
error of the sons of Zebedee, Nescitis quid petatis, you know not what you
should ask, Our Savior has set down a form of Prayer so absolute, as that we
cannot justify the asking of any thing according to the Will of God that has
not reference to one of those petitions.

Reply. If then we prevail in our Prayers,

Our answer is, that though the supreme agent in all operations be the Will of
God,

So God gives every good gift: yet we are without any wrong to God thankful to
men, by whose means any good comes to us.

So that the doctrine does remain firm; Whatsoever God has promised to his
Church, or threatened the perverse enemies thereof, that he will surely perform;
for the decrees and the word of God are unchangable.

Quest. But when God threatens me punishment, and denounces judgment against
me; how shall I know whether it be voluntas signi, or been placiti? is there
not an hope left me, that God may repent him of the evil that he threatened?

It is a note of the evil conscience to fear where no fear is, ^e, where there
is no cause of fear; an elect man fearing judgment threatened which shall not
come near him, fears where no cause is of fear.

Sol. To this I answer; let not us dispute the Will of God, or search beyond
that which is revealed; if God have revealed his Will to us, that must be our
guide.

That revealed will has threatened nothing in us but sin, and sin carries two
rods about it, shame and fear.

There be two things in a regenerate Elect man.

1. A Conscience of his sin. 2. Faith in the promises of God through Christ.
So long as we do live, we do carry about us Corpus peccati the body of sin;
and as that does shake and weaken faith, so does it confirm and strengthen
fear.

1. We are taught from hence to believe the Word of God; He is faithful that
has promised.

The faithful servants of God have this promise, I will not leave thee nor
forsake thee; David believes him, in convalle umbr aemortis non timebo, in the
valley of the shadow of death I will not fear. Job believes him, Though he kill
me I will trust in him. David believes verily when he smarts, I shall see the
goodness of God in the land of the living.

It is a sweet content of the inward man, when the conscience pleads not guilty
to the love of sin, though our infirmities miscarry us often, that we may say
with Nehemiah, Remember me O Lord concerning this, and blot not out the loving
kindness that I showed to thy house and to the officers thereof; Neh. 13.14.
and with Ezekiah, Remember Lord now I beseech thee how I have walked before
thee in truth, Is. 38.3.
and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. But
it follows,

And Hezekiah wept sore. If he were so good a man why did he weep? if not so
good, why did he boast?

Surely we carry all our good amongst a multitude of infirmities and therefore
we cannot rejoice in our own integrity with a perfect and full joy; yet is it a
sweet repose to the heart, when God gives us peace of conscience from the
dominion of sin.

So on the other side believe God threatening impenitent sinners with his
judgments; for he is wise to see the sins of the ungodly; he is holy to hate
them, he is just to judge them, and he is Omnipotent to punish them.

Let me give one instance.

The third Commandment in the first Table of the law says, Thou shall not take
the name of the Lord thy God in vain; what needs any more?

1. Put these two one against another Thou. The Lord thy God.


2. Consider what the law concerns, Gods name, wherein stands His glory. Our
help.


3. What is forbidden, taking it in vain, and we pray, Sanctificetur, let it
be hallowed.

But where all this will not serve; yet this is murus ahenus, a brazen wall,
one would think; God does make yet another fence about his name, an hedge of
thorns. The Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

The Laws of God be unreversible decrees; heaven and earth shall pass, ere
one of these words shall sink or lose strength.

Yet the blasphemer fears nothing; that is a crying sin in this land; not
the houses only, the streets and high ways resound the dishonor of Gods name;
this sin is grown incorrigible.

The Land mourns because of oaths.

Hoc dicunt omnes ante Alpha and Beta puellae. And believe God who cannot lie,
He will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

Thus we may make use of this doctrine, to restrain, if not overcome, and to
destroy the dominion, if not the being of sin in us.

2. For the better rectifying of our judgments, and reformation of our lives,
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. Whence comes all
this, but from the constant truth of Gods unreversible decrees, because the
word is gone out of his mouth? and though the ungodly do not believe it though
it be told them.

Verily there is a reward for the righteous, doubtless there is a God that
judges in the earth.

We may say of our times as Hecuba did of hers,

Non unquam tulit documenta fors majora quam fragili loco starent superbi: for

We live in the school of discipline, and the rod of correction is not only
showed, but used with a strong hand, that all men may fear to be unrighteous;
we have not only Vigorem verborum, the vigor of words, chiding sin in our
ministry of the word, but rigorem verberum, the rigor of stripes, in the
administration of justice; never did any age bring both fuller examples of
terror, then we have heard with our ears, and seen with our eyes; for the
wisdom of Gods decrees and the word of Gods truth is justified in our sight;
therefore seeing sentence executed upon evil works, let the hearts of the sons
of men be wholly set in them to do evil.

3. Let us consider the vain confidence of the ungodly, Isay expresses it
fully.

Ye have said we have made a Covenant with death, Isa. 28.15.
and with hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass
through, it shall not come to us; for we have made lies our refuge, and under
falsehood have we hid our selves.

They are answered and confounded.

The bed is shorter then a man can stretch himself on it, Verse. 20.
and the covering narrower then he can wrap himself in it.

He that is to lodge so uneasily, cannot say I will lay me down in peace and
take my rest.

The Chaldeans invade the Church, they kill, and take possession, and divide
the prey, they oppose better and more righteous men then themselves; their
trust is in their strength, and riches, and power, Nec leves metuunt Deos.

What care they who weeps, so they laugh; or who bleeds, so they sleep in a
whole skin; who dies, so they live. They trust in lying vanities.

Solomon says. Eccl. 8.12.
Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days his prolonged, yet
surely I know it shall be well with them that fear God, Verse. 13.
which fear before him: But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither
shall he prolong his days which are a shadow, because he fears not before
God.

God has made an Act against them, their judgment is sealed, they have nothing
but vanity and lies to support their staggering and reeling estate of temporal
felicity; God is not in all their ways, nor the direction of God to manage
them, and therefore not the protection of God to defend them; he leads them
into temptation, but he does not deliver them from evil.

But God is a Rock for foundation, and a Castle for defense to all such as put
their trust in him.

3. The patient expectation which he requires in the Prophet for the
peformance of this promise;

Though it tarry, wait for it.

We must not not think long to tarry the Lords leisure; He that believes shall
not make haste; Isa. 28.16. Ps. 37.34.
and it is David's precept, Wait on the Lord, and keep his way.

And we have Jobs example, All the days of my appointed time will I wait.

The promise of the Messiah was made in Paradise, The seed of the woman shall
bruise the head of the Serpent.

This was the Gospel that God himself preached to the Serpent, and all the
sacrifices of the old law, and all the Prophecies of former ages, and all the
Types in the Old Testament, were Commentaries upon this text; the Fathers in
all ages of the Church before Christ, rested on this; the Apostle says of them,

These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen
them a far off and were persuaded of them, Heb. 11.13
and embraced them.

1. Because this does best fit the constant decree of God, that we do rest in
it; Scio cui credidi, I know whom I have believed.

2. Because this does best declare our faith, for faith being of things not
seen in themselves, the Apostle says here, we see in a glass; faith is a
Christian man's Prospective, through which he beholds all things far off as if
they were near at hand.

3. Because this is an exercise of our patience; for ye have need of patience,
Heb. 10.36
that after ye have done the will of God ye might receive the promise,

For yet a little while, Verse. 37.
and he that shall come, will come and will not tarry.

4. This also does exercise our hope;

Rejoice in hope.

Saint. Bernard does teach us to make use of this doctrine,

Tua considero in quibus tota spes mea consistit;

1. Charitatem adoptionis: 2. Veritatem promissionis. 3. Potestatem
redditionis; upon this he builds.
Dicit fides, parata sunt magna inexcogitabilia bona a Deo fidelibus suis.

Dicit spes, mihi illa servantur.

Dicit charitas, curro ego ad illa.

We must be very tender how we do invade the royalties of God; Christ says,
that his Father has kept the times and seasons in his own power, he will have
the alone managing of them.

They that cannot tarry the Lords leisure, do commonly fall into one of these
two evils.

1. Either they murmr impatiently at God, and quarrel his delay, as Israel
did when they came out of Egypt. 2. Or else they seek unlawful means to
accomplish their desires; so the woman of Endor gets customers.
Against these, Jam. 1.4.
Let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting
nothing.

This work is thus perfected.

1. Let us not be too busy to search into the ways of God, to know things to
come.

It pleased God before the coming of Christ in the flesh, to reveal much of
his purpose concerning the time to come by the ministry of his Prophets; and
the Devil finding men taken with this desire of the knowledge of future events,
did erect his oracles, whose giddy and dubious predictions did so infatuate the
world, that few did undertake any matter of moment, without consulting the
oracle; the Devil grew rich by the offerings and presents that were given him
for divination, when the success sorted, and he lost nothing of reputation or
belief, when it failed, because all his oracles were of ambiguous sense, for to
carry if need were, contrary constructions.

And it is a thing admirable which the wisdom of observation has recorded to
the honor of Christ, that at his coming into the world all oracles grew
speechless, to show that he that should dissolve the works of the Devil was
come.

The head of this Serpent being now by his coming bruised, the way to establish
our hearts, is to rest in the Lord, and not to be too busy with the Key of his
Closet, and to content our selves with so much knowledge of things to come, as
either

1. The wisdom of foresight may read in the volume of reasonable discourse. 2.
Or the faith of Gods holy ones may read in the written word of holy Scripture.
3 Or the judgment of those Sholars of nature may find by searching the great
book of the creatures; for these open things are for us, and here, qui potest
capere capiat, he that can let him receive it.
It has been the fault of many, that they have so anxiously discrutiated
themselves with the solicitous inquisition of the future, that they have too
much neglected the present, and desiring to know what God would do for them
hereafter, both themselves lose the sense, and God the thanks of that good that
he was then doing.

God has his ways and his paths where his footsteps are not seen.

2. Let us take the word of God for his promise and threatenings, whatsoever
appearances do put in to counterswade.

In the case of my text, The oppressed Church must tarry; they have two promises

One of their own deliverance and restoration.

Another of their enemies confusion and ruin. God has promised both; yet
against this promise, the Church which hears of comfort, feels smart, and their
threatened enemies rejoice and divide their spoil; the assurance is, God cannot
lie, and repentance is hid from his eyes.

Why should man desire better assurance then the word of God to fix and
establish his heart? seeing al things had their being from the word, and no man
now in being does not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
from the mouth of God?

3. To perfect our patience, that we may wait the Lords leisure, we must
beforehand consider that the Vision may tarry; the promises of God which shall
be fulfilled in their fullness of time may be foretold long before.

Christ was promised in Paradise, some do think the first day of the world to
man, i. e. in the day of man's creation, the eve of the first Sabbath; but he
was not borne till almost 4000 years after; yet the faithful in those times
waited for the coming of Christ, and tarried with patience till he came.

4. God himself waited 120 years for the repentance of the old world, all the
while the Arc was preparing; it is the Apostles phrase,

The long-suffering of God waited.

If God have the patience to wait on us for our good, 1 Pet. 3.20
this may perfect our patience in our waiting on him for our own good.

Saint Paul calls this The riches of his goodness and forbearance and
long-suffering, Romans 2.4.
and says that The goodness of God leads to repentance.

If we consider his provocation, and how our daily sins tempt him to repent
that he either did make us, or do any thing for us; all which are in his sight,
and all which his soul abhors; and if we compare this his patience with our
passionate bitterness upon the least provocation; and consider how ready we
are to call for fire from heaven to consume them that anger us; we shall see
that God does wait for our repentance with much patience; and who would not
wait upon such a Lord?

5. Let us consider how willingly we do attend and observe those that can do us
any good; how early we rise to be sure to prevent their hours; how well our
hopes do support us, and stay our stomachs, though many delays interpose their
stop, and threaten failing: yet the success of expectation in things temporal
depending on men is always uncertain; for there are no bounds that can oblige
humane favor, not merits, not rewards, not promises, not oaths; but the
promises of God are Yea and Amen, as he says

The vision is yet for an appointed time; at the end it shall speak and not
lie: it will surely come.

This assurance that we have from the Word does make expectation easy; it is
no pain to tarry for that which shall not fail us.

Jacob thought the seven years a short time bestowed for Rachel, because he
loved her, though he served and was not his own man till he had fulfilled the
time.

Neither does that of Solomon discourage our tarrying the Lords leisure,
because he says, Pro. 13.12
Hope deferred makes the heart sick.

1. Because, if that hope be of some things temporal, depending upon the favor
of the times, or persons of men, there may be a failing, therefore delay is a
disease in such cases, and makes the heart sick. 2. But hope in-the promises
of God determined to their certain time, cannot be said to be delayed; for his
hope is in vain, who hops any thing before the time. 3. And again, where hope
rests in the Word and Promise of God; neither the alterations of persons, nor
the vicissitude of times, not the intercurrence of impediments can any way
cross the purpose, disable the means, or defeat the end of Gods decree.
Further, if we understand Solomon of hope rightly grounded on the promise, and
construe the deferring it, not to any protraction beyond the time, but to the
long expectation of it in tempore suo, which desire of fruition does make long,
that that hope makes the heart sick, we must not understand this sickness as
a disease of the heart: for when the Church says,

Stay me with flagons, and comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love. Cant.
2.5.
Let no man think that this sickness was any disease in the Church; we may say
of it as our Lord did of Lazarus his sickness, This sickness is not to death.

This is but fervor of the Spirit, and earnestness of desire, as Bern. says;
it is taedium quoddam impaetientis desideris; he means and holy impatience, quo
necesse est affici mentem amatoris absente eo quod amat, dum totus in
expectatione quantamlibet festinationem reputat tarditatem.

This is an wholesome sickness; it is the disease of the whole creation, and
of all the Elect;

For we know that the whole creation groaneth and traveleth in pain together
until now. Romans 8.22.


And not only they, Verse. 23.
but our selves also, which have the first fruits of the Spirit; even we our
selves groan within our selves waiting for the adoption, to wit the redemption
of our body.

This verse. 19. is called the earnest expectation of the creature, waiting for
the manifestation of the sons of God: This is not weakness of the flesh in the
Elect, but fervor and strength of the Spirit.

So David longed as he professes.

My soul longs, Ps. l 84.2.
yea even faints for the courts of the Lord, my heart and my flesh cries out
for the living God.

And this desire goes with us to heaven; for even there the souls must wait,
and they are full of this holy desire; which proves that their happiness is
not consummate till the resurrection.

For the souls under the Altar cry with a loud voice, saying, How long O Lord,
holy and true, do thou not judge and averge our blood on them that dwell on
the earth? Rev. 6.10.


This desire is Cos^orationis, the whetstone of prayer; for the more our hearts
are established in the assurance of the truth of Gods promises, the more is the
fire of this desire kindled and enflamed in us, and then it breaks forth into
prayer, and the prayers that are fired at the Altar of zeal, asend the next way
to the throne of grace.

Christ himself kindled this heat in us when he taught us to pray to our
father, fiat voluntas tua, thy Will be done: for we may tarry the leisure of
the fiat in faith, and yet desire it with fervency; for in nothing do we more
declare our concurrence with the will of God, then in our earnestness in
prayer to him to fulfill his Will.

For Application of this point, let us look back to the Vision; it is double.
For God reveals,

1. The purpose of his fierce wrath against the enemies of his Church, whom he
threatens to consume. 2. His promise of mercy to his Church, that he will
restore it to the joy of his countenance, and give it rest from all her
enemies.
This promise of God holds to the worlds end; even the whole Vision is for
appointed times.

Therefore the distresses of the Church must ever be comforted with those
comforts; for these the Apostle does call The comforts wherewith we are
comforted of God. All other comforts spend themselves into breath, and vanish
and leave the heart oppressed as it was; the Vision of Gods revealed comfort
establishes the heart, for this tells us where we may have rest for our
souls; namely in the decree and promise of God.

And needful is this comfort now; for though our Church by the good favor of
God do enjoy the liberty of the Word in peace, under the gracious government of
our King, whom God has anointed defender of the Faith:

The Protestant and reformed Churches in other parts of the world do at this
present smart for it; long have they lived under the rod of the Spanish
inquisition; long subject to the sugillations of the Jesuits their mortal
enemies.

But now the sword of massacre is drawn against them; before there were some
attempts made upon the persons of some few of the Religion, or some
encroachment made upon their goods.

They thought it gain to lose all for Christ, so that they might win him, and
be found in him; but now the poor distressed Church hears the voice of the
daughter of Babel crying out against her, Nudate, Nudate. First discerning
them, and then, but who can tell what then? the true Church lying at the mercy
of Rome shall find her mercies cruel.

We cannot but take notice of it, that the Church of Rome is both a strong and
a bloody enemy; she is not yet stupannated, nor past teeming; she abounds in
continual sucerescence of new seed.

Cardinal Bellarm. under the name of Tertus does wonder why our King should
fear the cruel dominion of the Pope, under whom all his Tributaries do so well.

And the humble Supplicants to his Majesty for the liberty of conscience as
they call it, and for Toleration of the Romish Religion have urged the
peaceable state of our neighbors in France, where the Papist and Protestant do
both exercise their Religion in Peace.

We now see they feel and smart for it, that there can be no peace with
Jezebel of Rome, 2 Reg. 9.22.
so long as her whoredoms and her witchcrafts are so many. She lies lurking
in the secret places, to murder the innocent; her patience is limited with no
other bounds, but Donec adsint vires, till they have strength. Nuni proximus
ardet Vcalegon, They have declared themselves here what they would have done;
Our comfort is in this Vision, and we must tarry and wait the Lords leisure.

Haman the Jesuit has got a decree against the Reformed Church in France to
root it out, and the sword is now drawn against them: the Protestants in
Bohemia have felt the edge of the Romish sword, she that calls her self mother
of the Christians, ostendit ubera, verbera producit; she pretends love. Savus
amor docuit natorum sanguine matrem commaculare manus.

And the Church makes pitiful moan, saying,

Shall they therefore empty their not, and not spare continually to stay the
nations? Hab. 1.17


But we know that God is good to Israel, to such as be true of heart: God has
a sword too, and he is whetting of it; he has a quiver, and it is full of
arrows; he is bending of his bow, and preparing his instruments of death, and
he has a right hand, and that shall find out all his enemies.

How shall we wear out the weary hours of time, till God come and have mercy
upon Sion? we have many ways to deceive the time.

1. The idle think the time long; whilst we have therefore time let us do good,
we have work enough to work out our salvation with fear and trembling, to make
our Calling and Election sure, to seek the Lord whilst he may be found, to wash
us and make us clean, to put away the evil of our works, to cease to do evil,
to learn to do well: to get and keep faith and a good conscience, to walk with
our God.

They that well consider what they have to do, borrow time from their natural
rest, from their meats, from their recreations, to bestow it on the service of
God.

There be that overcharge themselves with the businesses of the world, with the
care of gathering riches, with ambitious thoughts of rising higher, with wanton
desires of the flesh, with sensual surfeits in gluttony and drunkenness, and
the day is not long enough for these children of this world, to whom I say with
the shepherd,

Quin tu aliquid saltem potius quorum indiget usus. Virg Alexis.


Are these the things you look upon? non relinquetur lapis super lapidem, There
shall not be left a stone upon a stone Walk circumspectly, not as fools but as
wise, redeeming the time because the days are evil.

Remember your Creation to good works that you should walk in them, and whilst
you have the light walk in the light, Ambulate in luce, Ambulate digni luce.

2. To sweeten the delay of the vision, and to shorten the time of our
expectation, let us hear our Savior saying Search the Scriptures. There

1. We shall find the promises of God made to his Church in all ages thereof,
beginning in Paradise at semen mulieris the seed of the woman, and so
continuing to the fall of the great strumpet, the ruin of Babylon in the
Revelation; wherein we shall find God to be yesterday, and to day, and the same
for ever. 2. We shall read the examples of Gods mercy to his Church, and
judgment of the enemies there of all the Bible through.
It is a work for the Sabbath as appears in the proper Psalm for the day, To
praise God for this, Psalm 92.
to sing unto the name of the most high.

The Church professes it^^^ (...)

Thou Lord have made me glad through thy work, Verse. 4.
I will triumph in the works of thy hands.

The works of God are these.

When the wicked spring as grass, and when all the workers of wickedness do
flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.

For lo thine enemies O Lord, for do thine enemies shall perish; all the
workers of iniquity shall be scartered.

But my horn shall be exalted like the horn of an Unicorn; I shall be
anointed with fresh oil.

Mine eye shall see my desire upon mine enemies, mine ears shall hear my
desire of the wicked that rise up against me.

The righteous shall flourish like a palm tree, he shall grow like a Cedar in
Lebanon.

Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts
of our God.

They shall bring forth more fruit in their age, they shall be fat and
flourishing. The use of all,

To show that the Lord is upright; he is my rock, and there is no
unrighteousuesse in him.

These be meditations of a Sabbath of rest, and the word of God gives full
examples of this truth, and daily experience in our own times offers it.

3. The Scripture does put into our mouths Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, teaching us to sing and to make melody to God in our hearts.

Excellent to this purpose are the Psalms of the Bible, and if we sing merrily
to the God of our salvation, this will pass away the time of our waiting for
the promise of God cheerfully; we shall not think it long.

For this did David desire to live. Oh let me live, and I will praise thy name.

4. The Scripture is full of heavenly consolations to establish the heart; that
it shall not sink under the burden of this expectation, for in the
Scriptures, the Spirit of God speaks,

Let him that has ears to hear, hear what the Spirit speaks to the Churches:
this Spirit Christ has left in his Church to be the comforter of his Church,
to abide with it for ever: we have the earnest of this Spirit to bind the
bargain of eternal salvation.

We have the first fruits of this Spirit.

We have the testimony of this Spirit witnessing with our Spirits, that we are
the Sons of God, and if Sons, then Heyrs, and Co heyrs with Christ.

3. To spend the time of our waiting here for the promise of God, we have the
holy exercise of Prayer; this does bring us to a familiar conference with God,
and as in hearing and reading of holy Scripture, we say, Audiam quid loquatur
Deus;

So in Prayer God says, He shall call upon me and I will hear him, I will be
with him.

In Prayer we may challenge God of his promise, as the Psalmist, Do well O Lord
unto thy servant according to thy Word.

Remember thy Word unto thy servant, Ps. 119.49.
upon which thou have caused me to hope.

Faith and feeling are not always joined together; therefore in the want and
expectation of Gods promises we pray, building upon the Word of God, because we
know, Verse. 89.
For ever O Lord thy Word is settled in heaven.

Saint Augustine says of Prayer, it is oranti subsidium, and help to him that
prays; deo sacrificium, a sacrifice to God; daemonibus flagellum, a scourge
to the devils.

1. It helps us, for it sets us in the face of God, and brings us into
his conference; and the time can never seem long to us, that is spent in that
company. 2. It is a sacrifice to God; for it is the performance of a duty by
him commanded. 3. It is a scourge to the devils, and to all his agents; for
when we pray against the evil, our God hears us and delivers us from evil.
Verse. 4. Behold his soul which is lifted up is not upright in him: But the
just shall live by his faith.
GOd having directed the Prophet concerning the Vision in the two former
verses, 1. For the Publication, and then for the expectation thereof; He comes
now to the Vision it self, which contains A Declaration of his holy Will in
his general Administration of Justice, and so does not only serve those times
and persons present, but may be extended to all times and persons so long as
the world endures.

And Gods showing hereof makes it a Vision to his Prophet, and so to his
Church, and so it begins at Behold.

Now the answer of God does first prevent an objection which might arise out of
Gods former words; for when he says of the vision, that the time is appointed
for it, and though it tarry, the Church must wait: as implying that it might be
long before it were fullfilled; the Prophet might enquire; but what shall the
People do in the mean time? how shall the afflicted hold out till that time
appointed?

Therefore in the rest of the chapter,

1. He clears that objection, verse. 4. 2. He reveals the Proceedings of his
Justice, against sundry sins in all the rest of the chapter.
For the first let us examine the words.

Behold. Here he opens the eyes and clears the sight of the Prophet, and of
the Church to see the Vision, requiring us to take the matter into serious
consideration, as the Apostle says, Consider what I say. Let him that has
ears to hear, hear what the Spirit speaks unto the Churches; so is this word
often used in Scripture to move attention.

His soul which is listed up in him is not upright.

Interpreters do two ways understand these words, either thus, He that is not
upright, his soul is lifted up; or by Conversion.

He that is lifted up is not upright. This last we follow, and this I take to
be Gods meaning.

It is true in the first sense that the ungodly man seeks trust elsewhere
then in God, and does strengthen himself in the malice or pride of his heart.

But God would show here that whosoever is thus big-swoln in the pride of his
heart, has not rectam animam, some read quietam or tranquillam animam, a right
or a quiet soul.

It agrees well with the Prophets complaint of the insolenty of the
Chaldaeans, that they being now lifted up with the glory of their many
victories, their souls are not upright; wherein he declares them horrible
offenders, and therefore obnoxious to his high displeasure.

Mr. Calv. does understand this place thus, that God declares his just
judgment against the Chaldaeans, that because they have trusted in themselves,
they shall have no peace in their souls, but some new suspicions shall still
arise to disquiet them, or new hopes to put them on upon fresh adventures, or
some new fears to discrefiate them, so that they shall never rest in their
souls.

Arias Montanus and Ribera a Jesuit do both follow a corrupt Translation.

Ecce qui incredulus est non erit recta anima ejus. Whereas he speaks not of
unbelief, but of pride of heart which yet does include infidelity, because such
do translate the trust that they ought to place in God alone unto themselves,
and their own means of accomplishing their intendments: but our reading does
much better agree with our copy.

It follows in the second part of the Antithesis, But the just shall live by
his faith.

And here let me first tell you that this sentence is cited in the New
Testament often.

1. Romans 2.17. As it is written, the just shall live by faith.

2. Galat. 3.11. But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God,
it is evident; for the just shall live by faith.

3. Heb. 10.37. For yet a little while, and he yet shall come, will come and
will not tarry.

38. Now the just shall live by faith, and if any man shall draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him.

In all these four places the words have one and the same sense.

The just man, that is, he who is justified by a saving faith, shall be
supported by that faith; so as whatsoever either outward or inward calamities
shall assault him, his faith shall carry him through all: because putting his
trust only in God, in the confidence of the Mediation of Jesus Christ, he shall
have peace of conscience, and shall take all that befalls him in good part. So
then, 1. By the just, we do understand not any legal righteousness, such as
stands in the performance of obedience to the whole law; which no man but
Christ, God and man could perform: but an Evangelical righteousness, which
does consist in a godly zeal, and holy endeavor of obedience to the law,
according to the measure of that grace which God has given to men, and
whereunto is joined both repentance of all sins, and an holy sorrow that we do
come so short of that full obedience, which in duty we do owe to God.

And where he says vivet he shall live, he does mean both a natural, a
spiritual and an eternal life.

1. A natural life; for faith does make that to be a life which else were a
death; for the wicked are dead in trespasses and sins; so Christ says, let the
dead bury their dead, and the wanton widows are said to be dead even whilst
they live. But by faith our natural life has life put into it, as the Apostle
says,

And the life which I now live in the flesh, Gal. 2.20.
I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.

And surely this comfort must be applied in my text, so, though not so only, to
cheer the natural life of the distressed Jews, against the many oppressions of
the Chaldaeans, that their faith in the promise of God must be their life, as
David says, I had verily fainted, but that I believed to see the goodness of
God in the land of the living.

There faith preserved the natural life of David.

2. This includes also a spiritual life, which is the conjunction of our soul
with God by Jesus Christ; for what does quicken us but our faith? for by faith
Christ dwells in us, and by faith we are rooted and grounded in him. Ephesians.
3.17 Col. 2, 7.


3. This includes an eternal life: for how do we come to be where Christ is,
but by faith? Christ first testifies of the faith of his Church, then he
prays: Father, I will that they which thou have given me, may be with me,
that they may behold the glory that I had with thee, etc.

They that overcome this world do overcome it by faith, and such as have this
faith do grow boisterous and violent, They take the Kingdom of God perforce.

And this perchance gave occasion to the various lection, some reading in the
present vivit does live, some in the future vivet, shall live; some
understanding the natural and spiritual only, others only the eternal life.

But I understand the promise extended as the Apostle says, to both; for
godliness has the promises of this life, and that which is to come.

This shows what is meant here by faith, not the historical faith, by which
we understand what the Will of God is.

Not a temporary faith, which trusts in God for a time, and after falls off
from him.

Not the faith of miracles which even some wicked Persons whom Christ will not
know at the day of judgment had.

Not the faith of hypocrites which seems and is not; but a justifying and
saving faith. For we must live by the same faith here by which we must be saved
hereafter.

And this faith is called the ground of things hoped for.

Cicero defines the Latin word fides of fiat; for it implies performance.

Saint Augustine of the word fides says, Duae syllabae sonant: Fides, prima a
facto, secunda a dicto, which may have a double construction.

1. With reference to God: for his dictum does assure factum; and that is our
fides. 2. With reference to us; for as Augustine says, fac quod dicis and
credis, do what thou say and thou beleevest.
I will not conceal from you the dissection of this word Fides, as a witty
Ancient has anatomized it into five several letters, by which he collecteth
the ingredients which must meet in a saving faith.

1. F implies facere, to do, as the Apostle says, Romans 2.
Not the hearers, but the doers of the law shall be justified And Christ says,

Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, Mat. 7.
shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that does the Will of my
father which it in heaven. For a man must not be of the number of them who
confess God with their mouths and deny him in their works.

2. I, this imports Integritatem, Integrity, which does express it self in
believing all the Articles of Christian faith, for that faith which is not
entire does not hold fast, and there is no trusting to it.

3. D, that implies Dilectionem, love; Gal. 5.
for our faith must work through love; And Saint Bernard says, Mors fidei est
separatio charitatis, faith without love is dead. And again he says, ut vivat
fides tua, fidem tuam dilectio animet.

And in the school, that faith which is not joined with love, is called fides
informis, an unformed faith.

It is St. Augustines, saying. Cum dilectione fides est Christiani, sine
dilectione fides est daemonis.

For we find that the devils confessed Christ. Confitebantur (says Saint
Augustine) Daemones Christum credendo, non diligendo; fidem habebant,
charitatem non habebant.

4. E, implies Express, expressedly; for it is not sufficient to retain faith
in the heart, but we must also strive to express it two ways.

1. In the fruits of faith, good life. 2. In the outward profession, as the
Apostle does join them together, With the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the tongue he confesses to salvation: Romans 10.

Against those Nicodemites which come to Christ by night, and all those who
think it enough to reserve the heart for God, though their outward deportment
be fashioned to the time and place and persons, where, when, and with whom they
do live.

5. S. which stands for Semper, always, which does express perseverance; for
it is no true faith if it do not hold out to the end.

Let us now put all together; a true faith must be entire, working always by
love, so that men may see our good works, and glorify God which is in heaven.

In a word, the faith here mentioned is an holy apprehension, and a bold
application of the favor of God to his Church, in the mediation and merits of
Jesus Christ, by whom we do believe that God is in Christ reconciling us to
himself, and the just man does live by this faith. De verbis hactenus.

The words thus cleared, we come now to the division of this text.

It contains an Antithesis, wherein two contraries are set in opposition one
against the other.

1. The man that is lifted up; 2. The just man.
1. Of the first he says, non recta est anima ejus, his soul is not upright.

2. Of the second he says, ex fide vivet, he shall live by faith.

In the first I note two things.

1. His notation, Elevatus, lifted up. 2. His censure, Non recta est anima, his
soul is not upright.
1. His notation: Elevatus.

This is a thing that God loves not; for it it said, God resists the proud;
that is the point of doctrine in this place.

God takes offense at such as are lifted up.

It was the fall of the Angels that kept not their first estate, ero similis
altissimo.

It was the fall of man: Behold man is become like one of us, knowing good and
evil.

Some think this part of the text meant of Nebuchadnezzar, the proud King,
whose heart was so big swollen with his great victories, that in the ruff of
self opinion he ascribed all to himself, and therefore was turned to graze, as
in the story of Daniels prophecy we read.

Remember the fearful quarrel of Christ with Capernaum, And thou Capernaum,
which art exalted to heaven, Luke 10.15
shall be thrust down to hell.

It is one of the works of the preaching of the Gospel, I may call it one of
the miracles of the power of our ministry.

Every mountain and hill shall be brought low. Chrysostom. Elatos and superbos
nomine montis denunciat, Luke 3.5.
he calls the proud by the name of a mountain; the early and the later rain that
falls on them does slip off and fall into the under valleys, and the valleys
(as the Psalmist says) do abound with corn.

The power of the Word extends to the humiliation of many that are lifted up;
for it reveals unto us Christ, without whom we can do nothing, without whom
no man comes to the Father. And this leaves us nothing to lift us up.

I have spoken of this sin out of the former chapter, where the Chaldeans proud
of their victories, do rejoice and ascribe the glory thereof to themselves. And
from the mouth of an heathen man, Artabanus the Uncle of King Xerxes I take it,
Herodit. Polymnia
gaudet Deus eminentissima quaeque deprimere, his reason,

Quia Deus neminem alium quam seipsum sinit magnifice de se sentire. Yea
sometimes we find when God does owe a man a shrewd turn, he will lift him up
himself that he may throw him down; as David complains, Thou have lifted me
up and cast me down. But the lifting up here understood, is the pride of heart
which makes men to esteem of themselves above all that is in them; such are
their own Parasites; and the Wiseman says, there is more hope of a fool then
one of these.

In this Argument I went so far in the former chapter, as to teach you two
things,

1. To decline this as a disease. 2. To embrace the remedies against it.
8. Reasons I gave against it to persuade declining of it.

1. It trespasseth primum and magnum mandatum legis, the first and great
Commandment of the Law, etc. 2. Connumerat nos filiis Sathanae, patri fill.
superb. 3. Exterminat charitatem, voluntas Dominium exercet, 4. Subjicit nos
opposicioni divinae, Deus resistit superbis. 5. Tollit a nobis talentum dum
nostra quaerimus. 6. Male nos decet, poor and proud. 7. Nullum vitium Sathanae
magis placet. 8. Superbus ingratus, and so omnia dixeris.
The remedies, 1. Serious consideration of our selves. 2. Studious searching in
the word of God. 3. Putting our selves often in the sight of God. 4. Frequent
casting up the favors of God to us. 5. Earnest and devout prayer.


This is a sly and cunning insinuation of Satan, to lift us up in our own
opinion; there is a tang of our hereditary corruption that runs in the same
channel with our blood; we are all apt enough to value our selves above the
lone price.

Few of the mind of Agur the son of Jakeh, I am more brutish then any man.

Few of the mind of Saint Paul, Of whom I am chief.

It is a great victory that a man has gotten of himself, if he be once able to
keep himself under; for whether we do increase in outward goods or spiritual
graces, we shall have much ado to avoid this sin.

2. The censure, Non est recta anima ejus.

This Physician does search the disease to the bottom, he finds where the
fault is; the soul is naught, the inward man is corrupt.

And if the light that is in us be darkness, how great is that darkness? It
is the searcher of hearts and reins, that finds this fault; who but he can
examine and try the inward man?

We see what body, what complexion, what stature man has; we may see what
honors he attaineth in the world, how he increases goods, what delights a man
uses for recreation; we cannet see what souls men have, rectas an obliquas.

But if we see and observe men proud and lifted up high in their own opinion,
we see there is cause of fear, that they have not rectas animas, right souls.

And though the judgment of our brethren belong not to us, yet let us judge our
selves by this; for if we do find in our selves an elevation above our pitch,

1. Because this lifting up does dislodge God from the soul, he will not dwell
with a proud man, he has so declared himself.

For thus says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is
holy: I dwell in the hight and holy place, Isa. 57.15.
with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of
the humble: to revive the spirit of the contrite ones.

Now as Augustine says, Vita corporis anima, vita animae Deus. If he say to
our soul, I have no delight in thee, we may complain in pace mea amaritudo, our
soul is sick even to the death.

2. Because this pride of life which lifts us up, Jam. 1.14.
it is a man's own lust that draws and drives and forces him up.

And if Satan do put his help to it to lift us up, he will be the first that
will put hand to the casting of us down again.

When he had lifted up Christ to the pinnacle of the Temple, the next
temptation was, Cast thy self down.

3. Because this pride of life fills the soul so full of it self, that there
is no room for the spiritual graces of God to dwell there; quia non erat locus
in diversorio.

4. Because as the eating of somethings does put the mouth out of taste, that
it cannot relish wholesome food;

Let us make profit of this Doctrine.

1. Let it be the main and chief care and study and endeavor of our whole life
to get and keep animam rectam, an upright soul.

To keep your accounts strait, to keep your estate upright; to keep your body
in health by a regular observation thereof, to keep your interest in the love
of your friends: all those be lawful cares of life, and this is an incumbent
duty which obliges and engages all men: but let not these cares swallow us
up, and devour our whole life.

These things perish in the very using of them.

The soul of every man, that, is the man; if that be not kept upright, What
profit will it be to a man to win all the world, and loose the soul?

In the last day an upright soul will be able to stand it out before the
judgment seat, when they that have kept all things upright but their souls,
shall see that none but upright souls are happy.

2. Let us therefore not stand wishing I would I had such a soul, Balaam, I
would I might die the death of the righteous; but let us study and use the
means to get such a soul. These are

1. The Word; for in that the Spirit speaks; there is a sound of the voice
that comes to the ear, that is not enough, there is the Spirit speaking to
the soul; that is the Sermon, the Spirit of God is the Preacher, the souls of
men are the audience. So the Psalmist,

I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his Word do I hope.

2. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, for that is spiritual meat and drink,
the Pabulum animae, it is both meat and medicine, worthily received; it is
Emanuel, God with us.

I may say to you my brethren, as Christ said to the woman of Samaria: Joh.
4.10.
If you knew the gift of God, and understood what grace is offered you in the
word and Sacrament, and how beneficial they are, how nourishing, how cordial
to the inward man; you would not come to the Word when your leisure served, but
you would put by all businesses, and make them attend that service: you would
not receive the Sacrament once a year, if so much; but your Word would be
Desiderio desideravi comedere hoc pascha. I only say with Christ,

If you know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

3. Confession to God is another good means; keep the soul upright; we say,
even reckonings make long friends.

There is a threefold Confession.

1. Confessio fraudis; quid omisi? 2. Confessio facti; quid feci? 3. Confessio
laudis: quid retribuam?
Here is work enough to take up the whole life of man, and this keeps our
account with God even.

4. I must never leave out prayer; that must make one in all the exercises of
Christian life; pray continually. And let our petition be that God would give
us wisdom from above; to direct us in the ordering of our souls so as we may
ever keep them upright: for it is not in man to order his ways, much less to
govern his own soul; let us therefore pray to him who chalengeth interest in
all souls, who is called The Father of Spirits; and who says All souls are
mine.

We have a good encouragement from Saint James;

If any of you want wisdom, Jam. 1.5.
let him ask of God who gives to all men liberally.

And Christ has promised that whatsoever he shall ask the Father in his Name,
he will do it.

5. It will help to keep our souls in integrity, to have regard of our
conversation, of our calling, of our recreations, of our time, of our means.

1. That we keep good company, which may not corrupt our manners, either
consilio or exemplo, by counsel or example. 2. That we live in a lawful
calling, that we may have the testimony of a good conscience; that the means of
our maintenance are honest and lawful, and that we do not spend the wages of
unrighteousness, that defiles the soul with an indelible pollution, all your
prayers and alms will not purge you. 3. That your recreations be both lawful
and moderate, such as may make you more fit for the service of God, not such as
may make you suspend the time wherein God should be served, not such as may
provoke you to impatience, or to blasphemy, and abusing the name of God. 4.
That your time be spent by weight and measure, as those that are to be
accomptants to God for it. 5. That our means that we enjoy in this life be so
gained, and managed that they may seem as faculties of well-doing; and may by
no means stoop the soul to any departure from God for love of them, or by abuse
of them.
3. Let us learn humility; humillimus, should be humillimus.

But the just shall live by his faith.

This is the second part of the Antithesis, that contains in it the whole sum
of the Gospel, there be three words in it that carry the contents thereof.

1. Righteousness. 2. Faith. 3. Life.
Righteousness and Faith are the way of life: they are two special pieces of
that spiritual armor which the Apostle does advise all the children of God to
use against their enemies: The breast plate of Righteousness, Ephesians. 6.14.
and the Shield of Faith.

1. Of Righteousness

This is that virtue which denominateth a man just and righteous, and it is a
virtue which does give suum cuique; to God in the obedience of the first table
of the law; to man in the obedience of the second table.

This is given 1. Legally. 2. Evangelically.


For the first which is Legal righteousness; it is the fulfilling of the whole
Law in every part of it, by the whole man in body and soul, Ecles. 7.31
the whole time of his life; and Adam who was created in the image of God, was
clothed with this righteousness as the Apostle says; Ephesians. 4.24.
created in the image of God, and in righteousness and true holiness.

And this righteousness was lost by Adams fall, and was never found in any man
since, but in the Man Jesus Christ, who is called (...) that just one.

And of him it is said, Act. 22.14. Isa. 59.17.
that He put on Righteousness as a breast plate.

And this Righteousness the Saints in glory have; so the Apostle calls them,
The spirits of just men made perfect.

But on earth, Heb. 12 23 Romans 3.10
There is none righteous, no not one.

The Church of Rome does directly contradict the Spirit of God speaking in
Scripture concerning this righteousness. Sess. 6. Can. 18.
For the counsel of Trent has set it down for a Canon,

Siquis dixerit dei praecepta homini justificato, and sub gratia constituto,
esse ad observandum impossibilia, anathema sit.

Let me then clear the Church tenent concerning this point, that Legal
Righteousness is altogether impossible to man in the present state of
desertion from our creation.

Our Argument is this, Whosoever sins breaks the Law of God; but every one
that lives sins. Ergo every one that lives breaks the law.

The first proposition is proved by the definition of sin given by the
Apostle. (...). 1 John 3.4.


But every man that lives sins; Saint James will make that good, In multis
offendimus omnes, in many things we offend all.

The conclusion follows; ergo omnis praevaricatur legem.

Andradius answers with a distinction to the minor, every man sins; sins
are of two sorts.

1. Mortal, so every man sins not; for he that is borne of God sins not,
nor can sin. 2. Venial, so every man sins; but this kind of sinning says
he, does not break the law of God, because they deserve not the wrath of God
and condemnation. Lyndanus. Levicula vitiola lapsuum quotidianorum aspergines
and naevuli sunt qui per se non maculant and contaminant, sed quasi pulvisculo
leviter aspergunt vitam humanam.
Yet as light as they make of this pollution; it is no way to be purged but by
the blood of Christ; and Christ is answerable to the Father and to the justice
of his Law, even for the least of these. Therefore the Prophet says, God laid
upon him the iniquity of us all, and all our sins met in him; this cannot but
include venial sins, for the elect have no mortal sins.

Yet our tenet is, that all, even the least obliquity of thought, primi motus
ad peccata sunt peccata, the first motions to sin are sins, and directly
against the tenth Commandment; and he that breaks the least of the ten is
guilty of all, for he breaks the Law.

So then the veniality of sin is not in the nature and merit of sin, Ps.
22.1.2.
but in the favor of God by Christ, he suffering and satisfying for it, and we
by faith applying this to our selves, and it will follow; for in its own nature
every sin is mortal, deserving death: and the just are not said to be blessed
because they have no sin, but because their iniquities are forgiven, and
their sin is covered; and because God imputes not their sin to them; as some
are quit by Proclamation, because no evidence is given in against them.

2. We must then fly to Evangelical righteousness, which has two parts.

The one is called the righteousness of faith, the other of a good conscience.
Romans 10.6.


Pray for us; for we trust we have a good conscience in all things, willing to
live honestly. Heb. 13.18.


1. The righteousness of faith.

This is Christ's righteousness by faith received of us, by grace imputed to
us, as the Apostle says,

Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believes.
Romans 10.4


The end of the law is to save those that fulfill it; this by reason of the
body of sin that we do bear about us, none of us can perform; but Christ has
fulfilled the law for us, and his obedience is by the favor of God imputed to
us, and by our faith applied, and we justified and saved thereby.

For what the law exacted of us, is accapted for us, as if we in our own
persons had done it, because we believe it done by Christ for us.

2. The righteousness of a good conscience.

This is a work of the Holy Ghost in us, by which we do approve our selves to
God and man, by our endeavor to do that which the law commands. And such a
righteous person David describes,

Surely he does no iniquity, Ps. 119.3.
but walks in the way of God.

If any man object,

St. Paul does answer for himself, Sol.
and therein for all the elect of God, and shows wherein his innocence
consists, and says,

For that which I do I allow not; for what I would do that I do not; Romans 7.15
but what I hate, that do I.

If then I do that which I would not, Verse. 16.
I consent unto the law that it is good.

Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. 17.22.


I delight in the law of God in the inward man.

Here (...), know, if thou be an elect child of God, thou consistest of a
double man so long as thou live here on earth.

1. There is in thee an outward man, that is, the unregenerate part of thee. 2.
There is an inward man, that is, the regenerate part. For we must know and
confess, that we are not capable in this life of a total and full
regeneration, which is an utter abolition of the body of sin.
There is Corpus peccati, the body of sin: there is lex membrorum a law of the
members, there is Concupiscence which does carry us into the evil which we know
in our understandings to be against the law of God, and our conscience
trembles at it; this is an inward man, which in Peter is called (...). 1 Pet.
3.4.


So that the inward man which keeps the law, is the understanding and
conscience; and the outward man that breaks the law, is the will and the
appetite, and the instruments thereof in the act of sin.

So then I shall now describe to you whom the Prophet here means by the just
man, even him who in his understanding apprehends the good and perfect Will
of God, and makes conscience of obeying it according to the measure of grace
given to him; for this is an Evangelical righteousness.

The use of it is great; for the Prophet says of Christ Jesus, that he put on
righteousness as a Breast Plate. He that came to loose the works of Satan, and
therefore to bid him battle, Is.59.17.
did not come into this life, which is militia super terram, a warfare upon
earth unarmed; he is the General of Gods forces, against the Kingdom of
darkness, against the Prince that rules in the air; against the god of this
world, against Principalities and Powers, and no sooner was he baptized and
began to appear to his employment, but the spirit led him into the field to a
duel with Satan for forty days together, where this Breast Plate of proof was
a sufficient wall about his vital parts, and did preserve him against Satan's
fury and force.

And we that are his soldiers, who must ambulare sicut ille, walk as he, we
are taught by the Apostle, both to get and put on this righteousness as a
Breast plate.

The benefits that this righteousness does bring with it, are many.

1. It is a proof against temptations; for howsoever our affections do receive
some titillations from the outward senses to affect them with evil, 1. Benefit.
our understanding like Goshen will always see the Sun, although the rest of
our Egypt be benighted.

Howsoever our Will may be corrupted for a time, our conscience will continue
zealous of good works.

In our minds we shall serve the law of God, and this will keep our heads
always above water, that though we be put to it to strive and labor hard for
life in the deep waters, both of temptations and afflictions, yet through many
dangers and painful struglings, we shall at length recover the shore.

The distressed conscience troubled with the terror of sin, though it cannot
escape Satan's sifting, and buffeting, and wounding, yet can it not fall into
final despair, because this righteousness cannot be lost.

2. This makes our calling and election sure; 2. Benefit.
for if we be truly regenerate, we shall be saved certainly; and this
righteousness is a full assurance of our regeneration as the Apostle says,

1. Ioh. 2.29
Ye know that every one which does righteousness is born of him.

So that righteousness is the earnest of our salvation, it is salus in semine,
salvation in the seed here; it is salus in Mess, in the harvest, hereafter;
for St. James says,

The fruit of righteousness is sown in peace.

For where righteousness is once rooted, Iam. 3.18.
there is peace and assurance both of grace and glory.

3. This righteousness does honor God in this world; for when men live in the
conscience of their ways and in the holy fear of God, 3. Benefit.
abstaining from evil all they can, doing all the good they can, rather
suffering and forgiving then doing and revenging injuries, striving to bear
themselves uprightly before God and men, our Savior says, Others seeing their
good works will glorify their father that is in heaven.

4. This righteousness is the only witness of our sincerity in the love and
service of our God; for let no unrighteous man say he loves God or serves
God; the proud, the covetous, 4. Benefit.
the wanton, the breaker of the Sabbath, the drunkard, let them come to Church,
and hear and receive the Sacrament now and then, let them not deceive
themselves; without this righteousness no man shall please God.

Neither shall the Church esteem such as members of the body of Christ; for we
are taught, that no adulterers, fornicators, covetous persons, etc. shall
inherit the Kingdom of heaven.

But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an
answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you with
meekness and fear. 1 Pet. 3.15


Having a good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you as of evil
doers, Verse. 16.
they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good Conversation in Christ.

Let men hunt for fame and reputation in the way of honor and high place, in
the way of great dependence, or of riches: if they be ungodly and want this
righteousness, they want the falt that should pickle them to keep; the just
shall be in everlasting remembrance, their candle does not go out by night:
their name shall be like to precious unguent: But let the ungodly do what they
can, the name of the wicked shall rot.

5. This righteousness upon a deathbed will comfort, 5. Benefit.
when neither meat nor medicine will down with us; for there follows after
righteousness a gracious train, a comfortable sequence.

The Kingdom of God is righteousness and Peace, Romans 14.17.
and joy in the Holy Ghost.

Mark the upright man, and observe the just, Ps 37.37.
for the end of that man is Peace.

What a joy of heart was it to Hezekiah? he did not say, I have reigned a King
over thine inheritance so many years: I have gotten so much riches and
treasure, I have subdued so many enemies but, Remember Lord I beseech thee now
how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, Is. 38.3.
etc.

Thus having learnt what this righteousness is, and having surveyed the
benefits that attend it, let us take a few necessary cautions to order and
regulate both our judgment and our life.

1. Let us not take that for righteousness which is no such matter; 1 Caution.
for all that glistereth is not gold; Satan has good skill in varnishing, and
guilding, and painting, to make things that are not seem as though they were.

I do not think but the Pharisees thought themselves just men, and that opinion
was held of them abroad; and that Christ seemed a strange Preacher, that told
the People,

Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees etc. Acta 26.5
for Saint Paul does call their sect (...).

We must exceed that, or else no salvation; yet if that righteousness which
consisted in great chastisement of the flesh, in great austerity of life, in so
many real acts of devotion, would not serve:

Beloved, that cheap, and soft, and tender Religion, that eats and drinks of
the best, and wears soft garments, and lies easily: and consists only in
hearing much, and knowing something, and talking of good things, and an outward
formal representation of goodness, will never pass for righteousness before
God. This does not come near the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees.

Their Doctors were never out of Moses chair, they were faithful and painful in
teaching the law. Alas, many of our laborers loyter.

Their auditors were frequent and attentive; when they knew of the sitting of
their Rabbis, they would tell one another, and call one another to it, as
Jerome says, faying,

(...). The wise repeat;

And they would hasten thither.

They compass sea and land to make Proselytes to their sect; We by our evil
Conversation lose many from our Congregations.

It is the complaint of them of the separation, that our evil life is one
great cause of their forsaking of us; and though that do not excuse them, yet
it does accuse us, and we cannot plead not guilty to that enditement.

They gave God a quarter of their life in prayer. Let every man's own conscience
speak within him how far he out-goeth them in this. They read, they studied,
they repeated, they carried about them always some part of the Law, and were
expert in the understanding of it.

And do not Pamphlets of news, vain Poems, and such like froth of human
brains devour much of the time the holy Bible should have bestowed upon it.

Beloved, the righteousness that should be in us to fill us with true love of
God and our neighbor, is wanting in most, it is imperfect in the best, in too
many it is but seeming.

In Religion zeal is gone; some false fires there are yet in the Church, that
boast themselves to be zeal, and are good for nothing but to find faults and
pick quarrels; true devotion which had use to show it self in all outward
holiness and reverence, is so retired, that many are more homely at Church in
presence of God and the holy congregation, then they dare to be in the private
houses of many that are here present.

Our heads are grown so tender, that even boys must be covered at Church; In
prayer our knees are too stiff to bend; we grow drousie in hearing; the very
face of Religion has lost the complexion that it had, when knowledge was yet
but coming out, as if we would revive that Romish fancy, that ignorance is the
mother of devotion.

In civil conversation how is righteousness turned into a cry? the words once
past, of our forefathers, though ignorant, were faster ties then bonds,
recognizances, statutes, oaths now are: It was once the imputation of one
Nation, as Tully charge the Greeks, Da mihi manuum testimonium; It was once
Romes shame, omnia Romae venalia: Templa, sacerdotes altaria. It was once the
Grecians infamy,

(...). Titus 1.12.


There have been many National sins which one Country has upbraided another
withal.

But how is it that since the light of the Gospel in our Land, we have made
prize of the sins of all Nations, and made them free Denisons amongst us?
Schism in the Church, corruption of justice, bribes, gluttony, drunkenness,
contention, pride, outlandish manners, oppression, that Tyrus and Sidon will
appear more innocent then Chorazin and Bethsaida: and Sodom and Gomorra are
like to make a better reckoning in the day of audit then Capernaum.

Therefore try your ways, and make your paths even and strait, before he come
qui justitias judicabit. If your righteousness be not right, the light that in
them is darkness, and then quantae tenebrae? how great is that darkness?

2. When you have examined your righteousness, Caution. 2.
and find it to be a sincere reddition of due to God and man, take heed that
you trust not in it.

When Jacob came to a new Covenant with Laban for wages, he said to him, do
this,

So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come, Genesis 30.33.
for my hire before thy face.

Our upright dealing with men may justify us to face of man; but our
righteousness in the court of heaven is a poor plea; let no man retain it for
an Advocate to answer there for him, it will be speechless in that presence.

So much of it as is ours is foul, and immerent, deserving no favor at the
hand of God.

We have two things to do.

1. A debt to pay to God. 2. A Kingdom to be purchased in heaven.
We are broken for the debt; our righteousness comes nothing near the
clearing of the debt; and can we hope of doing any thing toward the purchase?

Nature it self cannot wish them more unhappy then they are, that trust in
their own righteousness; for the reed they lean upon will first wound them,
and then break under them.

3. Yet let it go for a caution too, Caution. 3.
do not so under value thy righteousness, as to think there is neither need
nor use of it, because it meriteth nothing at the hands of God; for God is
gracious to accept from us that which deserves no such good liking from him.

Thus he accepted the humiliation of Ahab, and he rewarded it; thus he accepted
the repentance of Niniveh: and the thief upon the cross that confessed
Christ, and shortly after died, received a promise to be with Christ in
Paradise.

Christ speaks comfortably; Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast
out. Joh 6.37.


Righteousness is the way to him:

This is the song and Jubilation of the Church, We have a strong City, Isa. 26.
i. Verse. 2.
salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks.

Open ye the gates that the righteous nation which keeps the truth may enter
in.

For God keeps a book of remembrance, Mal. 3.16.
such as Malacy says, A book of remembrance was written before him, for them
that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name; for the Lord loves the
righteous; Ps. 58.11.
and verily there is a reward for the righteous.

Yea beloved, I dare go so far, and I am sure that I tread on ground that
will carry me through, it is not faith, it is sin, it is presumption to trust
in the righteousness of Jesus Christ only, without a care and conscience, and
practice of righteousness in our selves.

For Christ redeemeth us, not to idleness, but to work out our salvation, we
are delivered from the hands of our enemies, ut serviamus ei; that we might
serve him; redemption does not destroy, but renew our creation; and we were
created to good works, and we are called to holiness.

Let no man think that Christ needs the help of our righteousness to
satisfy his Father; but we do need our righteousness to declare our faith in
Christ, and to make application of the righteousness of God to our selves.

Though the full strength of Scripture be bent against merit of righteousness,
there is no ground there for idleness to stand upon; we must not cast all upon
Christ, and make him who came to redeem us from the punishment of our evil
works, a redeemer of us from the necessity of good works:

Our very union with him is enough to necessitate operative; righteousness for
he says, My Father works as yet, and ego operor, and I work; and it is his
word, thus must we fulfill all righteousness.

Therefore that Christ may see he paid the debt for such as would have paid it
if they could, and did their best to pay all, let us not neglect our own
righteousness in our quest of salvation; but being only by Jesus Christ
delivered from the hands of our enemies, let us serve him in righteousness and
holiness before him all the days of our life.

Let it go also for a caution; 4. Caution.
that seeing the necessity of righteousness, we do look well to the integrity
thereof, as the Apostle admonishes us in his testimony of the Corinthians,

That in every thing ye are enriched by him, 1 Cor. 1.5, 7.
so that ye come behind in nogist.

It is noted of the Saints of God in glory that they do wear long white robs;
these be the garments of righteousness: there is our sicut in Coelo, we must
not wear our righteousness like a short garment; it must be entire, covering
the whole body to the foot, that is the integrity of the whole man. For,
whosoever makes conscience of his righteousness in some things, and not in
all, is but a hypocrite: that man makes conscience of nothing at all.

That professor that for his profit will do any thing contrary to the revealed
Will of God, or if for pleasure, or for revenge he will go out of the way of
Gods Law, that man's righteousness is but vain. For St. James says,

Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet fails in one point, is guilty of
all. Jam. 2.10.


Sin is like leaven, a little of it sowreth the whole lump of righteousness.

Knowing the necessity of this righteousness, and the continual use of it, 5.
Caution.
and that our whole life is a perpetual warfare here on earth, we must know
that this righteousness must never be put off or laid aside all our life long;
it must not beworne in our colors ad pompam, but in our armor ad pugnam, to
the fight.

This righteousness is not for show, but for service.

There be some temptations that take their aim at us, and come forth to
assault us; there be others that are shot at random, and yet may hit us. As he
that killed Ahab, directed not his aim at him; so a man sometime by occasion
falls into temptation. If a man at those times have not his righteousness to
seek, but that he wear it as a breast plate, it may preserve him. Had David
received two such mortal wounds in the body of his Religion, and fear of God,
if he had kept on his righteousness? Vrias wife was not more naked.

These be Satan's advantages, for keeping watch as he does; no sooner are we
disarmed, but fulmina mittit. But as Elibu told Job,

If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, Job 33.23.
one among a thousand to show unto man his uprightness:

Then he is gracious unto him, and says, Verse. 24.
Deliver him from going down into the pit, I have found a ransom.

That is then the use of our Ministry, to be as Noah was to the world,
praecones justitiae, Preachers of righteousness, to show men which way they
shall walk uprightly; he that is sit for this service, must have the warrant of
a Minister, A Messenger: and he must have the learning of an Interpreter, and
such a man is a rate man, one of a thousand; and his lecture is, Discite
justitiam moniti.

Lose no time from it, for only righteousness has the blessing of this
promise: justus ex fide vivit, the just does live by his faith, see what rate
you will set upon life, so much it concerns you to be righteous.

2. Faith, when the Apostle does come to this point concerning Faith; he says
(...).

Above all things take the shield of Faith, Ephesians. 6 19.


As Solomon says, keep thy heart above all keepings: for indeed there is no
Doctrine so necessary to salvation as the Doctrine of Faith.

You remember in the Acts of the Apostles, when St. Paul came to Ephesus, and
continued there three months, Act. 19.8.
both disputing and persuading the things that concern the Kingdom of God, but
after many oppositions, Verse. 10.
yet he abode there two years:

His preaching had so put the gods of the Heathen out of countenance, and had
so advanced the glory of the true God; that Demetrius a silversmith which made
silver shrines for Diana, called the workmen of his trade, together and said;
Sirs; Verse. 25.
ye know that by this craft we have our wealth; and

So that our craft is in danger to be set at naught. Verse. 27.


And presently upon it there was a great cry, Magna. Diana, great is Diana.

Beloved, look well about you, and you shall see that by faith we have our
welfare, we get our being by it, both here and in heaven; therefore let us join
in the cry, to cry up Faith, Magna est fidei Christianorum, great is the faith
of Christians.

1. Great is the good that it is, 2. Great is the good that it does.
1. In that it is.

Faith is a certain persuasion wrought in the heart of man of the truth of all
Gods promises; and a confident application of them is made to the beleiver,
both which are wrought in the beleiver by the Spirit of God.

1. So it is great in respect of the Author of it in us; for it is not (...),
growing of it self. This is a seed which the Lord has sown, a plant which
Gods own right hand has planted; for Faith is the gift of God.

2. Great is the Object; for it aims at the promises of God, which are Yea,
and Amen.

3. Great in the Extent, for it spreads to all the promises of God, and all
the benefits that do arise to us from him as Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, Redemption, Salvation.

4. Great in the Operation, because it lays hand upon all those, and
chalengeth a right to them, saying, Haec measunt, these are mine.

5. We may add also this to the excellency of Faith; that it is a mother
grace, the root of all other graces; for from Faith they do derive themselves.

1. Repentance, Act. 15.9.
For by Faith God purifieth the heart. 2. Love, For Faith works by love. 3.
Fear, that fear which is the beginning of Wisdom; for if we did not believe
the truth of Gods Word and Promises, and comminations, we would not so much
stand in awe of God, or fear and distrust our selves. 4. Obedience; for knowing
that we have no subsistence in the favor of God, but by Christ, that swayeth
all our observance that way, and bids us hear him.
And without Faith it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11.6.


2. For that it does, it is great.

1. No grace of God in us does more honor to God then our Faith does; for none
but the believer does confess God aright: for as the Apostle says,

He that believes not God, has made God a liar; 1 John 5.10.
make that breach in the holy chain or knot of Gods attributes and all fail;
for truth is the girdle of them all; so make him a liar, and make him unwise,
impotent, cruel, profane, all evil.

Abraham strengthened in the Faith, gave glory to God.

2. No grace to us more profitable; Romans 4.10
for it is not said of any of all the other virtues and graces that we do live
by any, by all of them; but only by faith, because faith does unite us with
Christ, in whom we are knit to God; for all fullness dwells in him, and of
his fullness we receive grace and grace. Ioh. 1.16.


And by faith only Christ dwells in our hearts. Ephesians 3.17.


By faith we are reconciled to God in Christ, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans 3.25
to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through
the forbearance of God; by faith we are justified. Therefore we conclude that a
man is justified, by faith without the deeds of the law. Verse. 28.
By faith we are sanctified. Acts 15.9 Ephesians. 2.8.
For God does purify our hearts by faith.

By faith we are saved, for by grace ye are saved through faith, and that not
of your selves, it is the gift of God.

Faith brings peace of conscience in the assurance of all this. Romans 5.1.
For being justified by faith, we have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

By faith we have access to God into the grace wherein we stand, Verse. 2.
and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

By faith we glory in tribulations, Verse. 3.
knowing that tribulation works patience, patience experience, experience
hope, and hope makes not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad in
our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given us.

And thus the Church of the Jews* is comforted against the oppressions of the
Chaldaeans by faith.

Lastly faith is commended to us for a shield, Ephesians 6.16.
by which we defend our selves against the fiery darts of Satan.

Therefore to make the necessary doctrine of faith profitable for us, let us
consider,

1. How faith may be gotten. 2. How it may be proved. 3. How it may be
preserved. 4. How it may be used.
1. How faith may be gotten.

Herein we must needs observe two things,

1. The Author. 2. The Means.
1. The Author.

We must go to him from whom every good and perfect gift does proceed, to seek
faith.

Here I must admonish you that faith is given without seeking at first; for it
is a free gift, and it is the glory of God; I am found of them that sought me
not.

Do not think that the gift of faith is acquired; that is freely given; but the
increase of our faith is acquired by means. I prove it thus.

The spirit of God is given in the womb, it is given to infants; therefore
faith is also given; for the spirit is never unfruitful, and faith is one of
the fruits of the spirit.

And the Apostles said unto the Lord, increase our faith. The grace of God
which moves in the generation of them that fear the Lord, is the seed of all
virtues, and first of faith the mother virtue which issues all the rest; that
is given early. And the gift of faith does so lie hid in the Elect of God, that
themselves know not of it, till God be pleased not to put his son into them,
but to reveal his Son in them.

This magnifieth the free grace of God, and teaches us to say, It is so father
because thy good pleasure is such.

And this excludes all boasting on our part, seeing we have it of mere and
free gift. And it ascribes the glory of all to God.

2. The means to get faith.

These as I have said do not lay the foundation of faith in us, that is the
free gift of God: but these means do advance the building, they do help to
increase our faith.

I will refer you to one place to declare to you the acquisition of more
faith.

And a certain woman named Lydia, Act. 16.14.
a Seller of Purple of the city of Thyatyra, which worshipped God, heard us,
whose heart God opened that she attended unto the things that were spoken of
Paul.

And when she was baptized and her household she besought us, Verse. 15.
saying, if ye have judged me faithful to the Lord, etc.

Observe the whole passage.

1. Here was a woman living in an honest and lawful vocation. She was a seller
of Purple. 2. Here were some beginnings of faith in her; For she worshipped
God. 3. The outward means to increase her faith. She heard us. 4. The inward
means: The Lord opened her heart, after which follows. 1. More attention to
Paul. 2. Baptism. 3. A Desire to be esteemed faithful. 4. Hospitality: she
welcomed her teachers.

So that for the increasing of faith she heard the word; and the more she
believed, the more attentively she heard, and for confirming of faith she was
baptized. Faith comes by hearing; for how shall they believe on him of whom
they have not heard? Here let me admonish you;

1. But when I say by the word with the Apostle, I do understand, and would be
understood to speak of the Word, not as it is the voice of a mortal man, nor as
it is a dead letter, but as the spirit does speak to us in the Word.

For this the Apostle bids us, Be swift to hear it concerns us much: but
that you may see that faith is not begotten in us by hearing* hearing does us
no good without faith, and we must have a grain of faith to season our hearing,
or else our hearing will add nothing to our faith.

The word preached did not profit them, Hebr. 4.2.
not being mixed with faith in them that heard it.

So do we see some at first pour water into a Pumpe, to set it a work, that it
may yield water plenteously; for faith poured into our hearing does make our
hearing bring forth more faith.

And so in Prayer. Fulgentius says of faith,

Incipit infundi ut incipiat posci.

A man cannot have faith without asking, neither can he ask it without faith.

2. When I name the word for a means to beget an increase of faith, I mean the
written word, to exclude all unwritten traditions and all written legends which
the tel-tale Church of Rome, has coined to gull the swallowing credulity of
the misled ignorants; that is, the books of Canonical Scriptures of the Old and
New Testament, of which the Apostle says, They are able to make a man wise to
salvation, and perfect, thoroughly perfect to every good work.

3. When I name the word a means of faith, I must mean the Word understood by
us; for the Eunuch learns nothing of Isaiah the Prophet by reading him without
understanding.

And I wonder that ever the Church of Rome could so befool and infatuate the
judgments of men, to believe that either hearing a form of service, or
praying in a strange tongue, could carry any validity in them, except they did
conceive, or do believe that such hearing and praying have power of incantation.

Therefore there is required

A translation of the word into our natural language, or some other that we
understand, if we understand not the original.

And herein I must stir you up to a thankful consideration of their
profitable labors, who have taken pains to translate the Bible to English for
the common benefit of you all, that you may read the Scriptures, and exercise
your selves in the study of them, and examine the doctrines that you hear by
them.

Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers, who put such a thing as this into the
heart of our Kings Majesty, to set this work afoot and to see it finished.

Herein also I must commend unto you the easiness and perspicuity of
Scripture; for if God had not left the way of salvation open, but had shut it
up in such clouds of obscurity, that we must needs have a guide to light us the
way to the lanthorn, why would David have called the Word it self A Lantern
to our feet?

Therefore let no man be discouraged from his own private studying of
Scriptures, for fear of their hardness. It is no better then idleness and
shuffling to say the Scriptures are too deep for me, I will not meddle with
them.

Christ commands, Search the Scriptures: is he not Antichrist that says, do
not, thou shall not search?

I say and believe that the Word only read over by us or to us, without the
help of any Comment, or Sermon, or Exposition of it is a Lantern, and gives
light to the simple.

Much more the Word with good Commentaries and written Expositions.

Much more the Word preached by learned and judicious Preachers, which know how
to divide the same aright; those be called fellow laborers with God, Angels of
God, the salt of the earth, the light of the world, and even Saviors of men,
and because of their labor in the Word, and oversight of the People, honor,
double honor is allowed to them by the Apostle Saint Paul.

This point is of great use.

1. To us that are Ministers of the Word; for it lays a necessity upon us,
and woe be to us if we preach not the Gospel.

I am sure the Apostle puts it home to Timothy;

I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 4.1^.
who shall judge the quick and dead at his appearing and his kingdom:

Preach the word, be instant in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke,
exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrines.

God has given and committed to us the Ministry of the Word of faith, by which
we must live; and if we be not found faithful in the dispensation thereof, our
souls shall answer for the sins of the People, which are committed by our
negligence, and for want of our giving warning.

2. To you it is a provocation of you to be swift to hear, to take heed how you
hear, to hear with meekness, to hear willingly, to hear attentively, to
meditate in the Word that you hear, to search the Scriptures, to believe the
word spoken, to be obedient to the form of doctrine delivered, not to despise
him that speaks in our ministry; it is said of Lydia that she heard us.

This was the outward means of her says. This had never done good alone; for
he that planteth is nothing, and he that waters is nothing, but God that
gives the increase.

He is nothing, says the Apostle, that planteth, that is, the Minister of the
Word is nothing.

There were two things much amiss amongst the Corinthians at that time.

1. One was. they did too much depend upon their Ministers, and ascribe too
much to them, wherein he that sent them had wrong.

2. They were partial in their estimation of their Ministers, some affecting
and preferring one, some another, that it came to a schism.

To remove which double disease in the Church, the Apostle tells them, that
the Minister is not any thing: his meaning is not to disgrace the Ordinance of
God, to defile his own nest, to dishonor his own high-calling, but to bring
them to true judgment of it, and to let them understand that the Ministry of
men is outward, that God has no need of it, he can convert and establish souls
without it.

And further, whatsoever the Minister does, it is by the suggestion and help
and efficacy of the Holy Ghost.

The purpose of the Apostle is to withdraw us from dependence on outward means,
he does not seek to discourage the use or to disparage the honor of them, or
to question their necessity: but to show that as planting and watering of a
tree are to the bearing of fruit, so is our preaching to your good life: except
God do give the increase, the means in it self is not any thing.

Therefore let us search deeper for the power of God in the increase of our
faith, and we shall find it a special work of the Holy Ghost: 2 Cor. 4.31.
and so Saint Paul speaking of the spirit of faith, does give us to understand,
that faith is wrought in us by that Spirit of God which blows where he
lists.

So it is said of Lydia, that the Lord opened her heart.

The manner of the operation of this Spirit in the work of faith, in thus.

1. It works upon the supreme part of the soul, that is, the understanding.
2. Upon the inferior part, that is, the Will and affections.
1. Upon the understanding, and there it opens to us three things.

1. The Excellency of our Creation. 2. The misery of our fall. 3. The remedy
thereof.
1. The Excellency of our Creation.

For man was made in the image of the Trinity, that is in holiness and
righteousness, he had Free Will to have continued that happy estate, and he
had the tree of life whereof he might have eaten and have lived for ever in the
state of his creation.

It is necessary that we be instructed in the story of man's creation that we
may understand the power, wisdom, and goodness of God showed in man, who out
of so base a matter, composed so excellent a frame as this of man's body, and
inspired it with a reasonable soul, endowing it with heavenly light, and
giving to man the lordship of the works of his hands, leaving it in his own
free will to perpetuate the tenure of his happiness.

This is called man's state of innocence, wherein 1. His knowledge 2. His
holiness
was full and perfect.

1. His knowledge was full 1. Of God. 2. Of himself. 2. Of the creatures.


1. Of God; knowing him so far forth as a frail creature was capable of the
knowledge of an infinite nature; and therein man was no whit inferior to the
Angels of God; Coloss. 3.10.
for God created men and Angels in his own image, and this knowledge is the
image of God; so says the Apostle,

Created in knowledge after the image of him which created him.

2 Of himself; for he was then sensible of all that God had done for him, and I
cannot doubt but that light which God set up in this excellent creature, did
show him the (...) of himself, so that he knew the secret of his own
composition, the admirable faculties of the intellectual and animal part the
Symmetrie, the Anatomy, the use of every part of the body, the end and use of
his creation.

3. Of the creatures; for as all the creatures were brought before him to
declare to him his dominion over them, so for more expressure of his lordship,
he gave to every creature a name; surely the light of his understanding
penetrating so deep as to the secret nature of all things sublunary, as also
well read in the great volume of the celestial bodies, and furnished with all
science whereby either the content of the mind, the honor of his high place,
being lord of all, or the use of his life, or the glory of his Maker, might be
maintained or procured.

Such was man in the state of innocence in respect of his knowledge; and though
his fall eclipsed that light very much, and much of that particular knowledge
which Adam had, perished in him; yet sure that which remained after the fall,
which was the stock wherewith he set up in the world, did give the first rules,
and lay down the grounds of all arts and sciences, which being perfected by
observation, study and experience in the long life of the fathers, descended
upon succeeding times, like rivers which gather in some brooks to mend their
stream as they hasten to the sea, and so improve their strength in current,
and dilate their banks.

Much of this makes much against man; for in this exellencie of his knowledge
extending it self so to the creature, no doubt but he knew the Angels also, and
knew of their fall. I cannot suppose that so excellent a creature as man
bearing the image of God that made him, and of the Angels that stood and kept
their first estate, could be ignorant, or that God would conceal from him such
an example of weakness in so excellent a creature, of justice in him.

I cannot suppose but that he knew into what condition the fall of Angels had
dejected them, and how far their sin had corrupted them; he could not but
know them, hating of, and hateful to God, and therefore no friend to man.

He might have suspected the forbidden fruit to have had some poisonous
quality, when God said, qua die comederis morte morieris; but he knew by that
full knowledge that he had of the creatures, that it was good and wholesome for
meat.

But the more we honor God in the perfection of his creation, the more we
dishonor man in the precipitation of his fall; surely he stumbled not, he fell
not for want of light, he fell in the day, as it will after follow.

But much of this knowledge survived his innocence, and no doubt but the Angels
that fell had and have much more knowledge then men now have.

2. His holiness was also complete; for that Maker is not author imperfecti
operis, of an imperfect work; he did nothing but it was bonum valde, very good;
surely I doubt not to affirm that there was as full and as great perfection of
holiness and righteousness in Adam in the state of his innocence as was in
Jesus Christ, for God was well pleased in them both.

The difference was this, Adam was a mere creature, and his height of honor
was the image of his Maker; but Christ was man not united by way of similitude
with the image of God, but by way of personal union with the nature of the
Godhead, so that Adams holiness was changable, but Christ's holiness was not.

This holiness and righteousness consisted in a sincere purity of the
creature within himself, and in a total conformity to the will of God.

The exaltation of Gods favor to him went no higher; so high it did go; Adam
might have kept him so to this day and for ever if he would.

The reason of this mutability in the state of man, was, because he was made of
earth, which was made of nothing, and therefore could not participate of the
immutability of God as it did of his goodness and holiness.

Considering man thus in his state of innocence, we shall find that all Adams
posterity was then in him, and in his person was the whole nature of mankind;
so that the whole nature either stood or fell in him, and was either in his
standing to hold the innocence of creation, or in his fall to lose the same.

By this light we see the goodness, and love, and wisdom of God in the
creation of man, and here is the ground laid of his justice also; for there is
no necessity laid upon man that he must fall; and being thus set up, he cannot
break but by his own ill husbandry of the talent of grace that is given to him;
for what would he have more? God may say of this Vine, what could I have done
more to it then I did? he may be eternally and unchangably happy if he will.

2. The misery of our fall, and therein

1. How we may know it. 2. What it is.
1. Whow we may know it.

It is properly the work of the Law to declare to man how miserable he is; so
says the Apostle, Romans 7.7.
I knew not sin but by the Law; for I had not known lust, except the Law had
said, non concupisces, Thou shall not covet.

Therefore to work faith in us, the spirit of God does preach the Law to the
conscience, and teaches us to examine and try our ways by the Law, not
literally as they of old did, whom Christ reproves, but according to the full
scope of the Law, which aims not at the boughs and exuberant branches of sin,
but is an axe laid to the root thereof, and tells us how miscrable we are,
declaring

2. What this misery is 1. In the infection. 2, In the wages.


1. In the infection.

Thus the Law declares us guilty 1. In original sin. 2. In sins of
omission. 3. In sins of evil motion, 4. In sins of evil affection. 5. In
sins of evil action.


1. In original sin.

The Law declares Adam a transgressour, and therein a corrupter, not only of
his own person, but of the whole nature of mankind; because having Free will to
have kept the good estate in which he was created, by prevarication of the Law,
he fell from the chief good, and thereby infected, and polluted his posterity,
so that ever since, no clean thing could derive it self from that which is
unclean. This sin has produced these effects in man.

1. The image of God is much blemished in him; for instead of that full
knowledge which he had, he reteineth only some principles, which be called the
law of God written in the heart, which do serve to make a man without excuse in
the day of his judgment, because he cannot deny but that he knew a Godhead, and
knew good and evil in some measure. Video meliora proboque.

For the invisible things of God, his eternal power and Godhead are seen by the
creation of the world, Romans 1.19.
being considered in his works.

And that law, Do as thou would be done to, serves us to distinguish
between good and evil in many things.

So though there be a total privation of our light, yet is there a dark cloud
overshadowing us.

For now the natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, 1
Cor. 2.14
neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned.

Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves.
2 Cor. 3.5


2. And from hence it comes, that we mistake our way often, and that is not
always the nearest and best way that is the fairest and broadest, and most
trodden; Pro. 14.12
There is away that seems good in the eyes of men, but the end thereof is
death.

For the wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God, Romans 8.7
for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.

2. The image of God in the Will.

1. There follows a natural inclination rather to evil then to good, and men
naturally do bestow their wits rather to project evil then good; for the mind
and conscience is defiled. Tit. 1.15. Ephesians. 4.17
For there is naturally a vanity in the understanding. So it may be said,

They are wise to do evil, but to do well they have no knowledge. Jer. 4.22.


2. In the Will, the image of God is blemished.

For we shall find in our selves a reluctation against God; all the service of
God naturally does bring a weariness upon us, and nothing does terrify so much
with fear of difficulty as good works.

This is called Original sin; because it runs in the same stream with our
blood, and we derive it from our faulty progenitors; which the Apostle
calls, The sin that hangs so fast on; Heb. 12.1. Romans 7.7
Saint Paul calls it peccatum habitans in me, sin dwelling in me,

Corpus peccati. Lex membrorum. Concupiscentia. And the whole corruption of man
deriveth it self from this head, so that we are born by nature children of
wrath; for who can draw that which is clean from that which is unclean.

Therefore the Spirit of God working faith in us, does set our eyes upon the
quarry out of which we were dug, and points us to this first corruption.

1. There is great use of this looking back, that we who think our selves brave
creatures, to whom God has put so many of our fellow witnesses into service,
may know that we are but men; so it serves to humble us under the mighty hand
of God. It is Augustines saying, Magna pars humilitatis tuae, est notitia tui.

2. I find it also urged by the Prophet Isay,

Hearken to me ye that follow righteousness, Isa. 51.1.
ye that seek the Lord, look to the rock whence you were hewn, and to the pit
whence ye are dug.

This, to consider the small beginnings of the Church; for God called Abraham
being one, and from him is the house of Israel.

3. I find it urged, to remember our unworthiness, and to establish the Faith
of Gods free grace. Ezch 16.3


Thus says the Lord unto Jerusalem, thy birth and thy nativity is of the land
of Canaan: thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother was an Hittite etc.

To chide the rebellion of Israel, to whom God had showed mercy, being so
unworthy;

Three good uses of this point, if these virtues do follow.

1. Humility: 2. Thankfulness: 3. Repentance.
This Doctrine of Original sin has found some haeretical opposition, though
the voice of Scripture and Reason does speak out loud and clear for it.

The Pelagians long ago denied propagation of sin, and ascribed all to
imitation.

The Romanists deny it to be peccatum mortale, a mortal sin.

But the Anabaptists of our times have revived both the Pelagian, and the
Popish haeresie.

For in their last book printed 1620. they do deny that Infants traduce sin
from their parents, and therefore are not borne in sin.

I only admonish you, if any such corrupt suggestions shall obtrude themselves
to your judgments, that you wave them as contrary to the express word of holy
Scripture, that you never forget the pit out of which you were dug.

2. Sins of omission.

This is another corruption of nature; for our original imperfection does so
incline us to evil, that we are ready to leave the duties undone, which the law
of God requires to be done.

The Spirit of God working faith in us, does show us that whatsoever holy duty
we omit, we transgress the Law which in every precept does bind the conscience
to obedience, and leaves them guilty before God, who do not those things which
the Law commands.

Note it, that in the process of the last judgment it is said, non pavistis
me, non amicivistis me, non visitastis, ye fed me not, etc. And in the
parabolical example of the rich man and Lazarus, it is declared that the rich
man went to hell for not feeding Lazarus. Consider this ye that forget God.

How often have you neglected public prayers when you have had no just
occasion to detain you? how often have you neglected to hear, to come to the
Sacrament? when the Table of the Lord has been prepared for you, you have
turned your back and gone away.

To such the Master of the feast says, Non sunt digni, and non gustabunt
coenam meam, they are not worthy, they shall not taste of my supper.

God does offer occasions every moment to praise him, or to pray to him; it is
part of man's misery that he is negligent, and takes not the benefit of these
occasions to serve God.

He was adjudged to utter darkness who hid the talent of his master in the
ground. Take that uprofitable servant and cast him into utter darkness: yet
was this but a sin of omission.

The Law says, Hoc fac and vives, do this and live; and not only they that do
Contrarium huic, contrary to this; but they that do not Hoc facere, are
prevaricatours of the Law.

To do good, and to distribute forget not; he does not say, forbear to do
evil, or omit not to do good, but forget not; it is a sin to forget our duty,
more to omit it willingly, but most horrible to do the contrary.

3. Sins of evil motion.

These are against the tenth Commandment, non concupisces thou shall not
covet; for there is a conception of sin, a vegetation, and a putting forth.
The Conception of sin is the first motion thereof, the first titillation of the
sense, as Galasius,

Quamvis non plane assentiamur desiderio, si tamen nos titillat, sufficit ad
nos reos peragendos. So Chrysostom. Aliud est concupiscere, aliud velle.

Saint Bern. does distinguish our Cogitations thus.

1. Sunt Cogitationes otiosae, idle thoughts, and ad rem non pertinentes: these
he calls Lutum simplex, that is, a thin clay which cleaves not, yet it
colors.

2. Sunt Cogitationes violentae and fortius adhaerentes, violent and faster
cleaving thoughts. These he calls Lutum viscosum, a viscous clay, stick-fast;

3. Sunt Cogitationes faetidae, Filthy thoughts, quae ad luxuriam; invidiam
avaritiam etc. pertinet, which belong to luxury, etc. Coelum immundum, foul mud.

The first of these cogitationes and motus primi, may be either in fantasy
only, so they defile not: or in voluntate, in the will; a little infecting
that, so they break the law.

St. Chrysostom. Si concupiscentiae non consentit voluntas, sola concupiscentia
non condemnat, if the Will consents not, the Concupiscence condemns not.

I dare not embrace his judgment Saint Paul found by the law, and he could
find it by no law but this of the tenth Commandment that Concupiscentia est
peccatum, Concupiscence is sin.

This is part of the misery of our fall from God, we cannot think a good
thought of our selves.

4. Sins of evil-affection.

The spirit does detect this further misery, when the consent of the will, and
the bent of desire does affect evil; in which kind our Savior the best
interpreter of the Law, does call anger murder, and unchaste desires adultery,
and desires of our neighbors goods theft;

These are not only sins in proventu ex cord, but in cord, as Christ says,
out of the heart comes murder, adultery, theft.

5. Sins of evil action.

These are evil praevarications, and actual transgressions of the law, such as
the erecting of another God against the true God, worshipping of idols,
Swearing and blasphemy, Breach of the Sabbath in the first table of the law.

Disobedience to authority, murder, adultery, theft, false witness in the
second Table.

They that do these things have not God in their ways: Haec sunt quae polluunt
hominem, says Jesus Christ.

It is a principal work of the Spirit of God in man, to make him sensible of
the pollution of sin: it is a thing natural to fear punishment, and to decline
it; but the perfect hatred of sin is in respect of the pollution; so that if
there were no further danger, yet because it fouls my soul, and defiles my
body, I abhor it.

This is an high degree of holiness.

Saint Paul who had an inward assurance, and certain persuasion of the
salvation of his soul, as he declares, reposita est mihi corona. And he knew
whom he had trusted; yet how does he complain!

To will is present with me, but I can do, etc. Of sinners I am chief.

But I am carnal, sold under sin, wretched man that I am!

Those sorrowful bewailings of himself, those confessions and deplorings of his
sin, do not proceed from fear of punishment: he knew that he was past the
rod: they proceed from the horror of the infection of sin: it grieved him
that he was so foul and unclean in the sight of him that has so pure eyes.

2. This misery appears further in the punishment of sin, which in the
justice of God is Ire maledicte. The curse of God, as it is written.

Cursed is he that confirms not all the words of this law to do them. Deuteronomy.
27.26.
To live under the curse of God, contains all the crosses and tribulations of
this life, outward, in our bodies, our estates, our liberty, our friends:
inward, in the surges of our own vexations, in the winds of temptation without
us, and death it self.

It contains also the second death, Poenam damni, depriving us of all
comfort, and poenam sensus, possessing us of all fullness of woe.

Two things make weight in this woe.

1. That the Judge has book't the full evidence against us; nothing can be
either suppressed or excused by us, nothing can be defended. 2. That there is
no power in us as of our selves to satisfy the Justice of God; so that we are
at Saint Paul's pass, Quis me liberabit? Who shall deliver me?
And herein the law does us a favor; for it is our Schoolmaster to bring us to
Christ, which is the next point which the spirit reveals.

3. The Remedy; wherein consider,

1. How the law does show us the remedy. 2. How the Gospel does declare it.
1. The Law is our Schoolmaster.

So says the Apostle, Wherefore the law was our Schoolmaster to Christ. Gal.
3.24.
In the school of God there are three forms. 1. Incipientes, beginners, in
the lowest form, for the most part taught by their fellows; such were they
before the law, taught by their fellow creatures, reading and learning both the
glory of God in the speculation of the works of God, and finding the use of
their life in the constant obedience of the creatures to the Ordinance of God.
2. Proficientes, Proficients, taught by the Usher of the school, that is Moses
and the Prophets. 3. Perfecti, Perfect, taught by the chief Schoolmaster, that
is, Christ.


The Law is our Usher, and makes us come fit to come into the uppermost form;
and that two ways.

1. By representing Christ in figures and types, in sacrifices and ceremonies.
This is the Ceremonial. 2. By showing us our misery, that in our selves there
is nothing but matter and merit of condemnation: so the law is a sharp
schoolmaster, and does severely correct us. And no man comes to Christ that
has not lived under the rod of the law, and been truly humbled in his soul
with the consideration of his sins, in such measure that he despaireth of his
salvation in himself, and finds himself in his own ways hateful to God; as
Job, Therefore I abhor my self. This done;
2. The Gospel reveals to us the full remedy of our misery in Christ, saying,

Unto you is borne a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. God sent his Son made
of a woman, Gal. 4.4.5.
and made subject to the law, that be might redeem them that were under the
law, that we might receive the adoption of Sons. Against our ignorance, Christ
is made our Wisdom.

Against our guiltiness, he is made our righteousness.

Against the infection of sin, our Sanctification.

Against the punishment of sin, our redemption,

The remedy thus sufficient, Christ, God and man, is a person able to satisfy
the law.

And being without sin, able to recover us the favor of God.

And being victor of all our enemies, able to open Paradise to us.

Thus far in the work of faith the spirit of God works upon our
understanding; and there can be no faith in us except we be rightly informed in
these three things;

Our excellent Creation; our miserable Fall, and the comfortable remedy.

2. To settle us in the faith, the spirit of God must also work upon our will:
that is, Vid. divis. sup.


1. In respect of the glorious Creation of man, to move us to three duties; 1.
Of thanksgiving to God for it. 2. Of sorrow for our fall from it. 3. Of holy
desire again to recover it.
2. In respect of our misery, it moves us, 1. To know it by searching and
trying our ways. 2. To deplore it with godly sorrow; the effects of which sorrow
are named by the Apostle. 1. Carfulness, 2. Clearing our selves. 2 Cor. 7.11.
3. Indignation, 4. Fear, 5. Desire. 6. Zeal, 7. Revenge,

3. In respect of the Remedy, it moves us, 1. To know it. 2. Hunger and thirst
after it. 3. To endeavor both all our time, and with all our strength to
attain it. 4. To use all the means to procure it.

And howsoever we find our selves most miserable in our selves; yet must we not
so far undervalue as to think our selves unworthy of eternal life.

The Jews are charged that they resisted the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51
and would not admit the gracious suggestions thereof, they would not hear the
voice behind them whispering in their ear a return from their evil ways.

Paul and Barnabas tells them, It was necessary that the Word of God should
first have been spoken to you: Act. 13.46
but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of life
everlasting; Lo we turn to the Gentiles.

But are we not all unworthy of eternal life?

True;

Another thing it is, out of the conscience of sin to confess our selves
unworthy.

Yet in this Confession and Contrition there is hope, that though in our selves
we be both unworthy and incapable of heavenly life, yet having an eye to the
remedy of our misery, we despair not in him, because we hold upon sure and
precious promises; which are precious.

1. In regard of the promiser, whose power and love does make him able and
willing to perform all good to us. 2. In regard of the motive that moved God to
promise, expressed by the Apostle to be his own goodness, the good pleasure of
his will so free. 3. In regard of the fullness of his favor, For God who is
rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. Ex. 34.6.
has promised. Abundant in goodness. 4. In regard of the extent: gaudium quod
erit omnipopulo, joy unto all People; Luke 2.10.
for this brazen serpent is lifted up, that whosoever looks thereon may have
help.
What then should keep thee from this remedy?

1. Consider that there is no man in better case then thou by nature: for all
have sinned and are deprived of the glory of God. 2. Confider that this remedy
is without thy self; if it were of thy self, thou had cause to distaste it;
but it is the free offer of Gods grace to thee. 3. Consider that the giver of
the Remedy, is the giver of faith also, by which the remedy is apprehended and
applied; and if thou do not feel this faith in thy self, do not judge thy self
void of it; for there may be and is faith often, where is no feeling thereof.
4. Tarry the Lords leisure, as before, wait; for the vision will not lie. How
long lay the poor man at the Poole of Bethesda? and though still hindered, yet
was he not without hope.
We must not part the truth of God and his justice and mercy: for the truth of
God binds both the threatenings of his judgment, and the truth of his mercy.

Thus is the faith of the Elect given and nourished in us.

2. How our faith may be proved.

Because there may be a show and seeming of faith, where the true substance
thereof is wanting, the best way to try our faith, is by the true touchstone:
for as gold is tried by the touch, so faith which is much more precious then
gold that perishes, has a proper touchstone to try it; 1 Pet. 1.7


1. That is the conscience of man within; for that does declare to himself his
faith. 2. That is good conversation and godly life; for that does declare our
faith to men.
1. A good Conscience.

For being justified by faith we have peace toward God. Romans 5.
This peace a wicked man cannot have; Non est pax impio, says God, No peace to
the wicked.

Against this is a double objection.

1. Many wicked men have quiet hearts and aile nothing,

The effect of true peace is joy in the Holy Ghost. Sol.
The wicked man's joy is not such; it is but a flash; it is neit^^^ ^ound, for
when any trial comes it fails; neither is ^t (...) for it perishes in time;
neither is it growing and incre^^^^g, neither is it excusing.

2. Many of the best of Gods servants have their minds troubled, and suffer
great distresses in their conscience for sin;

True; but observe from whence this arises, Sol.
even from the war of the spirit against the flesh, the world, and the devil,
in which conflict often times the spirit is daunted and dismayed for a season;
but there is ever joy in tribulations, and joy arising and growing out of
sorrows; whereas the hearts of them that have not Faith, dye in them.

And this fire is from heaven; the covering of it with oppressions does make it
burn so much the hotter; and the strring of it up with temptations, does make
it shine the clearer; so that peace of conscience is a sure sign of a good
Faith.

2. Another touchstone for this gold, this Faith is an evidence of godly
conversation, to approve our selves to God and man, both by doing all the
duties of a godly life, and avoiding the contrary.

This is the only work of Faith in us.

1. The pit whence we draw this water of life, is deep; the bucket by which we
fetch it up, is Faith; for whatsoever desire or strength we have, or endeavor
to live godly, it is an extraction drawn by our Faith from Jesus Christ.

I live by Faith in the same God.

2. Faith only does assure to us the loving kindness of God; God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten son, etc.

Ecce quantam charitatem, what eye shall behold this, but the eye of Faith?

3. Faith works love, that is, it breeds a correspondence between Christ
and us; for the believing soul assured of Christ's love to it, does cast about
within it self, quid rependam? and finding nothing to recompense that love, it
seeks how God may be pleased, and walks in that way so near as he can.

So it is said of the faithful, that they walk with God, and they answer every
temptation to evil, as Joseph did; How shall I do this and sin aga^^^^ ^^d?

Or if by infi^^^, ^hey fall, they cry God mercy, and they groan and grie^
^^^hin themselves that they cannot perform better service to God.

Thus we love God, 1 John 4.19 Luke 7 47.
because he loved us first.

And Christ said, Many sins are forgiven her, quia dilexit multum. This is a
fruit of the Holy Ghost shed abroad in our hearts by faith.

Observe it, when faith does lie concealed in us, that our selves cannot
discern it, yet may we discern in our selves our love of God, and of such as
love God; and this proves Gods love to us; for we could not love him, except he
loved us first.

4. Faith makes us sincere; for it is the notation of our faith, it is called
faith unfeigned, and Christ says, Blessed be the pure in heart; faith purifieth
the heart, as the Apostle says.

These are not the generation of them that are pure in their own eyes, of which
Solomon spoke, but the other of which David his father spoke, Haec est
generatio quaerentium faciem tuam.

Seeing there cannot be perfectio operis, the perfection of works, God is
pleased if there be puritas cordis, purity of heart, 2 Cor. 1.12.
which the Apostle calls Simplicity, and godly pureness.

And that is known by these signs.

1. If a man be humbled in true contrition for sins which he knows himself
guilty of, and has no peace in his heart till he has comfort in his
conscience that God has forgiven them. 2. If he consider his own weakness so
far as to acknowledge that he commits many sins that he knows not, and
prays earnestly, and often with David, a secretis meis munda me, cleanse me
from my secret sins. 3. If he find in his heart a present strife of his spirit
against the flesh, wrestling with his own corruptions, and not suffering sin to
reign in his mortal body, leading him captive to the Law of sin. 4. If he
find him watchful to prayer and fasting, and watching, and all exercises of
mortification, striving to bring his body in subjection to the law of God. 5.
If he be willing to hide the word of God in his heart, to arm him against
Satan's temptations, as Christ did with scriptum est, it is written. 6. If he
find a desire of perseverance therein to the end, which is discerned by his
spiritual growth from grace to grace, bringing forth more fruit even in age, as
Christ testifies of the Church of Thyatira, more at the last then at the
first, Rev. 2.19.
For he that believes in me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of the water
of life. John 7.38.

These be sure proofs of sincere faith, which though it be weak, yet it will
gather strength; and being able to fight, will in the end be made able to
overcome all our enemies.

3. How faith may be preserved.

This seems a needless question, because we have clear evidence of
Scripture, that sincere faith cannot be lost.

True; it cannot finally be lost, it is assured to God; but we must preserve
it, so as that in temptations and afflictions we may not be cast down with fear
that it is lost.

Neither that we do bear our selves too bold upon it so far as to presume.

Therefore we are bound to the use of all those means ordained by God to
preserve faith.

If it be an hypocritical or a temporary Faith, it may be lost; if it be a true
Faith, this is one certain sign of it.

The same means that breed Faith in us, the same means do nourish it: therefore

If thou stand by Faith, be not high minded, but fear.

It is a Tenet of the Church of Rome, Romans 11.20.
and it is now revived of late by the Anabaptists in a book of the last year,
that a man may finally fall away from saving grace;

And many false shows are made out of Scriptures not rightly understood, to
maintain this heresy.

I say no more, but as the Apostle does,

Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

He that is once assured of his standing, 1 Cor. 10.11.
cannot fall, because the same Spirit which witnesses to our spirits that we
are the sons of God, does also teach us all things, and bring all things to
our remembrance, which Christ has taught us.

The means are

The Word, the Sacraments, Prayer.

1. The Word; for as we are born anew by the immortal seed of the Word, so we
must as new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that we may grow
thereby. 2. The Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper; for these also
serve to strengthen Faith. 1. By visible representations to the sense of the
inward graces of Gods spirit, that walking here by Faith and not by sight, we
may have something to fasten our eye upon, which may be to us as the brazen
serpent lifted up. 2. By the virtue of consignation, because these Sacraments
are the Seals of Gods Covenant of grace, obliging God the giver to continue his
love to us, and reciprocally binding us to return duty and love and obedience
to him. 3. By the efficacy of mediation, because they be the means in the
Ordinance of God, whereby he does convey his spiritual graces to us, so that
Baptism is called the cover of regeneration, and by Baptism Christ is put on.

The Supper of Christ presents Christ to us our spiritual food, and therein
we do eat and drink his body and blood.

This admonishes us to be swift to hear, and to neglect no opportunity for the
same.

To renew our Baptism by often repentance, to frequent the Table of the Lord,
as the feast of our souls.

This advances our ministry of these by which this Serpent is lifted up on
high, and set on a pole for all that desire health to look upon it.

They that are careless and negligent in these things, will soon make
shipwreck of that temporary faith that they seem to have; for they that live in
the neglect of these things, do forsake their own mercy, and declare plainly
that their Faith is not sound and sincere, but their whole righteousness is
like the morning dew, soon dried up.

3. Prayer, 1. for that shows of whom we hold, not of our selves, but of God.

2. That brings us into Gods acquaintance and familiar conversation whereby
we do more perceive Gods love to us and declare our love to God.

4. How Faith must be used.

The handling of this point draws in the third word of my text, which is life.

The just shall live by Faith.

The right use of Faith is to live by it, as I have showed in the exposition of
the words.

1. There is use of it in the natural life. 2. In the spiritual life. 3. For
the eternal life.
1. In the natural life; for 1. In prosperity. 2. In adversity.
there is use of it.

1. In prosperity.

1. Faith is a shield to bear off all the flattering temptations of the flesh,
Heb. 11.24.
the world, the Devil; so it is said of Moses, By Faith Moses when he was come
to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter.

And by Faith Joseph when he was tempted by his unchaste mistress, whose offer
tendered him all sensual delight, refused her, and would not sin against God.

2. Faith is the contentment of the righteous in those things that they
possess; they believe them to be the gifts of God, and they are satisfied with
his allowance; so by Faith Daniel was content with his pulse, and refused the
Kings meat; they that do believe that God knows better then they what is good
and sufficient for them, are content with what they have.

3. Faith is the acknowledgment of all our good from God, for thanksgiving is a
work of Faith, and gives God his due.

4. Faith depends upon God for the time to come, Psalm. 16.5.
as David says, thou maintainest my lot.

I have set the Lord always before me, Psalm. 16.8.
he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.

Upon which ground the faithful do build things hoped for, and commit their
ways to the Lord.

They cast all their care upon God, for he cares for them. And surely it is
for want of Faith that the filii saeculi hujus the men of this world do rise so
early, and go so late to bed, and eat the bread of carfulness, robbing God
of his service, and breaking the Sabbath, and often doing wrong to their
brother to build up themselves, it is a sign that they dare not trust God.

A strange inference.

1. For we beought nothing with us into the world. 2. We cannot deny but that
whatsoever we have or possess in the world, it is the gift of God; for
aperiente manum de implet omnia; we have no interest in any thing, being born
in sin, the right is in him, the gift from him. 3. We must confess that very
little will serve our necessities whilst we do live in the world. 4. We shall
carry nothing away with us, and why should we discruciate our selves with cares
for others, seeing that is the care of God? our children also are his
inheritance.
I know and believe that our children are under the Covehant and Promise of
grace, Ero Deus tuus and seminis tui. Let us study to breed them to the love
and service of God, let us not waste unthriftly, what we may spare from our own
necessities, and for the charge of their education; Let us use all honest and
lawful means to provide for them.

Thus are we discharged of our duty, permit Deo Caetera, leave the rest to
God; Faith now does all that remains to be done.

By Faith Isaak blessed Jacob, Heb. 11.20, 21.
and Esau concerning things to come.

By Faith Jacob when he was dying blessed both the sons of Joseph.

2. In adversity.

Thus it serves to furnish us with 1. Patience. 2. Hope.


1. With Patience, to bear the present distress without murmuring at God.

David is a notable and a full example of this Faith. I shall show you him in
distress.

For when the Amalekites had burnt Ziklag, 1 Samuel 30.
and had carried away captives all the people therein, and amongst them David's
two wives, Abinoam, and Abigael,

David was greatly distressed, so were all the people.

They lift up their voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep.

David beside this sorrow of his loss, and compassion of the loss of his
people, etc. Feared.

For the people speak of stoning him, because the souls of all the people were
greived, every man for his sons and his daughters.

No remedy against all this sorrow but Faith. 1 Samuel 32.6.


But David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. 2 Chor. 20.


The like example of Jehoshaphat;

When some came and told the King of an army coming against him to invade him;
instead of mustering his men, surveying his armor, sending out for oxciliaries
to resist this army.

Or instead of sending a messenger to treat of peace to divert the enemy, and
to prevent war.

Jehoshaphat lets the enemy come on; Verse. 3.


Jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast
throughout all Juda, he goes to Church and prays;

O our God will thou not judge them? for we have no might against this great
company that comes against us; Verse. 12.
neither know we what to do: but our eyes are upon thee.

In the very distress to which this remedy is applied, God has threatened the
Jews with an invasion by the Chaldeans; he has declared the enemy insolent,
and violent, what shall the Jews do in the misery? Observe,

God takes no care of the wicked, let him sin, let the Chaldeans do his worst
to him, but The just man shall live by his Faith.

For he shall possess his soul in patience.

Beloved, we hear of distresses abroad; if we do but cross the water, the
sword is drawn against the professors of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and they
that have arms put them on to save their lives, and stand upon their guard.

The bloody Jesuits cry to the French King of our Religion, Raze it, Raze it.

We know not how God may visit us hereafter, when the light of Israel shall be
quenched; although there go over neitheir men nor money to relieve the
distresses of our own mothers children, filios ecclesiae, children of the
Church; such consultations are far above us; yet let us pray for them to God,
that God would give them Faith to depend upon him: and the just amongst them
shall live by that Faith.

There is an example nearer kin to this land, the daughter of great Britain
and her root and branches; for whom many a loyal heart in this Kingdom aketh,
in whose quarrel the honorable house of Parliament have in the name of the
Commons offered to unlock all the treasures, to put on arms, and to adventure
the lives of all faithful Patriots in the just cause of restoring them to their
rightful inheritance, and all such honors as their just claim shall
challenge. In their distress I know no other comfort but my Text. The just
shall live by Faith.

In a word, where these three great and crying sins do reign, which in this
Prophecy are threatened;

That is corruption of conversation, when there is no honesty nor truth left
amongst men, but that every man studyeth the building of his own house, he
cares not where he has the brick and the mortar.

Corruption of Religion, that schism and heresy do carry it from peace and
truth.

Corruption of justice, that honors, places of service in the Common wealth,
and justice it self are sold for money; good men punished, evil men rewarded.
Comfort: Justus ex fide sua vivet, the just shall live by his Faith.

2. Faith furnishes us with Hope.

That also 1. In Prosperity. 2. In Adversity.


We have hope through Faith that God will continue his loving kindn^sse to us,
and not take away from us the light of his countenance.

So David; Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life,
Psalm. 23.6*
and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

Observe in David's hope two things.

1. The ground of it, Faith in Gods protection, for that is the part of the
whole Psalm. The Lord is my shepherd, he shall feed me, he restores my soul:
In the valley of the shadow of death thou art with me; Thou preparest my table,
thou anoyntest my head with oil, my cup runs over. 2. The means by him used
to continue the assurance thereof, even by dwelling in the house of God
continually; that is by consecrating his whole life to Gods service and
worship.
2. In adversities.

We have hope that either God will strengthen us to bear it, or give issue out
of it.

This is grounded upon that promise of God to his Church. I will not leave thee
nor forsake thee,

And if we hope for that we see not, Romans 8.25
we do with patience wait for it.

There is no such comfort in the sorrows and distresses of life, as reading the
holy Scriptures for the support of our hope. For, They are written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope. Romans 15.4
This hope keeps the heart from breaking; for building upon the truth of God it
cannot be shaken.

2. How Faith must be used in the Spiritual life,

1. For this the Apostle does call it the shield of Faith; and it serves for
defense against the fiery darts of Satan, to keep off the evil that is yet
without us, either in temptation or provocation. 2. It serves also to purify
our hearts from that evil which we do bear about us in the infection thereof.
3. It serves for a provocation to stir us up, to resist the power of the
enemy; 1 Pet. 5.8
For so Saint Peter says, Though Satan go about like a roaring lion, seeking
whom he may devour, Whom resist steadfast in the faith. Verse* 9.


4. It serves for victory. This is the victory by which we overcome the world,
even our Faith. 5. Many that return out of the field victorious, yet may bring
home some dangerous wound that they have received in the battle; and there is
another good use of Faith, to cure and heal all the wounds. For our Faith
makes us whole 6. It serves for the effectuating the means. 1. Hearing. 2.
Sacraments. 3. Prayer.

3. For our eternal life.

Faith is profitable unto all things which has the Promise of the life
present, 1 Timothy 4.8
and of that which is to come.

The manner how it works this assurance, is,

1. It assures us that there is a life eternal, for that is an article of
Christian Faith, the close and sweet conclusion of our Creed. 2. It assures
us, that we are they who shall by the free gift of God, be made heirs of this
heavenly Kingdom: reposita est mihi corona justitiae. 3. It applies all the
promises of God to those several graces in us. Thus, I mourn, therefore I
shall be comforted: I am pure in heart being washed in the blood of Christ,
Therefore I shall see God: I hunger after righteousness ergo satisfied: I love
God; ergo, all things work together for my good: I believe, ergo, I shall be
saved. 4. It assures our perseverance to the end in our love and obedience;
yea Faith assures our faith to us; For beleiving in the Author, is beleiving
in the finisher of our Faith. 5. It stays us in expectation of the fruit of
our Faith, that though the Vision do tarry, yet we think it not long to wait
for the performance of it.
Having heard of the excellent use of Faith, you cannot but observe the reason
why Satan does aim all his fiery darts at our Faith, because all our
obedience, and righteousness, and holiness, is quickened and strengthened by
Faith, without which it is impossible to please God.

There is nothing in a Christian man that so much provokes Satan against him,
as his Faith.

For Faith keeps us from being devoured of this roaring Lion.

Therefore two assault we must provide for:

1. Satan's labor to keep us from getting this shield of Faith. 2. His sound
care when we have gotten it, to rob and spoil us of it.
1. Assault.

Satan knowing that our Faith makes us too strong for him, and quenches all
his fiery darts. does therefore all he can to keep us from the means by which
Faith is increased in us.

That is, from hearing the Word and receiving the Sacrament, from meditation,
from prayer; and as often as you find your selves tempted to neglect these,
know it to be Satan's malice against you to keep you from Faith.

The breast plate of righteousness without a shield of Faith, is not sufficient
to keep off the fiery darts of Satan from wounding us, but Faith quenches
them.

They therefore that live in the love and in the use of those means, may
comfort themselves that Satan shall not be able to hinder them from obtaining
a comfortable vegetation and growing up in Faith.

2. Assault.

And whereas he labors to wrest our Faith from us, we shall find that both
his cunning and strength will fail him, for saving Faith cannot be lost.

To establish our Faith, let us know that imperfect Faith may be a sound and
true Faith; for we cannot attain to perfection in this life, but if we have a
good conscience in all things, willing to live honestly, Heb. 13.18
we may have boldness with God. For as Christ prayed for Peter that his Faith
might not fail; so he prays for his whole Church, even for all that shall
believe in him through his Word, Joh 17.26
that the love wherewith the Father h^th loved him, may be in them, and he in
them: Which love will keep us that we fall not off quite from him.

We are not denied the use of riches, honors or lawful pleasures; these be
ornaments and comforts of life, but we cannot live by them, they perish in the
using of them.

Our obedience and good works are the fruits of Faith, we live by Faith, Faith
lives in obedience, for without works Faith is dead: Did we but know the
unvaluable price of Faith, we would seek it more then all other things, and
like the Merchant in the Parable, Mat. 13 44
we would part with all we have to purchase Faith. I conclude with St. Bern.

Dicamus fidem vitem, virtutes palmites, Botrum opus, devotionem vinum. Our
vine yarder has bestowed much digging and planting, and composing, and fensing
upon this Vine, let it put forth, and let the clusters call it fruitful, and
let the Vine please both God and men.

Now that we have searched this gracious mine of comfort, and found the rich
vein which makes us able to live both here and hereafter.

Let me admonish you what is objected against the Doctrine delivered out of
this place.

Ribera a learned Jesuit, when he comes to this Text in his full commentary
upon this Prophet, says. Incidimus in locum qui est lapis offensionis duabus
domibus Israelis, hoc est orthodoxis, and haereticis qui recesserunt a domo
David.

It greives the Church of Rome that we have so clear a Text in th is Prophet,
and that so much urged in the Epistles of the Apostles for our justification by
Faith alone; and Ribera is much deceived if he mean us under the tittle of
haeretiques; for this place is no offense to us: It is the most comfortable
doctrine that we can embrace, nothing does more set forth the excellency of
Faith, nothing does more assure to us our eternal life.

Fain would Ribera have shifted off the clear evidence of this place with this
illusion, that the Prophets meaning is this,

The just man, that is, the man that desires to be just, shall live the life
of grace by the Faith whith he has in Christ Jesus.

We understand that a man is justified only by Faith, and that without the Law
as the Apostle does also teach.

And it were a poor comfort to the Church in their distress to tell them, that
the just man should live by his Faith, except the Lord in that promise did
assure them the comforts, not only of the natural, but of the spiritual and
eternal life

Neither would the Apostle urge this Text, but with these contents. For
exexamine the places where these words are urged, and it will appear.

The Apostle professes. Romans 1.17
I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, etc.

For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith, as it
is written, Justus ex fide vivet, the just shall live by his faith.

The Gospel is said to reveal the righteousness of God, he cannot mean the
essential righteousness by which God is justice it self in his divine nature;
but he does understand that righteousness of which the Apostle speaks, who
is made unto us wisdom, Righteousness, etc. that is, Christ our
Righteousness: and this is called the grace of God which brings salvation

This is revealed now in the clear light of the Gospel in real performance,
which was before exhibited in visions and dreams, and types and ceremonies
whilst the veyle was up.

It is revealed from faith to faith.

As Origin and Chrysostom truly enough, but not enough fully: Ex side veteris
testimonii in fidem novi; as Ambrose,

Ex fide Dei promittentis in fidem hominis credentis.

But most fully. Ex fide incipiente, in fidem proficientem. For as Clemens
says,

Apostolus unicam tantum fidem annunciat, quae crescendo proficit, Till it grow
up to be (...) a fullness of faith. Heb. 10.22


And so this text is well cited; for the just man who is made just by faith;
does live in it and by it.

For how can the Gospel be the power of God to salvation, except it reveals
to us the life of says, seeing it is so only to such as do believe?

This first place clears the point, that the Apostle does understand Gods
word in my text so, as that the means of life is faith, and faith only: for so
it is further urged by Saint Paul, who says,

But that no man is justified by the works of the law in the sight of God, Gal.
3.11.
is evident; for the just shall live by faith. Here these words are brought in
to prove, that faith only does justify in the sight of God; which is thus
proved.

Life eternal comes only by faith; therefore righteousness comes only by faith.

The antecedent is Gods own word in my text.

The consequence is thus proved, for

Righteousness is the foundation of life eternal.

They which receive the abundance of grace, Romans 5.17
and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life.

And in the next verse it is called Justification of life. Verse. 18.


And this sequence does the Apostle make in his own comfortable persuasion of
himself,

I have fought a good fight, this is the great fight with Principalities and
Powers: 1 Timothy 4.8
And I have kept the faith, this is the shield which bears off the fiery
darts discharged against him in this fight: his comfort is,

From henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness.

This righteousness is not of the law, which he has fulfilled, but the
righteousness of the faith which he has kept.

It is not the breast plate of righteousness, but it is the shield of faith
that bears off all the fiery darts of Satan, and therefore the just man does
not live and come out of this battle victorious by righteousness, but by
faith.

This place thus applied by our Apostle, is the ground of our Church tenet,
against which the gates of hell cannot prevail, namely that sola fides
justificat, faith alone does justify.

That which the Romanists do lay to our charge, is, that we exclude good works,
and upon that slanderous imputation, both Dr. Stapleton, Harding, Bellarmine,
Campiane, Bishop, and indeed generally all Popish writers do proclaim us
Heretics, and they will not hear us, saying, that the justifying faith which
we preach, must be such as works by love.

They like the Pharisee trust in themselves that they are perfect; we with the
Publican, cry out in faith of Christ's sufficient satisfaction, Domine
miserere, Lord have mercy; upon whose example Saint Augustine says;

Videte fratres, magis placuit humilitas in malis factis, quam superbia in
bonis factis. The cause is in sight; the humility of the one was with faith,
the pride of the other was in presumption: And God resists the proud but
gives grace to the humble.

I conclude this point, wherein I have held you long; I know with how much
comfort and profit to my self, I hope without your loss of time. What man is
he that desires life, who would live as a man, as a good man, and as an happy
man? I answer in the words of the Son of God; As thou believe, so shall it
be unto thee. Or in the Words of the Father of that Son in my text.

The just man shall live by his faith.

Verse. 5. Yea also because he transgresses by wine, he is a proud man, neither
keeps at home: who enlarges his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot
be satisfied, but gathers unto him all Nations, and heapeth unto him all
People.
NOw that God has declared what rest and comfort his Church has in the
manifold oppressions of the enemies thereof, they shall live by their faith;

In all the rest of this chapter, he declares his own just Providence in the
Government of the world, and in the severe execution of his judgments upon
impenitent offenders, that the Prophet may inform himself and others, that God
has not forgotten to be just.

The last verse of the chapter is the total of the chapter.

The Lord is in his holy Temple, let all the earth keep silence before him.

That he sits not there idle, but is awake, that his eyes do see, and his
eyelids do try the sons of men, that we shall hear from his own mouth.

Concerning the words of this fifth verse,

Yea also, because he transgresses by wine, he is a proud man, neither keeps
at home.

These words are read diversely both by Translators and by Expositors.

Our first English Church-bibles read thus.

Like as the wine deceives the drunkard, even so the proud shall fail and not
endure.

The Geneva follows the same sense.

Yea indeed the proud man is as he that transgresses by wine, therefore shall
he not endure.

Arias Montanus: Et quo modo vinum potantem decipit, sic erit superbus, and non
decorabitur.

In his Interlineary he follows the text in the original, but in his
Commentary he follows the vulgar Latin authorized for the Canon by the
Council of Trent.

Pagnine. Quanto magis patator vini qui praevaricatr, qui est vir superbus, non
permanebit? So Mr. Calvin, Etiam certe vino transgrediens, vir superbus non
habitabit.

The 70 have no mention of wine.

(...).

Here be three words to express pride fully: 1. To think too well of our
selves. 2. To think contemptibly of others. 3. To boast and glory in vain
ostentation.


It seems to me that the purpose of this place, is to express the insolency
and pride of the king of Babel, proud Nebuchadnezzar, and generally of the
enemy of the Jew, the Chaldaean; and that the scope of the place is to resemble
them big swollen in their own self-opinion, to a man that is drunk with wine.

This has good coherence with the former words, for showing how the just man
and the proud man do stand in opposition.

His soul which is lifted up is not upright in him: but the just shall live by
faith; faith shall establish the just man.

But the proud man who is drunk with the vain overweening of himself, he shall
not continue, non habitabit, he shall not be established.

And here I forsake the Kings Bible, for I cannot find either sense or
coherence in it.

The words following are plain enough; for God therein does express that he
takes notice of the insatiable desire of the Chaldaean, who encouraged by his
victories, does covet to be Monarch of all the world.

And this is now the partition of the rest of this chapter.

1. Faults. 2. Punishments.
The first fault here named, infatiablenesse The punishment, v. 6, 7, 8.
1. The ground and note of this disease of infatiablenesse, is pride of heart.

2. The disease it self, is infatiablenesse.

1. Of the ground: it is pride.

This is resembled to drunkenness, it is a spiritual giddiness, wherein men
lose themselves, and as the drunkard does both think and speak, and do those
things which betoken madness, his reason, and understanding, and judgment, and
memory failing, and is wholly governed by his fancy: so the proud man made
drunk with the wine of his over weening, as a man beside himself, is
transported with his own self-opinion, Isa. 28.1.
to do things unseemly as the drunkard does.

The Prophet reproving the pride of Ephraim, does use this resemblance,

Woe to the Crown of Pride, the drunkards of Ephraim. And again,

Ver. 3. The Crown of Pride, the drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden
underfoot. And after,

They are drunken, Isa. 29.9.
but not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink.

Thus does pride rob us of our wits, and we say of the proud man; that he does
not know himself.

Wine and strong drink moderately taken do comfort the heart of man, but when
we over-drink, we cease to be our selves; so is it with self love: for every
man by the law of charity is bound to love himself, and to love himself first;
when this love does not ooverflow the banks, it is charity; when it
exuberateth, it is pride.

All sober men do esteem drunkards vile, and account drunkenness a loathsome
sin; let the proud man see himself in that glass, for the drunkard is the
picture of the proud man.

1. Drunkenness makes men think themselves very wise, and such as fly the
conference of their betters when they are sober, in their drink care not with
whom they do contest, and regard no man's presence.

So the proud man is wise in his own opinion; Solomon says, There is more hope
of a fool then of him

2. Drunkenness makes many apt to quarrel.

Who has contentions? the answer next verse.

They that tarry long at the wine. Pro. 23.29


And so is it with the proud man: for he that is of a proud heart stirs up
strife. Verse. 30. Pro. 28.25


3. The drunkard whilst he is in his Cups, is not to be admonished. Abigail
durst say nothing to Nabal, whilst the wine was in his head.

And the proud man is too full of himself to hear any good counsel.

4. David has two complaints.

The drunkards made songs of me. The proud have had me exceedingly in derision,
so both of them sit in the chair of the scornful. Ps. 1^9.51.

5. They are alike in their punishment in this world; for,

The drunkard and the proud man are both rewarded with contempt; all that walk
in good ways are ashamed of them, and avoid their company.

A man's pride shall bring him low. Pro. 29.23 Pro. 21.17. Pro. 15.25. 1 Cor.
8.10


He that loves wine and oil shall not be rich.

6 They are alike in the last judgment; for

The Lord will destroy the house of the proud.

And the Apostle faith of drunkards, that none such shall inherit the Kingdom
of God. You see how like they be both in culpa, and in poena, fault and
punishment.

Therefore humility is our lesson, and we shall find it an hard lesson to take
out now in the overgrown pride of our times, wherein contrary examples do grow
so thick.

It is a great part of the study of many to outshine their neighbors in
glorious buildings, gay apparel, rich furnitures of their houses: this kind of
pride has done much hurt, especially in the ruin of

1. Charity, which had wont to cloth the naked, feed the hungry, refresh the
thirsty, and minister to the necessities of the poor brother. 2. The ruin of
Justice which gives every one his own: I fear if many proud and gay persons
that slant it in bravery of rich show should do so, their feathers restored,
they would be found naked. 3. The ruin of Temperance which prays, give me not
poverty, give me not riches, give me things convenient for me for they be fools
in the judgment of the wife men, that die of prosperity. 4. The ruin of
Religion, for godliness is not it self without contentedness.
You have heard how deceitful a vanity pride is.

The pride of thy heart has deceived thee.

I hasten to the second point, the disease: Infatiablenesse.

It is set forth in two resemblances.

1. The proud man is resembled to hell. 2. He is resembled to death.
These are two things that cry Give, Give, and are never satisfied.

Observe wherein soever any man or woman is proud, if they do know any bounds;

Is it pride in apparel; who was ever fine enough? do we not see the richest
stuff laid and overlaid, almost hidden, with rich adornment of triming; and
when the stuff may call the wearer proud, the trim and fashion may resemble
them to the grave and hell, and shall testify against them that nothing can
satisfy them; and yet to this they add often change.

I do not say much change of rich apparel, but changing often in the wearing; I
have heard of two or three-shifts in a day.

These be they that entertain every foreign fashion, and naturalize outlandish
forms amongst us: Christ will one day tell some body, I was stark naked, and
you clothed not me.

The ambition, that all sorts and degrees of men and women are sick of, is; a
desire to exceed their own rank in show.

The Country striveth with the City, as far as their markets will bear it
out, the City with the Court; these encroachments put pride to shifts; for when
Mechanicals come so fast upon the ancient Gentry of the Land, usurping both
their show and title, almost ashamed of the name of their trades and
occupations that have made them so fine,

The Gentry are put to it to streine their tenant one note higher to enable
them to the start; and their rif^ing and growth must put on the Nobility; and
make them mend their pace.

Thus unsatiably do we strive to out-go our selves, that goodly inheritances
are worn out, and vanity does end in misery in many, in them it continues
with scorn and disdain.

And when you have made your self as fine as you can, you will come a great
many degrees behind Solomon in his royalty; yet Solomon was not clothed like
one of the Lilies of the field.

Thus insatiable is the pride in buildings, a vanity which ladeth the earth
here and there with specious, spacious piles of brick and stone, whereof the
owners have scarce the pleasure of beholding the same with their eyes, being
afraid of the hospitality that should correspond that great show of room.

The proud in beauty, declare themselves insatiable in striving to mend Gods
work by art.

In pretio quondam ruga senilis erat, the aged wrinkles were wont to be held in
honor.

But if there be any help for it now, time shall be spent in study how to hide
and conceal the ruins of time.

The pride mentioned in my text is of power, which every one desires, and few
do know how to manage. The Chaldaeans having obtained some victories, are now
ambitious to be lords of all the earth,

It is said of Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes, he sits studying how he may get
the next Kingdom to him, to make himself strong enough to bid the next King
battle, and to get the conquest of him, that the fear of his power may make the
next King yield himself.

And Alexander when he had conquered the world, sat down and wept, that there
were no more worlds left for him to conquer.

The Bishop of Rome from a Diocesan Jurisdiction, has swelled by degrees,
partly by his own ambition, partly by the connivence of Princes, to an
universal Hierarchy, and his Parasites make him the man to whom belongs

Omnia subjecisti pedibus ejus, thou have put all things under his feet.

His eldest son has fairly dilated his empire; we know that in 88. he had not
enough, he would have feign been dividing of Shechem, and meating out the
valley of Succoth.

In inferior places, how are men transported with desire of power and command,
and how unsatiable in that desire? witness the many offices, the various
employments, which some have desired and obtained to be congested on them.

I say no more of this unsatiable gulf of desire, then my text says, it is
like two things that they love not, Hell and Death.

Death is not satisfied but with all; it is named last in my text, as the
greediest of the two; hell desires all the ungodly of the earth, it is a pit
dug for the ungodly.

But death swalloweth all; Statutum est omnibus semel mori, what man lives and
shall not see death? So insatiable is the desire of power.

This resemblance does shake the strength of that desire much, if we think upon
it well, I labor and strive to get many under my command, and death is
laboring together with me to bring me to the grave; and if I do not use my
power to the glory of God, and the good of my brethren, hell is as busy and as
greedy to devour me.

This is one of the crying sins of our Land, insatiable pride; this makes dear
rents, and great fines, this takes away the whole clothing of many poor; to
add one Lace more in the suits of the rich; this shortens the laborers wages,
and adds much to the burden of his labor. This greediness makes the market
of spiritual and temporal offices and dignities, and puts well-deserving virtue
out of countenance.

This corrupts Religion with opinions, justice with bribes, charity with
cruelty; it turns peace into schism and contention, love into complement,
friendship into treason, and sets the mouth of hell yet more open, and gives it
a new appetite for more souls.

The use of all, is the doctrine of contentation, as we profess, that we have
our being, not of our selves, but of God; In him we live, move, and have our
being; He made us, and not we our selves; so let us be content with his
provision for us.

It was Satan's first suggestion to Adam; for so he had formerly corrupted
himself, and lost his first estate; to suggest pride he would show man a way
how to be like God, and then all the fruits in the garden would not content
him, he must taste also of the forbidden fruit.

Haman was as high as the favor of the King could advance him, Hest. 5.13.
and yet he confessed,

All this does me no good.

Pope Julius the third, was forbidden to eat Pork by his Physician, and no
other dish would please him, he commanded it to be set before him in despite
of God.

Therefore hear the Apostle

Is is good to have the heart stayed or established with grace, Heb. 13.9.
and not with meats which have not profited them etc.

The grace of contentment is like the ballast of the ship, which gives herher
trim, and makes her strong and jocund upon the great waters.

Faith does bring us to God, it stoopeth us to him, it fastneth us upon him.

Pride makes us shift for our selves, and divides us from God: he offers
his wings to such, and they will not be gathered together.

Let us know that we are never past the wings of Gods protection here, and
therefore let us resort humbly to them; for there is safety, and rest, and
sufficiency of all good things.

Let us remember we call him our Father, and therefore we may cast our care
upon him.

Let us know and remember that nothing but God can fill us; we are like broken
vessels that can hold nothing without he fashion us behind and before: we are
like fusty vessels that corrupt all things we receive, without he purify our
hearts by Faith: we are leaking vessels that let go all things, without he
calce us and make us teight.

We are bottomless bags, wide-mouthed to take in, but unbottomed to retain
any thing, except he do give us contentment to stay our stomaks and to remove
from us

1. An inordinate love of that which we have: 2. An inordinate desire of more:
3. An inordinate use of all.
The punishment will be terror domini, the terror of the Lord.

Verse. 6. Shall not all these take up a Parable against him, and a taunting
Proverb against him and say: woe to him that increases that which is not his,
how long? and to him that ladeth himself with thick clay. 7. Shall they not
rise up suddenly that shall bite thee? and awake that shall vex thee? and thou
shall be for booties unto them? 8. Because thou have spoiled many nations, all
the remnant of the people shall spoil thee, because of men's blood, and for the
violence of the land, of the city, and all that dwell therein.
2. The punishment of pride now follows.

Concerning the Words.

SHall not all these take up a Parable against them?

By all these he means, all those whom the King of Babylon and his Chaldeans
have troubled and persecuted, and all lookers on also.

By taking up of a Parable, which word is rendered by Apophthegma, a grave and
wise speech is here meant, declaring that the wisdom of men shall check the
pride of the Babylonians, and proclaim them vain.

The taunting Proverb which the seventy render here, (...): signifies
Dicterium: a bitter quip uttered in an aenigmaticall manner of speech, a secret
gird full of salt and sharpness, where under some obscurity of words is
secretly couched some galling and cutting tartness of meaning.

We must search this speech for two things, for here must be (...), a wise
saying, and here must be a taunt and salt taxation in some obscure and
aenigmatical speech.

The first is in the former words, wherein he denounces a woe to him that
makes up his heap which other men's goods, and he cries to him, how long? taxing
his insatiablenesse.

The sharp and salt reproof is in these words,

And to him that ladeth himself with thick clay,

For first wherein he thinks to gather an happiness, he reapeth nothing but
woe.

2. Wherein he hops for ease and relaxation of his cares, he gets a
burden, which the word of loading implies.

3. He is charged that he is author to himself of that burden: he loadeth
himself; as David, he disquieteth himself.

4. That for which he does himself so much hurt, brings on himself so much
danger, it is no better then thick clay.

The gold and silver of the earth is sharply and scornfully mentioned as no
better then thick clay. And indeed as it comes from the melting to the eye,
gold seems such, even like to a thick and massy clay, it has no beauty in it
to affect the eye.

And seeing the world prizeth this rich metal at so high a rate, that the
Babylonian does make no conscience of cutting the Jews throat, and breaking all
laws of nations to get their gold, God does in this smart quip show how the
Chaldean shall be censured, and taxed abroad for his scraping, when all that he
has gotten is but thick clay.

If we go to our principia naturae, principles of nature, we shall find that
God made the earth, and whatsoever after that, either mineral growing within
the earth, grass or pearl, flower, tree or fruit growing on the earth, beast
or bird, fish or foul, worm or fly living on the earth, or in the water, and
man the lord of all, all are made of earth.

Earth the chiefest material in their building, there fore to Adam, said God,
Terra es.

If man the most excellent of creatures in the composition of his body, be but
thick clay:

The style is high enough to give that title to any, either mineral, or
vegetable whatsoever.

7. Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee? and awake that shall
vex thee? and thou shall be for booties unto them? Some Interpreters think
this verse also a part of that taunting speech which many shall use against
Babylon and the Chaldaeans, wherein they shall declare that they do look Pride
should have a fall.

The manner of speech frequent to the Hebrews by interrogation, Shall they not
rise up, etc. has more weight in it, and implies both vehemence in the
Commination, and assurance of the judgment threatened, more then if he had said,
They shall arise that shall bite thee.

Read Isay 13. and see the burden of Babylon, and pass to the 14. for this v.
is but a short abridgment of that full prophecy,

And expounds these words of my text, that the Medes and Persians shall very
shortly arise to destroy Assyria, and all the Chaldaeans.

The same judgment is threatened by the Prophet Jeremiah, cap. 50. cap. 51.

A Nation coming out of the North, to make their land desolate; For Media is a
city north from Babylon, whence Cyrus came against it.

And for the manner of the taking of Babylon, it is here set down to be sudden.
They shall rise up suddenly that shall bite thee.

Herodotus reports that upon one of their great Holy Days, Chro. 35.
when all the city were in their dancing and disports,

Ex inopinato eis Persae astiterunt, on a sudden the Persians came upon them,
they came into the city, and took a part of it, when the other part sung out
their song, and danced on, and knew not that the enemy had surprised them.

So they were bitten, and vexed, and taken, and the mighty and glorious great
city of Babylon, was made a booty and prey to the Persians.

The greatness and riches of this city of Babylon, is by Herodotus thus
expressed.

The whole dominion of the Chaldaeans being laid and assessed to maintain the
Kings wars for defense of his state, for the twelve months in the year, the
charge of four months was imposed on Babylon, and all the rest of Asia bore
the charge of the 8 months so that one third of the imposition lay upon Babylon.

Verse. 8. Because thou have spoiled many nations.

The first Monarchy that we read of in holy Scripture is that of the Assyrians,
began by Ninus, of whom Niniveh took name, and by Nimrod, whom histories call
Belus, and after him succeeded by Semiramis his wife.

This Monarchy grew by continual wars and violations of their neighbors, to an
exceeding height and strength.

So that the exaltation of that Monarchy was the ruin of many nations in
power, and their subjection to the Assyrians, and this Monarchy lasted as some
write, an. 1300

Saint Augustine de Civ. dei lib. 16. cap. 17. speaking of this Monarchy,
says, In Assyria praevaluerat dominatus impiae Civitatis; hujus caput erat
illa Babylon: He calls it nomen aptissimum. Confusio, Confusion,

Actively; for it confounded all the parts of Asia, bringing them under one
Regiment, and it came it self after to a shameful confusion.

This victorious grassation of the Assyrians overrunning all like to a deluge
of waters, did so swell them with the pride above reproved, and here threatened,
that the Prophet Isaiah does call this Monarchy Lucifer.

How art thou fallen from Heaven O Lucifer Son of the morning.

As in the judgment of the ancient learned fathers, Isa. 14.12
alluding to the fall of the Angels that kept not their first estate.

Nimrod their founder, Genesis 10.9
is called A mighty hunter before the Lord, That is, a mighty tyrant and a
great Oppressor of men.

The blood of men was not precious; the Land the City, and the Inhabitants, all
bent to spoil and to violence. Therefore it is said,

The remnant of the People shall spoil thee.

There was not such an universal subjection to the Monarchy of the Assyrians,
but that there were a remnant left to come upon them, and to overcome them.

These as has been said, were the Medes and Persians, Isa. 13 3.
whom God calls his sanctified ones, his mighty ones for his anger;

Because he has called them, and set them apart from others, to be Ministers
of his vengeance for the destruction of this proud nation.

For he will make inquisition for blood; and they that have smitten with the
sword shall now perish by the sword.

De verb is hactenus.

In these words, which are the Declaration of Gods just judgment against the
Chaldaeans, before we proceed to the full handling of them,

We must first take notice of the just process of God against this pride of the
Chaldaeans. For it pleases God to give us here an account of his provocation,
and he gives in evidence against them, that their pride went not alone, but
was accompanied with many sins.

1. Their gripple covetousness in seeking to increase their own heap; and
covetousness is a sin that God abhors. St. Paul does call it the root of
all evil.

2. Their violent invasion of the goods of others by injury, oppression and
extortion; for he increases that which is not his. Not to be content with our
own is ungodlines: but to spoil and rob others, and to be our own Carvers to
take what we can get, is wrong to our brethren: covetousnes corrupts our
selves, but oppression does violate our neighbor, of whom the law gives such
charge, ama proximum ut teipsum.

3. Their folly. for what is this great stock which they have gathered, and
what is the rich heap that they have caught? it is but thick clay; and what
have they done with all their labor and travel, but made a burden thereof for
themselves?

4. Their cruelty is charged upon them, which is expressed in sundry
circumstances of amplification, as 1. In the extremity of it, no less then
spoiling, which comprehends all kinds of hard measure that can be offered. 2.
In the extent of it, which is amplified by two circumstances. 1. Not Persons,
nor Societies, Towns, Cities, but whole Nations. 2. Many Nations.



3. In the effect of their cruelty, which also brake forth into blood, the
blood of men, a thing that God holds at such a price, that he not only made
severe laws for preservation of life; but he makes a curious inquisition for
blood, when contrary to his law it is unjustly spilt: unto which God has given
a voice.

For there is vox sanguinis, a voice of blood, as we say in Abels story, and to
which voice he lends an ear, for that blood cries unto him.

4. In the general infection of this cruelty which has corrupted the whole
land of the Chaldaeans: the City, the great City of Babylon, and all the People
that dwell therein.

The Prophet in the former chapter did complain to God of the pride, and
cruelty, and covetousness of the Chaldaeans, in which as they exceeded, so the
poor Church of God smarted, and the patience of God forbearing to punish them,
made them think that God gave no regard to them* and it made many even within
the Church stagger, fearing least God had taken no notice of their sufferings,
and their enemies injuries.

Do you not now receive it from the mouth of God himself, that he has all
those things written in his book, that he keeepeth an exact account both of the
offenses done, and of the offenders?

5. To show that they have abused his patience and long-suffering, by
continuing in the evils abovementioned, he says, How long? to show that he
has contended with them in patience all this while, and that no forbearance
will recover them from their evil ways; no spoil or cruelty will satisfy them
in their evil ways; therefore he proceeds to judgment against them.

The argument of this text is the punishment of the pride of the Chaldaeans,
punished

1. With just reprehension of all. 2. With derision, they shall be taunted. 3.
With spoil and destruction.
Here we must first take notice of the justice of Gods process against them;

Our lesson is, Whenever God punishes, there is a fault deserving serving
that punishment, for God is just, he does not punish the innocent.

Thus he began with the first sinners that we read of in the holy story.

With the Serpent, quia tua hoc fecisti, Gen 3.14.
because thou have done this: So to Adam, because thou have hearkened to the
voice of thy wise, etc.

And to Cain, if thou do evil, sin, that is the punishment of sin,
stands at the door.

And for the process against the old world; first, God saw the fault thereof,
before either he repented the making of it, or resolved the punishing of it;
and so forth all the Scripture through, and through the experience of all times.

1. Because God is just, suam cuique, every one his own, now rods are for the
back of fools, and all sinners are fools, and all men are sinners, and
therefore none past the rod in the justice of God.

2. Because punishment in the nature of it, is evil; though in the use of it
it be good; for the good it does,

Therefore we may conclude, whenever we feel any punishment in our selves, or
see any inflicted on others, subest culpa, There is a power that deserves this
punishment.

Against this it may be objected, that

1. God does chasten some of his own beloved children with punishments, for
their trial, that they may come forth as gold fined. 2. God does sometime
correct his own for example of others. 3. The wicked and ungodly vex and
torment the righteous, even for the serving the true God, many have lost their
goods, their liberties, their lives for the testimony of the truth; Thus did
all those holy Confessors and all those glorious Martyrs suffer the cruelty of
the enemies of God. 4. The corruption of justice, and the abuse of power, does
sometimes turn into tyranny, and so evil men are cherished, and good men
punished, as the Prophet Isaiah says, He that abstaineth from evil, makes
himself a prey. 5. Sometimes good Princes are abused by their flatterers and
lying informers, who possess them of an evil opinion against better men then
themselves, as in the example of Mephibosheth; for Ziba his Bailey accosed him
falsely of treason to David, and David though a King of Gods choosing was not
at leisure to search into the matter, 2 Samuel 16 3, 4.
but presently not hearing the just defense of Mephibosheth, gave away to Ziba
all that pertained to Mephibosbeth. 6. Sometimes just persons in execution of
justice, are nimium justi, over wise; and such justice is injury, as Solomon
faith, Be not just overmuch, and the light of nature, taught the heathen to
say, Summum jus est summa injuria. 7. Sometimes Judges are swayed by the
affection they bear to others, to regard rather the satisfying of their envy
whom they love, then the execution of Justice, and so wrong may be done where
it is not deserved; as Herod cut off John's head, for no dislike of him in
himself, but to please his minion.
In answer to all these objections, put the case how you will, I am sure God is
just, and will neither himself punish, nor cause, nor suffer any to punish, but
where so much punishment is well deserved.

Peradventure he that inflicteth the punishment may offend in it, and there may
be a fault done in the manner of it; or that for which the punishment is
inflicted may be no just cause, or the person may be mistaken; but still I say
God is just, subest culpa, there is a fault; the hand of God, the will of God
is in every punishment, and they never do any thing without the justice of God.

Job that justified his integrity so stoutly, as we read in his story, did
never deny himself to be a grievous sinner, and to deserve the punishment that
he suffered, though he still did stand upon it, that he was not therefore
punished.

If the punishment be for trial, the gold that is tried will be divided from
the dross, and that dross deserves a melting.

If the punishment be for example, know that God will never give so ill example
as to punish an innocent.

If men do like men in execution of Gods judgments; know that God knows why he
suffers them so to do, for he searches the hearts and reins.

Thus many condemned to death by the law according to probable evidence,
profess their innocence at their death, yet can find in the book of their
conscience evidence enough to condemn them worthy of death for something else.

The use of all is, seeing God is just, and punishes not but where he finds
sin; stand in awe, sin not,

Thus doing, what punishment soever we suffer, it is rather the visitation of
peace then the rod of fury, and God will turn it to our good.

The punishment here threatened;

1. Just reprehension, shall not all these take up a parable against them, and
say, woe to him that increases that which is not his? (...). I remember the
question of our Savior to his Disciples, Whom say men what I the Son of man
am? It is wisdom for any private man, more for a great State, to enquire what
fame it has abroad.

The wisdom of State is such, as one government has an eye to another; I
speak not only of confederate Nations, which have lidger eyes in each others
Commonwealth, but even of enemy-states; and such as stand neither in terms of
hostility, nor in terms of confederacy, they have their secret intelligence,
and thus they know and judge each of other.

Nebuchadnezzar was a most potent Prince, yet his neighbors did not approve
his wisdom, they did condemn his violence, and cry out, woe be to him.

I understand this to be a great punishment to this mighty King, to be justly
condemned for injustice, and to deserve the curse of his neighboring Nations.

For extremes do ever carry the evil words, and the evil wishes of all that
love virtue; and they cry woe to him that increases greedily and covetously
that which is not his; and woe to him that wastes prodigally that which is not
his.

The wisdom of policy does hold violence and oppression hateful in great
Princes, and it calls them pusillanimous and idle that will not stir in the
just defense of their own.

But there is sapientia saeculi hujus, the wisdom of this world, which calls
all his own which he can compass directly or indirectly, justly or unjustly;
which Saint Paul does call enmity with God; just Princes are tender in that
pursuit, holding that axiom of Caesar irreligious and unjust Si, jus
violandum, regni causa: And therefore sapientia quae est desuper, the wisdom
from above, cries hand off, invade not, usurp not aliena jura, other men's
rights; be content with thine own; for woe be to him that increases non sua,
that which is none of his own.

Princes that manage the sword of justice, which is gladius Dei, the sword of
God, must be tender how they draw that sword against God that committed it to
them; and every attempt that their power makes for that which is not theirs,
does arm it self against God.

Mr. Calvine observes well

Manent aliqua in cordibus hominum Justitiae and aequitatis principa; ideo
consensus gentium est quaedam vox naturae, there abides in the hearts of men
certain principles of justice, therefore the consent of Nations is a certain
voice of nature.

Those Princes that care not what Nations do think and speak of them, but
pursue their own ends against the stream and tide of Jus natural, natural
right, do run themselves upon the just reprehension of other States, which wise
and religious Princes do labor to avoid, 1. Because the private conscience in
these public persons can have no inward peace, where public equity is
violated. 2. Because the old rule of justice is built upon the divine equity of
nature, and confirmed by experience of time, that Male parta facile dilabantur,
evil gotten goods soon consume. 3. Because all that love this jus natural,
will soon find both will and means to resist encroachments, fearing their own
particular; as all hands work to quench a fire.


But what cares Nebuchadnezzar, or Alexander, or Julius Caesar, so they may
add Kingdom to Kingdom? and what cares his holiness of Rome, so that he may
be Universal Bishop, what other Kings and Bishops say of them?

To make this point profitable to our selves, for we speak to private persons.

The Rule is general.

All that increase their own private estate by oppression and injustice,
multiplying that which is not theirs, making prize of all that they can extort
from their brethren, buying them out of house and home; wearying them with
suits of molestation, spending the strength of their bodies with immoderate
labors, at so short wages as will not sustain them with things necessary:

Such, though their power do bear them out in their unjustice, yet do they
undergo the hard opinion and censure of all that love righteousness; and they
do bear the burden of many curses. Let them lay this to heart, and take it for
a punishment from the hand of God.

2. The Derision: Taunted.

What do these men but lade themselves with thick clay? This also may pass for
a sharp punishment, Kings and great persons are not privileged from the tooth
of a Satyr, from the keen edge of an Epigram, from the bold affront of a
libel.

We live in the age of fresh and quick wits, wherein it is not an easy thing
for eminent persons to do evil, and to escape tongue smiting, and wit
blasting; pens and pencils; a hand up to blazon great ones and their actions;
and inferior persons want not eyes upon them to behold them, nor censures to
judge them, nor rods to whip them.

I must not draw from this place any authority to legitimate contumelies and
disgraces, and that which we call breaking of bitter jests upon another,
selling our salt cheap.

1. Therefore understand that bitter Taunts, Satyrs and Libels may be evil and
unlawful, and yet God may make a good use of them, to lash and scourge those
that deserve ill; and they that are so girded and jerkt, shall do well to do as
David did, to confess that God sent Shimei to curse; and as for Shimei, he
shall see that God will find a time to pay him too.

That this is a punishment sent from the hand of God, we have full evidence
from the witness of Holy Scripture, even in this case.

The Prophet Isay threatens the Chaldeans with this judgment. Thou shall take
up this Proverb, the Margent reads This taunting speech against the King of
Babel, How has the oppressor ceased, the golden City ceased? etc.

You see in derision she is called the golden City. Isa. 14.4.
And after, All they shall speak and say unto thee, Verse. 10.
Art thou also become weak as we? art thou also become like unto us?

How art thou fallen from heaven O Lucifer, Verse. 12.
etc.

Thus the great glory of the mighty Monarchy is become ludibrium vulgi, and
fabula mundi, the scoff of the vulgar, and the tale of the world.

So Jeremy declares, that this shall be one part of the punishment of Babylon,
she shall be laughed to scorn; read at your leasures the 50. and 51. of
Jeremy. Amongst many salt and sharp taunts spent upon Babel, this is one for a
taste, Babylon is suddenly fallen, Jer. 51.8.
and destroyed, howl for her, take balm for her pain, if she may be healed.
It is David's phrase,

But thou O Lord shall laugh at them, Psalm. 59 8.
thou shall have all the heathen in derision.

It was no small part of the passion of Jesus Christ, the subsannations and
scornful derisions of his enemies; they made sport with him, as the Philistims
did with Sampson;

Thou that could build the Temple, Come down, etc.

It pleases God sometimes to suffer his good servants to be tongue ^^^itten,
as we see in the example of David and of Jeremy, and Job, and others:

And we have many examples of his permission of it in the punishment of the
wicked.

This does not justify contumelies, or make libels and scandalous derisions
lawful, but it declares them to be the rods of God.

Therefore let men tender their reputations, and do that which is right in
their places, be they high or lo, that they may not deserve ill of the times in
which they live, that they may have good report of all men and of the truth it
self.

Amongst other things, which by way of caution we may take warning of,

1. Let them that would live out of the danger of scorn and derision, apply
themselves to glorify God in their bodies, and in their souls, and to honor
him: for God has spoken it,

He that honors me, him will I honor; 1 Samuel 2.30
but they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed.

2. Let such take care that they be no despisers of their brethren, that they
sit not in the chair of the scornful; for the wages of the scorner is scorn,
and they that trust in themselves and despise others, go away from the sight of
God unjustified. Can pride have a fall, and the lookers on not laugh them to
scorn?

3. Let such keep a good tongue in their own heads; for many fair pretenders of
Religion, and outward professors, are as long as Pambo in Eusebius, taking out
of that lesson from David, Servabo circa os meum capistrum ne peccem lingua, I
will set a watch, etc.

It was in fashion while that they that sought (as they pretended) Reformation
of the Church, sought it in the way of libelling, and breaking jests upon the
Prelates and Malignants of the Church.

But St. James tells us, That if any among us seem to be religious, Jam. 1.26.
and refraineth not his tongue, that man's religion is in vain.

4. Let such take out the lesson of the Apostle; Cor. 4.6.
Let their speech always be with grace, seasoned with salt, that you may know
how to answer every man. This is the seasoning of wisdom from above, which
being the breath of the holy Ghost, which is the spirit of meekness, does
rather put the burdens of our brethren upon us in Christian compassion, then
heap burdens upon them in spite and disdain.

2. Yet I do not determine all sharp and satirical tartness of speech
unlawful; the acrimonie of a taunt has sometimes due place, and it may be some
of the fire from Gods own Altar, when they do not proceed from anger, envy,
desire of revenge, vain ostentation of wit, flattery of others whom it may
please, pride of our own hearts.

When Adam had transgressed, and God had laid his curse upon him, God said,

Behold the man is become like one of us to know good and evil. Genesis 3.22.
St, Augustine says,

Verba sunt insultantis, quod non solum factus fuerit qualis esse voluit, sed
nec illud quod factus fuerat conservavit.

God derideth the folly of man fallen away from him: It is said of Eliah.

And it came to pass at noon that Eliah awaked them, 1 Reg 18.27.
and said, cry aloud, for he is a God; either he is talking, or he is pursuing,
or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleeps and must be awakeed.

So the Prophet Isaiah plays upon the Idolmakers and Idolaters, as if he had
one of our Papists in hand: For he sets a man upon the stage, having cut down a
tree*

He burns part of it in the fire: Is. 44.16.
with part thereof he eats flesh, he rosteth roast and is satisfied, yea, he
warmeth himself, and says, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire;

And the residue thereof he makes a god, Verse. 17.
even his graven image; he falls down to it, and worshippeth it, and prays
to it, and says, deliver me, for thou art my god.

You see what sport the Prophet makes with Idolaters, and sure he had the
Spirit of God.

The Apocryphal book of Baruch, 6. chap. is a very pleasant bitterness against
Idols and Idolaters.

Surely this example in my Text is justifiable; for it taxes the covetous
oppressors of the earth for fools; that take so much pain, and do so much
wrong to load themselves with thick clay.

But is it not an injury to Almighty God,

I answer, Sol.
the Prophet does not indignifie the creature; but as God said to man, Pulvis
es, thou art dust, and he told him true out of what materials the frame of his
body was built: so it is no disgrace to gold to call it thick clay, it being no
other in the matter of it.

And howsoever good use may be made of these outward riches, yet are they never
to be esteemed for themselves, but for their use, which if men on earth could
once understand and believe, they would not set their hearts upon them.

Saint Peter calls them Corruptible things. 1 Pet. 1.18 1 Timothy 6.57
Saint Paul calls them Uncertain riches.
Every man is easily drawn to study and labor to the getting of this burden,
and so insatiable in desire, that few say with Esau I have enough.

There is a singular wisdom in the use of riches which few do seek, because
they do not understand for what this thick clay serves.

In the Latin phrase, all those things which we use, are called impedimenta,
Impediments: for as the baggage of an army is of necessary use, yet hinders
the speed of their march; so do our riches, they are the faculties of
well-doing, yet we can hardly attain the wisdom to keep them from being
hindrances and let to us in our journey homewards.

They serve us for fame, and reputation; for they support our credit in the
world.

They serve us for show, for they furnish the table with dainties, the back
with bravery, etc.

They serve us for custody, to lay up for posterity.

They serve for dole and distribution, to be bestowed upon good uses.

They serve to buy out dangers, and to deliver us from evils.

They serve to make us friends.

And they that can plaster their walls with this thick clay, may keep off many
a storm, and much foul weather.

Yet we have seen that all rich men are not happy, even in the things of this
life.

Tully says of Rabirius Posthumus,

Jn studio rei amplificandae, non avaritiae praedam, sed instrumentum bonitati
quaerebat, that is the best use of them.

We see in this example, that the walls of Babel; though plaistered, and the
roofs tyled with this thick clay, so as it was called the golden City, could
not privilege it from ruin and contempt.

Therefore let us not strive and study by indirect means, nor take too much,
and immoderate care by direct means, to overload our selves with this thick
clay: we shall carry none of it away with us when we dye, and we are not sure
that they shall enjoy it, to whom we would fainest leave it.

The third punishment of Babel does show that this thick clay has wings.

It is subject to spoil.

It makes Babel a good booty: for when those spunges have sucked in their full
draught, many of them come to the wringing and squeezing till they be left dry.

There be such in the world as study the emptying of those full vessels, and
find means to spring a leak in them.

This fall from plenty and fullness to want, from honor to low condition, from
power and command to subjection and awe, makes the proud man a scorn to the
world, for to outlive riches and honor and power, and to see others decked in
our trappings whereof we had wont to be so proud, this pricks our bladder, and
lets out all the wind, and leaves us lank and empty.

This is the justice of Gods proceeding against the proud, whom he resists as
you hear out of Obadiah in the example of Edom, and see now in the example of
the Chaldeans.

As they that despise others are now punished with contempt: so they that
spoiled others are now punished with spoil.

One while the hand is receiving bribes as fast as it can to get all; and in a
moment the same hand is giving of bribes as fast, if it be possible to save
some.

If therefore there be no better hold to be taken of these outward things which
make many so proud, if riches increase, set not thine heart upon them, use them
rather then keep them.

Yet this is a great comfort to all that are oppressed by the proud tyranny of
men, God is still good to Israel; even to all that have true hearts; Psa. 125.3.
and the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous; God
will find a time to spoil the spoyler, and to strip him out of all.

There is neither wisdom, nor counsel, nor strength against the right hand of
God, and that right hand will find out all his enemies.

Greatness and power are fearful to the common man, yet nothing can restrain
either the thoughts of men and their judgments, but that they will search into
the actions of the Highest, and observe what is done according to the rules of
justice and wherein Religionand Justice are wounded.

Nothing can hinder but that where men may dare to communicate their thoughts
to faithful ears, there the scroul of greivances will be unfoulded, and the
unjustice of tyrannical oppressions will be laid open.

Nothing can hinder the vengeance of our just God the King of all the earth,
but that he will take the matter into his own hands, and deliver the oppressed,
and spoil the spoiler.

Oppressors must dye, then will their names stink and be abhorred of
posterity, and there will be black records made of them in the books of time,
when God puts his hand to the spoiling of them, he will spoil them in all
that they trusted in.

1. In their Friends, they shall fall off, and be the first that shall help to
strip them. 2. In their Honors, every man shall put an hand to the casting of
dust upon them. 3. In their reputations, their names shall be hateful upon the
face of the earth. 4. In their posterity; God shall curse their seed, and never
trust any of them again with his power, or the execution of his judgments.
Only let the oppressed wait the leisure of God for this; the Vision is for an
appointed time; but it will come to pass, it will not fail.

Verse. 9. Woe to him that coveteth an evil Covetousness to his house, that he
may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil. 10.
Thou have consulted shame to thy house by cutting off many people, and have
sinned against thy soul. 11. For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the
beam out of the timber shall answer it. 12. Woe to him that builds a town
with blood, and stablisheth a city by iniquity. 13. Behold, is it not of the
Lord of hoasts, that the people shall labor in the very fire, and the people
shall weary themselves for very vanity. 14. For the earth shall be filled with
the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the Waters cover the sea.
These words do tax the Chaldaeans with another sin, and denounce a punishment
against it. Concerning the words,

Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house; THere is a good
covetousness, which engrosseth the treasure of spiritual graces, of which the
Apostle, (...), Covet the best gifts. 1 Cor. 12.31.
Here is desire with intension; it must be zeal, and zeal with aemulation,
striving to be before others, that no man get precedence of us therein, but the
things desired be (...), that is, such gifts are given of free grace.

But that covetousness is evil to a man's house, that is, to his estate and
family, and posterity, which is joined with ambition of height,

That he may set his nest on high to be above others.

Which is joined with distrust in God, and trust in things temporal, that he
may be delivered from the power of evil.

Believing that honor and high place will set him out of the reach of misery.

Thou have consulted shame to thy house in cutting off much People. Verse. 10.


Here is another sin added to covetousness and ambition, cruelty and shedding
of blood to make their own portion fat; and whereas they have studied honor
and greatness, all turns to shame abroad in the world, and to the burden of a
guilty conscience within them. Thou have sinned against thy soul.

For the stone shall cry out of the wall, Verse. 11.
the beam out of the timber shall answer it.

Woe to him that builds a town with blood, Verse. 12.
and stablisheth a city by iniquity.

Here God brings in inanimate and senseless things accusing and upbraiding
them; they cannot look upon either the stone-work of the walls, or the
timber-work on the floors, and roofs of their buildings, but they shall hear
the voice of their upbraidings, speaking to their consciences that these are
ill gotten: rapine and cruelty put them together, and married them in that
frame without a license.

The voice of their clamor is woe to him that has done so.

Behold, Verse. 13.
is it not of the Lord of Hosts, that the People shall labor in the very fire,
and the People shall weary themselves for very vanity?

I understand him thus, it is Gods own hand against them that they shall endure
hard and extreme labor as it were in the fire, to compass their own ends, and
when they have crowned themselves they shall reap a crop of vanity; as David,
Man disquieteth himself in vain.

For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, Verse. 14.
as the Waters cover the sea.

That is God, who by his long forbearance and remissness is forgotten in the
world, shall now declare himself in the execution of justice, that he shall be
known: as David says, God is known by executing judgment; ut aquae, as the
waters, i. e. sine mensura, that is, without measure.

The Sum of this section is the denunciation of that judgment of God against
the Chaldeans, wherein we consider

1. Peccatum, the Sin. 2. Poenam, the Punishment. 3. Effectum, the Effect.
1. Peccatum, here is a Chain. For. 1. Here is Infidelity; he would be
delivered from the power of evil, but he will not trust God with protecting him
from it. 2. Here is Ambition, desire of high place to build his nest on high,
for more security. 3. Here is Covetousness, to get the means of this high
rising. 4. Here is cruelty, to break through all impediments that stand in the
way.


2. Poena. 1. Shame to his house. 2. Sin against his soul. 3. Loss of labor.


3. Effectus.

The earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, etc.

1. De peccato.

One observation I gather from this whole point concerning the sin of the
Chaldeans; it is St. Augustines Peccatum nunquam est solitarium, sins grow in
clusters; it is a stream that runs in the channel of nature, and the further
it runs, the more corruptions send in their currents into it; and as rivers
the further they run the wider they grow, so does sin, viresque acquirit
eundo.

When lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; and lust may say of that
birth as Leah did when Zilpah also bare Jacob a son, A troop comes, Genesis 30.11
and she called his name Gad. For sin is sociable.

In the temptation which corrupted Evah, 1. Satan suggested infidelity, shaking
her faith in the truth of Gods word. 2. He gave a touch upon the Justice of
God, that it was scarce equal, that God should except any tree, and not give
Adam unlimited power.

3. He suggested a titillation of pride, making her believe that they might be
like God.

4. Wherewith is joined a suggestion of discontent with their present state.

5. There went with this a tang of gluttonous desire.

So in Gehezies sin, 2 Reg. 5.20.
who was Elisha's servant; 1. He grudged that Naaman the Syrian should go away
with such a favor done him, and carry away the whole present that he rendered
to his Master. 2. He had a covetous desire to have some of it. 3. He went
after, and told Naaman a lie, my Master has sent me. 4. Another lie followed.
There be two young men of the Sons of the Prophets. 5. He was sent to demand a
talent of silver, and two changes of raiment for them. 6. He dissembled. He
must be urged to take two talents. 7. He made a cunning conveyance. He bestowed
them in the house, and let the young men go secretly. 8. He shut up all with
another lie. Thy servant went no Whether.


David's sin had many sins in it.

1. A sin against God in the disobedience of his law. 2. Sin against his own
body in defiling it. 3. A sin against the body of his neighbors wife. 4. A sin
against the Religion which was so scandalized. 5. A sin against his neighbors
life, 1. Inebriavit eum. 2. Jussit occidi.
6. Which followed all these, a neglect of Gods service for ten months
together, in which he continued impenitent.
St. James says, Whosoever shall keep the whole law, Jam. 2.10.
and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all.

How can a man keep the whole, and yet break the whole Law of God? Sol.


He is called here a keeper of the whole Law,

1. By supposition, and so it is but a case put thus. Put the case a man could
keep the whole law, save only in some one thing. 2. Or by his own opinion of
himself. 3. Or by his endeavor to keep all.
Yet this man offending in one, breaks the whole law.

1. Because there is such a concatenation of the Duties of Religion and
Justice, that he which offends in one breaks the chain.

2. Because any one sin unrepented, violateth love and obedience, which if it
be not full, it is no love, no obedience at all.

For the breach of one Commandment does distaste all the rest of our obedience,
as a little leaven sowreth the whole lump, therefore though we cannot say that
he which breaks the Sabbath commits adultery, or that he that steals is
a murderer; yet we may say that he that does break the least Commandment of
the law, is guilty of the breach of the whole law in omission, though not in
Commission, seeing the obedience that the law requires, failing in one duty
corrupts all that we do, say or think.

Let us now behold the concurrence of sins in the Chaldaean, and begin

1. At his incredulity, for he would be delivered from evil, but he trusts
not God with it, but goes his own way to it.

This is the mother sin of all evil ways and means unlawfully used to
accomplish men's ends here on earth; distrust in God.

For when we use fraud, and lying, and dissembling and concealing of the truth,
and bind untruths with oaths, to gain credit to what we say untruly; when we
make no conscience of injury which may be hidden with cunning, or born out with
violence, all this proceeds from distrust in God.

And so we grow guilty of the two great evils of which God himself complains;

For my People have committed two evils, they have forsaken me the fountain of
living waters, Jer. 2.13.
and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns that can hold no water.

Again this, Take heed least there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief
in departing from the living God. Heb. 3.12


The heart that distrusteth in God, departs from him; therefore he says, it
is a People that do err in their hearts, because they have not known my ways.

The corruption then is in the heart; for if that did love truly, it would
trust God wholly; for where we love faithfully we trust boldly.

But the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not. 2
Cor. 4.4.


That answers his question, Who has bewitched you that you should not obey
the truth?

Infidelity is the root of all evils in us; for we cannot fear any threatening,
where we do not believe any danger.

We cannot hope for any benefit where we do not believe any promise; for
infidelity does take away all wise do me from us.

This makes us to withdraw our selves from the Lord, and it is a note of the
wicked man, neither is God in all his ways.

Thus says the Lord, Jer. 17.5.
Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose
heart departs from the Lord.

For he shall be like the heath in the desert, Verse. 6.
and shall not see when good comes, but shall inhabit the parched places in
the wilderness in a salt land and not inhabited.

Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, Verse. 7.
and whose hope the Lord is;

For he shall be a tree planted by the waters, Verse. 8.
and that spreads out her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat
comes, but her leaf shall be green, and shall not be careful in the year of
drought, neither shall cease from yiedling fruit.

I need not say more of this Argument. Here is reason enough given why you
should commit your way to the Lord, why you should cast your care upon him, why
you should not leave him, to trust to your selves, David says,

He made us, and not we our selves: he saw us imperfect in the womb: he
fashioned us. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me; he took me from the
Womb.

He adds, Upon thee have I depended ever since I hung upon the breasts of my
mother.

When we are hungry, he gives bread that strengthens man's heart.

When we had not wit and understanding to shift for our selves, who fed and
clothed and preserved us then? surely his hand is not shortened, but his arm
is stretched out still.

Suppose that without him we could get bread; Man lives not by bread only.

Suppose that without him we could sow much seed; It is only he that gives
increase.

Let us observe the examples of Gods judgments upon such as forsake God, and
trust their money, or their friends, or corrupt means to preserve them: One day
tells another.

The Chaldaeans trust not in God: their own net is their god, their own yarn is
their idol, they kiss their own hands.

But fear ye the Lord all his Saints, and trust in him, for he never fails
them that trust in him.

I have blamed some for buying and selling on the Sabbah; They have answered
that they are poor and are forced to it, to help to feed them.

Is not this infidelity? they dare not trust God for their meat, they dare
trust to their own ways against the precise Commandment of God.

Unlawful recreations on the Sabbath are so defended; poor laboring men that
work all the six days, must have some time to refresh themselves.

But I would fain know by what indulgence they may dispense with the law of the
Sabbath. God has bidden thee to remember to keep the whole day holy: if thy
recreations be holy, thou keep the law; if unholy, thou breakest it.

When some are detected of fraud and theft, their plea is their necessity. Here
is a root of infidelity: for does God lay a necessity upon any man to break his
law?

He has laid on thee a necessity of labor; if that will not do, he has given
the rich charge of thee.

The truth is, that this root of infidelity does yet remain in the hearts of
most of us, and is the cause of all the sins that are committed.

For the light of the Gospel does shine much more clear now then ever it did in
this land, and the knowledge of the truth is more spread then ever before here.

Yet never was there greater corruption of manners, nor more cunning shifts
devised for the advancing of men's particulars.

The crying sins of the Jews,

Injuries done between man and man.

Corruption and contempt of Religion.

Corruption of Justice. To all these our land does plead guilty. Where Is the
fault?

Have you not heard? have you not been taught the ways of the Lord? have you
not been admonish't of your duty? have you not been chidden, and threatened for
these things? has not the seal of Gods judgments written within and without
with lamentations, mourning and woe, been opened and read to you?

Has not God rained examples thick of his justice and judgment against high
and low for these things? why then is not this amended?

There is a root of infidelity, we do not, we dare not trust God; and from
hence comes

1. In some Atheism, they live without God in the world. 2. In others
Epicurisme, they live all to delight. 3. In others temporizing, and following
and serving men. 4. In others heresy, embracing their own opinions. 5. In
others Apostasy from religion and faith. 6. In others hypocrisy, seeming what
they are not. 7. In most carnal security, not caring for threatenings. 8. In
many wilful ignorance, not caring for the knowledge of God.
But thou man and woman of God, fly these things, and know the Lord; the more
thou know him, the more thou love him; the more thou servest him, the more
thou trustest him, and the more he blesses thee.

2. Ambition, that he may set his nest on high.

Ambition is a limb of pride, and it is well set forth in my text, it is a
building of a nest on high; it is but a nest that the ambitious man does set
up, but he would have it high to overlook all; yet that does not make it safe;
for there be clouds that can carry fire from below to consume it, and there is
lightning from above to inflame it, and there is tempests and strong winds to
shake it.

And the axe is laid to the root of the tree in which the nest is built, and
with the fall of that tree the nest comes to the ground.

The highest tree for a subject to build his nest in, is the favor of the
Prince; yet David says,

Trust not in Princes; for there is no help in them, their breath departs,
they return to the earth, and their thoughts perish. It may be that he that
fitteth next in the chair of sovereignty, will be no tree for the same birds to
build in.

Ambition is an inordinate desire of honor.

Saint Gregory has a rule which would stop the mouth of suitors and
competitors for honor. Locus regiminis desiderantibus ^egandus est,
fugientibus offerendus. Virtu^ibus ergo pollens coactus ad regimen veniat.

Naturally the love that every man bears to himself, and the good opinion
that pride puts into him of himself, does make him desire to set his nest
high, and therefore every man observes the course of the times, in which he
lives to see which is the readiest way to rise.

The king is called the fountain of honor; for from the Ruler of the People
all subordinations of rule derive themselves; and therefore

Many seek the face of the ruler. Pro. 29.26


The way of preferment is soon found, and ambition has a foot for it: The
Prophets phrase, Pes superbiae, the foot of pride.

If only virtue were the way, only virtue would be studied.

But I look not so low as the Throne of earthly Princes for the fountain of
honor. I hear the Psalmist say,

For promotion comes neither from the East, Psalm. 75.6
nor from the West, nor from the South. But God is judge, Verse. 7.
he puts down one, and sets up another.

Many are ambitious of high places, who have both friends and means, and yet
cannot climb; Many more unlikely speed before them, and I can ascribe this to
nothing but the supreme hand of God, from whom all promotion comes, he will
have his Will done.

Some he raises to their own ruin, others to the punishment and correction of
the sins of the time in his anger: Others for the good of men in favor of his
Church, and the Commonwealth.

It becomes not us to censure the Powers that are ordained of God, as the
Apostle teaches, or to envy their high nests; but let every soul be subject to
the ordinance of God, and rest in his will by whom Princes reign, and by whom
they advance where he pleases to set up.

But ambition of high nests is the theme of our discourse, which is an
inordinate desire of honor, and that is a sin.

It corrupted the Angels which fell, and they impo^soned our Parents with it in
Paradise; both desired to be like God, neither stood content with the glory of
their Creation.

Concerning which, understand that the state of Creation did give man no
further dominion then this;

Replenish the earth, Genesis 1.28.
and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowls
of the air, and over every living thing that moves upon the earth.

Here is no dominion given to man over man. But all mankind is endowed with
equal dominion over all these things, and man is to acknowledge no sovereign
lord but God his Maker. But presently after the fall

For the punishment of the woman, who had brought the desire of her husband
subject to her, by tempting him to eat of the forbidden fruit, God said to her,
Thy desire shall be subject to thy husband, Genesis 3.16
and he shall rule over thee.

Yea when God saw Cains countenance cast down, he called him to account for it,
and knowing his discontent to be against Abel, he said to Cain, Unto thee his
desire shall be subject, Genesis 4.7.
and thou shall rule over him;

Which Saint Chrysostom does expound de Priviledgio Primogeniturae.

But as sin brought in the law, for Justo non est posita lex: so sin brought in
Magistracy for execution of the law, and brought down the sword of God amongst
men: and the equal condition of mankind in his Creation by sin was changed
into male and female: not in sex, but in subjection, high and low, rich and
poor, bond and free.

So that this ambition of an higher nest came in with sin; and being so
brought in at first, it cannot be without sin.

Saint Hierome speaks bugs words.

Cave honores quos sine culpa tenere non potes; sublimitas honorum magnitudo
scelerum.

And Saint Augustine complains of nothing more then that he was made a Bishop;
He was an holy man, but a man, and his passion transported him.

In nullo sentio Deum ita iratum mihi quam in hoc, quod cum indignus essem pont
ad remum, positus sum ad amplustre, sive gubernaculum Ecclesiae.

But howsoever his humility unworthied him to himself, it was Gods great
blessing to his Church not only then, but in all succeeding ages that God so
promoted him.

One thing amongst the rest makes ambition an unmanly sin: for two contraries
meet in the ambitious, that is, pride and a base mind. Pride striving to climb
high, and a base mind servilely attending the means of rising, waiting and
observing such as may help him up, as one that climbeth, embraces every bough,
and huggeth in his arms what he shortly treads under his foot.

But Seneca saves me a labor, for he does describe such a man to the life;
Ambitiosus semper est pavidus. Timet quod dicat vel faciat, quid oculis hominum
displiceat; honestatem mentitur, humilitatem simulat, cunctis adulatur, cunctis
inclinat, omnium est servus and tributarius, gravem habet in se pugnam.

The end of the Chaldeans ambition to set his nest so high, is that he may be
delivered from the power of evil.

Herein is a great fallacy; for be high nests the safest? and is greatness
security? may not we that have lived to see in few years great changes, say
that high preferments be giddy and slippery, feriuntque sumos fulmina montes?

The reasons why ambition makes men unhappy.

1. The ground of it is pride, which is an over weening our selves and our own
worth, and this robs God of glory; for quid habes quod non accepisti?
therefore God resists the proud.

2. The whole operation of ambition is by the wised ome of this world, and that
is folly. Petrus Ravenna does set it out well;

Ambitio est quaedam simia charitatis: charitas patiens est pro aternis:
ambitio patitur omnia pro caducis: charitas benigna est pauperibus, ambitio
divitibus: charitas omnia suffert pro veritate, Ambitiopro vanitate; utraque
omnia credit, omnia sperat, sed dissimili modo.

3. It is altogether uncharitable; for charitas ut teipsum: It is Jobs phrase
of the fatherless, he was brought up with me as with a father, so does charity
bring up inferiors, and equals grow together: but ambition does not, cannot
affect magnitudinem suam, sine parvitate aliena.

4. It is before expressed to be insatiable; quis enim modus adsit honori?

A man desires first to be eminent in the street wherein he lives, and then in
the city; and yet having attained his desire, as Seneca says,

Navis quae in flamine magna est, in mari parvula est. One that is high and
great in the city, in the country where he lives, in the University, let him
come to the Court, and he shall see how many Spheres of greatness do move
above him. Here is more work for ambition; if we remember the law, proximum ut
teipsum, thy neighbor as thy self, we will no more desire to exceed one the
other in the state wherein we live, then a man desires one hand or one leg, in
proportion of strength and bigness to exceed the other in his body.

5. We have a fair example in our elder brother, for though he was such as to
whom it was said, Adorent eum omnes Angeli ejus, Heb. 2.17
Worship him all ye Angels; yet to become our brother, In all things it behoved
him to be made like unto his brethren,

He could not do this without humiliation; there was no power above him to
humble him, and he thought it no robbery to be equal with God; the power that
did it was in himself, humiliavit semet ipsum, he humbled himself.

Ambition therefore puts us out of the way of life. Christ humbled himself;
Et qui vult esse discipulus meus sequatur me, He that will be my disciple must
follow me.

The doctrine of contentedness does still offer it self to us commanded in the
last of the ten: for non concupisces aliena, faith, sort tua contentus, be
contented with thy lot; this also serves for the next point.

3. They are charged with covetousness;

Of which Christ says, Take heed and beware of Covetousness, giving us a
double caution against it.

The Apostle gives a reason, because it is the root of all evil but that
reason does not draw blood; 1 Timothy 6.10
for where the conscience is not tender malum culpae, the evil of punishment is
not feared. But it follows.

Which while some have coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows.

Ambition has this handmaid to attend it, this factour to negotiate for it;
for ambition is not supported without great charge; our own times tell us so;
and Ambition cannot be a great spender, if covetousness be not a great getter.

Covetousness is an inordinate desire of the wealth of this world, and is many
ways culpable.

1. Because God has given man dominion of the earth, and has put all things
under his feet; let not us remove them, and as David says, let us not Cor
opponere, set our heart upon them.

Gold and silver are lower put under us then the surface of the earth; for they
grow within the bowels of the earth nearer to hell, to show the danger that is
in them.

Therefore the Apostles had these things not put into their bosoms, or into
their hands, but laid at their feet.

2. Because the Scripture has expresled the woe of God belonging to the
covetous, as you have heard, Vae homini qui congregat non sua, woe to the man
which gathers not his own.

They that are covetous, Ose. 12.7.
do carry stateram dolosam, a deceitful balance; for lay the conscience in one
scale, and the least gain that is in the other, the conscience is found too
light, as Saint Augustine,

Lucrum in arca, damnum in conscientia. For Saint Paul calls covetousness
Idolatry; Ephesians. 5.
and Christ calls Mammon the god of the covetous; ye cannot serve God and
Mammon.

This is clear; for where does the covetous man bestow and place his faith,
hope and love, but in his wealth, which we do owe to God?

The rich man sang a Requiem to his soul, Luc. 12.
Now my soul make merry, for thou have goods enough laid up for many years.

3. Because covetousness is a fruitful sin; the daughters thereof are commonly

1. Usury, 2. Rapine, 3. Fraud, 4. Bribes, 5. Simony.
1. Concerning Usury, let me out of the word say only to you, that he shall
dwell in the Lords Tabernacle, that is, shall rest under Gods Protection on
earth, and he shall dwell in the holy hill, that is, Ps. 15.
possessions in heaven, Who puts not his money out to usury: Where he shall
dwell that does so, you may easily conclude.

If you will hear the judgment of a Parliament, the Statute concerning the
forbidding of usury does begin thus,

Forasmuch as all usury by the laws of God is sin and detestable, An. 14.
Elizab.
Be it therefore enacted, etc.

If thou will know the judgment of learned Divines, fathers both of the Eastern
and Western Churches, Councels, later Divines have written against it, and
detected it unlawful, so that it is of all learned evil spoken of.

But the covetousness of the Chaldeans was not of this sort; therefore not of
purpose to be handled, but incidently to be remembered, yet non sine morsu in
transitu, yet not without a lash in the way.

Fraud is another of the daughters of covetousness; when we by any wit, or the
art of seeming, do overreach one another in matter of negotiation; of which
the Apostle, That no man go beyond, or defraud his brother in any matter,
because the Lord is the avenger of all such, 1 These. 4.6
as we also have forewarned you, and testified.

Bribes is another daughter of covetousness. It was part of Samuels purgation
of himself, Of whom have I received bribes, 1 Samuel 12.3.
to blind mine eyes there with? for Solomon says, A wicked man takes the
gift out of the bosom, to pervert the Ways of judgment. Pro. 17.23.


Micah describes more then his own times.

The heads of Sion judge for reward, Mica 3.11.
and the Priests thereof teach for hire; and the Prophets thereof divine for
money; yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord among us? no
evil can come upon us. Read on.

Symony is another daughter of covetousness. I say no more of it, but leave it
with St. Peter's blessings, Pereat argentum tuum tecum, let their money perish
with thee.

But rapine was the proper and natural daughter of the covetousness of the
Chaldeans; they had their Angle, and their Net, and their Dragge; nothing could
escape them.

The great fish did eat up the little ones; oppression was the crying sin of
Babylon, all their neighbors did groan under it.

1. This sin does destroy jus natural, natural right, which is quod tibi fieri
non vis, alteri ne feceris, do as thou would be done to; out of which
principle these two do arise.

1. Ne cui noceas, hurt none. 2. Vt communi bono deservias, serve the common
good.
2. It offends the written law, which does not only restrain actum rapinae,
non furaberis, the act of rapine, thoushalt not steal; but voluntatem rapinae,
non concupisces, but the will, thou shall not covet.

Agur the son of Jakeh says,

There is a generation whose teeth are as swords, Pro. 30.14.
and their jawteeth as knives, to devour the poor from off the earth, and the
needy from among men.

This generation is not yet grown barren; Christ says, Pauperes semper
habebitis vobiscum, you shall have always the poor with you; and this
generation of oppressors will be ever teeming, so long as they have such
matterto work; upon for the rich and mighty will shift for themselves.

3. It incurreth the severe censure of Gods justice; for if God say, Go ye
cursed to them that did not dare sua, give their own: quid faciet eis qui
rapuerunt aliena? woe to them that take that which is none of theirs.

4. This sin of rapine does incur the curses of them that are robbed; for
every man cries, woe to such as congest that which is not their own.

5. This sin does hinder the ascent of the prayers of them that commit it; God
will not admit them to his presence; for so God says.

Relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow; Isa. 1. 18.
Come now and let us reason together.

6. The time shall come when those that suffer wrong, shall judge their
oppressors, for the Saints shall judge the world.

Therefore let every man make conscience of doing violence; doubtless there is
a God that judges in the world; let us value men as our brethren, and seek
their good; let us direct our intentions and subventions to that only end that
he that loves God may declare it by loving his brother also; let our brethren
grow up with us, and let us joy in their prosperity.

4. Cruelty is charged upon them.

For they build in blood, and cruelty is also one of the companions of ambition
and covetousness. If Ahab have a desire to Naboths Vineyard, either Naboth
must part with his Vineyard or his life.

They are not all innocent of this great offense that keep themselves from
shedding of blood: they that invade the means of the maintenance of life, that
pinch the labourer in his wages, or that make the hireling work for nothing, or
that let their hire sleep in their custody, whilst he pineth for want of things
necessary, are all guilty of this accusation of blood.

It was the provocation wherewith God was provoked against the old world, for
which he brought upon them the great flood that destroyed them all; This was
Edoms sin in Obadiah.

There is a manifold cruelty as you then heard.

1. Cruelty of combination, when we make our selves strong in a faction, to
oppress all that oppose us, and go not out way. 2. Cruelty of the eye, when we
can be content to look on to see injures done to our brethren, without any
compassion, or subvention. 3. Cruelty of heart, when we rejoice against them
that suffer wrong, and make our selves merry with their afflictions. 4. Cruelty
of the tongue, when we insult over them and brand them with taunts. 5. Cruelty
of the hands, when we 1. Either persecute their persons with molestation. 2. Or
touch their liberty with unjust restraint. 3. Or rob them of their goods by
cruel direptions. 4. Or hinder the course of justice that should do them right.
5. Or procure their death, because they do stand in our light, and hinder our
rising; of all these I have spoken heretofore. We now hasten to the declaration
of Gods just vengeance against this ambition.

2. The punishment.

1. They consult shame to their own house. 2. They sin against their own souls.
3. They labor in vain, and without success.
1. They consult shame to their own house.

Ambition does affect to build up an house, to establish a name that may
continue in the blood and posterity, in succeeding generations with glory and
honor.

David has a cross prayer which is in the hearts and mouths of many that hate
such pride; let not their wicked imagination prosper, least they grow too proud,

These words do show that ambitious pride shall not prosper, and whereas they
study honor, and consult glory, in their aim and intention, God turns it
all to shame in the event.

The words of my text are the words of God; he knows what he means to do;
and he says, they consult their own shame, because he purposes to turn all
their glory into shame.

Shame is the thing that an ambitious man does desire to decline above all
things, all his studies bend their strength against it, and pursue glory which
is the contrary to it. To this purpose covetous men gather riches, and then
with money purchase great offices and great titles to make great houses, and
nominous families upon earth to survive them.

But where this greatness is begun by ambition, maintained and supported by
rapine, and cruesty, pride will have a fall; he that means to give it the
fall, says so, God whose power none has ever resisted, he will turn that
glory into shame.

The wiseman says, He that is greedy of gain troubles his own house. Pro.
15.27
For

The house of the wicked shall be overthrown; he does not mean domus, Pro 14.11.
the house, but familia, the family, the whole name and posterity, the glory,
all shall perish and come to shame.

And Prove. 15.25. Solomon tells us who shall do it. The Lord will destroy the
house of the proud; Pro 15.25.
this is their shame to come down again; when men have been aspiring and settled
their nest on high, and made themselves believe that their honor shall be
established upon their house; for then,

1. God shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision,
saying, Behold the man is become as one of us.

2. Men shall laugh at them, and say,

Lo, Psalm. 52.7.
this is the man that made not God his strength, but trusted in the abundance
of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness: for Solomon says,

When the wicked perish there is shouting. Pro 11.10.


3. The Lord shall be glorified in the shame of the proud, covetous, cruel man;
for every man shall say, strong is the Lord God who judges them, Rev. 18.8.
Verse. 20.
as over Babel; thus is God praised.

Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has
avenged you on her.

This point is of excellent use.

1. For Doctrine, Pro. 10 24.
it teaches us that which Solomon has said, The fear of the wicked shall
come upon him; the proud man fears nothing so much as shame; the covetous man
fears nothing so much as want; the cruel man nothing so much as revenge; the
glutton nothing so much as hard fare; the drunkard nothing so much as a cup of
cold water: and God has threatened these offenders with all these judgments.

2. It commends to us wisdom, and righteousness, and humility, and all holy
virtues, for they be all builders, and raise up houses, and lay the foundation
sure. Ab auditione mali non timebit. Psalm. 112.7. Pro. 28.2.
The just man is hold as a Lion; as Solomon, The wicked are overthrown and are
not: but the house of the righteous shall stand. Prove. 12.7


Humility lays the foundation of it low.

Faith works by love to furnish it.

Honor and much glory are the roof of it; peace is the fence about it, and
prosperity the demesnes belonging to it.

And the guard of Angels pitch their ten ts round about it.

This house is built upon a rock, yet it must endure the winds and waves.

3. This has deceived many; for they have thought unrighteousness the better
and safer way; because they have seen the wicked flourishing, and spreading
like to a green bay tree.

Job disturbeth them in their ruff, and glory, and fullness and fatness.

Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them. It goes
pleasantly for two or three Verses, but verse. 13. in a moment they go down to
the grave. Job. 20.9.


It is an admirable wisdom, that Job has recorded to direct, our observation
of such,

Lo their good is not in their hand. They are not masters of their happy
estate; which he proves; Verse. 16.


How often is the candle of the wicked put out; it is but a candle, and it is put
out; often for God distributeth sorrows in his anger. God is angry; he does
not cover them over with sorrows, and and overwhelme them with woe here, but he
distributes sorrow, giving them some lucida intervalla.

This varnish and paint, and guilding; Verse. 17.
of unrighteousness with temporal happiness, does make it deceive many.

A brutish man knows not, Psalm. 92.6
neither does a fool understand this.

When the wicked spring as the grass, and all the workers of iniquity
flourish: it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.

Who would have thought it? every man says, when he sees pride have a fall:
no, for the Psalmist says, Thy thought are very deep.

Here God himself declares, that ambition shall end in shame; and the candle
of the wicked when it is put out, will end in a foul and stinking smoke.

4. This admisheth and exhorts all that love their houses, and study their
own honor, to seek it in the way of piety and charity; let such serve God, let
them not neglect the Lords house the Lords day, the Lords Table; let them
suffer their brethren to dwell in peace by them, and to grow up with them, and
to be the better for them.

It is not the riches that we leave behind us to our heirs that does build our
house, but that we bestow well to the honor of God, and the good of our
brethren where we live.

You shall see it in our Saviors sentence, I was hungry and you fed me; Matthew.
25.35.
I was naked, and ye clothed me, etc. Not the meat that we do eat our selves,
nor the clothes that we do wear out selves, nor the money and land that we
demise to our posterity, makes us friends in the day of the Lord, but what we
dispose.

A worthy Citizen of our City that had been his own steward of his goods, and
disposed them to many charitable uses, was his own Poet for his Epitaph, and
caused this line among others to be insculped on his grave,

That I gave, that I have.

Which calls to my remembrance a story that I read in Peraldus, Bishop of Lions
in France: How a great Lord thinking his tenant somewhat too rich, and meaning
to share with him, required of him a true inventory of his estate, and what his
wealth was;

He answered it was in all 600 crowns; it was objected that he dissembled his
estate; such a grange, such a house, such a farm, and many other things of good
value belonging to him were not named; he answered.

Illa non sunt mea sed Domini mei, qui quando voluerit potest ea accipere; sed
quod dedi pro Deo in manus pauperum in salva custodia posui, it a quod nullus
potest mihi illud auferre. These are not mine but my Lords, who when he please
may take them from me; but what I have for God given to the poor, I have laid
that in safe custody, so as none is able to take that from me.

The riches wherewith we honor God, do build our house; always provided that
they be riches well gotten; for if charity have been violated in the getting of
wealth, the charity of giving it away to the poor, will not redeem the breach
of justice.

Justice must ever go before charity; in the dispensation of our goods. First,
Suum cuique, to every one his own; then Tuum, thy own; so Zachaeus, He began
at reddo, I restore: and from thence went to do, I give.

2. Punishment. And have sinned against thy soul.

The meaning as I take it, is, that all this evil shall one day smart upon the
soul of the Chaldeans. The doctrine is;

All sins committed against the law of God, are done against the souls of them
that commit them.

The committers of sin are of two sorts.

1. The Elect: 2. The Reprobate.
The Elect sin against their souls 1. Culpa, In the fault. 2. Poena, In the
punishment.


1. Propter culpam, In regard of the fault.

1. Because every sin that a man commits does defile the soul, and polluteth
the temple where the holy Ghost should dwell; so that Christ says to every
soul, except I wash thee thou have no part with me.

2. Because every sin that a man commits, does hinder the influence of
grace, and makes the soul the more incapable of light and heat from the Son of
righteousness. For every sin is an eclipse of that Sun: which is thus proved.

1. In our hearing of the word; if we be either like the high way where the
seed is lost quite, Mat. 13.3.
or like the stony ground where the seed cannot take root, or like the thorny
ground, where it may take root and spring up, but is choked in the growth, the
good seed never comes to an harvest.

Our sins must be removed, to make the soil good and fruitful.

2. In our prayer; If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear
me. Psa. 66.18


3. In our receiving the Sacrament; 1 Cor. ii. 29.
If I eat and drink unworthily, I eat and drink damnation.

4. In alms; If I do it to be seen of men, I lose my reward. Mat. 6.1.
For I have it here.

Sin is leaven, it corrupts the whole soul of man; and makes it a trespasser
in all that it does: so that the elect man in respect of his fault, does sin
against his own soul, and defiles it.

2. Propter poenam, In respect of the punishment.

1. Because it brings forth guilt of conscience, which makes us confounded
and ashamed in our selves, so that we dare not lift up our eyes to heaven, nor
look our God in the face, whose mercy we have abused, whose anger we have
provoked, whose goodness we have offended.

2. Because sin makes matter of sorrow in the soul of the offender; and a
godly sorrow troubles and disquieteth the soul within us.

In that case was Job, Peccavi, quid faciam tibi? quod feci? I have sinned,
Job. 7.20.
what shall I do unto thee?

3. Because the soul has no peace till it has wrought a revenge upon it self,
and upon the body too in which it committed sin.

David's Humiliavi animam meam, and St. Paul's Castigo corpus meum, Ps. 35.13. 1
Cor. 9.27 Isa. 38.17


There must be afflictio and amaritudo animae; we carry rods about us for the
nonce; even our own hearts will smite us as David's did; this brings God home to
us again; For I dwell with the humble and contrite, and then salvation is come
home to our house once again. Isa. 57.15


2. Impii autem non sic. Not so with the wicked.

They sin against their souls, because all the evils of their whole life are
written in the book of Gods remembrance, and foulded up in the roll of their
own conscience, which shall be opened against them in the last day, and they
shall be judged according to all that is written in those books; and there shall
be judgment without mercy to them that showed no mercy. Jam. 2.13.


This does not exclude temporal punishments: for so shall they smart also;
they shall have no peace in this life for ever and anon, as Job sait their
candle shall be put out, and God shall distribute his sorrows amongst them.

They shall have many great shames, many great fears, many sad affronts of care
and discontent, though commedled with some fair weather, good cheer, ease,
delights, and such sweetnings as the flattery of the world and the favor of
the times shall yield them:

Yet in the end, all the evil that they have studied and intended against
others, shall fall upon their own heads.

But still the worst is behind; their souls and bodies shall smart for it in
the last day, and the hand of God shall then pay home.

For them I take no care; be it unto them as they have deserved, and the Lord
requite it at their hands, and requite it upon them.

But for so many as follow righteonsnesse and fear God, and would walk in his
ways; let us stir up one another in the fear of God, to seek the Lord whilst
he may be found, and to tender our souls.

The sins that we commit with such delight, will cost us many an heartbreaking
sigh, many floods of salt water, tears of bitterness, which are sanguis
animae, the blood of the soul, hanging down of the head, beating of the breast,
fasting from our full fare, and stripping our bodies out of their soft raiment
into sackcloth, and changing our sweet powders into ashes.

There is no such disease incident to man as this Tremor cordis, the trembling
of the heart for sin; this Anima dolet, the learning of the Physician, the
art of the Apothecary have no receipt for it.

As Saint Paul says of the law, that is the strength of sin: so I may say,
that at first in the beginning of the cure, the very remedy is the strength of
the disease, and makes the disease double the distress thereof, as in David.

1. The Pophet came to heal him, and he says,

I said in my haste all men are liars, Prophets and all, if they speak of any
comfort to me. Ps. 116.21


2. God himself presented himself to his thought, and that would not do; I
thought upon God and I was troubled, my fear came and ceased not, my soul
refused comfort.

Yea there is such a sweetness in revenge, that a penitent man does take upon
himself, that he has a kind of delight in his own self-punishment, as in
Jeremiahs example,

Look away from me, Isa. 22.4.
I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me.

There is nothing that makes us sin with so much appetite and so little fear
as this; we have banished Confession which brings shame upon us, and penance
which brings smart; we have taken the matter into our own hands, and no man
hates his own flesh.

Repentance is rather matter of discourse and contemplation, then of practice
and passion, and so we sin and our souls are not much troubled at it.

But whosoever is touched in conscience thoroughly with the remorse of sin, will
say, there is no disease to a wounded Spirit, and the costliest sacrifice that
a man can offer to God, is a contrite spirit and a broken heart.

3. Punishment, labor in vain.

Is it not of the Lord of Hosts, that this People shall labor in the very
fire, and weary themselves with very vanity?

1. Here is labor, it is labor improbus, that uses to carry all before it; it
is amplified, For here is labor in the fire; Multa tulit fecit que puer,
sudavit and alsit; labor even to wearines. 2. Here is much ado about nothing:
For all this is for vanity, very vanity. 3. Who crosses them? Is it not of the
Lord of Hosts?
Annon ecce a Jehova exercituum? Calv. Nonne ecce a cum Domino? Interlin.

From the first, here is labor. This sin is very painful.

Covetousness to gather wealth together, Hic labor, hoc opus est.

Is it not strange? the way to hell is all down the hill, yet it is very
uneasy and very weary traveling thither.

Christ calls to him all that are weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11.28.
and promises to refresh them.

And God shows his People a rest, saying,

This is the rest wherewith you may cause the weary to rest, and this is the
refreshing. Isa. 28.12.


But this rest is not promised to them that weary themselves, and work in the
fire, rising early, and going late to bed to work shame for their own houses,
and to sin against their own souls; such shall one day complain,

We have wearied our selves in the ways of wickedness and destruction, Wisdom.
5
yea we have gone through deserts where there was no way, but as for the way of
the Lord we have not known it.

(...) which signifies a wicked man, comes of (...) which signifies labor,
for it is a great deal of labor that they take that live in pursuit of honor,
in the oppression and molestation of their brethren, in the racking vexation of
covetous congestions of wealth. Cain vexes himself, Nimrod must be a mighty
hunter before the Lord, Lamech must kill a man, the earth must be full of
cruelty, to have their own will, this is labor in the very fire to do mischief.

The head of wickedness must be always plotting and projecting: they imagine
wickedness upon their bed; it will not suffer them to sleep.

The hand of wickedness must be always working.

The foot of Pride must be always climbing.

The eye of envy is ever waking.

Shall I give you a full description of the labor of the unrighteous, Deuteronomy.
28.65.
drawn to the life?

The Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and
sorrow of mind.

And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shall fear day and
night, and thou shall have none assurance of thy life.

In the morning thou shall say would God it were even, and at even thou shall
say would God it were morning: for the fear of thine heart which thou shall
fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shall see.

Here is unquietness even upon the bed of rest; the reason is given. Isa. 28.20
For the bed is shorter then a man can stretch himself on it, and the Covering
narrower then he can wrap himself in it.

For there is no Peace to the wicked man.

It is one of Satan's suggestions that the way of righteousness is painful, and
denies a man the content of his heart.

And from hence arise these flattering temptations, Shall I labor and travel
all my days to sustain my life with mine own pains, when a little violence will
strip my neighbor out of all that he has gotten together, and make it mine
own?

Shall I make conscience of an oath or a lie, when it may get me more wealth in
an hour, then my labor shall earne in a year?

Shall I work my self when I may make prize of the labors of other men, and
drink down merrily the sweat of others brows?

Shall I sit low and be despised in the world, when I may lay my neighbors on
heaps under me, and raise up my self upon their ruins?

Shall I undergo the charge of a family, and the care of posterity, when rich
gifts and fair words may subdue change of beauties to my welcome desires and
lusts of the flesh?

Shall I expect a slow and lingering advancement by the worth of virtue in the
service of God, when I see the servants of Mammon carry all honors and
preferments before them?

Shall I be humble when I see the proud happy? Mal. 3.15
shall I live a godly life, when they that work wickedness are built?

Let us here observe how these wicked ones do work to compass their ends; they
labor in the very fire, the fire of hell. The Way of Peace they have not known.

2. The next point casts up the account of their gettings, and it is
anoughts, a mere Cipher in Arithmetic; Vanity, very Vanity.

Is it riches? then is it a thing corruptible, it is a thing uncertain, and
little of it is for use, and what profit has the Possessor thereof in the
surplusage, but the beholding thereof with his eye?

When a man considers his wealth gotten by oppression and injury, how can he
but think it may be so lost as it was gotten?

Is it the favor of Princes and great men? True, they be gods upon earth, but
they die like men at last: and they change their minds often before they die.

One day Haman rides about in Pomp, he is (...): and Mordecay waits at the
lane gate; another day Mordecay is set upon the Kings beast, and Haman leads
the horse, and proclaims him honorable, and the next day Haman is hanged,
and Mordecai rules all under the King.

Is it honor that thou labourest for? that also is vanity: Honor is in
honorante, as Aristotle says, it is very unhappy for a man to have his honor
without himself, his pride within him, and his happiness without him.

Wise Solomon that had all temporal felicity in the fullest measure, and all
of the gift of God, yet called all those things Vanity of Vanities!

I will shut up this point in the words of David,

Doubtless man walks in a shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain. Ps. 39.6.


3. Is it not of the Lord?

Many cross betydings befall the ungodly, and they never observe who opposes
them. It is the Lord that brings all the labors of the ungodly to loss and
vanity; that when they come to thrash their crop of travel in the world, they
find nothing but straw and chafe.

To express his power to do this, he is here called the God of Hosts; for all
things serve him, and he resists the proud, he and his Hosts.

He lays their honors in the dust, he disperseth their riches, and gives
them to the poor: he spoiled them of all their treasures, he that exalted them
made them low, he that gave to them takes away.

They had need be made to see this, therefore he says, Nonne ecce a Domino
hoc, is it not of the Lord?

In the time of the Persecutions under the bloody Emperors, if at any time
they succeeded not in their wars, they cried, Christiani ad furcas, ad leones,
Christians to the gallows, to the lions; they saw not the hand of God against
them; this makes Balaam smite his Ass; he sees not Gods Angel.

In the process of humane affairs, they that go on in these sins, which God
himself threatens with woe, though they find these sins profitable, and to
afford them large revenews, that they live plentifully upon the wages of
unrighteousness, yet have they many crosses in their ways, many great losses
they sustain; these they impute to second causes, and lay great blame upon
those whom they do oppress, because they stand not to it whilst oppression
grindeth them; they observe not the hand of God against them, yet says God, Is
it not of the Lord of Hosts that they weary themselves for very vanity?

It is a great matter to know who it is that protecteth his servants, that
crosses the designs of their enemies.

David prays for Gods saving help to them, and That they may know that this
is thy hand, Ps. 109 27
that thou Lord have done it.

For let all offenders in this kind of oppression, and indeed in all kinds of
bold and presumptuous sins, know, that they sin with an high hand. They are a
People that provoke God to anger continually to his face. Isa. 65.3.


if you observe the text well, you will find two things in it; and they are two
great judgments, and both of the Lord.

1. Is it not of the Lord of Hosts that the People shall labor in the very
fire, and shall weary themselves? 2. Is it not of the Lord of Hosts, that the
People shall labor for very vanity?
For the hand of God is in both for their punishment, both in putting them to
extreme labor, and in turning all their labor into vanity.

He asks the question, as if he should say Come now and let us reason
together, to what do you impute it, that this People take such pains and
prosper so ill? do you not perceive that Gods hand is in it, and that I the
Lord do undo all that they do?

1. It is of the Lord that they labor in the fire.

For God says, Ego creo malum; labor and travel is the curse of man, the
wages of sin: In labor vesceris, in sudore vultus: Here is fire that melts
and dissolveth us into water.

All the pains that is taken here on earth to do evil, is of the Lord.

1. In respect of the strength and wit used therein; for in him we live and
move; he planted the ear, etc. 2. In respect of his permission; for he has
chains to bind up Satan and his instruments, and he can carry snares when he
will to catch sinners. This is not approbation but toleration for a time. 3. It
is of the Lord in respect of his will; for he scourges a man with his own sins
in just judgment, and lets the wicked wear out themselves with extreme
labors for their punishment. Whereas if he have a favor to any he calls upon
them;
It is vain for you to rise up early, Ps. 127.2.
to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows; for he gives his beloved sleep.

And our Savior says, Nolite sollicitiesse, Be ye not careful.

But the Egyptians shall gather Jewels of silver, Ex. 14.25.
and Jewels of gold together: it is of the Lord; and they shall pursue Israel
into the sea; and to make them work he took off their charet wheels that they
drove them heavily.

2. It is of the Lord that all their labor is lost.

For the Jewels of Gold and Jewels of silver which the Egyptians have
gathered, the Israelites shall carry away. And they and their chariots which
they have driven long, shall all be covered with the sea.

The Prophet puts them together.

Thou shall sow, but thou shall not reap: Mic. 6.15.
thou shall tread the Olives, but shall not anoint thee with the oil; and
sweet wine, but thou shall not drink wine.

For God professes it, I will walk contrary unto you, Lev. 26 24
and punish you seven times for your sins.

It is a great wisdom in our labor to consider whither God be with us, and
walk with us, or walk contrary to us. Isa. 57.2.
For if we fear God, and walk in his ways, we are said to walk with God. But if
we do that which is evil in his sight, and covet an evil covetousness to build
our nests, and to gather riches by unlawful means, such as God in his word has
forbidden, we shall see and find that God will walk contrary to us.

To proud man shall find that when he is at the highest, God can cast him down:
The extortioner shall find that no bonds nor statutes will hold his debtors,
they will say we will break these bonds, and cast away these cords from us.

The wanton shall find that the sins of his youth shall ache in the bones of his
age; and they that sow in wickedness shall reap in shame.

There be many that meet with grievous inconveniences in their life manifold
crosses in their health, in their friends, in their children, in the affairs of
life, especially such as concern their estate, and they do not observe two
things most of all to be heeded.

1. That God walks contrary to them and crosses them. 2. The cause why God
does so.
Here it is plain, that these crosses are of the Lord, and the Lord himself
reveals the cause, and gives account of his judgments, for pride and
covetousness, etc. Observe how the Prince of darkness has blinded our eyes.

1. The sins that bring in profit and make the pot sees, 1. Suggest.
though Moses and his Prophets, Christ and his Apostles do tell them that they
are sins, and such as lead the offenders to hell, they will not believe them
all against their profit, but cry as the Ephesians did for Diana. Great is
Mammon; this is called The deceitfulness of Riches. Mat. 13.22


O Who has bewitched the heart of man, that he should value his soul for which
Christ died, at so low a rate, that he will sell it for corruptible things?

So St. Peter calls and silver;

Forasmuch as ye know that you were not redeemed with corruptible things as
gold and silver. 1 Pet. 1.18.


2. These sins be thought little sins where they be confessed, 2 Suggest.
because they make a man able to make God some part of amends in alms and good
works; so the oppressor of his brethren turns his oppressions into
sacrifices, as if oppressions of injury could be sacrifices of righteousness.

This suggestion seems supported by the words of Christ, Give alms of such
things as you have, Luc. 11.41
and behold all things are clean to you.

So that he which has congested wealth by oppression, shall purify all his
goods by giving alms of part thereof.

They mistake our Savior there; observe him well, he found the Pharisees
faulty in this sin here threatened with judgment: for their outside was a fair
Profession of Religion, their inside was full of rapine and wickedness.

1. Our Savior opposes alms against rapine: rapine corrupts all the goods
that we possess, even the fruits of our honest labors in our callings, the
fruits of our inheritance from our Parents; goods unlawfully gotten from our
brethren, against the law and word of God, do make all unclean, they defile
all, and bring a rust and canker upon our treasure; but charity by distribution
of alms does purify and keep clean all our wealth.

2. This charity must have matter to work upon, and that is (...), that is,
such things as are in our power; we may give no alms de alieno, of what is
another; and there is nothing in our power to dispose of but what we may
rightly call our own; this utterly despaireth the hope of the oppressor, that
he may make a sacrifice of his rapines.

And farther, whereas the custom of gathering wealth by injury, which robs
our brethren, does pass it over lightly as a small sin; let me tell you,
that ill-gotten goods do bring such a sin upon a man as cannot be purged but
with two Pills, 1. Unfeigned repentance. 2. Just restitution.


Observe it in Zachaeus, he joined charity and restitution; his charity was of
his own goods, Dimidium bonorum meorum. Luke 19.8.
It is theft what soever is not Gods gift, and nothing is the gift of God but
what is warrantable by the law and word of God.

For this, a man that fears God, will rather be Gods Lazarus and beg crumbs,
then the Devils Dives, and fair deliciously.

3. The oppressors of their brethren that live at ease, 3 Suggest.
and rest in plenty, and surfeit drinking the sweat of their brethrens faces,
and to use the phrase of David, drinking the blood of their brethren, when any
cross or loss betideth them, because they observe some formal customary
profession and practice of Religion, they smooth it over with this comfort,
that God does exercise the patience of his servants in this life with some
trials.

To whom I say, take heed, be not deceived, take not that for an exercise of
thy patience, which is a punishment of thy sin.

1. Thou mistakest God, he is not thy friend, but is contrary to thee. 2. Thou
mistakest thy self: thou call thee the servant of God; no, Mammon is thy
God; for thou go against the word of God to gather wealth: It is but a false
worship that thou give to God, God loves no divided hearts. 3. Thou mistakest
the cause of thy disease, and thy Physician; for thou think it to be some
propension in thee to sin, which needs some preventing physic, whereas it is
a coroding plaster to eat out dead flesh: yet flesh and blood has many
inventions; we use to shoot another arrow after the first; and like Balak, try
in anoth place, and see if it will prosper there.
Verse. 14. For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the
Lord, as the waters cover the sea.
3. The effect. Vide sura page

IT is plain, that Gods remissness in the execution of his just judgments
upon the proud and cruel Babylonians, and the miserable face of the Church
disfigured with tears, her voice hoarse with roaring for help, her throat dry,
her heart aching, and no relief appearing: all this had not only made the
ungodly and profane confident that there was no such thing as Providence; but
it appears by this Prophet that the faith of Gods children was staggered
hereby.

But when God shall declare his justice against these his enemies, then he
shall recover his glory; then shall they both know that Christ is the Lord,
both the oppressor shall know it, and the delivered shall know it, and they
that are no parties to the cause of any side shall all understand.

The words of God in this text are full of marrow and fatness; for God is rich
in mercy, aper it manum and implet, so he dilateth his favors.

1. In the latitude, all the earth over. 2. In the plenitude, the earth shall
be filled. 3. In the magnitude, the knowledge of Gods glory. 4. In the
profundity, as the waters cover the sea.
We are taught from hence, David, we are in great misery.

Help us O God of our salvation, Bs. 79 9
for the glory of thy name, and deliver us.

1. Because if the wicked overcome the Church, Moses,

Wherefore shall the Egyptians speak and say, Ex. 32.12.
he has brought them out maliciously to slay them?

Rabshakeh the General of Senacheribs forces proudly insulteth, Who is he among
all the gods of these lands, Is. 36 20.
that has delivered their Country out of my hands?

But God delivering his Church and punishing the enemies thereof is magnified
thereby, Isa. 37.20.
as Ezechias did pray: Now therefore O Lord our God save thou us out of his
hand, that all the Kingdoms of the earth may know that thou only art the Lord.

2. Because as the School says, gloria est clara notitia cum laud; and what
does more make the name of God known with praise then his present help to his
Church, his quick vengeance upon the enemies thereof? The Heathen shall say,
the Lord has done for them great things.

3. Because this declares the justice of God; First, He is just and faithful
in performing the gracious promises that he has made to his Church. Secondly,
He is just in the punishment of oppression and iniquity, which his soul
abhors.




Moses song is a good example of this duty; for when the Egytians that pursued
Israel into the red sea, were covered and destroyed by the return of the
waters of the sea upon them,

Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord, and spoke,
saying, I will sing unto the Lord, Exodus 15.1.
for he has triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider has he thrown into
the Sea.

This deliverance was a type of the final deliverance of the Church from all
her enemies; and therefore in John's Vision it is said

They sang the song of Moses the servant of God, Rev. 15.3.
and the song of the Lamb, saying, great and marvailous are thy works Lord God
Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints.

Who shall not fear thee O Lord, and glorify thy name; for thou only art holy;
for all Nations shall come and worship before thee, Verse 4.
for thy judgments are made manifest.

We have great and gracious examples at home of this; our blessed Queen of
happy memory, Queen Elizabeth Anno 1588, after defeat of the Spanish Armado,
came in person to the chief Church in her Kingdom, where having upon her knees
devoutly given the glory of that deliverance to God, she heard the Sermon at
Paul's cross, and taught her people by her godly example to know the glory of
God; for in those days Spaniards loved us not, and we thought it a great
favor of God to be delivered from them.

The like public declaration did our Sovereign that now is, make of the glory
of God, for the deliverance of his royal person, Crown and posterity, the
Religion and peace of the Kingdom, in the last session of that first
Parliament, delivered by the hand of God from the bloody design of the
Papists, whose Religion was also in those times thought dangerous to this
Commonwealth; his speech and recognition of the protection of God is extant in
print.

And as States and great Commonwealths have their dangers and deliverances,
wherein as every one that is a member thereof, has their share of benefit, so
from every one is growing a debt of duty, Isa. 38.19.
to acknowledge the same: so that as Ezechiah faith, The father to the children
shall make known the truth of God.

So in our particular estates, we have many tastes of the sweetness of God, in
our deliverances from dangers at sea, on shore from sickness, imprisonment,
infamy, and many other evils which annoy our life; in all which God reveals
to us the knowledge of his glory, and we shall do him but right, to give him as
David faith, the glory due to his name; and to invite our brethren as David
did, I will tell you quid Deus fecil animae meae, what God has done to my soul.

Seeing God promises to fill the earth with the knowledge of the glory of God,
Tua est gloria, thine is the glory. St. Stephen says, The God of glory
appeared to our fathers. Act. 7.2.
And of this God is so jealous, that he says, My glory will I not give it
another. Hold this fast; the Devil when he tempts us to sin, Isa. 42 8.
Reas. 1.
does not find an easier way to fetch us about, then to blemish the glory of
God, and to dim that to our sights and opinions.

As in the first temptation, he told the woman, ye shall not surely dye, for
God does know that when ye eat thereof ye shall be as gods;

Bringing the woman into diverse dishonorable thoughts of God, as concerning
his truth, his justice, his love to man. For in tempting her to eat against
the press and precise commandment of God, 1. She must think that God would not
bring death upon her for her fault, as he had threatened, which touches the
truth of God. 2. She must suppose that the offense of eating taken at the
worst, is a small offense, and so not likely to be avenged and mulcted with any
such punishment, which touches the justice of God. 3. She must suppose, that
God who showed so much favor to man to give him all the fruit for his meat
but that, had he loved man as he made show, would not have left that fruit for
a snare to catch him, and bring him to ruin, or if he did so, he was too
loving to man to work upon the advantage,


Yet in this very suggestion, wherein he infuseth so many dishonorable
thoughts into the heart of the woman to dim the brightness of Gods excellent
glory; observe how he does secretly confess that God is jealous of his glory,
for faith, Genesis 3.5.
he does know that in the day that you eat thereof you shall be as gods.

That is to say, as well; as he loves you, he would not admit you into the
society of his glory, for man was created in the likeness of Gods holiness and
righteousness, but not in the similitude of his glory.

That Satan knew well; and therefore suggested that ambition which he knew
would ruin mankind; for that had cast him out of heaven.

Here by the way, let me show you the sting of the first sin; God had said to
Adam, Thou shall not eat. 2. Qua die comederis morte morieris, what day thou
eatest thou shall die.

1. In the eating the forbidden fruit, the Commandment of God was broken,
therein man rebelled. 2. In the eating, being threatened with death for
punishment of their eating, there must either be 1. Presumption upon the
goodness of God, which should make him merciful against his truth and justice;
or 2. Unbeleife of his power to inflict that punishment; or 3. Contempt of his
power; or 4. A carelessness. I will taste come of it what will.

And in all these the glory of God is much defaced.

3. In the eating to be as gods, that most nearly touched the glory of God; for
it was a base opinion of God in the heart of the woman, to conceive him such as
she might come to be as wise as he; this laid home upon the crown of Gods glory.

In which passage let me commend one observation of mine own upon the Text, to
your judgments.

S^than tempted the woman only, not the man; and he sugard his temptation with
these two arguments only. 1. Non moriemini, ye shall not dye. 2. Eritis sicut
dii, ye shall be as gods.
There was aculeus in cauda, a sting in the tail; for that last stung her to
the quick.

When she came after to tempt her husband, it seems that her inducements were
three.

1. It was good for food. 2. Pleasant to the eye. 3. To be desired to make one
wise.
Here is no mention of this temptation to be like God.

Which makes me think that Adams sin did not violate the glory of God so much
as the woman's did, and that the refore the Apostle faith. I Tim. 2 ^4
Adam was not deceived, but the woman was deceived, and was in the
transgression. For though I cannot clear Adam from doing injury that ways, yet
as the school faith, he that cannot be excused a toto, may be excused a tanto.

But the point which I wish terrible in your remembrance, is that suggestions
to sin do lay their foundation in some unworthy opinion of God, which
trespasseth his glory here spoken of.

God himself declares as much to the ungodly; When thou saw a theif, thou
consentedst with him, etc.

These things thou have done, and I kept silence; then thou thoughtest that I
was altogether such a one as thy self. Ps. 50.21.


The fool says in his heart, Psalm. 14.1
Non est Deus; there is no God, that he may sin the more securely.

David stirs up God the avenger against the ungodly; that boast themselves
in evil, that break in pieces Gods people, Psalm. 94.5
and afflict his heritage.

That slay the widow and the stranger, Verse. 6.
that murder the fatherless. How dare they do all this?

Yet they say the Lord shall not see, Verse. 7.
neither shall the God of of Jacob regard it.

Augustine to such: In foelix homo, ut esses curavit Deus, non curat ut been
esses? Is not this a great trespass against the honor of God to deny his
providence?

There be presumptuous sinners that go on in very great sins, sins which Gods
word detecteth. and reproves, and threatens; yet as the Prophet says,

They will lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord among us? no evil shall
come upon us.

Thus they dishonor God that make him the patron of their persons and their
sins. Mich. 3.11.


But they that have true knowledge of the glory of God, they behold him in
Majesty, and that not only opening his hand, and giving and filling, but
stretching out his arm and striking; and so in that one sight they behold
both, Ecce quantam charitatem, and scientes terrorem Domini behold how great
love, and knowing the terror of the Lord.

In the due consideration of his justice and mercy, both governed with wisdom,
to moderate exuberancie, consists the knowledge of Gods glory.

This point serves to good use.

For first it assures us, I. Use.
that the God whom we serve is the true God, because he is so jealous of his
glory, that he will have none to share with him therein: For the gods of the
Heathen were such good-fellows, as they would admit society. Baal and Melchom,
and Moloch, and Rempham, the god of Eckron, Dagon, the Devil and all; I do not
hear of any great jealousy between them, but the true God is impatient of
corrivall in glory.

2. Because God claims glory in such extent all the earth over, which none of
the god of the heathen did, but were content with their territories, and
knowing him to be the true God;

We are taught,

Do but observe what remembrancers we have, to put us in mind of this.

The law begins: I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of
Egypt. That implies, who brought thee into the land of Egypt.

The Lords Prayer: Our Father which art in heaven; and the first Petition;
Sanctificetur, nomen tuum; then adveniat regnum; then fiat voluntas; all glory.

The Creed: Credo in deum patrem omnipotentem. All beginning to season us with
a reverend estimation of God, and to infuse into us the knowledge of his glory;
therefore do all to the glory of God.

This also serves to show how excellent a knowledge it is to know the glory of
God,

To animate us so much the more earnestly, and with appetite to seek it; and
indeed there is no knowledge to be compared to it.

1. In regard of this life: for if man know no better nature then that of the
creatures beneath him, though that serve to show him how great a lord he is,
and how much is subject to him: yet in them he beholds a society that he has
with them, in much evil, in all weakness, and in a certain mortality, which
can be no great comfort to him, if he stay there.

But if he look up to heaven above him, and behold Meliorem naturam, a better
nature; that of the Angels, and himself but a little lower: and above them,
naturam naturantem the naturating nature, the glorious Author of all being,
this puts metal into him, and teaches him how to preserve the Image of his
maker in him, which advances him above human frailty.

Hence are those ejaculations; that of Paul, Cupio dissolvi, I desire to be
dissolved; our conversation is in heaven; Veni cito; we walk by faith and not
by sight.

2. In the life to come, this is the happiness of the blessed souls, they
shall see God;

And this makes all those that wisely apprehend this joy in the glory of God,
to love the very earthy house which we call the Church of God, because it is
The place where his honor dwells, because every whit of it speaks of his
honor.

Because thither the Tribes go up to testify to Israel, to give testimony of
their faith and zeal.

Because there the voice of Gods promise is heard, and the whole house is
filled with his glory.

It was the blessing of God given in the consecration of Solomon's temple, The
glory of the Lord filled the house of God. 2 Chro. 5.14.
But it was gloria in nube, glory in a cloud: that cloud is much removed in our
Church, since the veil of the temple rent; for Christ has made all things more
clear, and removed the veil. Let us therefore love the Church well, for the
glory of God revealed therein.

Much more do such long after the house of Gods clear glory in heaven, wherein
one day in those courts is better then a thousand otherwhere, and where they
shall behold a full revelation of the glory of God.

Let us all labor for this knowledge of the glory of God,

For in these two books the wisdom of God is set forth to the soul, that we may
say, if we be students in these books, vidimus gloriam ejus, we have seen his
glory: for the heavens declare the glory of God to the eye, and God is glorious
in the least of his creatures, Magnus in minimis, so that every part of his
work does declare him a wise Omnipotent Creator, a wise and faithful preserver
of all things.

And for the book of God; he that says, this is life eternal to know thee,
and says that he came to give life eternal, says also: Dedieis verbum tuum;
I have given them thy word.

There is no labor that better rewards it self, then the pursuit of the
knowledge of the glory of God.

For there is Libertas gloriae, the liberty of glory, Romans 8.2.
which the creature does even long after, and travaileth with the burden of
corruption, desiring to be quit of it.

There be divitiae gloriae, Romans 9.23
riches of glory made known upon the vessels of mercy; for God will declare his
glory in showing mercy.

There is also aeternum pondus gloriae, 2 Cor. 4.17.
an eternal weight of glory.

There is splendour gloriae dei patris, the brightness of the glory of God the
Father; and this is the true light that enlighteneth all that come into the
world; that lights us the way to this glory.

But to know the glory of God here on earth, we must observe the course of his
judgments and we shall therein see both his favor to his Church, howsoever it
be distressed, which though it be gloria in nube, glory in a cloud, the
faithful will see through the cloud.

We shall also see this certain truth and justice in his hatred of sin, and in
the sharp revenge that he takes upon those that disease his Church, which
though it be slow, for God is slow to wrath; yet he that believes will not
make haste. 2 Cor. 4.6


God gives this light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ.

1. Mercy. Crucifixus, mortuus, sepultus, Crucified, dead and buried. 2.
Justice; venit judicare vivos, He comes to judge the live and dead.
Verse. 15. Woe to him that gives his neighbor drink, that put thy bottle
to him and make him drunk also, that thou may look on their nakedness. 16.
Thou art filled with shame for glory; drink thou also and let thy foreskin be
uncovered, the Cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned unto thee, and
shameful spuing shall be on thy glory. 17. For the violence of Lebanon shall
cover thee, and the spoil of beasts which made them afraid because of men's
blood, and for the violence of the Land, of the City, and of all that dwell
therein.
NOw does God rouse up his Justice against another sin, the great and crying
sin of drunkenness.

1. Concerning the words.

Woe to him that gives his neighbor ( socium or amicum others read) drink.

That put thy bottle to him. Some read Conuingens calorem tuum: Others
adhibens venenum tuum; Others iram.

He means, woe be to him, that when he sees his neighbor in drink, comes in
with his pot, or pint, or quart, to inflame him.

Thou make him drunk that thou may look on their nakedness.] For it is said
that the King of Babylon did use in his Conquests to bring forth great quantity
of wine, and to make the People drink drunk that he might make sport with them;
for in those drunken fits many shameful and bestial acts of lasciviousness
were publicly showed, drunkenness enflaming them with lost.

Mr. Calvin does interpret all this figuratively, not of drunkenness with
strong drink, Verse. 5.
but of immoderate desire of augmenting their dominions; of which kind of
drunkenness he spoke before, comparing the Babylonians to such as transgress
with wine.

So does Ribera a learned Jesuit understand this, of the insolent triumph of
the Babylonian King, making sport in the conquest of Kings, and exercising on
them cruelties, to discover their nakedness, how he has stripped them out of
all.

But Saint Hierom reports that Nebuchadnezzar did abuse Zedechiah the King at
a banquet in a very foul manner.

And because that kind of drunkenness was before touched to the quick, I
follow Arias Montanus in the literal exposition of these words, which I have
before delivered, that the King made his associate Kings, and his Conquered
enemies drunk to make him sport. Which sin of his is threatened.

Verse. 16. Thou art filled with shame for glory; for this turned to the shame
of the Babylonians.

Though Mr. Calvin expound it, satiatus es probro non tuo sed alieno. That the
Babylonian did even satisfy himself with the disgrace done to his enemy.
Rather I take it for a punishment inflicted on the Babylonian, that shame
should come to him for this sport that he made himself, as it also follows.
Drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be discovered: The Cup of the Lords
right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spewing shall be on thy
glory.

This I take, it was not only figuratively revenged upon Nebuchadnezzar, when
the glory of his Conquests ended in the shame of his transformation, the most
wonderful example that we do read in all the book of God;

The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.33.
and he was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet
with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like Eagles feathers, and his
nails like birds claws. For thus did the King continue in this shameful
punishment the whole term of seven years:

But literally this was fulfilled in Belshazzar, who made a great feast to a
thousand of his lords, Dan. 5.1.
and drank wine before the thousand;

In which drunken feast wherein the consecrate vessels of the Temple were
abused in quaffing and carowsing, the fingers of an hand were seen on the wall
over against the King, writing the doom of his shameful downfall. For observe
the end;

In that night was Belshazzar the King of the Chaldaeans slain, Verse. 30.
and Darius the Median took the Kingdom. So he did drink also, and his
nakedness was laid open, and the Medians came in and took away all their glory.

Verse. 17. For the violence of Lebanon shall cover thee, and the spoil of
beasts which made them afraid.

This overthrow of the Chaldean Monarchy he calls the violence of Lebanon
covering them.

Junius does understand this place thus, that the enemy should come upon the
Babylonian with the same violence that hunters use, who pursuing the wild
beasts in the forest of Lebanon having pitched their nets and tents for them,
do suddenly set upon them, and drive them into their nets: so sudden a surprise
shall the Babylonian suffer.

Master Calvin does give this as a cause of their punishment, and understands
the words thus, that God will cover the Babylonian with shame for the violence
that he offered to Lebanon, and to the beasts thereof forraging Judaea, and
destroying not only men and women in towns, but the very wild beasts of the
forest of Lebanon, which was near to Jerusalem. So that this expresses the
cause of Gods provocation against the Babylonian, and withal the comfort of the
Church, that God would revenge the wrong done to their land, not only to the
People thereof, but to the very wild Beasts of the forest.

De verbis hactenus. The parts of this text are two, 1. Peccatum, sin. 2.
Poena, punishment.


1. Peccatum, in which 1 Quid; potant amicum velsocium. 2. Ad quid; ut videant
nuditatem.


1. Potant vicinium. 2. Faults, 1. Drink drunk. 2. Make drunk.

1. They be drunk.

Drunkenness it self is an horrible sin, it is one of the fruits of the flesh;
Of which I tell you, as I have also told you in times past, that they which do
such things, Gal. 5.11
shall not inherit the Kingdom of heaven.

Drunkenness is confessed of all men to be a sin; and they that love it best,
and use it most, will be very angry with you, if you call them drunkards.

For it is not agreed upon as yet what drunkenness is: our statute law does
impose a penalty of five shillings upon every one that is convicted of
drunkenness.

Our Articles given to sworn men, do charge them to enquire, if there be any
Drunkards in our Parishes, and to present them.

But neither the Ecclesiastical Canon, nor the Act of Parliament does direct
the inquisition, by describing what Persons must be esteemed drunk.

I will tell you whom the Scripture denotes.

Lot was drunk when he committed incest with his daughters, Genesis 19.
and so overgone with wine, that he neither knew of their coming to his bed,
nor of their going from him.

Noah was drunk when he lay uncovered in his tent; Genesis 9.
these were far spent in the highest degree.

Vriah the husband of Bathsheba was drunk too, the text says David made him
drunk; yet he was so much Master of his own thoughts, and of his charge
committed to him, 2 Samuel 11.
that he would not go home to his own house as the King would have had him.

Amnon the son of David was drunk, 2 Samuel 13.28.
yet it is said of him his heart was merry with wine.

Elah King of Israel made himself drunk, 1 Reg 16.9
and Zimri his servant killed him.

Nabal made a great feast, 1 Samuel 25.36.
and was so drunken, that Abigail thought not fit to tell him of the danger
that his churlishness had like to have brought upon him till he had slept it
out.

A King that drinks wine is described then to be drunk, when they drink and
forget the law, Prove. 31.5
and pervert the judgment of the afflicted. So that to drink so deep as to
forget the law of our lawful calling, and to do things contrary to the same, is
to drink drunk.

Christ calls the overcharge of the heart with drink drunkenness. Luc. 21 34
His word is (...), signifying the laying on of a burden upon the heart.

For so much as we drink for necessity or for moderate refection does cheat and
refresh and lighten the heart: but excessive drinking does lay an heavy burden
upon it, Therefore

Be not drunk with wine wherein is excess. Ephesians. 5.18.


Now what is excess? not so much as lays us under the Table only, not so
much as makes us stagger and reele as we go, and takes away the use of our
memory, speech and good manners;

But they are drunkards that sit at the wine till it inflame them. Isa 5.11.
Wine is allowed to warm the stomach, not to set it on fire.

Some man excuses himself, that he drank not above his strength, but was able
to carry it.

Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle
strong drink. Verse. 22.


This shows, that all excess in drinking which is beyond the measure which
maintains health, is drunkenness; call it good fellowship, or making merry,
or keeping good company, or whatsoever fair colors you will lay upon it, it
is drunkenness.

It turns grace into wantonness, and medicine into disease, it makes the body
which should be the Temple of the Holy Ghost the very Cellar of Bacchus.

The evils that grow out of this sin are many.

1. The great Commandment is broken which bids us to love God above all
things; for the drunkard makes his belly his god and del^ghteth in his shame:
neither is God in all his ways; of whom does the name of God more suffer, then
of the drunkard, and who do make less conscience of the Sabbath, then such do,
who make that day of all other the most licentious, the most lascivious,
despising the Commandment of God? 2. It is a sin against himself who commits
it; for he shameth himself to beholders, he wastes his estate, hurts his own
body, drowneth his understanding, judgment, memory, and depriveth himself of
the use of reason; as Solomon says, Pro. 23.29.
Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has contentions? who has babbling? who
has wounds without cause? who has redness of eyes? They that tarry long at
the wine.
At the last it biteth like a serpent, Verse. 32. Verse. 33.
and stingeth like an adder.

It corrupts the affections, and inflameth lust.

Thine eyes shall behold strange women.

It corrupts the speech, thine heart shall utter perverse things.

It makes a man insensible of his punishment.

They have stricken me, and I was not sick; they have beaten me, Verse. 35.
and I felt it not.

It grows into an habit, and cannot be easily given over; drunkenness is
like a quartane, the dishonor of Physicians: so it is the dishonor of
Preachers, they cannot cure it; we would have cured the drunkard, and he would
not be healed.

When shall I awake, I will yet seek it again; as Saint Gregory says, qui hoc
facit, non facit peccatum, sed totus est peccatum.

3. It is a sin against our neighbor; for it is a waster and consumer of the
provisions which God has given to nourish and sustain many, and so he becomes
a thief, robbing the hungry and thirsty: for it is panis pauperis and vinum
dolentis, the bread of the poor, and the wine of the sorrowful, that is thus
swilled and swallowed.

It touches upon the Commandment of murder, for to take away life, and to
take away the means that should support life are so set, that we can hardly
draw a line between them.

It inflameth lust; as Ambrose, Pascitur libido conviviis, vino accenditur,
ebrietate inflammatur, it fills the tongue with allkind of evil words which
corrupt good manners, turpiloquium, multiloquium, vaniloquium, falsiloquium;
and where be the good names of men more foully handled then upon the ale-bench,
when a drunken Senate meets?

And to conclude, it dishonors Parents: for the laws of the Church, and the
laws of the Common wealth do forbid it, and design punishment for it.

Yet this sin is the Diana of our Ephesus, and if all the Preachers of England
do cry it down in Pulpits, the Court of good fellowship will cry it up again;
though we show you the serowl of God, and open all the folds of it, and read it
to you written within and without, with nothing but lamentations, mourning and
woe against this sin: though we bind the sinners in this kind by the power given
to us by Christ, saying, Whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained, yet do
men run headlong into this sin without fear or wit.

But when sin is once grown into fashion, we may stretch out our hands all the
day long against it, and spend our strength in vain, yet I will not despair of
a blessing upon our faithful labors against it; and thus much I will undertake
to do, as the Apostle says,

I will yet show you a more excellent way.

I will yet show you approved remedies against this sin, and there is no time
of the year unseasonable for the soul to take Physic. Remedia.

1. Take David's Physic; I have kept thy word in my heart that I might not
sin against thee; Remed. 1
for that word will answer the temptation, as Joseph did, How then shall I do
this great wickedness and so sin against my God? Remember the fearful
threatenings of woe and judgment against this sin: Remember the day of
judgment wherein every man must give account to God of himself, and of all his
ways; remember the bitterness of the latter end thereof; all this is clearly
denounced in the word of God; Remember that it is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God, for our God is even a consuming fire.

2. Remedy is a constant Practice of mortification; for they that humble their
souls with fasting, and chasten their bodies, and bring them in subjection,
that watch and pray, and call their sins every day to account, and examine
their consciences by the law of God, he that does these things well, shall soon
come to their diet, of whom the Psalmist speaks,

Thou feedest them with the bread of tears, and give them tears to drink in
great measure. Psalm 80.5*


Then thou will go mourning all the day long.

3. Remedy is, withdrawing thy self from such company as use drunkenness, from
such places wherein it is used, as Solomon advises.

Be not amongst wine-bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of flesh: for the drunkard
and the glutton shall come to poverty, Prove. 23.20.21.
and drowsinesse shall cloth a man with rags, So Saint Paul charge the
Corinthians,

But now I have written unto you not to keep company, if any man that is called
a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, 1 Cor. 5.11.
or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one, no not to eat,
It is company that corrupts many; there are few that love drunkenness so well,
1 Reg. 16.9.
that they will sit down and drink themselves drunk, as Elah king of Israel
did, but good fellowship spoils all, and one pot draws on another.

4. Remedy is, Let every man abide in the calling wherein he was called. 1 Cor.
7.20.
God has given his Angels charge of thee to keep thee in all thy ways; so it
is said of a drunkard that he is out of the way; for did he exercise himself in
his calling, within his way, he could not miscarry.

The desire of the slothful kills him: for his hands refuse to labor, Pro.
21.25.26.
he coveteth greedily all the day long.

5. Remedy is, a consideration of the hunger and thirst which Christ sustained
on earth for thee, and of the hunger and thirst which Christ yet in the members
does suffer. Remember what he has done for thee; do not waste that unthriftily
which would serve to relieve Jesus Christ; he hungered to satisfy thee, do not
thou surfeit to make him hungry; he thirsted, it was one of the last words that
he spoke on the Cross, Sitio I thirst; do not thou make thy self drunk with
that which should quench his thirst, lest thy last draught be like his vinegar
mingled with gall.

6. Remedy is, a consideration that we are required to pray continually, and in
all things to give thanks which holy duty we cannot perform so long as we are
in our cups; these duties require a sound judgment, a clear understanding, an
heart established with grace, as the Apostle says, Not in gluttony and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, but put ye on the Lord Jesus,
and have no care to the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.

We were created to glorify God in our bodies and in our souls, for they are
God's; and therefore whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all
to the glory of God.

7. Remedy, consider that we are bidden guests to the Supper of the Lamb, and
the Spirit and the Bride says come, and let whosoever hears say come, Rev.
22.17.
and take of the waters of life freely; we cannot tell when this supper time
is, till Gods messenger death comes and tells us all things are prepared;
come now, let not us over-charge our hearts with surfeiting and drunkenness,
least that day come upon us unawares; they that are drunk already and full
gorged with wine and strong drink, Luc. 21 34.
have left no room for the waters of life; vas plenum plus non recipit.

It is a work for our life on earth to travel and take pains, and to exercise
our souls to godliness, and all to get us a stomach to this Supper of the
Lamb; here is meat enough, the fatness of Gods house; we shall be fed as it
were with marrow; here is the hidden Manna for bread; here is Calix inebrians,
we shall be made to drink of the rivers of Gods pleasures; for at his right
hand are pleasures for evermore.

Here are good guests; for many shall come from the East and West, Mat. 8.11.
and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven.

They that come there, let them drink and spare not, but let them keep their
stomachs till then. I conclude this point in the words of our Savior,

If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

2. They give their neighbor drink, Joh. 13.17.
and put their bottle to him, adding heat to heat.

Drunkenness, as you have heard, is a grievous sin; but this is a degree of
fuller unrighteousness to make others drunk. Amongst all the sins that David
did commit, nothing sat so close to him, nor left so foul a stain upon the
honor of his memory, as did his carriage toward the Hittite Vriah.

David did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and turned from
nothing that he commanded him all the days of his life, save only in the
matter of Uriah the Hittite. 1 Reg. 15.5.
This excuse of David in all other things wherein through humane frailty he
failed often, does show how God passes over the sins of the elect, as the
Apostle says, (...), which through infirmity they do commit; but this special
notice taken of the matter of Vriah the Hittite, declares it to have been
peccatum primae magnitudinis, a sin of the first magnitude, in a vessel of
glory, because so many sins met together in it; to name the most eminent,
First, adultery; then the making of Vriah drunk; then the murdering of Vriah.

Wherein you see that this foul sin does make weight in the burden of David.

The Holy Ghost to declare how foul and hideous a sin drunkenness is, has not
spared to leave the dishonor of Gods good servants upon record, offending
therein; as of Noah, who is much to be excused, because having planted a Vine,
and out of the grapes having pressed the first liquor that we read made of
grapes, and not knowing the strength thereof, being also old, he was overtaken
with it once and no more.

Surely it was the will of God so early to let the danger of wine appear, even
at the first drinking thereof, that all succeeding times might beware.

So the example of David, who made Vriah drunk, against whom the matter of
Vriah is upon record, for terror that men should fear this great sin of
making their neighbors drunk; for that is part of the matter of Vriah the
Hittite.

Will you hear the decision of the canon law in their cases of conscience
concerning this sin, Ille qui procurat ut quis inebrietur, Summa Anglica
ebrieta^e.
mortaliter peccat quia consentit in damnum notabile proximi.

This is now the crying sin of our Land, Court, City, Country, all defiled with
it; and I must confess a truth which the Sun sees, not all innocent of it
who should by authority from God reprove it by the word, and punish it by the
sword: it is a sin in fashion.

Yet at the great feast which Assuerus made to his Princes, it is specially
noted,

And the drinking was by an order, Hest. 1.8.
none might compel: for so the King had appointed to all the officers of his
house, that they should do according to every man's pleasure. Lyran his note is,
Nolebat Rex ut in aula sua aliquis uteretur modo incomposito and irrationabili
more barbarorum qui nimis importune inducebant homines ad bibendum,

1. It is our duty to stir up one another, Reaf. 1.
and to provoke one another to all Christian duties; of these, to act sobriety
in the moderate using of meat and drink, and fasting, in the abstinence from
them for a season. St. Paul, whether ye eat or drink, do all to the glory of
God. Christ, quando jejunatis.

To omit this duty is a great sin, to commit the contrary evil is most
abominable. This the Prophet shows. In that day did the Lord God of Hosts
call unto weeping and mourning, Isa. 22 12 Verse. 13.
etc.

And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh
and drinking wine, eating and drinking, Cras moriemur: And it was declared in
the ears of the Lord of Hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not be purged till
ye die.

How then shall they appear before God, who instead of calling to fasting,
call to drinking, and press the drinking even to the making of their neighbor
drunk?

2. If we contrive against our neighbors life to take it from him,

Yet they that are thus overtaken, do commonly excuse themselves, that they
have been amongst their friends; but this pot-friendship which has the power
to divide a man from himself, will scarce prove a glue strong enough to unite
and knit him to another.

The kisses of such friends betray thee, and thou may say rather, Thus was I
wounded in the house of my friends. It was David's prayer, let it be thine;

Let the righteous smite me, for that is a benefit; Ps. 141.5.
and let him reprove me, and it shall be a precious oil that shall not break
my head; but Incline not mine heart to evil, that I should commit wicked works
with men that commit iniquity; and let me not eat of their delicates, nor
drink neither. It is a good observation of Cardinal Bellarm. here, ubique nocet
conversatio malorum, sed nusquam magis, quam in conviviis, and compotationibus.

This is no new danger, but a disease of former ages, infectiously transmitted
by imitation to our times, and in them grown epidemical.

Saint Ambrose describes a surfeiting and drunken meal, De Helia and Jenin.
6.13.
primo minoribus poculis velut velitari pugna praeluditur; verum haec non est
sobrietatis spes, sed bibendi disciplina; ubi res calere caeperit, poscunt
majoribus poculis, certant pocula cum ferculis.

Deinde procedente potulongius contentiones diversae, and magna certamina quis
bibendo praecellat.

Nota gravis si quis se excuset.

All you that call God Father, and do desire either the honor of his name, or
the coming of his Kingdom, or the fulfilling of his will; make conscience of
this great sin, call it no longer good-fellowship: for St. Ambr. says, vocatis
ut amicos, emittitis inimicos. Ibid. c. 14.


Vocas ad jucunditatem, cogis ad mortem; invitas ad prandium, efferre vis ad
sepulturam; vina praetendis, venena suffundis.

Say to him that tempts thee to drink drunk, vade retro me Sathana, get thee
be hind me Satan; the Kingdom of God is not meat nor drink, God shall find
thee out, thou have his woe upon thee, and thou shall see anon how he will
punish thee.

1. Ad quid ut videant nuditatem. It is the boast of brave drunkards, how long
they have sat at it, how many pots and pottles they have swallowed, how many
they have made drunk; this is thy nakedness.

Literally drunkenness does make men do things uncomly: some use this lewd
practice to make way for their lust, some to take advantages otherwise.

Modesty cannot utter what unclean provocations do arise from drunkenness,
what lewd and unchaste actions are done what profane and filthy words are
spoken. Noah himself full of wine, does lie uncovered in his tent, and shows
his nakedness.

St. Ambrose complains of women That full of wine did come immodestly into
the street singing and dancing, Ibid. c. 18.
irritantes in se juvenum libidines.

Coelum impuro contaminatur aspectu, terra turpi saltatione polluitur, aer
obscenis cantibus verberatur.

O the miserable state of man in whom sin reigns, he is not only tempted to
do evil, horrible and shameful evil, to drink drunk, but to be his neighbors
devil to draw him into evil by making him drunk, and also this propter malum,
even to discover the nakedness of his brother.

Some show themselves in their pots like lions furious and quarrelsome: others
are dull and heavy, only serving for whetstones to sharpen the wits of the
company: others drowsy and sleepy: others talkative, every man in his humor,
all in their nakedness. To do evil that good may come of it, is an heinous
sin, for God needs not Satan's help. But to do evil our selves to draw others
into evil for so evil an end, this does make sin out of measure sinful.

1. Take nakedness literally, for the discovering of those parts which modesty
does hide out of sight: so after the transgression the man and woman saw that
they were naked, and they were ashamed, being but themselves alone in the
garden, and they sowed fig-leavs together to hide their nakedness from each
others sight; so much remained in them, that having left primas sapientiae,
they yet retained secundas modestiae, and could not for shame behold each
others nakedness.

The Apostle says, These members of the body which we think to be less
honorable, 1 Cor. 12.23.
upon these we bestow more abundant honor, and our uncomely parts have more
abundant comeliness. The honor here meant is the decent hiding of their
nakedness, and the modest covering of our shame.

Where the Apostle does declare the care that is in the natural body; the
comely parts which need no hiding from sight do cover the uncomely parts from
sight.

Therefore they that uncover nakedness do show themselves to be no members of
the body: so that such drunkards as give strong drink to their neighbor, to
this end to discover their nakedness, declare themselves to be no parts of the
body of the Church.

Surely much nakedness is discovered in many drunken meetings, and no marvel
when men and women, having laid aside reason and temperance, religion and the
fear of God, if they then turn beasts, and do those things that are uncomely.

2. Take this nakedness in a spiritual sense, then St. Ambrose will tell you,
Lib. de Noe and Arca c. 30. Omnis impius quoniam ipsedevius disciplinae est,
aliorum lapsus pro sui erroris solatio accipit, quod consortes invenerit culpae.

Then is the season for the Cosener to invade the purse of his neighbor, for
the cunning insidiator to take advantage of words to find out the infirmitits
of his brother, that he may keep him in aw thereby. I cannot dive so deep into
this mystery of iniquity as to declare all; and again, I fear to go far in
it, least I might teach the ignorant sinner more cunning then he had before.

This I dare say that it is not love that maintains drunken acquaintance; for
true love is a coverer of nakedness: if literal, you may see it in Sem and
Japhet: if spiritual, you may hear it from the Apostle, love covers a
multitude of sins. And out of that love, David weeps fot them that keep not the
law.

It becomes them best in my text, who know not God, but were abominable, and to
every good work rebrobate, to make men drunk to make them sport; but these
things must not be so much as named amongst those that call God our father,
that come to Church, that hear the word, that offer themselves to be guests at
the Lords board.

Bur I remember the wise man says, Rods be for the backs of fools. What
greater folly then to sell our inheritance in heaven for strong drink? a worse
bargain then Esaus, and an harder pennyworth. The rods for this are,

2. Poena peccati, the punishment of sin.

1. Thou art filled with shame for glory. 2. It shall be thine own case; for
thou also shall drink, and thy nakedness discovered. 3. The avenger shall do
thee right is the Lord; The Cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned unto
thee. 4. Shameful spewing shall be thy glory. 5. The violence of Lebanon shall
cover thee, and the spoil of beasts.
I may resolve all these particulars to this total, that God will take the
punishment of this sin into his own hand, and shall turn his Cup unto them, and
they shall do him right therein. But for our better direction in this passage,
let me observe,

1. Who will punish this sin; God himself. 2. How he will punish. 3. Why he
will punish.
1. Who will punish this drunkenness.

It is the Lord; Is it not he whose glory the Babylonians have given to their
idols, yea in the pride of their heart assumed it to themselves? is it not he
whose People they persecute and destroy cruelly? whose goods they gather
greedily? whose fruits of the earth they abuse to surfeit and drunkenness? it
is for such as these that God says,

I form the light and create darkness, Isa. 45.7.
I make peace and create evil: I the Lord do all these things.

God has ever declared himself an enemy to this sin; you may see it clearly in
the first example of it in Noah, upon whom God said two great punishments,
which show how much that sin offended him.

1. That his own son should expose him to shame. 2. That this fault should be
kept in eternal Record in the living book of the Holy Word
You may see it in Lots example, wherein God would have it appear.

1. How strong liquor may prevail against a strong brain. 2. How easily a good
man, and one that fears God may be overtaken with it by temptation. 3. How
horribly he may oftend in it. 4. How temptation may relapse him into it, and in
the sins which follow it. 5. God would have us see his just indignation against
this sin in the punishment of it;
In both these, the first we read of transgressing in wine, God does declare
his judgments upon this sin of drunkenness.

1. Because this sin does much defare the image of our Maker in us, which is
chiefly stamped in our spiritual and intellectual part. For let reason once
fail, and man cease to be himself; the time, and becomes like to a brute
beast. 2. Because Gods love is violated by drunkenness; do you remember how
sharply God punished old Eli the Priest of the Lord, for not reproving his
ungodly sons, to whom he said, Thou honor thy sons more then me. 1 Samuel
2.29.
The drunkard loves his strong drink above the Lord; therefore he threatens
them,
Awake ye drunkards, and weep, and howl all ye drinkers of wine, because of
the new wine, Joel 1.5.
for it is cut off from your mouth.

Observe it that he bids drunkards awake, both because drunkenness does
beget drowsinesse; and quia vigilando dormiunt, for they say and do they know
not what, and he shows them that as soundly as they sleep, they shall not
sleep out his judgment, but shall feel the storm thereof; it is a contrary
course that God holds with them that love and serve him; for he bids them,

Come my People enter into thy chambers, Isa. 26.20
and shut thy doors about thee; hide thy self as it were for a little moment,
until the indignation be overpast.

There is a question in the cases of conscience in the Canon Law, Vtrum
ebrietas excuset a peccato,

I find it favorably judged in the Canonists, Excusat ebrietas non a toto sed
a tanto, it excuses not altogether, but in part.

Some go further, and search whether the drunkenness be a common disease of
the Party, and that he uses in his drink to behave himself so: and in that
case being found culpable, he is adjudged to be irregular; but if a man be by
the temptation of such whom he takes to be his friends overtaken with drink,
who is known to be one that uses not to commit that fault, the law does favor
such a one. Others resolve it thus,

Ebrius est irregularis ut ei imputantur ad poenam omnia quae sequuntur.

I find in this example that God does threaten to visit these Chaldeans for the
sins committed in their drunkenness, because it was wilful. Vide lege Exodus
21.28, 29.

The school distinguishes well between voluntary and involuntary drunkenness.

They call that voluntary drunkenness, when men do sit at the wine till it
inflame them, knowing the strength of wine, and their own weakness, and seek
it with delight in it. Ox used to gore.

Involuntary they call that which overtaketh a man, not using, not loving it,
who also is sorry for it, and wary to decline it hereafter: and that they hold
excuses a tanto, in part.

Me thinks this should be a great argument to dissuade drunkenness, Ps. 75.8.


This Isay calls The Cup of the Lords fury, and he gives his own children a
taste of it, not ad ruinam, but ad dignam emendationem, Isa. 51.17
not to their ruin but amendment; it is called also The Cup of trembling.

God himself calls it The wine cup of his fury. Jer. 25.15


It is called in Ezechiel Deep and large. Ez. 22.32


And as the Apostle says, speaking of the judgment to come, Knowing therefore
the terror of the Lord we persuade men. 2 Cor, 5.11


If men will not be persuaded, let him that is filthy be filthy still; let him
that is a drunkard be a drunkard still: But as the Apostle St. Peter says, if
we look well about us,

The time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the
Gentiles, 1 Pet. 4.3.
when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings,
banquettings, etc.

Yet better late then never; for if God have taken the matter into his hand,
David will tell you that that hand of God is strong; strong is thy hand, says
he, this is dextra subveniens suis, suscipit me dextera tua: Psalm. 63.8
and it is dextra inveniens, Thy hand shall find out all thine enemies, thy
right hand shall find out those that hate thee. Psalm. 21.8


It is a fearful thing to fall into that hand. Heb 10.31


Thy right hand is full of righteousness. Psalm. 48.


That righteousness will give suum cuique, to every one his own; it pays
home; he keeps it in his bosom of purpose to spare men, and to give them time
of repentance.

But I must tell you that the Saints of God are so impatient of the wrong done
to the name of God, that they cry unto him, O God how long shall the adversary
reproach? Psalm. 24.10, 11.
shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever? Why withdrawest thou thy hand?
even thy right hand, pluck it out of thy bosom.

2. How he will punish.

1. He will fill them with shame for glory, which shame is further expressed,
Shameful spewing shall be on thy glory. 2. He will punish them with their own
sin; for he says, Drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered.
1. With shame.

You are not to learn that all sin is folly, and all sinners are fools; but no
transgressor in any kind does more make a fool of himself then the drunkard
does; for he proclaims his own shame, as he walks up and down the streets;
as he sits in the house, his words, his gestures, his actions do all shame
him as Solomon says,

When he that is a fool walks by the way, his wisdom fails him, and he
says to every one that he is a fool: Eccl. 10.3.
so does a drunkard shame himself by telling every one that he is drunk.

This were a great punishment if custom of sinning* and multitude of sinners
in this kind had not hardened the foreheads of them that transgress in this
kind, that they feel not the rod of shame.

I may say with the Prophet of the drunkards of our days, as he spoke of the
idolaters of his time, Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination?
nay they were not ashamed, Jer. 6.15.
neither could they blush.

But let no man despise the good opinion of his neighbor; sober men care not
how little conversation they have with drunkards, they seek to avoid them, and
all that fear God abhor their evil manners.

Yet they glory and boast how much themselves have drunk, how many they have
made drunk; but as the Apostle says, Their glory is their shame.

And though they be not sensible of it in the heat of their wine, and in the
custom of their sin, the end thereof will be bitterness; for the wise man
tells them, At the last it biteth like a Serpent, Pro. 23 32
and stingeth like an adder.

When shame once begins to smart, it goes to the quick. Remember Adam in
paradise.

I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid because I was naked, Genesis
3.10
and I hid my self.

The Lord will come in the cool of the day to us, and we shall hear his voice
in the evening of our time, and then our ^hame shall come with a sting, even
the sting of servile fear, and cast up our account.

What fruit then of those things whereof we are ashamed? then is God even with
you.

For he cries out to you, How long will thou turn my glory into shame? Do not
drunkards do so, who make their bodies which should be the Temples of the
Holy Ghost, the styes of uncleanness?

The Holy Ghost you see is plain and homely in his phrase of speech; these
drinks which they pour into their bodies luxuriously, shall not make their
hearts glad; they shall not comfort the stomach, they shall not nourish the
body.

The stomach shall complain of them as a wrong, and cast them up as a burden
too heavy for it to bear; nature it self shall exonerate it self, and resist,
regest it in a shameful vomit.

And to use Gods own phrase, God shall spew these workers of iniquity out of
his mouth, and all the service that they do to him he shall cast up again; for
he will say nauseat anima mea, my soul loatheth, he is even sick of them and
their service.

And if God once set upon us to shame us, who then shall have pity upon thee O
Jerusalem? or who shall bemoan thee? or who shall go aside to ask thee how thou
do? Isa. 15.5.


2. He will punish them with their own sin, Drink thou also and let thy
foreskin be uncovered.

1. This calls to your remembrance a doctrine formerly delivered out of
Obadiah,

That God requiteth sinners with the same measure that they have measured to
others.

2. This renews also the remembrance of another doctrine there delivered, that

God ponisheth sin by sin; as there Edom trusted in the help of men, that was
their fault; and that God laid upon them after for a punishment.

So here, the fault of the Chaldeans was their making men drunk, that they
might see their nakedness, and that is their punishment; now they shall be
drunk and their nakedness discovered.

There I handled this question how God would be Author of this kind of
punishment, and innocent in the sin of the offender;

Resolving it thus; that God will withdraw his grace, and forsake them that
forsake him, and leave them to the sourse and strong stream of their own
corruptions, as the Apostle says,

God gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, Romans
1.24. Verse. 26.
to dishonor their bodies.

For this cause God gave them up to vile affections.

We carry stuff enough about us to punish us withal; if God do but make rods
of our own corruptions, he will soon be armed against us.

You shall find in that place of the Apostle, that in man there are two things
to which for sin they are yielded up by God himself in his justice.

1. (...). v. 14. 2. Eis(...).
These two do differ much; for 1. Concupiscence is but a grudging of a disease,
but (...) is the very strength of the fit. 2. Concupiscence is within the heart
and affections, but this pathos is active and in operation, and so corrupt the
whole man.


God leaves the wicked to both these (...) is the minority (...) is the
strength of sin.

Thus as Augustine says, some sins are not tormenta peccantium, but incrementa
vitiorum, and men do not feel any punishment.

Yet he that shall consider it well, will find that Solomon means a punishment
to the young man, when he says, Rejoice O young man in thy youth: So does the
Holy Ghost, saying, Let him that is filthy be filthy still.

For if God let go the reins, and leave us to our selves, we are likely to
bring our sin to a full stature.

It is a good use of this point which St. Paul teaches, Brethren, Gal. 6.1.
if any man be overtaken with a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a
man with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self lest thou also be
tempted.

God has a just hand in the moderation of the things of this world, and of
men's persons.

Has not the Sun shined on those that have made sport to behold men drunk,
or otherwise, have made the most of it to their shame and disgrace amongst men;
who in the just punishment of their uncharitableness, have themselves fallen
into the same sin of drunkenness, and thereby have borne a shame and scandal
to their profession: this is Gods justice upon them, they did not consider
themselves, they knew not the strength of the temptation, they knew not their
own weakness.

The greatest Professors of Religion are commonly the severest judges of their
brethren; for their zeal against sin, and for the glory of God does fill them
with hatred of evil.

Yet let such consider themselves; for if God see that their zeal begin once to
burn up their charity, he will leave them to themselves awhile, and they shall
see quo semine nati, what they are.

For, let all men know that the evil Angels are as much at Gods commandment as
the good, for omnia illi serviunt, all things serve him: and as it is said,

He will give his angels charge over thee; so it is said likewise, He cast upon
them the fierceness of his anger, Ps. 78.49.
wrath, and indignation and terriblenes by sending evil Angels among them.

As we have the ministry of good Angels sent unto them that shall be heirs of
salvation:

So God sends evil Angels also, not only to Saul and to the false Prophets
of Ahab, but even to Adam in Paradise God sent him, and to St. Paul the Angel
of Satan.

These evil Angels sometimes come with suggestions to sin, to try our
strength, that we may know how weak we are; and sometimes they prevail with
Gods children, that they may stand upon their guard, and keep better watch.

But for the ungodly of the earth, they emplunge them in the same sin that they
do cause others to commit, that the same disgrace and shame which they have
done to their neighbor, may reflect upon themselves.

Some have been so afraid of making God the author of evil, because it is said
Tradidit eos Deus, God has delivered them up, that they have understood the
Apostle to speak of that God who is called deus saeculi hujus, the god of this
world; as the Manichees saw so much evil done, and knew not how to free God
from guiltiness of it, they therefore made duo principia, two beginnings. But
that needs not.

It is likely that such a Father as is personated in the parable of the
Prodigal, could not but observe in the education of his son, how thrifty he was
like to prove; yet such a father giving the portion of his goods which is a
child's part, to such a son, and letting him take his journey into a far
country, is not accessory to his riotous living.

Augustine says, that the heart of man is harned by God, Non impartiendo
malitiam, sed non largiendo gratiam, not by instilling any malice, but not
giving grace.

He sees the Chaldeans take delight in making men drunk; ut nuditatem videant;
he lets go the hold he has of them for a time, and leaves them to
themselves; and that which was their sport, is now their fault and their shame.

I say therefore again, consider your selves.

When thou see a drunkard shaming himself, as these here did, consider whose
light shines in thy understanding, to show thee how foul a sin that is;
consider that that is not enough; for all drunkards know that drunkenness is a
sin; consider whose grace it is that establishes thy heart, and keeps thee
from committing the same sin.

Insult not over thy brother, deride him not, discover him not to increase his
shame; rejoice not against him, rather bewail his sin with the tears of thy
soul, seek by the spirit of meekness to restore him, advise him friendly,
chide him lovingly.

For if thou who professest a severe life, and to make conscience of thy ways,
should fall into this sin thy self, thou would not only shame thy
person, but thy profession also.

And indeed thou carriest about thee corpus peccati, a body of sin; thou have
the matter and stuff of all sins within thee, if grace do not aid and assist
thee.

Lastly, let me admonish you; if any of you by occasion are over-taken at any
time with this fault, be of David's mind. Let the righteous smite me, suffer a
gentle chiding from your friends that love you, and hate that evil in you.

Take it for a favor of God, and think that it is he that speaks to you in
that reprehension.

Hearken not to those that flatter you in your sins.

Alexander in a drunken fit slew Clitus his beloved friend and faithful
Counselor.

Instead of reproving his fault, even then when he was fit to be wrought upon,
being sensible of it; he had three flatterers, Anaxarchus, Aristander,
Calisthenes.

Anaxarchus an Epicurean Philosopher, he told him that it was no matter, he was
a King, and he might do what he list.

Aristander a Stoic Philosopher told him that it was not fault, but fate that
killed Clitus.

Calisthenes a Courtier sought to heal the soar with sweet words.

That is not the way to bring us to amendment of our evils; a gentle discreet
reprehension well taken, will pierce the heart, and fill it with comfort. John
the Baptist, quis praenunciavit vobis ut fugeritis ab ira ventura? who has
done you such a favor to prevent such a danger?

3. Why does God inflict punishment?

God gives a reason of his severe proceeding against the Babylonians; the
violence of Lebanon; and the spoil of beasts which made them afraid, and for
the violence of the land, etc.

Showing that their cruelty to man and beast, had provoked God against them to
punish all their sins, their pride, covertousnes and drunkenness.

You have heard of their cruelty at large before to men, their very Cities were
built with blood.

The Apostle says, Has God care of oxen?

Here you see that God used the beasts of Lebanon for a terror to the enemy;
and now he declares himself an avenger also of their quarrel, because of the
cruel spoil that the Chaldeans did make amongst the beasts of Gods people.

God gave man Lordship over the beasts of the field, he made him a lord to rule
them, not a tyrant to destroy them.

One says upon those words of Solomon, Pro. 12.10
a just man regards the life of his beast; that seeing God has put the
beasts of the field in subjection to man, that he must show himself a lord.

1. In pascendo, providing necessary food for them. 2. In parcendo, using them
favorably. 3. In patiendo, bearing with them in their kind. 4. In compatiendo,
relieving them in their griefs. 5. In compescendo, restreining them from hurt.
6. In conservando, preserving them all we can.
This was the sin of the Chaldeans, they were destroyers, and sought not only
the ruin of the people of the land, but the destruction also of their cattle,
that the means of living, if any escaped to re-inhabit, might be taken away.

This justice of God in avenging the wrongs done to brute beasts, by calling
them to an account for their sins that did the wrong, does teach us

1. That the providence and care of God does stoop so low as the regard of our
catted.

Christ made good use of it, Considerate volatilia caeli, consider the souls of
heaven; God feeds them, quanto magis vos, how much more you?

2. It teaches us to use our dominion of these creatures moderately, lest the
Ass of Balaam do reprove his owner.

3. It shows how much God does make of any thing that serves him; the text
says that these beasts did make the Chaldeans afraid, and for this they
suffered predation, for the service they did to God and his Church against
their enemies, in Christ's argument, how much more will he defend us, if we
fight his battles against his enemies?

4. We learn here that when God comes to execute vengeance, he surveigheth
the whole catalogue of offenses; and as he says in David, I will reprove thee,
and set them in order before thee; the wrong to the Cities, to the men, to the
beasts, to persons, to places, all comes into an account, and the offenders
shall smart for all.

Verse. 18. What profits the graven Image, that the maker thereof has graven
it? the molten Image, and a teacher of lies, that the maker of his work
trusts therein, to make dumb Idols? 19. Woe unto him that says to the wood,
awake; to the dumb stone arise, it shall teach; behold it is laid over with
gold and silver, and there is no breath at all in the midst of it. 20. But the
Lord is in his holy temple, let all the earth keep silence before him.
HEre God denounces his judgment against their Idolatry. The words of this
text have no obscurity in them. Thus much then shall serve for the opening of
this text, that all this commination of woe and judgment, of which you have
heard, is the voice of the true God, declaring his just proceeding against the
sins formerly mentioned, and to this purpose he does here lay open the vanity
of false gods.

What profit can there come says he of a graven Image, that the maker thereof
has graven? he asks men this question, and appealeth to the light of
natural reason; can that profit a man, meaning in the power and goodness of a
Divine nature, which is the work of a man's hands? be it either a graven image
wrought upon by art of the workman, or a molten Image cast in any metal: can
this profit a man?

He calls the Image thus carved, graven or molten, a teacher of lies, for it
is a mere illusion that any man should so befoole himself, as to believe that
such an artificial composition wrought by the hand of man, should be esteemed
a god.

This is amplified, and the wonder increased, for though other men may be
carried away with a superstitious overweening of such an Idol; yet that the
maker of it should trust in it, who when he was at work, peradventure as the
Poet says, Incertus scamnum faceretne Priapum, maluit esse Deum. It was at his
courtesy whether it should be an Idol or some other thing.

Therefore verse. 19. God says, Woe unto him that says to the wood awake, and
to the dumb stone arise; that is, woe to him that trusts to an Idol for
defense against evil, or deliverance out of danger; for that is one of the
uses that is made of Idols to succor in time of distress, as the Disciples
did awake their Master in a storm.

You see that when the workman has put his hand upon it, and showed his best
skill, here God does call it wood, and a dumb stone still.

He proves it thus. It shall teach, although it be dumb, yet the dumbness
thereof shall declare it to be an inanimate impotent thing: For howsoever the
matter of the Idol, be it wood or stone or metal, be laid over with gold and
silver, as superstition is costly enough in adorning their gods, yet there is
no breath at all in the midst of them, and having no life in them, they have no
power to give help to them that serve them.

Verse 20. But the Lord is in his holy temple; for having showed the vanity of
Idols, he comes now to reveal himself to them.

This some understand, that the Lord is in heaven, the temple of his holiness;
and though the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, yet he has said, Heaven
is my throne; and Christ teaches us to say, qui es in caeli, who art in heaven.

So the temple at Jerusalem, where he said, I will dwell, is the temple of his
holiness; and as the Babylonians and other heathen had their Idols and their
Temples for them to which they did resort; so he produces in opposition to
them the God of Israel in his holy Temple, to whom the Jews may resort for
help against all their enemies.

Let all the earth keep silence before him.

In which words either he discourageth all power that should rise up against
him; or he requires the voluntary submission of the earth to him as to the
supreme Sovereign of all the world: for

Keeping silence is a sign of reverence and submission, as Job speaking of his
former glory, when God had abased him, says, that when he came forth,

The Princes refrained talking, Job 29.9.
and laid their hand on their mouth.

De verbis hactenus.

The parts of the text are two 1. False-worship. 2. True Religion.


In the first, 1. Peccatum, that is, idolatry. 2. Poenae: Vae Woe.


In the first, here is 1. A description of the idolatry of the heathen Babel.
2. A derision of the idolaters.


1. Idolatry is a trust in, and an invocation of graven and molten images, dumb
idols.

First here is trust then follows invocation, and that is the Apostles method
in all religious adoration. How shall they call on him in whom they have not
believed? Romans 10.14


This does open to us the occasion of this last imputation to them of idolatry;
for what has made them so proud, so cruel, so covetous, so voluptuous, as the
opinion that they have in the protection of their gods? therefore now at last
God overthrows that also, and does show them that in religion they are most
of all wrong.

If you desire a general definition of idolatry, which comprehends all kinds,
I think this is full of comprehension. It is Cultus Religiosus exhibitus
Creaturae, A religious worship given to the creature.

Learn then that no nation of the world did ever deny a divine Power, but
acknowledged some God in whom they trusted, and whom in their necessities they
called upon; and because this invisible Godhead was out of sight, they devised
idols, which they erected for representation of their gods, which they also
worshipped with divine honors, and this we call idolatry, or the worshipping
of idols. They saw that there was much to do in the Government of the world,
and therefore they adored many gods, as thinking it too much to believe any one
God able to manage the universal Government of all things.

These gods they represented some forms either cast in metal, or graven in
gold, silver, wood and stone: this they call (...), ab (...), video to see,
signifying somewhat that was to be seen; for they walked by sight and not by
faith, and would have somewhat to see before they would worship.

2. The vanity of this worship is derided here, because this idol which they
worshipped could profit them nothing; for no man would do service, where
nothing is to be gained by it.

He proves that it cannot profit.

1. Because it has a Maker; for so there was a time when it was not; and how
can he profit a man, that is beholding to man for his making? 2. Because every
idol is a teacher of lies; for it teaches a man to trust in his own work, and
is a mere illusion, planting his trust, and directing his worship in and to
that which is able to do him no good when he needs. 3. Because these idols
are dumb, and can give man no answer to his demands or Petitions. 4. Because
when man has bestowed his workmanship upon it, and all his cost in over-laying
it with gold and silver, it is yet a dumb statue, it has no life in it; there
is no breath at all in the midst of it. So that the doctrine of this place is;
Idolatry is a grievous sin.

The reasons to prove this are great;

1. In respect of God; there is no sin that does more dishonor God; because
this does as it were un god him, and sets up the creature in the place of
the Creator, at once breaking the two first Commandments of the first. Table of
Gods holy Law. 1. Thou shall have no other gods but me. 2. Thou shall worship
no graven image, etc.
But this reason God omitteth, as having now to do with those who knew not the
true God.

2. He urges a second reason; this sin is against them that commit it; for
they trust in, and call upon that thing which cannot profit them; the two great
acts of Religion cast away and lost, that is, trust and invocation.
This is a great Argument in our temporal affairs; for will a man bestow his
time, his labor, his love and service, where no profit is like to arise to him?

But this kind of idolatry is so extinguished by the light of the Gospel, and
so little cause of fear of it, that I need bestow no time nor pains on it; for
there is none of us, who does not confesse' one God in three Persons.

But there is an idolatry amongst those that call themselves Christians, and
would have none be the Church of God but themselves, that is the Church of
Rome, and though they protest against it, and plead not guilty to our
accusation, yet the evidence of truth will convince them of it.

Under the name of idol, Cardinal Bellarmine does understand only falsam
similitudinem representantem id quod revera non est, a false similitude
representing that which indeed is not, as the dols. He says the heathen did
represent fained gods, such as never were; but were only the fictions of humane
device; they have none such.

Theirs are imagines: imago ab imitando, of imitating, and they be
Counterfeits, representing in similitude such Persons as have been, and have
lived in the world.

So idols they defy, images they embrace. In this very beginning of their
defense, both absurd in the strife of words, making distinction where there is
no difference, for (...) is properly a visible Representation, and so is an
image, and therefore both in Greek, Latin and English one and the same thing;
but the custom of speech has impropriated certain words to set fict^ons, as
that an image is the representation of any thing, but an idol is commonly taken
with us for the representation of some thing that is worshipped.

Therefore the best part of the Papists defense of their Religion against our
imputation of idolatry, is this.

1. That for the images that they do retain, either in the Churchoratories, or
in their private use, they know them in their matter to be no other then the
creatures of God, of wood, stone, metal, or some other mixed matter; they know
them to be in their forms the art of the workman; they do know and confess
them to be dead, inanimate, senseless things in themselves, and they protest
against any adoration of them as much (they say) as we do. Here Cardinal
Bellarmine speaks for the rest, and he will charge the Protestant Church with
slander in this point and say there is no such matter, they do not worship any
idols.

He complains, that by this slander, some of the Protestants have so
distasted the Religion of Rome to many that knows it not, that though they do
hear of worthy men amongst them, who for gravity of manners, holiness of life,
and all exemplary virtues deserve reverence and respect, yet our opinion of
their idolatry distasteth them so to us, that we will not hear them speak.

2. They answer, that their images are of two sorts which they use in divine
worship.

Either they be of God, or of the creature.

In the images which represent God, they only do worship God in the Image, not
the Image it self with Holy-worship.

In the images of the Creatures, as of the mother of the Lord, Angels and
Saints, they do but honor God in his Saints; and in their invocation they use
them but as means of quickening their memories, and turning up their devotions
by that which the eye beholds: and God loses no honor by it to have so many
means used to him.

This is that which they give out for themselves, we charge them that they
adore creatures, and give divine Worship to Images, s the heathen did.

For it is plain that they worship the wood of the Cross, in that they speak
that to the Crucifix, which can only be applied to the Cross it self and not
to Christ, Salve crux spes unica. They add, thou only were worthy to bear the
ransom of the world O faithful Cross. Which agrees with their doctrine,

That all the honor due to the Samplar is given to the image thereof.

And where they excuse their idolatry, that they do not worship the image, but
God represented in the image: if that be not idolatry, neither were the
Athenians Idolaters, who worshipped in their images the same God whom Paul
preached. Act. 17.23.


Neither were the Israelites idolaters, who worshipped the true God in the
Calfe which Aaron made; for they could not be so ignorant as to ascribe their
deliverance from Egypt to such a thing as Aaron could make.

This doctrine and practice of idolatry in the worship of images came in by
little and little into the Church of Rome; for it is clear that there was a
time wherein there were no images at all known in the Church.

There were some desirous then to bring them in, but the council of Eliberis
decreed that no picture or image should be brought into the Church lest it
should be adored.

And Epiphanius finding an image painted on a cloth, Can. 36.
hanging in a Church, rent it down, and said it was against the Authority of
Scriptures that any image should be in the Church.

Saint Origin says of his time, Con. Cells. l. 7.
nos imagines non adoramus, we do not worship images. Eight hundred years after
Christ the second Nicene Council set up images; but

The Council of Franckford, which was a general Council, and where the Popes
Legates were present, repealed it, and affirm,

The Catholic Church does affirm, that mortal man ought to worship God, not
by images and Angels, but by Christ our Lord.

And whatsoever the practice of the Church of Rome now is in the use of them,
they shall never be able to reconcile the judgments of their best learned
concerning them. For

Some condemn all divine adoration given to them some condemn external bowing
before them, some confess that the ancient fathers condemned them, some think
their use dangerous.

And they which have gone farthest in defending them, have done it by so nice
distinctions, that the common People cannot understand how to beware of
idolatry, themselves* not understanding themselves therein.

Even in the administration of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, they are
idolaters in worshipping the host; which I prove from Cardinal Bellarmines own
pen De justif. lib. 3, cap. 8.

Ne que potest certus esse certitudine fidei, se percipere verum Sacramentum,
cum Sacramentum sine intention ministri non conficiatur, and intentionem
alterius nemo videre potest. And thus much Garnet the Provincial did
ingenuously confess upon his private conference with some of our Bishops.

Wherefore how they can excuse their idolatry in the worship of the elevated
host, I cannot see, seeing they worship they know not what.

Any man may easily conceive that they do carry a corrupt mind that way,
because in all their Catechismes set forth for the institution of young
beginners, they do leave out the second Commandment quite, and to make up the
number they divide the tenth Commandment into two.

Now having convinced them of idolatry which is the high sin against God, and
touches him in his Majesty and Glory, we see how dangerous a thing it is to
have conversation with such, least we receive of the plagues due to them.

Though the Church of Pergamus did hold fast the name of Christ, and denied not
his faith, yet had the Lord something against her; Rev. 2.14.
Because she had there them that held the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak
to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things
sacrificed unto idols, and to commit fornication.

The same quarrel had our Lord to the Church at Thyatira, in which, though he
approved her works, and charity, and service, and faith, and patience, yet he
says,

Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer that
woman Iezebel, who calls her self a Prophetess, Rev. 2.20
to teach and to seduce my servants, to commit fornication, and to eat things
sacrificed to idols.

We have no law to favor idolatry, or idolatrous meetings to mass; we have
severe laws against them, yet it is in sight that Mass is frequented by
multitudes of all sorts, in the sight of Israel, in the sight of the sun,
whence this boldness grows we cannot judge but from ^n negligent execution of
our godly and just laws.

Have we forgotten 88? have we forgotten the fifth of November. 1605? do we not
believe experience?

Were not the Canaanites whom Israel suffered to live amongst them against the
Commandment of God, Jude 2.3.
thorns in their sides, and pricks in their eyes, and were not their gods a
snare to Israel?

Is not Popery a dangerous religion to the Sovereign Authority of the King,
setting the Pope above him to overruled him, and to deprive him of his Crown,
if he be not for his turn?

Is not Popery a professed enemy to the Religion that we profess? light and
darkness, God and Belial may as soon be reconciled; and therefore an enemy to
our Clergy, who are all armed with the Word of God against it.

Or is it good and wholesome doctrine which the Anabaptists this last year
tendered to the King, Prince, Nobility, Judges and Commons of Parliament? that

Freedom of Religion is not hurtful to any Commonwealth; or that

Freedom of Religion depriveth not Kings of any Power given them of God.

The times are foul; God is much dishonored; where the fault is, and of whom
the Church and Religion has cause to complain, is not so much our duty to
enquire, as to pray to God to amend all. I Will tell you where you shall have him.

2. The punishment of this sin is expressed in one word, Vae Woe, and it
contains the whole Cup of Gods indignation.

1. In this life, they trust in that which cannot help them. 2. They invocate
that which cannot hear them.
They trust in lying vanities, and they forsake their own mercy: they are
taught by teachers of lies, and therefore the light that is in them is
darkness.

Baals servants cried from morning to evening upon Baal their god to hear them,
and it would not do; here is a double woe, 1. Loss of labor. 2. Want of help.
In the first, they bewray their folly; the god of this world has made fools
of them, for turning the glory of the invisible God into the images of
creatures.

But it the second they find the misery; for we cannot subsist without help,
and they trust to idols where there is no help.

But that is not all the woe: the Apostle tells us, that no idolaters shall
enter into the Kingdom of heaven; Gal. 5.20
this is terror domini, the terror of the Lord; for how shall they hope to
have glory witch God who deny glory to God? will God give them glory, that seek
to take away glory from him, or let them into heaven that would thrust him out?

Observe it in that law concerning graven images, God has more expressed himself
then in any of the rest, to be a God of vengeance; for there is ratio legis.
God is jealous.

And there is Comminatio judicis visitabit; and it goes in descent to the
third and fourth Generation of them that hate him. Observe he calls them such
as hate him.

There is a promise, He will show mercy to thousands of them that love him.

And I conceive this added to this Commandment rather then any of the rest,
because Gods Israel did most often offend in this kind, by worshipping God in
creatures, and by performing external adoration to them, which is in this law
chiefly forbidden.

The fear of this woe has not wrought enough upon the Romanists who are guilty
of gross idolatry; so on the other side it has wrought too much upon some
zealous Professors, who fearing superstition and idolatry, dare scarce show any
external reverence to God himself, either when they come into Gods house, or
when they come to Gods Table.

Yet the Angel that would not be worshipped, said, Worship thou God, and that
is all the Church exacteth; not an inward Worship only, but an outward also
commanded in the second Commandment.

Verse. 20. But the Lord is in his holy Temple, let all the earth keep silence
before him,

The Temple of Gods holiness is understood here as you have heard, two ways.

1. For the Temple at Jerusalem. 2. For heaven.
In both let all tremble before him. This is the second part of the Antithesis,
True Religion, containing two parts.

1. Where God is. 2. What duty is owing to him.
2. He is in his Temple at Jerusalem, Vbi est.
and in all other Temples dedicate to his service.

For the Temple at Jerusalem, he appointed the making of it, and chose the man
to whose care he committed the trust of the work; David might not do it, but
Solomon was the man. When it was finished, and Solomon had assembled the People
to the consecration of it, and prayed there, God answered the Prayer of Solomon
with a visible expressure of his Presence: for a cloud filled the house; it was
filled with the Glory of God.

But some of our Sectaries say, there is no need of Churches for Gods public
service; there is neither precept nor example in Scripture for it, but the
words of Christ to the woman of Samaria leave it at large.

The hour comes and now is, John 4.23
when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth.

Saint Augustine calls this heresy in the Massilians, that they denied the
use of Temples, because Christ foretold that the use of the Temple at Jerusalem
should cease, which was a shadow of things to come.

In the Old Testament beside the Cathedral, and Mother Church, the People had
their Synagogues for their meetings to Gods service, which continued even to
and in Christ's time. Christ himself designed a place for that meeting, wherein
he celebrated the last Passover, and instituted the Sacrament of his Supper.

The Disciples had a place of meeting wherein Christ twice found them the first
day of the week.

The persecutions of those times gave no sudden liberty to settle a Church, and
to erect Temples, nor that I can read, for the first 200 years after Christ
were any Temples built.

Yet before the persecutions ceased, they had erected Oratories for their
meeting to Prayer and hearing of the Word; for in the tenth Persecution under
Dioclesian. Eusebius. 8.2
An. Reg. 19. Mense Martio, he made an Edict for the pulling down of the
Temples of the Christians.

But under Constantine, when Christian religion had the favor of Authority
regal, then Concurrebant populi ad populos quasi os ad os.

Ecclesiae quae antea impiis tyrannorum machinis destructae fuerant, redivivae,
etc. Then the People came together. Eus. 10.2.


And ever since the Church has continued this practice of maintaing Oratories
for the meeting of the Congregations for the praise and service of God.

There is warrant enough from the example of the Church, and the Authority
thereof to maintain this holy practice.

Those places be the Temples of Gods holiness, the houses of God separate from
all common use to the holy service of God.

And God who by his Omnipotency fills all places, is in our Churches by a
more special presence; for if the Glory of God filled the Temple in the time of
the Law, why may we not believe that in the light of the Gospel, he reveileth
his Presence more, because the place wherein we serve God is Gods house, and
all Civil and common use of it is resigned, to consecrate it to Gods service.

If God be present where two or three are assembled, surely where there is a
meeting of a full Congregation he is present with a special presence.

And therefore it has ever been esteemed a pious charity in those that have
been founders, enlargers, restorers, or adorners of Churches, as Saint Origin
says, quam gloriosum est si dicatur in Tabernaculo domini. Illius fuit hoc
aurum, hoc argentum, In ex. 25. Hom. 13.
etc

Rursus quam indecorum ut dominus veniens nihil muneris tui inveniat in eo,
nihil a te cognoscat oblatum.

Ego optarem si fieri posset, esse aliquid meum in auro quo arca contegitur:
Nollem esse infoecundus etc.

These houses of God are the temples of his holiness where the name of God is
declared to the Church, wherein God by his Spirit speaks to the Churches in
the outward ministry of the word; where the holy ones of God do speak to God by
the same Spirit in prayers, in hymns, and spiritual songs, where the
sacrifices of righteousness are offered.

And herein is that gracious Prophecy of Isay fulfilled which our Savior
alleges in the Gospel,

For mine house shall be called a house of prayer for all people,

Observe: Isa. 56 7.
here is not only oration, prayer, which is cultus divinus, divine worship, but
here is Domus mea, my house, a place designed for the worship of God, and that
for all people.

This cannot be made good in the temple of Jerusalem; nor in any one Church,
but must determine both the extent and dilatation of Gods worship, and the
designation of fit houses for the same.

Another like Prophecy we have before in Isay.

It shall come to pass in the last days that the mountains of the Lords house
shall be established in the top of the mountains, Isa. 2.2.
and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it.

And many people shall go and say, come ye and let us go up to the top of the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us
his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for out of Sion shall go forth the
Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

The common exposition is that after the return of the people of Israel from
the 70 years captivity in Babylon, then Religion and Gods Worship shall be
settled at Jerusalem.

But observe how this exposition shriveleth up the promise of grace; for this
is not all. He says this shall be (...) in the last time: and he adds that
all nations shall flow to it, and he says, not that one mountain, but The
mountains of the Lord shall be established; which must needs be understood of
the Churches of the Christians to which the faithful should resort.

For further proof hereof read Micha 4. where you shall find this Prophecy
totidem verbis, Verse. 1.2.
in so many words, and a commentary upon it, Micah 5. wherein he prophecyeth
the birth of Christ in Bethlehem.

In both these Prophecies we observe, that the promise of God has not only
assured the spreading of true Religion, but the assemblies of beleivers to
certain places for instruction, that they may be taught vias Domini, the ways
of the Lord.

Never was there Religion in the world, without some places of publick-Worship,
for meeting of people together: Even in Adams time, there was a place where
Adam and his children met to offer sacrifice, and Cains flying from the
presence of the Lord, was his wilful excommunication from that place.

And in truth they that would have no Churches, may as well cry down Religion,
and the public ministry of the Word, and pluck down the hedge which God has
planted about his Vine, and lay all common.

Understand us rightly; we do not affix holiness to the place, nor think any
special sanctity inherent in it; but seeing God is by a singular right become
master of the house, that is separate to his use, as the Apostle says, judge I
pray you, is it comely, that we put not difference between Gods House and our
own houses.

It is observed that Christ when he purged the temple, purged only that part of
the temple which was set apart to prayer, and hearing of the Word, because that
use of the Church was to continue in the time of the Gospel: and after he had
cast out the oxen and the doves, which were provisions for sacrifice, then he
cites that place and renews the sanction,

My house shall be called an house of prayer to all nations, which is a
sanctification of all Churches to the Worship of God. That this was so
understood,

Know that before they had any Churches built for the public exercise of
Religion, they had some places of meeting which they called Aedes sacras, holy
houses; of which the Apostle putting difference, says, have ye not houses to
eat and drink in? Cor 1.1^. 22.
despise ye the Church of God?

Here be our own houses for common and natural, moral and civil use; here is
the Church of God, the place of assembling of the Congregations to the Worship
and service of God.

No sooner is a place consecrate to this use, but it is a Temple of Gods

So when Jacob had set up a stone for a pillar, Genesis 28.19.22.
in the place where he dreamed and had the vision of the ladder, he called the
name of it Bethel, (...), Gods house. And after

At his return he came to that place, and having first put down all the strange
gods, Genesis 35.7
he built an altar to the Lord, and called it (...), the good of Gods house.

It is palestra in which we do meet with God to wrestle with him in our fervent
prayers and supplications; He by his word wrastleth with us to overcome both
our ignorance and impiety. And therefore as Jacob, Genesis 32.31.
so may we call our Church (...), the face of God: for there God did look upon
him.

And in the times of the Gospel these houses of prayer have had several tittles;

Aedes sacrae, in respect of their succession to them, and Templa, in respect
of their succession to that at Jerusalem. Tectum amplum, some derive it, and
(...). 1. Propter dedicationem. 2. Propter usum. 3. Propter jus perpetuum. 4.
Propter sabbatum.
For there is Dominica in Dominico, thence came the word Kirk; Yet, in use in
Scotland.

And Ecclesiae, in respect of the meetings there.

When David could not come to the sanctuary of God, he worshipped toward it.

Hear the voice of my supplications, Psalm. 7. Ps. 28.2. Dan. 6.10.
when I cry unto thee, when I lift up my hands toward thy holy temple.

Daniel being far from the temple, opened his window toward Jerusalem, and
prayed three times a day.

The Temple is a type of Heaven, where the Saints of God do meet to praise God,
which is the worship that is done to God in heaven;

And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying; Behold the tabernacle of God
is with men, Rev. 21.3.
and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself
shall be with them, and be their God.

This Mr. Brightman understands of the Church of the Gentiles, where God is
seen.

So does James Brocard an Italian understand it of the Church delivered from
Popery, and Mahometry, and all haeresie.

But Master Bullinger better advised, says, that as in the former part of this
Revelation hell is described; so in this chapter heaven is set forth;

And that as you see in the similitude of a tabernacle, so does Junius and
Napier well interpret this place.

I conclude then that all the Churches wherein the Christians meet to call upon
God, are the temples of Gods presence, wherein God is invisibly resident both
to give his Spirit where he thinks good, and to direct our service of him,
and to receive our prayers and sacrifices of thanksgiving: and to communicate
to his servants the ordinances of his grace, the means of their salvation.

2. As God is in these temples made with hands, and declares his presence in
his house, in his Word and Sacraments, and in the solemn meetings of his
children; so is he in heaven which is his highest temple, whereof these are but
types and figures.

We believe in him as maker of heaven, and we pray to him our father which art
in heaven; this place he himself calls his habitation.

I dwell in the high and holy place. 1. In heaven.

Yet as Solomon says, The heaven of heavens is not able to contain him. Isa.
57.15 2 Reg. 8.27.
So he is there as in the most excellent part of his creation, but not
comprehended there; for there he is most purely worshipped; thence comes our
Sicut in Coelo.

The heathen gods are no where in heaven they are not, that is the temple of
the true God; in earth they are not; for they are no gods that have residence
in earth, and have no power at all in heaven,

As the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 8.4
We know that an Idol is nothing in the world.

Here by the name of Idol is not meant, the material image representing their
god: for that is a bodily substance to be seen and felt, and it is in the
world: but he speaks it de numine, the divinity is a non ens.

For he adds that there is no God but one; and whereas many be called gods in
heaven and in earth, as there be many gods and many Lords; yet he says there
is but one God, the rest are nomina, not numina.

For there were that worshipped the, Sun the Moon and the stars; these as
creatures and second causes do us good, but they serve our God.

When our God is in his Temple, all those help to make up the quire of them
that praise him; For the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmaments
and the out goings of the morning praise him.

Therefore do we lift up our eyes to heaven when we pray, we say that every
good and perfect gift comes from above, from the Father of lights.

Yet is not God so far off, but that as heaven is his throne, earth is his
footstool.

The Lord looks from heaven, Psalm. 33.13.
he beholds the sons of men. He is not so far off but if we pray to him,
Prope est invocantibus ipsum, he is near to them that call upon him.

And in this respect all the earth is a common oratory, so is the sea, for our
prayers.

But as the perpetual duty of a Religious service of God, which does require
holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives, does not take away the
particular duty of the Sabbath: neither does the great hahitation of God in
heaven abate any thing of his special presence, both in the temples dedicated
to his service, and in every particular person which does belong to the
election of grace.

For so God says, I dwell with him that is humble and contrite in heart: and
he says so presently after he had said, I will dwell in the high and holy
place: in so much as St. Augustine upon those words of David, exaudivit de
templo sancto suo vocem meam, says

Exaudivit de cordo meo in quo habitat Dominus vocem meam. For know you not
that you are the temples of the holy Ghost, and that God dwells in you, etc.

God is in heaven, Per specialem gloriam.

He is in our Churches, per specialem cultum.

He is in our hearts, per specialem indulgentiam.

He is in his Word, per specialem illuminationam.

In a word wheresoever is cultus dei, there is vultus dei.

The use of this point is taught in the Text, it is the second part of my Text.

2. The duty: Let all the earth keep silence before him. This as you heard, is
a postulation of reverence; he does not put us to silence that we shall say
nothing, for he has commanded us to call upon him, and invocation is a note of
his children; He says he shall call upon me, and I will hear him. The wise
man does help us to expound this Text: Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not
thine heart be hasty to utter any word before God: for God is in heaven, and
thou upon earth, Eccles. 5. Reg. lib. ver. 2. Genesis 5.1.
therefore let they words be few.

So that temerity and rashness is here forbidden, and reverence and holiness
required.

1. Let us consider God in our Churches, the temples of his holiness, there we
are taught.

1. Take heed that thou have not an unreverent opinion of the house of God. St.
Paul says, despise ye the Church, that is, the place set apart for the worship
of God? and that he means so, the place and not the company,

So Theophil. loco ipsi infertis injuriam, you do wrong to the place, Lyranus,
est contemptus ecclesiae quae consecrata est divinis usibus, the very words of
that Text do show it: For our own houses, and Gods house, our houses for our
common meals, and Gods house for the Supper of the Lord, are compared together.

2. There must be in us a love of those houses of God; God said of his holy
City where his Temple was built, here will I dwell, for I have a delight
therein.

It is David's protestation for Jerusalem, For the house of Gods sake I will
seck to do thee good.

The heart never more desired the waterbrooks then he did to go to the
Tabernacle where God was; my soul longs and faints for them. I was glad
when they said to me, come, we will go up to the house of the Lord.

3. Let us prepare our selves before we come to Gods house; for he is present
there; come not hand over head as thou would go into thine own; house;
consider if thou were to go before thy Sovereign King, how thou would
compose thy self that nothing in thy apparel, in thy gesture, in thy
countenance, in thy words might give him offense. Will thou do less when thou
art to appear before the Lord of Hosts, who is the King of glory? Micah says,

Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord, Mich. 6.6.
and bow my self before the most high God? shall I come before him with burnt
offerings?

The old law was, None shall appear before me empty.

When Iesse heard that David his son was sent for to King Saul, 1 Samuel 16.20.
I-sse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle on wine and a kid, and sent
them by David to Saul.

So Jacob sent a present to Pharaoh when his sons went the second time for
corn. Solomon says, and it is no news in our times.,

A reward in the bosom pacifieth strong wrath; we know what cause we have
given our God to be angry with us, let us think of it when we are to come and
stand in his sight at Church.

Manus in sinu tuo, manus in sinu dei.

He is not ashamed to ask it, fili praebe cor.

4. Take heed to thy foot when thou entrest into the house of God, for the
place where thou art entering is holy ground, put off thy shoes, that is, all
earthly and carnal affections, and say with Jacob, Genesis 28.
quam terribilis est hiclocus! this is no other but the house of God, porta
coeli.

5. When thou art entered into Gods house, remember thou art come before the
face of God and his holy Angels, into the place where God's honor specially
dwells.

1. It is enough thy heart be reverent, let thy outward man express it also,
do not think that because the Papists do superstitiously adore the Crucifix,
and the Altar, and idols therein, therefore it is superstition to do worship to
God; every man that comes into another house, does in good manners salute the
Master of the house where he enters the same; may not a visible worship be due
to the invisible God! O come, let us worship, and fall down, and kneel before
the Lord our Maker.

It is a godly custom if done in zeal of Gods glory, with devotion, and not in
a customary formality, to sanctify our entrance into Gods house with Prayers,
to fall low upon our knees before God, to invocate him for his blessing upon
our selves, upon our Minister, upon the whole Congregation.

2. Learn of the Apostle, let all things be done decently and in good order;
compose thy outward man to all due reverence, and conformity with the holy
Congregation, and thine inward man to all zealous devotion; remember the
meetings of the Saints in the primitive times of the Church, (...). Do not give
God thy knee, and thy tongue, thine eye, thine ear and thy hand, thy whole
outward address, and keep thy heart from him, and let thy thoughts go and
wander from the service thou art about.

Confess your sins together, pray together, give thanks together; confess
your faith the common faith together, hear the Word together both read
distinctly and preached profitably.

Remember that God speaks in the Ministry of his Word, and say with David, I
will hear what the Lord God will say.

Gather Manna whilst you may for you and your houses.

Take heed that Satan cool not your zeal of Gods glory, by suggesting
irreverent opinions of the Prayers, and form of service of the Minister, of
the Ceremonies of the Church, or uncharitable opinions of the Congregation.

For all these be whips of Satan's twisting to whip thee out of Gods Temple, and
to make the ordinances of God ineffectual.

Bring with thee an humble and contrite heart, and say within thy self, as St.
Paul did, I am the worst of sinners, I am the worst Person in all this
Congregation, for I know mine own wickedness, and my sin is ever against me.

Bring faith with thee that will show thee the glorious and gracious face of
God; by that eye thou shall see the son of God making intercession for thee,
and thou shall feel the spirit of God helping their infirmities: mingle faith
with thy hearing, and the word shall profit thee.

Hide the word in thy heart, be not like a leaking vessel, to let it out as
fast as it is poured in.

Take heed of the cares of this life and voluptuous living, least they choke
the good seed of the Word, when it comes up.

In thy whole carriage at Church, consider that the service is public; hoc
age, do all thou do at Church according to the occasion, separate not thy
self from the body of which thou art apart, by reading praying, or any other
meditation, which may divide thee from the Congregation.

Tarry it out to the end, and depart not without Gods blessing pronounced by
his Minister, to whom he has given power from above to bless in his name.

2. God is in his holy Temple, Let all the earth be silent before him.

This serves for the direction of our whole life; for 1. This dwelling of God
declares his Omnipotency. The Lord is in heaven, he does whatsoever he will.
The earth is but as the drop of a bucket, compared to the unbounded, unsounded
ocean of his fulness of power and strength. 2. This dwelling declares the
graciousnesse of God; for every good and perfect gift comes from above; and
unless the heavens hear the earth, the earth perishes utterly. 3. This
dwelling declares the Omniscience of God; there God stands in the
Congregation of God as upon a watchtower, and from the heaven the Lord
beholds the earth: the eye of the Lord is over all the world. 4. This
declares the eternity of God; so he says, The high and lofty that inhabiteth
eternity, which makes his purpose established with steadfast decree, Isa. 57.15
without variablenes or shadow of change, a God that repents not, his gifts
and calling are without repentance. 5. This declares the wisdom of God; for
the Master of that house is the wisest; as the Prophet says of him, He that
rules that house well where the Angels dwell that excel in strength, Isa. 31.2.
The Lord of Hoasts is his name, and they are his ministering spirits; how can
it be but his wisdom is incomprehensible, and his ways past finding out? 6.
This declares his justice; for there is the throne of judgment; heaven is his
Throne, and all the holy ones give him that glory,


Even so Lord God Almighty, Rev. 16.7.
true and righteous are thy judgments.

To conclude.

1. Tremble O earth at the presence of God who has such power, tempt not,
provoke not this power against thee, he can rain snares; but if he be thy
father, fear not; there are more with thee then against thee.

2. Love the Lord, who is so rich in goodness and mercy, who dwells in the
storehouse of blessings, and who gives liberally with an open hand, and
fills, etc.

3. Be jealous of thy words, works and thoughts before the eye of jealousy,
which sees all things.

4. Be strong, and God shall establish thy heart; for he is unchangable, whom
he once loves, he loves to the end, that is finis sine fine.

5. Let his wisdom guide thee, and seek that wisdom which is from above, ask
it of him; for he gives it liberally, and never upbraideth thee.

He upbraideth many with his gifts, never did he any with the gift of his
wisdom, for that cannot be abused, his grace may.

6. Remember that for all that thou have done in this life, God shall bring
thee to judgment, every man shall give an account unto God of himself; Felix
trembled to hear this.

Let all the earth keep silence before this God.

A COMMENTARY, OR EXPOSITION UPON HABAKKUK.
HABAK. 3.1. A Prayer of Habakkuk the Prophet upon Sigionoth.
THese words are the title of this Chapter, showing the contents thereof.

It is called a prayer, and it is a Psalm or Hymn, such as David's Psalms; the
Heathen Poets call them Odes, or Songs.

It is called the prayer or song of Habakkuk, both as composed by him, used by
himself; and addressed to the use of the people of God in their captivity in
Babylon.

It is a song upon Sigionoth.

The Hebrews affirm this song to be one of the hardest places to interpret in
all the old Testament, because it is full of dark Parables, such as could not
be well understood till he came, Who has the key of David, who opens and no
man shuts.

Our former Translation reads a Prayer of Habakkuk the Prophet for the
ignorances, and it is expounded diversely.

Some understanding it a prayer to God for the pardon of all those sins which
the people of God have committed ignorantly.

Others conceive thus, that seeing the Prophet in the behalf of the Church in
the first Chapter had taxed God, of too much remisness toward his people, in
bearing with their sins, and forbearing to punish them: and then again,
foreseeing how God in time would awake and punish them by the furious
Chaldaeans, he does as much tax the severity of God toward his Church.

Now, that God in the second Chapter has declared his justice in punishing his
people, and reveiled the decree of his vengeance against his and their enemies;
now the Prophet makes this recantation and prayer for the ignorances, because
they not knowing the secret purposes of God, have been so forward to judge his
ways.

But we must admit this confirmation, and the learned translators of the Kings
Bible, finding this to have been an error in the former translations, have
followed the Original more faithfully, and call it, The Prayer of Habakkuk the
Prophet upon Sigionoth. Some say, this Sigionoth was some special instrument
of Music, upon which this song was sung in the Church of God, and the last
verse of this Chapter says.

To the chief singer on my stringed instruments. For as Titleman says in this
Psalm. the Prophet, Canendo orat, orando canit. By singing prayed, and by
praying sung.

So the 70 read (...).

But Tremelius and Junius read, Oration Habak. Prophetae secundum odas mixtas.

That is not accommodated to any set kind of verse, but mixed of sundry kinds.

And so they do not understand the word Sigionoth to be the the name of the
instrument, upon which it was sung: but the name of the verse into which their
prayer is digested.

As the Greeks and Latins had their several kinds of verses.

Heroic, Iambick, Asclepediake, Phaluciake, and such like.

I cannot better express this to the understanding of the weakest judgment,
then by referring you to the varieties of verse in our English Psalms, that we
sing in the Church, for if they were all composed in one kind of verse, they
might all be sung to one tune.

Some have their set tunes and admit no other, because they are of a several
kind of verse. So I take it that this Sigionoth was the name of that kind of
verse, in which this Psalm was written.

Thus much of the words of the title.

The things which we may make profit of in this title are these.

1 That the Prophet composeth a prayer for his own use, and for the use of the
people in captivity. 2 That he puts this prayer into a song or psalm.
Concerning the first.

The contemplation of the Justice of God in punishing the sins of his Church;

The reason is, because these things well considered that God is just and
merciful, do breed in us Fear and Faith, which being well mingled in us,
cannot choose but break forth into prayer.

Fear discerning the danger of his power wisely, and Faith laying hold on the
hand of his mercy strongly.

For howsoever Fear be an effect of weakness, yet does it serve to good use in
the fitting of us to prayer; because,

1 Fear breeds humility, which is necessary in prayer, as St. James adresseth.

Cast down your selves before the Lord: and St. Peter, Jam. 4.10. 1 Pet. 5.6.
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God.

And howsoever the proud despise humility, as too base a virtue for heroic and
generous spirits, St. Peter commends it for a special ornament.

Deck your selves inwardly in lowliness of mind. 1 Pet. 5.5.
That fear which is in the reprobate, does drive them quite away from God, but
the fear of the elect brings them to his hand, and casts them at his feet,
the Publican full of fear, yet it had not power to keep him from the Temple,
nor from prayer, rather because he feared, he came to Church to pray.

2 Fear breeds in us a desire to approve our selves to God, and keeps us in
awe, setting both our sins always in our own sight, and our selves in the sight
of God, which shows, what need we have to fly to him.

3 Fear does serve for a spur, to put us on, and to mend our pace, that we may
(...), run the way of Gods Commandments; For men run for fear.



This also does break forth into prayer, as the Prophet says, I believed,
therefore did I speak.

Fear directed by Faith, will soon find the face of God.

For fear humbles us, faith directs this humiliation to the mighty hand of
God.

Fear makes us full of desire, faith directs our desire to God.

Fear makes us run, faith shows us the face of God, and bids us run
thither; and thus the contemplation of Gods justice and mercy does fill the
heart with zeal, and the spirit of supplications, as in this present example.

The Church sees God remiss in forbearing them, it feels God sharp in
punishing them, it discerns him just in avenging them, and it is promised
mercy and favor in delivering them, therefore the Prophet teaches them to
pray.

We are taught to think on these things, 1 Use.
which may move us to seek the face of our God, and that is a work for the
soul, when it keeps a Sabbath of rest unto the service of God, as appears
in the Psalm, Psalm. 92.
for the day wherein the Church does consider the justice and mercy of God.

Our idle and wandering thoughts run all the world over in vain imaginations,
we could not bestow them better then in sweet contemplation of the works of God
here in the government of the World.

Babylon.

This prayer being made for the use of the Church, 2 Doct.
as we have said, we are taught.

That the afflictions of this life cannot separate the society of the faithful,
but that even in exile, they will assemble together, to do service to their
God, and therein also to comfort one another.

1 The reason is in respect of themselves, the faithful are one body, and the
ligaments and bonds of their communion are love and peace, therefore much water
cannot put out this fire of charity, neither can the floods drown it; so
afflictions are in Scripture resembled in floods and waters. 2 In regard of the
service, they know it to be a debt from them, an honor to God, and though each
of them in several may do it, yet when a Congregation meets together, their
conjoined zeal is like a bonefire, for every ones zeal enflameth another.
What needed the faithful else to seek out corners and private places to
assemble in, in the times of persecution for their devotion, if single and
several persons, had been either so fervent in it self, or so acceptable with
God: so that before persecution ceased, they began to build Oratories for their
meetings.

Therefore, Ecce quam bonum, and quam jucundum: Behold, how good, and pleasant
a thing it is to see one holy congregation set upon God by prayer.

This prayer made for the use of the Church, does teach, 3 Doct.
that set prayers are both lawful and necessary to be used by the faithful;
both in their private and public meetings.

And this is proved by these examples in holy Scripture.

God himself prescribed to the Priests a set form of blessing the people,
which they constantly used, for God said to them.

Thus shall ye bless the children of Israel, numb. 6.23. etc.
and say unto them.

The Lord bless thee and keep thee.

The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be merciful unto thee.

The Lord lift up his Countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.

The 92. Psalm. is called a Psalm for the Sabbath.

The 102. Psalm. is a prayer for the afflicted when he is overwhelmed, and
pours out his complaint before the Lord.

Hezekiah the King and the Princes commanded the Levites to praise the Lord
with the words of David, 2 Chronicles. 29.3^.
and of Asaph the Seer; which is the 136. Psalm.

This was also used by Jehoshapht. 2 Chronicles. 20.21.


And in the Gospel the Disciples came to Christ and told him that John had
taught his Disciples to pray, and desired him to teach them, and he taught them
the Lords Prayer, which does imply, in the judgment of the best learned, that
John had taught his Disciples a set form.

The reasons are first for hlep of the infirmities of such as have good
affections in them but cannot so well express them that they may be directed,
lest they should utter any thing rashly of themselves.

For thus the spirit helps their infirmities by those who can direct them,
and in themselves using these set forms.

This much advances the service of God,

Herein we are like to poor petitioners that come to the King, who not
trusting themselves with their own suites, do get some wiser than themselves to
set down their minds, and then they have nothing to do but to importune the
Soverreign Majesty of the King to hear them, and to grant their requests.



This maintains outward Uniformity, when the whole Congregation join together
in an outward worship, and service of God.

This admonishes us.

1 To take it for a great blessing of God that he has provided these helps for
our weakness. 2 It shows us that God for our good does so labor to fit us
to his service, as that he is pleased that one of us be helpful to another
therein. 3 It reproves those who out of a presumption and overweening of the
graces of God in themselves, do not only despise those helps themselves, but
disgrace them in others: in which number we may reckon all the depravers of our
Church prayers. 4 Here the prayer of the Prophet is used.
This teaches that the fittest persons to be used for direction of devotion
are the Prophets, and Apostles, 4 Doct.
and Ministers of the word.

The reason is, because they are the most fit to speak to God for us, and to
teach us how to speak to him, who are set apart to speak to us for God and to
instruct us from him.

These are the Physicians of our souls, and should best know our diseases and
defects; and therefore best able to direct us to the remedy, for as in the
state of bodily health many superficially in-sighted in some empericall
Physic, do hurt themselves, by being their own Physicians.

So in the state of the spiritual man, many do overthrow their spiritual
health, by presuming to be their own Divines, and trusting too much to their
own skill.

Therefore it is wisdom for the flock to be directed, Habbakuk teach Israel
how to pray.

And for us howsoever the spirit of contradiction, which likes nothing long,
have labored long to disgrace our public Service, yet because many faithful
and godly Pastors of the Church have zealously joined their united forces of
piety and charity to compose this book, and the approbation and authority both
of Church and Commonwealth has commanded it to the use of our Congregations,
and the malignity of all the times since has not been able to remove it, let
us embrace it, and use it as Gods ordinance, sealed with the seal, the double
seal both of prescription of time, and good success in the use of this Church
of England.

2 He puts this prayer into verse, and makes a song of it, and fitteth it
to be sung by the Church with an instrument of Music, for so the last verse of
the Chapter directs it to the chief Singer on my stringed instruments.

This manner of praising God is ancient, and of much use in the Church.

Mr. Beza has taken the pains to collect fourteen songs, eleven out of the
old Testament, and three out of the new, which he has interpreted by way of
Paraphrase, and has annexed them to his Paraphrase of the book of David's
Psalms, and they are translated into English.

I shall not lose my labor nor you your time, to show you where you may find
them.

Exodus 1.15. The song that Moses taught Israel to sing to the praise of God for
their deliverance from Pharaoh and his armies, which is of such excellency,
being a type of the deliverance of the Church, from the adversary power of the
world, and the tyranny of the beast; that there is mention of it in the
Revelation. Rev. 15 3.
And they sung the song of Moses the servant of God.

Deuteronomy. 2.32. When Moses drew near his end he makes a Prophetical song for the
use of the people, both to commemorate Gods mercies to them, to lay open the
judgments of God against them, to chide their rebellions, and to comfort them
with types of grace in the revelation of the Messiah. And promising them the
gift of the spirit of repentance to return them into the favor of their God.

3 The triumphant song of Deborah and Barak, Judge. 5.
after the victory of Jabin, King of the Cananites. 4 1 Samuel 2.1. the song of
Hannah, the Mother of Samuel, in thanksgiving, for the blessing of her
fruitfulness, containing in it both thanksgiving, doctrine, and prophecy. 5 2 Samuel 1.19. the elegy of David, bewailing the death of Saul and Jonathan. 6 2 Samuel 7.18. A song of David in thanksgiving to God, after Nathan the Prophet had
from God told him, that the Messiah should be the Son of David. 7 Isaiah 5.
Containing the rebuke of the people, which is a Satyricall Psalm. 8 Isaiah
26.1. the song of the Church containing consolation and prophecy. 9 The song of
Hezekiah, when God comforted his sickness with promise of recovery. Isaiah 38.
10 The song of Jonah in the belly of the Whale. 11 Is this song of Habbakkuk
In the New testament we have three.

The song of the blessed Virgin: Magnificat. The song of Zechariah: called
Benedictus. The song of Simeon: Nunc dimittis.
Besides frequent mentions of singing to instruments upon several occasions,
where the songs themselves are not recorded.

From whence I gather these two observations.

1 That Poetry is ancient, and has been of use in the Church of God, and in
Gods service and worship, for these were the Anthems of the Church in former
times. 2 That Church-musique has had the same honor, both of reverend
antiquity and holy use.
The first point concerning the ancient, laudable, and holy use of Meeters,
which we call Poetry, so continued through the whole course of the Bible, as
you have heard, does show that God requires of us in his worship, not only
plain faithfulness, soundly and sincerely to express our selves in his
service: but he requires also that we show all our learning, wit, and art in
our compositions, according to the strict laws of a Verse: those were the
Ballads of former times.

And though vain, obscene, wanton, lying rithmes, now printed, do carry the
name of Ballads wholly, yet holy songs have been so called, if you look in your
old Church Bibles, that were first printed in English, you shall find the Song
of Solomon or the Canticles called Solomon's Ballad, or the Ballad of Ballads.
The reasons why God desired and delighted in this form of worship.

1 Because this gift of holy Poetry is of and from himself, he is the Author
of it, and the sweet Singer of Israel learned it of him, to honor him in
Hymns, therefore the Apostle calls them spiritual songs, that is inspired
by the Holy Ghost; and it is just that those spiritual graces, which derive
their being from him, should be consecrated in their use to him. And this is
clear, that there is no poetry so ancient as the holy Hymns of the Church. 2 St
Augustine, in his preface to the Psalms, says. Spiritus sanctus videns
obluctantem ad virtutis viam humani generis animam, and ad delectationes hujus
vitae inclinari delectabilibus modulii Cantilenae vim suae doctrinae
permiscuit, ut dum svavitate Carmine mulcetur auditus divini sermonis pariter
utilitas inseratur.
He says, he has observed that both young children, and those of more years,
who have at Church given no heed to the reading of the Prophets and Apostles,
have been so taken with the delight of the Psalms, that they have learned to
sing them at home, and upon the way, which also brought forth good effects in
them, by the power of that good Spirit which endited them; quia miscuit utile
dulci.

St Augnstiue resembles the wisdom of God herein to the art of the
Physician, who gives his patient things wholesome, but not very tastfull in
some sweet sirrups, or liquours, which may convey it without distaste into the
body.

3 This expressure of the zeal of Gods glory in verse, being the labor of the
brain, the marrow of wit, the earnest wrestling of the soul striving to
glorify God, as David says, With the best member, that we have, does best
present the inward man, the hid man of the heart, as St. Peter calls it, to
Almighty God.

The Apostle bids us to affect the best gifts. They that do only read a
Psalm, or a Prayer in a book, have done little, but they that love the dead
letter, an enlightened understanding, and sanctified affections, they pray and
praise God.

They that wisely compose their own meditations, and exexpresse their own
hearts in their own words, holy hearts in holy words, do mount a degree higher.

But they that honor God with art and nature, observing the laws of time,
number, and measure; as Bernard says, they have Eruditam mentem, a learned
mind, and they are come, ad provectam aetatem, to a ripe age.

Solomon excelled in this kind, whose Nuptial Hymn is called worthily
Canticum Canticorum. It is a good observation of St. Bernard, that the Proverbs
of Solomon, which is Disciplina morum, the discipline of manners, and
Ecclesiastes which is Disciplina amorum, the discipline of loves, the one
correcting our vain love of our selves, the other of the world, must go first,
and then our understanding and affections will be fitted to make such Verses.

4 This kind of honoring God in Ditties and Hymns, does please God in the
Church, because even such of the learned Heathen, who had no other light but
the light of nature, have yet in this kind honored the unknown God.

Therefore Lactantius writing to the Heathen to bring them to the knowledge of
the true God, proves the Divinity by the very testimonies of their Poets, who
in Poetical raptures have given testimony to this truth.

1 He names the most ancient of Poets that we do read amongst the heathen; De
falsa relig. 1.1. Jude 23.
Orpheus, who lived about the time when Thola judged Israel.

He did celebrate the honor of one God, whom he called (...), Quod ante ipsum
nihil sit genitum, sed ab ipso sint cuncta generata. He spoke also of the
immortality of the sons of this god.

(...), As Lactantius says, he could not rest in Jupiter, seeing he heard
Saturn was his father, nor in Saturn, who was said to be the son of the
heaven, nor in the heaven, which was but a part of the world, and eguit
authore: and wanted an author.

Haec illum ratio perduxit ad primo genitum illum deum, cui assignat and
tribuit principatum: this brought him to the first begotten god, to whom he
assigned primacy, he passes over Homer and Hesiod, as finding nothing in them:
but Virgil, who lived about the time of Christ, and excelled in Poetical
invention, has much honored God in his Verses, according to the Light that
shined on him.

I need not follow Lactantius any further, having in him overtaken the point
which I have delivered, that seeing God has had honor from Poetry amongst the
heathen, much more in his Church let him be so honored.

St. Paul has transplanted some of those flowers of Poetry, 1 Cor. 15.33.
which grew in the gardens of the heathen into his own holy Epistles.

From Menander the poet he took that excellent saying, that evil words do
corrupt good manners, Acts 17.28
and he took it out of a wanton Comoedy called Thais.

From Epimenides they took that imputation on them of Candie.(...)

Now since God had honor from heathen Poets, much more is he honored within
the Church, by those ravished spirits, within a lofty strain, sound out his
praises, or their own sorrows, and wants.

5 This kind of writing as it is most delectable, so it is most hard and
difficult of all others, the strict laws of Verse; exacting choice of words to
take their places in there measure, and the inspired wit affecting such
sublimity and svavity of matter and order, as is often involved in tropes and
figurative, and parabolicall Phrases; so that all readers of holy Scripture,
find the poetical parts of the Bible exceeding difficult, more then the
historical and moral.

Now, where most cost is bestowed of search, to find out the meaning of the
holy ghost, and most delight is reaped, it being found, that does tarry by us
better, and we hold it with strongest retention. This pleases God well, that
we hide his word in our hearts, that we do not run it out in a leake.

This doctrine of the holy use of Poetry in the worship and service of God
serves,

1 To stir us up to affect the best gifts of all in Gods worship: if there be
any way more excellent then others, to use that in our prayers, and
thanksgivings, and praises of our God.

I remember what David said to Araunah, the Jebusite, when he offered to give
him his threshing floor to erect an altar upon it for God.

I will not offer a burnt Offering to the Lord my God, 2 Samuel 24.24.
of that which cost me nothing.

Let it cost us the highest strain of our invention, the lowdest extension of
the voice, the earnestest intention of the heart, we have nothing good enough
for him, all we have is of him, let it be all for him, and for the advancement
of his glory.

2 Seeing this kind of exercise of Hymns and Psalms has been by Gods holy
Servants consecrated to the worship of God, let us bestow our wit and
inventions that way, not in devising Satyrs to gird and lash our Brethren; not
in amorous and wanton evaporations of our lustful affections; not in base
flattery of the corrupt times, and soothing of ungodly persons, not in
broaching and venting useless fictions, the scumme and froth of idle and
unsanctified brains, but let our wits and pens be exercised in glorifying of
our God, and our readings rather bestowed in the Psalms and Hymns of holy
Scripture, then in the vain and artlesse, dull and brainlesse Ballads and
Poems, which fly abroad amongst us, and devour precious time, which should be
better spent, and transport affections which should bend their strength to Gods
service.

2 I consider that this song of Habakkuk was directed to the Musician, to be
fitted to the stringed instruments, so to be, not only sung, but played in the
meetings of the Church: from whence I collect.

That Church-musique has the honor of antiquity, and of holy use also.

I need not prove this out of the old Testament, for the examples grow so thick
there, that he has read little in the Old Testament, that has not informed
himself of the Churches use and practice therein.

We have Myriams consort. Exodus 15.20. There were Timbrels and Dances, all the
women came out after them.

We have Jephthaes Daughters consort, Judge. 11.34.
meeting her victorious Father with Timbrels and Dances.

We have David's full example in the Tabernable: Solomon's constitution, for the
full Music of the Temple.

If any object, that these be those old things, which are done away, but now
all things are made new, those were but shadows and ceremonies serving only
for those times, but now antiquate and abolisht.

Let me tell them, that in the time of the Gospel, where the Church has more
cause of joy, then ever it had before, we can give no cause to abate any thing
of Gods worship.

Who can deny, but that the first tidings of the birth of Christ was proclaimed
by an Angel, and the Proclamation was seconded by a Quire of heavenly
Soldiers, even a multitude of them, the whole consort of heaven praising God.

The Anthume which they sung is upon record in the living Book of the Gospel.
Gloria in excelsis. Luke 2.14 Ob.


But yet the singing and Music of instruments in the time of the Law were
shawdows of things to come, at the coming whereof they must cease, whereof then
were they shadows.

It is answered of the inward and spiritual joy of the faithful for the
coming of the Messiah. Sol.


Had not then the faithful before Christ this inward and spiritual joy? and
why should we which have it more in the inward man, express it less in the
outward worship. Ps. 48.10.
David says, According to thy name so is thy praise to the ends of the earth.

Christ says, I have manifested thy name to them that thou gave me: does it
not follow well, where there is manifestum nomen; there should be, manifesta
laus.

The Church use to praise God with instruments of Music, the Church has more
cause to praise God since the coming of Christ then before, why should any
thing not repealed and forbidden to be used be neglected, to manifest Gods
praise.

Ob. But all things in the Church must be done to edification, Music does not
edify.

Sol. Then was it never of lawful use in the Church, and David and Solomon did
ill to bring it into the Tabernacle, and the Temple, and the Church did as ill
to contiune it, if it be without edification.

But if ever it seemed for edification, why not now as well as ever, it is the
same God that is now served whom they worshipped, and as Augustine, Tempora
variata, sunt fides vna, times vary, but faith is one: how, where and when did
Music loose that honor, that use, in the Church of God?

Ob. But it spends time which were much better bestowed in hearing the Word
of God preached.

Sol. I answer, it was used, when much more was to be done in the Church, then
we have now to do, and they thought it not tedious.

They had many Sacrifices to offer, and the time spent in prayer, and hearing
of the word; yet they use it.

Ob. But popish superstition has so defiled it, that it is not now fit to
receive it in our Christian Churches.

Sol. I find that our fathers before the coming of Christ were not so
squeamish, to like their own holy worship the worse, because Idolaters did use
some of their forms of worship; for

Nebuchadnezzar, made a golden image and that was worshipped with all kind of
still and loud Music, yet that did not defile the holy worship of the Church.

It is a dangerous rule of religion to menage it by opposition, they are not
all opera Diaboli, works of the Devil; which the devil does, for you know,
that he confessed Christ, which many Scribes and Pharisees did not. They that
condemn all that popish superstition has also abused, may want a candle to
light them to bed.

I profess sincerly, I cannot see but that the same motives that bgan to bring
in Music into the Church, may hold it there still for any thing that I can see.

1 In respect of God, to glorify him in the best manner that we can by any
gifts of art or nature. And Music being one of them, we see how much it has
decayed, and how much Students in that excellent art have been discouraged from
that kind of study since the Church cast out Music. 2 In respect of Gods
service, the more pomp and solemnity is used, the more glorious is the house
of God made and the more differing from our common house of habitation. 3 In
respect of our selves, we have need to have the help of outward things, to draw
us on with delight, to entertain our thoughts with cheerfulness, to incite and
move our affections, to quicken our devotion, and to blow the fire of our zeal,
and to relieve our natural weariness in Gods service.
These reasons brought in the song and instruments into the Church, and
gloriously was it settled in Solomon's time in the temple, according as his
Father David had left it in the tabernacle, where he designed to that service
men of cunning 288. 1 Chrom. 25.7.


Ob. But Christ and his Apostles, and the primitive Church, had no such music
in Churches.

Sol. They had no Churches, but in their meetings, they sung Psalms, so did
Christ and his Apostles in the room where he kept his last Passover, and in
the Emperor Trajanes time, Mat. 26.30
which was before the death of St. John. Pliny writes to the Emperor of the
manner of the Christians: this one amongst the rest, that, They did meet
together early in the morning, and sung Hymns to their Christ.

But after Religion had found favor with Princes, and began to appear in
peace, then came in Churches, and Church Ornaments, then were Liturgies
devised, and used, then were instruments of music intermixed with the
service, and God glorified in all.

St. Aug. Confess. 9. Cap. 6. Quantum flevi in Hymnis and Canticis svave
sonantis Ecclesiae tuae, voces illae influebant auribus meis, and eliquabatur
veritas tua in cor meum, and ex ea aestuebat, inde affectus pietatis and
currebant lachrymae, and been mihi erat cum eis.

In the next Chapter, he tells how the Arrians attempted the taking of Ambrose
B. of Millain, whom they accused of heresy, and Justina the Empress bearing
them out in it, they meant him a mischief, he went to the chief Church, and
much people followed him, ready to dispatch their holy Bishop, St. Augustine
and his Mother were amongst them, and there Aug. says; Tunc institutum ut
Hymni and Psalmi canerentur more orientalium Ecclesiarum ne populus moeroris
taedio contabesceret, quod ad hodiernum diem retentum est, etc. The Hymns and
Psalms were ordained to be sung, etc.

Ob. It is a means often to carry away our thoughts more with the tune then
with the matter. St. Augustine makes it one of his Confessions, that he was so
transported.

Sol. And may not the same happen in our singing of Psalms? let us not lay our
faults to the charge of the Church, what good shall we go about, but we shall
find Satan busy to divert us from it.

Obj. It is costly to maintain Music in our Churches, and that money were
better bestowed on the poor, and other better uses.

Sol. What, better bestowed on the poor then upon God himself: is the cheapest
religion the best? they had poor in the time of the Law, and yet that hindered
not the magnificence of the Temple, and the Ornaments thereof, and the
maintenance of Gods worship, alit pauperes 288. in Templo ut ante. The earth
has not the like glory now to show, as that of Gods House: And shall Aaron that
was but for a time be thus glorious, and shall Melchizedeck a Priest for ever
want honor.

It is true, that it has been policy in these later times, to keep the Church
lean, and to strip it out of all outward pomp, and to transfer Gods inheritance
into the hands of strangers. But remember the great Commandment, Thou must
love God above all things; and so doing he shall have the best of all that thou
art, the best of all that thou have.

Our prayer is. Sicut in coelo, as in heaven; and Christ promises is to the
just, that they shall be as the Angels of God in Heaven: Reve. 15.3.
there they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and David says,

Blessed is the people that can rejoice in thee: Psa. 89.15.
we have more cause to use both voices and instruments in his praise, because
he has redeemed us from Satan, has made us all Priests of the high God, to
offer to him the calves of our lips, and with such sacrifices God is well
pleased.

Ver. 2. O Lord, I have heard thy speech and was afraid: O Lord, revive thy
work in the midst of the years make known; in wrath remember mercy.
THis whole Psalm as it is in the composition of a mixed kind of verse, so in
the matter of it mixed, for it consists;

1 Of supplication and petition, ver. 2. 2 Of celebration of the praises of
God, 3 and 15. 3 Consternation before God, ver. 16, 17. 4 Consolation in God.
1 Of the supplication.

O Lord, I have heard thy speech; that is, all that thou have said in the
former Chapter, in defense of thy justice, and in prophetical revelation of
thy holy will, both concerning thy Church how that shall be afflicted, and
concerning the enemies of thy Church how they shall be punished in the end.

And I was afraid] fear came upon me when I heard thee recompt thy judgments.

O Lord revive thy work in the midst of the years] here be three quaeries; 1
What he means by the work. 2 What by the midst of the years. 3 How this
work should be revived.


1 Thy work] Lyranus says, Opus tuum in punitione Chaldaeorum, qued fiet
virtute tua magis quam humana.

2 Beza, by the work of God, here understands the Church of God, the people
of Israel.

So do Tremelius and Junius, for they parellel this place with those words of
God in the Prophet Isa, Ask me of things to come concerning my sons, Isa. 45.11.
and concerning the work of my hands command ye me. Where he calls his Church
opus manum, my work.

Thus does Master Calvin here understand statum Ecclesiae, the state of the
Church, which is called, The work of God, (...), as being the most
excellentest part of his work, wherein he is most glorified.

So David prays for the Church under that appellation: Psa. 138.8.
Forsake not the works of thine own hands. So does Isaiah name them.

Thy people also shall be all righteous, Isa. 60.21.
they shall inherit the Land, for ever, the branch of my planting: the work of
my hands that I may be glorified. Isa. 61.3.
So in the next Chapter Christ is anointed for the good of his Church; Isa.
61.3.
that they may be called the trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord.

3 Now there is such a correspondence between the head and the body, betvveen
Christ and his Church, that sometimes that which is literally spoken of the
Church, is mystically applied to Christ.

Jeremie expressing the great misery of the Church, Lam. 1.12.
brings her in thus complaining; Have ye no regard all ye that pass by the
way, consider, and behold, if ever there were sorrow like my sorrow.

Yet this complaint of the body is so fit for the head, the grief so
surmounting, that the uniform judgments of the Ancients of the Church have
applied them to Christ, either in his Agony in the Garden, or on the Cross,
where also he sed David's bewailing and passionate moan, My God, my God, Why
have thou forsaken me?

So the wonder of God in Hosea, spoken of Israel literally, Ex Aegypto vocavi
filium meum, Verse 11.1.
that God by mighty hand brought Israel out of Egypt, are applied and verified
in him, by the Evangelist St. Matthew. Mat. 2.15.


From hence the mystical sense of those words does express the head of this
body of the Church, that is Jesus Christ, for his Incarnation was the work of
God. He was made of a woman, and was made under the Law. So that this is a
prayer to God to send his Son into the world.

This agrees well with the comfort before given to them, The just shall live
by Faith.

That faith is in the promised Messiah, and that is it to which the ancient
Fathers do apply this place, as being the most excellent work of God, for the
good and comfort of his Church.

St. Augustine makes this whole Psalm a prophecy of Christ. Consideravi opus
tuum, says he;

Quid hoc est, Revel. Dei, 18.32.
nisi novae and recognitae salutis hominum ineffabilis admiratio? Idem in
Oratione contra Judaeos Arrianos, and Paganos, Cap. 13.

St. Jerome paraphraseth this petition thus.

Deprecor Domine, ut quod promisisti expleas, and finito tempore reddas
Christ^m tuum. Ribera, a learned Jesuit, says, that this Exposition does
pass most current with the ancients, he names Eusebius, Euthenius, Rupertus,
Theophilact: all of reverend antiquity, and one says, for the most part
seniores, saniores, the elder, the sounder.

Arias Montanus, one that has taken as much pains in the Bible, as ever any
one man did in latter days, says, this Note, this Song, does begin at the name
of God, which of all other in holy Scripture; Divinam naturam maxim
significant, does especially signify the divine nature. (...); a note which
God revealed unto Moses, a name for the most part used in the old Testament,
says he, Vbi negotium Messiae agitur, where the business of the Messiah is
handled.

2 What is meant by in medio annorum, in the midst of years: here I must give
you to understand, that the 70 Interpreters do render this part of the text in
other words, and in another sense, yet agreeing well with the mystery of
godliness, that is, the Incarnation of Christ.

They read, (...). Saint Augustine does receive that interpretation, so do many
more, for great is the authority of the 70. And we find often in the new
Testament, that their translation is cited by the Apostles, and not the
original in the old Testament.

I will not quite pass over this reading of the 70, as neglecting it, though
in the end, I do not mean to follow it, because many great judgments have
embraced it.

This is observed in these Interpreters, that often in their translations, they
do not strictly observe the words of the original, but rather expound the
sense of the place: often they do add something, especially in the prophecies,
which they think do point at the Messiah, whereby they declare, that that
prophecy is to be referred to Christ.

So do they in this place, and to show that they understand this place of the
Messiah, they add, (...).

Which St. Augustine does understand either figuratively, in medio duorum
Testamentorum, or literally, in medio Mosis and Eliae, with whom he spoke in
the mountain when he was transfigured: or, in medio duorum latronum, between
whom he was hanged, when he was crucified.

Others of late following the tradition that lay in the manger between an Ox
and an Ass, that were feeding there, understand these two living creatures, in
the midst of whom the Wisemen that came from the East, found Christ.

Yet Eusebius and Theophilact read not (...), with an acute accent in the first
syllable, which signifies living creatures, but with a circumflexe in the last
(...), which does signify lives, in medio duarum vitarum quia venit in mundum,
habens duas vitas, alteram mortalem and humanam, alteram immortalem and divinam.

I only make this use of these exposition to show you how of this old place
has passed for a testimony of the Prophets foresight and prophesying of
Christ.

But reading as we do in medio annorum, here also sundry interpretations are
given: for some do refer this to that time which St. Paul speaks of.

But when the fullness of time came, Gal. 4.
God sent his Son.

So the Prophets prayer is, that God would remember to perform his promise of
the Messiah, in medio annorum, that is, in the fullness of time; for it is
certain, that from Christ to the end of the world, the world is in a state of
declination.

Lyranus says, that these years here meant, are from the destruction of the
temple at Jerusalem, to the rebuilding thereof finished, for he says, there
were 52 years from the destruction of the temple to the first year of the
reign of Cyrus, from thence to the sixth year of the reign of Darius, were 46
years, for so long it is said the temple was in building.

In the midst, not in medio Geometrico, but Arithmetico, the Prophet prays
God to revive his work of restoring the people to their liberty and
possessions.

But I choose to follovv the Exposition of the 70 Interpreters, (...), cum
temporis opportunitas fuerit, when there shall be a fit time, which leaves it
at large to God to take his own time, and that seems to have been the
judgment of Tremelius and Junius, who render it interea temporis, as we in
English, in the mean time. So Beza.

Master Calvin does go with the former exposition of the fullness of time, for
he says, the Church was but growing and coming on till Jesus Christ came in
the flesh; but then it grevv up to a ripeness, so that the coming of Christ was
the growing up of the Church, ad aetatem virilem, to the age of a man.

3 Vivifica, revive, the margent reads, preserve thy work, that is, maintain
thy Church, and keep it from the power of her enemies, till thou sendest a
Redeemer to recover it from the injuries of time, and the violence of the
ungodly; for the time of the Church under persecution, is the vvinter of it, in
which it seems dead, and prays God to quicken and revive it by the sending
of his Son.

In the midst of the years make known, he re-inforceth his former petition,
now desiring that God would reveal his gracious purpose of succouring his
Church, and triumphing over the enemies thereof.

In the mean time, while thy Church is groaning under the burden of their
exile, make thy will known to them.

This favor of God vvil svveeten the adversity of their banishment, when they
shall know the loving purpose of God tovvard them.

In wrath remember mercy.

They confess, that they have given God cause of displeasure, and have
provoked him to wrath, they feel the smart thereof in a strange land, and they
have no plea but mercy, they dare not make so bold with him, as to entreat him
to turn away all his wrath from them, because they are so guilty to
themselves, that they have provoked him, and deserved his indignation.

Only they desire that in the midst of his wrath, he would remember mercy.

By wrath in this place is not meant any such affection in God, whereof his
unchangeable and constant nature is not capable, for God is semper idem, ever
the same, whom he loves, he loves with an everlasting love, and he cannot
at any time be angry with them. But whom he loves, upon occasion, he
rebukes, and chasteneth every son, whom he receives, and this love sometimes
bringing forth the effects of that which in man is called wrath, we speak
after the manner of men, and avouch it of God.

Thus then the text is literally to be understood, O Lord, I have heard what
thou have spoken in the defense of thy upright justice, I have heard what thou
purposest in the punishing, and in the avenging of thy Church, in the mean time
preserve it, and make it know thy love toward it, and whilst thou art
punishing of it, remember mercy.

The parts of this are two.

1 The preparation to prayer. 2 The prayer it self.
1 In the preparation, I observe Motum the motive. Metum fear.


2 In the prayer, I observe 1 Subjectum the subject. 2 Petitiones the petitions.


The petitions are three.

1 O Lord, revive thy Work in the middle of the years. 2 O Lord, in the middle
of the years make known. 3 In wrath, remember mercy.
First, of the preparation, 1 of the Motus.

O Lord, I have heard thy Speech.

The Word of God is well bestovved on them that will hear it with reverence,
and receive it with humility, here was a maze, the Prophet and the Faithful
of the land had lost themselves, they knevv not what to think, till they had
put the matter to God himself. Cap. 1. and God having made a full answer. now
the Prophet says in his own name, and in the name for whom he consulted God,
I have heard thy speech. All the Scripture is full of examples, of the Children
of God, hearkening to his word of precepts, and admonitions to us to hearken:
of promises to them that do hearken.

The reason is, because it is a special note of Gods children to hear his
Word, even as our Savior himself says.

He that is of God, hears Gods Word: ye therefore hear them not, Joh. 8.47.
because ye are not of God.

And now seeing God has given over speaking by miracles extraordinarily to his
Church. St. John says: We are of God, 1 John 4.
he that knows God, hears us, he that is not of God, hears not us, hereby
we know the Spirit of Truth, and the spirit of error.

The Spirit of truth is left in the Church by our Savior, and he speaks in
such; who by the Ordinance of Christ, are the Priests of the new Testament, of
whom Christ says. Qui vos recipit, me recipit: and qui recipit me, recipit eum
qui misit me: he that receives you, receives me, and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me: we must hear him, before he hear us, for St. Paul
tells us true, Romans 8.26.
We know not what we should pray for as we ought. The art of prayer, is not so
quickly learned as some forward proofessours make themselves believe. John
besides his continual preaching to his Disciples, taught them also to pray.

And never had any Disciples a better Master, then the Disciples of Jesus
Christ, yet they living in the ear of his Doctrine, and in the eye of his holy
example, were glad to come to him to be taught to pray, and he taught them the
Lords prayer privately, which after he taught the whole multitude in a Sermon
openly.

My observation is that his Word must minister matter to our prayers,

The reason is, because God hears not sinners, John 9.31.
and David says: If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear
me. But the prayer of a righteous man prevails much, Jam. 5.16.
if it be fervent.

Against sin we have no such remedy as the word. So David, Thy word have I hid
in my heart, Psalm. 119.11.
that I might not sin against thee.

Our Lessons from hence are;

1 We must take it for a great favor of God to us, that he gives us his word,
for that is a lantern to our feet, that is, our counsalor, as David calls
it.

This word is given us to profit withal, and it is deposited.

1 In the Books of the Canonical Scripture, which we have not, as the Church of
Rome shut up in an unknown language, but translated faithfully into our own
tongue, that all of us may be partakers of it. 2 As in the time of the law, the
Priests lips did preserve knowledge, and men were to require the law at their
lips, so in the time of the Gospel, St. Paul says, of the Apostles, and of all
the Ministers, that should succeed them in their office in the Church, 1 Cor.
5.19.
God has committed to us the word of reconciliation, he has so committed it
to his Son first, as he gave him power to transmit it in the Priesthood of the
New Testament; to all ages of the Church till his second coming.
The spirit which Christ left to comfort and instruct his Church, was not given
at large to all men, but in particular ordinance to them whom he sent, to teach
all Nations, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 3.6.
Our sufficiency is of God, who has made us able Ministers of the New
Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for the Letter kills, but
the Spirit gives life.

So we are the Ministers of the word that gives life, and there is no life to
be had but by our Ministry. This gives us interest in your affections, in your
understandings, in your goods, in your prayers.

2 Now we know where we may hear God, we are taught also not to neglect him
speaking to us, for as the Author to the Hebrews says, Heb. 12.25.
See that ye refuse not him that speaks: for if they escaped not who refused
him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from
him that speaks from heaven.

And the Ministers of the Gospel do speak even as if Christ himself spoke in
us, 2 Cor. 5.10.
we speak in Christ's stead.

But as in the time of the Law God sent his Prophets sometimes to such as would
not give them the hearing: so does he now in the time of the Gospel, but that
must not discourage our Ministry, at their peril be it, Gods Word will ever be
Gods wisdom, though the profane count it foolishness, and it will be Gods
truth though heresy and schism pick quarrels.

Therefore, if you would learn to pray, and be prepared for that holy worship?
hear Gods speech first, and that will teach you what to ask as you ou ought.
Hear the word from us as the Thessalonians did. 1 These. 2.13.
When ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as
the word of men, but as it is in truth the Word of God, which effectually
works also in you that believe.

2 Here is metus. I was afraid, the Seventy read; (...) I was in an ecstasy, as
St. John says, when he saw the vision of the Son of man, Rev. 1.17.
I fell at his feet as dead.

There were two things to strike the Prophet with astonishment; 1 The Majesty
of the Speaker. 2 The matter of the speech.
And both these must both meet in our understandings, and in our affections, to
enlighten and to move them, that we may know what we have to do, and with
whom, when we pray; that we may come before him with fear and holy
reverence.

1 The great glory and Majesty of God to whom we resort in prayer, is such,
as no creature can endure the sight thereof. The Angels standing before him,
Isa. 6.2.
cover their faces with their wings.

2 The matter of his speech contained in his word to the Prophet, is the sum
of the Bible. Justice punishing sin in his Church: Vengeance destroying the
enemies of his Church: and Grace redeeming his Church from the power of Satan,
by the glorious Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Quae. Why should the Prophet be afraid at this? here was matter of comfort,
the heaviness of the night; is promised the joy of the morning: The Church
though it must suffer for a time for sin, has here a promise of two main
consolations.

1 Their own deliverance from dangers, into a restitution of them into Gods
favor. 2 Their eye shall have their desire also upon their enemies, they shall
see the wheel of wrath go over them, and the Lord shall let out of their
throats the blood of his people, with which they have made themselves drunk:
all this is matter of joy, and what needs this fear?
Sol. Who can come without fear before him, that can and will do all this? for
if he be angry, yea but a little, they are blessed that trust in him, fear is a
proper passion of a true believer, and is inseparably joined with saving faith.

For seeing the bond of our union with Christ by faith, whereby he dwells in
us is.

Partly, the hold that he has of us by his Spirit:

Partly the hold that we have of him by faith.

The first is firm, Joh. 10.27.
There shall not any one pluck them out of my hand, he gives a strong reason
for it, for my Father who gave them me is greater then all, and none is able to
take them out of my Fathers hand. we are his gifts, and his gifts and calling
are without repentance.

But the flesh does put the Spirit to it so hard some times, even in the elect
of God, that the hold on our part is weak, which breeds fear, and that fear
makes us hold so much the faster.

From hence it comes, that all the intelligence between God and man does begin
at fear in us.

This is not the fear of an evil conscience, as it was in Adam, when he hid
himself from God, but the fear of reverence of God, and the good conscience of
our unworthiness being fallen from our original righteousness.

The Shepherds that were keeping watch by night, because of their flocks were
sore afraid, when they saw the light shining at that time of night, that the
Angel began with, Nolite timere, fear not, yet were they in the lawful
business of their calling. The blessed Virgin, no doubt, well and holily
employed, Zecharie the Priest in the Church about the occasions of his office,
yet all afraid.

This is the seasoning and preparing of the heart for God to be cast down
before him, it is humbling our selves under the mighty hand of God, and we
cannot pray as we ought without it.

When the Apostle says, we cannot pray as we ought, and that the spirit
helps our infirmities, he shows that such as he have infirmities and they
feel them, when they come to appear before God; and where infirmities are,
there must needs be fear, if they that have them be sensible of them.

Yea, I dare say, that they that come to prayer without fear, come without
faith, and all their prayers are turned into sin.

Ob. We read of coming with boldness to God. Because we have an high Priest
which is touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4.15, 16.
in all points tempted like as we are yet without sin. Let us therefore come
boldly to the throne of grace, that we may obtein mercy, and find grace to
help in time of need.

Sol. this is cleared by the same Author in the same Epistle, declaring how
many considerations must concur, as ingrediences in this our spiritual
boldness.

1 Let us draw near with a true heart. Heb. 10.22.
2 In full assurance of Faith. 3 Having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
Consciences. 4 Our bodies washed with pure water. 5 Let us hold fast the
profession of our Faith without wavering. 6 Let us consider one another, to
provoke to love and good works. 7 Not forsaking the assembling of our selves
together, etc. 8 Exhorting one another.
Let a man before he pray try his vvayes and examine his soul, upon those
interrogatories, and I dare say the best of us (if we sin not also in
presumption) will find himself short in every one of these perticulars of
that perfection that should accomplish boldness.

But having those things in some measure, and more in desire and endeavor, our
boldness must needs be as much shaken with fear as these graces in us are
shaken with infirmity.

And upon this fear our Church teaches us to pray to God in these words.

Pour down upon us the abundance of thy mercy, forgiving us those things
whereof our conscience is afraid, 12 Dom. post Trinit.
and giving unto us that which our prayers dare not presume to ask, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

And this some of our brethren have quarrelled, as a contradiction in our
prayers, because we say, we pray for tha we dare not pray for.

To whom, I answer, in these words of my Text; O Lord, I heard thy voice and
was afraid: In thy word, I see how corrupt I am, for that shows me what thou
requirest: my conscience fears those sins of which it is guilty, for which I
come to thee for mercy.

O give me through Jesus Christ our Lord, that which my prayer without him dare
not presume to ask. Here is spiritual boldness through Jesus Christ our Lord,
here is fear in respect of our selves; for we must serve the Lord in fear, and
rejoice in trembling: it is well that that is not branded with a mark of
contradiction.

We have to do with three sorts of persons.

1 The profane and carnal. 2 The generation the Wise man names, of such as
are wise in their own eyes, yet want washing. 3 The truly zealous faithful
ones that do worship God with fear and trembling.
First, concerning the profane and carnal.

These do not pray at all, the reason is, because they do not fear, Psa. 9.20.
of such David says, Put them in fear, O Lord, that they may know they are but
men: for when they know that, they will see and confess, that they have need
of help.

Thus was Saul converted, there suddenly shoon a light from heaven upon him, a
voice spoke to him, he was cast down to the earth.

Then trembling and astonished he said, Lord, Act. 9.6.
what will thou have me do? then was he fit to be wrought. To such we must
preach as Paul did to Felix of righteousness, Act. 24.25.
temperance, and the judgment to come: to put them into trembling, better to
put them between the two mil-stones of the law of Moses, and the law written
in their hearts, and to grind them as small as the dust of the earth, then to
let them make sin out of measure sinful, by holding out to be abominable,
and to every good work reprobate.

We cannot open the gates of hell too vvide for such to show them the anger to
come, a fit text for a generation of Vipers, we cannot lift up our voices too
loud in the deaf ears of such, to tell them their transgressions, and to put
them in fear.

David wept rivers of waters for such, and that is a good remedy, let the
faithful vveep for them, for (...) which signifies to vveep, comes of (...),
frango.

So when the man of God looked on Hazael, 2 Reg. 8.11.
and fore-savv the cruel butcheries, which his bloody hand should perform, he
wept, this weeping of the Prophet brake the heart of Hazael for the time, and
he said, Is thy Servant a dog, that he should do these things?

So St. Paul puts them together. What mean you to weep, and to break my
heart, Act. 21.13.
their vveping brake his heart.

The hearts of the profane are hardened with the custom of sinning. St.
Bernard.

Aperiatur vena ferro compunctionis, we must dravv blood of them, by the
preaching of the terror of the Lord to them.

This blood is the tears of compunction, of which David, My soul melts, or
drippeth for heaviness. St. Augustine says, that Lachrymae compunctionis be
sanguis vulnerati cordis, Epist. 199.
when the remembrance and consideration of their sins has vvounded them, and
left them half dead, then the good Samaritan will come with his Wine and
Oil, even the Oil of gladness, and the poor patient will say, Thou have put
gladness into my heart.

This was Saul's hard heart broken in pieces first, and he that before did carry
the cross of Christ to torment others, now rejoiced in nothing but the cross
of Christ himself, whereby the world was crucified to him, and he to the world.

Thus when the law has humbled the profane under the mighty hand of God, he
turns all into tears full of the fear of God, and vovveth with himself as
he did in the Poet, In fontem frontem, atque in flumina lumina vertam, then is
he fit to pray, and to call upon the name of the Lord, saying, Sana animan
mean, quia peccavi contrate, heal my soul, O Lord, for I have sinned against
thee.

2 We have to do with that generation, who are wise in their own eyes,
these have a good opinion of themselves that they know more then others, and
they are not in conversation like to the Publican, and therefore they look God
in the face, they dravv near to him, they stand and pray, these are so full of
the spirit, that they need no help in their prayers, they can pen their own
petitions, their hearts endite good matters, their tongues are the pens of
ready vvriters, they can talk with God Almighty ex tempore Dabitur illa hora.

Self-opinion is a kind of spiritual drunkenesse, and therein of like effect,
it makes men daring and foolhardy, the profane care not for God, there is no
fear of God before their eyes, these make two bold with him, they also must
take a little physic to purge the exuberancy of their presumption, we must
give them a doze of fear, and teach them to drink of the cup of trembling next
their hearts, there is no such antidote against tumor, as timor: swelling, as
fear.

It is the Wise man's counsel.

Be not rash with thy mouth, Eccle. 5.2.
and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before the Lord, for God is
in heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore let thy words be few.

He adds, Verse. 3.
a fools voice is known by multitude of words, that is further urged.

In the multitude of words there wants not sin. Prove. 10.19.


For this Christ teaching us to pray, begins at Our Father which art in
heaven, that we upon earth, might consider that he to whom we pray, is in
Heaven: that we might compose our selves with fear and reverence to come before
him, and to present him with our prayers.

And again, he comprehends all that we may ask of God in a very short
prayer, to teach us that our words must be few.

And to that purpose, in his Sermon he taught; Mat. 6 7.
But when ye pray, use not vain repititions, as the heathen do, for they think
they shall be heard for their much speaking.

They that come in presence of great persons, speak their words by number and
by weight, the very presence does stamp in them an impression of reverence and
fear: now seeing God to whom we pray is invisible, our faith must behold him
before us in glorious majesty, as he says, I have set God always before me,
and like Abraham, the nearer we come to his presence, and the more that we
solicit him, the more shall we be shaken with this holy fear; considering
him who dwells in the light, that no man can attein unto, and considering
our selves that we are but dust and ashes: the heathen could teach, deos cast
adeunto, let men go reverently, and inwardly cleave before their gods.

3 There are yet another sort of them whom their sins do oppress as a burden
too heavy for them to bear, whose hearts do smite them, and whose
consciences do accuse them, that though the zeal of Gods house do bring them to
Church, yet the fear of their unvvorthiness does make them stand a far off,
beating their breasts, and not daring to lift up their eyes to heaven.

These had need of comfort, we must labor to put metal into such, by telling
them that he whose face they seek is, God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3.
and the God of all comfort.

David, is a full example of a distressed man, Psalm. 119.107.
fearing and yet praying, for he confesses, I am very sore afflicted, yet he
prays God to quicken him, he says, My soul is continually in my hand, he was
even ready to yield it up, yet the comfort that he had in God established his
heart.

And herein God is most gracious, for when our sins come in our sight, and we
are horribly afraid of Gods judgments, even then God sends his Spirit to us,
not to take away our infirmities quite, but to help them, not to turn our
sorrow into joy, but to sanctify our sorrow, and to supply it with sighs and
groans, and this addition of fear and grief does also mend devotion.

To such we must say, that though he to whom we pray be in Heaven, yet he is
our Father, and though great and glorious be his Majesty, yet he is the
preserver of men.

David calls him our Sun and Shield, the brightness of this Sun may dazzle
our weak sight, but the protection of this shield will save us from danger.

Be strong then, and God shall establish your hearts, he shall anoint you with
the oil of gladness, and he shall say to your soul, I am thy Salvation.

2 Subjectum, Vide divis. supr. Page 29.

This prayer is for the Church, that is, for all those that then were the
visible society of such as worshipped the only true God.

It is the duty of every child of God,

The Church at this time was within a pale, and confined to the house of
Abraham, not in his whole blood, for Ishmael was excluded, in Isaac was the
promise, not in his whole blood; for Esaias was excluded, Jacob was Israel, and
prevailed with God, of him came the Fathers, and in his seed was the Church
continued.

This Church was now threatened with deportation, and sundry great judgments,
the Prophet teaches them how to pray one for another.

To this there are great motives.

1 The direction of Christ in the Lords Prayer, which calls God, our Father,
and in the process of it, shows that the Church of God, is still included,
Give us, forgive us, lead us not. 2 The content that we give to God, in these
general prayers, which the Apostle does well express. I exhort that first of
all prayers, etc. be made for all men: For this is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior, 1 Timothy 2.1 3.4.
who will have all men to be saved.

All are or may be members of the Church of God, for ought we know.

3 The benefit that we reap hereby is great, for thus we come to have our
portion in the charitable prayers of others. Ambrose, Si prote rogas tantum,
prote solus rogabis, H^xam 1.
si autem pro omnibus rogas, omnes pro te rogabunt.

4. It is a true rule, that extra Ecclesiam non est salus, without the Church
there is no salvation: Acts 2.47.
it is said that God added to the Church daily such as should be saved: the
reason hereof is, because Christ is no where to be found as a Savior but in
his Church, and the means of salvation, Preaching, Prayer, and Sacraments,
they are only found in the Church.
Without are dogs, enchanters, Revel. 22.15.
etc.

Christ is the good Shepherd, and he has his fold, all the sheep that are
without, must be brought to that fold, as himself says, alias oves habeo, quae
non sunt de ovili hoc, illas oportet adducere. I have other sheep, etc. they
shall hear my voice, Joh. 10.16
and there shall be one fold, and one Shepherd.

Therefore there is no safety in singularity, they that forsake the Church,
forsake the fold, the unity of spirit, not the singularity, is the bond of
peace.

We are members one of another, the common safety of the body communicates
particular safety to all the members of the body.

In the temporal state, the peace of particular persons is included in the
peace of the whole kingdom, therefore Jeremiah says to the Church then in
deportation.

Seek the peace of the City, Jer. 29.7.
whether I have caused you to be carried away captives, and pray unto the Lord
for it, for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace.

Much more shall we have peace in the peace of the Church, seeing Christ
bequeathed his legacy of peace, not to some parts and members of his Church,
but to the whole body thereof. Joh. 14.27.
Pacem meam do vobis, I give unto you my peace. It must be so understood, for
as he left his Spirit the Comforter, so he left his peace the comfort, not to
his Disciples only, but to all the Church, therefore pray all that it may be
well with thee, in communi bono, in the common good.

per communionem pietatis et charitatis, by the communion of piety and charity,
to be one another Orators, but especially to study and pray for the peace and
welfare of the Church, let us consider it is the Spouse of Christ, it is a
Lilly among thorns, it is a flower in the field, not only open to all weathers,
but to the tooth and foot of the beasts of the field, Satan going about seeking
to devour it.

Let our prayers to God resist Satan, and fight the Lords battle against him.

We hear of the troubles of the Church in other countries, we hear of the
tyranny of Popery, and the oppressions of faithful professors, if we give
them no other help, yet let our prayers give God no rest, till he have mercy on
them, and give them deliverance.



Let us be of good comfort, their darkness dare not come so near our light,
for our light will discover it, their error dare not come so near our truth,
our truth will confute it; and the God of Truth will not suffer his truth to
fail.

Yet if our unthankfulness to God for his light so long shining in our Church:
if our evil lives so unanswerable to our outward profession: if our contentions
so displeasing to the God of peace: our want of zeal and devotion in prayer, do
turn away the face of God from us, we may thank our selves: and his justice may
say, Perditio tua ex te, Thy destruction is of thy self.

2 The Petitions; these are three, vide p. 29.

1 Revive thy work in the midst of the years; that is, as we have expounded
it literally, in the mean time, preserve thy Church.

In which Petition we are taught:

That the Church of God is the work of God; 1 Doct.
ye have heard it so acknowledged by God himself.

Ask me concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands, Isa. 45.11.
command ye me.

Wherein God confesses his Church to be his own work; and therefore so
comprehended in his care, that they may challenge his protection.

Again, He calls his Church thus: The Branch of my planting, the work of my
hands, Isa. 60.21.
that I may be glorified.

And David upon this prays, Forsake not the works of thy own hands. Psalm.
138.8


The reasons why the Church is thus called.

Because the Church is not an Assembly that does gather themselves together: as
we say, That Birds of a feather do fly together: but it is (...), it is a
congregation of such as the free election of grace has called out of the world
by the ministry of the Word of God, and the Sacraments.

The first Church of God, in whom God was glorified, consisted of Angels,
intellectual spirits, whereof many kept not their first estate, but were
excommunicated never to be redeemed.

The first Church of God on earth, were our first Parents, whom God created in
his image.

The Creation miscarried by the fall of our Parents, who might have stood if
they would.

The election of grace remained unchangeable and continued a Church in Adam, in
Abel, in Seth, which separated from Cain and his issue: in Noah and Sem, and in
Japhet, persuaded to the tents of Shem, in the calling of the Gentiles, so that
all that have the election of grace, do come to be members of the Church by
virtue of an effectual calling: election designeth them, vocation declares
them to be the members of the Church, and both these are the work of God.

Will you take it from Gods own mouth? who says, Levit. 20.26.
Ye shall be holy unto me, for I the Lord am holy, and have severed you from
other people that you should be mine.



1 For his own providence, he has declared it in a promise, I will not sail
thee, Josh. 1.5.
nor forsake thee, in which promise, what interest the Church has, and every
member thereof, the Author to the Hebrews shows.

Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such
things as you have, Heb. 13.5.
for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.

So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man
shall do unto me.

For which gracious protection, 1 Pet. 4.19
St. Peter wills us to commit our souls to him in well-doing, as to a
faithful Creator, so called, says Lyranus, quia secure conservat, and
gloriose coronat; non relinquit opus.

He not only builds, but stands to reparations.

2 For the ministry and subvention of Angels, the Psalmist says; Psalm. 91.11
12.
He has given his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They
shall bear thee up in their hands.

Are they not all ministering Spirits? sent forth to minister for them, Heb.
1.14.
who shall be heirs of Salvation?

together, righteousness and peace kissed each other, our election adoption is
to the praise of the glory of his grace. Ephesians. 1.6 Is. 60.21.
You heard himself say of his Church. The work of my hands, that I may be
glorified. For God is more glorified in those things, which he has wrought by
Jesus Christ in our flesh, and in those things which he does for his sake, then
in all the other works of his hands.

This will one day appear, it is revealed already in part to us, for whatsoever
God did work sine verbo incarnato, without the word incarnate, it all shall
fail, and come to dissolution, or to a worse condition, that is, an eternal
being in woe.

For example, the heavens and the eath shall all perish, and new shall be made
in their place, a new heaven, and a new earth, wherein God will plant
righteousness.

The Angels that fell, and the reprobate, shall suffer eternal flames.

What remains now but Angels and just men, the elect Angels and the holy Church
of God; the one sort elected in Christ, established in bliss by Christ: the
other redeemed by Christ, these are reserved to glory, the just shall be as the
Angels of God in heaven.



The Church is called the Work of God, to give honor to it here on earth, for
God would have the World know, that he owns his Church, and that they are a
peculiar people, a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, that he delights
in in them. And again, the faithful delight in nothing, but what he has
wrought in them and from them. So Augustine brings in the Church, saying;

Opus tuum in me Domine, vide, non meum nam meum si videris damnum, tuum si
videris Coronas. Behold, thy work in me, etc.

It is David's glory, I am thine,

All things else have the same maker, that have any being, but the Church has
the honor of curious and costly work, all the rest of the works of God are
not vvorth the cost that he bestovved in the white washing of this work.

To turn this point into profit.

1 Seeing we are the work of God in regard of election of grace, of creation
and protection, this teaches us to live godlily, righteously and soberly, in
this present world, and to keep our selves unspotted of the world.

1 For election, Ephesians. 1.4.
He has chosen us that we should be holy, and without blame before him in
love. 2 For creation, Ephe. 2.10.
We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, that we should
walk in them. 3 For all his other favors, as that we are a royal priesthood,
an holy nation, a purchased people, it is, that we should show forth the
praises of him, 1 Pet. 2.9.
who has called us out of darkness into his mavelous light.
Survey thy soul, peruse thy whole conversation without, search thy heart
within, suffer not the Work of the Lord in thee to be defaced, and defouled
with the uncleanness of gross and foul sins. If Satan have been too strong
for thee, that he holds thee captive, and binds thee, and makes thee go
where thou would not, and do what thou abhorrest, yet declare it by thy
resisting of him that he has usurped, thou have not yielded him possession,
let not sin set up a stool of wickedness within thee, let it not reign in
thy mortal body.

Do thy Maker so much right, to preserve and keep his work, as clean as thou
can from the defiling of the world.

2 Gather boldness from this consideration, to solicit God in prayers, for so
it is used as an effectual argument, Vivifica opus tuum, revive thy Work, as
David, I am thine, O save.

So Solomon enforces his suit to God for Israel, for thou did separate them
from all the people of the earth to be thine inheritance.

Therefore, 1 Reg. 8.52, 53.
he prays, that the eyes of God would be open to their supplications, and
that he would hearken to them in all that they pray for.

2 In the petition that God would revive and quicken his Church, in the mean
time, that is, during the affliction and vexation of it, we are taught.

That afflictions and the withdrawing of the light of Gods countenance from his
Church for a time, 2 Doct.
is such a deading of it, that except it be quickened with some beams of grace
and light, and have some lucida intervalla, it is a burden more then they can
bear.

Satan is a cunning Serpent, a roaring Lion, when he can get leave to assault,
he puts his whole strength to it, as in the sifting of Peter, and in the
buffering of Paul, and in the afflicting of Job. If Peter, had not he had
Christ's ego oravi pro te, I have prayed for thee, and Paul had not heard his
sufficit tibi gratia mea, thy grace is sufficient for me, and Job had not had
the preserver of men to friend, how had it gone with them?

And great reason there is for this, why the Church should faint under the
cross, if it were not strongly supported by grace.

For there is no lesson so hard for a child of God, to take out as to take up
the cross of Christ, and to follow him, to suffer the smart of affliction with
patience and thanksgiving.

For in the very regenerate man, the flesh is both strong and unruly, and
nothing so contrary to the flesh, as affliction and tribulation is.

Therefore does God measure to his Children their portion and draught of this
cup, because he knows whereof we be made.

So the Psalmist says, Psalm. 125.3.
The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, lest the
righteous put forth their hand unto iniquity.

And for this St. Paul says, God is faithful, 1 Cor. 10.13.
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with
the temptation also make away to escape that ye may be able to bear it.

Wherein note for comfort in tribulation.

1 That though Satan have no stay of his fury and malice in our temptations,
yet God will not suffer us to be tempted further, than he thinks fit. For there
is good use to be made of some temptations, as St. James says, My brethren,
Jam. 1.2.
count it all joy, when you fall into diverse temptations, he means
temptations of trial, by which we do approve our faith and our patience, St.
Peter says.

That the trial of your faith being much more precious than gold that
perishes (though it be tried with fire) might be found unto praise, 1 Pet. 1.7.
and honor, and glory, at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2 We see that all the elect children of God have a measure of strength to bear
temptation, and he that gave them their measure, and knows what it contains,
will not suffer them to be tempted further then they are able.

Herein many mistake themselves, and think their ability to bear affliction,
less then it is, for indeed till God put us to it, we do not know how much we
are able to suffer, and many great examples in Church story we find of those
Christians, young men and aged, tender Virgins that have feared their own
weakness much, who have filled the catalogue of Gods confessors and martyrs
with invincible constancy.

3 We see that when God opens a way out of tribulation that the faithful see
an issue, though for the time the temptation be more then our strength, yet the
issue in-sight, does put mettle into us to bear it.

Howsoever, the flesh will be more then a looker on in this conflict, Heb. 12.11
because no chastning for the time seems to be joyous but grievous.

For many fears arise in the hearts of the afflicted, and Satan is still
suggesting, that God has forsaken him that is afflicted.

Especially such a great affliction as this that was now threatened to the
Church, the sword of the Chaldaeans, depopulation of their Cities and Towns,
destruction of the temple, deportation into the land of their enemies, and
seventy years captivity: this shakes their faith in the promise of God made to
his Church, and makes them to doubt that God has forgotten to be gracious,
and will show no more mercy.

Let us learn of the Prophet what use we must make of afflictions in this
kind, even prayer: O Lord, revive thy work, let us comfort our selves in all
tribulations that we are the work of Gods hand, and let us commend our selves
to his fatherly love.

Prayer is fidelis nuncius, a faithful messenger, we may dispatch away this
messenger from Babylon, from the Lions den, from the belly of the whale, from
the fiery furnace of heaven, and it will do our errand to God faithfully and
effectually.

It is St. Augustines comfort. In Psalm. 65.
Cum videris non a te amotam deprecationem tuam, securus esto, quia non est
amota misrecordia ejus.

2 Petition. In the midst of the years make known.

That is in the mean time, whilst thy Church is in captivity, reveal to the^
thy gracious purpose of restoring and avenging them.

The true comfort in afflictions grows out of a right understanding of the
will and purpose of God therein, that is,

1 This makes them able to bear affliction, 1 Cor. 10.13.
when we see that God makes a way to escape, as you heard from St. Paul.

And this is very clear in this people, for God made known to them his purpose
concerning their bondage in Egypt, his will was thus revealed to Abraham.
Genesis 15.13
Know that thy seed of a surety shall be a stranger in a Land that is not
theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred Years.
And also that nation whom they shall serve, will I judge: Verse. 14.
and afterward shall they come out with great substance.

This, as St. Augustine well understands, does include all the time that
passed between the birth of Isaac, and the entering of the people of Israel into
the land of promise, during which time, they had no land of their own, and in
a dis-junct reading, they were either strangers, as during their first abode
in Canaan, and after in Egypt, or they served, as after Joseph's death, and
were afflicted.

Four hundred years are a long time, yet they savv an end of their travails,
and afflictions, and they knevv that their posterity should have rest at last,
and they knevv that God would judge their oppressors, this made them able to
bear the affliction.

Here is a picture drawn to the life of a christian man's life here on earth,
for he must be a stranger and pilgrim here, and must serve and suffer before
he can come to Jerusalem, which is visio pacis, the vision of peace, before he
can come to rest from his labors.

This captivity in Babylon, was a great punishment to this people, but God made
his will known to them, as the Prophet here teaches them to pray, for he gave
them warning of it long before, 2 Reg. 20.17.
but somewhat obscurely, he came to a more clear discovery of his purpose to
Hezechiah. All shall be carried into Babylon, nothing shall be left. The Lord
also by Jeremie his Prophet gave them warning of it. Jer. 16.13.
I will cast you out of this land, into a land that ye know not. He threateneth
to send Fishers to fish them, compare that with Habakkuks prophecy. Thou make
them as the fishes of the Sea, Hab. 1.14.
there you heard of their angle, net, and dragge.

Jeremy is yet more plain in this prediction. Jer. 20.6.
I will deliver all the strength of the city, and all the labors thereof, and
all the precious things thereof, Jer. 25.11.
etc. to be carried into Babylon. But most fully begin at the 9 verse. And this
whole Land shall be a Desolation, Verse. 12.
and an Astonishment, and these Nations shall serve the King of Babylon 70
years. And it shall come to pass when 70 years are accomplished that I will
punish the King of Babylon, Jer. 30.2.
and that nation, says the Lord.

There is some better news, sic dicit Dominus; The days come, faith the Lord,
that I will bring again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, says the
Lord, and I will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their
Fathers, and they shall possess it.

The miseries that smart upon afflicted men do make them forget the comforts
that should heal their wounded spirits: David expresses his vexation so: My
soul refused comfort, therefore, O Lord, make it known. Make thy people
sensible of that comfort, which thou have graciously reserved for them.

And indeed, the people were not quite out of heart, all the time that they
lived in that captivity they still remembered Jerusalem, and thought upon Sion,
and expected their deliverance.

But the dispersion of the Jews that has now continued almost 1600 years that
has lasted long, and the time of their restitution is not perticularly
revealed, this makes them hang the head, God in justice for the cruelty which
they did execute upon his Son, would not let them know the time of their
deliverance, as in their former afflictions he did, which, no doubt, is a great
sign of Gods heavy indignation.

Seeing then that the knowledge of the will of God and his purpose revealed in
his Word, 1 Use.
is so great a comfort in afflictions, we are taught to study and search the
Book of Gods Will, and therein to exercise our selves, for he is the same God
that he was, and his will is the same, the just have the same promises that they
had, the unjust shall have the same judgments, hear read the Book of God, and
apply it as thou go, for there thou shall have thy portion.

And be not conformed to the World, but be you transformed by the renewing of
your mind, Romans 12.2.
that you may prove what is that good, that acceptable, and perfect will of
God. For God will not reveal himself to the ungodly, but the secrets of the
Lord are with them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant.

fiat voluntas tua, thy will be done, we must not resist it, we must not
murmr at it, we must not make haste, but we must live by faith, and tarry the
Lords leisure and in the mean time, gather strength from his promise, to
establish our hearts that they faint not, and fail us in our tribulations.

3 Petition. In wrath remember mercy.

The plea of the true Church in afflictions is mercy,

How would they solicit God, Jesus Christ was not yet known to them,
therefore they fled from God, for there is no drawing near to God, for sinners
without Christ, then God came and sought out Adam, he arraigned the offenders,
and finding the Serpent guilty of the temptation, he cursed him; and there he
promised Christ.

When mercy was revealed to man, then he called the man first, and then the
woman. And ever since, that mercy was made known to the Church, the true Church
has had no other plea but mercy.

There is misericordia condonans, a pardoning mercy, he forgiveth all our
iniquities, an article of faith, remissio peccatorum, remission of sins, there
is misericordia donans, a giving mercy, he gives medicine to heal all our
infirmities.

The Church knows that they have given God cause to be angry, 2 Reas.
they know that if his wrath be kindled but a little, he is a consuming fire,
and it is a fearful thing to fall into his hands, they know that in his favor
is life, and at his right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

We have nothing to keep us from the anger to come but mercy. Lam. 3.22. Psalm.
51.1.
It is of the Lords mercies, that we are not all consumed, for his compassions
fail not. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, according to thy loving kindness, etc.

We have nothing to bring us again in favor with God, whom we provoke every
day, but his mercy. But as for me I will come into thy house in the multitude
of thy mercies. Psalm. 5.7.


The Church knows that God is more glorious in his mercy, 3 Reas.
then in all his other attributes, for his mercy is above all his works; the
justice of God is against us, because we are unrighteous: the wisdom of God is
against us, because we have walked as fools, and not as wise men.

The holiness of God is against us, because we are unclean, conceived in sin,
and born in iniquity.

The truth of God is against us; for omnis homo mendax, every man is a liar;
The power of God is against us, because we have forsaken him the fountain of
living water, etc.

The Patience of God is against us, because he is a God that loves not
iniquity, neither shall evil dwell with him; he hates all those that work
wickedness.

Only Mercy is our friend, that makes Christ our justice, our wisdom, our
sanctification and redemption; that makes truth perform gracious promises, and
his power becomes our protection, his patience our peace; Divitiae
misericordiae, riches of mercy.

This seems to excellent use;

1 To assure to us the favor of God, 1 Use.
because it is built upon the foundation of Gods mercies, of which David says,
The mercy of God endures for ever, his mercy is everlasting.

The knowledge of salvation given by the remission of our sins is, Through the
tender mercy of our God, Luke 1.77, 78.
whereby the dayspring from on high has visited us.

So that if God be angry with us for our sin, yet his wrath does not burn like
fire; but as he said of Solomon, I will chasten him with the rods of men, but
my mercy will I not take utterly from him.

2 It seems to rebuke those that put their trust in humane merits, or works
of the Law, they that come to God for wages, forsake their own mercy; nothing
so contrary to Divine mercy, as humane condignity.

3 Because here is anger and mercy together, 2 Cor. 1.3. Na^u. 1 2.
this kills all presumption, for he that is called The God of mercies, is
called a jealous God, and a furious Avenger.

And the rods of men well laid on will smart, and draw blood.

4 This inviteth to new life, because, The goodness and mercy of God leads to
repentance, and the Crown of it. Romans 2.6.


5 Seeing we have so much need of mercy our selves, let us show mercy unto
others. Estote misericordes, ut pater vester coelestis, be ye merciful, as
your heavenly father; for there shall be judgment without mercy to him that
shows no mercy

Christ abides yet naked, and sick and imprisoned, and hungry and thirsty, in
our poor brethren, as his mercy embraces us, so let our mercy embrace him,
that he may say, esurivi and pavistis, I was hungry, and ye fed me.

Ver. 3. God came from Teman, and the holy one from mount Paran, Selah. His
glory covered the Heavens, and the Earth was full of his praise. 4 And his
brightness was as the light, he had horus coming out of his hand, and there was
the hiding of his power. 5 Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals
went forth at his feet.
THe second part of this Psalm does contein a celebration of the praises of
God, Vid. divis. p. 23.
which also does declare upon what grounds, the Church in affliction and
captivity does put trust in God.

The whole Section is a commemoration of the great power and glory, and power
and mercy of God showed in behalf of his own people, v. 3, 4, 5. ad finem, v.
15.

1 In his coming to them from Paran and Teman. 2 Of the same power and glory
declared in giving of the possession of the land of Canaan to Israel. 3 In the
dismay of the Nations, v. 7. 4 In the mavelous Waterworks, 8, 9, 10. 5 In
their great victories within the Land.
I begin at the first;

God came from Teman, and the holy one from Mount Paran. The best exposition
that I do find amongst many, of these words, is, that here is remembered the
coming of God to Israel, when he gave them the Law written in two Tables of
stone, with his own hand.

For God came then from Teman and Paran: Paran was a great mountain near to
mount Sinai, but Teman signified the South; so God came from the South, thence
came God to give Israel his Law, wherein he did express himself the King of
this people, by coming so near to them, by showing himself so openly, and by
revealing his will to them so plainly.

This was so great a favor done to them, that he adds Selah, which word is
only used in David's Psalms, and in this Psalm, and the word in the judgments
of the learned is sometime vox optantis, the voice of one that wishes,
aequivalent to Amen, or vox admirantis, the voice of one admiring, showing some
special matter, or vox affirmantis, of one affirming, avouching what is said,
or vox meditantis, of one meditating, requiring consideration of what is said.
But withal, it is a rest in Music.

Jerome says, it is, commutatio metri, or vicissitudo canendi, his glory
covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise.]

And His Brightness was as the Light,] he means the brightness of that
glory wherein he appeared, when he gave the Law set forth. Exodus 19.16. For
there were Thunders and Lightnings.

He had Horns coming out of his hands,] by Horns, in Scripture, strength is
signified, the horn of salvation is the strength of salvation, the exalting of
the horn is the advancing of power, and these are said to be in his hands,
because the hands and arms are called the strong men in the body, they are the
instruments of power.

And there was the hiding of his power,] there in that apparition, God did hide
his power from the rest of the world, and declared it perticularly to his
Church, as David says. He has not dealt so with any nation, and as for his
judgments, Psalm. 147.20.
they have not known them.

Before him went the Pestilence,] and burning coals went forth at his feet.]

His meaning is that God then declared himself mighty in the punishment of his
enemies, and the enemies of his Church, for under these two kinds of
punishments by pestilence and fire, he shows that God has the command of
all the instruments of wrath, of which these two, by plague and fire, are
the most licking and devouring, putting no difference where they go.

And this has reference to the many plagues wherevvith he punished the
Egyptians, when he brought his people from the land of Egypt, from the house
of bondage.

The sum of all is this, that God has declared himself glorious.

1 In his special favor to his people. 2 In his just vengeance.
From whence these points of doctrine issue.

1 That the consideration of Gods former mercies, does strengthen faith in
present tribulations. 2 That the Church of God has a special interest in the
power and protection of God. 3 That God is armed with power to punish evil
doers. 4 That in all this God was glorified.
First, the consideration of former mercies does strengthen faith in present
troubles.

Therefore do they commemorate the manner of Gods glorious coming from Teman
and of Paran, wherein he had glory in the heavens, and praise upon the earth.

David did make good use of this point often. For when my distress came, he
found comfort in this remembrance.

Now thou art far of, and go not forth with our armies.

Thou make us turn back from the adversary, Psalm. 44.9.10.
and they which hate us spoil for themselves, etc.

To comfort this affliction, he begins that Psalm. We have heard with our
ears, O God, and our fathers have told us, what thou did in their days, and
in the times of old.

How thou did drive out the heathen with thy hand, and planted them, etc.

So, Psalm. 74 9.
again, complaining of great afflictions. We see not our signs, there is no
more any Prophet, this is his comfort. God is my King of old, working Salvation
in the midst of the Earth.

Thou did divide ehe Sea by thy power, etc.

So again, Psalm. 77.2.
In the day of my trouble, I sought the Lord, my soar ran, and ceased not, and
in the night my soul refused comfort.

Then I considered the days of old, Verse 5. Psalm. 4.1.
and the years of ancient times. Thou have enlarged me when I was distressed.

The reason why this does minister comfort to the Church, 1 Reas.
is, because we have learned that our God is constant in his love, whom he once
loved, he ever loves; for he is without variableness, and shadow of changing,
as the Apostle and the Psalmist says. But thou art the same, and thy years
shall have no end. Ps. 102.27.28.


The children of the servants shall continue, and their seed shall be
established before thee.

The goodness of God endures continually. Psalm. 52.1. Reas. 2.


Because the commemoration of former benefits is a work of thanksgiving and
praise, and that is the highest service that we can perform to God in his
worship, this is, Sicut in coelo, it is heaven upon earth; For it is a good
thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises to the Name of the most
High. Psalm. 92.1. Ps. 50.23.


It is good for God, for, He that offers me praise glorifieth me, and for
that he made us.

It it good for us, for, with such Sacrifices God is well pleased; there is our
happiness, for in his favor is light.

Again, the thankful commemoration of former mercies of God to us does draw on
new benefits; for thanksgiving as it is Gods crop which he gathers from us of
the seed of his many favors, so it is our seed which we cast into the ground
of Gods kindness, and it brings us an harvest of new blessings.

Every man thinks his seed well bestowed in good ground that yields an
increase, and God has said;

Them that honor me I will honor. 1 Samuel 2.30.


This point is of excellent use,

Benefits are soon forgotten, therefore, as David says, I called upon the Lord
in my trouble, so he stirs up himself to thankfulness; My soul praise thou
the Lord, and forget not all his benefits,

He found great comfort in this looking back.

When he undertook Goliath, and Saul discouraged him as unable for it, he looked
back to the time past, and remembered how God had delivered him from a Lion, and
a Bear, and from that experience of Gods good help, he resolved to attempt the
uncircumcised Philistine.

And in his declining years, when age grew upon him, he comforted his drooping
spirits thus, Thou art my hope, O Lord, God, Psa. 71.5.
even my trust from my youth.

Upon thee have I been stayed from the womb, thou art he that took me from my
mothers bowels.

Cast me not off in the time of age, forsake me not when my strength fails.

There be three sorts of men that do even run themselves upon the edge and
point of reprehension, we cannot here forgive them a chiding.

1 Those that, tanquam prona pecora, as grovelling beasts do look only upon the
time incumbent, mistaking St. Paul, who says, I forget that which is behind.

Lyranus understands him, legalia and terrena.

Theophilact better: Praeteritarum virtutum nihil reminiscor, nec memoria
repeto, Phil. 3.13.
sed ea omnia post tergum relinquo.

So we must forget all the good we have done, as being short of perfection,
that we may mend our pace in the ways of Gods Commandments.

But the Apostle did look back to times past, to see what Christ had done for
us, how he loved us when we were his enemies, how he washed us in his blood,
how he forgave him his sins, and how he obtained mercy of him, because what he
did, he did it ignorantly through unbelief.

2 Those also are here reproved, who look only to the time past, and see
therein nothing but Gods temporal favors, but regard not the times present,
and consider not Gods spiritual graces

Some that lived in the time of Popery, do praise those dais: then was good
housekeeping, easy rents, a constant fashion of apparel; that many Gentlemen
had the lands of their grandfathers in possession, and their clothes on their
backs; then was no seeking of reversions, or buying of offices, no market of
Church Livings.

Israel did so: Remember the fish that we are in Egypt for naught, the
Cucumbers, and the Melons, and the Leeks, and the Onions, number. ^1.5.
and the Garlic.

I deny not, but when the people of this Land were fewer, and the vanity of
the pride of other Nations, and many of their foul sins kept home, and were not
imported hither, there were better times for the belly then these are.

But let us see the state of souls at that time, they were then in the house of
bondage, under Pharaoh of Rome: Beef and Mutton, Wheat and Barley were cheap:
but the two Testaments, the two breasts of the Church, were like a Fountain
sealed up, and like a Garden enclosed.

But when Queen Elizabeth began to rest in this Hemisphere, like the Sun to run
her race, she turned that night into day, and maintained this light till she
was taken up into heaven; and she that was a shining star on earth, and blessed
the Church of God here with benign aspect and influence, was made a glorious
ever blessed Saint in heaven.

In the beginning of her reign, God came from Teman: The Holy one from mount
Paran; God revealed himself in the glorious Sunshine of his Gospel of peace.

3 They are also reproved, who out of too much fore-casting fear of the times
to come, do quite forget both the former and the present mercies of God, and
astonish themselves with representations of hideous forms of ensuing dangers.

The God that gave us his light of Truth, and has continued it so many happy
years of peace amongst us, has begun, he will also make an end; by this light,
no doubt, many faithful souls have found the way to the throne of grace, whose
continual prayers to God for the happy estate of his Church, are able to make
this Sun stay his course, and not withdraw his light from us; their prayers and
devotions know the way to heaven so well, and plead the cause of the Church so
effectually, that we have cause to hope, that the goodness of God which
endures, yet daily will not fail us, but that we shall fee it, and taste of it,
in this land of the living.

Once, let us remember, under whose shadow we live, a learned gracious King,
who has seen into the darkness of Popery, and laid it open, no Christian
Prince so much, no Christian more: he has put his hand to the Plough, and he
cannot forget Lets Wife.

Let us not make our selves certain afflictions, out of uncertain fears, and
draw upon us the evils of to morrow, For sufficient for the day is the evil
thereof.

Queen Elizabeth, brought into this Church and Land, True Religion and Peace,
King James has continued it, let us be thankful to God for it, and let us be
ever telling what the Lord has done for our souls: Let not our unquiet
vvranglings amongst our selves provoke the God of Peace against us, neither let
our busy eves-dropping the counsels and intendments of State which are above
us, and belong not to us make us afraid, our work is, In all things to give
thanks, For what we have received already, for what we do possess and enjoy:
and pray continually for that we would have, for all men; especially for our
King, that under him we may lead a quiet and and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty: 1 Timothy 2.2.
and then, Rejoice evermore, Rejoice in the Lord, and again, I say rejoice.

He that came from Teman and Paran, to a people, that sat in darkness and in
the shadow of death, and gave us light, has ever since so supplied us with
oil, that we may say, difficiunt vasa, the want is on our part, for truly God
is good to Israel, to all such that have faithful and true hearts.

To this end, let me stir you up to a remembrance of the times past, beginning
at the Initium regni November, 17, in Anno, 1558. for so long has this Sun of
righteousness shined clear upon our Church.

2 Doctr. The Church has a special interest in the power and protection of
God, gathered from hence, he had horns coming out his hands, and there was
the hiding of his power.

There is a power that God openly shows, and that is extended to an
universal protection of all the works of Gods hand, but there is a power that
he hides, and that is his special protection of his Church.

1 He protecteth them, David gives them a good instance in the former mercies
of God to this people.

When they were yet but few, and they strangers in the land. 1 Ch^on. 16.19.


And when they went from nation to nation, from one Kingdom is another people.

He suffered no man to do them any wrong, but reproved even Kings for their
sakes, saying,

Touch not my anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.

And the Psalmist can give no other reason of this special protection, but on
Gods part, because he had a favor to them; and on their part, that they might
keep his statutes, and observe his laws.

And these be motives that establish Gods protection upon his Church, in all
the ages thereof.

His mercy and our obedience, which lesson if we take out well, we shall
learn thankfulness to him for his favor, and holiness in our lives. And
this is that godliness, which has the promises of this life, and that which
is to come.

2 He hides the horn of our Salvation.

1 From his Church, in some measure, to keep us from presumption, so that we
do often rather believe then feel the loving kindness of the Lord, and to
stir us up to prayer, for the more we are made sensible of our wants, the
more are we provoked to invocation of the name of the Lord. 2 From the world,
that hates his Church, that they may fulfill their iniquity, and declare their
uttermost malice against the Church, and when he had suffered PHARAOH and his
host to follovv his people of Israel into the red Sea, and there takes of
their Chariot wheels, then they shall see it and say, we will fly from the face
of Israel, Exodus 14.25.
for the Lord fights for them against the Egyptians.
Great is the profit of this point in the case of those spiritual desertions,

Well are they described by Gods own mouth.

For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather
thee. Isa. 54.7.


In a little wrath, I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord, thy Redeemer.

Which shows that the hiding of Gods protecting power, is not total, but
partial, for it is in a little anger, and it is not final, but temporary, for
a small moment.

1 In outward things.

In the example in my text, God hid his hand in his bosom, and the horn of his
Salvation was almost all out of sight for the space of 70 years, during the
captivity of the Church.

So many of Gods dear Servants drink deep of the bitter cup of affliction,
suffering the contempt and injuries of the world, in bonds, imprisonments,
oppressions, scourges, such as the world is not worthy of: yet do they not want
a secret feeling of the power of Gods protection, quickening their patience, and
reviving his own work in them, in the midst of the years.

2 In spiritual graces.

Sometime God takes away from his children their feeling of his love, and of
the joy of the Holy Ghost, and that they find with much grief.

1 In the oppression of the heart with sorrow, wherein they feel no comfort, as
David; My soar ran, and ceased not; my soul refused comfort. Psalm. 77.2, 3.
I did think upon God and was troubled.

In the ineffectuating the means of salvation for a time. For many holy zealous
souls desirous to do God good service, do complain, that they hear the Word,
and do not profit by it, they receive the Sacraments, and do not taste how sweet
it is; they pray, but they feel not the Spirit helping their infirmities; they
give thanks and praise to God, but they do not feel that inward dancing of the
heart, and jubilation of the soul, and rejoicing in God, that should attend his
praise, yea, rather they perceive in themselves a going backward from God, as
the Church complains.

O Lord, Isa. 63.17.
why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy
fears?

3 Sometimes when we have the zeal of Gods glory, and a strong desire to serve
him, we feel a failing in the act of obedience, and as the Apostle complains,
when we delight in the Law of God concerning the inner man: Romans 7.22
We find another law in our members rebelling against the law of our minds,
and leading us captive to the law of sin, which is in our members: for,

Sometimes, when we set and dispose our selves to the worship of God in prayer
and thanksgiving, or to the hearing of the Word, either a covetous or a wanton,
or an envious, or an ambitious thought thwarts us, and carries us quite away
for a time, and we have much a do to redeem our selves from it.

4 Sometimes we do feel such want of the Spirit of God in us, that Satan takes
advantage thereat, persuades that God has forsaken us: and thus many of Gods
dear children feel the bitterness of despair for a time, in which agony, Job
cries,

For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, Job. 6.4.
the poison whereof drinks up my spirit, the terror of God do set themselves
in array against me.

In this fit of deep agony some have died despairing and blaspheming the name
of God: some have done violence to themselves, and have died of their own hand,
of whom let christian charity hope the best, seeing, that God hides the horn
of his salvation out of sight.

Therefore David prays, O forsake not me utterly, Ps. 119.8.
the word is (...), usque valde, as our English overlong, for the word
utterly, is somewhat too full of fear, and the hiding of this power, gives
hope to the distressed, the light will rest in darkness.

3 Doctr. God is armed with instruments of vengeance to punish sin, pestilence,
and burning coals.

The 10 plagues of Egypt do prove this and the destruction of Pharaoh and his
host in the red Sea. And lest the Church should presume too far upon his
favor, the story of the passage of the children of Israel, from the Land of
Egypt to Canaan is full of examples of terror to evil doers, which the
Apostle does urge and press to the Corinthians, and gives them warning of the
wrath to come.

For he says, 1 Cor. 10.5
first in general terms, that with many of them God was not well pleased, for
they were overthrown in the wilderness.

And in particular, he names some sharp judgment, For fornication, Verse. 8.
Number. 25.9
there fell in one day twenty three thousand.

That was the plague, and St. Paul speaks within compass, for we read 24000.

For tempting: Verse 9. Number. 21.6 Verse 20.
of God, they were destroyed with serpents: these were the fiery serpents.

For murmuring they were destroyed of the destroyer, which I understand the
plague.

Those men which did bring up the evil report of the Land, number. 14.37.
died by the Plague before the Lord.

David describing the judgments of God in those days, says; Ps. 106.18. Number.
16.31.
A fire was kindled in their company, and burnt up the wicked: meaning the 250
that offered incense, who murmured against Moses and Aaron.

Thus you see, how the pestilence still walked before him, and burning coals at
his feet.

Not only without the pale amongst the enemies of his Church, but within foul
amongst such, as were reckoned with the Church.

In which course of powerful justice, 1 Reas.
he has still gone forward to put the sons of men in fear, that they may
know they are but men, and that they may not dare to resist the right hand of
the most High.

For Satan does still suggest that God is merciful, and so animates sinners to
do evil, by feeding their presumption.

Therefore the children of God, who set God always before their eyes, do not
only behold him as he is togatus in peace, or as he is rogatus easily
entreated, but as he is oculatus to behold, and aculeatus to sting sinners, it
is the voice of the Church.

In the way of thy judgments have we waited for thee: Isa. 26.6.
this keeps children in awe, this showing of the rod saves them many a
swinging, and for the ungodly of the earth, it fills them with the terror of
the Lord, they dare not do all that they would, for fear of the pestilence that
destroys at the noon day, and for fear of stirring these coals at the feet of
God, which can so soon overtake them. So God has these judgments at hand, to
put men out of hope of impunity, which is the greatest flattery to sooth up
sin, that is;

The false Prophets seduced the people of God, saying, peace, peace: Ezekiel. 13.10
and thereby,

They strengthened the hands of the wicked, Verse 22.
that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life.

It is said of the Magistrates of the earth, That they do not bear the Sword in
vain, and can we think that this supreme Lord of all does carry these rods of
vengeance so near him; the Pestilence before his face, and these burning coals
at his feet for nothing

2 He names these two judgments for all, 2 Reas.
because they be of sudden dispatch, and of quick execution: the plague we do
know how speedy it is in a work of destruction, three days pestilence swept
away threescore and 10000 in David's time.

We cannot forget what desolations it has made in this our great City, and
what terror it made all the Land over.

Fire is a merciless Element, sudden and cruel in consumption of all
combustible matter, the Apostle chose that resemblance, to express God in a
fury, Deus noster ignis consumens, Our God is a consuming fire.

Here is not only the violence of wrath, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
but the suddainess also expressed, the last fire that shall destroy the world,
shall come as a Thief in the night, as that shovver of fire and Brimstone fell
upon Sodom.

This teaches the man of earth, 1 Use.
who is but man to fear when the plague comes, to consider that he is but
stubble; and therefore not fit to encounter this fire, he is but man, and not
fit to meet this devouring pestilence; therefore let him not provoke the God of
this power, let him not stir up these coals, nor awake judgment, rather let
him quench this fire with the tears of true repentance.

As Christ said to the Church of Sardis, Remember how thou have received and
heard, R^v. 3.3.
hold fast and repent, if thou will not watch, I will come to thee as a thief.

It is not the way of peace to put away the evil day, Amos 6.3.
rather let us put away the evil, and break off our sins by repentance, that
we may obtein mercy in the time of need.

He that has such ready instruments of wrath to punish sin, is not to be
dallied with, he may surprise us on the bed vvhereon we study mischief; he
may meet us at the door when we are going forth to act it, he may overtake
us when we are upon the way, he may cut us off in the act of sin, and bring
us from the fact to judgment.

And how soever his mercy has the name above his other works, and his patience
and long suffering be the fruits of his mercy, yet he never had mercy enough to
swallow, or consume either his justice or his truth.

He has diverted his plague often, he has sometimes called it in, and long he
keeps it in, for that he expects repentance, but he has never turned it
out of his service, but has it always before him, he has also turned his fire
another way, that it might not come near the Tabernacles of the righteous; but
he has never quenched it, it is always at his feet, if he moves that moves
with him, the Rainbow about his head is the joy of his Church, the coals of
terror at his fire, are the terror of the wicked.

2. We have also our lesson herein, 2 Cor. 5.11
for the Apostle says; Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade
men, but we are made manifest unto God, and I trust are made manifest also in
your consciences.

We find this danger in sin, and this severity in judgment; thereupon we
persuade men to a conscionable course of life, such as may keep them unspotted
of the world.

If we do not acquaint you with the terror of the Lord, and show you the
pestilence that walks before him, and the burning coals at his feet, God will
right himself upon us, for as he told his Prophet Ezekiel, so he will deal with
us.

Son of man I have made thee a watchman to the house of Israel, therefore hear
the word from my mouth, Ezc. 3.17.
and give them warning from me,

When I say to the wicked, thou shall surely dye, and thou give him not
warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his evil way, to save his life,
the same wicked man shall dye in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at
thy hand.

This excuses us to you, when we preach the rod of God, even pestilence and
coals of fire, that this is not our fury and railing, as some call it, but it
is the wrath of the Lord against sin, and if we temper a bitter potion for you
to drink, it is not poison but medicine, and it is ministered to you, as God
himself says, to save your lives, that you may not dye in your sins, it is the
therapentique physic to heal your souls, it is prophilactique to us, to
prevent disease, that we perish not for your unreproved sins.

The arrows of vengeance are aimed at your sins, that you may kill sin and save
the sinner alive, Cry therefore, Spare us good Lord.

4. Doct. God is glorious in heaven and in earth for this: Heaven is covered
with his glory, and the Earth is full of his praise.

This is the confession of David;

O Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the Earth, Psa. 8.1
who have set thy glory above the heavens.

What need we any more reason to think this his due,

1 His name only is excellent, his glory is above the Earth and Heaven.

Here we are sure we cannot over-doe in matter of praise and glory: the Angels
and Saints do him that service, and cover the heaven with the praises of God,
Psa. 148.13.
for his love shines to his Church; and we pray Sicut in Coelo, as in heaven.

He also exalts the horn of his people, Psa. 14.3.
the praise of all his Saints.

Let not us sit out when all join to glorify God, Gideon be dry, when all
the floor is watered with the joys and jubilations of the Church. David is
not content with a bare praising of the name of God, as they that say always.
The Lord be praised, but he requires both a song, Ps. 149.1.
Canticum novum, a new song, and that in the congregation of the Saints.

He also requires a dance, Verse 3.
he requires also instruments of music, he gives reason.

He would have us delight in the service that we do to God, therefore he
adds.

The Lord takes pleasure in his people, Verse 4.
he will beautify the meek with Salvation.

Let the Saints be joyful in glory, Verse 5.
let them sing aloud upon their beds.

Let the high praises of God be in their mouth. Verse 6.


This is that which this example requires, not to be shallovv and slight in
the promises of God, but to strein our selves to the uttermost: the inward man
of the heart, the voice, the hand playing, the feet dancing, till we cover the
heaven, and fill the earth with his glory.

Verse 6. He stood and measured the earth, he beheld, and drove in sunder the
Nations, and the everlasting Mountains were scattered; the perpetual hills did
bow: his ways are everlasting.
2 HEre is a commemoration of the power and glory of God, in giving to his
Israel the Land of Canaan, for their possession.

Diverse judgments have made diverse constructions of these words.

Mr. Calvine is of opinion, that they declare God in his glorious Lordship,
over all the world, for as David, when he should come to be absolute Monarch of
Judah and Israel, said, I will rejoice therefore, and divide Shechem, and mete
out the valley of Succoth, etc. So God is here declared absolute Monarch* in
this phrase of measuring of the earth: as David would cast his shoe over the
Philistines would rejoice: So God is here declared Conqueror of all by
dividing in sunder the nations, etc.

St. Augustine turns all into Allegory, and applies it to Christ.

You remember, how before, I found that the Church does comfort their present
miseries, with remembrance of Gods former mercies, therefore I choose to keep
pace with the story of Gods former mercies to his Israel. And as before he
spoke of the coming of God from Teman and Paran, when he appeared glorious to
them in giving the law, so now he comes to another powerful mercy, that is,
when he gave them the promised Land, for then he that went before them all the
way of their journey in their removes, now stood still, as declaring that now
they were come to the land of their rest, as he had promised it.

And there, He measured the Earth, it is ascribed here to God, that he divided
the land amongst the Tribes, because it was done by lot, wherein not chance,
but God answered.

This has reference to that story which we read Joshua 5. for when the
people were entered into the land of Canaan, and were come so far in to it as
Gilgall, that the Ark of God was settled in Gilgall.

Then God commanded the Sacrament of Circumcision to be revived, which in the
whole journey between their coming out of Egypt to this place had been
omitted, so long was it omitted, because of the journey that there entered into
Canaan, but two of all that came out of Egypt, who had received the Sacrament
of Circumcision, who were Caleb and Joshua.

Now all the males are circumcised at Gilgall, there the children of Israel
kept the Passover, and there they began to eat of the old provision of corn,
that they found in the land, and as soon as they had eaten thereof, Manna
ceased, and there, Verse 13.

There stood a man over against him, with his sword drawn in his hand, to whom
Joshua went, and said unto him. Art thou for us, or for our adversaries? he
said, nay; but as a Prince of the host of the Lord, am I now come, and Joshua
fell on his face, and did worship.

Compare that story with this text, and you shall see that this man that stood
before Joshua, is he that stood in my text, and after measured the earth: and
so Joshua conceived him to be, else he had not worshipped him, for Joshuah was
not to learn that Angels are not to be worshipped.

So this place will not help the Church of Rome for the maintenance of the
worship of Angels, though Lyranus say, that it was adoratio duliae, quia
cognovit eum esse Angelum. The man that stood there was that Son of man, that
Prince of the Lords Armies, which brought Israel out of the Land of Egypt, out
of the house of bondage.

And he stood there, for there was the Ark settled, and the Sacrament revived,
and they were at home when they began to feed upon the provision of the
promised Land: and next it follows, that He measured the Earth.

For in the next Chap. Jericho was taken; Chap. 8. Ai is overcome; and shortly
after the land is measured, and by lot assigned to the Tribes. The Nations are
drove in sunder:] for they took and destroyed Jericho: Ai, and the five Kings
that made war against Gibeon, as David says, He cast out the Nations and
planted them in. Then the everlasting mountains were scattered, and the
perpetual hills did bow.

These titles and attributes of Everlasting and Perpetual, are in true
propriety of sense only belonging to God, but this is a poetical and
figurative hymn, and by an Hyperbole, these words do signify the mighty power
of God, who stooped these unconquered mountains, fixed and settled in their
places, to the obedience of his people, and brought the strenght of the land
into their subjection.

Declaring that by no strength of their own, they got the quiet possession of
that land, but they received it of the gift of God, who subdued the impregnable
strength to their hand, and gave them victory, for it follows;

His ways are everlasting] that is, as David does render it; He does whatsoever
he will. He long before promised Abraham this land, and though the posterity of
Canaan have held the land in possession for many ages, yet there is no
prescription against God: Nullum tempus occurrit regi, he will go in the way,
that the counsel of his wisdom has long ago trod out for them.

There was an old curse which lay in the deck, and slept all this while, ever
since Cham the youngest, the son of Noah, discovered his fathers nakedness, for
then Noah awoke and knew what his sons had done to him, and he said, Cursed be
Canaan, that is, Let a curse fall upon the posterity of Cham: these be the ways
of God, for the issue of Shem drove out Canans seed and possessed their Land.

Here is another argument drawn from the same head with the former; for the
Church does comfort her it self in present misery, by remembering what God did
for them, in giving to them the possession of the promised Land, which is
wholly asscribed to God, as the Psalmist;

For they got not the Land in possession by their own sword, Psalm. 44.3.
neither did their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and
the light of thy countenance, because thou have a favor unto them.

This commemoration of Gods settling them in the promised land serves to
comfort the captivity of Israel in Babylon, because it teaches them;

1 That their tenure of that land howsoever interrupted by calamities and
deportations is a good tenure, they hold it by the free gift of God, who is
able to maintain the right of his donation against all. 2 That there is no
counsel or strength against the Lord, for he that can subdue mountains, and
eternal hills, and he whose ways are everlasting, is not to be resisted.
From which premises they conclude, comfortably, that they shall have their
land again, and that their enemies shall not be able to keep them out of it
with all their strength.

For God did not do so great things for them, to plant them in Canaan, for no
long time his standing there: as if he would say, now I have brought them to
their rest.

His driving out of the Nations to make them room, his scattering of the
mountains and bowing of the hills, all this was not done that Israel might hold
the land of promise no longer: for the promise was made to Abraham, and St.
Matthew says, Ma. 1.17.
that from Abraham to David are 14 generations: and from David to the
deportation into Babylon 14 generations; there were from the promise of this
land to the captivity but 28 generations: and the first 14 generations from
Abraham to David were well spent, before the land was possessed; and so much God
foretold Abraham, and four hundred years delay, and expectation of the promise
we have hereof from the mouth of God to Abraham, Ge. 15.13.
before they should come out of Egypt: and thirty years, were found added to
that reckoning before they had a deliverance, and forty more spent in the
wilderness, four hundred and seventy years, which will make up much of the time
between the promise and the possession of this land, that is, four of the
generations.

Compare this with the promise of this Land, and you shall find it so.

But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again. Ge. 15.16.


Now, for the term for which they should have this land, that is set down
before.

For all the Land which thou see, Ge. 13.15.
to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever.

Yet we find that for 70 years, they lost the possession of their land being
carried captive into Babylon, and our Church stories, and the histories of the
heathen writers old and modern, do show that the Jews have lost this land
almost 1600 years; which may seem to frustrate that deed of gift in respect of
the term, and so it does for matter of fact, for matter of right it is
questionable, and thereupon, some have determined: 1 that that Land is by right
as yet belonging to the seed of Abraham, by virtue of that promise.

2. That in the last calling of the Jews, it shall be restored to them again,
and that the Commonwealth of the Jews shall be resetled there before the end
of the world, as it was after the return from the captivity of Babylon, so that
though there have been interruption of possession for so many years, there
shall be no impeachment of title, but their right does run on, till the time
appointed for the restoring of them.

Concerning the calling of the Jews, and the restoring of them to the Church,
St. Paul has prophesied so plainly, Romans 11.
as there can be no doubt thereof.

But for the restoring of them to the land of promise, we have no good ground
in holy Scripture.

1 Because they have forfeited their estate therein, which they held with
condition of obedience.

When thou shall beget children, Deuteronomy 4.25
and childrens children in the land, and shall have remained long in the land,
and shall corrupt your selves; and make a graven image or the likeness of any
thing, and shall do evil in the sight of the Lord thy God to provoke him to
anger.

I call Heaven and Earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall soon
utterly perish from of the Land, whereunto you go over Jordan to possess it,
ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall utterly be destroyed.

And the Lord shall scatter you among the nations. This is not without hope,
for as by sin they lost their inheritance there, so by repentance it was
recoverable.

When thou art in tribulation, Verse 3.
and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn
to the Lord thy God, and be obedient to his voice.

He will not forsake thee, nor destroy thee, nor forget the Covenant with thy
Fathers.

This proves their tenure conditional, and their restitution to this land after
their return from captivity was also upon the same condition of obedience, as
appears in the words of Christ.

How often would I have gathered thy children together, Mo^h. 23.37, 38, 39.
even as an hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not.

Behold, the house is left unto you desolate.

For I say unto you, you shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say,
blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

That place is plain, that the habitation of Jerusalem, that is, Domus vestra,
and the temple of which our God said, Domus mea, now become by abuse Domus
vestra, shall be desolate till the second coming of Christ.

2 The Prophesies do speak plain.

Thus says the Lord of hoasts, Jer. 19.11.
even so will I break this people, and this city, as one breaks a potters
vessel that cannot be made whole again. My conclusion therefore is, that

Though the argument drawn from the free gift of that land to the people
measuring out the same to the tribes, do serve to comfort their captivity in
Babylon, with hope of restitution, yet now in these times, and ever since the
dispersion of the Jews for the cause of Christ, this can minister no comfort at
all to that nation, to promise them their land again.

I come to matter of instruction.

1 These words aim not at the general scope of this Section, in which is
declared that,

The remembrance of Gods former mercies is a sweet consolation of present
afflictions.

2 Because he names the measuring out of the land of Canaan, to the tribes,
the driving in sunder the nations, the scattering of the mountains, the bowing
of the hills.

1 Docemur, We are taught, The best form of thanksgiving is that which makes
particular commemoration of the mercies of God to his Church, or to any member
of it. 2 That the matter of thanksgiving is an acknowledgment of all benefits,
as received from the hand and free gift of God.
3 From the phrase and manner of speech here used, we are taught, that
figurative forms of speech, are in use in holy Scripture.

In thanksgiving, 1 Doct.
let us be particular in our commemoration, we have David's example for it.

Praise the Lord, Psalm. 103.2.
O my soul, and forget not all his benefits: so he stirs up himself to
remember them, to remember them all.

The two Psalms 105.106. are full examples of this particular thankfulness,
and they are good guides to such as would learn it.

This is necessary. Deuteronomy. 4.
Moses says.

That God had done much for this people, never so much for any, read from Verse
32. ad finem 38. And all those favors grew out of one root, Because he loved
thy Fathers.

It is the Apostles note. Ecce quantam charitatem, behold, how great love. Sic
Deus dilexit mundum, God so loved the world.

2 Seeing Gods temporal favors are not always bestowed in love, but are made
rods to whip the ungodly,

3 They that keep an inventorie of their receipts,

For how many great blessings have we from God, that we never prayed for, so
that God gives us much more cause of thanksgiving and praise of his name, then
of prayer and supplication.

4 Thanksgiving is a work of justice: as David,

Thanksgiving does put us in mind of our unablenesse to requite God, propter
Dominum, for the Lord.

6 Thanksgiving does put us in mind of our unworthiness, Mephibosheth to
David, What is thy servant, that thou should look upon such a de ad dog as I
am. Jacob, Non sum dignus, I am not worthy. David himself, What is man, 2 Samuel
9.8.
that thou art so mindful of him?

7 If we will forget, God will remember us, as to David: I anointed thee King
over Israel, I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, I gave thee thy Masters
house, and thy Masters wives into his bosom: Domus Israel. Domus Judae.

Surely,

St. Augustine upon those words of David: And forget not all his benefits,
says, pro quibus bonis? primo quia es, cum non esses, sedest and lapis, deinde
quia vivis, sed vivit and pecus, sed fecit te ad similitudiuem suam, suum
exigit retribue ei similitudinem suam in te.

Look to the common blessings of the God in general: upon the Church in which
thou live, pay God his debt for the good he has done, before thou find
fault with the defect in it: recompt what he has done for the Commonwealth in
which thou live.

Look home to thine own family, to thine own person: recompt thy spiritual
graces, thy temporal blessings: consider what God has given thee, what he
has forgiven thee, the preventions, the subventions of his love: what
spiritual, what temporal evils thou have either not felt by his keeping of
thee, or escaped by his delivering of thee: and to all, and to each of these
say; The Lord be thanked.

It is a small duty that is required of us, to repeat what God has done for us.

2 Doct. He stood and measured the Earth, he drove asunder the Nations, he
scattered the everlasting mountains. Here we are taught to give the whole
glory and praise of all good to God.

We know that Joshua brought this people into the promised land, that he caused
the land to be measured, that he led them against the Inhabitants of God, and
that the people of God did valiantly; yet, Not unto us, not unto us, but to thy
name give the praise.

We need no other reason for this Doctrine, then that of St. James, For every
good and perfect gift comes from him

Thanks are given to creatures as the ministers and instruments of God, by whom
he works the good pleasure of his will, but none has a proper right to them
but God only. The Lord gives, the Lord forgiveth: in both he uses the
ministerial means, for both he must be thanked.

1 This serves to inform our understanding in the truth of this Doctrine, The
Ox has known his own, the Ass his masters Crib: but my people do not know,
Isa. 1.3.
etc.

It was charged on them in Hosea.

She did not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, Hos. 2.8.
and multiplied her silver and gold.

2 This serves to reprove all those that ascribe the benefits which they
receive to themselves, Jer. 2.8.
like them in the first Chapter of this Prophecy, that did sacrifice to their
net, Hab. 1.16.
and burn incense to their dragge, because by them their portion is fat, and
their meat plenteous. 3 This reproves them that murmur, for seeing God is the
Author and giver of all good, we must seek all from him, but we must not be our
own carvers, we must learn to abound if the Lord gives, and to want if the
Lord takes away. 4 This chideth those that repine at common blessings, when
they do abate any thing of their own particular profits.
Of this God has given us a fearful example, for the last year our portion
was fat, and our bread plenteous, great was the unthankfulness of many to God
for it.

Then the Landlord complained he could not have his rent: the Tenant that he
could not pay it, plenty had undone him.

Such is the unconscionable rack of rents, generally through the Commonwealth,
that plenty is a punishment to many, even a sharp and smarting rod. And does
not God begin to visit our land with sudden dearth, how much of the hope of the
earth does now lie in steep in the drowned earth, never likely to pay the seed
that the earth borrowed.

It is time for the Lord to pull thy hand out of thy bosom, and to whet thy
sword, when thy mercies become burdens to the sons of men.

5 This reproves all those that study men, and tender all their addresses to
them, seeing their advancement and establishment here on earth by the purchased
love and favor of men, they seek not the Lord.

Did ever age sow precedents so thick for posterity, of drooping, declining and
falling greatness. Truly God is the Lord, and his name only is excellent; If
God must have the glory, all that is done for us, whatsoever is done for us
must be done by him, else it must needs miscarry.

6 This serves to establish the hearts of those who have obtained any
competency for the support of this life with contentment, for if God be the
giver of my daily bread, and if his hand do minister to my necessities, he
knows best what state of life is fittest for me, I will not aspire higher: he
knows how much will serve me, I will not covet more; this resolution will give
thee much peace, For it casts all thy care upon God, who will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee.

7 This also stirs us up to walk in the obedience of the Laws of God, for if
we consent and obey, we shall eat the good things of the land; let us seek the
face of God, and depend upon his providence for all things: let us consider the
fowls of the air, and the lillies of the field, and wherein we are better then
they, even in our reasonable service of God, and conclude, that God will not
let them want any thing that lead a godly life: so will he furnish us with
matter of praise, that we may ever be telling of his goodness from day to day.

Unlawful and indirect means of bettring our estates, by corrupting of our
consciences, do break our bags, and spring leaks in our Ships, that we and our
good perish, but the fear of the Lord makes us rich; and what wants in the
peace of the world, is supplied in the peace of a good conscience.

3. Doct. Figurative speeches are in use in holy Scripture: this Text is full
of them, so is this whole Psalm.

I will only note these figures, which in this verse do offer themselves to
us, for a taste.

1 It is here said that God stood.

This is spoken after the manner of men, for when hearing and seeing, and
smelling, and touching, and tasting, which are our senses are attributed to
God: when our parts of body, our eyes, ears, mouth, hands, feet, arms are
given to him: our motions: as setting, standing, rising, going, striking and
such like are spoken of God, know that these be figurative forms of speech,
wherein the holy Ghost does retein our weak capacities, and under those forms
of words, does present to our understandings the unconceiveable operations of
the most high God.

And let us take heed that we do not conceive God in our thoughts like to man
in the structure and composition of the body as the Anthropomorphites did.

For it is here understood by the standing of God, that when he brought the
people to the promised land, there the progress ended, he stood there where he
brought them to rest.

2 It is here said, that he measured the earth, that is, also a figurative
manner of speaking, wherein that is charged upon him, which was done by his
direction and warrant.

3 He beheld and drove in sunder the Nations.

God is all eye, and beholds all things, all ear, and hears all things; all
hand, and makes all things, and does whatsoever he will: all foot and stands
in all places: he is here said to behold, which denotes his provident care of
his work, and he is said to drive in sunder the Nations, because he ordained
their expulsion, and he gave commission for the destruction of them, that he
might give their land, according to his promise, to his own people.

4 Where he calls the mountains everlasting and the hills perpetual, this is
also a figure. For these be attributes only belonging to God to be everlasting
and perpetual, and it shows the stability and setlednesse thereof.

5 There is also another figure in the very name of mountains, for we must not
literally understand that there was any violence offered to the mountains and
hills, but thereby the strength and process and settled estate of those nations
that dwelt in the land of Canaan, is signified, and so the scattering and
bowing of these moutains, does express the dispersion of those nations, or the
bringing of them under the yoke of subjection to the people of Israel.

6 His ways are everlasting, this is also figurative, for by the ways of God
are understood here the counsels and decrees of God, and his executions of his
will, which are no sudden operations, but proceed from everlasting wisdom.

And this is the wisdom of the Reader of holy Scripture, to observe, what is
spoken literally, and what figuratively, else many errors and heresies may
arise.

As even in this attribution of the parts and motions, and actions of the body
of man to God, the Anthropomorphites, not understanding the figure, did
conceive God in body like to man.

The heresy of transubstantiation grew out of the mistake of those words, hoc
est corpus meum, this is my body, wherein the figure not observed, the
Romanists do believe a real transmutation of the bread into the body of
Christ: whereas that is to be understood only by sacramental representation,
as as the sacrament of Circumcision is called the covenant of God in the flesh,
and the water of Baptism, is called the laver of regeneration, being the sign
and seal thereof.

You know that when Christ said to his Disciples; Beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees: Mat. 16.16
they understood him not to speak figuratively, and said; It is because we have
taken no bread.

So when he said, Destroy this Temple: the Jews understood him of the temple at
Jerusalem. The Scriptures of both Testaments, are full of examples of
figurative speaking.

The whole book of the song of Solomon, is a continued figure, and all the
poetical part of holy Scripture abound therewith.

The reasons why the wisdom of God has thus expressed it self, are: 1 Because
herein he would commend to us the use of that excellent science of the
Rhetoric, which teaches the use of figures, for there is no eloquence or
oratory in all the wisdom of the world, comparable to the holy elocution of
Scripture, the majesty whereof is such, that it convinces the judgment of man,
and makes it to yield it to the breath of God. 2 Because this cripticall
manner of speaking does involve the secrets of Gos wisdom in some obscurity,
to stir up and awake our diligence in the search, that we may be put to it to
study holy Scriptures, as Christ says, (...), search; for easy things do soon
cloy us and make us idle. 3 Because this difficulty, does put us to our
prayers, to be seech God to open to us the secrets of his wisdom. 4 This makes
us fear God, because the secrets of the Lord are only revealed to them that
fear God. 5 This difficulty is so sweetened with the pleasant mixture of art, as
it has omne punctum in it, for it mingleth utile dulci. 6 It does teach us to
be spiritual, for the carnal man cannot perceive the things of God, because
they are spiritually discerned, and the letter kills, but the Spirit gives
life: this Spirit he has left to teach his Church, and to bring all things to
our remembrance. 7 This obscurity does call upon us to set apart some time for
the study and search of Scriptures, and we cannot employ our spare hours of
leisure better then in this search, for here are the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, and these are able to make the man of God wise to salvation,
perfect, then to thoroughly, perfect to all good works. 8 He has distributed
his graces in his Church accordingly, and has ordained some to be teachers of
others, whose whole time is consecrated to the study of this book of Scripture,
that they may be able to understand this word aright: divide it aright to their
hearers.


Herein you have a great advantage, if you consider the goodness of God to
you, for in one hour, you reap the harvest of our labors in many hours of our
readings, of our inventions, judgments, search.

These reasons I gather from Clemens Alexandrinus, St. Augustine, and St.
Gregory, and some others.



Logic and Rhethorick, are two such necessary and requisite parts in a
Minister, as without which, neither can the method of Scripture, nor the power
of the arguments therein used, nor the clear interpretation of the words be
given.



St. Origin says, that as man, so the whole Bible does consist of a body and a
soul, the body is the better, the sense is the soul of Scripture.

That is the spiritual Manna that gives strength to the weak, that is, the
true Light that gives understanding to the simple.



For we do also affirm, that figures do sometimes give light to our
apprehension, and make the mind of God better known to us: as when Christ says;

I am the good Shepherd: as David said, The Lord is my Shepherd: this does
make Christ better known to us in his careful protection of us, and his
watchful keeping, and his plentiful feeding, and safe foulding of us, and in
such like.

Now, because the Church of Rome, has taken advantage of the obscurity of the
Scripture, to forbid the translation thereof, into the vernacle tongues of
nations, and to prohibit lay persons, or any other without special leave. Thus
much I dare affirm, that holy Scripture are plain and easy in all dogmaticall
points, all the articles of faith are plainly set forth, and the whole doctrine
of godly life, and the way to salvation is openly declared. So far our Church
does avouch, yet withal we must consider, that there is a double plainness of
Scripture.

1 Rational and Intellectual, which apprehends the true meaning of the
words in Grammatical construction, in Logical composition, and in Rhetorical
illustration, thus all the dogmaticall part of Divinity is plain to a natural
man, that is capable of these helps. 2 Spiritual and Metaphysicall, which is,
saving knowledge, and is the work of the Holy Ghost in us, making us thereby
wise to salvation, this knowledge is both the daughter and mother, of faith, for
by faith we hear the word, else it would not profit us, and by hearing comes
faith, else it were unfruitful.
Therefore I must indite many of the learned of the Church of Rome of slander,
who have given out in print, that we do hold the whole body of Scripture so
easy, both in the whole, and in every part thereof, that any unlearned men and
women may read, and understand, all as they go, and that they need no
interpreter. This no sober man will affirm; but that the difficulty is not such
as should deter us from the study thereof, rather that it is such as inviteth
us thereto, that we affirm.



1 Though the Scripture be full of figures, let us not make figures where there
are none, and strein plain and evident Texts from their genuine and proper
sense, to foreign and far-fetcht mysteries, as the Papist does often.

For when Peter says, Ecce hic duo gladii, they understand the double power of
Peter, and so of al Popes as his successors Ecclesiaticall and temporal; so
on these words:

He made two great lights, the greater to rule the day, the less to rule the
night; that these two lights are the Pope to rule the day; that is to say, the
Church: and the Emperor to rule the night, that is, the lay people.

Where note, that as the Moon borrows all the light it has of the Sun, So
must the Emperor borrow all his glory of the Pope.

Some of our own brethren have trod awry in this way, for an Article of Faith
lies bleeding in the unresolved judgments of many, by this fault of making a
figure where none is.

The words of Christ, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, are plain enough:

For we know that Christ had a soul, we know that there is an hell, and we hear
Christ say; that God would not leave it there.

But Mr. Calvine turns this into a figure, and his words be all oracles with
some that take their upon trust, his figure is that, descendit ad inferos diros
in anima cruciatus damnati, ac perditi hominis pertulet: he descended into
hell, that is, he bare in his soul all the torments of the damned.

Mast. Perkins refuses this as the meaning of the article, for he says, all
this is contained in the former: he suffered, was crucified dead.

And he finds another figure in these words, by soul, he means the body;
and by hell, he means the grave; for he thus renders it.

He descended into hell, that is, he was held captive in the grave, and lay in
bondage under death for three days.

Which need not, for the Article that says, he was buried contemns that: for
then God did not suffer his holy one to see corruption.

This turning of Articles of faith into figures, does destroy faith, therefore
without figure the safest way is to understand the word of the Prophets in
their own proper sense and natural signification: by soul, to understand the
living soul of Christ, which by death was separated for a time from his body.

By hell, to understand the place of the damned, in which Christ triumphed
victoriously over the Devil and his angels, and brought away the keys thereof,
that he might open it to the reprobate, and shut it again: the elect to whom
the promise is made, that, The gates of hell shall not prevail against them.

2 Let us also take heed, that where there is a plain figure, we do not
understand that literally, to corrupt the Text: which was the error of the
Disciplies, to whom when Christ had spoken of restoring the Kingdom to Israel,
they understood it literally, of the temporal Kingdom of the Jews, which was
meant of the spiritual Kingdom of Christ.

So the woman of Samaria thought Christ had spoken of an Elementary water, and
the Capernaites mistook Christ, speaking of the bread of life.

Therefore, let common judgments take good counsel, how they expound
Scriptures, lest they pervert them to their own damnation, for as Aug. Hinc
natae sunt omnes haereses, quia scripturae bonae intelleguntur non been, hence
all heresies grow, etc.

Ver. 7. I saw the Tents of Cushan in affliction, and the curtains of the Land
of Midian did tremble.
3 HEre follows further instance of the Majesty and glory of God, and
goodness to his Church, declared,

1 In the power of his fear, which was upon the Nations, When he brought his
Israel to Canaan, for that put them into affliction and trembling. 2 In the
wonders that he showed in the work.
I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction.

Who saw this? no the Prophet only, but the Church of God, to whom God has
made himself known by this judgment.

The vision was, that God did cast the fear of his people upon the Nations: he
names Cushan, or the people of Ethiopia bordering upon Egypt and Midian, which
took name of Midian the son of Abraham by Keturah. Genesis 25.2.


The terror of God fell upon many Nations, when God put Israel into the way to
the promised Land, and long after; and these two Nations are hereby a figure
Poetically and Rhethorically named, for many Nations,

The reason whereof I conceive to be this; Genesis 10.6.


Cushan or Ethiopia took name from Cush the eldest son of Cham them youngest
son of Noah, to show, that though Canaan the son of Cham be only named in
Noah's curse, yet the smart thereof should also light upon Cush also, and he
should taste also of affliction.

Again, herein the extent of this terror is well expressed, that Cushan or
Ethiopia should be made to tremble, which was remote from Canaan, for the whole
land of Egypt lay between.

Midian lay near to that land, so that I understand the Text thus; That God
cast his fear upon people remote, and near hand, and shook them with trembling
at his mighty power, when he brought his Israel into the promised Land; and
this was so palpable and manifest, that the Church of God could not but take
notice of it.

By tents and curtains, he expressed this people dismayed not in their Cities
and Towns, and places of habitation, but in the fields, and amidst their
military preparations, when their tents were pitched, as it were in readiness
to give battle: which is a Rhethoricall amplification of the greatness of
their terror.

My observation from this place in this;

The power of God showed in the terror of the wicked, does prove that there is
a God,

Why should the tents of Cushan be in affliction? Why should the curtains of
Midian tremble? but that the fear of the Lord is upon them, God daunteth and
dismayeth them.

It was one of Gods promises to his people; Ye are to pass through the coasts
of your brethren the children of Esau, which dwell in Sen, and they shall be
afraid of you. Deu. 2.4.


This deliverance of Israel from Egypt was a most memorable act of Gods power,
and made his name great in all the earth; it follows,

He, (i.e.) Esau) knows thy walkings through the great wilderness: these
forty years, V^r. 7.
the Lord thy God has been with thee, thou have lacked nothing.

Rahab that entertained the Spies whom Joshua, sent to view the Land of Canaan,
saved them from the dangerous pursuit of the messengers of the King of
Jericho: and she said to them:

I know the Lord has given you the Land, and that your terror is fallen upon
us, Josh. 2.9.
and that all the Inhabitants of the Land melt because of it.

For we heard how the Lord dried up the waters of the Red Sea for you, when he
came out of Egypt, and what you did to the two Kings of the Amorites on the
other side Jordan, Sihon and Og, whom ye destroyed utterly.

And as soon as we heard these things, our hearts did melt, neither did there
remain any more courage in any man because of you, for the Lord your God, he is
God above in Heaven, and in Earth beneath.

And this is the right way to make God known to the wicked and ungodly of the
earth.

From thence came that prayer of David, Put them in fear, O Lord, that they may
know, themselves to be but men. Psa. 9.20.
The fear of God will smite them with such terror, that they shall not have
hear to stir against him.

So it is said that God is known by executing his judgments. Romans 2.5.


For as the Apostle says, the very natural man has the work of the law
written in his heart.

The law written in the heart of every man is a general principle both of
truth in the understanding, which affirms, a divine nature, and of awe in
the affections to make him feared. And this law is not idle, but it works,
for there is, (...), the work of the law. And this is the true cause why
there is no peace at all to the wicked man, because he has the law of nature
vvorking within him, which is against him, and he has not the law of grace
to lay the storms which the law of nature raises.

From hence it comes, that the wicked flies when no man pursues, as Solomon
says, and he fears where no fear is: and Tully could say, that all the
poetical fictions of the furies which disquieted men so much, were but the
pinchings and convulsions of men's guilty consciences, who when they had done
evil, knew that they had broken the law written in their hearts, and then
feared the power which they saw above them, armed with vengeance against evil
doers.

St. Paul teaches us the use of this point.

Will thou then not be afraid of the power? Romans 31.3.
do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same.

Where doing that which is good has a double reward, for it quiteth fear, and
it crowns us with praise. Me thinks, that this consideration of the reward
should stir us up to say:

What shall we do that we may work the works of God? John 6.28, 29.
Then will Christ tell us: This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom
he has sent.

Faith in Christ takes away this terror of the Lord, as the Aoostle says, we
knowing the terror of the Lord do persuade men, and what is the thing to which
the Apostles do persuade, but to reconciliation with God through Christ: so
that when we preach faith to you, we preach peace, even as the Apostle says,
peace to them that are near, and peace to them are far off, and the God of
peace sends his Son, the peace of his Church with the Gospel of peace.

We are taught here that the welfare of the Church is the grief and vexation
of her enemies: 2 Doct.
Cushan and Midian are afflicted, and in a cold fit, when they hear what God
does for Israel.

So did the Egyptians repine at the prosperity of Israel, in Egypt they said:
Behold, the children of Israel are more and mightier then we: Exodus 1.10
Come let us deal wisely with them, lest they multiply, etc.

You see what the world thinks of their plots against the Church of God, they
think they do vvisely, when they vex the Church, this is that wisdom which
the Apostle does call, carnal, sensual, and divelish.

And these be the wifemen, of which it is said; ubi sapiens, where is the
wiseman, and God has made the wisdom of the world foolishness.

The reason of this opposition is given by our Savior, the world hates you
because you are not of the world,

Truth fails, and he that departs from evil, makes himself a prey. Isa.
59.15.
So David.

But mine enemies they are lively, they are strong, Psalm. 38.19.
and they that hate wrong fully are multiplied.

They also that render evil for good are mine adversaries, Verse 20.
because I follow the thing that good is.

They began betimes, for Cain slew his brother: 1 John 3.12 Ratio rationis.
and wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil, and his brothers
righteous.

I can easily bring you to the head of these bitter waters, so soon as Adam had
fallen from grace when God kept his first assise upon earth, and convented and
arraigned the transgressors, the man, the woman, and the serpent, he revealed
his eternal counsel of election and reprobation, and put a difference between
the seed and seed, the seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent.

Which is not only to be understood of the unreconciliable enmity that is
between Christ and the Devil. For Christ was the seed of the woman, quia solus
ita semen mulieris, and non etiam v^ri semen sit.

But he meant therein that enmity which should be betwixt the elect, who
are the seed of the woman by natural generation, and the holy seed by
spiritual regeneration, so called, Semen sanctum, and the seed of the serpent,
for Christ calls the wicked genimina viperarum, generation of vipers; and to
such he says, Vos estis ex patre vestro Diabolo, you are of your father the
Devil. John 8.44.


For this Rupertus says, that the Bible is called the Book of the battails of
the Lord, Number. 21.14.
because it contains the story of the wars betvveen these two; the Church
and the world.

From this enmity which God put betvveen the Church, and the world arises
this hatred and opposition, so that the prosperity of the wicked is David's
grief, the miseries of David be the worlds joy, the joy of the Church is the
affliction of the world.

God left the Devil in his fall, and took him not up again, thereby forsaking
him, he put enmity into him, and he for the hatred that he bears to God, has
ever since persecuted him in his Church, because his malice cannot extend to
hurt him.

And herein he is the more cruel, because he knovvs his time is but short.

Satan is but Gods instrument in the afflicting of the Church, so it is said to
the Angel of the Church of Smyrna. Behold, the Devil shall cast some of you
into prison, Revel. 2.10
that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days.

He goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour: If he be kept
from devouring, he biteth and rendeth, and does what hurt he can, for he is a
murderer, but if God show the light of his countenance to them whom he
pursues, he is sick of that mercy, and so are all the tents of Cushan, the
whole brood of vipers have this venom from the old serpent, to be afflicted
at the prosperity of the Church.

For instance, I will prevent the time, David says; one day tells another,
and one night certifieth another.

To morrovvs memorial teaches this day, this was the vigill of that popish
holy day, which the same Papists here at home, and many beyond the seas, hoped
to have made festival to all posterity.

The children of darkness had provided to put out our light, to quench the
light of our Israel: it was an affliction to the Papists to behold religion and
peace settled under the government of a learned King, who knew what he believed,
and why, and who had discovered himself an enemy to their Antichristian and
heretical synagogue.

They saw a fair issue ready for timely succession, so graciously seasoned with
the salt of heavenly wisdom from the first of their capacity and apprehension;
that there remained no hope for their politic religion to find footing in
these Churches.

Their flourishing state of Church and Common-welth was such an affliction to
them, that some Zealots of their Religion, the sons of thunder could no longer
contein themselves, but their study was how to put their grief upon us, and to
transfer our joy upon themselves.

They showed us the way of their rejoicing, their mercies were cruel, nothing
could remove their grief at our vvelfare, but the destruction of the head and
body, root and tree, and all in a day. And they that would have destroyed us
thought, and the Jesuits and Priests of the Roman Faith taught them to
believe, that they should do God good service.

We see the mercies of that religion so clearly in this horrible Treason, that
all that know and serve the God of peace; have just cause to esteem Papists
disloyal subjects, secret enemies to the State; bloody persecutors of the
Gospel of peace.

Our stories are full of their malice, vvrackings, imprisonments, starvings,
burnings, hangings, and many exquisite torments executed upon innocent and holy
Martyrs.

But when we remember the Povvder-Treason, that calls all the tormentors of
the Church before them merciful: the Devil did never roar so loud before, the
Bulls of Rome never bellovv'd such terror to the Church, as in that damnable
and desperate attempt.

The provocation was their affliction at our prosperity, and grief at our
vvelfare, again, this venom of the generation of vipers boiled over, and they
that bore evil will to our Sion, said, one unto another. Catosby to his
confederates.

I have bethought me of a way at one instant to deliver us from all our bonds,
and without any forriegn help to replant the Catholic Religion, which is to
blow asp the Parliament house with Gunpowder, for in that place have they dohe
us all the mischief, and perchance God has designed that place for their
punishment: for this strikes at the root, and will breed a confusion, fit to
beget new alterations.

What alterations could be here meant but those that Job felt, that our Land
and Church might complain: Thou have turned my Harp into mourning, and my
Organs into the voice of them that weep.

How did they swallow up the joy of this change, in hopeful expectation of
success: but the children came to the birth, and there was no strength to
bring forth.

Their own fear came upon them, For it was Catesbyes own Lenvoy, to his
revealed Treason; But, says he, If this take not effect (as most of this
nature miscarry) the scandal will be so great to the Catholic Religion, as not
only our enemies, but our friends will with good reason condemn us. Thus did
their minds mis-give, and abodements of evil did secretly call upon them, to
fly from the anger to come,

This diverted them a while from this execution, and put them into a new
project; Thomas Winter was sent (as his confession under his own hand
reports) to inform the Constable of Spain then coming in Ambassy from the
King of Spain to our Sovereigne, of the state of the Catholics in England, and
to entreat his mediation to solicit our King for the revocation of some penal
laws, and the admittance of the English Catholics into the rank of his other
Subjects. Winter met with him at Bergen near Dunkirk, and by the means of
Owen, an apostate Traitor, he had access to him, moved him in his suite, and
had a fair promise from him to do all good offices in that errand.

But Owen discouraged that hope, saying, that he believed nothing less, and
that they sought only their own ends: meaning the state of Spain, holding
small account of Catholics.

Owen animated the Treason, and promised to send Faux over to help to set it
forward.

From thence Winter went to another of our fugitives, Sir William Stanley, to
Ostend, where he asked his opinion, whether, if the Catholics of England
should do any thing in England to help themselves, the Archduke would second
them? he answered, no: for all those parts desired peace with England.

After all these despairs, they had no remedy to cure their disease of envy at
the gracious peace of this State, but their powder plot, in which none but
professed. Papists within the land had any hand.

None that we can discover, but Priests and Jesuits, here or abroad did blow
the fire.

No foreign Prince has the dishonorable name of privacy with it, or abetment
of it, only the Church of Rome lent her help to this nefarious Treason, for
there was here, 1 The seal of Catholic Confession; 2 The bond of a Catholic
Oath; 3 The Vow by a Catholic Sacrament; 4 The indiction of Catholic
prayers, to be used for the prosperous success of the Catholic cause in
England.


But, I may be short in the Catastrophe of this whole danger, as God was sudden
in his exceeding great mercies to us.

The nets were broken, and we escaped as a whole neast of Birds from the hands
of the fowler. Never was there day wherein God did so great things for this
Land as on that day, never did the Sun shine in more perfect strength upon this
Church then on that day, which God crowned with our deliverance.

1 It was and is a good use of this mercy, to fill our mouths with laughter,
and our tongues with joy; but that must not be all.

2 We must tell the people what things he has done, and once a year, at least
we must say, this is the day, that the Lord has made, exultemus and laetemur,
and his praise must be in our mouths, we must give unto the Lord the glory due
to his name, and praise him according to his excellent greatness.

3 But that is not all, we must being delivered from the hands of our enemies,
serve him in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life,
and remember that if we do wickedly, we shall perish, we and our King.

4 But that is not all, we must pray also for the peace of our Jerusalem, for
we shall prosper if we love it: for our brethren and companions sake in the
common faith, we must wish it now prosperity, for the house of Gods sake, we
must seek to do it good.

6 But this is not all, we must cast out the bondwoman, and her son, that is,
the superstition of the blondy Church of Rome, I may safely persuade, thus far,
every one of us out of his own heart, and thus far we may go without our
selves to let our light shine before men, that in our light they may see light.

The Minister may go further, for he has the warrant of a lawful calling, to
reprove the works of darkness openly, and to convince heresies, and to warn
men to take heed of the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees.

The Magistrate may go further, to execute the just laws of our land upon such,
and let him see to it, that he bear not the sword of God in vain.

The sovereign Defender of the Faith amongst us bears that high title, which
is proper to all godly Kings, to this end, accomptable to none but God for his
vice-gerency herein.

Verse 8. Was the Lord displeased against the rivers? was thine anger against
the rivers? was thy wrath against the sea? that thou did ride upon thy
horses, or thy chariot of Salvation.


1 The power of God showed in the waters: 1 he made a passage for his Israel,
through the red sea, as on dry land, to bring them out of Egypt, 2 He made a
passage through Jordan, the river turned back, and gave them way to pass over
into the land of promise.
The words of my text are easy.

Does any man conceive that God did take any spleen at the river of Jordan,
that he drove it back: or that he was angry with the sea, that he made dry land
to appear: surely, God was not moved thereto from any fury against the
creatures, which keep their course according to his appointments.

And he says, that God did ride upon his horses, poetically, and figuratively,
expressing God in state, riding on, as the Psalmist says, prosperously.

And he calls the protection of God the char^o^s of salvation, because God
took them up to him to preserve them

Verse 9. And this is well expounded in the next words; in a new figure.

Verse 9 Thy bow was made quite naked according to the oaths of the tribes,
even thy word, Selah. Verse 9.
Thou did cleave the earth with rivers.
For here by the bow of God is meant the armor wherewith with God is
furnished, for the defense of his Church. This bow is therefore said to be made
quite naked, because then God declared that all the wonders which he did in the
division of the waters of the red sea, and of Jordan, were wrought for the
preservation of his Church.

This bow he always had, that is, this strength for his Church, but then he
made it so naked, that the Egyptians cried, let us fly from Israel: and the
tents of Cushan were afflicted, and the curtains of Midian trembled to see this
bow of the Lord.

Abraham saw this bow, but in the case, for it was under promise, the
Patriarchs saw it somewhat nearer hand, but yet not uncased, in the deliverance
from Egypt, it began to be drawn out in the possession of the land of Canaan,
it was made quite naked, and this was done.

According to the oaths of the tribes, even thy word, that is;

All this was done that thou might make good thy word, whereby thou had
sworn to give this land to the tribes, the oath of God was sworn to Abraham, as
Zechariah remembers it.

To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, Luke 1.72 73.
and to remember his holy Covenant.

The oath which he swear to our father Abraham.

Selah, is a rest for meditation, for admiration, it is a confession of the
goodness of God.

Thou did cleave the earth with rivers] This was another of Gods waterworks.

Tremelius and Junius read thus: flumina diffidisti terrae: and so it is no
more but what before he said, more plainly expressed that: he clave the waters to
make way for passage.

And to omit the various opinions of men, concerning this wonderful work of
God, I think it has special reference to that story, where the people of
Israel upon the way almost perishing with thirst, numb. 20.11.
and therefore murmuring, Moses struck the rock, which by the commandment he
should only have spoken to, and the waters gushed out and cut themselves a
channel, which here is called cleaving of the earth with rivers.

Here was a double miracle, one in giving the water out of the rock, whence
formerly none have issued: another in the continuance of this full stream,
running along the way of their journey, in the wilderness to supply them, so
the Psalmist says; He brought streams also out of the rock, Psalm. 78.16.
and caused waters to run down like rivers.

These words do contein three parts.

1 The wonders which God showed in the waters. 2 The motive that induced him. 3
The argument drawn from hence.
1 The wonders here mentioned are three.

1 He names the last as freshest in memory, the division of the waters of
Jordan, to give way to the passage of Israel, into the promised land. 2 He
names the first, the cutting of a passage through the red sea to bring Jsrael
out of Egypt. 3 He names the miracle of giving his people water out of the
rock, and loading the stream along with the host.
2 The motive that induced him 1 Affir. 2 Neg.


1 There was internus motor, the inward motive, 1 Affirm*
his love to Israel, and his care to preserve them, which is expressed in his
riding on the chariots of salvation. 2 There was externum motivum, the
outvvard motive, and that was the oaths of the Tribes, even his word which
he had put to Abraham for that land. 2 Non iratus, I am not angry. 3 The
Argument drawn from hence. 2 Neg.


God has showed himself marvelous to Israel, in exitu, in their going forth,
then he divided a sea for them in via, in their way, then he made rivers to run
in dry places after them, in introitu, in their entrance, then he divided
Jordan for them.

Therefore we may trust in him, and commit our selves to his care, he will
never leave us, nor forsake us.

1 Of the wonders showed in the waters, and therein, 1 Of the division of
Jordan.
This was a great wonder, the story of it is recorded so, for the day before it
was done Joshua said to the people:

Sanctify your selves, Josh 3 5.
for to morrow the Lord will do wonders among you: yea, God himself said to
Joshua; This day will I magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may
know, that as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee.

The wonder is set down thus:

No sooner did the feet of the Priests which bare the Ark, dip in the brim of
the water, but the waters that came down from above stood, and rose up upon an
heap very far from the City Adam, that is beside the Zaretan: and those that
came down from the Sea of the plain, even the salt Sea failed, and were cut
off: and the people passed over right against Jericho.

This was so great a wonder, that we read,

When all the Kings of the Amorites which were on the side of Jordan westward;
Josh. 5.1.
and all the Kings of the Cananites which were by the Sea, heard that the Lord
had dried up the waters of Jordan from before the children of Israel: until we
were passed over that their hearts melted: neither was there spirit in them any
more, because of the children of Israel.

And the Psalmist does celebrate the praises of God for the same, with
poetical streins of divine rapture; he puts both together, as this our
Psalmist does, both that of the Red Sea, and this of Jordan,

The Sea saw that and fled: (i.e. it saw that, when Israel came out of Egypt,
Psa. 114 2, 3.
Judah was his Sanctuary, and Israel his dominion.) Jordan was driven back.

What ailed thee O Sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan that thou wast turned
back?

The things most remarkable in that wonderful work of God were these;

1 That the waters of so great a River as Jordan should recoil toward their
head; for water being a ponderous body, does naturally fall downward, and
seeks still the lower place; but God did make a wall of water to stop the
decourse of the stream, which was a work against nature: for the other part of
the stream ran on, and left the land dry. 2 The second wonder was the means
that God used to accomplish this great work: for the Priests that did bear the
Arc must set the first foot into the River, for God said;
As Soon as the soals of the feet of the Priests, Josh 3 13.
that bear the Ark of the Lord, the Lord of all the Earth, shall rest in the
waters of Jordan, the waters of Jordan shall be cut off, etc.

Here was the Arc, the Sacrament visible of Gods invisible presence, and the
Priests of the Lord bearing it: they had the warrant of Gods Word to attempt
this passage, and they did not so much as wet their feet in that river; no
sooner did the soals of their feet touch the water, but they fled from the
Lord, not from the Priests; yet from the Priests as the Lords instruments, not
that any virtue or efficacy was in the feet of the Priests, the virtue was in
the Sacrament of Gods presence, the Ark which they carried upon their
shoulders: neither was the virtue of that wonder in the Saerament efficiently
and primarily, but mediately and instrumentally.

It was the work of the Lord of all the Earth, whose Sacrament was the Arc,
whose servants the Priests.

3 A third wonder was the faith of the Priests that did bear the Arc, who
could believe a thing in nature so impossible, in reason so improbable, that
they durst attempt it both in regard of their own persons, but especially of
the Ark of God which they did bear.

Moses vvanted faith in a less matter, when God bade him only speak to the
Rock, he smote it twice, once in vain to punish his unbelief, once with
success to fulfill Gods promise.

Yet the Priests believed faithfully, and obeyed vvvillingly, and did not
debate the matter anxiously, or go on timerously.

4 A fourth wonder was in the time, Josh. 3.15.
for it was in the time of the harvest when Jordan overfloweth all the banks,
when there was a great deal more river then channel, and the more water, the
more wonder.

5 We may add here to a fifth, that when all the people were past over, Josh.
4.5.
Joshua did command twelve men out of every Tribe a man, to return back again
into the midst of the Channel, and they were not priests, but laymen, and they
were not to follow the Ark, but to go before it, and from thence, they must
every man bring upon his shoulder a stone, and those were set up in Gilgall for
a monument of this passage, for the memorial thereof to their children.

6 The last wonder was, that when the twelve men returned from the midst of the
channel of Jordan, to the land which was for them to dwell in. The Priests
following them with the Ark of God, the soals of their feet were no sooner
lifted upon the dry land, but

The waters of Jordan returned to their place, and flowed over all his banks as
they did before. Josh. 4.18.
But he names river in my Text, so; Further, this mention of the Rivers is yet
referred to a former story, wherein God declared his power in the Rivers of the
Egyptians, and that not improperly, because then the people were in the house
of bondage, and the first Plague which God put upon the Egyptians was this, All
the waters were turned into blood, Exodus 7* 20.
the fish died, and the Waters stanke.

It may also renew the memory of two more passages over Jordan, 2 Ki^. 2.8.
one of Eliah, who took his mantle and wrapped it together, and smote the
waters, and they were divided hither and thither, so that they two went over on
dry land. V^rse 14.
Another of Elisha, who took up the mantle of Eliah, and stood by the River of
Jordan, and said, Where is the Lord God of Eliah, and smote the water, and it
parted hither and thither, and Elisha past over.

2 In the next place, he remembers the Sea, meaning the Red Sea, and Gods
riding through it, and conducting his Israel through the midst of it, Exo. 14
16.
the story of it is recorded by Moses.

And there are many wonders in it.

1 The danger that Israel was in, the Egyptians behind them with power and
fury to destroy them, the Sea before them to swallow them, God opened them a
passage through the Sea to save them for the over-taking of their enemies, and
to lead them to the next shore, a wonderful help in extremity of danger. 2
Another vvonder, Exo. 14.16.
that God rather used Moses and his rod, then his own word, in the parting of
the waters of the Sea: for using the Ministry and service of men, in his great
and extraordinary operations, he does honor to men therein, as he said to
Joshua.
This day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, Josh. 3 7.
that they may know that as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee.

So the Psalmist says, Psa. 77.20.


Thou leadest thy people like sheep by the hand of Moses and Aaron: It is well
observed of Master Calvine, Ministros simul commendat, quibus tam honorificum
munus deus injunxit.

So in the Gospel, Christ has honored his Ministers, to whom he has committed
the office of the ministry of reconciliation: teaching by them, baptizing by
them, binding and loosning by them, for though he do all these things himself,
as he says, Sine me nihil potestis facere, without me you can do nothing, yet
he will do nothing ordinarily in these things without us, because this is his
Ordinance, and the established constitution in his Church.

3 As he used the ministry of Moses in this great work of dividing the sea,
Ex^. 14.21
so did he also use the service of an East Wind all the night, to drive back
the waters, that dry land might appear.

This abated nothing of the honor of God, that he used the service of his
creatures, neither can this separation of the waters be, therefore ascribed to
some natural causes, seeing this wind was miraculously sent of God to this
purpose.

Some enemies of God have slandred this miracle, and said, that the passage of
Israel was but an advantage taken of an extraordinary neap tide, which turns
the truth into a lie, for it is here added, that the waters were a wall on
both sides of them.

The work it self of dividing the sea, that was the greatest, what is the rod
of Moses, or the force of an east wind to part the waters in two, and to cut
out a lane of dry land, in the midst of the sea for such an army to pass
through on foot, to make the waters a fluent and liquid element to stand on
both sides, as a wall and fence to their passage.

Yet I must tell you that many learned have believed and written, that the
waters of the sea were divided in twelve places, and twelve lanes, cut out, for
the twelve tribes to pass over every of the tribes a part, and by himself.

And this was the tradition of the Hebrews: as St. Origin, upon this place
affirms.

Audivi a majoribus traditum quod in ista digressione maris, Hom. 5 in Exodus
singulis quibusque tribubus filiorum Isr. singulae aquarum divisiones factae
sunt, and propria unicuique tribui in mari aperta sit via.

And for proof, Ps. 136.13.
he alleges the words of the Psalm. He divided the red sea into parts, it is
rendered in divisions, implying more than one division.

I say with St. Origin. Haec a majoribus observata in Scripturis divinis
religiosum credidi non tacere.

But though this do much advance the glory of Gods power, yet because it is not
recorded in this story of the passage, we need not admit it, and against it I
find, that the place alleged will not carry it through. For the same word
which is used to express the division of the waters in this story, is used by
Moses, in the story of Abraham.

Who by the commandment of God, took a young heifer, a sheegoat, Genesis 15 9, 1^.
a ram, a turtle dove, and a young pigeon, an^ divided them in the midst, and
laid each piece; one against another.

Here was a division made but into two parts, only, yet it is said after that,
behold, a smoking furnace, and a lamp of fire past between those pieces: the
word is the same (...), yet the division was but into two, no doubt, that story
would not have concealed so great an addition to the wonder, so much serning to
set forth the glory of God.

The Lord sufficiently showed his Church that all things serve him, and they
had as good cause as those in the Gospel to have said: Who is this, that both
winds and sea obey him?

5 Another wonder was the hand of God, drawing the Egyptians, Pharaoh and his
host after Israel, into the, sea for God has taken it upon himself, that this
was his own doing.

And I, behold I, will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, Ex 14.17.
and they shall follow them, and I will get me honor upon Pharaoh, and upon
all his host; upon his chariots, and upon his hors^men.

And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord. Verse 18.


They, no doubt, had their own ends in this, for as St. James says;

Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, Jam 1.14.
and entised.

They had their own motives to draw them into this mischief.

1 Their desire to recover the Israel to their service, whom they held so long
vassals to them. 2 They had also a desire to recover from them the wealth of
Egypt, which they had improvidently parted with to the Israelites. 3 Their
desire of revenge to punish this flight, and this robbery of the Egyptians. 4
Their error who thought they might pass as safely after Israel, as Israel went
before, as Josephus speaks for them.
These motives grew within themselves, and they were their own lusts.

But God gave them over to these lusts and desires, of purpose to punish their
cruelty to his people, and to make his name glorious in the deliverance of his
Church, and in the conquest of the enemies thereof.

It is revenge enough in God upon man, to leave him to his own ways, for they
lead him to destruction.

Some heathen writers have charged all this wonder of the escape of Israel, and
of the passage through the sea upon Moses, who by art Magic, they say did all
this.

But could he by that art work upon the affections, and wills of King Pharaoh,
and all his people, to force them after Israel, into the red sea.

The most that we read of Moses, concerning any art in natural Philosophy, is,
that Moses was brought up in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and no man
thinks that he got all their wisdom from them: how then did not the
wisdom of the Egyptians, at time serve the Egyptians themselves; when this
was done.

6 Another memorable miracle of this passage was, that before all Israel, had
recovered the further shore, the same passage was safe to Israel, and
pernicious and fatal to the Egyptians, which appeared: 1 Because God did not
let the waters come together, to hinder the Egyptians pursuit, but kept them
divided, till they were all within the verge of the sea, for this God could
have done, as it after follovveth. 2 That to hinder their journey of pursuit,
God turned the pillar of Cloud behind Israel, between them and the Egyptians,
so that Israel led the way by a clear light, the Egyptians follovved them in
the dark. 3 That their chariot wheels were smitten off in the night, so that
they drove uneasily. 4 That the waters came together upon their consultation
to return, and drowned them all, before all the children of Israel, had
recovered the further shore.


7 The last memorable wonder was the casting up of the bodies of the Egyptians
upon the further shore, which Israel had recovered, and whereon they pitched,
to make good the word of Moses: you shall see them no more, that is, living to
terrify you, thus Israel saw what God had done for them; and their eyes, had
it desire against their enemies.

All these be things worth remembering.

3 He adds another wonderful mercy, in cleaving the earth with rivers: which
has reference, as you have heard, to Numb. 20.11. In which, 1 It is
wonderful, that God hearing the murmur of his people for want of water, had
not punished their sin with present death; but did choose rather to give them
their hearts desire, and to satisfy them with water. 2 That he made the rock
to yield them water, which did not naturally, but by virtue of his word. 3 That
it should have been done so easily, as by a word of Moses, that it was done so
easily, as by twice smiting 4 That those waters did follow the host to relieve
it all the way of their journey, till they had other supply, as also the Manna
did, till they came to come in Canaan, so these waters ran into no sea. 5 That
these rivers dried up after Israel, and no show of any river ever since, where
these waters ran in dry places, to show who ordained that stream, and for
whom.


Though God has had his praise for all the things before, yet they desire,
Canticum novum, a new song.

Here, and here it is work for the rector Chori.

2 The motive that induced God to do all this for his people, 1 Affirm.
expressed in two things: internus motor.

1 His desire of the preservation of his Israel, For he did ride upon his
Horses and Chariots of salvation. Pharaoh followed Israel into the red Sea on
horses and in chariots, these were the horses and chariots of destruction, God
took off their wheels, and they failed in their speed.

But God went forth with salvation: Israel could not but see in all these
wonderful works of God, that God was for them.

1 In their setting forth, to bring them out of the house of bondage, even
through the sea. 2 In the way of their journey, to quench their thirst in the
dry and unwatered wilderness. 3 At their journeys end, to open them a passage
into the promised land through Jordan.
Israel is a type of the Catholic Church of God on earth, and their passage
from Egypt to Canaan, is a type of our passage from the womb to heaven, and
God is the same, his Church is as dear to him as ever it was, and he has taken
upon him the care of it.

He is called by Job, The preserver of men, especially of his elect.

Here are only mentioned three of the most eminent wonders of God: there were
many more which David repeated; Psalm. 105, and 106.

All these were the effects of the free favor of God to his people, Ps. 106.21.
whereby he got the name of a Savior. And the Psalmist prays.

Remember me, Ps. 106.4.
O Lord, with the favor that thou bear to thy people, O visit me with thy
salvation.

This was a singular favor, for he says also, Non fecit taliter, he did not
so to any Nation.

That I may see the good of thy chosen, Verse 5.
that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy Nation, that I may glory with thine
inheritance.

For this favor of God to his Church is a special grace above his universal
protection.

This it is that the Spouse of Christ does pray for. Set me as a seal on thy
heart, Cant. 8.6.
and as a Signet upon thine arm.

That wish of the Church then was thus, and is now an Article of Faith: that
prayer was then, and now is our Creed.

But much more evidently has this eternal love of God to his Church in Christ
Jesus showed it self: since Christ our Savior was made manifest in the flesh;
and much more has it extended, and dilated it self, since he was believed on
of the Gentiles; and preached to the world.

For when God once had fitted him with a body, and therewith had given him a
heart like ours, and such an arm as we have, and such hands, it has been more
discerned, how we were set as a seal upon that heart, how we are worn upon
that arm, how we are engraven in the Palms of those hands. For that heart was
pierced with a spear, those hands were nailed to the Cross, and these be the
stamps and Characters of his love to us.

And as the affection of love is noted to be most vehement in a woman, as David
does imply when he bewailed Jonathans death.

Thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women: 2 Samuel 1.26.
so our Savior to take upon him this affection in the dearest tenderness, and
most intense measure and degree, is said to be made of a woman, and she a
Virgin.

And that sin might not corrupt this affection, Ga. 4.4.
or harden the heart: He was conceive by the Holy Ghost.

The Church does well to remember this interest that God gave them in this
land, for there out suck they no small advantage.

This calls God the God of Israel, and it calls Israel Gods peculiar people:
this does spread the wings of this Hen over all her Chickens, and gathers
them together under the same, it makes them room in the bosom of God.

2 Another motive was the oaths of the tribes, even Gods Word: that is, the
covenant of God made with Abraham and his seed, for so the Psalmist does
express it;

He has remembered his Covenant for ever: Ps. 105.8.
the word that he commanded to a thousand generations.

Which Covenant he made with Abraham and his oath unto Isaac.

And confirmed the same unto Jacob for a Law, and to Israel for an everlasting
Covenant.

And after having briefly surveyed the story of Isreal's deliverance and
passage, having recapitulated the coming of Israel into Egypt, the plagues of
Egypt, there coming out thence with the wealth of Egypt, the pillar of
cloud, the pillar of fire, the Quails, the Manna, the water out of the rock,
he gives this reason of ad, for he remembered his holy promise, V^rse 42.
and Abraham his servant.

Of this oath of God, the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 6.13.
for when God made a promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater,
he swear by himself, saying.

Surely, blessing, I will bless thee, and multiplying, I will multiply thee.

The reason why God bound himself by oath follows.

Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, Verse
17.
the immutability of his counsel confirmed it by an oath. This was a great
obligation to bind God to this performance, neither does it any whit abridge
his own liberty, but that he remained Liberimum agens still, for that he
declared therein the constancy of his decree, which was (...).

2 Because as I have showed, that and all other Gods promises have reference to
the obedience of the people, so that God might have cancelled this obligation
upon their forfeiture thereof by disobedience, if he had pleased, which makes
good the former motive of his own good will and favor, who notwithstanding,
their many provocations and rebellions, yet performed this promise.
2 The motive is negatively set down, For here it is expressed what was not the
cause of these vvonderfull vvater-vvorks, was it? which is as much, as it was
not because the Lord was displeased at rivers, it was not because his wrath was
against the sea.

To part the Sea in two, to divide Jordan, to make rivers run a while in full
stream to serve his people, was no displeasure taken at these elements.

God never lays his rod upon those creatures, which he has ordained for the
service of man, but to punish man.

To the creature it is all one to keep the natural order of creation, or to
suffer supernatural alteration, for omnia illi serviunt, all things do serve
him, was God angry with the earth when he cursed it after Adams fall, when
he drowned it, after it grevv full of cruelty.

The insensible creatures do the will of him that made them.

It is recorded as a blemish to that mighty King Xerxes, Herod. Polihim lib. 7.
Number. 173.
that he foolishly overweened his power in such a case.

For being to pass his army over the Hellespont, where the sea was about
seven furlongs over, he caused a bridge to be made of floaty vessels to that
purpose.

But a great tempest arising, and breaking his bridge, when he heard thereof,
he was in such passion at the sea, that he commanded it to be punished with
three hundred stripes: and he cast in fetters into it to take it prisoner, and
caused these wise words to be spoken to it.

O aqua amara, Dominus hanc tibi irrogat poenam, quod eum laesisti, qui de te
nihil mali meritus es: te tamen Rex Xerxes, velis, nolisve transmittet.

As wisely, either he himself, or as Herodotus reports, Clio 34. Cyrus.
Cyrus his Grandfather fell out with the river Gyndes, for drowning him a white
horse, but his revenge was more in sight, so was his deliberate furious folly.
For he set his army a work to cut out new channels, and divided the river into
360 brooks, ut a mulieribus ne genua tingentibus transiri possit.

But our God had no quarrel, the text says, to these inanimate creatures of
his, which were so at his command. The Church here does God right, to confess
the true motive, of this extraordinary operation of God, so here is a double
confession.

1 That Tu, Domine, fecisti, thou, Lord, have done it. 2 That he did for such a
cause.
This is not barely avouched, but it is proved. Thy bow was made quite naked,
that is, thou did let all the world take notice of thy power, and strength,
and favor, in the cause of thy Church. At the coming of God in great Majesty
and Glory on Mount Sinai, to give the law, beforementioned, there was
absconsio roboris, the hiding of his strength, God revealed himself then to
Israel only, but these three great wonders here confessed, did uncase the bow of
God, and made it quite naked, so that all nations might take knowledge of the
arm of the Lord, and might give testimony to the same.

The Argument drawn from hence is still the same, for from the former evidences
of Gods great power and mercy showed, and openly, declared unto the Church,
they gather comfort to assure themselves of the favor of God, toward them in
this captivity in Babylon.

They know and believe that the hand of God is not shortened, nor his arm
weakened, but that he who was able to cut a way for them through the sea, and
the river of Jordan, and to make rivers run in dry places, to relieve their
fathers in the wilderness, is still as able to succor them in that captivity
against the King of Babel, and all the Chaldeans, so he shows by what faith
the just shall live in their banishment.

Namely, by faith grounded on the power and wisdom, and love of God, and of
his truth.

The doctrines which this passage affords are these.

1 God must have the glory of his own great Works. David is a full example of
this duty, for, 1 in his own case, he says, Ps. 66.16.
Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for
my soul.

2 He stirs up others to do the like, even in this case mentioned in my
text. Come and see the works of God, Ps. 66.5, 6.
he is terrible in his doings toward the children of men. He turned the sea
into dry land, they went through the flood on foot, there did we rejoice in him.


The reason hereof is in sight, David says, this honor is due to his name.

We have two debts which we shall ever be paying, and yet never clear with our
Creditors, that is of praise to God, of love to our neighbors, he that came of
purpose into the world to pay our debts has not wiped off this score, rather
he has set us further in debt.

1 To our brother: if God so loyed us as to send his Son amongst us, we ought
also to love one another so much the more.

2 To himself: David says, The loving kindness of the Lord is ever more and
more toward us: therefore, laus ejus erit semper in ore meo, his praise shall
be ever in my mouth. The coming of Christ amongst us has made it more and
more seen, for therein the bow of God was made quite naked.

2 We must do God this right to honor him in his own works, David says; Ps.
145.10.
All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord.

3 We see the enemies of God do not spare to do all they can to rob God of his
glory, Vigilat bostis, and tu dormis? the enemy waketh, and do thou sleep?

Some gave out amongst the Egyptians, that this passage over the sea on dry
land, was only an advantage taken by Moses, of a great ebb occasioned by an
extraordinary wind, which coming of the land, at the head of the bay, made all
the head of the bay dry land for many miles together, but the text is against
that, for it shows how the waters were a wall unto them on both hands.

Again, the waters were divided by an East vvind, but that vvind blows not from
that shore, but rather it should have been a Northerly vvind: others imputed
this to Moses, as done by magical arts, which if it had been so, no doubt,
but there were with Pharcah, of his Magitians that could in the learning of
the Egyptians, have wrought with Moses hand to hand.

And surely, that is the reason, that there is so often mention of this vvonder
in Scripture, to stir up all faithful people to vindicate the honor of God,
against the depravers thereof.

This admonishes us both to the hearing and reading the story of the Bible,
Genesis 18.19
God himself made Abraham so much of his counsel, for that, because he knew
that Abraham would teach his children.

And for that the Sacrament of the Passover was instituted, Ex. 12.26.
for that it might teach their children after them.

For this were the twelve stones set up in Gilgall, Josh. 4.21.
to teach the story of the passage over Jordan; and in the New Testament, the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper was instituted in remembrance of Christ till his
coming: so many as would learn matter enough to fill their mouths with the
praise of God, let them open the two Testaments, and read therein, let them
hear and study that holy story, there is enough in it to make a man wise to
salvation.

For this is your wisdom and understanding to know the Lord and to serve him,
and to honor him, for, For him that honors me, I will honor, says our God.

2 This reproves those that swallow the gracious favors of God without any
relish or taste of them, and neither consider the former mercies of God, nor his
present blessings, that live like bruit beasts, saying, this day is like
yesterday, and to morrow will be like this day, and more abundant: and such
sensual and carnal sons of nature there are that reap benefits, where they
never sowed prayers, and gather mercies where they never scattered
supplications,

3 This chideth the Euchites of our time,

I have ever commended to you the use of prayer, it is a special part of Gods
worship, and God loves both frequent and importunate petitions, but if we part
praise from it, and do not join thanksgiving with supplication, we have the
profit, but God has not the honor of his own favors.

All our care must not be who will show us any good? we must also offer to him
the sacrifices of righteousness, as well as call upon the name of the Lord, for
quid recipiam, we must have, quod retribuam.

Seeing God must have the glory of his own great works, David;

The works of the Lord are great, Psa. 111.2.
sought out of all them that have pleasure therein

His work is honorable and glorious, and his righteousness endures for ever.

He has made his wonderful works to be remembered. David says, He is worthy
to be praised.

This serves for caution; of him more then he has done, and put miracles upon
him that he never did.

The Church of Rome has long had a busy hand in these false ascriptions: the
golden legend of vvorm-eaten authority amongst them, and their Speculum
exemplorum, set forth by John Major a Jesuit in Anno 1607; and Cantipatranus a
Domican Friars full Volume of miracles, set forth, Anno, 1605. tell fine tails,
ridiculous, even to children, yet the implicit faith of Papists does swallow
all for canonical: wherein God is dishonored with humane inventions, and
truth it self with lies: their legends of their Ladies of Loretto, and Hales;
are of the same coynage: and it is the policy of that Strumpet of Rome to keep
this mint always at work, to amaze the ignorant with strange wonders.

But I say unto them in the words of Job, Job 13.7.
Will ye speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him?

Gregory their own Pope, upon these words, says, Veritas fulciri non quaerit
auxilio falsitatis; he says, that it is the trick of heretics: It is, I am
sure, the practice of Papists, but thou man of God fly these things; truth is
not honored but with truth.

2 We must search out, and confess, the true cause of all the good that God
does to us.

It is Aristotle's Doctrine in his Elenches, that, Elene. 1.4.
id quod non est causa ut causam ponere, to make that a cause which is not; is
a capatious and sophistical manner of reasoning.

So the Serpent over-reach't Eve in Paradise; for when God had given our
Parents there a precise Law, Thou shall not eat of the tree in the midst of the
Garden.

The true cause why God put that restraint upon them, was to try their
obedience to him, in a small and easy precept; forbidding them a thing in it
self good, to show his reservation of his own power to awe them. So says, Mo^.
35.10
Saint Gregory.

But Satan tempting the woman to break this Law, and to cast off this light
burden, and easy yoke of God, suggested another cause: Genesis 3.5.
God does know, that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened,
and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil: as if God had dealt too
sparingly with man in the communication of his own similitude to him, and had
set him that bar to keep him from attaining the perfection thereof.

So Eve deceived her self, for when God gave her Issachar her fifth son, Ge
30.18.
she said, God has given me my hire, because I have given my maiden to my
husband,

Wherein she deceived her self, for by adding one wife more to the number of
Jacobs Wives, she did violate the state of matrimony, which in the
institution; was in these words.

I will make him a help meet for him, not helps, and so Adam understood it,
Genesis 2.24.
for he said; A man shall forsake Father and Mother and cleave to his wife, not
wives; and they shall be one flesh.

Which lest the friends of Poligamie might understand of many wives, Christ
citing this place, adds by way of interpretation

And they twain shall be one flesh, Mat. 10.8.

So Saint Paul understood it, Mat. 19.5. 1 Cor. 6.16
two shall be one flesh.

So the Prophet Malachy understood it, for charging his people with this sin of
breach of Wedlock, he speaks as to one man.

Thou have dealt treacherously against the Wife of thy youth, Mal. 2.14
yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy Covenant.

And did not he make one: yet had he the excellency of spirit, and wherefore
one, that he might seek a godly seed.

So that this giving of her maid to her husband, was no good service done to
God that she should expect wages, it was rather a trespass of wedlock,
howsoever it pleased God to dispense with it in the fathers of former ages;
but our rule is, quomodo fuit in principio, how was it at the beginning; for
we know, that he who had abundance of spirit, could have created many Wives
for Adam, if he had thought it fit, and then for the increase of the seed of
man, and the speedy peopling of the world, there was more need of Poligamy,
then was ever since.

I urge the fallacy, here, Non causa pro causa.

So Micah when he had made him gods, and gotten a Priest into his house,
flattered himself.

Now I know that the Lord will do me good, Judge. 17.13.
seeing I have a Levite to my Priest.

This was Idolatry, one of the greatest provocations of God to anger that
could be, yet he would flatter himself, that this would turn a cause of his
vvel-doing.

These three examples do sufficiently open our sense, to perceive the cunning
of this fallacious suggestion in ourselves.

The Doctrine of merit which the Church of Rome teaches is a natural
Doctrine, as God said to Cain: If thou do well shall thou not be accepted: it
is true, that God accepts even vveak services from us, but as we say, it is
more of his courtesy then our deserving: if we call it wages that he gives
us in revvard, we over-ween our own works.

And this is a special sin vvhervvith God does punish the sins of the ungodly
in the Church of Rome, the seat of Antichrist, as the Apostle plainly
describes it.

God shall send them strong delusions, 2 These. 2.11.
that they should believe a lie.

They believe that to be the cause of their salvation that is not.

The reason of this Doctrine,

True faith can find no rest, but in the assurance of Gods goodness to us.

God does many favors to the wicked here in this life; which he does not for
any love that he bears to them, but for the use that he makes of them, to
whip and scourge others by them; as for example, God to Ezekiel, Son of man,
Eze 29.18.
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel caused his Army to serve a great service against
Tyrus: every head was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled: yet had he no
wages, nor his Army for Tyrus, for the service that he had served against it.

Therefore, thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will give the land of Egypt unto
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and he shall take her multitude, and take her
spoil, and take her prey, and it shall be the wages for his Army,

Because they wrought for me, 1^.
says the Lord God.

Here is the King of Babylon doubly rewarded, with success and victory against
Tyrus, with the possession and spoil of Egypt, not for any favor that God did
bear to the King of Babylon, but to punish the iniquity of Tyrus, and of Egypt.

Let not Nebuchaduezzar boast of the favor of the Lord, that he set him a work
and paid him his wages, the sins of these ungodly people, not the goodness of
God to the King of Babylon did all this.

We see daily, that the wicked do compass about the righteous, the poor
Church of God bleedeth in many places of Christendom, the enemy proscribeth,
imprisoneth, beheadeth, hangs, cutteth out the tongues, smites off the hands
of Gods faithful Servants, and devises new tortures to make death more
terrible and more painful.

This svvelleth the enemies of God with pride, and they impute all this
success against the Church of God, to the love of God tovvard them, and the
justice of their cause is maintained by the Jesuits, abetments, and
acclamations.

But thus, did Babylon prevail against Gods own Israel, for a time, the
distressed part of the Church which groaneth under these burdens; does not
hang the head for this.

They know that their sins have deserved these rods, they have had the light,
and have not vvalked worthy of that light, therefore is this evil come upon
them, yet let them take courage and say:

Why beastest thou thy self in mischief thou mighty man? Psalm. 52.^.
the goodness of God endures continually: there is our Selah, the rest of our
music, this is the joy of the Churches harvest.

And great is the profit of this point.

be in himself, and not in us, we may assure our selves that his mercy endures
for ever, for his gifts and calling are without repentance, 2 A greater comfort
then this is, that godliness has not only the promise of this life, but of
the life to come also. 3 We may rise in comfort a degree higher, to assure our
selves, that this favor of God will give us our fruit unto holiness, for
these go together, Gods love to us, and our comfort, and hope in him, for this
fruit, Romans 6.22.
as the Apostle joyneth them.
Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, 2 These 2.16.17.
which has loved us, and given us everlasting consolation, and good help
through grace. Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and
work.

This blessing of the Apostle does show, that when the love of God is settled,
there follows grace and expressure of his favor, that brings forth inward
consolation, of the spirit present, good hope for the time to come, an
establishing of the heart in holiness.

This I name as the highest step of our exaltation, because this repairs in us
the image of God, which is his holiness, and the true children of God do value
this above their eternal life.

For let us see, wherein the weight of the blessing and cursing of sheep and
goats does lie. It is not the gift of eternal life, that is, our happiness in
heaven, but as David says; in his favor is life: if a damned soul should be
admitted to the fruition of all the pleasures of eternal life, without the
favor of God, heaven would be hell to him.

It is not the dark and horrid house of woe that makes a soul miserable in
hell, but Gods displeasure: ite maledicti: if an elect soul could be cast
thither, and retein the favor of God, hell would be an heaven to him, and his
joy could not all the Devils of hell take from him, his night would be turned
into day.

The Angels sinned in heaven, and in the place of joy lost Gods favor.

The soul of the Son of God was in hell, and hell was an heaven to it, because
God was with him in the valley of the shadow of death, and left not his soul in
hell, he took him from the nethermost hell.

3 Doctrine. The truth of God is a good ground.

For faith gathered from Gods oath to the tribes, even his word: he adds
Selah, to show that we may safely rest there.

The reason is because, The Word of God is a sure word, and those things
wherein men fail, are not incident to him.

1 Whereas men do promise or swear rashly, and without consideration, as David
did, when he swore that he would not leave one of the house of Nahall to make
water against a wall, God cannot fail that way, because he does all things with
stable truth, and according to the counsel of his will. 2 Men do sometimes vow
and swear things utterly unlawful, and most wicked, as Herod did to Herodias
daughter, to give her whatsoever she demanded of him, which included the life
of John Baptist. So there were many that swore they would neither eat nor drink
till they had killed Paul, our God cannot fail so far, he loves
righteousness, neither shall any evil dwell with him.

3 Whereas many promise, and swear, what they mean not ever to perform, as
Jacobs Sons in the Covenant, that they made of confederacy with Hamor the Son
of Shechem: the Apostle says: Our God cannot lie. 4 Whereas many amongst men,
do swear and promise, that which they are never able to perform, therein like
the Devil, who said to Christ, Omnia hac tibi dabo, all these will I give thee:
God herein cannot fail, for he is omnipotent, and he does whatsoever he will
in heaven and earth, and in abyssis. So then, if the Word of God be gone out of
his mouth, we may build faith upon it, for heaven and earth may and shall pass
away, so shall not one jod of the Word of God.

5 Times may change with men, and he that was rich and able to make good his
word, may suddenly be poor and break, and fail: but God is without
variableness, or shadow* of alteration, all times are in his hand and power.
This serves for confirmation of faith,

That by two immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie, H^b.
6.18.
we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge, to lay hold upon
the hope set before us, By this faith, the just lives in Babylon, and in the
weakness of their temporal estate they have (...), and thus they lay hand upon
the hope set before them in the word.

Jonah says, They that follow lying vanities do forsake their own mercy: Vana
salus hominis, vain is the help of man: they that go down to Egypt for help,
have their woe threatened.

An horse is but a vain thing to help a man; Princes are the sons of men, there
is no help in them: the word of God fails none.

At that Word Abraham will leave his own Country, and go he cares not, he
enquires not whether. At that Word Abraham will go three days journey to kill
Isaac with his own hands, and will never dispute how the promise of God shall
be performed, That in Isaac his seed should be blessed.

At that Word Peter will let fall his net, against all rules of fishing, and he
will forsake the Ship to come to Christ upon the Sea, by the warrant of that
Word.

The promises of God to his Church, and his threatenings of sin recorded in the
living Book of his word are not antiquate, no age shall ever superannate them,
or put them out of full force and virtue.

What if good persons, and good causes do suffer oppression? the Poet is a
Divine in that case, Non si male noster and olim sic erit, informs hyenes
reducit Jupiter idem summovit, after foul weather comes fair, though it be ill
with us now, it will not be always.

What if enemies of Religion, and Moaths of Commonwealths, do flourish and
prosper, and have all things at will, let it not trouble David, and Job, both
of them saw as fair a Sunshine shut up in a dark cloud, and a world of foul
weather following.

2 This tenderness in God of his word and oath, 2 Use.
does serve for example to teach us to make conscience of our promises and
oaths; and we may urge the Argument as the Apostle does. If God so loved us, we
ought also to love one another. So

If God be careful to keep his promise and oath with us, we ought also to do
the like with our brethren.

Here arise two Quaeries;

1 Whether it be lawful to swear at all, 2 Whether all oaths must be kept.
1 An liciat jurare? is it lawful to swear?

An oath is, a calling of God to witness in such things as cannot otherwise be
assured, and it is of two sorts.

1 Assertorie, when we do call God to witness against our souls, if we affirm
not the truth: in this case the awe of Gods Majesty, is thought to be such a
rule of the conscience, that no man will dare to violate the religion of an
oath. 2 Promissary, When we do engage the honor of God, for the truth of our
purpose, to perform what we promise, and we cast our selves upon his just
judgment, if we be either deceitful in our promise, or unfaithful in our
performance.
This may answer the first Quaere, for this does declare that an oath does
serve,

1 For the glory of God, 2 For the good of our Brethren.
1 The glory of God, for it shows him, 1 To be present amongst us, and privy
to our ways, 2 To be a God of Truth; 3 To be a God of justice to punish
unfaithfulness.


2 It shows that we by sin have lost our credit, and therefore God does
engage himself for such as swear aright.

2 It serves for the good of our Brethren, H^b. 5.19.
for it is the end of all strife.

I will not enter into the lists with the Anabaptists, to confute their weak
arguments against the lawfulness of an oath, you hear it warranted by reason,
and examples grow thick in the book of God to justify it.

2 Quaere, Whether every oath be to be kept.

To that we answer in a word; every lawful oath is to be kept, so is every
lawful promise.

If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, nu^. 30.3
or swear an Oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall not profane his word,
he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth.

Every oath and every promise engages our faith, that is our fidelity, and so
it is a bond upon our souls, and though it it be to our hinderance we must not
break.

Remember how the breach of the oath of the Lord, made by Joshua, and the
elders of the people to the Gibeonites, smarted in the house of Saul.

Zedekiah had engaged himself by oath to Nebuchadnezzar, an heathen King, and
brake, and rebelled against him: indeed, it was before the doctrine of Rome was
afoot: Fides non est servanda cum haereticis, no faith to be kept with
heretics: But here the Prophet, Shall he escape that does such things? Or
shall he break the Covenant and be delivered? Eze. 17 15


And after says God:

As I live, surely mine oath that he has despised, Ver. 19.
and my Covevenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon his own
head: For he said;

He despised the Oath by breaking the Covenant, (when lo, V^rse 18.
he had given his hand.)

A lawful promise and oath has three notes to justify it.

Truth, Righteousness, Judgment. Jer. 4.2.

1 In truth the heart joining with the Author.

2 In righteousness seeking, Deo and proximo servire, serve God and our
neighbor.

3 In judgment: it is deliberation and advice.

4 Doctr. God declares his power sometimes openly to the comfort of his
Church, and the terror of the enemies thereof, gathered from these words.

Thy Bow was quite naked: for as before there was abscontio roboris, the hiding
of his strength, when God revealed himself to his Church only upon Mount
Sinai, so there was now revelatio roboris, a revealing of his strength; when he
had made his Bow quite naked.

1 For the settling of his Church in obedience to him, Israel.

That they might keep his statutes, Ps 1^5.45.
and observe his Laws.

2 For the glory of his name, Israel a while, for when God had done great
things for them.

Then they sang his praise. Ps. 106.12.


3 For the credit of his Word, Then they believed his Word.

4 To convince the ingratitude of men, Yet they sinned more against God by
provoking the most High in the wilderness: he repeateth more of his great
works, Psa 78 17.
and adds;

For all this they sinned still, and believed not, for all his wondrous works:

Yet they tempted and provoked the most high God, and kept not his testimony,
etc.

5 To instruct posterity that should succeed them.

That the generation to come might know them, even the children which should be
borne, Psa. 78 6.
who should arise and declare them to their children.

That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but
keep his Commandments. This is the way to keep the bow of God still naked,
that all the ends of the world may see the salvation of our God.

God lays his Bow quite naked in the sight of the world, that the Egyptians
may see that God fights for Israel against them, and may fly from them, that
the world may see that all their consultations against the Church shall fail
of success, and it will turn to bitterness in the latter end.

You may easily discern how all this is directed to our instruction.

To awake us to a consideration of the revealed power of God, for if God show
it, it is, that we may see it, Isreal's so many rebellions.

For, whereas God did so great things for them, Ps. 78.7.
That they might not forget his works.

They forgate his works and his wonders that he has showed them; and that made
them children of disobedience.

To direct to the right use of this mercy of God,

1 In respect of God, to give him due praise, that he may have the honor due
to his name. 2 In respect of our selves, to confirm our hope and faith in his
word, and in the arm of his strength, believing that bow, and the whole quiver
of arrows belonging to it, is on our side, and we need not fear what man or
Devil can do against us. 3 In respect of this life, that we pass the time of
our dwelling here in fear, living in the obedience and service of this Almighty
Maker and preserver of men, by keeping his statutes, etc. 4 In respect of
posterity, that we leave them our good example, and the light of our knowledge
to instruct them in the wonderful works of God, that generation may praise him
to generation and declare his power. 5 In respect of our enemies, that they may
see and know whom we have trusted, and may know that our help is in the name of
the Lord, who has made heaven and earth: so that we shall not need to fear
their bow, nor their arrows, upon the string ready to go off against us, there
is a Bow on our side, and an arm to weild it.
Verse 10. The mountains saw thee, and they trembled, the overflowing of the
water passed by: the deep uttered his voice, and lift up his hands on high.
THese words have reference to the former wonders of Gods works, in which the
Holy Ghost Poetically, and Rhethorically does give life to things in-animate,
to express their yielding and giving way to Gods extraordinary operations,
some understanding that; For such impression did the power of God make in the
everlasting mountains, as he calls them before, ver. 6. and in the perpetual
hills that they gave way to his people, as if they had seen God himself, and
that the fear of God had been upon them to make them tremble.

The like Poetical streine we have in the Psalmist: What ailed ye mountains
that ye skipped like ramms, Psa. 114.6.
and ye little hills like young sheep? And the words of David do seem to guide
my judgment, to expound this place, not of the mountains upon the dry land,
but with reference to the miracle of the passage of the children of Israel over
Jordan, in which God by his power did make the waters of the river rise up like
mountains to stop their way, and yet not to suffer them to drown the
neighboring Continent, and this was effected with an extratraordinary motion
of the waters, leaping and skipping like Sheep.

Therefore here is added, the overflowing of the water passed by, that is, it
did not overflow the way of the Isralites, but bestowed it self in the raising
up of the mountains of water: The deep uttered his voice: he means the noise
of the waters, running and swelling in heaps: And lift up his hands on high:
for this rising of the waters into such huge hills, did give restimony of their
yielding to the almighty power of God in his working, though contrary to their
nature.

This exposition of these words I embrace, as most consonant to the web of the
Scripture, yet I will not conceal from you, that some refer this trembling of
the mountains, and this noise of the waters, figuratively, to the trembling of
the Kings in Canaan, and the noise of the people afraid, and melting in their
hearts at the strange passage of Israel through the red sea first, and now at
last through Jordan.

Whom I dare not follow, holding it dangerous to admit more figures then need,
when some more literal sense may be proper.

Others to refer this to the trembling of mount Sinai, when God appeared to the
people in the way, of which Moses says,

And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, Exo. 9.18.
because the Lord descended upon it in fire, and the smoke thereof ascended as
the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.

But this connection of the trembling of the mountains, with the noise of the
waters, does make it probable to me, that it is one and the same miracle.

Magister Historiae felleth of a mountain in the land of Canaan, near to the
river of Arnon, which suffered a violent earthquake at the time of the entering
of Israel into Canaan, but that is an Apocryphal relation, and the silence of
the story does make it questionable, whether any such thing were done.

The figurative and poetical form of speech here used is in sight.

1 The heaps of waters swelling to a very great height, are called mountains.

2 Here is attributed to them humane sense, motions, and affections, as seeing,
trembling, uttering of a voice, and lifting up of hands.

These things are familiar and frequent all the Scripture through, especially
in the poetical part thereof, as I have showed.

The senseless and livelesse creatures are subject to the will of God,

For that which the heathen do call nature in the creatures, is in religion the
constant order which God has established in the universal machine and frame
of the world, and in every particular member and part thereof, serving Gods
general providence: that which we call miraculous and extraordinary, is the
particular will of God upon occasion, declered out of his singular and special
providence.

In both these, all creatures whatsoever do so serve him, as if they knew what
they did. The Centurion did not keep his servants in better awe, and had them
not so ready at his command, as God has his creatures, their nature is subject
to rule, and that so as fire shall burn and not consume, as in the bush, waters
shall stand in heaps, as in the passage through the red Sea, and here in my
Text, in the river of Jordan.

Water shall not put out sire, the hail as watery substance shall mingle with
fire in the same shore, and Eliah shall call for sire that shall lick up the
water, and dry the ditches filled to the brim.

The reason hereof is because there is nothing in the world that has any
being, Jehovah, and he never gave being to any thing but for use; he has made
nothing idle and unprofitable, for in wisdom he made all things, and that use
is directed by the Creator: and therefore as it is said of him, that he had
made the heaven and the earth by Moses: so Melchizedeck calls him the high
possessor of heaven and earth, as the Prophet David says: Fecit quicquid
voluit in coelo and in terra, and in omnibus abyssis.

The right of Creation without which nothing had any being, the right of
protection which keeps all things in being, does put all things in subjection
under his feet, his will is their nature; and it is all one to the inanimate
creature to serve his true will in an ordinary, and in a miraculous way: for
his will is the soul that animateth them, and makes them active, and he could
have as easily let the sea keep his course, and let the river of Jordan run on,
and have brought his people over upon the face of the waters, as Christ and
Peter walked, as he made them a passage through.

This ready obsequence of the inanimate creature to the will of God, does
upbraid man whom God made for himself, and his special honor, with much
unworthiness; for things without life owe less to God for creation then
things animate, much less then man, to whom God gave a living soul, made in
the image of God, and having but one law of restraint put upon him, broke it,
and brought a pollution of himself, which like the leprosy of Gehezi runs
in all his posterity.

It is our shame that all things else do serve him, only men and devils the
corrupters of men stand out and rebel.

And this makes God cry, Hear O Heavens! and hearken, Isa. 1.2.
O Earth! I have nourished, and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me.

Why does God make his complaint to the Heavens, and to the Earth, or why does
he call them to witness against Israel his people? but to signify that
creatures without life shall condemn the disobedience of men, even of Israel,
the people that God has chosen to himself.

And truly, when we do look out of our selves upon these things, as David
says, When we consider the Heavens, Psa. 8.3.
the work of thy fingers, the Sun and the Moon, with, etc.

What is man that thou art so mindful of him.

There be two things that may move.

1 What is man that such excellent creatures should be made for him? 2 What is
man that beholding the heavens which do serve him, and living upon the earth,
that is obedient to him, and does his will, that God should be mindful of man,
who of all the works of his hands that enjoy his favors, does serve him worst
of all.
Do not we thank God for it, and take it for a high favor that he made us men,
and did not make us stones, or plants, worms, or flies, serpents or toads; or
any other kind of hateful or hurtful creature.

But yet, if we live not to serve him, and to do his will, our condition had
been much more happy, to have been the worst of these, then to have been made
men and women.

I will not go from the example in my Text, to teach you what we are, for by
original generation we run like Jordan in a full and swift current, into the
great and wide Sea of the world, and there we loose our selves in those salt
waters.

Sometimes as Jordan in harvest times, that is, in times of our plenty and
fullness, and when we have ease, and whatsoever our heart desires, we do
overflow our banks, and exceed all measure.

But when the Priests of the Lord do bring the Ark of God into us, that is,
when we come to have a sense and a feeling of Religion, and the fear of God,
then do we recoile and strive against nature, and overcome nature, and we learn
to do the good, that we would not do.

For truly religion does carry us against wind and tide: religion leads us all
up-hill, and he that will follow Christ must deny himself, so Saint Paul does.
Vero ego, and non amplius ego, sed vivit in me Christus: I live, yet not I, but
Christ in me.

Observe the creature here, and you shall see that whatsoever is ingredient in
perfect obedience, is ascribed to this River of Jordan; for,

1 It was congrua, for it was to God, they were his Priests, and they did carry
his Ark upon their shoulders, and they had his warrant for it.

It was prompta, ready, no sooner did the soales of the feet of the Priests
touch the waters but they fled back, no sooner were they all over, and the
stones carried out of the river to shore, but they returned again to their
course.

Such let our obedience be, and this is acceptable in the sight of God, this
Lecture is read to us in Heaven, in Earth, in the Sea: in Heaven we have the
example of the Angels, who are called, Angeli facientes voluntate ejus: In
Earth we have the examples of all creatures, who in their several kinds do his
will, according to the general Law of Creation, and the particular law of
special dispensation.

In the Sea, the winds and sea obey him.

This serves to teach us to pass the time of our dwelling here in fear,
because we see the omnipotent hand of God in the government of the world, that
we may say,

Ah, Lord God, Jer. 32.17.
thou have made the Heaven and the Earth by thy great power, and stretched out
arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee; and he remembers the wonders of
this deliverance out of Egypt, and says;

Thou have made thee a name. Verse 20.


This fills all that think of it with a reverent fear of Gods name, it
exalts him in the congregation of the just, and makes him say, Domine, quis
similis tibi? Lord, who is like thee?

This serves to convince the enemies of God, Israel wheresoever they went? to
rest when they rested, to run when they removed? could nature keep their
clothes on their backs, their shoes on their feet for wearing, for forty years?

Did nature rain Manna, and bring in the Quails, and feed the people till they
came to the corn of Canaan?

Did nature make these mountains and high piles of waters in the river of
Jordan?

Is not the extraordinary hand of God in all these?

This also serves for increase of our faith, Abraham did when he was commanded
to kill the son of the promise. The very captivity of the Church has had that
comfort in the greatest terror thereof, so the Psalmist says,

1 That God suffered no man to do them wrong, but reproved even Kings for their
sakes 2 That he made them that led them away captive to pity them, and to
minister to their necessities: they became rather nurses then their Jaylors.
Upon comfort of which confidence, Job protested that, Though he kill me, Job
13.15. Use 5.
yet will I trust in Him.

This assures to us all the promises of God, which the Apostle distributeth
into these two sorts, The promises of this life. And of the life that is to
come.


And this made Abraham when God promised him seed, not to consider his own body
was now dead, Romans 4 19 2, etc.
nor the deadness of Sarahs womb.

He staggered not at the promise through unbelief, but was strong in faith,
giving glory to God.

And being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was able also to
perform.

And therefore it was imputed unto him for righteousness; and he adds;

Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him.

But for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe.

We see some parts of the Christian Church now in great extremity, and no way
in sight open from their escape out of great misery: the Bohemian Protestants
put to cruel deaths: the French Protestants have the sword drawn against them,
and the arrows upon the string to shoot at them: the Palatinate under
proscription, the Prince thereof in exile: Our help is in the name of the Lord.

All these will faint, except they believe verily to see the goodness of God
in the land of the Living. Sweet and full of comfort is the example of Gods
people, to whom it was promised, even when they were in captivity in Babylon,
they had hung up their Harps upon the Willows, and sat weeping by the rivers
of waters.

Thus, Zech. 8.3.3.
says the Lord, I am returned unto Zion, and will dwell in the midst of
Jerusalem, and Jerusalem shall be called a City of truth, and the mountain of
the Lord of Hosts, the Holy Mountain.

Thus, says the Lord of Hoasts: there shall yet old men, and old women dwell
in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his hand for very
age.

And the streets of the City shall be full of boys and girls, playing in the
streets of it.

Thus, says the Lord of Hoasts, if it be mervellous in the eyes of the remnant
of this people in these days; should it also be mavelous in mine eyes, says
the Lord of Hoasts.

I will save my people from the East, and from the west Country.

This is the help in trouble, ready to be found, let us awake, this help with
the loud voice of our importunate supplications, saying, O Lord, help now, O
Lord, now give prosperity.

Let us give him no rest, till he has bowed the heavens, and is come down, to
visit the distresses of his faithful servants.

Our Savior comfort us well, saying, My Father works as yet, and I work,
and if our labor which is, opus in Domino, a work in the Lord, be not in
vain, his labor which is, opus Domini, a work of the Lord, will prosper in
his hand.

He is as strong in the river of Rhine, as in he was Jordan, and his Church is
as dear to Him now as ever it was, and he is as diligent in making inquisition
for blood, and as attentive to the complaints of the oppressed as he was.

Verse 11. The Sun and Moon stood still in their habitation: at the light of
thine arrows they went, at the shining of thy glittring spear. 12 Thou did
march through the Land in indignation, thou did thresh the heathen in anger.
13 Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with
thine Anointed: thou woundest the head out of the house of the wicked by
discovering the foundation to the neck. Selah. 14 Thou do strike through
with his staves the head of his villages, they that came out as a whirlwind to
scatter me, their rejoicing was as to devour the poor secretly.
I Read all this together, because I conceive it has reference to one story,
and that is recorded in the book of Joshua.

For after Israel came into the land of Canaan, and had destroyed Jericho, and
the City of Ai: the Gibeonites terrified with this news, craftily pretending
themselves to be a people dwelling in a far Country, and for the name of Gods
sake, whose wonderful works they had heard of, they desired to make a league
with Joshua. Joshua and the Elders were deceived, and confirmed a league with
them by oath.

But after the fraud was detected, Israel made the Gebeonites serve them, but
they were under the protection of Israel.

This league of Gibeon with Joshua did much trouble the neighboring Kings, for
they feared Gibeon, being a strong City, therefore five Kings do make war
against Gibeon to smite it. The Gibeonites send to Joshua for succors, Joshua
according to his oath of confederacy with them came from Gilgal, he, and all
the people of war with him, Ver. 7.
and all the mighty men of valor, he gave the assault to the five Kings and
their Army, he discomfited them, and made them fly.

Then the Lord rained stones from Heaven upon them: Ver. 11.
there were more that died with the hailstones, then they whom the children of
Israel slow with the Sword.

Then spoke Joshua to the Lord, Ver. 12.
in the day when the Lord delivered up the Amorites before the children of
Israel: Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon.

And the Sun stood still, Ver. 13.
and the Moon stayed until the people had avenged themselves upon their
enemies: Is not this written in the book of Jasher? so the Sun stood still in
the midst of Heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole day.

And there was no day like that before it nor after it, Verse 14.
that the Lord hearkened to the voice of a man: for the Lord fought for Israel.

This is the wonder that Habakkuk our Prophet does here commemorate, a miracle
yet fresh in the memory of the Church, yet by computation of times from the
time of Joshua, when this was done to this time of Habakkuk: when this is
remembered were past, more then 700 years.

Habakkuk does well to remember this, for of all the miracles that God wrought
for Israel, this was the greatest; here Heaven fought against Earth, the Sun
and Moon stood still to give light to the Battle, and the faithful witnesses
of Heaven (so the Sun is called) staid his course to bear witness how God
fought for Israel.

We may truly say to Israel, Tibi militat ether: Observe the words of the
Prophet, how well they follow the history in Joshua. Habukkuk says,

The Sun and Moon stood still in their habitation, they stood in their several
sphere wherein they move, for these be their habitations, and note that they
both stood still, Sun and Moon. For the Moon borrowing all her light of the Sun,
had she kept her course while the Sun had stood still the length of a day,
there had been great irregularity of motion in these Caelestiall bodies, from
the constant order set them by their Maker in their Creation.

Observe also, that he does not say the earth stood still, but the Sun: it had
been, as some said, the Earth and the Moon stood still as the Sun and the Moon,
and our understanding would have as soon apprehended, if that new Astronomy had
had been then revealed, which some of our Empericks, and Journeymen in that
excellent Science of Astronomy have of late revived in their Almanacks, telling
the world that they have long been in a wrong belief, that the Sun moves, and
the earth is fixed, for they believe that the Sun is fixed, and the earth is
moved.

And to evade the clear evidence of this text, which tells it for a wonder that
the Sun stood still, they say, this is spoken to our capacity, because to our
sight it so seems, that the Sun moves, and the earth is fixed, but indeed it
is otherwise.

Our capacity I think has much wrong done in this, for if the Word of God had
told us, that God had created the Sun to stand still, and the Earth to move, it
is more likely that we should have taken his Word for it, and have believed it
as it is, as well as now we believe it, as it appears.

We are neither incapable nor incredulous, but that many against the letter of
Scripture have written, and made more believe, that the Sun stands still from
the creation.

The common defense of this opinion grounded upon Gods application of himself,
to humane capacity, does make figures in story where is no need, and makes
David a man of small judgment in the knowledge of the Sun, who says, that God
has set a tabernacle for the Sun in the Heavens, (called here) an habitation,
Which is a Bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoices, as a strong
man, to run his race.

His going forth is from the end of the Heaven, and his circuit unto the ends
of it.

Does not this Prophet speak of the glory of God, declared in the motion, not
the station of the Sun? or in the glory of God showed in our opinion of the
Suns motion, not in the truth thereof.

Greater secrets then this are revealed in holy Scripture, which are against
the vouchie of the outward sense, or the rational discourse of man, and no
doubt, but if the Sun had stood still, and the earth that we live upon had
moved, when this miracle was by the spirit of truth recorded, it had been so
set down to us, as follows:

[At the light of thine Arrows they went, at the shining of thy glittering
spear.]

The meaning, I conceive, to be this, that the Sun and Moon did not now keep
their ordinary motion appointed in their Creation, but by a miraculons
dispensation they attended the arrows of God and his spears.

For God declared himself in this war, to be the God of Israel, by shining
arrows and glittring spears, he means not only the arms of Israel his
people, but the apparent demonstration of his own miraculous and extraordinary
power declared in this war;

For you heard in the story, that God cast down great stones from Heaven upon
them, which slew more then Isreal's sword did.

These were arrows of God, and his spears with which he fought for Israel, they
are called bright and glistring both.

1 Because the Sun-shining upon these great hailstones reflected a dazeling
light from them, as experience tells us, both in snow, ice, hailstones, and
all waterie bodies. 2. And because in this judgment, there was so manifest
appearance of the immediate hand of God in this war.
Thus Mr. Calvine does understand these words, and says, Sol retentus est, ut
daret locum sagittis and hastae Dei.

Only, he seems to me somewhat too strict, when he says, per sagittas and
hastam nihil aliud intelligit, quam arma populi Dei.

Yes sure, he means his own weapons too, with which he fought from heaven,
and those rather, as the more shining and glittering. Montauus, also upon these
words, says, Solemn and Lunam cursus suos ad commoditatem exercitus sacri
temperasse.

Junius also and Beza do conceive that these hailstones fell not without
thunder and lightning which are the terrors of heaven, and the voice of God,
it follows.

[Thou did march through the Land in indignation, thou did thresh the
heathen in anger] this, (as I conceive has reference to the following
victories, by which all the land of Canaan was subdued to Israel, for the
Church here confesses, that as God by deed of gift, had long before assured
this promised land of the heathen to his Israel, so he gave them a full
possession thereof by marching through the land, and by threshing the
inhabitants thereof.

Thus the Church confesses.

We have heard with our ears, O god, our Fathers have told us, Psalm. 44.2.
what work thou did in their days, in the time of old.

How thou did drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst them in, how
thou did afflict the people and cast them out: For they gate not the Land in
possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them, but thy
right hand and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou had
a favor unto them: this phrase of marching through the Land does express God
in arms for Israel.

But the other phrase of threshing, the heathen does imply victory, and full
power over them, even to the stripping them out of all.

[Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with
thine anointed.]

The cause why God put himself into this quarrel was the preservation of his
people, where Israel is twice called the people of God, which must be
understood of the adoption of grace, for by right of creation all people of the
world are Gods people.

This was Isreal's glory, and it was also their safety, that they were Gods
people, and how they came to be so, Moses will tell.

The Lord did not set his love upon you, Deuteronomy. 7.7.
choose you, because ye were more in number then any people (for ye were the
fewest of all people.)

But because the Lord loved you, Ver. 8.
and because he would keep the oath that he had sworn unto your Fathers: that
is, He loved you, because he loved you. But he adds, thou wentest forth with
thine anointed.

Which Mr. Beza does understand of David, and so makes a long stride from the
conquest of Canaan, to the reign of David, and from these victories to David's
victories many, many years after.

And Tremelius and Junius do so apply the text, Mr. Calvine lead them all into
this Exposition.

Others conceive, that the former commemoration is continued, and they that are
before called Gods people, are here called Gods anointed: for wheresoever
there is election, there is unction, and we may say of Israel, that God
annoined them with the oil of gladness above all their fellow nations, for
David says; Non fecit taliter.

I am sure the Seventy read and understand the text thus, for they read, that
God went forth, (...), the Latin reading is, Cum Christo tuo, and the
original Hebrew is (...) his Messiah, which moves me to refer this to Christ,
who was the bond of that love which knit God so to Israel, for whose sake, God
was so favorable to Israel.

Master Calvine does confess, that this has reference to Christ, and
includes all the favors of God declared to Israel; from their coming out of
Egypt to the last mercy showed to them, to have come to them, non nisi
interposito Mediatore, not without a Mediator.

But he adds, that the promise of Christ did more cleely appear, and was more
manifestly revealed in the reign of David then before, which might give
comfort to the Church in distress, that makes Master Calvine go so low as
David's reign, to apply these words.

But the next words show, that the former history of the wars of Israel, to
settle their possession in Canaan, and not yet at an end.

So then I understand that God went forth with his anointed, that is, with
Jesus Christ, to save his people, and there is the the life blood of all the
comfort in this whole Psalm of the Church; and by this faith, by faith in this
Messiah the just shall live. It follows,

[Thou woundest the head out of the house of the wicked.]

By the house of the wicked, the land of Canaan is here meant, and by the head
that God wounded, either the wisdom and policy, or the sovereignty and power
of the Land is meant; for none of the Kings of the land could stand before
Israel, so that the very head of the house was wounded.

[By discovering the foundation to the neck.]

This was the manner of Gods working against the head of the house of the
wicked, by making the foundation naked; that is, digging up the very roots
thereof, by an utter extirpation of the Inhabitants of this land.

It was Edoms cry against Jerusalem, Raze it, Raze it: the Margent: make bare
even the foundation thereof, Psa. 137.7.
as before you heard, out of Psalm. 44.

Thou have cast out the Nations, and placed them in: It follows.

[Thou did strike through with his staves the head of the Villages.]

That is, thou did overthrow the Inhabitauts of the land with their own
staves: As the Poet says,

Suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruit. He declares here the extent of the victory
not only to their walled Towns, and defenced Cities, but even to the Villages
and Hamlets of the Land: so that no part or corner of the Land escaped the hand
of God, or the possession of Israel, but God who promised them that land, gave
it them, and gave it all into their hands.

This, as it has a general extent to the whole story of Isreal's conquests, so
it may have a more particular reference to the story of that war made in the
behalf of the Gibeonites, where the five Kings that made war against Gibeon,
hid themselves for safety in a cave at Makkedah: and that cave chosen for
safety, proved a prison for their forthcoming, and Joshua sent men to roll
great stones to stop the mouth of the cave till he had finished the war, Josh.
10.16.
and then he brought them forth and slew them, and buried them in that cave.

Thus the head of the Villages were beaten with their own staves, and that
cave which the Kings chose for their safety was first made the trap to catch
them, then the prison to hold them fast, and at last, the sepulcher to bury
them.

Yet more particular reference may it have to the conquest of the Midianites,
Judge. 7.
for in that battle the Lord declared his strength for Israel mervellously,
for he said to Gideon their Captain.

The people that are with thee, Ver. 2.
are too many for me to give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel vaunt
themselves, and say, mine own hand has saved me.

In conclusion, God would have no more to go up against Midian, but three
hundred men.

Now the Army of the Midianites was great, as appears in the former Chapter,
ver. 33.

Then all the Midianites, and the Amalekites, and the children of the East
together.

Yet God would have no more to go against Midian but three hundred men against
this great Army, of whom he says before: that they came as Grasshoppers for
multitude, Judge. 6.5.
for both they and their Camels were without number.

And they had much vexed and impoverished Israel, as the story says.

But Israel had the victory by those three hundred men, who being divided into
three Companies, in the beginning of the middle watch of the night, when the
sign was given by Gideon, every man brake a pitcher of earth that was in his
hand, and held their lamps in their left hands, and their trumpets in their
right hands to sound withal, and cried, The sword of the Lord and of Gideon,
and they stood every man in his place.

And the Lord set every man's sword against his fellow throughout all the host.
Judge. 7.22.
Here it is plain, how God beat them with their own staves, and slew them with
their own swords. And of them we may well understand that which follows. They
that came out as a whirlwind to scatter me, their rejoicing was to devour the
poor secretly: for the Midianites by many direptions had made them poor, and by
spoiling the increase of the earth almost starved them, and now they came as a
whirlwind in an army to destroy them.

Their secret coming to devour the poor, it is well expressed in the story.

And so it was when Israel had sown, Judge. 6 3.
that the Midianites came up, and the Amalakites, and the children of the East,
even they came up against them. And they encamped against them, Verse 4.
and destroyed the increase of the Earth, till thou come to Gaza, and left no
sustenance, neither Sheep, nor Ox nor Ass.

Here they assaulted them secretly, by sudden incursions upon them, and they
came out as a whirlwind by sudden violence, and they made them poor.

The words thus expounded, we may in this part of the section consider.

1 The miracle of the station of the Sun and Moon. 2 The victory that followed.
3 The conquest of Midian.
1 Of the miracle of the station of the Sun and Moon.

This example of the station of the Sun and Moon,

It teaches that God is above all second causes, Non obstante, often
inter-curreth by virtue of his prerogative.] To express him absolute Lord of
all,

To divert us from the overweening of our fellow creatures, for many Nations
having observed the good that the Sun does on earth, have worshipped the Sun,
and some Lunatiques have as wisely worshipped the Moon, others have adored some
special Stars, as the ascendents in their nativities.

The Egyptians in respect, as is thought of the great profit that came of
kine, did worship a living bullock, or calfe, and of them the Israelites
learned that Idolatry.

Herodotus tells how Cambyses coming with his conquering forces into Egypt,
Thal. 76.
saw the Egyptians worshipping their calf, he drew his sword, and cut him on
the thigh, that he bled exceedingly, and shortly after died.

Cambyses seeing this, cried out in scorn of the Egyptians: O Capita nequam
hujusmodi Dii existunt, carne and sanguine praediti, and ferrum sentienter?
dignus nimirum Aegyptiis hic Deus.

Thus came into the Church the worship of Angels, and the Mother of our Lord
and Saints, and its because they were Benefactors to the Church. And after for
their sakes, their images were worshipped, as at this day in the Church of Rome.

To divert us from this superstition and idolatry, and to teach us to know our
fellow creatures, God does alter sometimes the established order of his
government, and says, as Christ to his Disciples. Are these the things you
look upon.

Surely the Sun, of all things is that God has made for the use and service of
God, as the most glorious, the most comfortable, in respect of light, which it
gives us from its own body, and which it bends to the Moon and Stars; and in
respect of its influence, so that as Ambrose calls it, Ornamentum Coeli, the
ornament of Heaven, and Oculum mundi, the eye of the world; others have called
it animam mundi, the soul of the world, as the quickner of all living things.

Three most memorable evidences of Gods power in the Sun are past, this of the
standing of it for the space of a whole day.

The going back of the shadow upon the dyall of Ahaz in the days of Hezechiah,
2 Reg. 20.11.
10 degrees, And the miraculous Eclipse at the death of Christ. And Christ
foretelling the end of the world, says that, The Sun shall be darkened, Matthew.
24.29.
and the Moon shall not give her light.

St. Augustine proves the Divinity from these things, which we call
portenteous, and he blames the Mathematicians, for affirming those
extraordinary effects in natural bodies, caelestiall or terrestiall to be
contra naturam, against nature, De Civit. 21.8.
quomodo est enim contra naturam, quod Dei fit voluntate, cum voluntas tanti
Creatoris, Creaturae natura sunt.

Portentum enim fit non contra naturam, sed contra, quod nota est natura.

3 This station of the Sun and Moon at this time does serve to justify the
lawfulness of a just war,

1 It had a warrant from God to possess Gods Israel, of their own land, which
God had given them, this is the warrant of policy. 2 It was against Idolaters,
whom they were sent to destroy: the warrant of Religion. 3 It was in the behalf
of the Gibeonites, their confederates by oath. Lex Gentium, the Law of Nations.
It is a sin to set and look on, when either our Commonwealth, or Gods
Religion, or the Oath of confederacy suffers.

This war was here managed openly, and in the sight of the Sun, and God
declared himself both of the Council of War, and an auxilary friend to his
Israel, in the same, for none but he could have stayed the course of the Sun
and Moon.

Now these extraordinary operations of God, Austine says, are called, Monstra
ut a Monstrando, so they are called portenta a portendo, and prodigia a porro
dicendo: therefore let us see what they show, and what they teach us.

1 They teach us the great Commandment of the law to love God, and to keep his
Comandements. This power in doing so great things, and this mercy in doing the
same for Israel, does well deserve that service from his Church, observe it in
a touch, remember it in the front of the law. I am the Lord thy God which
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, for that leads us into the full story
of Isreal's peregrination, and is there used to move obedience.

And we cannot make a bettter use of our frequent Commemoration of the manifold
mercies of God to us, then to stir up our selves to serve him: so Christ's
greater deliverance is urged by Zecharie, ut liberati serviamus.

2 It serves to direct us in the estimation of the creatures of God, for the
honor that we can do them lawfully, is but to glorify God for the good we
receive by them: honor is only due to him that implies them.

Take heed of Idols, take heed of superstition, let not another Gospel bewitch
any of us, when the Sun communicates his light to all the world, every corner
and part of the world, is not illuminate alike, there be some precious stones
that reflect the light of the Sun more then others do: we value these above
other, yet we know that the light is all borrowed of the Sun.

And though in our fellow creatures the gifts and graces of God be in differing
measures given, for which we value them above an ordinary price, yet we reserve
to our God the honor of the gift, of every good and perfect gift, who is the
Father of lights, and we do him wrong if we draw any of our fellow creatures
into the communion of his glory.

3 Let me add this for caution, let not our thoughts be so ravished with the
contemplation of Gods extraordinary power, sometimes expressed in the service
of his creatures, as that we do neglect his ordinary providence: which in true
judgment is more admirable.

It is Saint Austins note, Quae sunt rara, sunt mira: But he says, it is more
admirable to behold so many faces so unlike in form, feature and proportion,
yet we do more wonder to see two faces alike.

It is not so admirable in true judgment to see the Sun stand still in heaven,
as a glorious candle set upon a Candlestick, as to see it move and set, and
rise in so constant manner as it does.

Therefore, let the common providence of God loose nothing by his extraordinary
lightnings of Power, and flashes of Prerogative.

4 This serves also to encourage us in the cause of religion, or in the just
defense of the oppressed, to awake our courage and to take pains.

It belongs not to us who are Gods Ministers, to enquire what cause of wars
we have at this present, what means must be used to commence and maintain them.

This belongs to us to animate all that are called to just wars, to take
courage from this example.

If the sun stood still whilst Joshua did fight for the Gibeonites, because Gods
oath had bound Israel to them is confederacy.

I cannot doubt, but the Son of righteousness, the Captain of Gods guards, the
Lord of his Hosts; will cover their heads in the day of battle, that fight for
the oppressed Church of God, their brethren, the professors of the same faith,
the worshippers of the same God.

Whereas this miracle of the station of the Sun and Moon was done at the
instance of Joshua, we are taught to behold the truth of Gods promises made to
his servants.

He had promised Joshua to magnify him in the sight of his people, and the
blessing of the people on Joshua was only, the Lord be with thee, as he was
with Moses.

So he was in the division of the waters of Jordan, Josh. 1.17.
so was he in the conquest of Jericho and Ai, and never was there such a thing
seen, that the Lord heard the voice of a man to make the day two days long.

1 This was done to prevent Idolatry, that the people might not erect any
memory to Moses, to honor him with divine honor, which also God feared, and
therefore he buried Moses himself, and would let no man know where he was
buried, to prevent Idolatry.

The Devil, no doubt, knew the place; that was the quarrel between Michael and
the Devil, about the body of Moses; for the Devil would feign have discovered
where it was, to have misled the people to Idolatry, but Michael resisted him:
Now when the people see that he which was great in Moses, is as great in
Joshua, and they have experience that Joshua has of of the same spirit that
Moses had, this does direct their judgments not to look upon the instruments
by whom wonders are done, but on God who does them, and can do them as well by
Joshua as by Moses.

2 This was done to assure the former promises of the quiet and full possession
of the land, against the fear which the Spies suggested; Josh. 10.14
for if God declare by these signs that he fights for Israel, as it is said
upon this sign, Israel need not fear the power of their enemies, they may go
forth in the strength of the Lord, his word is their warrant, his truth their
assurance.

When we behold the same power of God in the change of Ministers of his will,
thou Lord art the same, and thy years do not fail. Therefore, as David says,
Put not your trust in Princes, nor in any son of man, for there is no help in
them: there is help by them, but it is not in them: our help is in the name of
the Lord who has made heaven and earth.

2 This shows the perpetual course of Gods favor to his Church, Moses
dies, but the spirit that God put upon Moses survived him, Eliah. Elisha. Number.
27.18.
and rested upon Joshua, he was consecrated to that employment.

1 By Gods own election and designation. 2 By the imposition of Moses hands,
and the devolution of some of his honor upon him. 3 By Gods own gift of the
same spirit that was upon Moses.
Thus where God loves a poople, the favor of God runeth in a full stream in
the Chanel of his Church.

3 Seeing this constant truth of God in his gracious promises to to his Church,
has reference to our obedience: this much teach us to obey and serve our God
in all things, that his sun may shine upon our Tabernacles, and that we may
anoint our paths with butter; for as David says, No good thing will he
withold from them that serve the Lord. D^u^. 28.


He has shevved his people what they shall trust too, blessings and cursings,
life and death.

3 Doctrine. This also teaches us, as the Apostle does. The effectual fervent
prayer of a righteous man prevails much. James 5.16.


He proves it by the example of Eliah, who though he were a man subject to the
like passions, as we are, he prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it
rained not on the earth in three years, and six months.

And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain.

So this example of Joshua praying, is a full example of the effectual power
of prayer, these examples, as that also of Moses praying upon the Mount, when
Joshuah fought with Amalek, do all seem to prove the force of prayer. Exodus 17.
And great reason there is that this should be effectual with God.

1 Because there is no service that man can perform to God, wherein he does so
much part with himself, and even lay himself down in prayer, for therein he
opens his heart to God, and pours forth his spirit to him; and his faith
does bring God to him face to face.

When men pray as they ought, they know God and themselves, they know and
confess him the faithful Creator, the merciful redeemer, the gracious
preserver, the bounteous rewarder of men. And they know themselves to be but
men, that is indigent and needy, having nothing but what they receive from his
hand, and of his free gift, immerent, deserving none, not the least of his
favors.

Which two considerations do serve to humble us, and to honor him.

We find in Scripture watching and fasting often joined with prayer, as
outward means to tame and subdue the flesh, that it may be the lesser able to
resist the power of the spirit, for the spirit is willing in the servant of
God, but the flesh is weak.

2 There is no part of Gods worship that has so many precepts to impose it on
us, as prayer has in both the Testaments, none that we have so many examples
of great success and prevayling with God, none that we have so good means to
perform as prayer: none that has so many promises made to it in holy Scripture.

1 For precepts, 1 Precept.
so soon as God had established him an house for his public worship, he
commanded it to be called an house of prayer to all nations.

Solomon dedicated that house to God by prayer, it is Gods own Word, seek ye my
face, it is the Churches answer. Thy face, O Lord, will I seek. And Christ our
Savior often in the gospel, the Apostles after him enjoins it.

2 For example we have Abraham, 2 Example.
Isaac, and Jacob, Moses, David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Eliah, Manasseh, Nehemiah,
Job, Samuel, Daniel: all the Prophets, all the holy men, Christ, his Apostles,
all with admirable success,

3 For means, 3 Means.
Christ taught us to pray, showed us the way to the Father, in his mediation,
and by his name.

And the spirit which Christ left in his Church helps our infirmities.

Christ has comprehended all in a few words, 4 Promise.
Whatsover you shall ask the Father in my name, it shall be given you.

Ask and receive, that your joy may be full petite, quaerite, pulsate.

These great examples of success do all seem to stir us up,

1 In obedience to the Commandment of God, who has imposed this duty on us,
whose Commandments are mighty and ought not to be light laid. 2 In an holy
ambition of the best graces of God which are this way obtained of him. 3 In an
humble love to our God, to whose presence and conference we come by prayer. 4
In an holy imitation of those great examples, which are so frequent in Gods
faithful ones, in the double Testament of God. 5 In a thankful use of the
means by God ordained to facilitate this service, that we receive not the grace
of God in vain. 6 In a confident faith in Gods gracious and free promises,
which are yea and Amen. 7 In an humble sense and feeling of our own wants,
and the necessities of our brethren, for so we do exercise both our piety to
God, and our charity to our selves and our brethren.
But this discourageth many, Ob.
we read of great power of prayer of old, as that Moses prayer gave Joshua
victory. Joshuahs prayer made the Sun stand still. Eliah by prayer, shut up
heaven, by prayer he opened it. Daniel by prayer shut up the mouths of the
lions in their den.

We see no such effects of prayer now, and therefore we think prayer is not of
such effect now, as heretofore.

To this our answer is, Sol.
that great and extraordinary examples of the success of prayer are but thinly
scattered in the Book of God, to show the power of Gods Ordinance.

Neither may that be a rule to us, that prayer is not of force as it has been,
because we do not see such great effects thereof, as have appeared in former
times.

For in the time of the shadow, when Christ was seen in type, and under a veil,
there was need of extraordinary examples to confirm faith, but to us that live
in the clear light of the gospel, to whom Christ is made manifest to be our
intercessor, this may seem to strengthen faith.

If God did hear the prayers of his faithful owns, and answered them by
miracles, they had special warrant to demand those things at the hands of God.

We have no such warrant, but look we what we may pray for, and we shall find
that God does answer us with success.

1 That the name of God may be hollowed, does not every faithful servant of
God place his trust in this name? does he not praise it for all things? 2 That
the Kingdom of God may come; Is not this Kingdom of grace in the Church? does
not the believer feel Christ reigning in his heart, and ruling him by his
spirit? and does he not expect his second coming in glory and believe
everlasting life. 3 That the will of God may be done here as it is in heaven,
is it not so?
Our conversation is in heaven; does not the whole life of a faithful soul
spend it self in imitation of Christ, and of the Angels of God, and of the holy
Saints that are gone before us to praise God in heaven.

4 Have we not daily bread? does not God feed us with food convenient for us?

5 Does not God assure our consciences of the free remission of our sins?

Does not he in temptations save us from the evil one that seeks our
destruction, and makes them the exercises of our virtue, and are directed to
the dilapidation of our faith?

We may ask nothing else of God but what has reference to one of these
petitions, and in all these God hears us and grants our requests.

Our own want of faith and zeal in prayer, our own neglect of the duty, our
own unthankfulness to God for benefits already received, our corrupt desires to
spend the favors of God upon our lusts, may make many of our prayers miscarry.

Much more if we do ask any thing at the hands of God, which is not lawful.

But let us ask as he commands, and the argument will follow comfortably.

If the servants of God have heretofore prevailed with God, so far as to work
miracles for their good, much more will God hear our ordinary suits, and grant
them so far, as may stand with the glory of his name, and our good.

But at adventure he has commanded us to pray, and let us do our duty in
obedience to him, and leave the success to his fatherly providence: prayer is
the casting our care upon God, and is not that a great comfort to us, when our
care is put off and so repose, that we may serve our God without fear or care
for things of this life.

2 The victory that followed the station of the Sun and Moon, contein two
things.

1 What God did in indignation to his enemies. 2 What he did in favor to his
people.
1 What he did in indignation?

Containing,

1 His martial march through the Land. 2 His conquest of it,
1 His March.

Thou did march through the land in indignation; which tea^heth us;

That in all wars God is Lord of Hosts,

This was assured to Joshua by a Vision, for

It came to pass when Joshua was by Jericho, Josh. 5.13.
that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and behold there stood a man over
against him, with his sword drawn in his hand, and Joshua went unto him, and
said unto him, art thou for user for our adversaries?

And he said nay: but as a Captain of the host of the Lord am I now come, and
Joshua fell on his face to the earth and did worship.

This must be God that appeared to him by this Angel: and it is the same Angel
which God before promised.

Behold, I send an Angel before thee to keep thee in the way, and to bring
thee into the place which I have prepared.

Beware of him, and obey his voice, and provoke him not; Ex ^2.22
for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him.

This Angel must needs be the same, who is after called the Messiah, or
anointed in the next verse, and both the power that was given him of God to
protect, and to pardon, and the charge that was given to the people not to
offend him, and the worship which Joshua did give him, and the name which God
said was in him, prove him to be Jesus Christ.

All serves to prove that God was the leader of these wars, as here is said.
Thou did march through the Land.

And God does take it upon himself. I the Lord do all these things. Esa. 45.7.


The reason is, because war is one of the rods of God, wherewith he does
scourge the sins of men. For thus, says the Lord God.

How much more when I send my four great judgments upon Jerusalem: the first of
them is the sword. Ezekiel. 14.21.


Who can manage the judgments of God but himself, and therefore when wicked
persons are employed by him to punish sinners by the sword, he confesses, the
service done to him as in the case of Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babel against
Tyrus.

I have given him the Land of Egypt, Ezech. 29. V^rse 2^.
for the labor wherewith he served against Tyrus: because they wrought for me,
says the Lord.

God orders all wars, for wars, as I have said, is one of Gods own rods, and
none can manage them without him, so all wars, as they are from him, are just
wars.

But they may be unjust in respect of them that commence and prosecute them.

The point then here taught is, that in all wars which are just in respect of
God who smites them, God is the leader, and the protector of his armies, who
gives them both strength to fight and victory in battle.

These were Gods wars by which Israel was settled in the land of Canaan, and
they were the wars of God, by which Israel was led away captive into Babel. you
heard God himself say so. Hab. 1.6.
For, lo, I raise up the Chaldaeans, that bitter and hasty nation, which shall
march through the breadth of the land, to possess the dwelling places that are
not theirs.

God was he that marched through the land then in indignation.

This teaches us wheresoever we see the sword of God abroad in the world to
smite,

God brought in his Israel by the sword, and by the sword he carries them out
of Canaan, note.
the hand of the Lord is in both.

Therefore, whatsoever preparations of war, Gods servants do make to hold or to
recover their own right, to relieve the distresses of others, or to suppress
the injuries of oppressors, they must commit their cause to the Lord, and seek
their strength from him, and depend on him for their success.

But as God is the author and manager of all wars, so is he the special
protectonr of those that he has separated from the world to be his Church and
peculiar people, as in the story of Isreal's passage you have heard.

In this war, God did march before his Israel against the inhabitants of
Canaan, and cast the fear of them upon them all.

This is a great advantage in all wars, to have God on their sides, for as
David says, If the Lord had not been on our side, when men rose up against us,
they had swallowed us up, etc.

Then is God a special protector, when he directs his war to the good of
them whom he protecteth, and marches in fury against their enemies.

And thus it was with Israel when they took possession of Canaan, as you have
heard. For they gate not the Land in possession, by their own arm, neither did
their own arm save them, Psalm. 44.
but thy right hand and thine arm, etc.

The distressed have a special warrant to call upon God, and it was the voice
of the Church, when the Arc removed to say, Exurgat Deus dissipentur inimici
ejus: let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered.

God is merciful to our land, and Church, that we yet live in peace, it is
full of comfort, when God marches before his Church in their wars, but it is
much more happiness when he bids us go to our chambers, and shut the door
after us, and tarry a while till the storm of troubles over-blow.

But then it is most joyous, hen he gives peace within our walls, and plenty
within our palaces.

Thus have we lived hitherto by the favor of the God of peace, and it shall do
well that we do lay this example to heart: For the same God that marched before
Israel to plant them in, does now march before the Chald^ans to cast them out,
he that fought for them to give them their land, now fights against them to
carry them captives out of the Land.

It is the indig^ation of God that makes this change, and it is their sin that
thus provokes him.

Yet they look back in their captivity and comfort themselves with the
remembrance of Gods former protection.

Sin has made this change: are we more in the favor of God then Israel was,
or have we sinned less then they did, that their evils should not come on us.

Surely the sins of our land, are both many and heinous, the double edge of the
word which is drawn and used against them, does not draw blood.

Nullus sequitur de vulnere sanguis. The course that is taken for reformation
is preposterous, for men look without themselves, and complain of the faults
of others, and would feign amend their brethren, but the right way is: Let
every one strive and labou^ to amend one.

And all that say, Let not this evil come upon us; not the sword, not the
pestilence, not famine: let them be tender that no evil come out of them, for
our sins are they which part God and us, which makes him that set us up, cast
us down.

2 His conquest. This is expressed in diverse phrases, to declare it fierce and
violent.

1 Thou did thresh the heathen in anger. 2 Thou woundest the head out of the
house of the wicked. 3 Discovering the foundation to the neck.
All look one way to describe God in his indignation, how he lays about him,
and they teach us, that

It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, for he is
known by executing judgment, and the heathen are punished in his sight.

True, that he is patient, and long-suffering, even toward the heathen that
know not God; long did the cursed seed of Cham possessed the land of Canaan, and
God deferred their punishment to the fourth generation, himself gives the
reason of it.

For the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.

There be six signs of ensuing judgment, G^ 15.16.
and where they are found, what remains but a fearful expectation of the
fierce wrath of God?

1 The quality of the sins committed, if they be of those crying sins which
do immediately impeach the glorious Majesty of God: such as are superstition
and Idolatry, which do give the glory of God to creatures; Blasphemy, breach of
Gods Sabbath.

Or such as violate humane society, sins against nature, as in the Sodomites,
sins of blood, as in the old world, sins of oppression, bribery, extortion,
corruption of justice and such like.

These things do put Almighty God so to it, that he says, How shall I pardon
thee for these things?

Shall I not visit for these things says the Lord, Jer. 5.7. Ver. 9.
shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?

The fields look yellow, as Christ says, for the harvest, and call for the
sickle of Gods vengeance to cut them down.

2 The spreading and extent of sins, when it has corrupted the most, as in the
old world, God said to Noah, Thee only have I found righteous before me in
this age.

And in Sodom not ten righteous to be found, and in Jerusalem God said,

Run too and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and
seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that
executes judgment, that seeks truth, and I will pardon it. The Prophet did
go the circuit.

He searched amongst mean men, and he found them foolish and ignorant: he gate
him amongst the great ones, and he found them such as had broken the yoke.

When sin once covers the face of the earth, and is grown like a general
pestilence infecting the greatest part, Moses, Job, Samuel and Daniel may pray
and have no audience.

3 The impudency and boldness of sin when men are not ashamed of their evils
that they commit to cover and conceal them to do them in the dark, but brave
the Sun with them: as Absolon defiled the Concubines of David in the sight of
the Sun, and before all Israel. It is Gods complaint of his people.

The show of of their countenance does witness against them, Jer. 3 9.
and they declare their sin as Sodom, and they hide it not. And again,

Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination; nay, Jer. 6.15.
they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush.

Thou have an Harlots forehead, thou refusest to be ashamed.

4 Ostentation of sin, ^er. 3.3.
when men do make their boast thereof. Why boastest thou thy self in mischief?

Upon which words, Saint Augustine says, Gloria malignitatis, gloria est
malorum.

He says, it is a foolish boast to glory in evil: for evil is easily done.

He gives many instances, the care of preparing the seed, and of the ground the
sowing, the weeding, the attending, how many hands it asks, and Absolon can
set it all on fire in a moment.

So Samsons Foxes did the fields of the Philistines.

The Wiseman sets it down as a fault;

Most men will proclaim every man his own goodness; Prove. 20.6.
how much more to boast of evil.

As wantons boast how many they have defiled, and drunkards how many they have
out-drunk.

5 Making a mock at sin: so the Wiseman says, there be that toss firebrarnds,
and say,

Am not I in sport?

All our sins are firebrarnds, we need no other rods to scourge us here, no
other fuel to enfire us hereafter, then our own sins: this is, Hilaris
insania, to make our selves merry with these, and to set in the chair of the
scornful.

6 Incorrigibility, when the gracious warnings of God do not lead them to
repentance: when the angry threatenings of God do not draw blood of them, when
the rods of Gods favorable chastisement do not smart upon them. O Lord, says
Jeremy, Jer. 5.3.
Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved.

Correction had wont to be the way to reclaim sinners, but when iniquity is
come to the full ripeness, God may lay on while he will, they that have not
known the way of peace will harden their hearts, as Pharaoh did, and correction
will but make them curse, and blaspheme God to his face.

This was the full iniquity of these nations, whom God threshed and wounded,
and dug up, and cast out, that he might plant his Israel therein.

And it teaches us to be wise to salvation, Thou man of God fly these things.
And let me say to you, as Lot to the Sodomites, I pray you, my, brethren, do
not so wickedly.

Idols, Babes, keep your selves from Idols. Idolatry has grown bolder of
later then heretofore, the Factors of Rome are busy amongst us, trading for
proselites but God stirs up the spirits of his religious servants to
solicit the cause of Religion, and the worthies of our land stand up with
zealous fervency of spirit for the truth of God.

This is the light of Israel, so long as we keep the fire of God burning upon
our Altars, we shall have hope that God is with us, and that he will give us
his blessing of peace.

Let us break off our sins by repentance, that we may turn away the indignation
of God from us, let not sin reign in our mortal bodies, that we should obey it
in the lusts thereof.



Job; I covered not my transgression with Adam, by hiding my iniquity in my
bosom.

Job, Peccavi, quid faciam tibi: with Saul, I have sinned and done foolishly.

David's heart smote him, when he had numbered the people, and let us do no more
so.

Let the judgments of God make us afraid.

Paul, let us pray three times, that the Angel of Satan may be taken from us.

Then shall we neither feel the flail of God threshing us, nor the sword of God
wounding us, nor the spade of God diging up, but we shall rejoice every man,
under his own Vine, and under his own Fig Tree.

2 What he did in favor to his own.

Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with
thine anointed.

David says, Truly God is good to Israel.

The everlasting comfort of the Church has been planted and grounded in the
favor of God by the mediation of Jesus Christ his anointed.

For although Christ were not so manifest to his Church before, and in the time
of the law, as he has been in the time of the Gospel, yet he has been always
the hope of all the ends of the world.

The reason is,

For as God created us to his own image, so he fitted to his only begotten Son
a body in our image, he was made of a woman, and so soon as his word had made
him the promised seed, so soon was he crucified for us, and was the Lamb slain
from the beginning of the World.

Then did he take his Church into his bosom, and married her to himself, and
they became one body, and ever since his Angels have charge over her to keep
her in all her ways, and this must comfort Israel in Babylon, that God went
before them with his anointed, to setle them in the promised Land.

There be no other mercies that will tarry by us, but those which God does
vouchsafe us by the means of this Mediator.

He imports many outward blessings, even to the wicked, by the means of his
holy ghost. For all the knowledge that they have, all the wisdom in arts and
sciences be the gifts of the holy ghost, but they have no portion at all in the
office of Christ, he was not anointed for them.

From hence the Apostle does conclude, that God has not forsaken the Jews,
but that they shall be called again, for he says. Has God cast away his
people? he answers: God has not cast away his people whom he foreknew. To.
11, 1, 2.


The election of grace which made them his, does confirm them to him forever,
and therefore they mention his going before them with his anointed to assure
them, that though they go into captivity and abide a long time there, yet they
shall not be left in bonds for ever. For the spirit of the Lord is upon this
anointed, to preach liberty to Captives, Isal. 61.1.
and the opening the prison to them that are bound.

This is now the true comfort of the distressed parts of the Church, which
groan under the burden of oppression, and bloody persecution.

They cry for the help from men, and no Nation does succor them, they weep and
pray to God and to his anointed, and, no doubt, but in good time, he will come
down to them to visit them in his mercy, they are Christians, and they carry
the name of Gods anointed, his name is in them, and his righteousness and
truth are their hope and strength.

It is time for thee, Lord, to put to thy hand, for the wicked sons of Belial,
the children of Edom cry out against thy Church, down with it, down with it,
even to the ground.

The Bishop of Rome, abetteth the unchristian shedding of Christian blood, by
his letters, and disperseth his vvhetstones to sharpen the sword of Gods
enemies against Gods Church.

Let us say with old Jacob; O Lord, I have waited for thy salvation, for thy
Jesus.

2 This repetition of salvation.

Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation,
teaches us.

That God has taken upon himself the care of the preservation of his Church.

Therefore he goes before them for salvation, and he does never leave them nor
forsake them.

1 God has many gracious titles,

He is called Jehovah: so we live, move, and have our being in him.

He is callrd by Job, The preserver of men, Saint Paul adds especially of the
elect, for their salvation is a peculiar grace, no common favor.

And so his right hand both supporteth and guides us, that we neither stray
out of the way: nor fall in the way.

He is called our Shepherd, and so we come to want nothing, for he leads us
both to the green pastures, and to the waters of comfort.

He is called the husband of the Church, and Christ preserves her to him, sine
macula and ruga, without spot or wrinckle, and Christ teaches us to call him
our father, so as a father has compassion, etc.

The Lord is our King of old, he makes salvation in the midst of the earth.

All these titles declare him no Non-residont from his charge, he is always
Incumbent.

For ipse est qui dat salutem.

2 Because the Church commits it self to him,

Saint Paul, I know whom I have trusted,

Commit thy ways to the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass.

3 The Church of God gives him no rest,

He that calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved.

They are called the assembly of Gods armies, and their prayers be their
weapons, Heaven is their abiding City which they besiege, and Christ says, the
violent take it by force. For, multorum preces impossible est contemni.

4 Christ himself always prays the Father for his Church, I know that thou
hear me always.

This comfortable Doctrine serves to refresh the grieved soul in time of
affliction,

In great losses as of our honors, and preferments of our liberty, of our
wealth, of our dear friends: it is some time before we can recover from this
shaking fit of fear, that God has forsaken us, and we say:

Why stand thou so far off, O Lord, and hidest thee in due time, Psalm. 1^.1.
in time of affliction?

But when we remember, thou art with me, it establishes our footsteps, it
strengthens our weak knees, and comfort our sorrowful hearts, and bids
us, Rejoice in the Lord, again, it says, Rejoice: so David,

I waited patiently for God: and so he comfort his soul. Psalm. 43.5.
Wait on God, for I will yet give him thanks, for the help of his presence, he
is my present help, and my God.

So then, if present issue appear not out of affliction, let us not faint in
our troubles: but persuade us that God is with us, and the rock of our
salvation will not fail us.

2 This shows that we need not seek further for salvation, Messiah, that is,
both the giver and the mediator of salvation with us.

This foolish devotion of the Roman Church, of making way by Angels and Saints,
has three great defects, which all the wit of Rome and hell, could never cover
or conceal.

1 It has no Commandment to require it. 2 It has no example to lead us to
it. 3 It has no promise in Scripture to reward it.
Whom have I in heaven but thee, and I have none upon earth, Psalm. 73.25
that I desire besides thee?

They be our glorious fellow creatures, we honor God for the good that they
have done in his Church.

We believe that they pray for our happy deliverance from all miseries of life,
and the society of their lives.

We imitate their holy examples and do strive to follow them in their virtues,
and pray for the graces of God that sanctified them on earth.

But for our salvation, we know that he is always with us, that saves us, and
his anointed does never forsake us, that keeps us from evil.

We hear him saying, Come unto me, and he calls us not to heaven to him, but,
Lo, I am with you to the end of the World: he is near unto all that call upon
him, and he is easily found of them that seek him.

3 This does give us fair warning to take heed that we do not leave our God and
live in sin, Solomon says;

The Lord is far from the wicked, Pro. 15.29.
but he hears the prayer of the righteous. And as God is far from them, so is
salvation, as David says. Psalm. 119.

Salvation is far from the wicked. Verse. 155.


As we tender the favorable protection and love of God, let us take heed of
sin.

Behold, Isay 59.1.
the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot save, nor his ear heavy, that
it cannot hear.

But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, Verse 2.
and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear.

4 Seeing our salvation is of him, Christum: Lo, I am with you, and Spiritum
Christi, whom I will send you from the father, but we have (...), the very
anointing it self, left and deposited in the Church, as S. John says.

But ye have an Unction from the holy one. 1 John 2.2.
If we keep this Unction, we are sure of this salvation, therefore grieve not
the spirit of God, resist not the holy ghost, receive not the grace of God in
vain.

And so let the enemy of mankind, and his agents do their worst to annoy us,
our salvation is bound up in the bundle of life with our God for ever, we may
go forth boldly in the strength of the Lord, both against the enemies of our
temporal estate, and the spiritual adversaries of our souls, for who can
wrong us, if we follow the thing that is good?

God who makes in us both velle and facere, to will and to do, and make us able
for this work of our salvation.

Verse 14. Thou did strike through with his staves the head of his villages:
they came out as a whirlwind to scatter me: Hab. 3.14.
there rejoicing was to devour the poor secretly.
THis, as you have heard, before in the exposition of the words, has reference
to that victory, which God gave against the Midianites, to his Israel. Judge.
7.22. wherein the Lord set every man's sword against his fellow throughout all
the host, for there he struck them with their own staves, and armed them
against themselves to their own ruin.

Wherein consider with me two things;

1 Their punishment. 2 Their sin.
In the punishment we are taught.

That God in his just judgment makes the ungodly rods to punish one another of
them:

This is that which God threatened against the sins in Israel: no man shall
spare his brother. Isai. 19.19.
He shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry, and he shall eat on the left
hand, and shall not be satisfied, they shall eat every man the flesh of his own
arm.

Manasseh, Ephraim, and Ephraim, Manasseh, and they together shall be against
Judah.

This was the burden of Egypt.

And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, Isai. 19.2.
and they shall fight every one against his brother, and every one against his
neighbor, City against City, and Kingdom against Kingdom.

In the first of these two places, the Prophet does foretell how the Tribes
shall fall out among themselves, and how their greediness of wealth and honor
shall make them devour one another. For the Apostle gives warning that we be
tender, how we bite one another, Lest we be devoured one of another.

This is sin and punishment both, wherein they offend, therein they are
punished.

In the second example of the Egyptians destroying one another, we behold the
uncertain state of ungodly nations, and people, they can have no constant peace.

1 Because they know not,

2 Because he would thereby maintain the equity of that natural law written in
every man's heart by the finger of God, Do as thou would be done to.

Would thou be content to be beaten with those staves, that thou have made
to beat others, to be hewed and mangled with those weapons of violence?
therefore, God in his justice employeth this preparation against themselves,
and scourges them with their own rods.

3 That we may know that all things in the administration of the world are
directed by the wisdom and providence of God,

The ten Kings in the Revelation, which are the 10 horns of of the beast, that
is of Rome.

These at first join their forces against the Lamb, and set up the beast.
Revel. 17.13.
These have one mind, and shall give their strength unto the beast.

But in the end. And these 10 horns which thou saw upon the beast, Verse 16.
these shall hate the whore and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall
eat her flesh, and shall burn her with fire. For God has put in their hearts
to fulfill his will, and to agree, and to give their Kingdom to the beast,
until the words of God shall be fulfi^^^d.

From whence we gather, that that agreement which is amongst wicked men,
against Christ, and against his Church, is strengthened by the will and
providence of God for a time, till that time, the confederacies of the ungodly
do hold, but when he pleases to dissolve them, they end in self-woundings and
intestine combustions.

This serves to settle our judgments,

Or to bring the greater condemnation upon those, whom he uses as instruments
in this trial of his chosen servants.

Therefore, now, that we both hear the news, and see the effects of this new
bloody league to destroy the Church, and to root out the Protestant Religion,
whereby much Christian blood of Innocents is already shed, more is feared: let
it establish our hearts, and settle our judgments upon this rest. The Lord will
have it. A Domino factum est hoc. Tu Domine fecisti: thou, Lord, have done it.

Surely, there is much dross in our gold, which must be purged, we have not
spared one another with schismatic mouths and pens to break the peace of
the Church, and God in his just judgment suffers the wicked to prevail
against us.

This comfort the Church against these tempests of fury,

For though they weaken us thereby, and exalt their own horn on high, yet when
the waves of the sea do rage horribly, God that is on high is more mighty then
they, and he will smite them with their own staves that supported them, and
wound them with their own swords, that defended them.

3 This admonishes us not to settle any confidence or trust in the friendship
of man, for wherein is he to be trusted? The Prophet Micah says;

The good man is perished out of the earth, Mical. 7.2.
there is none upright among men, they all lie in wait for blood: they hunt
every man his brother with a not. That they may do evil with both hands
earnestly.

The Prince asks, Verse. 3.
the Judge asks for a reward, and the great man utters the mischief of his
soul, so they wrap it up

The best of them is a bryar, Verse 4.
the most upright of them is sharper then a thorn hedge.

And from this consideration of the general falsehood that is in friendship,
his caution is;

Trust ye not in a friend, Verse 5.
put no confidence in a guide: keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies
in thy bosom.

For the Son dishonors the Father, Verse 6.
the Daughter rises up against her Mother, the Daughter in law against her
Mother in law, and a man's enemies are the men of his own house.

What shall we do then?

Therefore, Verse. 7.
I will look upon the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God
will hear me.

Christ our Savior does apply this text to his own coming into the world, Mat
10.34.
he professes it, that he came not to bring peace into the world, but the
sword.

In which words he rather expresses the events and effects, then the
intention and purpose of his coming: for where the light of the gospel does
shine, Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, are but nuda nomina, bare names, where
Christian Religion is not, for the true Gospeller will fall out with all, and
forsake them all for Jesus Christ.

The rest of the Church is God in Christ, let us seek peace with men, if it be
possible, as much as in our power, let us have peace with all men, but let us
trust no humane or temporal supportation.

Seeing it is here set down as a great judgment of God upon Midian,

Let us take notice of this judgment, and take it for a great sign of Gods
indignation against us, when we break the bonds of peace, and Christian
charity, biting and beating one another, libelling, and defaming, woorrying one
another with suits of molestation, schismatically forsaking the fellowship one
of another, and changing public Congregations into private Conventicles, and
forsaking the settled Priesthood of the Church, for such as do labor most to
break the peace of the Church, for what is this but the angel of Satan, beating
of us with our own staves. Does not this home-contention in our Church, open an
easy way to the enemy of both to enter in and spoil all.

And this I have observed, that two sides have gained by our Church contentions.

The Anabaptists have recovered some from us, who standing so violently against
Popery, have questioned all that they received.

The Papists have recovered many, who have gone so far in the defense of the
mean, that themselves have staggered into the extreme.

God be merciful to our land, and continue the peace of the State, even the
sweet correspondence of our Sovereign and his subjects, and we shall have hope,
that our arms shall be strengthened against our enemies, and our own staves
shall do us no hurt.

2 Their sin, it was a trespass against the Church of God, devouring of the
poor: and that by open violence, coming like a whirlwind in sudden fury
against them, and by secret practices to hurt and annoy them: teaching us that,

It is a grievous and provoking sin,

There be two words of strong signification here used. 1 Scattering, which
signifies their expulsion out of their places, where they dwelt, to go as the
Levite did, to get them a place where they can find one, which suiteth well
with the humor of the covetous rich man, who desires to dwell alone upon the
earth. 2 Devouring, which signifies, taking away from them all that they have,
to put it to their own heap, whereby they become vassals to those that strip
them.


This is a grievous sin,

1 Because God has declared himself the patron and protector of the poor, and
therefore the Psalmist says. The poor commits himself unto him, for he is
the father of the fatherless: so that to distress those, is to clip the wings
of the hen, that gathers in her chickens, it is:

2 Because the poor are our own flesh,

To deal thy bread to the hungry, to bring the poor that are cast out to thy
house, Isa. 58 7.
when thou see the naked to cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from
thine own flesh.

The poor and rich both dug out of the same pit, both cast in the same mould.

3 Because, Natura paucis contenta: nature is content with a little, and we
have enough amongst us to minister that. For if we have food, he means not
Manna and Quails, but necessary food and raiment, he means not costly, but
necessary raiment, we must be therewith content.

To strip the poor naked, to multiply our changes of raiment, or to take away a
whole garment from them, to put one lace more upon ours, this is inhumane
irreligious.

To scatter them, that we may have elbow-room enough, and more then needs for
our selves, that we may have so much the more to look upon, and lie by us, this
is Midianitish and heathenish.

Vos autem non sic: do not you so.

Because God has committed together with riches, The silver is mine, Hag. 2.9.
and the gold is mine, says the Lord of hoasts.

When David gave up all the provisions that he had made for the building of
Gods temple, to Solomon his Son, he blessed the Lord, and he confessed, saying.

O Lord, our God, 1 Ceron. 29 16.
all this store that we have prepared to build thee an house, for thy holy name
comes of thine hand, and is all thine own: so before, all things come of
thee, and of thine own hand have we given thee.

The use then that we must make of this point is.

1 For the rich, let them know their duty to the poor, love is a debt that they
owe to them, not an arbitrary courtesy: they may not,

1 Either encroach upon them by robbing or spoiling them of that which they
have, as here those Midianites did, to spoil their corn, to take away any thing
of theirs. 2 Neither may they come upon them as a whirlwind to encompass and
gird them in by their devices of power, or wit, or authority, to make prizes of
their labors, whilst they eat the bread of adversity, and drink the waters of
Marah. 3 Neither may they withhold their hands in their bosoms in their wants,
but stretch them forth to relieve their necessities.
The wise son of Jakeh says; Pro. 30.14
There is a generation, whose teeth are as swords, and there jaw teeth as
knives to devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy from among men.

And Solomon says: The soul of the wicked desires evil, Pro 21.10
his neighbor finds no favor in his eyes.

Let them remember, that the rich man in the gospel is not charged with any
oppression of the poor, but with suppression of the relief, which he should
have given to Lazarus.

And in that overture of the last grand sessions in the gospel, it is only
charged upon them that are adjudged to hell fire, Esurivi, and non pavistis me,
etc. I was hungry and you fed me not. Suppression is oppression.

That cold charity which St James speaks of, will be warmed in hell.

If a brother or a sister be naked, and destitute of daily food.

And one of you say unto them, depart in peace, Jam. 2.15. Verse 16.
be you war^^ed, and filled, notwithstanding you give them not those things
which be needful for the body, what does it profit?

2 Let the poor know that their God does take care of them to visit their sins
with rods;

Therefore let them follow the Wisemans-counsell. Curse not the rich, Eccles.
10.20.
no not in thy bed chamber, let no railing and unchristian bitterness wrong a
good cause, let it be comfort enough to them, that God is both their supporter
and avenger, is it not sufficient to lay all the storms of discontent against
their oppressors, that God sees their affliction, and comes down to deliver
and to avenge them.

3 Rather let this move them to commit their cause to the Lord, Tertullian
says:

Si apud Deum deposueris morbum medicus est, si damnum restitutor est, si
injuriam ultor est, si mortem resuscitator est. Let not the fair weather of
oppressors grieve them that live in the tempest of their injuries, David will
tell them, that he says, ungodly flourish like a green bay tree, and anon he
sought them, and their place was not found.

Here is the exaltation of Christian charity, to bless and pray for such, and
this will heap coals of fire upon their head, either to warm their charity
which has taken cold, or to consume or devour them.

There was a time, when he that denied Lazarus a crum, begged of him a drop:
and qui negavit dare micam, non accepit guttam, and he that denied a crum, had
not a drop.

Verse 15. Thou did walk through the sea, Hab. 3.17.
with thine horses through the heap of great waters.
THese words do end the section, which contains a thankful commemoration of
Gods former mercies to his people.

De Verborum interpretatione. It seems to me clear against all question, that
this text has reference to the wonderful passage of Israel through the red
sea, of which mention is made before, Verse 8.

Was thy wrath against the sea, that thou did ride upon thy horses, and
chariots of thy salvation.

The words express that miracle very fully and fitly, for where it is said.
Thou did walk through the sea: this has reference to that which we read
concerning this passage over the red sea: Exodus 14. In which this is
memorable, that God went before the people of Israel, on the shore, but it is
said, when God gave Moses direction to lift up his rod, and stretch forth his
hand over the sea to divide it, Moses having so done. The Angel of God which
went before the camp of Israel, removed, and went behind it, and the pillar of
cloud went from before their face, and stood behind them.

And it came between the camp of the Egyptians, and the camp of Israel, and it
was a cloud of darkness to them: i.e to the Egyptians, and it gave light by
night to these, that is, to Israel, so that the one came not near the other all
night.

This story shows how God did walk through the sea, even between the two
camps.

The power of Gods word went before them, the presence of his Angel went behind
them, God himself carried the dark lanthorn, which kept all light from the
Egyptians, and showed a clear light to Israel.

The horses of God here mentioned are the emblems of strength, courage and
speed. For thus was Israel relieved through the heap of the great waters, that
is, on the way made through the sea, which was gathered in heaps on both sides.

So the words are plain and easy.

The sum of them is a repetition of that great wonder of the conduct of
Israel, per mare, through the sea, of which I have formerly spoken at large,
and now remains that we search the reason why, this one special miracle is
here again repeated. That is,

Because this was the greatest miracle of power and mercy,

Yet I will not conceal from you, that Josephus writing this story of the
division of the sea for the passage of Israel, to give it the more credit. Ne
quis discredat verbo miraculi: does report a like wonder, Antiquit 2 cap. 14.
that God intending by Alexander the Great, to destroy the Persian Kingdom, did
open the like passage through the Pamphilian sea to Alexander and his army, he
adds, Id quod omnes testantur, that which all do witness, who wrote the story
of Alexanders conquests.

Quintus Curtius, who writes of purpose the life and acts, and death of
Alexander, says no more of it but this, Mare novum itur in Pamphiliam
aperuerat: which being ascribed to Alexander himself, does declare it no
miraculous passage.

But Strabo cleereth it thus, that this sea was no other, then such as we have
within our own land, which we call Washes, wherein the sea forsakes the sands
at an ebb, and leaves them bare and passable, on foot or horseback, and he
says, that Alexander passed his army through these washes, but being belated,
the waters returned upon them before they could recover the shore of
Pamphilia, ut to^o die itur faceret in mare umbilico tenus.

Therefore Josephus was ill advised to parallel this passage with the Israel
passage through the red sea, seeing there were so many disparisons, and whereas
he seemed to labor to give credit to Moses his history, by this unlike
example, he rather blemished the glory of this superadmirable miracle.

There is not any of the great wonders that God wrought for Israel, so often
remembered in Scripture as this is, and where the Spirit of God so often fixes
our eyes and thoughts: we shall do evil to take them of.

Moses bids Israel remember this miracle of their passage, Deuteronomy. 11.4.
What God did to the army of Egypt, unto their horses, and their chariots, how
he made the water of the Rea Sea to overflow them.

Rahab could tell the Spies, Josh. ^. 11.12.
We have heard how the Lord dried up the water of the Red Sea for you. As Soon
as we heard, our hearts did melt, neither did there remain any courage in any
man because of you.

Thy way is in the Sea, and thy path in the great waters, Ps. 77.19.
and thy footsteps are not seen.

Thou leddest thy people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron. Verse 20.


Therefore, it is a fabulous relation of Paulus Orosius, who reports it as an
addition to this wonder, that the trace of the Chariot wheels, was in his days
to be seen on the sands of the Red Sea at every ebb: and that if they were
defaced, yet they renewed again. But David says, that the footsteps of this
passage were not seen: and we need not add any thing to the miracles of God to
make them more miraculous.

David, again, remembers it, saying;

He divided the Sea, and caused them to pass thorough: Psalm. 78.13 53.
and he made the waters to stand on an heap. The Sea overwhelmed their
enemies.

He rebuked the Red Sea also, and it was dried up, Ps. 106.9.
so he led them thorough the depths, as through a Wilderness.

The waters covered their enemies, so that there was not one of them left.

When Israel came out of Egypt, Ps. 114.1.3.5.
etc.
The Sea saw that and fled.
What ailed thee, o Sea, that thou fleddest!
He divided the Red Sea into parts. Ps. 136.13, Verse 15.^.

He overthrew Pharach and his host in the Red Sea.
Art not thou it, that has dried up the Sea, Isai. 51.10.
the waters of the great deep, that has made the depths of the Sea a way for
the ransomed to pass over?

Many more are the mentions of this miracle in the book of God, and here we
find it in this Psalm doubly repeated.

Which teaches us that Gods extraordinary mercies must be often remembered.

For we must consider our God two ways.

1 Qua Deus, as God, and so he is to be worshipped, cultu latriae propter Deum,
for his own sake, though we could live without him. Though he do hide his face
from us, and heap up his judgments on us, as Job says, Job 7.20.
though he makes us, as his mark to sh^ot at, though all his arrows do stick
fast in us. 2 Qua benefactor, as a benefactor, and that also two ways. 1
Propter opus providentiae, for his work of providence, whereby he is to us a
gracious God and merciful father, taking his Church to himself, and gathering
it under his wings, shielding it against the Sun by day, and against the Moon
by night. 2 Propter opera privilegiata, for his privileged works, especially
favors of mercy, quando non facit taliter. For the first, all our life,
especially the Sabbath, is designed to the worship and service of God for the
same: the second of his extraordinary works, does exact of us singular
commemoration by themselves, and therefore Abulensis says;

Omnia festa quae Deus instituit observanda a Judaeis fiebant, ad recordationem
beneficiorum ejus.

Now the school says well, that latria is not totaliter determinata, to these
or these times or ceremonies, or occasions, but that we may worship God always
qua Deus, as God; upon special occasions qua Benefactor, as Benefactor.

And so the Jews kept the memorial of their deliverance from Egypt in their
anniversary celebration of the Passover, and of their dwelling in tents, in
the feast of Tabernacles.

And of their deliverance from Haman in their feast of Purim.

And the Germane Protestants do keep a Christian Jubilee every 50 year, for
their deliverance from the darkness of Popery, and their ejection of the Pope.

Wherein our Church as much beholding to God for the same benefit as they, does
come short of them in matter of thankfulness to God for the expulsion of that
man of sin from us.

We have three Commemorations enjoined us by high authority, the one is ortus
auspicia, so of all, it was called the initium regni, the beginning of the
reign of our Sovereign, whom God sent to settle the religion and peace with
his glorious predecessor Queen Elizabeth had so happily and so valiantly
brought in and maintained, during her whole reign, and by the providence of
God, we enjoy it to this day.

Another is the remembrance of his Majesty's deliverance from the treason of
the Gowries in Scotland, before his reign here, as it were his reserving of him
for us.

The third is the commemoration of the admirable goodness of God to our land,
in the bloody treason of the Papists, the mortal enemies of our religion and
peace in their powderplot.

But this often remembrance of the mercy of God to Israel, in the red sea
upbraids our forgetfulness of that 88 sea mercy, which God showed to our land
in our deliverance from the Spanish intended invasion, in the times of
hostility between Spain and England, and though the established peace between
these two Kingdoms have laid aside open wars, yet let God be no loser in the
glory due to his name for that deliverance.

I will add another reason, Israel through the red sea, is so often remembered in
Scripture, twice in this Psalm of Habakkuk, which I gather from the Apostle
St. Paul.

Moreover, Brethren, I would not have you ignorant, 1 Cor. 1^.^.
how that all our Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea.

And were all baptized unto Moses in the sea, Ver. 2.
and in the cloud.

For this was memorable not only in the history of the thing done, but in the
mystery also of the signification thereof.

You see by this Apostle, that this is a memorable thing, and he would not have
us ignorant of it, and if we know it, he would not have us forget it, there is
continual use of it in the Church; even so long as baptism continues therein.

For that is the scope of the Apostle in the beginning of that Chapter, to show
that the Church of the Jews, as they had Sacraments of their own Circumcision,
and the Lords Passover, so had they types and figures of our two Sacraments
also.

The type and representation of our Baptism was their passage through the red
sea.

The type of our Lords Supper was the water out of the rock and Manna.

But they and we do all receive the same spiritual meat and drink, that is
Christ.

So that this passage over the red sea does figure our Baptism, here is Moses,
the Minister of the Sacrament, here are Israelites, the receivers of it, and
here is water the element, and the cloud, the sign of Gods presence: here is
Israel, that is, the persons baptized, preserved in these waters, and here is
King Pharaoh and his hoasts, that is, Satan and our hereditary corruptions
drowned and destroyed in the same waters.

And the Apostle says, I would not that ye should be ignorant of this thing
which admonishes both you and us that are your ministers.

1 You, not to be ignorant in those great mysteries of salvation. 2 Us, not to
leave you untaught or unremembred thereof.
We that preach to a mixed auditory consisting, incipientes, Abcedaries in
religion, who are not yet out of their first elements, which the Apostle
calls the doctrine of beginnings.

And some few proficients, who also have their measures, not all of equal
growth, but some few, as much better grown then others, as Saul was higher,
then all the rest of the people, must as well give milk with the spoon as break
bread, and divide strong meat, and, me thinks, there be two places that direct
us well in the dispensation of the Word of God.

1 That of the Prophet Isaiah.

The Word of the Lord was unto them, precept upon precept precept upon precept,
Isa 2.^3.
line upon line, line upon line, here a little and there a little, in which
words.

The matter of our preaching is expressed in two words, 1 precept which teaches
us what to do. 2 line, which exemplifieth doctrine, and serves as a copy to
write by.


And again, the manner of our preaching is declared profitable, if the same
things be well taught, till they be well learned.

And this is modicum ibi, modicum ibi, here modicum not too much at once, for
oppressing the spiritual stomach: and here is ibi and ibi, ibi amongst the
proficients, and ibi amongst the incipients.

2 That of St. Peter. Wherefore, 2 Pe^. 1.12
I will not be negligent to put you in mind of those things though ye know them.

Yea, I think it meet, so long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by
putting you in remembrance.

This shows the use of often repetitions of such things as we ought not to
forget, for it is not enough to have light in our understanding, there must be
also zeal in our affections, Religion in the head is speculation, in the heart
affection, in the hand action.

If we do our duty thus, as we are directed, it must be your great fault if
either you be ignorant or forgetful, of these things.

The spirit of God is our example, for he remembers this passage of Israel
often, and modicum ibi, a little here in the old Testament, modicum ibi, a
little there, in the new Testament, for this is also profitable for us.

This shows that the often preaching and learning and remembering the doctrine
of our Baptism, is a most necessary lesson in the school of Christ, that we do
not enter into a new peace with the Egyptians, whom God has drowned in the red
sea, that we do not revive and quicken in us those things which the laver of
new birth has purged, by suffering sin to reign in our mortal bodies, and by
obeying it in the lusts thereof.

That we do not so much as in heart return again into Egypt, out of which God
has so graciously delivered us.

Profitable is the remembrance of our Baptism, for it is the sacrament and
seal of our deliverance from the curse of the (...) from the spiritual bondage
of Satan, from the dominion of sin, i^ ^heweth us the old Adam, dead in the
death, and buried in the grave of Christ.

It also serves being often remembered to stir us up to a practice of
Christian conversation, and to an holy imitation of Christ in godly life: that
we may not receive the grace of God in vain, that we be not again defiled with
the world, for the Apostle will tell us.

That if Christ has opened us a new and living way through the vail, Heb.
20.22 23.
that is his flesh, we must draw near with a true heart in full assurance of
faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies
washed with pure water.

Holding fast the profession of our faith without wavering.

For if we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, Ve^se
26.
there remains no more sacrifice for sins.

But a certain fearful looking for of judgment, Verse 27.
and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries.

I conclude, in the Apostles words: therefore, brethren, I would not have you
ignorant concerning this passage of the Lords Israel through the red sea.

Verse 16. Hab. ^. 6.
When I heard, my belly trembled, my lips quivered at the voice, rottenness
entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day
of trouble, when he comes up unto his people, he will invade them with his
troops.
AT this verse begins the third Section of this Chapter, and it contains
the consternation of the Prophet dejected before the Lord, with the former
considerations and the sad estate of the land of Canaan.

1 Concerning the words.

When I heard.] The Prophet fitting this Psalm as you have heard for the
common use of the Church, does not speak in this place in his own person
perticularly, When I heard] but in the person of that Church of God to which
this prophecy was sent. Verse 14.

They came out as a whirlwind to scatter me,] is spoken of the Midianites,
invading Gods people, not the Prophet Habak.

So that Theard, here is collectively the whole Church, and perticularly every
member thereof.

But what is that is here heard?

Surely this has a double reference.

1 To the former prophecy, of Gods threatened judgments against his people, of
which you heard before, Verse 2. O Lord, I have heard thy speech, and was
afraid.

For it was a fearful judgment, which God had denounced against them.

2 It has reference to the full commemoration of Gods former mercies, for
howsoever faith may grow upon this root of experience of Gods favor, yet when
the Church of God shall consider all that former favor now turned into
indignation, and shall feel that power, which once protected them so
miraculously now armed against them, this cannot but cast them into great fear.

This fear is described fully and rhetorically in four several phrases.

1 My belly trembled, 2 My lips quivered; 3 Rottenness entered into my bones: 4
I trembled in my self.
It is the manner of the spirit of God in such like phrases to express a great
horror and dismay, by the belly is meant the inward parts and bowels.

So the Prophet upon the denunciation of the burden upon the desert sea says;

Therefore, are my loins filled with pain, Isai. 21.3.
pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth, I was
bowed down at the hearing of it, I was dismayed at the seeing of it.

My bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab, Isa. 16.11.
and mine inward parts for Kirharesh.

So Job, Job 30.27.
My bowels boiled and rested not.

And David, Mine eye is consumed with grief, yea, Psalm. 31.9.
my soul and belly.

I am poured out like water, all my bones are out of joint, Ps. 2.14.
my heart is like wax it is melted in the midst of my bowels.

Thus the perturbations of grief and fear, and the passions of anguish are
expressed.

The quivering of the lips which hinders speech, shows a man overcome with
anger, fear, or grief, so does,

The general disabling of the body, as if the parts thereof, the brains and
sinews suffered luxation and debilitation.

And the earthquake in the whole frame thereof, and the distemper of the man
within us. I trembled in my self, that is the inward man, the hid man of the
heart felt this anguish of grief and fear, and all this trepidation and terror
had this good effect following.

That I might rest in the day of trouble.]

For of sufferance comes ease, this fear of the heavy hand of God is but a fit,
for faith follows it, and consumes it, and setleth the heart in a yielding
to the mighty hand of God, and that gives rest in the day of trouble, that day
is also described.

When he comes up unto his people, he will invade them with his troops.]

Either when God comes, or when the enemy whom God shall employ in the
execution of this judgment comes, he will invade his people that have rebelled
against him, and are fallen away from him with troops, that is, he will come
upon them with a full power to make a full conquest of them.

This day is is further described in the verse following.

Verse 17. Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in
the vines, H^b. 3.17.
the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the field shall yield no meat, the
flocks shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stals.
IN which words he supposes the worst that may befall to the land, that God
should not only as before, carry away, or destroy the inhabitants thereof,
although he should smite the land it self with barrenness, that neither the
fig tree nor the vine should relieve them, nor the olive, nor the fields, nor
the foulds, yet the Church will not despair of the loving kindness of the Lord
toward them.

This land so long promised to the seed of Abraham, so long expected, and at
last by them possessed is much praised in Scripture.

God himself calls it a good land, and a large, Ex^d. 3.8.
a land flowing with milk and honey.

And so the spies that were sent to search it, brought word, number. 13.9.
and they brought of the fruit, and showed it to the people.

Again, for the Lord thy God brings thee into a good land, Deuteronomy. 8.7.
a land of brooks of water, of fountains, and depths, that spring out of
valleys and hills.

A land of wheat, and barley, and wines, and fig trees, and pomegranates, a
land of oil, olive, and honey.

A Land wherein thou shall eat bread without scarceness, thou shall not lack
any thing in it, a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou
may dig brass.

It was one of the miracles of the earth, and the full blessing of the Lord was
upon it, for the land was small both in length and breadth, as all the Charts
thereof describe it.

For from Dan to the river of Egypt, which is somewhat further then Beersheba,
it was little more then three hundred miles, which was the length of it, and in
the broadest place thereof it was not an hundred, yea do I put it in this
account, all the land on this side Jordan, the portion assigned to Reuben, Gad,
and the half tribe of Manasseh.

Yet did it contein two great Kingdoms, of Judah and Israel, and in David's
time, there were numbered in it thirteen hundred thousand fighting men, 2 Chronicles.
24.
which cannot in probable computation be more then a fourth part of the people,
seeing aged men, women and children, and all undertwenty years of age are not
reckoned, and this land fed them all, much is said by heathen writers of the
fruitfulness of this land, and as great a wonder is it of the change thereof
now, for travailers do report it at this time to be a barren and unfruitful
land: it is in the possession of Gods enemies, and David says.

A fruitful land makes he barren, for the iniquity of the people that dwelt
therein.

De verbis hactenus, of the words hitherto.

The parts of this Section are two.

1 The fear of the Church. 2 The misery of the Land.
In the first, I observe also three things.

1 The cause of this fear. 2 The fear it self. 3 The effect hereof.
In the second, the misery of the land. It is distressed in the three great
commodities of life.

1 In the trees yielding fruit. 2 In the soil yielding corn. 3 In the flocks
yielding increase.
1 Of the fear of the Church, and therein.

1 Of the cause of this fear in these words, When I heard.

The commination of Gods judgments,

1 Because this opens to man his conscience, and declares to him his sin,
for we know that God is gracious and merciful, and long suffering, and hides
his hand in his bosom, his mercy does often pull it out, and opens it, and
he fills the hungry with good things, his mercy stretches it out often to
gather together his chosen, to defend them from evil, to stay and support them.

If his indignation do pluck it out, it is a sign that sin has provoked him,
and therefore we read what of old was the practice of the Church. If there were
any judgment abroad, presently they made search for the sin, that had provoked
God to it; for they knew him so just, that he will not smite without cause.

God taught Joshua this, when the men of Ai smote the men of Israel, and made
them to fly before them, Joshua went to the Lord to make his moan, and God told
him.

Israel has sinned.

And so there was a present search made by the commandment of the Lord
throughout all Israel, to find out the sinner, and Achan was defected.

In like manner, when Saul had made a vow that none of his army should taste any
food till night, and Jonathan not hearing of the commandment had eaten a
little honey upon the end of his rod, he went to advise with God concerning the
pursuit of the Philistines, by night, and God answered him not, wherefore Saul
said.

Draw you near hither all the chief of the people, 1 Samuel 14.38.
and know and see wherein this sin has been this day.

And this is so natural a quest, as that whosoever do acknowledge a divinity,
cannot but upon the sense of judgment, or the fear of it presently conclude,
God offended with some sins.

So the Mariners in the great storm in Jonah, said, every one to his fellow.
Come and let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil is upon
us. Jonah 1.7.


The confideration of Gods judgments do breed fear in respect of God, whose
judgments they are. For,

2 He is so wise, to weigh the sins that we commit, putting into the scales
the incitements and temptations, the circumstances of time, person, place,
number, even the very affection, wherewith sin is committed. 3 He is so just as
not to impute more sin to us then we have committed, not to abate any of that
we have mis-done. 4 He is so holy, as not to abide or appear the least evil,
for he is a God that hates iniquity. 5 He is so powerful, as to avenge it
with his judgment, and he has all sorts of instruments of vengeance to punish
sin. 6 He is Ubiquitarie, as that no remove can avoid him, his presence
fills all places 7 He is so true of his word, that heaven and earth shall
pass, but no part of his Word shall fail, till all be fulfilled. 8 He is one
that cannot repent of any thing that he peremptorily decrees.
All these things do declare, that there is great cause to fear, when he
threatens.

The Apostle teaches us the use of this point, Rom^ 3.3.
will thou not then be afraid of the power? do that which is good, then shall
thou have praise of the same.

This is the way to make us seek the face of God, the first sinners fled from
the presence of God behind the trees in the garden, Adam confessed to God. Genesis
3.10.
I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid.

A good life is a good fence against fear, Solomon says: the righhteous is
bold as a lion.

Perfect love casts out fear, for perfect love is ^^e f^^filling of the law,
where our love falls short, there fear fills the empty and void room.

The voice of the Lord is comfortable, and his words are sweet to those that
fear him, he will speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints: Psalm. 85.8.
But let them not turn again to folly. So David resolves there. I will hear
what the Lord will speak.

It is a plain sign, that all is not well with us, when the voice of God does
cast us into fear, when we are afraid to hear the Word preached, when just
reproofs of our sins are unwelcome to us, and anger us, and make us think the
worse of our Minister that chideth and threatens us.

A good life and a well governed conversation, does not fear the voice of God:
the Word of God is the light which God has set up in his Church to guide her
feet in the ways of peace, they that do evil, hate the light, and will not
come near it, lest their-works should be reproved, the children of the light
resort to it, and call upon God, search my reins and my heart, and see if there
be any way of wickedness in me.

This fear of the Church is not joined either with obstinacy against God, or
murmuring at his judgments, or despair of his mercy, it is that fear, which is
one of the effects of a godly sorrow, and it is one of the documents to true
repentance, it is the hammer and mallet of God, wherewith he bruiseth us, and
breaks us, that we may be truly humbled under his almighty hand: it is that
fear which the spirit of bondage suggesteth, which is not a grace of God in us,
Romans 8.15.
but a punishment of God upon us, and we would fain be without it, it is the
fear of servants, and not of sons, yet God uses it as a means to bring us home
to him again, when we like sheep have gone astray, and therefore, the prodigal
to re-enter himself into his fathers house prayed, fac me unum ex mercenariis,
make me as one of thy hired servants: it may be that fear which in the school
is called Initialis, which re-entreth us into the service of God, and keeps
us in awe, it is ut ilis, but not sufficiens, and we would be glad to be
delivered out of it, that we might serve God without fear in holiness and
righteousness.

For so the Apostle does recompt it a favor to the Romans, Ye have not
received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but the spirit of adoption.

2 The fear it self.

This fear was great both in the inward man, and in the outward, it was that
fear of which David spoke to God, saying, of the heathen, put them in fear, O
Lord, that they may know themselves to be but men.

And David himself was soundly shaken with it, as his complaint shows.

My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. Psalm.
119.120.


And we find the best of the faithful servants of God subject to this fear,
and it is clear in my text, that it may be joined with faith. For after this
cold fit of fear, you shall see the faith of the Church to quicken it again.

The elect of God are shaken with fear.

1 Because they are great Students in the Law of God,

And wheresoever the law is wisely understood and applied rightly, there fear
does arise, for so long as we are under the Law, we are under a Schoolmaster,
and as the Apostle does say, a child differs very little from a servant, you
know when a young man came to Christ, to ask him the way to heaven, Christ
referred him to the Law, and the keeping thereof.

That is our first lesson: it follows so in the mission of our Redeemer, he was
made of a woman, and made subject to the Law.

The law shows us how much we are in Gods debt, and you may note it in the
parable of the good Mr. in the gospel.

1 He called his servant to account, and cast up the debt. 2 Then he put him to
it to pay it. 3 When he saw him willing but unable, then he forgave it.
God calls us by the light of the Law, by the sight of our sins, our sins are
debts, when we see them, how can we choose but together with them behold the
danger of them, and the wrath due to them, this cannot be done without fear,
even great horror and dejection.

The thief that was converted upon the cross, when he had but a little time,
he made an example of great mercy, the only example in all the Book of God, of
so late a conversion, yet in that short time, he began at the Law of God, and
said, to his fellovv.

We indeed are justly punished, for we receive the due rewards of our deeds.
Lu. 2341.


And after that he sought grace: this Law was the Schoolmaster, that brought
him to Christ, saying, Lord, remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom:
for

Until we compare our selves with the law of righteousness, we cannot know how
unjust we are, and what need we have of a Savior.

We may see it in our first parents, who no sooner had sinned but they hid
themselves from God, because they savv their fault by the light of the Law,
which they had transgressed.

This fear brings us to repentance, ferte ergo fructus dignos poenitentia,
bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance: it is time to amend when
sin stands at the door, that is the wages of sin to punish all, or some new
temptation to sin, to make it more; fear will tell us that time is precious,
we must lose none of it from our true repentance and conversion to God.

3 This fear serves for caution against the time to come, piscis ictus sapit,
one that has been once soundly shaken with a strong fit of this fear, will be
the more weary to decl^ne and avoid it another time. For there is nothing that
so much agonizeth the soul and body of man, as the sense and conscience of the
wrath of God.

4 It is one of the arguments, as you have heard,

1 It proves that there is a God, for that power which the conscience of man
does fear as an avenger of evil, is God. 2 It proves the resurrection of the
body, for as the Apostle says, if in this life only we have hope, so we may
say, if for this life only we have fear, it can be no great matter, for the
judgments of God cannot take sufficient vengeance of sin here. 3 It proves the
final judgment, for all the afflictions of a temporal life are but the
fore-unner of the last judgment.
But here it is objected that this may well hold in the reprobate, Quaest
but to see this earthquake of trembling in the Church, and amongst the holy
ones of God, as it is here described, this seems too hard a portion for Gods
beloved and chosen ones.

To this I answer, that judgment begins at the house of God, and the
righteous are hardly saved, Sol.
they that have no other hell but in this terror of the Lord here, do most
smart in this world, and there is great reason for it.

1 In respect of God, to show him no accepter of the persons of men, but an
equal hater of evil in all that commit it, as David says; If I regard
wickedness in my heart, God will not hear me. 2 In respect of the sin
committed by his chosen, that God may declare the danger of it for terror to
others, and his justice in avenging it, that men may fear and do no more so. 3
In respect of the wicked, that they may have example of fear in the smart of
others, to bring them to the obedience and service of God.
This does serve, our God, in the way of his judgments, and to bethink us what
evil may hang over our heads for sin, the Church has ever found this a
profitable course:

In the way of thy judgments, Isai. 26 8.
o Lord, have we waited for thee, the desire of our soul is to thy name and to
the remembrance of thee.

The profit that grows hence, is there confessed by the Church: When thy
judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness.

This does serve to put difference, Lord, when thy hand is lifted up they will
not see, Verse II. Use 3.
but they shall see and be ashamed.

This also serves for consolation of the Church, for let them not be too much
dejected with consideration either of Gods revealed wrath, or their own just
fear, no, though their fear do shake and stagger their very faith for a time,
for God will not forsake them unto despair, but will let some of the beams of
grace shine even through the clouds of fear to comfort them, David felt it,
Psalm. 56.3.
and confessed it, saying: What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee. See how
they grow together, fear and faith.

But this is objected as an argument against that doctrine of the assurance of
salvation, Ob.
that a child of God may have in this life, for it is urged: Can a man that
stands assured of the favor of God to him in Christ Jesus be so shaken with
fear, as the Church here confesses.

We answer.

1 That fear of temporal smart in this life is natural, Sol.
and may be in the sons of God, it was in the Son of God Jesus Christ, and it
may be without sin, and the elect, although they fear the judgments of God on
earth, yet they doubt not, but that their names are written in heaven.

2 That fear is not against faith, which is quick and sensible of the wrath and
judgments of God: it is Cos fidei the Whetstone of faith, it puts a better edg
upon it, and serves to teach us to lay so much the faster hold upon Jesus
Christ.

Courage either to resist an evil ingruent without a right knowledge of it, or
to bear an evil incumbent, without a right understanding both of the Author
of it, the cause of it, or the end of it, or the measure of it, is not courage
but stupidity.

But when we do rightly know God to lay his hand on us for sin, or hear him
threaten us with the rod: is it not time to fear, and to pray with Jeremie: Be
not a terror to me, Jer. 17.17.
for thou art my hope in the day of evil.

3 Fear and faith go together, in respect of the temporal judgments of God,
because the threatenings of temporal judgments are not always peremptory, but
oft-times conditional, therefore the King of Niniveh proclaiming a general.
Fast and repentance in Niniveh, had this encouragement: Jonah 3.9.
Who can tell, if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger
that we perish not? God himself has put us into this comfort.

At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, Jer. 18.7.
and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it.

If that nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will
repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them.

So that this fear of the temporal judgments of God, does no way weaken the
faithful assurance that we have conceived of eternal salvation, rather it
strengthens it, yea, the more that we either taste or fear the punishing hand
of God here, the more do we desire the release of us hence, which is rest from
all labors.

4 They that take this fear to be contrary to faith, and assurance of the
favor of God do mistake it, for it is true, that a doubtful and despairing
fear does destroy faith, but the faithful cannot fall into that fear, because
God presses not his temptations above that which his children are able to bear.

And fear in them is but contrary to presumption, it is not contrary to faith,
which thus appears, because this fear does not make the servants of God give
over the work of their salvation, rather it makes them double their endeavors,
and redeem the time.

But in the reprobate their fear does make them give heaven gone from them, and
profess it lost labor to serve God.

Ye have said, it is in vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have
kept his Ordinances, Mal. 3.14.
and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of hoasts.

But they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another: that is, encouraged
one another, and it is said, the Lord hearkened and heard it, etc.

3 The effect of this fear: That I might rest in the day of trouble.

This also shows that this fear of the Church was not separated from faith,
for it is entertained of purpose to settle the heart, and to give it rest in
the day of trouble.

I cannot but often remember that sweet saying of Austine: Medicina est quod
pateris, thy suffering is the Physic, for the Physic that we take to purg the
ill humors of the body, does make the body more sick for the time, and so do
the chastisements of God.

The fear of judgment threatened, is more pain to the children of God, then the
sense of the judgment inflicted.

It is a note of the just, that they rejoice in tribulations, yet you see they
fear tribulations before they come, which shows that the bitterness of that
cup, is more in the cause then in the effect.

The righteous in these threatenings do behold God in displeasure, themselves in
the guilt of provocation, and nothing goes so near the heart of a godly man,
as that his God should take any unkindnesse at him, for in his favor is life.

To help this, when God threatens, the just man fears, and that fear does
both remember him of the occasion of this judgment, and composeth him to
repentance of his sin, and to prayer, to divert it, or to patience in it.

Fear joined with faith, prepares us for peace and rest in the day of trouble.

An admirable work it is of wisdom and mercy to extract rest out of fear, but
to him that brought light out of darkness, nothing is impossible, more to give
rest in the day of trouble, when the soul refuses comfort, and even begins to
take a kind of pride in the fullness of misery, and says, videte si dolor,
sicut delo^ ^^us.

1 Because these inward convulsions of the hid man of the heart are joined
evermore in the godly, Peccavi.

Observe it in Job, he did not ask, Quid patior? but Quid faciam tibi? so it
works in us a care and conscience of obedience hereafter.

It also discerns an issue out of trouble, Heb. 12.11.
The peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them which are exercized thereby.

Wherefore, lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees.

Make straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of
the way, but let it rather be healed.

The way is there described. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord.

Look diligently, lest any man fall from the grace of God, lest any root of
bitterness springing up in you trouble you.

Out of this whole passage, you may observe a sweet description of a full
repentance.

1 Here is the law of God, revealing both sin and the judgment due to it,
called here, the hearing of the voice of God. 2 Here is the conscience agonized
with the fear of Gods judgments. 3 Here is the fruit and benefit thereof, even
peace and rest ^n the day of trouble.
Here is sowing in tears, and reaping in joy, rather it is Sunshine in a
tempest, for the outward man is shaken, and the flesh suffers, but the just
do say with the ever blessed Virgin. My spirit rejoices in God my Savior.

Impii non sic, not so with the wicked: for God has said it, that there shall
be no peace at the last to them, but as the raging of the angry sea, which
casts up nothing but foam and dirt.

2 The miseries of the land.

This is described fully.

1 In the agent. 2 In the patient.
In the agent two ways.

1 The Primus motor, the supreme agent, God. 2 The instruments of action:
Chaldaeans.
In the patient the land of Canaan distressed, as you have heard.

1 In the trees bearing fruit. 1 The figtree. 2 The vine. 3 The olive.
2 In the field or arable. 3 In their Cattle 1 Such as feed abroad 2 Such as
are stalled

1 Concerning the agent Supreme, God.

The same hand that gave them possession of that good land, Mutatio dextrae.

It is a thing notable that God is ever in Scripture described to us constant,
yesterday and to day, and the same for ever, without variableness, or so much
as a shadow of alteration, yet in his government of the world, he sometimes
gives, and sometimes he takes away: sometimes he fills, and sometimes he
emptieth.

The reason hereof is partly in our selves, Isa. 1.19, 20.
as himself tells us. If you consent and obey, you shall eat the good things
of the land.

So our disobedience and transgression does lose us all these things, as he
adds. If you refuse and rebel, you shall be devoured with the sword: for the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Partly it is in God, for his mercy in giving, must not destroy his justice in
punishing of evil doers; 2 These. 1.6
it must needs be as righteous to recompense tribulation, to them that trouble
him. It is an heavy complaint that God made of this people. I have nourished
and brought up children, Isal. 1.2.
and they have rebelled against me.

It is well observed in God that he is primus in amere, and postremus in odio:
he loves us before we can seek his face, and we are tender in sight, before we
know the right hand from the left, as in the case of Nineveh, God pleaded with
Jonah for the infants.

But God never forsakes us, till we first forsake him, not then, if there be
but animus revertendi, he is patient and long suffering, but when we come once
to two evils.

To forsake him the Fountain of living waters, and to dig to our selves
cisterns of our own making, then he can no longer forbear, when we grow

A sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, Isai. 1.4.
a seed of evil doers, children that are corrupters, forsaking the Lord,
provoking the Holy One of Israel to anger, going away backward.

No wonder, If he make our Country desolate, burn our Cities with fire, let
strangers devour our land in our presence, and lay it desolate, as overthrown
by strangers.

Where we are guilty to our selves of provocation, We have gone away from thee,
and have not hearkened to thy voice, therefore art thou displeased with us.

Seeing the Justice of God does set him against us, just art thou, O Lord, and
just are thy judgments.

But especially, this stirs us up to divert this wrath to come, Jeremy was
sent on this very message to this people, and he threatened them from God, as
Habakkuk here does, yet with this caution of repentance.

For Jeremie being required by King Zedekiah to enquire of the Lord concerning
Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babel, If the Lord will deal with us according to all
his wonderful works that he will go from us. Jer. 21.2.


Jeremie through the whole Chapter resolves him, that God is purposed to
deliver his people and their Land, into the hand of King Nebuchadnezzar, yet in
the next Chapter he brings this comfortable message, from God to the King.

Thus, Jer. 22.1.
says the Lord, go down to the King of Judah, and speak there this word.

And say, hear the Word of the Lord, O King of Judah, that sit upon the
throne of David, thou and thy servants, and the people that enter in by these
gates.

Thus, says the Lord, execute you judgment and righteousness, and deliver the
spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, and do no wrong, do no violence to
the stranger, the Fatherless, nor the Widow, neither shedinnocent blood in
this place.

For if you do this thing indeed, then there shall enter in by the gates of
this house, Kings sitting for David upon his throne, riding in Chariots, and on
horses, he and his servants, and his people.

But if ye will not hear these words, I swear by my self, says the Lord, that
this house shall become a desolation, etc.

This declares that the threatenings of God when he menaceth our sins with
judgments, are like Jonathans arrows, shot rather to give us warning then to
hurt us.

Which admonishes us, that whenever any fear surprizeth us of wrath to come
upon our land, either in the corruption of our religion, or in the perturbation
of our peace, or in the fear of falf friends that may kiss and betray, or in
the dearth and scarcity of the necessaries of life, in any, in all these fears
the change of our ways, the repentance of our sins, the amendment of our lives,
will ever make our peace with our God, and turn away these threatened and feared
evils from us, for godliness has the promises both of this life, and of that
which is to come.

2 Let us consider the instruments in this action called his troops.

The armies of the Chaldaeans, Israel is to be punished, are the troops of God.

God owns them, as Jeremiah tells Zedechiah; Thus, says the Lord God of
Israel, Jer. 21.4.5.
Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war, that are in your hands, wherewith
ye fight against the King of Babylon, and against the Chaldaeans which besiege
you without the walls, and I will assemble them into the midst of this City.

And I my self will fight against you with an outstretched hand, and with a
strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath.

So he told them before in this Prophecy.

I raise up the Chaldaeans, a bitter and hasty nation, Hab. 1 6.
which shall march through the breadth of the land, to possess the dwelling
places that are not theirs.

From whence we have learnt.

That God orders this war against his people, which Doctrine we have at large
handled in the Prophecy of Obdiah.

We learnt also that God punishes one evil nation by another, and those whom
he employeth in the correction of his enemies, he protecteth and prospers in
their wars, and he is very careful to pay them wages, as in the service of
Egypt against Tyrus, which Nebuchadnezzar did. Ezekiel. 29.20.
I have given him the Land of Egypt, for the service wherewith he served
against it, because they wrought for me, says the Lord God.

For God can make use of wicked men to ferve in his troops, for the punishing
of such as rebel against him.

Therefore, let no man say the Turk is an enemy to God and to Religion, he
serves Mahomet, he is an infidel, and therefore he shall not prevail against
us.

Let no man say, the Pope is a man of Sin, and a mainteiner of Idolatry, an
usurper upon the royal prerogatives of Jesus Christ: he advances himself
above all that is called God, and is worshipped, he is an incroacher upon the
rights and honors, and power of Princes, and usurpeth a transcendent
jurisdiction over them, a mainteiner of treason, and murder of Kings, a Coiner
of Articles of Faith, an hider of the Word of God, a maker of counter-laws,
against the Law of God: therefore neither he nor his religion shall ever
prevail against the Professors of the truth of God.

For if these sins be found in our land, which God conditioned again in Judah,
that is;

If just judgment be not executed, and righteousness practiced, if the spoiled
be not delivered from the hand of the oppressor: if wrong be done to the
stranger, the poor, the Fatherless, and the Widow.

Turk and Pope; Papists, and Infidels; may be gathered together into the troops
of God, and employed against us, and prevail against us, for we are no better
then Judah, nor deerer to God then his own people.

And if he please to punish Christendom, or the professors of his truth by
these, if once they become Gods troops, they shall prosper and carry all before
them.

2 The misery in the patient: the Land of Israel threatened, as you hear in the
trees.

Here are named the chief trees for fruit, the fig tree, the vine, and the
olive. Non omnis fert omnia tellus, these trees do not grow in all lands, our
land though rich and plenteous is no fit soil for these trees.

They served for food, and they are of special note, for in the parable of
Jotham.

When the trees went to choose them a King, ^^dg. 9.8.
they came first to the olive tree, and said, reign thou over us, they went
next to the fig tree, and then to the vine.

The Olive says; shall I leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honor God
and man.

The fig tree says; should I forsake my sweetness and my good fruit.

The vine says; should I leave my wine which cheareth God and man.

You see of how excellent use these fruits were; two of them used in the
special service of God, Oil, and Wine, and often is the Land of Canaan praised
for fruitfulness, in respect of these trees growing there, which every soil
does not yield: they are all of excellent use both for food and medicine, and
David says of Wine, that it makes glad the heart of man, of Oil, that it
makes him have a cheerful countenance.

The failing of these, which the soil did naturally bring forth, does show that
God had called in his blessing, which he gave to that land, for the true nature
of every soil is the Word of Gods blessing, which once called in, a fruitful
land is made barren, and a populous country is soon turned into a desert.

But this is not all, not only God will smite the land in these excellent
fruits, which are for food, but as Jeremie threatens, They shall cut down the
choice Cedars, Jer. 22.7.
and cast them into the fire: trees for building.

The reason whereof we may find in the first of our parents,

So that we may say as the Church does in this Psalm, Was thy wrath against
the trees of the land, that thou smotest them? not so, but against the sins and
sinners of the land.

the fields shall yield no meat.

Bread is the staff of life, God threatens to break the staff of bread. So
he bad Ezechiel prophecy.

Son of man, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem, Ez^k. 4.16.
and they shall eat their bread by weight, and with care.

God has many ways to perform this judgment, either by taking away his
blessing from the earth, that it shall not bring forth bread for the use of man.

Thus he makes a fruitful land barren, or he can hold in the early, and the
later rain, that it shall not fall to moisten the earth as in the time of
Aggaeus the Prophet.

Ye looked for much, and lo, Ag. 1 9, 10
it came too little.

The heaven over you is stayed from dew, and the earth under you is stayed from
her fruit.

Yea, God when he pleases can drown the fruits of the earth with too much
rain, and destroy the crop, and when he has showed us plenty upon the ground,
he can deceive the hope of the husbandman, and make a thin harvest.

When we have gathered in our crop, he can blow upon it, and destroy it in the
barn, he has his judgments in store, ready to be executed upon sinners.

We have tasted of this rod, for how did God crown the former year with plenty,
and how unthankfully was it entertained of many? what complaint did we hear of
the cheapness of Corn, not able to yield the rackt rents of their ground to the
laboring husbandmen, to satisfy the greedy Landlord.

And God heard from heaven, how heavy his plentiful hand was to many, and he
has since shut it up, and turned our plenty into dearth, and now he hears
another cry of the poor: their labors will scarce give them bread to eat.



You behold in this whole passage a miserable face of a land with which God is
fallen out, the very foil is accursed for the peoples sakes, the people either
perish by the sword, or go into captivity, or tarry to serve the enemy in the
land.

The full Cities, the glorious buildings therein, either demolisht and laid
even with the ground, or inhabited by strangers

You have heard before, what sins have brought these evils upon this pleasant
land.

Corruption in common conversation, between man and man.

Corruption in religion and the service of God.

Corruption administration of Justice.

And so free as our land is from these sins, so far are these judgments off
from us.

But if either the present times or times to come, are or shall be guilty of
these heinous sins, I think we may boldly say, that God is holy now as ever he
was, to hate them, and the committers of them, and as wise as ever he was to
discern them, and as just as ever he was to punish them.

We know that these sins carried Gods people into a strange land, where they
had not the heart to sing the songs of the Lord.

God best knows why, but we see a great part of the Protestant reformed Church,
at this time bleeding under the sword, or flying from the hand, or standing
upon their guard against the power of strong opposition, and by the mercy of
God, we are lookers on, and their smart is not yet shared amongst us; but if
Canaan were thus smitten both in the soil, and fruit, and beasts thereof, and
most, in the inhabitants of it.

If our brethren, professors, with us of the same Religion, do in our days
suffer so many vexations, we had need study holiness of life, and put more
fire into our zeal of Religion, and make the balance of Justice even, lest we
drink of the same cup of bitterness.

The Jews returned again to their land from their captivity, they had the face
of it renewed, they had their Temple rebuilt, Religion re-planted, and then
they relapsed to their former sins, and in Christ's time: Christ was bound, and
Barraba^ was set loose.

And not long after, the Jews went into a dispersion, wherein they have
continued almost, one thousand six hundred years.

God be merciful to us, to preserve us from their sins and from their
punishments, that our trees may bring forth their blossoms, and their fruits,
in their seasons, that our land may bring forth increase, that our Oxen may be
strong to labor, that there be no invasion, no leading into captivity, and no
complaining in our streets. Amen, Amen.

Verse 18 Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, H^b 3.18.
I will joy in the God of my salvation. 19. The Lord God is my strength, and he
will make my feet like Hinds feet, and he will make me to walk upon my high
places. To the chief singer upon my stringed Instruments.
THis is the last part of this Psalm, it ends in consolation,
notwithstanding all these afflictions of the Church threatened, though they
shall fall upon it, and it must needs suffer this sharp Visitation. Yet will I
rejoice in the Lord.

It is the Apostles counsel, Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always: and here the Church does so: the Apostle resumeth
it again, I say rejoice: and the Church here resumeth it. I will joy in the God
of my salvation showing the reason and ground of her joy, Psalm. 13.5.
which is Gods salvation. My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.

The Lord God is my strength.] they are the words of David, and he is more full
and Rhetorical in the expressure thereof.

I will love thee, Psalm. 18.1, 2.
O Lord, my strength.

The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, my deliverer, my God, my strength, in
whom I will trust, my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower.

David speaks like one in love with God, for he does adorn him with confession
of praise, and his mouth is filled with the praise of the Lord, which he
expresses in this exuberancy and redundance of holy Oratory: the Church adds.

He will make my feet like hinds feet.] this also is borrowed of David, in the
same Psalm.

He makes my feet like hinds feet, and sets me upon my high places: Psalm.
18.33.
that is, he does give swiftness and speed to his Church; as St. Augustine
interprets it, transcendendo spinosa, and ambrosa implicamenta hujus saeculi:
passing lightly through the thornie and shadie incumberances of this world. He
will make me walk upon my high places.

David says: he sets me upon my high places.

For, consider David, as he then was, when he composed this Psalm, it was at
the time when God had delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from
the hand of Saul.

For then God set his feet on high places, setting his Kingdom, and
establishing him in the place of Saul.

The Church here hoping to obtein of God the like deliverance by faith,
apprehends the same mercy and favor of God, that God will again restore them
to their high places, and establish them in the same: that is, in the free and
undisturbed possession of their own land, and the liberties thereof. Isaiah
58.14. Those are called high places, Deuteronomy. 32.13.
because God was exalted in them, in the profession of Religion, and God
exalted them above all other places of the world by his special favor, as it
is said, Non fecit taliter.

St. Augustine goes higher in the mystical surveigh of these words, and
looks up to the future glory of the Church, saying,

Super Coelestem habitationem figet intentionem meam, ut impleat in omnem
plenitudinem Dei.

The last words of the Psalm, are a dedication thereof, to the use of the
Church, dedicating it to the chief singer, to be fitted to the Church music,
that it may be sung in the congregation.

The words are taken from David's Psalms, David's Psalms in our frequent reading
and meditation of them.

Our Church has divided the Psalms into so many equal portions for our
reading, that in every thirty days, such as can read, may read over the whole
book of David's Psalms, and it is no great task for every one of us, so to read
them over privately in our houses: the benefit is great that will redound to
them, that shall do this, for this will our experience find, that St.
Augustine long ago has testified of the book of Psalms, that it is, Communis
quidam bonae doctrinae thesaurus, a common storehouse of good learning: it
will instruct the ignorant, it will draw on forward those that are incipients,
it will perfect those that are proficients, it will comfort all sorts of
afflictions, veteribus animarum vulneribus novit mederi, and recentibus
remedium applicare, it knows how, etc.

He that would pray to God, may make choice here of fit forms dictated by the
Spirit of God, to petition God upon all occasions, whatsoever he would desire
of God, either to give him, or to forgive him.

He that would make confession of his sins to God, is here furnished and
accommodated with the manner of searching and ripping up of the conscience, and
laying the hid man of the heart open before God.

He that would make confession of praise, has his mouth filled with forms of
praise, to set forth the goodness of God, either in particular to himself, or
in general, to the whole Church.

He that is merry, and rejoices in the Lord, may find here the music of
true joy, and may from hence gather both matter and manner of Jubilation: you
see that the Church in my text resorteth to this store house of comfort.

He that finds himself dull and heavy in the duties of Gods service, may here
find cheerful strains of music to quicken his dead affections, and to put
life into them.

Many are too well conceited of their own sufficiency for those holy services
of God, so that in confession of sins, in prayer or in praising God, they
over-ween their own measure of the spirit of God, and are too much wedded to
their own forms of address to God.

But let no man despise these helps, the best of us all need them, and the most
able amongst us shall abate nothing from his own sufficiency, to borrow of them,
we are sure that the Holy Ghost has indicted them: and if a wise judgment do
make choice and fit application of them to our several purposes, and
occasions, we cannot more holily or more effectually express our selves then
in them, the sweet singer of Israel has furnished us plentifully by them.

2 Before I come to handle the text in the parts thereof, let me return your
thoughts to the former verse, where the Church puts her own case in great
affliction, supposing the good land flowing with milk and honey, touched and
accursed for their sakes, so that neither their best fruit trees, nor their
common fields, nor their fruits, nor their flocks, and herds shall yield
increase, yet says she: Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my salvation.

Teaching us that where there is the true joy of the Holy Ghost, no temporal
affliction whatsoever,

The Book of God is thick sown with examples and promises, with doctrine and
use, with assertions and experience of this truth, and it is so sealed to the
perpetual consolation of the Church of God, that when Christ left his sheep
among Wolves, saying: In the world you shall have affliction. He left the Holy
Ghost in his Church in the office, and under the name and title of a comforter:
to assure this.

David gives a good reason hereof,

Indeed we are made of such stuff, and by our sin, we have so marred our own
first making, that if God did not support us in afflictions, with a strong
supply of faith, we should soon sink under the burden of our own infirmities.

David confesses as much.

I have fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the
land of the living. Psalm. 27.13


Blessed be God that ministers ever some comfort to sweeten the calamities of
life, and to keep the soul from fainting, to keep the head above water, that
the deep waters swallow us not up.

The true Church of God, when the ambition of the Bishop of Rome, to be
universal Bishop began to sway Religion to the service of humane policy, then
began to lose of her full numbers, many of them, most of them defecting to
popery and superstition: the true professors of the Gospel were pursued with
all kinds of bloody persecution, and in many years, the true Church of God
lived in concealment, yet God did never suffer this little remaining spark to
be quite put out, and when the Pope thought himself absolute Lord of all, then
arose Martin Luther, an arrow out of their own quiver, and in the low ebb of
the true Church, he opposed the Pope, and put a new life into the true
Christian Church, which ever since his time has grown to a cleerer light, and
the man of sin is more and more revealed, and the mystery of ungodliness
detected, and in many parts of Christendom, the Pope ejected, as an usurper
both in Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and temporal Sovereignty.

At this time, this poor Church does suffer persecution in France, and is
threatened with utter extirpation.

In Bohemia, the Protestants feel the uttermost of extremity: the Prince
Palatine, and the Kings Children remain under proscription, and in exile from
their inheritance, and their country invaded and depopulated does groan under
the fury of war, Religion is oppressed: the fig tree, and the vine, and olive
fail, the earth is not husbanded to profit, to feed the inhabitants: In this
extremity, what comfort surviveth but this? that our God, the husband of his
Church will not chide continually, nor reserve his anger from generation to
generation, but even in this extremity of distress, we have joy in his favor,
and love to his Church.

This holy care of Religion now assaulted, and the natural care that our
loyal allegiance to our Sovereign and his children does lay upon us, inciteth
us to join, as one man with united strength to work for God and his truth to
the uttermost of our best abilities, and who knows whether God having crowned
our land, so many years with peace and truth, does now try us what we will do
for Religion and peace, and how forward we will be in his cause, and how
charitably compassionate of the afflictions of our brethren abroad: wherein, if
we shall acquit our selves like the children of light, and the sons of peace,
we may prevent a further trial of us nearer hand in our own land.

Blessed be the God of mercy, and of all consolation, who has revealed to us
this comfort and joy in him in all our afflictions, that we may be able to
comfort the distresses of our brethren, as we our selves are comforted of our
God.

His Majesty by his letters graciously inviteth all his loyal subjects to this
commiseration of his children, to this religious compassion of Gods afflicted
Church, he requires us your Ministers, to lay this as near as we can to your
hearts, to stir up your willing and forward affections to a tenderness, and
increase of zealous love of this cause, and he believes, that our labor in
the Lord will not be in vain.

If it be heavy to us to part with some small portion of our estates to this
assistance, what is it to his children to lose all.

Impius haec tam culta novalia miles habebit, Barbarus has segetes? shall we
look on whilst Papists possess the inheritance of Protestants, while
superstition and Idolatry usurpeth the temples, where the holy worship of God,
and the gospel of truth and peace, have been so many years gloriously
maintained?

Hia Majesty has well acquitted himself to us to be a Prince of peace, who
has with unmeasurable expense assaid, by mediation and treaties, to compose
the bloody wars in Christendom, with fair conditions of peace; he has showed
himself tender in the case of Christian blood, and he would have all the
Christian world bear him witness, that if he could recover the inheritance of
his children in peace, he would not draw a sword, nor hazard a life in that
cause.

He is now put to it, to seek peace by the way of wars, and his children being
shut out of their own, in the way of inheritance, must wade in again by way of
conquest, or sit out altogether.

If that part of the afflicted Church, have hope in this disconsolate
extremity, and trust in God for deliverance and restitution, they shall sing,
Carmen in nocte: and let God strengthen their faith and trust in him, and let
them not think it long to await his leisure, till he have mercy upon them.

Worse was the condition of Jerusalem, and the people of Judah, Gods own
inheritance, yet when they had summed up their miseries, and cast them into one
total of full calamity, they have both faith to assure, both deliverance, and
restitution; and hope to expect it, and joy to recreate and refresh their
present droopings.

And truly, to our understanding, it is time for the Lord to put to his hand,
for the cause is his. The strife was for a kingdom, but Religion is such a
party in the quarrel, that it cannot but share in the sufferings of those who
fare the worse for Religions sake. Be we comforted in the Lord.

Rome and Roman Idolatry can neither spread further, nor gather more strength
then her elder sister Babylon did, her armies are called here the troops of
God: God employed them, and God prospered the^, and they prevailed against Gods
inheritance.

But the same Prophets who are sent to tell Judah of their deportation into
Babylon, do also foretell the ruin of Babylon: for this read at your leisure.
Isaiah 46.47 Chap. Jerem. 50, 51. and when you have read them, compare them
with Revel. 17.18 Chap. and you shall see that Babylon in Chaldaea, was but a
type of the present Babylon in Rome, a double type of sin and punishment.

Therefore comfort your selves in the Lord, God works as we see against the
usurper of Rome by his own domestiques, and they tell tales of him, and
discover the nakedness of that prostitute strumpet to the shame of their
Religion, he that has begun, will, also in time make an end, and he that
begins to lose estimation at home, will hardly either increase or maintein
it abroad.

Who are papists or affected popishly amongst us for the most part, but such as
are ignorant of holy Scriptures, or such as corrupt and pervert them, for the
revelation does point out Antichrist, as the finger of John did Christ, with,
This is he: it calls Rome, Babylon, and shows us the fall thereof, and the
cheerful rising of the true Church to light and glory. In all those dangers
that the Church of God runs, the comfort here expressed in the Lord, stays
the heart thereof with flagons, and comfort it with apples, for his love is
a banner to it.

The parts of this text are three.

1 The hope of the afflicted Church. 2 The ground of this hope and comfort. 3
The dedication of this Psalm.
1 The hope of the afflicted Church.

Yet will I rejoice in the Lord.

You know that joy dilateth the heart, and gives it searoom in the stormy and
tempestuous state of trouble, joy is a thing that every soul affects: we
desire many days to see good, we are apt with Solomon to try our hearts with
joy.

This is welcome to them that live here on earth, which is convallis
lachrymarum, a valley of tears, wherein the story of our whole life is written
upon a scroul on both sides, filled with lamentations, mourning, and woe, and
our Savior says: Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

We have so many causes of mourning, that whether we look to our selves, the
occasions of our own woe, or to our sorrows, the fruitful spawn of our
breeding sins, the natural and proper effects of our own corruptions, we have
from both, matter of grief, and provocation of sorrow.

1 Pro nobis, for our selves, for what we suffer. 2 In nobis, in our selves,
for that we do deserve.
Therefore we must not seek joy in our selves, for then we shall weep, as
Rachel for her children, because they are not.

The joy of the Church is in the Lord.

Plerumque in ipsis piis fletibus gaudii claritas erumpit, and then it is when
man forsakes all comforts, and finds that, Gregor.
Bonum est adhaerere Deo semper: when a man unmindeth all other comforts.

This, as Augustine says, est gaudium, quod non datur impiis, sed eis qui te
gratis colunt, quorum gaudium tu ipse es: and ipsa est beata vita gaudere de
te, propter te, ipsa est, non est alia.

All you then, who have found sorrow and heaviness, by the due consideration
of those evils, which you have committed and of those holy duties which you
have omitted, and of those punishments which you have justly suffered, come
hither, and learn how to rejoice, forget that which is behind, remember Lots
wife, look not back to the beguiling delights of the bewitching and flattering
world: look before you to the Lord, for he is the Author, he is the
Mediator, he will be the finisher of your joy, and gaudium vestrum nemo tollet
a vobis, and your joy no man shall take from you.

Joy not in greatness, and high place, or in riches, in the fruit of the womb,
in the extent of your lands, in the favors of Princes, in the full sea of
temporal happiness, they that suffer in all these things, do find joy in the
Lord.

Reasons, why in the Lord.

1 They that joy in the Lord, rest in the Lord, and cast all their care upon
him, they pray fiat voluntas tua, thy will be done, and they are content with
it, and they are thankful for it when it is done, neither relucting at the
doing of it, nor repining and finding fault when they see it performed.

They say with old Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. Isa. 39.8.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: and with Hezechiah, good is
the Word of the Lord.

And therefore, the Lord is the same to them, whether he be offerens, opening
his hand and giving, or auferens, stretching out his hand to strip and divest
them of all that he has, as he was to Job.

2 They that rejoice in the Lord, rejoice in nothing otherwise, then as a means
and faculty to serve the Lord.

And so we may rejoice in honors, which do put our good example more in sight,
that others may behold our good works, and glorify God.

So we may rejoice in authority and power over others, if we use it to the
winning of others to the service of our God, to the coertion of evil doers,
and the reward of the good.

So may we rejoice in riches, if we use them as means to advance the Law of
God, and to express our charity to the needy.

All this is joy in the Lord, that God trusts us with the dispensation of
these outward things, and the applying of them to his service.

3 They that rejoice in the Lord, rejoice, because God is Lord: so David; The
Lord is King, the earth may be glad of it, for

Blessed is the people, whose God is the Lord.

This is the Jubilation of the Church.

Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us: Isa. 25.9.
this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his
salvation: that do thus acknowledge him their Lord, and are glad that they live
under his government. Isai. 26.8.
The desire of their souls is to his name, and to the remembrance of him.

For when thy judgments are in the world, the inhabitants of the earth will
learn righteousness. O Lord, our God, other lords have ruled us, but by thee
only will we make mention of thy Name.

This was the joy of the Church here, professed in the midst of extreme sorrows.

There cannot be a better sign to know this true spiritual joy from all other
false seemings and blandations of joy, 1 Sign.
then the lasting thereof, for the candle of the wicked shall be put out, but
God is a Sun and a shield to his Church.

Joy in all other things is but a sojourner, and tarrieth but a small time, but
when once it fastneth upon God, it says; Here will I dwell for ever, for I
have a delight herein.

This joy has none of the fears that other joys have, to make us doubt the
losing of it, it has none of the impediments to stop the way to it, that other
joys have.

It has none of the sorrows that other joys have to commedle with it.

It has none of the miseries, that conclude all other joys to determine it.

Therefore, as the Apostle admonishes,

Rejoice when thou aboundest, rejoice also when thou want, full and empty;
when thou give alms, and when thou receivest alms, it is a more blessed thing
to give, it is also a blessed thing to receive in health, in sickness, on the
bridebed, on the deathbed, always.

Quest. But have not the Saints of God on this earth their sorrows? do they not
bear forth their seed weeping? do they not sow in tears? do they not feel
heaviness for the night? is it not a true word, Tribulus est, qui non est
tribulatus. Was not David's soul heavy within him? did not Hezechiah taste of
bitterness of soul, when he chattered as a swallow? did not this very Church
of the Jews in Babylon sit down by the rivers of water, when they remembered
Sion? Did they not hang up their harps upon the willows, or could they sing the
song of the Lord in a strange land?

True, Sol.
and yet all these, who found such cause of mourning in themselves, and expressed
so much grief to others, yet rejoiced in the Lord always.

I deny not that their cup was bitterness, yet had they sweet fruits of
spiritual joy, even in the midst of sorrows; for as David says. They did
rejoice in trembling.

Optime dictum est exultate contra miseriam optime additum est cum tremore,
August.
contra presumptionem, quia tremor est sanctificationis custodia: see this in
the Apostle, who expresses the life of a Christian well.

As unknown, 2 Co 6 9.
and yet known, as dying, and behold we live, as chastened and not killed.

As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, as poor, and yet making many rich, as
having nothing, and yet possessing all things.

Which words, though neither Mr. Calvine, nor Beza in their Commentaries, have
vouchsafed so much as a note upon them, yet are they an holy riddle to flesh
and blood, and both these have brought forth their light in much fairer weather.

Aquinas clears this darkness well, for he shows, that temporal things
have but the resemblance and appearance of good and evil, they have no true
existence and substance of them, and therefore they are brought in with a
tanquam as: for as the Apostle says, we are tanquam ignoti, as unknown, etc.
tanquam castigati, tanquam dolentes.

But Gods spiritual favors are real, we are known, not tanquam noti, as
known, we rejoice not tanquam dolentes, as sorrowing.

For the light affliction which is but for a moment, trouble them, and he
speaks of them rather as they appear to others then as they do feel
themselves, or of them rather in some crazy fits of distraction, then in the
constant uniformity of their true health.

And I deny not, but the dearest of Gods Saints, here on earth, have their
sudden qualms, and their agonizing pangs, and convulsions, even such as do
sometimes shake their very faith, as you have seen in this Church of the Jews,
that make their bellies and bowels without them to tremble, and their lips to
quiver, and themselves to fear within themselves, but when they remember Jesus
Christ, the author and finisher of their faith, saying to them. Ecce ego sum
vobiscum ad finem saeculi, behold, I am with you to the end: this renews the
face of the earth, and puts new life into them, and quickens them; for how
can they want any thing, habent enim omnia, qui habent habentem omnia: for they
have all, who have him that has all: for he that gave us his son, how could he
not together with him give us all things.

I hear St. Ambrose thus comforted upon his death bed; Non ita vixi inter vos
ut me pudeat vivere, nec mori timeo, quia bonum Dominum habemus: for it is a
true rule, poenitens de peccatis dolet, de dolor gaudet.

Another note to distinguish this joy in the Lord, from all other joys is the
fullness and exuberancy of it, 2 Sign.
for it is more joy then if corn and wine and oil increased, else what needed
the Apostle having said, Rejoice in the Lord, always to add? And again, I say
Rejoice: what can be more then always? but still adding to the fullness of our
joy, till our cup do overflow.

This is that measure, which the Apostle does so comfortably speak of, which is
both full and pressed down, and heaped, and running over, for it is still
growing and increasing like the waters in Ezekiels vision, from the ancles to
the loins, to the chin over head and ears, for waders, for swimmers, for
sailors.

Upon working days rejoice in the Lord, who gives thee strength to labor, and
feeds thee with the labor of thy hands: on holy days, rejoice in the Lord,
who feasteth thee with the marrow and fatness of his house.

In plenty, rejoice again and again, because the Lord gives, in want rejoice,
because the Lord takes away, and as it pleases the Lord, so come things to
pass.

This poor distressed Church, being in deportation and feeling the heavy
burden of affliction, yet it found comfort in the Lord.

Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction, Lam. 1.7.
and of her miseries all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old.

And this joy was quickened with hope of the favor of God to be showed to
them, even till their joy did swell into ecstasy, as David expresses it. When
the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion, then were we like them that dream.
Then was our mouth filled with laughter, Psalm. 126.1
and our tongne with singing.

Therefore, is the joy of the ungodly compar^^^ to a candle, which spends it
self to the snuff, Job 18.5.
and goes out in a stench, and evil savor, for the very name of the wicked
shall rot: but to the just, Isai. 58.8.
says God. Thy light shall break forth as the morning: this begins in
obscurity, and grows more and more till the Sun rising, and yet grows till
the noon day, that is also promised the just.

Thy light shall rise in obscurity, Verse 10.
and thy darkness shall be as the noon day: he expounds himself

Thou shall be as a watered garden, Verse 11.
and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.

Therefore, it is said of the just, that, they shall bring forth fruit in old
age, they shall be fat and flourishing: and this is,

To show that the Lord is upright, that he is our rock, and that there is no
unrighteousness in him.

For his word is gone out, his promise is past to his Church, he will neither
deny it, nor reverse it, to comfort them with all spiritual consolation, for
he is the God of all consolation, not of some only.

2 The ground of this joy: wherein consider,

1 The main: The Lord is the God of her salvation. 2 The Lord is her strength.
3 The Lord will perform two great mercies to her. 1 He will make her fect like
hindes feet. 2 He will make her walk upon her high places.

1 Under the title of Salvation, I comprehend not only corporal, and
spiritual, but eternal salvation also.

2 Under the name of strength, I understand the whole mercy of supportation, by
which God does preserve them in their deportation and return.

3 Under the title of Hindes feet, I contein the mercy of expedition, whereby
they are delivered from their captivity in Babylon.

4 Under the title of walking upon high places, the mercy of restitution to
their own land, and of constitution, and establishing of them in their land.

The just live, and are supported by faith, apprehending these full mercies.

1 Of Salvation.

The Church of God has need of salvation, and therefore great cause to rejoice
in it.

1 In respect of her spiritual enemies, for your adversary the Devil goes
about like a roaring lion seeking to devour: says the Apostle.

These spiritual enemies do assault the Church.

1 Out of their own malignity and envy to man, and to this purpose, the powers
and principalities of darkness do go always armed both with temptations to
corrupt them, and with fiery darts of provocations to destroy them, for this it
is, that Satan goes and comes to survey the earth, and to pry and search
where he may fasten any hold, where he may gripe: so St. Bernard says. Hosts
indefessi nos assidue oppugnant, modo aperte, modo fraudulenter: he gives this
reason. Invidet humano generi, quia praevidet horum Deum futurum.

2 By way of commission, for God does employ Devils in the Church amongst his
holy ones, both for probation of their faith, for exercise of their patience,
for preservation of them in humility, for punishment of their sin, for
sweetning to them the hopes, and quickening their desires of a better life, and
for the polishing and burnishing of their example, that others that be lookers
on, may know before hand, that this life to a just man is militia a warfare,
and they that will join with the Church, must know before they put their hand
to the plough, what hazards they must run, lest they look back, and make their
sin more then it was by apostasy, departing away from the living God.

It is clear in Jobs example, that Satan had commission from God himself to try
the faith, and love, and patience, and humility of Job, and to make him an
example.

And as clear it is, which the Psalmist says of Isratl, when they started
aside from God, Psalm. 78.21
that a fire was kindled in Jacob, and anger came up against Israel: and in
these executions, God does uphold the ministry and service of evil angels, as
he did against his enemies the Egyptians, of whom it is so said. He cast upon
them the fierceness of his wrath, Verse 49.
anger, and indignation and trouble, by sending evil angels amongst them.

St. Paul confesses that least he should be too much exalted with that
Metaphysicall rapture above measure. 2 Cor. 12.7
There was given me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me,
lest I should be exalted above measure.

Thus in respect of spiritual enemies without us, we have need of a salvation,
the rather because our own corruptions within us are false to us, and ready to
join with Satan against us.

2 In respect of humane opposition, for the regiment and Kingdom of Christ is
thus assigned to him; Be thou ruler in the midst of thine enemies. David does
well express this.

For they have consulted together with one consent, Psalm. 83.5.
they are confederate against thee.

The tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, of Moab, and the Hagarenes:

Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines, with the inhabitants of Tire.

Ashur also is joined with them, they have h^lpen the children of Lot.

Here is no mention of this sweeping broom of Babylon, that comes in the Rear
of this march, and carries them clean away.

Christendom has for many years suffered from the Turk* whose invasions
encroach upon the bounds thereof, and gain ground of it daily.

And even within our selves, the Pope and all the friends of his Hierarchy, do
hate and persecute so much of the true Protestant Church, as they either can or
dare attempt, and the earth has nothing to show more bloody and cruel then
the Spanish Inquisition: nothing more cunning and dangerously plotting then the
society of Jesuits: so, that in respect of humane opposition, there is great
need of a salvation

3 In respect of the punishments deserved for sin, for what Nation has so kept
in their sins to themselves, that we have not found means to impart them even
into the Church. Solomon could not take a wife out of Egypt, but his wisdom
proved too weak a fence against the temptation to Idolatry. Nehemiah presses
this example.

Did not Solomon King of Israel sin by these things: yet among many Nations,
was there not a King like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made him
King over all Israel; nevertheless, even him did outlandish women cause to sin.

The children of Israel could not eat of the fat and fruits of the land of
Goshen, to relieve their famine, but they were mingled with the Egyptians, and
learned their works: and worshipped their gods. Therefore, in regard of their
many and great sins, they needed salvation.

These sins endangered their heavenly hopes, for the wages thereof is death.

This Doctrine may turn to great profit to us.

1 If we apply our selves to the means, Vs^.
by which we may apprehend this salvation: For this general apprehension of
Gods mercy in Christ, which the most part of common professors trust to, will
never justify any man in the sight of God, except

1 He be by the law of God, brought to a sight and sense, to a confession and
acknowledgment of all his sins. 2 To a true sorrow and mortification of the
flesh for them. 3 To a serious deprecation of the wrath of God due to them, in
the justice of God. 4 To amendment of life, ruled and governed by the holy Word
of God rightly understood. 5 To a faithful application of the sufficient
merits of Jesus Christ to our selves, which faith does so root and ground us in
Christ, that we become one with him, so that we may lay the burden of our
sins upon him, and put the robe of his holy righteousness upon us.
For so doing, we may rejoice in our salvation, as his free gift to us, and as
our full acquitall and discharge from all our sins before God.

So that the ignorant person that lives in darkness, not knowing the mystery
of his salvation.

And the blinded Papist who trusts either to the power of his own free will,
or to the merit of his own works, or righteousness, or to the mediation of
Saints and Angels, or the mother of our Lord, to propitiate on his behalf, or
that trusts to the Popes indulgence and pardon of all his sins.

Or that believes to have salvation by the dispensation of the Church
treasure, the supererogate works of over-doers that have done more then the Law
of God has required of them.

Also the unconscionably profane that go on in their sins without check of the
inward man, their hearts never smiting them for that they mis-do, all these are
excluded from this salvation, Jesus Christ died for none such, and goes not
forth with his anointed amongst them.

These shall have no salvation hereafter, they can have no true joy here, and
therefore when the evil day comes, they are shaken with the terror of the
Lord, and they find no balm in Gilead, their sins do appear to them greater
then the mercies of God.

Let those who have the comfortable assurance of their salvation, rejoice
therein in the Lord, Heb. 6.4, 5
for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and
were made pertakers of the holy Ghost: have tasted the good Word of God, and
the power of the world to come to fall away: which puts Jesus Christ to open
shame.

Therefore, the joy of our salvation must not be rooted and grounded in our
selves, but in the Lord, that the whole honor of it may redound to him as the
whole benefit and profit of it does redound to us.

Our salvation is only of God.

It is Jonahs faith. Salvation is of the Lord.

It is David's faith. Salvation belongs only unto the Lord. Jonah 2.9. Psalm.
3.8. Ps. 43.11.


God takes it upon himself: I, even I, am the Lord, and beside me there is no
Savior.

He gives it as a reason of his first Commandment. Ose 13.4.
Thou shall know no God but me, for there is no Savior beside me.

I may call heaven and earth to record this day, to avouch the truth of this,
for, who is it that supporteth the great frame of the whole universe? who is he
that knows the numbers of the stars, and calls them all by their names,
that sends forth the Sun as a bridegroom out of his chamber, and as a mighty
giant to run his race? who is it that makes and keeps the covenant between
day and night to take their turns for the use of man? who is it that clotheth
the lilies, that feeds the birds of the air, that can neither labor nor
spin, that preserves man and beast, but the Lord? Psalm. 36.6.
All these look up unto thee, and thou give them their meat in due season.

It is glory and happiness enough, for the Angels in glory to behold the face
of God always.

Hail and snow, stormy winds and vapors, the dragons, and all deeps,
mountains, and all hills, fruitful trees, and all cedars, beasts and cattle,
creeping things, and feathered fouls, Kings of the earth, and all people, young
men and maids, old men and children, all Queristers in this great temple of the
world, and this is the matter and argument of their song, salus Jehovae,
salvation is of God: for their being is derived from him, their supportation is
borrowed of him, their operation is guided by him, their whole address is
directed to him. The Angels that kept not their first estate of glory, man that
kept not his first estate of innocence, could not lose, could not forfeit their
existence and being, their happy being, they might, they did forfeit, he
preserves the Devils and the reprobate, and he makes them immortal, that he
may be glorious in his just punishment of them.

But especially, he is the salvation of his elect, so St. Paul; We trust in the
living God, 1 Timothy 4 10
who is the Savior of all men, especially of those that believe.

He is the savior of all men by universal providence, but of them that
believe by singular and especial grace. And that is the salvation here meant,
our preservation in this life, our sanctification for a better life, our
glorification in heaven is of the Lord.

Because the Kingdom is his, and none has power to make us Kings but he,

Because salvation is a work of power, and none can give it, but he who is able
to put all our enemies under our feet,

Because salvation is a work of glory, of glory to him that works it,

These three we ascribe to him in our Lords prayer, for thine is the Kingdom,
the power and glory.

Salvation is a work of mercy, David says Apud te est misericordia, with thee
is mercy, and God has committed the dispensation of mercy to no creature, it
is one of the glories of his Crown, and prerogatives of his supreme Diadem,
only his son, who thought it no robbery to be equal with him, has the
dispensation of his mercies.

This teaches us where to seek and find salvation, seek ye my face.

We are wise enough in our quest of temporal, either protection or preferment,
to observe which is the way to the fountain of honor, and to direct our
observance that way, let us not be wise for this life, and fools for the life
to come.

With men on earth there be some small brooks of a present life, but apud te
est fons vitae, with thee is the well of life, and the brooks and cisterns that
we seek after, do derive themselves from this fountain.

These brooks do often change their channel, for men have their breath in
their nostrils, they die and their thoughts perish, but God is the same, and
his years do not fail.

And our Saviors method, that he teaches his Disciples is; seek ye first the
Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and then all these things
shall be cast upon you.

This also serves to stir us up to a godly life,

David puts us in good comfort: Psalm. 84.11.
For the Lord God is a Son and shield: the Lord will give grace and glory, no
good thing will he withold from them that live uprightly: and the Apostle
says:

For the eyes of the Lord are open to the righteous, 1 Pet. 3.12.
and his ears are open to their prayers, but the face of the Lord is against
them that do evil.

And who is he that will harm you, Verse 13.
if you be followers of that which is good?

Let the wicked take root in the earth, and spread his boughs never so far, God
has not denied him this, yet his face is against him, and though the Sun
shines on him for a time, and the early and later rain do make him grow and
flourish: yet our Savior will tell us, that Every plant which his heavenly
father has not planted shall be rooted out.

This serves to reprove the doctrine and faith of the Church of Rome, Domine
into Domina, Lord into Lady, and so in the Church of Rome the Virgin Mary, has
more Devotoes vowed to her service then Christ has: she has more temples
dedicated to her honor, then Christ, and far more miracles ascribed to her,
then to Christ.

Yea, they shame not in print to tell the world, that she has saved some from
hell, whom her son had condemned thither, and she has released many from hell
whom her son had already sent thither.

I only allege against them the plain words of our Savior. Thou have given
him power over all flesh, Joh. 17.2.
that he should give eternal life, to as many as thou have gived him.

Therefore beware of the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, the poisonous
doctrines of the Church of Rome, which take salvation out of the hands of God,
and ascribe the donation thereof to creatures.

This was wont to be called Idolatry in the sermons and writings of the
learned, to invocate the Virgin Mary, as they do in their Rosaries and Letanies
of the holy Virgin.

Mother of mercy, Gate of heaven, our salvation, she that has bruised the head
of the serpent.

They make their vulgar Latin Bible say so.

Ipsa conteret caput tuum. There be two Psalters both printed in Paris in
French, and set forth with the approbation of the Sorbonne, one called St.
Bonaventures Psalter, in which wheresoever God is named for Dominus, they have
put Domina, printed in Anno 1601. The other Psalter is digested into fifteen
demands, printed the same year with the same approbation, wherein the Virgin
Mary is called the first cause of our salvation, the finder out of grace, and
puts her before Christ, even in gloria.

Gloria Virgini Maria, and Jesu Christo. What think you? does that Church wish
the salvation of of any man in good earnest, that swerveth us from the God of
our salvation, and directs us to seek it from a creature?

Yet this is the religion which is now grown in fashion with many in these
doubtful and giddy times, which as it robs God of one of his highest
prerogatives, and does divest him of his power of salvation: so the professors
thereof will find it a thief in their things temporal, for in ordine ad Deum,
the Church will engrosse all, the Apostles of that Church will not be content,
till all be laid at their feet.

Let me commend to you the Kings Majesty's confession of his faith, published
in Latin, and in English, directed to all Christian Kings, in this particular,
his words are.

For the blessed Virgin Mary, I yield her that which the Angel Gabriel,
pronounced of her, that she is blessed amongst women; and that which she
prophesied of her self in her Canticum; that all generations shall call her
blessed: I remember her as the mother of Christ, whom of, our Savior took his
flesh, and so the mother of God since the divinity and humanity of Christ are
inseparable, and I freely confess, that she is in glory both above Angels and
men, her own Son, that is, both God and man only excepted. But I dare not mock
her, and blaspheme God, calling her not only Diva, but Dea, praying her to
commend and control her Son, who is her God and her Savior,

You see what opinion his Majesty has of the Doctrine and practice of Rome, in
this point, he does call it mocking of her, and blaspheming of God, to ascribe
salvation to her, or to seek it from her.

I hope you have lived too long in the light of the Gospel, to be taken with
any of these baits, and to be befooled with any of these enchantments of
palpable heresy. I hope if an Angel from heaven should come and teach you this
doctrine, to seek your salvation any where else but from God, you would answer
him, (...)
as Nehemiah did answer Sanballat. There is nothing as thou say, but thou
feignest it out of thine own heart.

Beloved, let all that love Jesus Christ, and his holy truth, join as one man
against popery, and seek to the light of the Word whilst it shines upon us,
that we may not lose the way of salvation, which that Word reveals.

Popery robs the Church of this Word, and puts this candle under a
bushel, it sends us the wrong way for salvation, and like the blind
Aramites, it leads them into the midst of Samaria, even puts them into the
hands of their enemies.

God did much for this land when he gave us this light, let not our
unthankfulness to him, or our peevish waiwardnesse amongst our selves, or our
evil and unworthy conversations forfeit this light, or remove our candlestick.

So long as we know where our salvation is settled, and who has it in keeping
for us, so long as we look that way, and direct all our obedience and worship,
our thanks and praise that way, we are safe: for, Blessed is the people that be
in such a case: blessed is the people, whose God is the Lord: for ipse est qui
dat salutem.

2 Ground of their hope: The Lord is my strength.

This comfort supporterh in afflictions, and this is that which is our ability,
of which the Apostle says.

But God is faithful, 1 Cor. 10.13.
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able: for what are we
able? surely of our selves, to nothing that is good for us: the name of man
ever since the fall of man, has been a name of impotency and weakness.

Cease ye from man, Isai. 2.22.
whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of?

Christ has told us: sine me nihil potestis facere.

For by strength shall no man prevail. 1 Samuel 2.9. Psalm 71.10


I will go in the strength of the Lord God, and I will maeke mention of thy
righteousesse, even of thine only.

The words of my text are Doctrinall: The Lord is the strength of his Church.

Consider this which way you will

1 In eo quod sumus: in that we are. In him we live. 2 In eo quod facimus, in
that we do: the good that we do, he does it himself: O Lord, thou have wrought
all our works in us. Isai. 26.12.

The skill that we have in our several professions and trades and mysteries,
it is his spirit that gives it, the strength that we have to labor in our
several callings is his strength, and that blessing was included in the curse
of man. Genesis 3.19.
Thou shall eat thy bread, in the sweat of thy face: that God would give man
strength to earn his bread, and his labor should be his physic, it should
make him breath out evil and noxious vapors in his body, which might offend
health, in sweat.

And if we consider with what coarse fare, and little rest, and mean apparel,
the laboring man does pass through great labor, we cannot but acknowledge
that experience has sealed this doctrine, that God is the strength of man; for
man lays on load upon man, and they that live at ease, feel not the burdens
that they do lay upon their brethren.

God is our strength, in eo quod patimur, in that we suffer, for could we
fore-think our selves able to bear that sorrow and misery, which captivity and
war does bring upon us? do you not hear some say, they cannot eat such and such
meat, they cannot rise early, they cannot brook the air, their tender flesh
cannot endure any hardness.

Can such endure to spend their whole time in praising the goodness of God
toward them for his great mercy, that he puts them not to it, to try what
they can suffer, let them hear the Prophet Jeremie complain.

The precious sons of Sion, comparable to fine gold, Lam. 4.2.
how are they esteemed as earthen pitchers?

They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets, they that were
brought up in scarlet, embrace dunghils.

The women fed on their own aborrements, and did eat their own unripe fruit,
children of a span long. Lam. 2.20.
Such as were so tender, that they could scarce endure to touch the ground of
the street with the soals of their shoes, even to such God sent word that, Her
own feet should carry her a far off to sojourn.

When it shall please God to turn the wheel of providence, and to set Princes
and high persons in the rank of common men, in the condition of miserable and
distressed men, tender hands will learn to labor, and God will give strength.

The ordinary, the extraordinary, the outward, the inward, the expected, the
sudden calamities of life are manifold, to bear them all with patience, to
digest them with cheerfulness, to turn them into the nourishment of our faith
and hope, this is the strength of the Lord in us, our soul would soon grow
weary of them, if God did not establish our hearts: for the sense of evils
incumbent, and the fear of evils ingruent, would soon distract and distemper
us, if the strength of the Lord did not sustein us.

This doctrine which informs us whence we have our strength,

Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, Deuteronomy 6.5.
with all thy soul, with all thy might.

We must put our whole strength to his service, Luke 10.27.
and to the obedience of his Law.

All other use of our strength for this life is subordinate to this, for they
mistake their own creation, that think they were made for themselves, and
employ their wits, and time, and strength, to support, to adorn, and to make
pleasant and easy this temporal life of ours.

Christ says, that this love of our God must be (...), with all our strength.

Babylon is called the hammer of the whole earth, for God did use these
Chaldaeans as the rods of his fury, to punish the transgressing nations: but
there came a time, when this hammer was cut asunder and broken.

How is the hammer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken? how is Babylon
become a desolation among the nations? Jer. 50.23.


I have laid a snare for thee, and thou art also taken, O Babylon, and thou
wast not aware, thou art found, and also taken because thou have striven
against the Lord.

Let the oppressors of their brethren consider this, the snare of God is full
of danger, for it has three dangers in it.

1 To catch suddenly: thou wast not aware. 2 To hold fast: thou art taken. 3 To
destroy, for they that are taken in the snare of God are at his mercy, in his
power. Upon the wicked, Psalm. 11.6.
he will rain snares, fire, and brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall
be the portion of their cup.


It was the advice which Batsheba the mother of Solomon gave to her beloved
Lemuel, and she puts it home in a mothers holy passion.

What my son, and what the son of my womb, Prove. 31.2.
and what the son of my vows?

Give not thy strength to women, nor thy ways to that which destroys Kings.

It seems that Solomon had taken out his mothers lesson, for he gives all
that fear God warning, to take heed of the strange woman, for he says.

She has cast down many wounded, Prove. 7.26.
yea many strong men have beea slain by her.

Her house is the way of hell, going down to the chambers of death.



Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, Isai. 5.11.
that they may follow strong drink, that continue till night, till wine inflame
them.

Some give their strength to covetousness, some to pride,

It is his strength that they abuse, and he calls for all of it in his
service.

Me thinks the Apostle does plead for God very reasonably, and therein he
teaches us to try our selves, whether we be innocent or faulty in this.

As you have yielded your members servants to uncleanness, (...) 6.1^.
and to imquity, to iniquity: so now yield your members servants to
righteousness unto holiness.

It is unreasonable, when God desires but the same service done to him, that
made and preserves us, and would save us, that we give to Satan, who goes
about like a roaring lion to destroy us; and it is a good way between God and
conscience, to try our hearts, whether we have done our God the right that we
should do him in our strength, for have we had as great delight in the Bible,
and have we read that with as much diligence, as we have read other books of
delight and pleasure? have we heard the Word with as much attention and profit,
as we have heard, other vain and wanton tales: have we bestowed as many private
hours in prayer, as we have done in game.

Have we as much delighted in the Lords Supper, the souls feast, as we have
done in the feasts and banquets of the body?

Nay, have we not usurped some of Gods day for our temporal business, and
neglected the Church assembly, and the ministry of the word, to eat, and
drink, and game, and sleep, and take our ease? would we have done so, if some
command from some superior powers had commanded us any special service.

This is the way to try us: surely we have not given our whole strength to the
Lord, if we have done these things, and therefore unless we redeem the time,
and amend our ways, our consciences will tell us, that his servants we are whom
we obey, and the servants of sin must look for the wages of sin, that is death.

But let us do no more so, seeing the Lord is our strength, let our strength be
the Lords, let it serve him for himself, our brethren for his sake.

Another use of this point I learn from the song of Moses, Israel after they
came out of the red sea.

The Lord is my strength and song: let him that is our strength, Exodus 15 ^.
be our song also, that is, let us praise him with joy and thanksgiving, it is
the honor that David gives to the Lord: as his strength is always from him,
so he promises. My song shall be always of him: and he desires that his mouth
may be filled with his praise all the day long, these be called the calves of
the lips of them that confess his name, they are sacrifices of righteousness,
and they please God better then bullocks that have horns and hoofs: this is,
(...): reasonable service.

It follows there, and it is another use of this point: The Lord is my
strength: I will prepare him an habitation.

In which words though literally, there be a prophetical reference to the
Tabernacle of God, which God did after appoint, to be erected and consecrated
to his special worship; and further yet to the building of the Temple at
Jerusalem; the joy of all the earth; yet in thankful retribution to God for
the strength that we have from him, every faithful soul must within it self
erect an habitation for God and his anointed.

Know you not that your bodies are the temples of the holy ghost? does not
Christ dwell in us by faith? is not the soul the body of the Church? is not the
understanding and intellectual part the holy of holies, the chancell of the
Church, where the glory of God dwells, and where the memorials of his mercies
are kept? is not the heart the altar whereupon all our sacrifices of
thanksgiving, and the incense of our prayers are burnt?

Is not the mouth of them that confess his name the beautiful porch of this
Temple?

Does not Christ stand at our doors, and knock, and desire our entertainment?

O let us receive him, he is our strength, there is not a stronger man to come
in and bind him and cast him out, that day we receive him, that day is
salvation come home to our house. Let him not come in as a guest and sojourner,
to tarry a night and be gone, let him have the rule of the house. Christ will
then tell us, that the Kingdom of God is within us, and where he rules, there
is peace which passes all understanding.

3 The next ground of their hope is a strong faith, that he will make my feet
like hynds feet. That is, he will give me a swift escape out of all my
affliction, and I shall come again out of captivity.

The Lord will loose the bonds of his Church, and give her deliverance out of
all her troubles.

This is a good ground of hope.

Because it is one of Gods honorable titles to be a deliverer, so is he called
in this 18 Ps. v. 2.

From whence these words are taken, so

Thou art my help and my deliverer. Psalm. 70.5.


Thus David honors God with that great title, for it includes a confession
of praise, both of the power of God, able to deliver, and of his wisdom and
love, applying that power to the comfort of his afflicted Church.

Because it was the office of his anointed, the Son in whom he was well
pleased,

He gave redemption to his people.

He shall save his people from all their sins: he confesses it his errand
hither.

He has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, Isai. 6.11.
to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the prison to them
that are bound.

Because God knows the weakness of his Church, Psalm. 125.3
lest the righteous should put forth their hand unto wickedness.

This has special virtue to comfort us both.

1 Generally in our whole life: and 2, especially in the several crosses and
distresses, incident to the body of the Church, or any member of the body.

3 And individually to each particular person in their personal vexations and
unrest.

1 For the general calamities incident to life. Job says: Man that is born of
a woman has but a short time to live, and is full of misery.

If a man have no time of respiration from sorrow, if his body be in sickness,
his mind in grief, his estate in poverty, his person in prison, suppose him as
much afflicted as his time and strength can bear, yet death determines all,
and sets the oppressed and the prisoner free, as Job says.

2 The Church or any part of it, be it afflicted and driven into corners
persecuted, as in the time of the ten bloody persecutions, and as at this day,
the Protestants are cruelly pursued both in our neighbor France, and in the
Palatinate, and in Bohemia, Ministers banished as raisers, and strivers of
sedition, which was laid to the charge of Jesus Christ, and after of St. Paul.

The Lord has ever heretofore been a deliverer of his Church, and his hand is
not shortened, our hope is that he will also make his Saints hearts glad by a
timely deliverance, and will give them hinds feet to escape from the arrow that
flees after them by day, and from the dogs that hunt and pursue them with open
mouth.

3 In the case of personal grievances, how can we either in dangers feared or
in oppressing griefs, and pains receive any peace to our souls, but in the
faith of deliverance, believing that no miseries can so environ us, but that
there may be found an open way out of them: so David says;

Many are the troubles of the righteous. Dominus ex omnibus liberet. This
admonishes the afflicted to, Israel, their trust in the broken staff and reed
of Egypt. And they that trust to Idolatrous nations to help them in their
distresses and wants, thrust thorns into their own eyes, and goads into their
own sides, and their trust shall be their ruin, Israel did find it so, and
smarted sharply for it.

This also as all other favors of God, either possessed or expected, does
awake us to a duty of service of our God: servi quasi servati, and we must
serve him that we may be delivered out of all our fears and griefs, and being
delivered from the hands of all our enemies, we must serve him in holiness and
righteousness.

Then shall our feet be like hyndes feet, to run away lightly out of all our
afflictions.

More yet we shall say, our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the
fowler, Psalm. 124 7
the snare is broken and we are escaped.

4 The last ground of hope is restitution. He will make me to walk upon my high
places: that is, he will restore his Church again to their own pleasant Land,
and re-plant them in the inheritance of their fathers.

He calls this land high places, as you have heard, because it was a choice
country, blessed with plenty, and fruitful with all abundance.

Though they have been long banished from it, yet now they are persuaded of a
restitution.

God is the restorer of the Church,

1 In respect of his eternal love, 2 In respect of his promise made to
Abraham, for that he often remembers, and his promise to David. 3 In respect
of his Word, that he has sent by his holy Prophets, who have from the mouth of
God promised them return and replantation. 4 In respect of their enemies, by
whom he punishes his Church, for they must both feel the wrath of God in the
sense of their own judgments, and in the envy at the prosperous estate of the
Church.
Observe it here for a matter of great joy in the Church, to be restored to
that which formerly they enjoyed;

Do not we see some ambitious men climing and aspiring still higher and higher
who being suddenly cast down, sit looking up to the rooms which they held, and
though not contented with them in possession, would now think it a great honor
to be restored, saying as Job says: Oh! that I were as in months past, Job
29.2.
as in the days when God preserved me: when his candle shined upon my head.

Even so is it in the spiritual favors and graces of God, for many times the
elect of God by evil husbanding these do lose them, so that they have no
feeling of the love of God, and hardness over-grows their hearts, blindness
be-nights their understanding, sin surprizeth all their instruments of action,
and makes their members the weapons of iniquity, to work iniquity: when these
come again to themselves, as the prodigal did, then they would ask no more of
their father, but that they might be admitted into the house as servants.

David had a great defection from God in the matter of Vriah the Hittite, and
slept in it the most part of a year, but recovering himself a little, as one
awaked after drunkenness, and finding himself in the dark, the light of Gods
countenance eclipsed: then he prays.

Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation. Psalm. 51.12.
Therefore, whilst the Sun shines upon our Tabernacle, let us rejoice in the
Lord, and serve him, that our time may run no other but Sunshine days, in the
cheerful light of Gods countenance.

3 The Dedication of this Psalm, to the use of the Church, is spoken of at
large at the first Verse.

FINIS.

