The two Noble Converts; OR THE Earl of MARLBOROUGH and the Earl of ROCHESTER
Their Dying Requests and Remonstrance, To the ATHEISTS and DEBAUCHEES of this
Age.
The Earl of Marlborough's Letter to Sir H. P. a little before the Sea Fight,
in 1665.
SIR,
I Believe the goodness of your Nature, and the friendship you have always born
me, will receive with kindness the last office of your Friend. I am in health
enough of Body, and (through the mercy of God in Jesus Christ) well disposed in
Mind. This I premise, that you may be satisfied that what I write, proceeds not
from any fantastic terror of Mind, but from a sober resolution of what
concerns my self, and earnest desire to do you more good after my Death, than
mine Example (God of his Mercy pardon the badness of it) in my lifetime may do
you harm. I will not speak ought of the Vanity of this World; your own Age and
Experience will save that labor: But there is a certain thing that goes up
and down the World, called Religion, dressed and pretended phantastically, and
to purposes bad enough, which yet by such evil dealing loses not its Being:
The great good God has not left it without a Witness, more or less, sooner or
later, in every Man's Bosom, to direct us in the pursuit of it; and for the
avoiding of those inextricable disquisitions and entanglements our own frail
Reason would perplex us withal, God in his infinite Mercy has given us his
Holy Word, in which, as there are many things hard to be understood, so there
is enough plain and easy, to quiet our Minds, and direct us concerning our
future Being. I confess to God and you, I have been a great neglecter, and (I
fear) despiser of it: (God of his infinite Mercy pardon me the dreadful Fault.)
But when I retired my self from the noise and deceitful Vanity of the World, I
found no true comfort in any other resolution, than what I had from thence: I
commend from the bottom of my Heart the same to your (I hope) happy use. Dear
Sir H. let us be more generous, than to believe we die as the Beasts that
perish; but with a Christian, Manly, Brave Resolution, look to what is Eternal.
I will not trouble you further. The only great God, and holy God, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, direct you to an happy end of your Life, and send us a joyful
Resurrection. So prays,

Your true Friend, MARLBOROUGH.
Old James, near the Coast of Holland, April 24. 1665.

The Reader, if he please, may see more Instances of the like nature, in a Book
called, Fair Warnings to a careless World.

The Earl of Rochester's Remonstrance, Signed with his own Hand a little before
his Death.
FOr the benefit of all those whom I may have drawn into Sin by my Example and
Encouragement, I leave to the World this my last Declaration, which I deliver
in the presence of the great God, who knows the secrets of all Hearts, and
before whom I am now appearing to be judged.

That from the bottom of my Soul I detest and abhor the whole course of my
former wicked Life; that I think I can never sufficiently admire the goodness
of God, who has given me a true sense of my pernicious Opinions and vile
Practices, by which I have hitherto lived without Hope, and without God in the
World; have been an Open Enemy to Jesus Christ, doing the utmost despite to the
Holy Spirit of Grace. And that the greatest testimony of my Charity to such is,
to warn them in the Name of God, and as they regard the welfare of their
Immortal Souls, no more to deny his Being, or his Providence, or despise his
Goodness; no more to make a mock of Sin, or contemn the pure and excellent
Religion of my ever blessed Redeemer, through whose Merits alone, I, one of the
Greatest of Sinners, do yet hope for Mercy and Forgiveness. Amen.

Declared and signed in the Presence of Anne Rochester. Robert Parsons. June
19. 1680. J. ROCHESTER.


Besides which, take one memorable Saying of his, on his Deathbed. One day at
an Atheistical Meeting, at a Person of Quality's, I undertook to manage the
Cause, and was the principal Disputant against God and Piety, and for my
performances received the Applause of the whole Company; upon which my Mind was
terribly struck, and I immediately replied thus to my self: Good God! that a
Man, that walks upright, that sees the wonderful Works of God, and has the use
of his Senses and Reason, should use them to the defying of his Creator! But
though this was a good beginning toward my Conversion, to find my Conscience
touched for my Sins, yet it went off again: nay, all my Life long I had a
secret value and reverence for an honest Man, and loved Morality in others. But
I had formed an odd Scheme of Religion to my self, which would salve all that
God or Conscience might force upon me; yet I was not ever well reconciled to
the business of Christianity, nor had that reverence for the Gospel of Christ
as I ought to have.

With several other like Expressions, which may be seen in the Sermon preached
at his Funeral.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. and sold by Randal Tailor, 1680.


