A LEARNED TREATISE CONCERNING WARDS AND LIVERIES; WRITTEN By the Right
Honorable and learned Gentleman Sr. James Ley Knight and Baronet, Earl of
Marlebrough, Lord high Treasurer of England, when he was Attorney of his
Majesty's Court of WARDS and LIVERIES.

WHEREIN IS SET FORTH the learning concerning Wards and Liveries, collected and
well digested out of the yeare-bookes, and other authorities of the Law, for
the benefit of all that are Studious.

London printed by G. Bishop, and R. White, for Henry Shepherd, and Henry
Twyford, and are to be sold at the sign of the Bible in Chancery Lane, and at
the three Daggers in Fleete-streete. 1642.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
TO THE STUDENTS OF the Common Law of England.
It Is not to commend this Work, that this is written, for that it will it self;
nor is it to present unto the curious Readers view, novelties but ancient
learning usefully digested; the common Law of England that is defined to be Lex
non Scripta, is best known by the multitudes of particular cases reported and
set down in the several yeare-bookes, and other reports of the Law, and in
them the several resolutions of different natures being set down as in time
they happened to be argued, without having regard to report together all such
cases as concerned one kind of learning, breeds such confusion, that the
painful student must be very careful under his several titles in his
common-place-bookes to take notes with reference to the books from whence he
takes them proper to be applied to the title under which he writes it, and
likewise carefully to coat his books to each other, or otherwise upon sundry
occasions he may be driven to tumble up and down the several books to
resolve himself, and miss too of such good resolutions as the books would
afford him, if his memory (which may easily fail) be not admirable; This
small Epitomie will-prevent that trouble, and help (more then any abridgment
extant) the laborious Student to know and find out the learning concerning
wards, and Liveries, no small part of our Law, nor easiest learning; It was
written by the right Honorable and learned Sir James Ley, Earl of Marlebrough,
Lord High Treasurer of England, when he was Attorney of the Wards and
Liveries, for his own private use, but now presented to public view for the
common good of the Students of the Law; The learning concerning Wards and
Liveries was not practiced in one peculiar Court, nor differences concerning
Wards lands not confined to any particular Court, but left to be proceeded in
all Courts proper for the nature of the causes, till of late years: but now by
a Statute made 32. H. 8. cap. 46. A peculiar Court known by the name of the
Court of Wards is erected, wherein all things that concern the Kings Wards is
heard and determined, so that now the Law as to Wards being to be only
practiced there: This Treatise will be of good use to him that intends that
practice, for in it will be found very much of the learning concerning Wards,
for him that desires the knowledge of such learning: It was chiefly published,
and to him is wished increase of Learning,

Farewell.
Instructions for our Mr. of our Wards and Liveries, for the better authorizing
and directing of him in the execution of his Office and performance of our
service.
FIrst our pleasure is, and we do declare the Master of our Wards shall and
may survey and dispose of all and every of our Wards, Idiots and Lunatiques,
and respectively, of their Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Chattells, goods,
properties, interests, rights, titles, Intrusions, Arrerages and Meane-rates,
and all Liveries, Ouster le maines, and ancient Manors, and all Advowsons, and
presentations of Churches, Herriots, Reliefes, Coppyholds, Woods, Mines, and
Quarries, of any our Wards, and of all duties belonging, or to belong to us by
reason of any Tenure.

That the Master of the Wards shall from time to time call unto him one or more
of such persons as we nominate to be his assistants, and shall use the
assistance and advice of the mor one of them, at a place certain, and times
certain be limited and appointed by the Master for the sitting upon the
matters within his survey and disposition, so that our Tenants and Suitors may
make their repair thereunto.

That the Master with the advice aforesaid shall have power and authority to
compound for the Wardships, Idiots, Lunatiques, and other duties aforesaid, and
to assesse all Fines, install all payments for the matters aforesaid, and to
take Bond and Security in our name for the same, and to commit them to the
safe custody of our Clerk of our Wards, and Liveries to our use, and upon full
payment to cause the same to be delivered up and cancelled, and also to
discharge and renew any Bond or Securities as occasions shall require.

That there be ordained a special seal for our Wards, Li^eries, and Tenures,
and for our (...) ^ising by reason thereof, which (...) shall be in the custody
of the said, Master of the Wards, and that no other seal shall be used for,
or concerning any the matters or causes aforesaid.

That the Master with the advice aforesaid shall have power and authority to
grant Wardships for Fines, to make Leases of Wards Lands, and of Lands in our
hands for want of Livery or Ouster le maine, for Fines and reserving of rents,
and to grant the custody of Idiots, and Lunatiques, and their goods and Lands,
and to compound for mean rates, and to mitigate and remit as well the
forfeitures of such bonds and mean rates, as also to allow reasonable
recompense to prosecutors, such as do service in the cases aforesaid. That the
Mastor with the advice aforesaid shall have power and authority to give
direction to any of our Courts, and unto the officers thereof and unto any of
our Ministers and officers, as well for the proceedings and prosecution of any
suites, and pleas, and finding of offices and inquisitions, making of
certificates and other services, as also for the stay, surceasing or
superseding thereof, and that no direction shall be given to the contrary or
otherwise by any of our chief Officers touching the premises: That all
petitions or suites made to us touching the causes aforesaid shall be either
referred or directed to the said Master, who shall have power with the advice
aforesaid to answer and determine the same, and that petition, suite, or
information shall not be received by our council of revenew touching the
premises but that the same shall be made and belong unto the Master of the
Wards and Liveries.

And whereas the Kings most excellent Majesty by Indenture bearing date 10.
Ianuarij 14. Jacobi, made between his Majesty on the one part, and Sir
Francis Bacon Knight, Lord virulam, and Lord Chancellor of England, Sir John
Daccombe Knight deceased, Thomas Murrey Esquire our Secretary, Sir James
Fullerton Knight, one of the Gentlemen of our Bedchamber, John Walter Esquire
our Attorney General, and Thomas Trevor Esquire our Solicitor General of the
other party, has demised and granted unto them for our only use and benefit
of sundry Lordships, Castles, Burroughes, Towns, Manners, Lands, Tenements,
Liberties, Franchises and Hereditaments, to have and to hold the same from the
Feast of St. Michael the Archangell last past before the date hereof, for the
term of 99. years. And upon the trust and confidence, and to the intent and
purpose in the same Indenture mentioned and expressed. Now our pleasure is that
the said Lord Chancellor and the rest of the surviving Lessees and their
Assigns shall from time to time join in all such grants, discharges,
conveyances and Instruments touching the matters aforesaid by writing under
their hands and seals and otherwise, as by the Master of our Wards, with the
advice aforesaid shall from time to time be directed; And our further pleasure
is that the Commissioners for our revenewes (if need shall so require) shall
allow and give warrant in writing for the same.

That the Master with the advice aforesaid shall have power by Letters Patents
under our great Seal to appoint such Feodaries, Escheators Auditors,
Receivers, Surveyors and other Ministers of the Wards, Liveries, and matters
aforesaid as he shall think needful for our profit, and service, and from
time to time to alter, change, determine and discharge all or any of the said
Officers and Ministers, and their Offices and employments as now or hereafter
shall be, and determine our Will and Pleasure concerning the same.

That all Ordinances, Constitutions, Acts, made, published, declared and set
down contrary to the hindrances of these our instructions, shall so far
only as they are contrary, or to the hinderance thereof be utterly void and
annihilated, any other matter, cause, or thing to the comrary thereof
notwithstanding.

That the Master of our Wards and Liveries do acquaint the Attorney and
Council of the Kings Majesty's Court of Wards and Liveries withal such
proceedings as may require their assistance for our said Tenures, Revenew and
profit, and especially his Majesty's Attorney of that Court, and the Clerk of
that Court for the preparing, clearing, finding, searching, and revealing of
Tenures, and of the states subject unto our Wardships and Liveries, by any due
and lawful means whatsoever.

Lastly, whereas the Kings most excellent Majesty has by his Letters Pattents
under his great Seal, dated the 11. day of this December granted unto the
Master and Council of the Court of Wards and Liveries, Commission with
instructions and directions for compounding for Wards, Idiots, and Lunatiques.
Our will and pleasure is, that the Master of the Wards shall diligently and
carefully inform himself of the same instructions and directions, and by
Example and presidents thereof order and dispose the affairs of our Wards,
Idiots, Lunatiques, Liveries and Tenures, so far forth as the same may stand
with congruitie and concordancy, taking special care that our just and
reasonable profits may be raised without diverting the same to others; and that
nevertheless our Tenants may be moderately charged, and our Wards may be
educated in Religion.

Examinatur per Jac. Ley.

Tenures.
IF the King grant Land in Fee, and reserve nothing, Coo. 6. Wheelers case. fo.
6. b. Coo. 9. Ant. Lowes case. 123. 7. E. 4.12. b. 44. E. 3.45. a. Co. 9. Ant.
Lowes case 123. b.
the Patentee shall hold by Knights service in Capite.

So if in his grant the King says by express words, Absque aliquo inde
redendo, yet because all Land must be holden by some service, the best shall be
intended for the King; therefore against the express words of the Patent, the
Law will create a new Tenure by Knights Service In Capite.

So if the King gives Lands tenend. as freely as he holds the Crown, yet the
Grantee shall hold by Knights service in Capite, and in all these cases the
Tenure shall be by such a part of a Knights Fee, as the value of the Land shall
bear; what shall be said of a Knights Fee, see the end of this Title.

But if the Grant be Tenend. de nobis per servitium unius Rosae, Coo. 6.
Wheelers case 7.
Rubiae, or the like, pro omnibus aliis servitiis, this is a Tenure by Soccage
in Capite, because, if the King reserve any special rent, the Tenure shall be
such as he reserves.

If it be Tenendum de nobis ut de honor, Castrum vel Manner. de A. per
servitium Militare, or, De honor Casiro vel Manner. de A. per servitium unius
Rosae, Rubiae, or by 2. s. or by Fealty, for all the services, these be mean
Tenures of the King, in the first case common Knights service; in the second,
common Soccage, because the Tenure is not immediately from the person of the
King.

But yet there are certain Honors so anciently annexed to the Crown, 33. H. 6.
Br. Tenur 94. Inst. fo. 77. a.
(viz.) Barkinsteed, Newland, Rawleighe, The Abbey of Marle, etc. That a Tenure
of the King, as of any of these, makes a Tenure in Capite, either in Knights
service, or Soccage, Stamf. pre. Rs.
according to the words of the Tenure; but yet this is improperly a Tenure in
Capite, for he which holds of the King, as of any of these Honors, may alien
without license of the King, 44. E. 3.45.
which he cannot do which holds in Capite of the King, as of his person.

If the King grant Lands Tenend. de nobis per servitia debita, 44. E. 3.45.
This shall be in Capite by Knights service, because where the words be
uncertain, the best shall be intended for the King.

If the King have Lands in his hands, holden by a common person immediately as
aforesaid.

For Treason all Tenures, as well of the King as others, are thereby
extinguished, Co. 6. p. Sir John Mollins case 6.
but if the King grant the same Land to another Tenend. de capital. Domino per
servitia debita, the Tenure is restored, and the Land holden of the Lord of
whom it was holden before the Treason, and not of the King immediately; Co. 9.
p. Bewleyes case 131.
yet if he grant it, Tenend. de nobis heredibus and successoribus nostris, and
al. capital. dominis feodi illius per servitia debita, It shall not make an
immediate Tenure from the King, but the immediate Tenure shall be of the Lord
of whom the Land was holden before; and if he grant it Tenend. de nobis and by
new services, and faciend alias dominis servitiad bita, the mean Tenure shall
be revived, without any regard of the priority of the words of the Patent,
reserving new services. And this in favor of restoring an ancient Tenure, but
it is otherwise in the Creation of a new Tenure by the Kings grant, without any
respect to an ancient.

And in this last case, Stam. praerog. Rs. cap. 12.
and also where the King purchases land holden of a subject (in which case
also all Tenures are extinct) it has always been used upon a grant thereof
made by the King to restore the ancient Tenure of the Subject, and if a grant
had been made otherwise, he of whom the lands were holden before, had his
remedy by petition to the King.

If the King purchase a Manor, of which I. S. holds, he shall hold as he
held before, and shall not sue Livery, nor pay Primer seisin, nor hold in
Capite.

To hold of the King by graund Sergeancy, is Knights service in Capite; by
petty Sergeancy, is Soccage in Capite; whereof more in the following Title.

To hold of the King by Castle-guard, Lit. 34. b. Coo. 2 p. Cromwels case. 81.
Lit. 266.
is Knights service in Capite, but to hold by certain Rent for Castle-guard,
is but Soccage; But by Fitz Harberts natura brevium a Tenure of the King, Coo.
4. Luttr. case. 88. b. F. N. B. 256. a. Stam. praerog. 29. b.
as of an ancient Honor by certain rent for the keeping of Dover C stle, is
taken to be Knights service in Capite; but this seems no Law.

Note that there must of necessity be a Tenure of all Lands in the hands of
Subjects, Coo. 9. p. Ant. Lowes case. 123.
wherefore if the King grants or releases the service of his Tenant by Knights
service, etc. to his Tenant and his heirs, this cannot extinguish the Tenure
wholly, but that fealty shall remain for necessity of Tenure; 26. H. 8.9.
As in graunts, so in offices found after the death of the Kings Tenant to
entitle the King or Lord of a Wardship, the words of the office directs what
the Tenure is, and therefore before the Statute of 2. E. 6. cap. 8. if an
office had been found, that one held of the King generally, Sed per quae
servitia Jurat. ignorant, this was taken for a Tenure by Knights service in
Capite, because where the Tenure is uncertain, the best shall be intended for
the King.

And for the same reason an office finding De quo tenetur Iurator ignorant,
this was taken for Tenure by Knights service in Capite, because where the
Tenure is uncertain, the best shall be intended for the King.

And for the same reason an office finding de quo tenetur jurat Ignorant. was
taken for the immediate Tenure of the King, and was sufficient to entitle the
King to a Wardship, but by the said Statute it is provided that in the first
case, Stat. 1. Ed. 6.4.
it shall not be holden for a Tenure in Capite, and in the second place no
immediate Tenure of the King, but in such case a Melius inquirendum shall be
awarded, howbeit, if upon the Melius inquirendum the same be so again
uncertainly found, the best shall be intended for the King, (viz.) a Tenure in
Capite by Knights service.

There are also Tenures by collusion, or estoppell, 7. E. 3.37.
as when a man seized in Fee simple of Lands holden of a common person, has
sued a Livery, or Ouster le main of the same out of the Kings hands, or has
confessed by any matter of Record a Tenure in chief of the King, this makes
the Land holden of the King, of whemsoever it was holden before, and the King
shall have wardship by reason of this Tenure.

Tenant in tail general holds of his Donor in such Knights service as he
holds Ouster of his Lord, 38. E. 3.7. 2. Ed. 4.5. 1. Ed. 2. de militibus,
Nevell.
yea although upon the gift made the Land be given Tenend. de capital. dom. yet
such a cause shall not alter the Tenure, but that he shall still hold of his
Donor.

Twelve plough Land, being every one of them anciently of the yearly value of
five nobles, make a Knights Fee, worth per ann. 20. l. which was anciently
accounted sufficient maintenance for a Knight, thirteen Knights Fees, and a
third part being 400. marks yearly value, made a Barony, Re. 9.124. Ant.
Lowes case. Inst. fo. 69. a.b.
twenty Knights Fee of 400. l. yearly value, made an Earldom, and according
to the same proportion 800. marks a Marquesdome, and 800. l. a Dukedom, the
fourth part of which is paid the King for a relief, viz. of a Knights fee, 5.
l. and so of the rest.

To hold of the King in Fee Farm, Mag. Cart. cap. 27. 20. E. le case.
Inhabitant de Sassron Walden.
is a Soccage Tenure, and yet this Tenure shall yield no relief, because the
Law intends that the Farm, or Rent, that he pays for the Land, is the full
value of the land, and recompenses all other profits of the Tenure, and this is
the common experience of the Exchequer.

Tenures for the most part are either Knights service, or Soccage; Knights
service is either in Capite of the King, or in common Knights service; in
Capite, is of two kinds, one more special, viz. a grand Sergeancy, the other
the general service; Knights service is either of the King, as of some Honor,
Castle, or Manor, or Knights service of common persons: So Soccage is either
in Capite, or common Soccage, in Capite more special, as petty Sergeancy, or
more general, the common Soccage is either of the King, as of some Honor,
Castle, or Manor, which are species of ancient Demesne and Burgage of the
King, or Soccage of a common person.

There are also other Tenures, as Frankallmoigne, Tenure by Divine Service,
base Tenure, as Coppy-holder, Tenure by villenage, of which I need not speak
for the purpose in hand.

Of Knights service and Soccage Tenure of a common person: I may likewise spare
the description; but of either of these much is said in the Title of Wards
collusion, and those that follow.

Tenure in Capite by Knights service.
IS properly where lands are holden of the person of the King and of his
Crown, as of a seigniory it self in gross, 30. H. 8. Dyer 44. a.
and chief above all other seigniories; Improperly of him as of some ancient
Honor annexed to the Crown, as Barkingsteed, Newland, Rawleigh, Stat.
praerog. Rs. fo. 29. b.
the Abbey of Marle, etc. And this description is understood as well of Knights
service, as Soccage in Capite.

Knights service in Capite is denoted either by express words, as Tenend. de
nobis per servitium militare, or improperly, by construction of Law upon
uncertain words, as in the cases supra Title, Tenures.

The more special Knights service, is grand Sergeancy, Lit. 34. b.
which is denoted by some particular service to be done in his own person to
the King, then the other requires, as to carry the Kings Banner, Lance, etc.
to lead his Host, to be his Marshall, to carry his Sword before him at his
Coronation, to be his Sewer, Carver, or Butler at his Coronation, to be one of
the Chamberlaines of his Exchequer, and diverse other the like.

To Knights service in Capite, 2.24. Ed. 3.47. C. Stam. prero. Rs. fo. 7. ib.
6. L. 2. ib. 12.6.5. Plo. Com. Fogags. 17. 2. 13. H. 4.6. b. 22. H. 8. 5. E.
4.12. Stam. prerog. Rs. fo. 8.
are incident not only Ward, Marriage, Primer seisin, Relief, Livery, and
License to alien, but also Prerogative to Wardships, and Primer seisin of all
other Lands holden of common persons in Knights service, or in Soccage, and of
all other services, whereof the Tenant in Capite dyed sole seized in Fee, and
Fee tail in his own Right, or in the Right of his wife in Possession,
Reversion, Remainder, or in Right which descended to the Kings Ward, and not to
any other customary heir, 12. Ed. 4.18.
as the younger sons in Gavellkindes, etc. Except the Lands holden of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Duresme between Tyne and Tese, and the
Lords of the Marches, where the Kings writs runs not, which they had in Anno
17. Ed. 2. 17. Ed. 2. Meues case. 133. Sta. 17. Ed. 2. Stam. pre. Rs. 7. b. 6.
H. 2. Guard. 105.
But the body is not wherefore the King shall have that against all men, but
the King shall have no Prerogative in the Lands of the second Ward, which he
has by reason of Ward, as where one that held of the Kings Ward, was never
seized of those Lands, nor of the service they were holden by.

And the mean Lords, whose Fees the King has in Ward by his Prerogative,
shall have their Rents by which such Lands were holden during the Minority
paid to them, by the Kings Officers appointed to receive the profits of the
Land holden of the other Lord, upon request and tender of an Acquittance to the
said Officers.

As by this Tenure the King has Prerogative in case of Ward, so also he has
the like Prerogative of Primer seisin, which see after, Title Seisin.

Soccage in Capite.
THE Tenure is described in the last Title; Coo. 6. p. Wheelers case 7.
the service that this Tenure is known by, is generally where the Tenant holds
by certain services, not by knights service, for all manner of services, as
Tenend. de nobis per fidelitatem tantum, or by homage and Fealty, or by Fealty
and rent, or by homage, fealty and rent, or by a red Rose, or the like, pro
omnibus servitiis, and although in the last example nothing be said of Fealty,
Lit. fo. 36. a.
yet it is employed by the Law, as incident to all manner of services,; More
special soccage in Capite is petty Sergeancy, which is where a man is bound by
his Tenure to render yearly to the King a Bow, a Sword, Gauntlet, or such like
small matter touching the War.

To Soccage in Capite are incident, Stam. praer. Rs. cap. 3. fo. 13. b.
Relief, Primer seisin, and Livery, and license to alien; whereof in these
small Titles.

Common Knights service of the King.
IT is where land is holden of the King, as of some Honor, Castle, or Manor,
per servitium militar. expressly, or implyedly by construction of Law upon
ambiguous words.

This Tenure gives the King Ward, Marriage, Relief, Livery, but no Primer
seisin, nor license to alien, nor has the King hereby any prerogative to have
other lands holden by the Kings Tenant of common persons into Wardship. But yet
the King shall by his prerogative have the Marriage of such Ward of whom soever
he holds besides, Stam. praer. Rs. fo. 10. 24. Ed. 3.31.6.5.
though his Tenant were enfeoffed of the lands holden of his Majesty after he
was enfeoffed of his lands holden of others, without respect of the priority of
feoffement, which always prevails amongst mean Lords; whereof more fully
afterward, in Title Marriage.

Common Soccage of the King.
IS where Land is holden of the King, as of some Honor, Castle, or Manor, by
the services mentioned supra Title Soccage in Capite.

This Tenure yields a Relief, but no Wardship to the King, Marriage, Primer
seisin, etc.

Ward.
THe Tenure by Knights service, had his original Creation for the defense of
the Kingdom, Lit. fo. 20.
binding the Tenant to serve the King, or other Lord to whom he is Tenant in
the Kings wars for a certain time, to the quantity of his Term, and
therefore that the Commonwealth should not be unserved, the Law gives the King,
Lit. fo. 22.
or the other Lord custody of the heir Male of such Tcnant, being under age of
one and twenty years at the death of his Ancestor, together with the profits
of his Land, till the same age.

And of the heir Female, Lit. fo. 22.
under the age of fourteen years at the death of her Ancestor, and unmarryed,
together with the profits of her Land, until her age of sixteen, to the end
that he may provide himself of a man able to do him Knights service: But if
the heir Female be married at the death of her Ancestor, then her Land only
shall be in Ward but till her age of fourteen years, because those two years
after fourteen, are given only to make tender of her marriage, which is already
done: And if at her Ancestors death she be fourteen years old, Lit. fo. 22.
Bro. Guard. 86. Ac. 35. H. 6.52.
then there shall be no Wardship, neither of her body nor Lands, because at
that age she may have a husband able to do Knights service, and that is her
full age to be out of the Ward by the Common Law, 35. H. 6.54.
and the other two years are given in favor of the Lord.

But when lands that are holden of the king or other Lord, descend to an heir
male or female in the life of the father, from some other ancestor, as from the
grandfather etc. of the mothers side, the mother being dead, Lit. fo. 25. Coo.
3. Ratch. case. 38. Coo. 6. Re. Ambrosia: Gorges case. 22.22.6. re. N. B 143.
o. Lit. fo. 114.
though the Lord shall have the Wardship of the land, yet the law of nature
gives the father the Wardship of the body of such heir, with this difference,
in case of an heir female, that he shall have the Wardship of her body till he
have a son, and then the Lord shall have it, because by the birth of the son,
he is become heir apparent, and this privilege is given to the Father, but
for his heir apparent, which now she is not, in those cases the grandfather
shall not have the Wardship of his grandchilde if his father be dead, touching
the kings prerogative, to have Wardships of his lands, that his Tenant by
knights service in Capite held of another Lord: See before, Title Tenure in
Capite by knights service, and more in Stamf. exposition of the kings
prerogative, cap. 1.

So the essence of Wardships is requisite, that the Tenant die sole seized of
lands in possession, Remainder, or Reversion, or in right holden in knights
service, and a descent to their heir, for if men be jointly seized in fee, or
in fee tail, and one of them die, his heir under age, he shall not be in
Ward, because the Lord has his Tenant alive, viz. the Survivor who has the
whole, and by Title of Survivorship.

And therefore if I. D. for money by him disbursed, Coo. Knights case. 163.
purchase lands to himself and others, and their heirs, this is holden
collusion within the Statute, 34. H. 8. ca. 5. to avoid Wardship which may
accrewe after the death of I. D. because he was never sole seized, Coo. 9.
Flopirs case. 126. a. b.
and so no title of Wardship could be after his death, because of the Survivor.
Coo. 9. Flopirs case. 126. a. b.
But where to be jointly seized of lands holden of the king in possession, and
not in remainder to them and the heirs of the body of one of them, and he that
has the inheritance dies, his heir deins age, the king shall have the
Wardship and Marriage of such heir notwithstanding the Survivorship of the
other Tenant: And this is provided by the other Statute of 32. H. 8.17. in case
of the king only, and therefore in such case, if the lands were holden of a
common person, there would be no wardship during all the life of the Survivor.

Ward, where the Tenant dies seized of land in the very possession thereof, by
taking the profits, etc. This admits no difficulty, and therefore in vain to
multiply cases thereof.

He in the Remainder upon an estate for life, Coo. 2. Binghams. 92. b. 33. H.
6.5. 24. Ed. 3.33. B. Na. Br. 142. b Coo. 2. Binghams case. 92. b. Coo. 9.
Quicks case. 129. b. Vet. Na. Br. Bro. Guard. 113. 4. H. 6.20. 20. Eliz. Die.
362. a.
is not Tenant to the Lord until the Remainder happen in possession, and
therefore if a man makes a lease for life, the Remainder to another in fee,
and he in the Remainder dies, his heir being within age, here during the life
of the Tenant for life, the heir of him in the Remainder, shall not be in
ward, because the impediment is not removed; but in that case, if after the
descent of the Remainder and before the death of the Tenant for life, the Lord
grant away his Seigniory, and after the Tenant for life dies, the heir of him
in Remainder being under age, neither the grantor nor the grantee of the
Seigniory shall have him in ward.

If the Tenant make a gift in tail, the Remainder over in fee to another, 4.
H. 6.10.
here the Tenant in tail holds immediately of the chief Lord, and he die, his
heir under age, he shall be in ward to the chief Lord, and so shall the heir
of him in remainder in fee, if the Tenant in tail die without issue during the
minority of the heir of him in the remainder, because the impediment is
removed by death.

But if an estate tail be made of lands holden of a common person, the
remainder in fee to the King, the Tenant in tail die, his issue under age, he
shall be ward to no body, because the Tenure and services are extinct by the
fee simple, being in the King who can hold of none, And the estate of Tenant in
tail, and the remainder over makes both but one estate.

If the Tenant make a lease for life, Vid. Na. Br. B. Guard. 113.
or a gift in tail, leaving the reversion in himself, he remains Tenant
still to his Lord, and his heirs shall be in Ward for the reversion, because
his estate never moved at all out of him, and he is immediate Tenant; so note
the diversity between a Remainder and a Reversion: So if the Tenant infeoffes
A. who gives the land back again in tail to the tenant, or to the son of the
tenant, Tenend. de Capital. Dom. yet the Tenant in tail should hold of his
Donor, and he of his Lord Paramount, and the heir of the Donor shall be in
Ward to his Lord, for the reversion, and the heir of the tenant in tail shall
be in Ward to his Donor for the possession.

And for the same reason, Coo. 2. Binghams Case. 92.
if the Tenant in tail be with the reversion expectant to himself and his
heirs of lands holden by Knights service, of a common person, and he dies, his
heir within age, he shall be in Ward for his body, but not for his lands, 24.
Ed. 3.33.
because between the estate tail, and the reversion, stand two distinct
estates in the tenant, and the reversion only is holden immediately from the
Lord, and not the estate tail in possession; but if the Case had been Tenant
in tail, with the remainder to an estranger in fee, there the heir of the
tenant in tail under age shall be in Ward to the Lord of whom the land is
holden, for body and land, because the particular estate and the remainder make
but one estate in Law, and all is holden of the Lord immediately.

But note, that in the Kings Case, if his Tenant make a gift in tail, and
grant the reversion, over, or keeps the reversion expectant to himself in
fee, in these Cases, and the like, by some books the King may elect his
tenant, and there shall be a Wardship of the heir of the Tenant in tail, or
of him in the reversion, as his Majesty shall elect, Stat. 34. H. 8. cap. 5.
and this election shall bind him, so that afterward he cannot resort to a
new choice, but other books are contrary, viz. that he in the reversion is
only the Kings Tenant, and he has no election but by common experience of the
Court of Wards, they use to choose the Wardship of the best estate for the
King, and for the third part to be in Ward upon the Stat. of 32. and 34. H. 8.
of Wills, the words of 34. H. 8. are, that the King shall have as well lands in
tail, as in fee simple.

If the kings tenant, F. N. B. 142. d. 14. H. 8.16.
or the tenant of a common person be disseised of his land, and die, so that a
right only descend to the heir, yet the heirs being within age, shall be in
Ward for this right, Coo. 3. Butler, and Bakers case. 35. a.
because after the disseisin, the disseisee remains still tenant to the Lord
in right of Law.

So if tenant in tail make a feoffement in fee, 48. Ed. 3.8. 15. Ed. 4.10. br.
and thereby discontinue the tail, and then dies, his issue under age shall be
in Ward to the Donor.

So where the heir under age recovers lands holden, etc. by a Br. de entrey
sur disseisin, writ of Cosenage, for the action which descends he shall be in
ward for this land so recovered, because of the right descended to him. Mes
auterment est lou il recover, by a writ which does not descend as by a writ, De
dum non fuit compos mentis.

Yet where a possibility only descends, as if a man covenant with the father to
stand seized to the use of the father and his heirs upon a contingent, the
father dies, his heir under age, the contingent happens, It was held by the
Court of Wards, that the heir was in by descent, and that there should be a
wardship, and yet nothing descended but by a possibility: And in every wardship
there must be a descent, Re. 10.83. a. Leonard Low. Case.
except it be in some cases, upon the Statute de 32. and 34. H. 8. quem vide in
le prochein. Title.

Where, Re. 3.62. a. Lincoln College Case.
if the issue in tail under age enters into the jointure of his mother by
force of the Stat. 11. H. 7. c. 20. for a forfeiture by her alienation thereof
he shall not be in ward, because he has the land in manner of a purchase, and
not by descent.

So if the father leaseth to his son and heir for life, and dies, 9. Ed.
3.4.15. Co. 6. Sir Geo: Cursons ca. 76.
and the fee descends to the son under age, so that the freehold is mergd in
the inheritance, yet he shall not be in ward for the land, because he had the
possession by purchase, Si soit bona fide valet, ut etc.

And generally in all other cases where the heir has the land by purchase
without collusion, is where he buys the land of his father (bona fide) and for
valuable consideration, or in the like cases; Coo. 10. Re. Leon. Lowes case.
83. b. t. Inst. 78. ^.
for if it be by collusion, then there will be a wardship by the Stat. of
Marleb. and 34. H. 8. cap. 5. though the heir had not the land by descent,
whereof after see in the Title Collusion.

If the King Knight the heir apparent of his own Tenant, Plo. Com. fo. 268.
Ratclifts Case. Coo. 6. Sir Dru: Druries Case. 74. Coo. 8. Sir Hen. Constables
Case. 171.2.
or of the tenant of a common person under age, and in life of his Ancestor,
he shall not be in ward though he be under age at the death of his Ancestor,
neither for body nor land, but shall for all purposes be reputed of full age,
because the king by knighting him, has adjudged him of full age, and able to
do knights service.

But if he knight him after his Ancecestors death while he is in ward, Stat.
Mag. Carta cap. 3.
he is thereby presently out of ward for his body, but for his land shall be
in ward till his full age of one and twenty years, Quem vide apres en le Title
Marriage, as also some other Cases, where the heir shall be out of wardship
for his body, though his lands remain still in ward.

Wardships and Primer Seisin.
By these Statutes of 32. H. 8. c. 1. a. 34. H. 8. cap. 5. of Wills.
WHereas the words of the Statute are, That every person having Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments of an estate in fee simple, per Knights service in
Capite of the King, or of any other Lord in common knights service, etc. May by
his last Will in writing, by act executed in his life time, give, dispose,
will, or assign two parts thereof for advancement of his wife, preferment of
his children, or paying of his debts, etc. leaving to the King wardship and
primer seisin, and to no other Lords wardship of so much of the same lands as
shall amount to the clear yearly value of a third part thereof; It is to be
considered that these Statutes give to the tenant power to devise his lands by
his last will in escript, which he could not do before these Statutes, which
was some prejudice to the Lords of these lands for their wardships of the two
parts so devised: Coo. 6. Re. Sir Geo: Cursons Case. 76. a.
So then they do give benefit to the King and other Lords, to have wardships,
etc. In cases when they shall have had none before, though the Ancestor neither
dyed seized, nor any land descended to his heir, which are contrary to the
rules of the Common Law, which see before in the last Title.

And where the father conveyes his land holden, etc. by act executed in his
life time for advancement of his wife, preferment of his children, or payment
of his debts, and dies, his heir under age, here is neither dying seized, nor
descent; and yet the Statutes gives a third part of these lands to be in ward
during the minority of his heir, notwithstanding it shall at his full age go
according to his fathers disposition, because the conveyance was only avoided
during the minority for benefit of Wards by the Statutes, Co. Re. 8. Digbies
Ca. 165. b.
and not utterly void, but these Statutes do in no case give wardship, where
there is no heir, as where the father after such conveyance is attainted of
Treason, and dyed his issue, being under age, here the third part shall not be
in ward by the Statute, Re. 10.85. a. t. Leon. Lowes Case.
because the Ancestor dies without heir, in regard of a corruption of his
blood.

And note, where the Ancestor devises by his last will land holden, etc. to
his wife, Dyer 150. b. St. 34. H. 8. ca. 5. Coo. 8. Sir Richard Pexals Case.
85. a.
younger children, etc. the will is not avoided only, during the minority for
the benefit of wardships, as in the said Cases of acts executed, but the will
is utterly void for a third part by those Statutes, and therefore he has the
third part by course of descent by the Common Law, and the will is good only
for the other two parts, whereof there shall be no wardship but only for the
third part descended, which the heir also shall have a son plein age,
notwithstanding the will, Coo. 3. But. and Bak. Case. 35.
for if a man devise a rent out of all the lands holden, etc. this is void to
charge a third part of the lands, notwithstanding the land descends, charge of
the rent.

But where the land holden, etc. are deviseable per custom in London, and some
other towns, the^e all may be devised, and the will is not void for a third
part, because the land was deviseable before the Statutes which are in the
affirmative, and therefore do not destroy the custom, but the case: But the
saying of these Statutes do avoid the will pro tempore, Coo. Re. 3.35. a. b.
But. and Bakers Case.
and give a third part to the King for a wardship during the minority, etc. And
yet the heir is barred by custom to have the third part at his full age, as
before in the third case of disposition by act executed he is barred by the
conveyance.

It is seen who shall be said to be a person having of lands, tenements, or
hereditaments holden within the meaning of these Statutes, and that will best
appear by cases of difficulty, for of common persons having of lands, etc. I
purpose not to speak, plain matters need no demonstration, a disseised of
land in capite which is put out of possession, and has only a right of lands,
Coo. 3. But. and Bak. Case. 35. a.
holds of a common person Soccage lands, he is a person having of lands
within these Statutes, because in the judgment of the Law, he has the land to
many purposes, and therefore devise, etc. by him of his other lands holden in
Soccage, is good only for two parts, and his heir shall be in ward, etc. for
the third part.

If a man have only a fruitless reversion without rent expectant upon an
estate tail, Coo. 11. Re. Henry Harpers Case. 24. Coo. 10. Leon. Lowes Ca. 80.
or for life of lands holden, etc. and devise but two parts of his other lands
holden in Soccage, a third part shall be saved for wardships and primer
seisin, etc. By these Statutes.

But if the first grant away this reversion, Coo. Leonard Lowes Ca. 81.
then he may devise all his Soccage land, because at the time of the devise,
he is no person having, etc.

But if he that has a remainder, etc. expectant upon an estate tail, or a
lease for life of lands holden, etc. devises all his Soccage lands, and dies
before his remainder shall fall into possession, this devise of all is good,
because he is not a person having of such estate in lands holden, etc. as by
the common Law yields wardship, and therefore out of the purpose of the
Statute, and so note the diversity between a reversion and a remainder upon
the Reason of the Cases thereof before, Title Marier,

Inheritances which of their nature are not of any certain yearly value, 5.
H. 7.36. Coo. 10 Leon. Lowes Case. 82. a.
as a Franchise to have felons goods, Court Leetes, waifes, estraies,
advowsons, etc. holden of the king, etc. shall restrain the owner thereof to
devise a third part of his Soccage land, because he that has these, is a
person having hereditaments within the meaning of these sttatutes.

But where a man has Soccage land, Cars Case. 29. Eliz. cited in Coo. 3. But.
and Bak. Case. 30. b. a.
and has also a rent hat was holden by knights service in Capite extinguist in
his Tenancy, he may devise or dispose of it by act executed, all his Soccage
lands, and there shall be no wardship of a tierce part, because that the rent
being extinct, he was not a person having thereof at the making of his last
will, etc.

So where the husband and the wife be both Jointenants of an estate in Fee
after coverture, Coo. ibid. Stat. 34. H. 8.
the husband shall not be said a person having of this land, Coo. 8. Re.
Wights. fo. 163. b.
because he alone is not owner of this land, and so generally, he that shall
be said a person, having of land holden, etc. to be within these statutes, must
be sole seized, and not jointly with another.

Thirdly, as these words are in these statutes having lands, do import sole
ownership of the land holden, Coo. 10. Leon. Low. Ca. 82. b.
so they do also import and appoint the time of such ownership to be the same
instance when he makes disposition or devise of these lands, so that the time
of having, holding and disposing ought to concur, where if a man convey to
his younger, or to his wife, etc. his lands holden, etc. in Fee simple, Coo. 11.
Re. Harpers Case. 24. a.
either absolutely, or with power of Revocation, having a third part, which is
Soccage land to descend, and after purchase more land holden in Soccage, he may
devise all his new purchased lands, because at the making of his will, he had
no land holden, etc.

So if a man have Soccage land, and convey it as Jointure to his wife, etc. and
afterward purchased lands holden, Coo. 10. Leon. Low. Ca. 83. b.
etc. and devise two parts thereof and dies, his heir under age, no part of
the Soccage land shall be taken to make a third part of the whole for watdship,
etc. because when he made the conveyance of the Soccage lands he had no lands
holden, and therefore the conveyance good for the whole.

But if a man having soccage land of 20. li. yearly value, devises it to his
younger children, or to a stranger, and afterward purchases land holden of the
yearly value of 20. li. and dies, the devise is not good for all the soccage
land, because the Will took not effect before his death, and before the land
holden, etc. See now the difference between the last Case of conveyance by Act
executed, and this of devise.

But if a man having land holden in Fee, and soccage land, Coo. 3. But. and
Bak. Case.
devises this soccage land, and after he aliens his his land (bona fide) this
divise is good for all the soccage land, Coo. 10. Re. Leon. Lowes Case. 84. a.
t.
because when the Will took effect, he had no land holden to cause a wardship
or Primer seisin.

Fourthly, it is to be considered, who shall be said to be a wife or a child to
be within these Statutes to be advanced, and then what estate shall be said an
advancement of such wife or children.

A disposition for the advancement that a man intend to marry, Coo. 8. Virgill
Parkers Case. 173. b.
though at the time she be no wife, if after he marry her, she is made a wife
within the intent of these Statutes, as if at the disposition made she had had
him.

If by Act a man disposes of all his lands holden to his bastard, 14. El. Dyer
313. b. Coo. 10. Leon. Lowes Case. 83. a. t. Coo. 6. Report, Sir George Cursons
Case. 77. a.
or to one of his collateral blood, not being his heir apparent, or to his
grandchild in the life of the father, these Statutes give no wardship nor
Primer seisin of a third part, no more than if the deposition had been to a
mere stranger, bacause these are not children in judgment of law, and then
the conveyance remains as it was, at the common Law, good to all, because the
Statutes provide for wardships, or primer seisin, but where the conveyance is
made to a child.

But if after the fathers death, the grandfather conveieth the land to the use
of any of his children, there shall be wardship, etc. for a third part, because
by the fathers death the care of the children is cast upon the grandfather by
the law, as of his own children, and therefore they are to be taken children
within the statute.

Then to see what shall be said an advancement of such wife and children; if
the land conveyed to the wife and children by the said father or grandfather,
be levied to her and her husband to her use, of the wifes lands, therefore
there shall be no third part in ward, Coo. 9. Floyers Case. 126.
because this conveyance is no advantage to her in regard the land was
originally hers, and moved not from her husband, and therefore out of the
statute.

So if a man convey land to his wife for life, the remainder for one of his
sons, the remainder is no advancement to the son, to give wardship either for
the body or third part of the land by these statutes, Ibid. Coo. 2. Binghams
case. 94.
because the mother is the Kings tenant during her life by advancement, and
such a remainder which may give wardship of body and land at the Common Law, is
only intended, by the word Remainder in these Statutes, which this Remainder
does not; the reason is about the title of the ward.

But a remainder which is in part of a reversion, Coo. 10. Leon. Lowes ca. 81.
a.
as if a man makes a lease for life or years, and after grants the reversion
for life or in tail le remainder in fee to his son, and after the grant for
life, or Donee in tail dies without issue, it shall be said advancement within
these Statutes, and shall give cause of wardship of the body during the life of
the tenant for life, because this remainder by common Law, Coo. 9. Holts Case.
132. b. t.
shall draw ward and marriage; as also a revorsion does in such case give
wardship, because he in reversion is immediate tenant to the Lord, and not
tenant in tail, or for life.

If the son and heir, or any other son purchase land of his father (bona fide)
for money, etc. this is no preferment for the child within these meaning of
these Statutes, and therefore there shall be no third part of these lands
taken for wardship, or primer seisin, because it was land purchased by the
child, and not given by the father to prefer him.

This Statute gives authority disjunctive to make a disposition either by act
executed, or by will of two parts of land holden, etc. And thereupon if a man
by act executed in his life time, dispose of two parts for the advancement of
his wife, Coo. 3. But. and Bakers Case.
and preferment of his children, and payment of his debts, he cannot devise the
third part thereof, because he had executed his authority before, but if he
had aliened two parts to a stranger (bona fide) then he might also devise two
parts of the third part remaining, because his alienation to a stranger is out
of these Statutes.

If a man alien two parts for advancement of his wife, Re. 6.18. Sir Edw.
Cleres Case.
etc. he may also make a feoffement of the third part to a stranger, or he may
make a feoffement of the third part to the use of his last will, and by his
will may declare the use of that feoffement to a stranger.

But here note that the land passes by feoffement, and not by will, and that
the will served but as a limitation of the use upon the feoffement, and yet in
that case, a third part of the two parts first disposed of shall be in ward.

If a man by act executed conveyes two parts for life in tail for advancement
of his wife, 35. El. Clem. Howards Case cited in Coo. 10. Re. Leon. Lowes Case.
81. a.
etc. he may also devise the reversion of the same two parts, because the
Statute gives him full power over the two parts, to dispose it as he will, by
will or otherwise.

It is to be observed, that these Statutes are to be expounded to save a third
part for wardship and primer seisin, when the advancement continues in the
advanced without alteration either by descent, or alienation, and not otherwise.

Wherefore, Coo. 2. Binghams Case. 93. b. 94. a. Coo. 9. Holts Case. 132. a.
if the son advanced aliens (bona fide) or dies, and the land descends to his
heir in the life of the father that gave the land, there shall be no wardship
of a third part by these Statutes; the same law is, when the land is conveyed
for the advancement of the wife, or payment of the debts.

Whereas these Statutes serve to be in ward, Coo. Re. 10. Leon. Lowes Case. 84.
a. m.
etc. lands to the full yearly value of a third part of the whole, it is to be
noted that the same value shall be accounted as the lands be of value at the
Ancestors death.

The thing of a casual and uncertain value may not be left for the third
part, Coo. Leon. Lowes Case. 81. a. t. R. 3.32. b. But. and Bak. Case.
as a franchise to have felons goods, and of fugitives, and out of fines,
outlawes fines, amerciaments, which have not been accustomably let unto farm
for yearly rent, but if they have been so let, then they may be left for the
third part.

The King or the Lord ought to have his third part immediately after the death
of the tenant, But. and Bakers Case. 34.
and shall not expect upon any uncertainty, wherefore if a man seized of three
acres holden in Capite, etc. leaseth one acre for life, and after devises the
other two acres, and dies, and after the tenant for life dies, yet the devise
is void for a third part of the two parts, because the third part did not
descend immediately to the heir.

In construction of these Statutes, 35. H. 8. Bro. Testaments 29.
an equality has been used, so that for the levying and making up of a third
part saved by these Statutes, parties alike interessed shall equally and alike
be respected, wherefore if a man have three several Manors holden of three
several Lords by Knights service, Coo. 8. Virgill Parkers Case. 173. b.
every Manor being of equal value, he cannot devise two Manors, and leave
the third to descend according to the generality of the words of these
Statutes, for then he should prejudice the other two Lords of their wardships,
but he must devise two parts of every Manor, and leave to descend a third part
of every Manor, to make a wardship to every Lord.

So if a man seized of land holden, Coo. Virgill Parker. 173. b.
etc. disposes before marriage one moity for a jointure of his wife that shall
be, and after marriage disposes the other for payment of his debts and
legacies, and the third part for the King, as other Lords shall be equally
taken out of both halfes, and not out of the half last disposed.

So if the other devises the land, Coo. 9.133. b. Mat. Menes Case.
to his eldest son one part, and so to four other sons like parts, whereof one
part only is holden, etc. the third of the whole shall be made up equally out
of every several third part of a younger brother a like quantity, if the King
or the Lord has once the benefit of the Statutes against one son, the Statutes
are satisfied, and he can have no further benefit thereof against another-son,
as if the father convey land holden, etc. to one son in tail the remainder
over to another of his sons in tail or in fee, Coo. 9. Tho. Holts Case. 132. a.
and after the fathers death the King or the Lord has wardship and primer
seisin of a third part, and then the first son dies without issue, the King or
Lord shall not have the benefit of the Statute against the son in the
remainder, for the Statutes do extend to the first son advanced only, if he
survive the father, and then be owner of the land.

Wherefore, if a man have lands holden, 20. El. Calthrops Case, cited in Coo.
3. Re. But. and Bak. Ca. 31. a b
etc. of the yearly value of 20. li. and Soccage lands of 10. li. yearly
value, he may devise all the lands holden, etc. and leave the Soccage land only
to descend for wardship and primer seisin, and the Statutes are satisfied, and
the heir shall sue Livery for one of the acres holden, etc. though no land be
descended to him, if the land be holden of the King by Knights service in
Capite.

So if a man have land only holden, Coo. 10. Leon. Lowes Case 84. b.
etc. And conveyeth the whole for advancement of his wife, preferment of his
children, and afterward purchase so much land in Soccage as amounts to the
third part of the land holden, and leaves this to descend, this Statute is
satisfied, and the conveyance is good for the whole land holden, etc.

And note, Coo. 10 Leon. Lowes Ca. 84.
that to make wardship upon these Statutes, the estate of the Lord holden,
ought to continue after the Tenants death; And therefore if a man have an
estate tail only of land holden, and has Soccage, and dies without issue, so
that the estate tail is spent, the devise is good for all the Soccage land, so
if the land holden be defeated by condition after the Tenants death.

And so the estate of the Tenure ought to continue after the death of the
Tenant; Coo. 3. But. and Bakers Case. 34. b.
wherefore if the King gives land to one, and his heirs to hold during the
life of the Patentee by Knights service in Capite, and after his death in
Soccage, or E converso, here shall be no wardship or primer seisin, neither by
the common law, nor by these Statutes, because in the first case the Tenure
continues not after the Tenants death, and in the second case, the Tenure to
make a wardship commenceth in the son only.

Collusion to avoid Wardships.
IF Tenant enfeoffe his son and heir apparent, St. Marle. b. ca. 6. Plo. Com.
or his collateral heir apparent, to make him have an estate in land as a
purchasor, and so to beguile the Lord of his wardship, because the heir comes
not to the land by descent; this is collusion apparent, and manisest against
which by the Statute of Marleb. made Anno 32. H. 3. It was provided that the
Lord shall notwithstanding have the wardship of his heir.

There is also collusion which is not so manifest, as when the Tenant enfeoffes
others upon collusion between him and them had for the benefit of the heir,
and to prevent his wardship, and this collusion is averable, against which also
this Statute of Marleb. provideth.

To instance in particular cases what shall be said, collusion within these
Statutes of Marleb. and what is not, is needless, because the cases thereof
are too many for this Treatise, as for that by the said Statute of 34. H. 8.
cap. 5. a more ample provision is made against Collusion, then was by that
former.

Wherefore before the statute of 34. Inst. fo. 78. a.
H. 8. if the father had stepped but a little further, and had made a Feoffement
to his son and heir, and to a stranger, although the inheritance were
limited to the heirs of his heir, and that the stranger had but an estate for
life.

Or if the Father had made but an estate for life or tail to his son and
heir, 27. H. 8.10.
and limited the remainder, and granted the Reversion to another, or had left
the Reversion in himself, or if the father had enfeoffed a stranger for the
advancement of his younger sons or of his daughter, or for the payment of his
debts, and after do enfeoffe his heir, in all these cases the Lord had been
prevented of the wardship of his Tenants heir, and he not helped by the
Statute of Marleb. because those conveyances were in judgment of the law no
Collusion, neither apparent, nor averable within the intent and meaning of the
said Statutes.

But now by these Statutes of 32. Coo. 6. Sir George Cursons case. 76.
H. 8. in all these cases and the like, Collusion may be averred for a third
part of the Land so conveyed, and the conveyance pro tempore avoided, Re. 8.
Rep. Wignts case. 163. Inst 78. a.
or the wardship, primer sesin, in case of land holden of a common person, and
for wardship of primer sesin in case of land holden of the King for a third
part of the land, but as these Statutes in many other cases gives remedy to the
King and other Lords, where they had none before; so in other cases these
Statutes give the Tenant benesit, where he had none before.

And therefore, where the King, Coo. 8. Wights case. 3. 164. b. Coo. 10. Leon.
Lowes case. 82, 83.
or the Lord by the Statute of Marleb. might take advantage by Collusion
apparent, or where the Tenant conveyes the land to his son and heir under
age, of an estate in fee simple, might have had the whole land so conveyed by
fraud in ward, now by these Statutes, because they did enable him to convey the
two parts for preferment of his child, the King shall have but a third part in
such case, this Statute of 34. H. 8. cap. 5. concerning Collusions to this
purpose, that if the Tenant being seized of an estate of inheritance do by Act
executed in his life time, convey by covin to any person his land holden, etc.
for, or with diverse Remainders over in Fee to a stranger, or to his own right
heirs, or shall make by fraud contrary to this Act, any estate, conditions,
mesnalties, tenures, or conveyances, to the intent to defraud the King or the
Lords of these wardships, etc. which ought to come to them after their tenants
death by force of this Statute, and of the Statute of 32. H. 8. the said
estates and conveyances being found by Office to be so made by covin.

There the King shall have the wardship and other profits, 2. and 3. Eliz. Dyer
193.
etc. according to the intent of the said Statute, as though no such estates
had been made, until the said office be lawfully undone by traverse or
otherwise, and other Lords shall have their remedy in such cases, as their
wardships of body and lands by the Writ of Wards, and shall distraine and
aver for their reliefes, heriots, or other profits, as if no such estates had
been made.

But observe, 10. Eliz. Dyer 276. Re. 8.165. a. Wights case.
that it is adjudged upon these Statutes of 32. H. 8. and 34. H. 8. that where
a third part is left out of such conveyance to be in Ward, etc. no covin or
collusion can be averred for the other two parts disposed of by the Tenant,
though the covin be found by Office, because the intent of the said Statute is,
that the King, and other Lords should be satisfied with a third part, which is
here left unto him.

If A. with his proper money purchase land holden, etc. to himself, and B. an
Infant, and their heirs, this cannot be averrred to be Collusion to avoid
wardship, Primer sesin after the death, within the intent of these Statutes,
because A. was never sole seized as he ought to be by the provision of these
Statutes, and no feoffment which A. can make of his moitie can be averred to be
Collusion, because if no feoffement were, no benefit of wardship could acrue
person Mort.

If the son and heir purchase (bona side) for money, his fathers lands
holden, Re. 10.83. b. Sir Nicholas Strange's case, cited in Leon. Lowes case.
etc. this shall not be taken to be a conveyance of Collusion within the
Statute of Marleb. nor within the Statute of 32. and 34. H. 8. to have a third
part to the King or other Lords for the wardship, because by the third part it
cannot be found preferment of him within the meaning of this Statute.

Marriage.
THe Tenure of Knights service as it gives the King or the Lord the wardship of
the lands of the heir under age, so it gives him also the custody of the body
of the heir male till his age of 21. years, and of the heir female, if she be
under the age of 14. years, and unmarried at the death of her Ancestor, till
her age of 16. years, whereof see before Sect. 6.

Relief.
INcident to all manner of Tenures, 14. H. 8.45. and 156. Tenures. Br. Reliefes.
be they King or common person, except the Tenure of the King by Fee-farme,
which therefore yields no Relief, because the Farm or rent thereof is in the
judgment of the Law accounted a full value of the Land, except Tenures in
Frank Allo moigne by divine service, and the like.

But Relief is no service whereby the land is holden, Co. 3. Penants case. fo.
66. Lit. fo. 28. b.
but a profit or approvement of the services, as a blossom fallen from a tree,
and it is due immediately upon the death of the Ancestor.

The Reason why it is paid, as also the name thereof is given by Brook, thus,
Cum homagio facta fuerit, and fidelit. Succ. abillis cum plenitat. existent.
oportet statim quod Tenem. quod fuit in manibus Antecessoris, and haereditas
qui jacens fuerit eorum decessum relevatur in manibus habend. and propter talem
Relevationem fasiend. orit ab heredibus prestatio qui dicitur relevin.

This excludes all purohasers from paying Relief, as he says also in another
place, Dabit Relevin. qui succedat juri hereditario, non qui acquiret, Brac.
fo. a. 11. H. 8.422. 22. Ed. 4. Relief 8.
And with this agrees the current of our books now at this day, and common
experience; and this also excludes inheritances which go in succession; and
therefore all Corporations, because they never die, so that their land descend
not, pay no Relief, Bro. Relief 9. 3. H. 4 2.
because the successor has not the land, Jure hereditario, but by
prescription; a Corporation may pay no Relief, the heir ought to be of full
age at the death of his Ancestor, or else he is not to pay any Relief, Lit.
fo. 24. a. b. Mag. Cart. c. 3.
as appears by Br. and by all other books, and the full age for this purpose
as of the heir male of Tenant by Knights service 15.21. of his heir female 14
as also of the heir of the Tenant in Soccoge his age of 14. hence it is
plain, that where the Lord has the wardship of the heir of his Tenant, that
at the full age of the heir he shall have no relief: And this is true,
although the Lord has only the land in ward, and not the body, whereof if the
Lord has by the priority the body and the land holden of himself in ward, the
other Lords by posteriority at the full age of the heir, shall have no
relief, because they had every of them the land holden of themselves in ward.

But where the heir is left under age, and the case is so, Inst. 83. b. Stam.
prae. 96. 24. E. 3.14. Vet. Na. Br. 93. a.
that the Lords of whom the lands descend is holden, cannot have the land in
Ward, there at the heirs full age he shall pay relief to such Lord; as where
a man holds his land of the King by Knights service in Capite, and of other
Lords by Knights service, and dies, his heir being under age, and the King
seiseth the wardship, and all his lands which he holds of others, the heir at
his full age is to pay relief to the other Lords, because they had no lands in
Ward.

The relief for a Knights fee of lands holden by Knights service in Capite,
Inst. 83. b. Lit. fo. 24. b s. 112. Coo. 7. Nevills case. 33. b. t.
is the fourth part of the value thereof, viz. 5. li. for a whole Knights fee,
being anciently valued but at 20. li. per annum, And so after the same
proportion for a greater and lesser quantity; whereof see before in Tenures.

Of land holden by grand Sergeancy, Lit. fo. 35.
the relief payable to the King, is the value of the land by the year, above
all charges and reprises.

The remedy for a subject to get his relief, is to destraine for it, 7. H.
6.13. Inst. 83. a.
if it be not had in the life of the Lord, his Executors remedy is an action of
debt against the heir.

In the Kings case, where relief is due to him, the use is in the writ of
Livery, to the heir, and directed to the Escheator to command him to take
surety of the heir for payment of the relief, but he seldom or never does
the same: but them of the Exchequer to whom the charge in this kind belongs
upon record of the Livery, send out summons against the Tenant for the said
Relief, and upon the Sheriffs Return of Nihil, etc. Process of Extent for the
same.

Of Livery.
IF after the death of the Kings Tenant in Capite, his heir enter into the
land to him descended before he does his homage, and has received his seisin
from the King, he is by law an intruder upon the Kings possession, and shall
forfeit all the profits of such lands to the King from the time of his
intrusion, until he have sued out the Livery, and has no freehold of the land
in him, 3. H. 7.2. Stam. prae. Rs. fo. 12.14. b.
insomuch that he can neither make a feoffement, nor other disposition thereof,
nor shall his wife be endowed thereof, but for restitution thereunto, and the
profits thereof, he is driven to sue to the King for his special grace and
pardon.

To prevent which penalties, the Law requires that the heir do (at times)
therefore by the Law appointed sue to the King to have such lands re-delivered
unto him by his highness, They cannot seize before the office.
which is called in Law, saving of Livery, till which be done, the Escheator in
the County where the land lies may (to the Kings use) seize and take the whole
profits of the land, Coo. 9. Sir Geo. Reinolds case. 95. b. Coo. 8. Hales Case.
172. b.
which notwithstanding is not used to be done till office be found, and then
the King is in possession without seizure, and is to be answered of all profits
since his Tenants death, till Livery sued forth, then he does his homage, and
has the land delivered unto him out of the Kings hands, and paieth the King
his Primer seisin, whereof see before in the last Title.

But because to your suing of Livery many things are to be done with great
care, Coo. 8. Hales Case. 172. b.
and still the Lord gives the heir 6.3. months time for the prosecuting
thereof, if the heir at his full age, having been in Ward, or at the death of
his ancestors, if he after his full age tender his Livery, and pursue it with
effect, he shall have as much benefit by his tender, as if he had done homage,
and had sued his Livery; And therefore if the heir after the tender dies
within the said 6.3. months, Coo. 9. Holts Case. 132.
so that the prosecution of the Livery is become impossible by the act of God
In providentia excusat legem, and the interest of the King to Primer seisin is
determined, as if he had taken homage of the heir when he made his tender, but
the mean rates if any were forfeited, are not discharged.

And so for the same reason, the heir after such tender may bargain and sell,
or make other disposition of the land, and the same is good in law if he die
within the said 6. months, Instructions by the new institutions the sur veon.
and has as much power over it, as if he had sued his Livery, this tender at
6. months end is used to be continued over for 6. more, and so from 6. months
to 6. months, as long as the Master of the Wards shall give leave, and in the
mean time the heir has like benefit thereof, as if he had sued his Livery.

Livery shall not be sued but where the Kings Tenant dyed seized of lands
holden by Knights service in Capite, Inst. 77. a.
or Soccage in Capite.

If the Tenure be Knights service in Capite, Stat. Marleb. ca. 16. viz. F.N B.
61.
the King has the same prerogative for his Livery that he has in case of
Wardship, whereof see before to have a Livery sued of lands holden by his
Tenant of others, either by Knights service, or Soccage, or for lands which he
has in Ward by reason of Ward, or that are holden of his Tenants, or that are
holden of a Bishop by a Tenant that dies, while the temporalties of a
Bishopric are in the Kings hands.

But if the Tenure be in Soccage in Capite, 4. El. Die. 113. F. N. B. 256. b.
32. H. 8 Br. Guard. 97. 45. E. 3.19. 35. H. 8.6.52. F.N B 259. Inst. 77.
the King as he shall have primer seisin, and a Livery to be sued of no other
lands holden by his Tenant of others, besides the land holden by Soccage in
Capite; so also the heir of such Tenant shall not sue Livery, nor pay primer
seisin, if at the death of his ancestor he be under the age of 14. but in
every of these cases, they to whom the body belongs shall have an Ouster le
maine una cum exitibus, viz. the Lord of whom the lands are holden by Knights
service.

And here in the last case, 20. Eliz. Dyer 362.
howbeit when he attaines his full age of 14. years he must sue Livery, or
else shall lose the mean rates.

But be the heir of the Tenant by Knights service in Capite under age at the
death of his ancestor, West. 1. cap. 22. St. 39 H 6. ca. 2. a. Stam. prae. Rs.
13.
yet at his full age he shall sue Livery, although he has been in Ward, as
well as though he had been of full age at the death of his ancestor, though
with some difference for the primer seisin, as appears, Title Primer seisin.

The time after the death of the Kings Tenant for his heir to sue Livery, is
of lands in question holden by Knights service in Capite, be the heir in Ward,
and then comes to full age, or be of full age at his ancestors death, then viz.
the heir male at 21. the heir female above 14. at the death of the ancestor,
then if the possession of the freehold do descend immediately after the
ancestors death to the heir, the Livery is to be sued forthwith: If only a
reversion do descend, then not till after the death of the particular Tenant,
if it be a reversion without rent incident thereunto; howbeit the heir at this
day has election either to sue immediately in the life of the particular
Tenant, paving for Primer feisin but half a years value, or to tarry till
after his death, Inst. 77. a. Dyer 14. Eliz. 308. b.
and then to sue it, and pay a whole years value of the land, but if it be in
reversion with a rent incident thereunto, and he sueth out his Livery in the
life of the Tenant, he may do so, and shall pay for Primer seisin but one
years value of the rent.

And the time of the heir of Tenant by Soccage in Capite to sue Livery is,
Coo. 9. Hales case 132. b. Re. 9.81. Leon. Lowes case.
immediately upon the death of the Ancestor, with the same observation of
possession, or Reversion, as is for the heir of the Tenant by Knights service
in Capite, if he be above 14. years of age at the death of his ancestor, and if
he be under, then he is to sue no Livery till he be 21. years, as is before
showed.

But the time which the law has appointed for Soccage of Livery may by
Accident be altered or changed, Co. Re. 9.173. Sir Hen. Constables case. Coo.
Re. 6.74. Sir Dru Druries case.
as where the son and heir is a Knight in the life of his father, and his
father dies before he be of full age, his Livery must be sued or tendered
immediately on his fathers death, and before his full age, because the King by
Knighting him, has adjudged him of full age.

So in diebus illis, if the father had entered into Religion, his heir being of
full age, his heir should have sued Livery presently, and should not have
expected his fathers natural death.

No Livery can be sued of lands above the yearly value of 5. li. before office
found before the Eschator or other Commissioners Stat. 33. H. 8. cap. 22. 14.
Ed. 4.5.
by virtue of the Kings Writ or Commission derected out of the Chancerie or
other Courts that have authority to make such writs or Commissions for suing of
Livery.

But Livery of lands under the yearly value of 5. li. may be by warrant made
from the Court of Wards and Liveries be sued forth, St. 33. H. 8. c. 22
although there had been thereof no office returned.

The reason of this is, F.N.B. 253. Ib. in Stam. 52.
that the King may be certainly informed by matter of Record, who shall be his
Tenant, and whom he ought to make Tenant, and this cannot be but upon an
office, or by a special Writ or Commission, in nature of that Writ or
Commission to enquire of all wards, or the like.

And these Writs or Commissions are of two sorts.
These of the first sort are to enquire after the death of the Ancestor of what
lands holden of the King, 14. Ed. 4.5.
or of others, the Ancestor was seized at the time of his death, the value, the
day when he died, who is next heir, and of what age, of this kind are diem
claus. extremum, which is sued within a year after the ancestors death.

Memorandum, Stam. prae. Rs. 52. F.N.B. 253. c.
if there be no suite made within the year after the ancestors death, and upon
these writs the Jury ought to enquire, who took the profits since his death.

Deneverunt, Ibidem.
whether the Ancestor died in ward to the King.

Or Commissions of the nature of these Writs.
These of the second sort are such as issue upon some defect in offices, and
found upon the five first writs of this kind, are

Qua plura, F.N.B. 255.
where some of the Ancestors lands are left out. Melius inquirendum, Inquired
upon some defect in the former office.
But if the heir were of full age at his Ancestors death, and so found by
office, then he shall have Livery upon that office without any estate probanda.

Datum est nobis intelligi, where after the delivery of the writ, and before
office found before the Escheator dies, or is removed from his place.

But now these Writs or Commissions since the erecting of the Court of Wards
may pass out of the Chancery or other Courts having authority to make them,
Stat. 33. H. 8. cap. 22.
and by warrant or bill signed and subscribed by the Master Surveyor and
Attorney and receiver, of the Court of Wards, or one of them, directed to the
chancellor of England or other chancellor or officer having power to award such
writs; if upon office found upon any of these writs, the heir be found under
age, and in ward, and after do accomplish his full age, F.N.B. 254. a. 257.
he must have a writ of Estate probanda, to prove himself of full age before
he shall have Livery.

But if the Tenant be found within age, 13. H. 4.6.
and in ward, and after his full age other lands descend to him, which the King
seiseth, by an office that finds the heir of full age, he must sue an estate
probanda by reason of that office which found him within age, which is the best
Record for the King.

If general Livery, or Ouster le maine be not rightly pursued according to the
order of Law, Stam. prae. Rs. 12. a. infra title Ouster le main
the King may receive the land without any process and shall be answered of
all the mean profits from the suing of the Livery.

A livery is not rightly pursued according to the order of law when it is sued
by percells, 35. H. 6. Live. 19
as if the heir sue Livery but of part of that which is found by office, as
where the Ancestor had lands in several counties, if the heir sue a general
Livery before office found in every county where he has land, omitting them in
the Livery, the Livery is void, and the King may have relief; whereof see a
whole Title in Stamf. Praerog. Regis, fo. 8.6. etc.

But in some case a Liverie may be sued of parcel, 38. H. 6.9. a.
as where land discends to two daughters, one of the full age, the other under
age, she of the full age shall have the Livery with a partition suitable of all
things, and this Livery is well sued, though it be not of all the land
descended; but things not severable, as advowsons, or the like, must still
remain in the Kings hands till the other daughter be of full age.

And note, Stam. prae. Rs. ca. 5. fo. 22.
that between Coparceners the King upon the Livery always makes partition, and
this is for the Kings benefit, in that upon partition every one shall have a
part of the land holden in Capite, for if any of them should have for her part
the lands holden of others only, then the King shall lose his prerogative in
that part for ever; wherefore in the writ of Livery in such case, there is a
proviso, that every of them should have for part, parcel of the lands holden
in Capite.

When two are found heirs by one Title, 1. H. 7.28.
be they twins male, and found heir by the same office, diverse men by several
offices are found heirs to the same ancestor, and by the same title there,
because it is doubtful to the King to whom to make a Livery, until the
certainty and the verity be discust between them; then his highness ought to
make a Livery to him that is proved to be the true heir to the common
ancestor; the manner of this trial is by Interpleader, and in what cases it
shall be, and in what not, you may see at large in Stamf. prae. Rs. fol. 51.
65. and 66. b.

The manner of suing a general Livery may be seen in N. B. 258. viz. Samf.
prae. Rs. 79. 80. and for this purpose see also the Statute 33. H. 8. c. 22.

But at this day general Liveries are out of use, Stam. prae. Rs. 67.2. Inst.
77. a.
and for the most part men use to sue special Liveries, which contain in them
a pardon for all entries, intrusions, issues, profits, and likewise to dispense
with all misusings which may happen upon a general Livery, etc. But these
books must be understood where the lands are found in the office to be above
20. li. yearly value, for otherwise general Liveries are most in use.

Thus speak our books, but by the common experience of the Court of wards, and
liveries since the Stat. of 33. H. 8. c. 2. are distinguished, and sued in this
manner, viz. A general Livery under value, which is when the land whereof
Livery is to be sued, is found by the office not to exceed 5. li. per annum,
and the less fees are appointed by the said Statute for the suing forth
thereof.

A general Livery above value, viz. when the land is found by office to be
above 5. li. yearly value, and under twenty pounds per annum, and then
greater fees are allowed by the said Statute, and upon suing either of those
Liveries, no other Primer seisin is paid then the mean profits of the lands,
inured from the ancestors death to the suing of the Livery, according to the
description thereof by the Stat. Prae. Rs. cap. 3. See before Title Primer
seisin; which mean profits may also be saved by tender of the Livery, and so
the King has nothing for Primer seisin.

And lastly, a special Livery which the Court of Wards says ought not to be
sued, unless the land be above the yearly value of 20. li. found by office,
and if a man will sue a special Livery for lands of a less value, he must
confess his land to be above that value.

Howbeit, the law is taken otherwise in our books, where mention is of a
special Livery, without speaking of the value of the land, and reason proves
it may be so called, because it contains a special pardon of all entry,
intrusions, mean rates, etc. which may well be granted upon a lesser quantity
of lands, as upon a greater, and upon this special Livery, no primer sesin
other than the said mean profits is taken by the name of a primer seisin, but
they use to take a sum of money to the Kings use by the name of a fine for his
Majesty's special grace, and pardon vouchsafed to his Majesty's Subjects by
the faid special liveries to be sued of, and in possession, and the heir has
not him in ward, or if the livery be so sued of, and in possession, and the
heir has not been in ward; or if the livery be to be sued of a Reversion
half a years value, which agrees by the common proportion above in the
books, named primer sesin, and upon tender of any of these Liveries, they
shall use to take a bond, for that shall be due to the King upon Livery sued
for fear of the heirs death within six months before the Livery sued out;
and note, that a special Livery gives the heir license to enter and take the
profits of the lands immediately without suing any writ of aetate probanda, as
if a Livery had been thereof sued, and pardons all issues, mean rates and
profits of the lands, but yet the same are paid before he can have such livery
and pardons, all entries and entrasions by the heir, or any his Ancestors, and
fines for alienations without license, and yet they of the Exchequer
notwithstanding such Livety use to send process to the Sheriff to seize the
land after such alienation, and to compel the heir to pay a fine, and to sue
a pardon for such alienation without license, so that the benefit of a special
livery above a general, as I conceive is little other than that the heir
thereby avoids the trouble and charge of suing his writ de aetate probanda, and
prevent the danger of misusing his Livery, and by consequence the reseising of
this land without great inconveniences, they appear in part in this Title, and
more amply, Praerog. Rs. fo. 19. 80, 81. etc.

Ouster le maine.
Is in all other cases where Liveries is not to be sued, as where the Land is
holden to be in common Knights Service of the King, as of some Honor, Manor,
Castle, etc. and the heir within age, no Livery shall be sued; and yet because
no man may enter upon the Kings possession without his leave, the heir at his
full age shall sue an Ouster le main cum exitibus: but in the first year of
Queen Elizabeth, Inst. fo. 77. a. 1. Eliz. Dyer 168. a.
it was questioned in the Court of Wards, whether it should be a Livery Cum
exitibus, or an Ouster le maine, and there agreed, that Ouster le maine is
only of Lands in the Kings hands holden of others then of the King, but yet
ordered, that a Livery in this case una cum exitibus should be granted by the
name of Ouster le maine, because the course of that Court was so by the space
of 30. years before; where note, that no mean rates shall be forfeited for
land holden of the King by common Knights service, though there be no tander of
Livery, which is the reason why Ouster le maine is granted cum exitibus.

So if the Escheator claim land by virtue of dying, etc. before office, Stat.
de Eschetor. mode 29. E. 1.
and after by the office no title is found for the King, the party that ought
to have again the land shall have an Ouster le main cum exitibus.

So if the Eschetor will seize land found by office to be holden of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, or of such other person as are exempt in the first
Chapter of the Statute deprae. Rs. they shall have an Ouster le main cum
exitibus.

So of lands holdan in Capite, if a Lease be made for life the Remainder over
to a stranger, and Tenant for life dies, this matter being found by Office, if
the King seize the Land, he in the Ramainder shall have an Ouster le main cum
exitibus.

So where two hold land jointly of the King in Capite, F. N. B. 257. g.
and one dies, and the matter is found by office, which notwithstanding the
King seiseth the land, the Survivor shall have an Ouster le main cum exitibus.

So if the heir of Tenant in Soccage in Capite be under the age of fourteen
years at his ancestors death, 35. H. 6.52. F. N. B. 256. c. Stam. prae. 12. b.
and the matter is found by office, and yet the Escheator seiseth the land for
a primer seisin, le procheine de kin to the heir, shall have an Ouster le
maine cum exitibus, but yet in that case after the 14. the Escheator may seize,
and the heir must have Livery, and for want of tender thereof, he shall lose
mean rates from his age of 14.

So if Tenant by Soccage in Capite die also seized of other lands holden of
other Lords then of the King by Knights service or Soccage, 45. Ed. 3.19. a. 4.
Eliz. Dyer 213.
which descend to the heir under age, and after office thereof found, the
Escheator seiseth the lands into the Kings hands, the Lord of whom the land is
holden by Knights service in the one case, and procheine kin in the other
case shall have the lands out of the Kings hands by Ouster le maine cum
exitibus; And if the heir be of full age at his Ancestors death he himself in
both cases shall have the Ouster le maine.

And generally in all cases whereupon the matter is discust, Stam. prae. Rs.
fo. 77.6. et 82. 21. H. 7.5. 29. Ass. 43.
it appears either upon the return of the office, or upon trover monstrous
de droit ou petition de droit and the like, as the cause shall require, that
the King had no right or title to the thing he seized, there judgment is given
that the Kings hands shall be amoved, and thereupon the writ of Amovcas manus
or Ouster le maine is awarded to the Escheator.

By the Common Law the Ouster le main was never awarded Vna cum exitibus though
it did so plainly appear that the King ought not to have seized, Art. Sup Ca.
19. 29. Ed. 1. Statute de Escheator
but this was the help by two Statutes in the 28. and 29. years of King Ed.
1. by which was provided that where land is seized into the Kings hands without
just cause the profit thereof in the mean time shall be wholly restored to him
that ought to have had the land, and has received the damages upon Ouster le
main cum ixitibus.

But if by the same Stat. of Ed. 1. it is provided that if after such Ouster le
main cum exitibus, a title does appear for the King in Chancery, Kings Bench,
Exchequer, etc. whereby the King is entitled of a title grown before the
Ouster le main, although the party could have had no Ouster le maine if the
Records had then appeared without avoiding them, yet in that they did not then
appear, he should not be now cast out of possession, without a Scire facias
against him, upon which if he be warned, and do not come, or comes and say
nothing against the Kings Title, the land shall be reseised, and the King
reseised, and the King answered of the profits from the time of the first
office, though this Statute make no mention of Livery, but only of Ouster le
maine; yet by equity Liveries are taken to be within the meaning thereof; And
here note this difference, that in the cases last mentioned, no seisin shall be
before Scire facias, and against the party, yet in the case above, and Title
Liveries; of a livery the King he may reseise without office, whereof see at
large Title Reseisor, in Stamf. prae. Rs. 856.

Office.
AN Office is an Inquest by twelve men at the least, taken before the
Escheator, assisted with the Feodry, or the Commissioners of things which
convert the Kings revenue to find his Title, and as a matter of Record,
requisite bv. law to give the King an actual and perfect seisin, or possession
of the thing whereof the office is found, as of Escheators, Wards land
forfeited or aliened without license, and the like.

To pursue which Descriptions.
OFfices concerning Wardships, 4. Ed. 4.24. 33. H. 8. c. 22.
of which only I speak, the Escheator may find as well by office, as Virtute
brevis, but with this difference,

Added by Statute, that if the land whereof the office is to be found, be of
60. pound yearly value or above, and holden of the King, the Escheator forfeits
5. pounds if he finds any office thereof without the Kings writ directed to
him for that purpose.

Writs or commission in nature hereof whereupon offices are to be found may not
be made out of the Chancery or other Court having authority to make the same
but by warrant or bill signed by the Mr. Survey or of the court of Wards, 33.
H. 8. ca. 12.
or one of them directed to the Chancellor or officer having power to award
the same writs.

Such or the Commissions are the diem clausit extremum Mandamus devenerunt, Co.
8. p. Stoughtons Case. 169.
quae plura, Melius inquirendum and datum nobis intelligi, the several natures
whereof in what cases they be, so see Title Livery.

To which may be added that after the diem clausit, or a mandamus awarded an
office found, there shall go forth no more writs of the same kind to enquire
further therefore at the instance of the same party.

But where the office is imperfectly found against the King, in such case the
King cannot traverse the office, as a subject may upon surmise in the Court of
Wards, that the lands are of greater value, that they are holden of other
services, that the Tenant was seized of another estate, that these are more
heirs or other heirs then were found in the first office, or where by the
first office the heir was found within age, where indeed, the Tenant dyed
without heir, so that the land ought to escheate, or where by the first office
one is found heir of full age, where he was under age, and generally where his
highness has a better Title then was found for him by the first office, a
Melius inquirendum may be awarded in the Kings behalf.

But in good discretion, Co. 8. Paris Stoughtons case 169.
no Melius inquirendum should be awarded after a perfect office found against
the King without view of some record or other pregnant matter to entitle the
King.

If upon the Melius inquirendum the office be found against the King, Ibidem.
169. b.
he shall not have a second Melius, but is found by the office even as a
subject, as against whom his traverse which see Title Traverse.

And note that upon the last office upon the melius, makes the first office
void, 12. Eliz. Dyer 2 ^2. Stat. E. 6. Cap. 8.
as if upon the diem, it be found that the land was holden of the King, sed per
quae servitia Iur. ignorant. And thereupon the, Melius awarded, it is found
that the tenure of a subject, and all other points uncertain, as the Tenure,
the State, the Value, etc. the first office is void.

When such inquest is found for the King, 21. Ed. 3.2.
this finding is called an office, and it is a Title for the King, whereof the
Inquest was taken of such validity, that when the King is once seized by
office, the seisin, the office remains till it be discharged by matter of as
high a nature as the office was, 1. H. 7.19.
viz. matter of Record, namely a Livery, or Ouster le maine.

But if an office found for a subject, 21. Ed. 3.2.
it makes no Title for him, but is and may be used, as matter of evidence to
prove his Title.

An office is sufficient to entitle the King, Stat. 1. H. 8. Ca. 8.3. H. 8. Ca.
22. Coo. 1. p.
although it be never returned, for if it do appear by the examination of the
Escheator that has upon such office seized the lands into the Kings hands, it
is sufficient; But offices are usually returned if they be found by Writ or
Commission into the Chancery whence the Writ or Commission issued, Alton Woods
42. Coo. 4. p. Sadlers case. 5.7. 18. El. ca. 12.
and from thence to the Clerks of the Bag transcripted into the Exchequer,
and into the Court of Wards, but offices found Virtute officii, without any.
Writ or Commission, the Escheater may at his choice return them either into
the Chancery or Exchequer; And if they be found in the County Palatine of
Lancastar, Chester, or Durham, either by Writ or otherwise, they are to be
thence transcripted into the Court of Wards.

When an office is found inttiling the King to a Wardship, 16. Ed. 4.1. Coo. 4.
p. Sadlers case. 59.
it relates to the time of the ancestors death, and gives the King all the
mean profits of his land for that time, because the King has the wardship
Ratione prioris tituli, viz. by reason of his seigniory, and loses his rent
and services in the mean time.

But an office to entitle the King to an Idiot, Coo. 8. p. Comsors case. 180.
relates for the mean profits and the land no further then the finding the
office, because the King has the custody of an Idiot, Jure protectionis Rege,
protection comes by the office found, and not before; but yet for avoiding of
mean conveiances of his land made by the Idiot, the office has relation to the
Idiots Nativity.

An office is requisite to be found after the death of the Kings Tenant for two
causes, 4. Eliz. Dyer 3: 1. H. 7.19. etc. Coo. 9. P. Sir Geo. Reynolds case 95.
b.
first for the dignity of the Kings person, who cannot take nor depart with any
inheritance or freehold but by matter of record.

Secondly because it puts the King presently upon the office found in actual
and full possession of the Wards, lands, and the profits thereof since his
Ancestors death before any service or entrey by the Escheators, which actual
possession the King has not before Office.

For although by Stamf. he has before office possession in law cast upon him
by right of his signiory, Sum. prae. Rs. 54.69.
which he may by entry or seizure of his Escheators before office reduce to an
actual possession, sufficient to enable him to keep the lands in his own
hands, and to take the profits thereof, yet he has not till office be found a
perfect actual possession, such as may enable him to grant or lease the land
to his Committee.

Because the statute of 18. H. 6. provivideth that all letters patents made by
the King of lands or Ten: Stat. 18. H. 6. C. b.
before office found and returned, or within one Month after, unless it be to
him that tendreth his traverse, the same office shall be void.

But the Master of the Wards may within that month after office make a release
of Wards or Idiots lands to other then he that tenders a Traverse being enabled
thereunto by the Stat. Stat. 32. H. 8. Ca. 46.
32. H. 8. which is general, and a latter Statute 18. Hen. 6.

This seems to be the reason why our books say that in case of Wardship of
land the King is presently by the office in possession before seizure, Coo. 1.
p. Sir. Geo. Cursons ca. 956.
that he has not possession till office, and that at this day the Escheator
cannot seize any lands into the Kings hands for Wardship or other cause before
the kings Title be first found by office, 1 H. 7 17. 4. H. 7.1. 5. Ed. 1. B.
offic. 55.
which is to be understood to enable him by such seizure to grant the lands
before office found, Coo. 8. Paris Stoughtons case 169.
for to all other purposes it seems not against law that the Escheator may at
this day seize a Wards lands before office as the words of the diem directed
him to do, and as many books warrant, whereof see Stamf. Prae. Rs. fo.
12.14.78. b.

But because before office it is doubtful whether the King have Title or no,
the Es^hraters do generally of their own discretion ever since the Statute of
Lincoine 79. E. 1. forbear to seize before office, thereby to avoid the Kings
great trouble in suing the Ouster le maine, which he was driven to do by the
Escheators seizure only, though afterward the office found did not entitle the
King.

But the King as all other Lord, 20. Ed. 4 11. Stam. prae. Rs. 54.69.
that are common persons, is in the judgment of Law presently upon his Tenants
death in possession of the body of his Ward in right of his seigniory, 30. H.
6. Br. Patents 74. 11. Ed. 4.7.
and may grant away the Wardship thereof, before or after seizure, and before
office found, because the said Statute of 18. H. 6. extends not to the body, or
in the ancestors life time may grant it Quando event. and de haered, as our
books and common experience agree.

What words in Offices make a Tenure.
See before Title Tenure.
BUt by that which has been said it may be collected how great inconveniences
may issue as well to the King by suppressing his Tenures, and consequently
withdrawing one of his ancientest revenues of the Crown as to his subjects, by
finding the lands to be holden of the King, where in truth they are not, if
corruption should be used in the finding of offices, to prevent which, diverse
Statutes have been made under several penalties, concerning an upright and
just demeanor therein, as well by the Kings Ministers, as Jurors, and the
parties whom it may concerue.

The substance of most whereof follow, 34. Ed. 3. c. 19. 36. Ed. 3. c. 13. 8.
H. 6. c. 16. 18. H. 6. c. 7.
All offices not found in good towns openly, and by men of good fame, and
impanelled by the Sheriff, and having sufficiently in the same County, and by
Indenture between the Escheator and the Jurours shall be void. 33. H. 6.17.
33. H. 8.2.
Escheators ought to find offices by virtue of writs within one month after
the receipt thereof, and in good towns, and in open places; and shall take no
fees therefore but 40. shillings for executing every writ.

Escheators ought to be men of 40. marks per annum at the least, 1. H. 8.8.
except Escheators in Cities, Towns, and Counties Palatine of Lancaster and
Chester.

Escheators or Commissioners shall not return any office not found by the
oaths of 12. men, and indented, and by them sealed.

Every man shall be admitted by the Escheators, etc. to give evidence openly
in his presence, at the finding of offices.

Escheators, etc. ought to receive offices found by the Jury without delay, and
to deliver, the Counterpart thereof indented and sealed by himself to the
Jury, and the rest with the foreman of the Jury, to the end that the Escheators
may not imbesill or change such offices. Stat. 8. H. 6. Ca. 16. 18. H. 6.7.


All offices are to be returned in the Chancery or Exchequer within one Month
after the taking thereof, 33. H. 8.22. Stat. 1. H. 8.8. 7. H. 8.2.
and the officers of the Chancery or Exchequer ought to receive the same, and
to fill it within 3. or 4. days after receipt, and are thence to be
transcripted into the Court of Wards, as above is set forth.

Tenant for years, Copyholder, Stat. 2. Ed. 6.8.
and he which has a rent or other profit out of the Wards lands which are not
found in the office, shall have and enjoy these, as if no such office had been
found, which before this Statute he could not have.

Where an heir of full age is by an office found to be under age, he may have
his writ de aetate probanda, and may sue his Livery or Ouster le maine, and
shall be restored to the profit of his land, so if the heir under age be found
to be of lesser age then in truth he is, at his full age he may have like
remedy, and shall be restored to the profit of his lands from the time of his
very full age, notwithstanding such untrue office.

FINIS.

