Herod's cruelty Mat: 2. v. 16.

(...) Herod was exceeding wrath and sent forth and slew all the Children that
were in ^eth^



THE SLAUGHTER OF THE Innocents BY HEROD.

Written in Italian By the famous Poet the Cavalier Marino.

In Four BOOKS.

Newly Englished.

LONDON, Printed by Andrew Clark, for Samuel Mearne Stationer to the King's
Most Excellent Majesty. 1675.

To Her Royal Highness MARY Duchess of YORK.
May it please Your Royal Highness,
THis Present which I most humbly lay at Your Royal Highnesses Feet, could not
be worthy Your Acceptance, were it not derived from that Garden of the Muses
Your own Country. It is a Poem famous both for its Subject, (Strage de gli
Innocenti) and its Author, the Cavalier Marino, who if he appear not to Your
Royal Highness in so beautiful and glorious a Dress as was Native to him, yet I
hope Your Royal Highness will vouchsafe to look upon him in this English Habit,
with which You are now so well acquainted, that, among other felicities which
the Nation hopes from Your Royal Person, it is not the least satisfaction that
we have so great an Argument of Your good and gracious Inclinations for us, as
to have so soon, and so easily attained our Language, which will encourage the
most Ingenious to embellish it for Your sake, with all the Ornaments they can
borrow from Your Italian, thereby the better to express their Devotion to Your
Service, and more easily obtain pardon for what comes short of Your Royal
Highnesses Merits, which is the most humble Petition of,

May it please Your Royal Highness, Your most faithful, and most Obedient
Servant T. R.

THE SLAUGHTER OF THE INNOCENTS.
BOOK I. Herod his Jealousy.
I.
NO more of Love my Muse; we'll sing the dire
Rage of a King, who thousand Infants slew,
Torn from their Mothers breasts. (O cursed desire
Of Rule! What will not blind Ambition do?)
You Christ's Vanquerours; my weak thoughts inspire!
You faithful Witnesses assist Me! You!
Whose tender throats, enlarged by murdring swords,
Gave streams of Blood, instead of Cries and Words.
II.
And thou Antonio, great Iberus Fame!
Most noble Branch of Emperors, and Kings!
Who must not yield to thy transplendant Flame?
Even Sol's eclypsed, as thy Aurora spring's.
Mirror of Heroes, to whose valued Name
Unconquered Virtue her chief glories brings.
This flowery Wreath, although of small esteem,
Vouchsafe to accept, composed of Sacred Rhyme.
III.
Nor blush (my Muse) devoted to adorn
With these poor Flowers, his so deserving Brow.
These Flowers, near the Phebean Fountain born,
Whence those Immortal Veins of water flow.
Flowers on the Sacred Hill preserved, that scorn
Or Sirius burning Rage, or Soreas Snow.
Whence their most secret sweets, the Ingenious swarm
Extract, and their eternal Honey form.
IV.
Thou, who with such esteem, with so great Fame
The reins of the Parthenopian War do guide,
That neither Rome, nor Athens boast a Name
More worthy in their Monuments of Pride.
So, that thy famous Actions to proclaim,
Not only my Joy'd Siren is employed,
But all the ecchoing streams of the Tyrrhene shore,
Thy Name, Immortal, murmur, and adore.
V.
Under the vast Abyss, near to the Heart
Of The Universe, and Center of the World;
Within the Gulf of the profoundest part
Stood the old Spirit, which from Heaven was hurled;
About whose Loins, with horrid jaws retort,
Myriads of Aspes in filthy knots ate curled,
Subdued in Paradise, with those dire Chains,
The Angel bound him to Eternal Pains.
VI.
Here Judge of Torments, and the King of Woes,
His Throne, and Robe of Everlasting Fire,
A Robe, once rich, that did the Morn disclose,
Now interweav'd with Flames, and Night entire.
On's Head (and's Scepter this sole glory knows)
A Crown, from which seven lofty Horns aspire.
About this Diadem (most dreadful Snakes;)
A Fring, the Cerast, and green Hydra make's.
VII.
Within his Eyes, where Death and Sorrowly,
A troubled fiery Light of gloomy Red.
From's squinting Aspect rays obliquely fly,
Like Comets Stygian Lamps his Eyebrows shed.
From's nostrils, and swollen Lips, of livid Die,
Dark Mists, and filthy Stinks, by vomit fed.
His thoughts, are rabid Rage, Pride, black Despair,
Thunder his Sighs, his Breathings lightnings are.
VIII.
Looks bloody, and contagious, his Breath
Which raises dreadful flames, and deadly fumes,
Kindle's that horrid Pile, that carrys Death,
And others inconsumably consumes.
With harshest noise, he champs, and grinds his Teeth,
All rough, with blackest rust, and nasty scums,
And entering, with his limbs of steel, the flames,
His Tail the clashing of his scailes proclaims.
IX.
Near his infernal Throne, assistants are
Three Virgin Sisters cruel as his Mind,
Who whips of Vipers, and of Thorns prepare;
To prick Him on to Mischief still inclined.
About their Faces, curled instead of hair,
Making a dismal shade, are Serpents twined.
His Scepter is of Ir'n, and while He reigns,
H'abhors his Empire, and Himself disdains.
X.
Wretch! as thou fells't from Glory, in thy Prime,
Who did most glorious Angels once excel,
So the severe Revenger of thy Crime,
Shall justly thy Injustice plague in Hell.
Proud Lover of thy beauteous Self! to climb
Unto another's Throne, Thou did rebel,
But changed, and into Phlegethon now thrown,
Oh proud Narcissus! Impious Phaethon!
XI.
And now the grand Contest, that raised, of old,
So great a flame in Heaven, he calls to mind;
What Oracles, what dark Decrees enfold;
What Sibylls Holy Prophets had devin'd,
Think's what their Songs, and Writings had foretold;
What thousand Prodigies, of late, designed.
He saw, and heard those things, that, in his breast,
Reviving grief, his Jealousies encreas't.
XII.
He saw from God, sent into Galile
An heavenly Nuntio, to an humble Maid
Whom greeting low, as to a Deity,
He Lillies of the Eternal April paid.
Made Fruitful, in her old Sterilitie,
Into the aged Hebrew's womb conveyed,
He a Babe leaping saw (a Saint before
'Twas born) his God conceived, with joy, adore.
XIII.
He saw the Atlantique, Adamantine snow,
Resolve to Nectar, and to Silver Rills.
On Scythian, frozen Hills all Fruits to grow,
While sudden Springs, the Libyan Desert fill's
Honey from sweating Pines, and Oaks to flow,
While Heavenly Manna from the wind distill's.
Thorns winter Roses, in Engaddi's field,
The Fountains Balsam, milk the Rivers yield.
XIV.
He saw in that most happy, holy Night,
The silent Shades, and darkest horrors all
Struck by the Voice of Heaven, and ruined quit,
And, by the Angel's glory vanquished, fall.
Through woods, and wildest Caves, in joyful flight,
The Peasants on the neighbring Shepherds call,
And have together, to their newborn King,
The simple Tribute of Rude gifts to bring.
XV.
The Eastern Palace open, He, from far,
Beheld, and thence a Triple Sun to rise,
Sacred to the fair Goddess, who all war
Detests, a Temple fallen before his eyes;
Her Images, and Altars ruined are
Which they were wont to cloy with Sacrifice.
The Earth he see's to tremble, and divide
The Wanton Lover, from his Mistri's side.
XVI.
He saw besides, with an unusual Ray,
A Star Miraculous, in Heaven to shine,
And toward Bethlaem, the directest way,
With flames, like lightning, but more bright, design.
Which as a glorious Servant, to convey,
And guide them, as a Messenger Divine,
The Royal Troop of three presaging Kings
Thither from the Odorous Orient brings.
XVII.
To these new Monsters, as Ills yet unknown,
This Enemy of Good, converts his eyes.
Which certain to Himself, and Death alone,
As Mortal Wounds, He did before surmise.
He stretched his Wings, and would away have flowne.
(His Wings like Sails full blown, of largest Size)
But the strong Gyves that bind Him, and enchain,
In his Eternal Prison him restrain.
XVIII.
From these Effects of things below, the high
Intent of what was done Above he knows
Then dipped in Blood, and Poison instantly,
Dire lamps, (his Hellish brands) he overthrows
Hides with his claws his Face, then gives a Cry
That bellowing through the darkest Caverns goes.
And while his Rage, and Fury thus prevail,
He bites the Top of his entorted Tail.
XIX.
Thus with himself he frets, but still in doubt
'Twixt two, and un-resolv'd he yet remains.
He Studies the grand Book and to find out,
The Sense, of Ancient Writings wracks his brains.
He knows: -- Yet does not: how to bring about
The Birth of the Heavenly Infant, God ordain's.
Or how a Child should pure, and spotless come,
Divinely Humane, from a Virgin's Womb.
XX.
Hence He denies that greatest Mystery,
That Wonder hid from Wits the most refined,
As how a wife should still a Virgin be
And keep that Flower un-touch'd, as was her mind.
It seems a strange Impossibility
That true God, should to true Man be resigned.
The Spirit Incarnate be, and, in the Toiles
Of life involved, be clothed with Mortal spoils.
XXI.
The Incomprehensible, Invisible Light
When born, to Shepherds should revealed be.
That God Omnipotent, and Infinite
Should be Confined to Swaddling Bands: that He
Who fed on Heavenly Nectar, should delight
To suck like Children in their Infancy.
That He should be in the rude Stable laid
Of a poor Inn, whose Throne of stars is made.
XXII.
That a small Veil should the chief Sun obscure,
The Word Divine, like Infants, stam'ring Cry.
Who made the Fire, should, trembling, Cold endure.
The Joy of Angels languish: Majesty
Of Heaven, to Servitude Himself inure:
And He who was Immense, should Les'nedly:
That Greatest Glory, should to griefs, and Fears
Be Subject, and Eternity to years.
XXIII.
That He himself should humble so, to pay
Exacted Tribute, and to Laws be bound,
Whom, as the great Lawgiver all obey.
He from the Knife of Flint receive a wound,
And that on their Redeemer men should lay
The Sinner's Mark, in whom no Spot was found.
These Ambiguities his thoughts involve,
Nor can he this great Knot of doubts dissolve.
XXIV.
Mean time, his busy thoughts new plots designed
His black Hearts Image, his stern Face does bear
For looks in that dark Empire show the Mind,
And the Impress of inward Sadness wear.
As we Heaven's Cheerfulness by Light do find,
And Mirth on Earth by Laughter does appear.
Stung with these cares (like Thunder) from his breast,
A Desperate Oh-me! his grief expressed.
XXV.
Oh me! He bellowing cry's, what mean's this high
Concourse of strange Portents I now behold?
What can it be? -- ah, to my Sorrow, I
Remember what the Angel said, of old.
Oh-could I Nature's Seat ore'turne! that by
My hand the Course of Stars could be controlled!
Since these so direful Omens from Above
Through Me must joyful, and most happy prove.
XXVI.
What can He more, who chased Me, long ago,
From my bright Palace, and Celestial Seat.
It might suffice, that I Am for ever, so
Confined to the horrors of this sad Retreat,
Condemned to shades of Misery and Woe,
To make the torments of the Damned complete.
And to its Height my cruel Destiny
Is raised, while I Am denied all hope to dye.
XXVII.
He to its primitive, and simple state
A base, corporeal Nature, would restore.
And to be Chief in Heaven will elevate
A vile Mass, that was earthly Slime before.
I Will not endure't, in the North, I le try my Fate,
Mong whose salt cliffs the Angels never soar.
And though, even thence, my Troops may vanquishd fly
'Twill be a Trophy to have ventured high.
XXVIII.
But why his Will unsatisfied? pretend
To rob of Souls my Ancient Mansions? why
Himself so absolutely apprehend
All Humane weight, to raise my rage more high?
And then a Conqueror to Us descend,
Rich in his Spoils, and glorious Victory:
And flourishing his bright Arms here below
Come to disturb Me in my Endless woe?
XXIX.
Ah, art not thou that Creature once so Fair?
The glorious Prince of beauty and of Love!
The Star, enlightening first the Morning air,
Prime Light of all the winged Quire above;
Which as the Moon, when lesser Stars appear,
Above their Luster, does her rays improve.
So rich in splendor, and in flames Divine,
Above the Vulgar Angels Thou did shine.
XXX.
Wretch! but in this Despair, what can it Me
Avail, to think upon my Pristine state?
If past Felicities, remembered, be
So harsh, and present Ills ingeminate;
It Is time the Acts of such an enemy
TO oppose, and his too haughty pow'er abate.
If Hell must Languish, let not Heaven rejoice
If Force cannot prevail, then Fraud's my choice.
XXXI.
But what Force is it I fear? long since have I
Lost ancient Candor, and high Nature too
Let the world Arm, and Heaven; with terror my
Sole Nod the Elements, and Stars shall view.
I Am what I was, whatever arrive: and why
If not the Doer, fear I what He Will do?
God Arm's: what then? I best that war approve
Which, since denied in Heaven, on Earth I le move.
XXXII.
All praise his haughty Language, and anon
Their Fronts the Three Fierce Sisters higher threw.
All shake their Lamps, from Styx, and Ackeron
To Him all Serpents craule, and homage do.
See here! how prompt, how ready every One
Of Us appears, thy pleasure to pursue,
Great Lord of this most dreadful House (say they)
Do but command and we will soon obey!
XXXIII.
Your first so brave Attempt in Heaven, did prove
What your Alecto, with her friends could dare
Nor though in these dark Mansions now you move,
And with these rusty Roofs still covered are,
Ought You to be less proud. For, though Above
To the great Thunderer You Subject were;
Yet, here You are a King whose Empire is
Free, and entire on Earth, and the Abyss.
XXXIV.
If Wit, and Industry shall prove too weak
Virtue of Herbs, of Stones, or powerful Spell,
Anger, Deceit, or Love, by which Men break
Often into blood, and cruelly rebel.
Thou (which must please Thee) shall behold my Beck
Draw Stars from Heaven, and Ghosts from Graves compel
The Seas shall quake, Earth up-side down be hurled
And from its Center We will force the World.
XXXV.
He (Fierce) reply's O my dear Props, O true
Supporters of my Hopes, and of my Throne!
^'ve seen your Arts, I Have seen your Valor too
Which in that Starry Mount, you have clearly shown.
But, though in all I do confide ('it is true)
^'ve at this instant need of one alone.
It Is Cruelty alone, I now require,
That can from doubts, my jealousy retire.
XXXVI.
Of the Three Goddesses of Mischief, She
A worthy Sister, fierce above the rest
Employes her bloody Wings continually
To view those ill-born Troops, that men infest,
Busy with Food Immortal to Supply
Those Flames, where black Souls, boiling are oppres't.
In the profoundest Secret depths of Hell,
Where Sorrow, and Eternal Weeping dwell.
XXXVII.
Most sadly thrice the dismal Caverns houle:
Thrice the deep Shades like smoking Cannon rore.
Then from dark, unknown Gulphs, the Waves that roll,
And quarries, thunder on Crcytus's Shore.
The noise She heard, and with a squinting Scoul
From thence revert's her eyes enflamed with gore.
And her reply, to her most dreadful Name
Her Snaky Locks with a dire Hiss proclaim.
XXXVIII.
No House more terrible, more dark in all
Death's Region, then this was made by Fates
Against cries of others, who for pity call,
Still shut, rough Adamants compose the Gates.
The fixed Foundation is of Iron, the Wall,
Of Jasper is, which nothing penetrates,
And Heads, which blood, and filthy gore besmear,
With limbs lopt off, are scattered every where.
XXXIX.
Revenge has here her Throne, and in her hand
Waving a naked Sword, all bloody, sets,
Near her Disdain, with senseless Fury, and
Fierce War, with Slaughter, that still pants and sweats.
Far off they easily may understand
Impetuous Rage, like mad, to vent her threats.
Midst these, with grim Aspect, proud death commands,
And turns his mighty Sithe with both his hands.
XL.
Upon the Walls they horrid Engines see,
By which, so often, poor Mortals Plagues endure,
That through the House, as dreadful Tapistry,
Are hung, the worst that mischief could procure;
Their Wheels, Chains, Gibbets, Spears, and Grindstones be,
Nails, Axes, Swords, with other Furniture;
All steeped in blood, and bear the horrid stain
Of Brothers poisoned, or of Fathers slain.
XLI
At her detestably sad Table sit
The Harpies, with devouring Famine: There
Inhumane Erisicthon's appetite
Untamed, calls, every moment, for repair;
While Progne, Tantalus, fierce Atreus fit,
With Infamous Lycaon, their cursed Fare;
And dire Medusa's hand supplies them all
With frequent Bouls of Blood commix'd with Gall.
XLII.
The dire Eumenides (her Sisters) still
Attend, with flaming torches in their hands;
Her Servants, Sylla, and proud Jezabel,
With Circe, near to whom Medea stands,
The Damsels of her Court, for all commands,
The Parcae, cruel, and inflexible:
Whose hands her Robes, of blackest threads of Life,
Compose, cut off by their Impartial knife.
XLIII.
This dismal House is circled by a Grove,
Where fatal Trees their baneful shadows spread;
Each Plant's a Plague, and all Flowers poisons prove;
The Winds are sighs, the floods tears lately shed:
Within fierce Minotaurs, and Cyclops move
in herds, and, by the gloomy air are fed:
In troops Hyenaes, Dragons, Tigers, there,
Sphynx, Cerastes, Hydra's, and Chimeraes are.
XLIV.
Fereus Dogs, horses of Diomed,
Therodamas his furious Lions, there
With blood, profane Busiris Alters fed;
Proud Sylla's Prisons above all severe,
Cruel Procrustes, strange, and dreadful Bed;
And Lestrigonion Tables there appear:
To these his Impious Rocks fierce Sciron joins,
And cruel Scinis his tormenting Pines.
XLV.
Such tortures as by dire Mexentius,
Nor by Gerion could invented be,
Or Ochos, Ezelino, Phalaris,
Or Nero, ever feared for cruelty:
There all the flames, and knives of Barbarous
Nabucco, Acabbes, and Pharaoh they see:
Such is her Mansion, and with horrid cries,
On active Wings, thence this Fourth Fury flies.
XLVI.
Scarce then to her the secret of his mind,
The Prince of this black Empire did disclose,
But straight from Hell swifter than swiftest Wind,
Or Lightning, from his bloody Gates she goes,
And as the face of Heaven serenely shined,
The pallid stains of Death upon it throws,
While to the ground the poisoned Birds at sight
Of her alone fall dead amidst their flight.
XLVII.
From this dark Gulf, soon as this Monster came,
To vomit thus her Hell against the Day,
The Flowers, and Herbs, as by contagious flame,
Or Winter's fury blasted, straight decay;
She, with her frown, could Nature's active Frame
Make stupid, and the Eternal Sun dismay,
Conceal the Stars, and Elements beside,
Did not her Serpents her cursed Visage hide.
XLVIII.
Already from his secret shady Den
Dull Somnus, chief Companion of the Night,
Rose, on his lazy Wings, and eyes of Men
With welcome theft, deprived of tedious light;
And with a pleasing tyranny had then
Shed his Lethean Water on their sight.
While various wanton dreams, and calmest rest,
As Lords, their senses, and their thoughts possess't.
XLIX.
With black, and nimble pinions, soaring high,
To Bethlaem then Erynnis was conveyed.
(For there Usurped, with greatest cruelty,
And restless cares, the King his Scepter swayed)
And as with impious, fatal Torches, She,
A bloody Feast, at Thebes appearing, made:
Into all rooms o'th Royal House She pryes,
Searching with careful steps and busy eyes.
L.
Herod, Augustus Vassal, one now old
In years, possessed good David's Royal Place.
No lawful King, but of the Throne a bold
Usurper, and of Idumaean Race.
For Juda's progeny no more did hold
Judaea's Scepter, but was in disgrace.
And while, lost, ancient Honors they bewailed,
Felt the sharp rigor of a Yoke entailed.
LI.
Through all the lofty Palace now she goes,
Glides into most retired cabinets,
Where at great Ease, and pleased, with sweet repose
On Softest plumes the King his cares forgets.
Nor will She (foul perfidious Fiend!) disclose
Her self, in her own Shape, which Hell befits.
But changing first her Face, and habit, made
Herself a pallid Ghost, and fleeting shade.
LII.
All that She had of Fury, off She throws,
And instantly a mortal Form She takes
* Joseph's aspects, his mien, his action shows.
Such, and as big as He, herself She makes.
Then to the King, oppressed with sleep, She goes,
Her cold hand chills his Heart, and then he Wakes.
While thus disguised, an Humane Voice She feigns,
And Him 'twixt sleep, and waking thus arraigns.
LIII.
What Sleep'st thou Fool? and as when every part
Of the Egean Sea, thick Storms surround,
To the fierce winds, and waves, his Helm, and Art
A slothful Pilot quits, whom fears confound.
Thou art here idle, and thy warlike heart
In sloth, thy senses in repose are drowned.
Nor do regard, or know, what mischiefs thy
Strong Fates now threaten, and are very nigh.
LIVE.
Know, that from ancient race of Hebrew Kings,
(As fruit unhop'd for, from a Stock that is dry)
A child (though poor) that with Him wonders brings,
As soon as born, with beasts on straw does ly.
Of this new branch the ungrateful Vulgar sings,
(Too much his Friend, to thee an Enemy:)
Their praise: Him follows, and, already, Fame
Styles Him their King, and thy Successor name.
LV.
O what Seditions, Plots, by him designed!
What Engines! in his breast He fire does bear.
In's hand the Sword; even now it is in his mind
To mix fell poison, with thy princely Fare.
Nor one to curb his Fury can thou find,
Or that his Treason will to thee declare.
Go then, with laws, and Arms what is safe pursue;
And this vile people to thy Rule subdue.
LVI.
I Am He, who once thy Scepter to maintain,
TO establish in thy hand, that Noble weight,
My Life, and Blood have ventured, but in vain,
Have I my blood spilt life exposed to Fate?
On lighter reasons, Thou thy sword did stain
In Thine own brother's blood, and sons of late.
But now intent on other Cares: why so
Irresolute (when more concerned) and slow?
LVII.
Up, why do stay? what business hinders Thee?
What folly? rouse thy self; this sloth forsake.
Already, wretched! rouse thy self, and see,
What sword hangs over thy Head! rise, and awake
Thy doruzy spirits, hence let thine anger be
Worthy a King; new Arms, and Fury take.
IN the sword, and blood thy servant I will be
Invisible (thy Brother's shade) with Thee.
LVIII.
Thus She, and straight her Amphisbaena, fed
By foam of Cerberus (which then she wore,
About her left arm twined) its poison shed
On's heart, and hissing irritates him more
Then flames, that strike all sense of Virtue dead,
Her breath into his veins, at once, does pour.
This done among deepest, and most (...)
To hide Herself, she Hell again (...)
LIX.
His sleep thus broke, while cold sweat overflows
His limbs, the King starts from his troubled bed,
Which though most rich, and stout to's fancy shows,
A field of battle, and with thorns o'respread.
His memory nothing he had seen forgoes,
And keeps imprinted deep whate'r was sed.
With grief, and anguish filled, from hope he falls,
And, mad, for Arms with threats, and sury calls,
LX.
As when the food of flames, the wealthy spoils
Of fields are made, and kindled are by breath
The hollow brass grows hot, and while it boiles
With vapor mixed, it smoakes, and murmureth.
Then proudly swells, and like a Serpent coiles
About the brims, foames, and rolls from beneath.
At length o'reflows, and strives to extinguish quite.
Those very flames, that raised it to that height.
LXI.
So Herod troubled and perplexed to hear
Another rose, who might disturb his reign;
His discontented soul, late chilled with fear,
Now burns with cruel anger, and disdain.
He plots, impatient such a wrong to bear,
To cut him off, his thoughts are still in pain.
And in the night while others silent are,
In rest, rejecting peace he seeks a war.
LXII.
Many Prophetique signs had long before,
Imprinted in his heart this doubt, but when
The tributary Kings their way explore,
From a strange climate, through his Kingdom, then
A silent wrack of fear torments so sore,
His bloody, and inhumane thoughts again,
That his suspicion, awaked, renews
The infernal shade, which, restless, still he views.
LXIII.
Soon as the East had issued out the Day,
(The air not yet from clouds, and darkness clear)
His summons all his Princes must obey
In Counsel at his Palace to appear.
His Sergeants straight, and Heralds, every way,
Are sent, and busily the Message bear.
By them his chiefs, and vassals understand,
From whom they come, and what is his command.
LXIV.
But (Horod) what is thy fear? or whence so dire
A thirst of blood, that, now, inflames thy heart?
The King of Kings assumes man's form entire,
Not to command, but act the servant's part.
Nor came on Earth thy Kingdom to acquire,
But with his own to enrich thee, 'bove desert.
Oh vain, and foolish fear! that he his own
should thus bestow, to usurp another throne.
LXV.
He born indeed to rule, but not for war,
A poor, neglected, naked Babe is found,
A tender Virgin's milk his only far,
In a small Cradle and poor blankets bound:
His soldiers shepherds, his arms, swathbands are,
With thatch a Cottage (his high Palace) crowned.
His Trumpets are his infant-cryes, and those
Dull beasts, the Ox, and Ass, his train compose.
Stanza II.
Antonio de Toledo, Duke of Alva, Viceroy of Naples under Philip, the second,
King of Spain, famous for many great Actions in the service of his Master in
the Wars of Italy, Flanders, and Portugal, to whom our Author Marino, was
rather a Friend, then a Domestique servant, though after his return to Naples
(whence he was in a sort banished for some years to satisfy the malice of some
men) he continued in the family of that great Man employed in his most
important affairs, till he died in the 56 year of his Age An 1625.

Stanza XVI.
This General fall of Idols, in Egypt was prophesied by Isaiah (cap. 9. v. 1.)
but it is remarkable in Ecclesiastique writers (as Eusebius, etc.) that Joseph,
and the Virgin Mary, either by design, or curiosity, bringing the Child Jesus,
into one of the stately Temples in Hermopolis (where they made their first
abode) all the Idols immediately fell down, and were broken in pieces. Eusebius.
de demonstr. c. 20. Athanas. de Incarnat. verb. etc.

Stanza. LI.
M. Antony having crucified Antigonus (which as Dion observes ( Vit. Caes.
Octav. was never done to a King before by the Romans) gave the Crown of Judae
to Herod (an Idumaean, by descent, and of no Regal line) which Augustus
afterward confirmed.

Stanza LII.
* Joseph brother to Herod commanded his Army against Antigonus, and as he
besieged Jericho, was driven into streights by Pappus ( Antigonus his
Lieutenant) his Army routed, himself slain and his Head, cut off, was sold to
Herod by the Enemy for 50 talents.

The End of the First Book.
THE SLAUGHTER OF THE INNOCENTS.
BOOK II. The Counsel of Peers.
I.
NOW to the golden Car, that bring's the Day,
The morning Virgins had the Harness joined,
And at the Gate, that does the Light display,
Phoebus enthroned (the Stars dispersing) shined,
And chasing fleeting Dreams, and clouds away,
His nimble Train of Messengers combined,
That shining Shades, through every Clime should fly,
And scatter Rosy Blushes through the Sky.
II.
When straight the Senators together come,
By Guards conducted to a spacious Hall;
Where Silken Images appear t'assume
Life from the Artist to adorn the wall.
Their Story was the most unhappy doom.
Of Mariamne's Love, and Tragique Fall.
The Work the Spoil of the Babylonian Loome,
The stately Hangings of a stately Room.
III.
Regarding little, all the Wealth was there,
The curious Work, and costly Tapistrie,
To the King they have, and busily prepare,
IN the Royal Senate (each in his degree)
To take his places, as they distinguished were
In blood, or title, year, or dignity.
Some near Him, some more distant, in their Tribes
Of Princes, Rabbines, Pharisees, and Scribes.
IV.
To his high Throne, most royally arrayed,
(A Work of greatest Pomp, and Wondrous state,
Which by a good, and peaceful King was made,
And admiration did in all create)
Himself the cruel Tyrant straight conveyed,
And all the Rest beneath about Him sat.
Formed like an heart, the Seat he sat upon
Was a choice Ruby, and a single Stone.
V.
The Foot pace, where his Feet did proudly tread,
With stiffest cloth of gold was overlay'd.
A Royal Canopy, above his Head,
The Starlike Beams, of various gems displayed.
The six large stately Steps, which thither led,
Of whitest, polished Ivory were made.
And as his furious Guards, on either hand,
At every Stair, two golden Lions stand.
VI.
Here soon as sat, grown pale, He, frowning thrice,
The trembling Company surveys around.
Then turning up to Heaven his bloud-shot eyes,
Strait downward looked, and fixed them on the ground.
And in one act, his griefs, and threats implies,
While both within, though not expressed, abound.
Yet he complains not, but, as winds the rain,
So sighs, and rage, a while, complaints restrain.
VII.
His Scepter and his Throne, at once, he shook,
And stamping fiercely, his dire Rage to show,
From's Head, its Ornament, and Honor took,
(His Golden Crown) which he does sighing view,
Then from his Chin, with a disdainful look,
The hoary hairs, like bristles, singly drew.
At length, the flood of grief, and fury broke
From his swollen, livid Lips, and thus he spoke,
VIII.
What terrors (Princes) what new shapes of fear
Disturb, at midnight, my profoundest rest?
What phantosms, visions do I see, and hear?
What cruel stings of cares torment my breast?
Poor men! who must this weight of trouble bear!
Oh wretched Kings, whom dangers still invest!
And to the plots of Foes must Herod, made
A Victim, in his Palace be betrayed?
IX.
Ah, it is my grief, to find, that now the bold
Usurper of my Throne, cause of my fear,
So long by Jewish Oracles, foretold,
Within the walls of Bethlaem should appear.
My self, of late, did for rain Kings behold,
From the East, to him, their wealthy tribute bear,
And to their Home, with breach of faith which they,
To me me had given, returned another way.
X.
And now, by this my Scepter, and my Crown,
I swear! to Me (whether I were awake,
Or morning slumbers did my senses drown)
All this before my brother Joseph spoke;
These eyes him pensive saw, and sadly frown,
And his known voice (whose language made me quake
These very ears have heard, what secrets he,
Of present dangers has declared to me!
XI.
Could I Arabia's Pride, and Egypt's too
Debell? and by unusual means, of late,
The treacherous Atemion's plots subdue,
And all Arbella's conquering force defeat?
Antigonus with victory pursue?
Kill Pappus, and destroy the Rhodian fleet;
Pacorus rout, and on Hircanus ('mong
The rest most false) revenge, with fame, my wrong
XII.
And now, a people weak, whom I with care,
Have cherished; nurtured with a Fathers name;
I know not what poor Child (rebellious!) dare
(While yet I live) their lawful King proclaim;
And do I sleep? and, silent, tamely, bear,
A King despised, a King betrayed, my shame?
And, with vain pity, for Another sake,
My self the object of their malice make?
XIII.
Already I (me thinks) the Hostile cries
O'th Infant, round about these walls, do hear.
Yet cries they are not; nor will I despise
Another tender age; I, now, may fear.
Dire sounds of war, and of conspiracies,
Threatenings of death, and noise of arms they are.
Trumpets, which the base people fire with rage,
Against my Life, and Quiet to engage.
XIV.
But all this noise of dreadful Tumults, I
In sad, and mournful silence soon will drown;
And in an Ocean of cruelty,
Will, firmly, fix the Anchor of my Throne.
The Innocent, and Guilty, all shall die.
Justice, and Rigour's unto me all one.
For I Am resolved with Blood, and Slaughter, now
My Royal Crown to establish on my Brow.
XV.
I know, as yet, my Ruin sucks, as yet
Wrapped up, in swadling-cloths, in secret lies;
And, puiling, like an Infant, craves the Teat;
But, I Will provide, he may not, prattling, rise.
I know his Treason into arms would get
Against Me, and Me silently surprise.
But let him come, as speedy, as he will,
With certain vengeance i will prevent him still.
XVI.
I shall no pleasing hours, no quiet know
Until a sea of blood, by Me be shed;
And that the blushing billows largely flow;
And die this purple with a deeper red.
My safty through a thousand wounds must show
It self (as through a thousand eyes) and spread
Vermilion characters, till it confound
All treason, and in it my fears be drowned.
XVII.
For tell me (you my faithful friends,) who, here,
In this our common danger, now are met,
Should I these flames, which (you perceive) so near
My kingdom threaten, carelessly forget?
Should I not, rather, while they thus appear
In Embers, smuther th m, before too great?
And shunning by another's woe, my fall,
To kill this One more certain, murder All?
XVIII.
This said, his silence straight a noise supplied,
which through the amazed Assembly humming goes;
Such, as when Northern winds the Sea divide,
Or rocks the waves imprison or enclose.
Or when the Bees, like murmuring armies hide,
The tops of flowers, where sweetest Nectar flows,
And on their laden wings the odorous prey,
In Troops, unto their waxen Camp convey.
XIX.
But Vrizeus straight replied* as one
Of nearest confidence, a Priest, who long
Had traveled; many Lands, and Seas had known;
Had much observed, and much had seen, when young,
And now in's Master's secrets Aged grown,
For Judgment, and for Trust perfer'd among
The Chief, a bushy grove of Beard extends,
Over all his Face, and over his breast descends.
XX.
Honey in's words, but snares that all surprise,
In's mouth are hid; his tongue with arrows stored;
His actions a grave countenance disguise;
His modest eyes a front serene afford.
(...) candid style, his Voice accompanies;
^is Looks give emphasis to every word;
And from his Lips, when He his story told,
Flowed streams of purest Milk, through veins of Gold.
XXI.
^e hazards much said He, (Great Sir) whoe'r
(...) resumes in this affair, to counsel you,
^or, if my counsel different appear,
^our anger (which I dread) may Me pursue;
Or if to your resolve I should adhere;
Against justice, and my duty, that is worse too,
A traitor to my Country God, and King,
I, to my Self shall certain ruin bring.
XXII.
Yet shall I not conceal, what now to mind
I call, and in my Youth have proved, and tried,
That rash resolves, and hasty, seldom find
An happy End, or can the Test abide;
Nor should He, who is to furious Acts inclined,
Hope other, or expect ought else beside.
For it is a crime in wisemen (all consent)
First not to think, and, after, to repent.
XXIII.
Do then what best may seem, their fierce desire,
who do, so lightly, snatch the easy Rain,
With which an hand so gentle does conspire,
Reason advised must with hard curbs restrain;
Who their stiff necks, from the yoke of laws retire,
A free Prince cannot, ought not to maintain.
Yet the Lawgiver should observe his Law,
And men to obedience by example draw.
XXIV.
What boots it, that a King of greatest might
Should, with an happy Scepter, Kingdoms sway?
If afterward the peoples appetite
(Like an unhappy slave) he shall obey.
Things that to loose desires, and rage invite,
Wound generous Souls, and to ill fame betray.
But he that for another blood does thirst,
As cruel, by the King of Heaven is cursed.
XXV.
And, if in vilest souls, of lowest fame,
That in the oblique path of sense do tread,
This raging fury is esteemed a shame,
When beyond rule, with it the spirits are fed:
Oh, how much more from souls of highest name,
From Princes hearts, should this be banished.
Oh how much more should they their wills restrain,
And from this cruel precipice refrain.
XXVI.
For as the Region of Heaven above,
Is always, in it self, serene, and pure;
Where nor dark clouds, nor earthy vapors move,
To hide its Brightness, or its Light obscure.
Or as Olympus does his height improve
Above all showers, or Thunder to endure.
So in a Noble Breast, and Royal mind,
We seldom storms, or noise of Fury find.
XXVII.
Laws were, at first, for terror rather made,
Then always to be rigorus, and severe;
Their execution should be gently laid,
If the offense an easy hand will bear.
It Is fit strong whips correct, and guide the Jade,
Yet then still feel them, let him rather fear.
Jove, when he thunders, with the dreadful noise,
Does many terrify, but few destroys.
XXVIII.
Forbid it Heaven! that I my Prince persuade
Unto so Brutish, so accursed a Deed;
That my dear Country should be desert made,
That Ruin should so great esteem succeed:
Or that so brave a City waste be laid,
And by a Civil Sword to death should bleed:
Poor the Command, and vile the Scepter, when
The King a Kingdom wants; the Captain men.
XXIX.
It Is clearly open what you have in view,
But what you fear is doubtfully obscure;
After so long experience, will you
For future profit present loss endure?
And through vain fear of Ills that may ensue,
A certain mischief to your self procure?
A mischief that perhaps brings with it more,
And greater ruins than you feared before.
XXX.
Do you suspect a War, and yet intend
So many of your Youth should murdered be?
Who knows but, among the newborn, you have a Friend
Of greater value than your Enemy?
Tell me (for Gods-sake) then who shall defend
Your Crown, or arm for your security?
If an whole Army in its growth, and spring
You shall unseasonably to slaughter bring;
XXXI.
What then will Fame Report? Alas! that Fame,
Whcih Truth, and Falsehood does, alike, declare,
She Will say that Thirst of Blood did you inflame,
To fain them Rebels, who most faithful were:
A People who adores, and loves your Name:
Who far remote from your Paternal Air,
Amidst the Tumults, that your Throne invade,
A constant Faith, and true Obedience paid.
XXXII.
Nor would I credit (Sir) your Brother's shade,
That some nights since seemed to appear to you;
I rather think, you then the sport were made
Of vainest Fancies, and of Dreams untrue:
Or that the Prince of Darkness did invade
Your thoughts, and them to those Illusions drew:
For (as I Have read) Heaven's King does never choose
Fantosms for Messengers, but Angels use.
XXXIII.
And then, that King, whom you so apprehend,
Must not expect his kingdom here below;
Him spir'tual, and holy things attend,
In his, all Grace, with Love, and sweetness flow;
Immortal wealth does from his Lap descend,
Although he be a King most poor in show:
Then let your fears, that he brings Tumults, cease,
Since He to Earth descends to give it Peace.
XXXIV.
He most Pacifick, Mild, and void of Harm,
Will all Celestial Thunder lay aside;
And should he strengthen his most powerful Arm
Against Thee, how could Thou his Wrath abide?
Oh! how can You your self from the alarm
Of shining Troops of winged Armies hide?
Who can conceal himself? Or whither flee
From Him who all Things moves, and All does see?
XXXV.
Whether this old Prognostic of your Crown
Be false or true does not, as yet, appear;
^f vain, why is your Peoples Peace o'r thrown?
Why should you raise their Scorn, or Hatred here?
(...) wish (for my part) that it false were known;
But subtle wits are busy, every where,
Such lewd Reports, with Art, abroad to fling,
To provoke God, and Man against the King.
XXXVI.
If in the Stars it be engrave'd and writ;
If Heaven decrees that this great Babe be born,
Why should you Fate oppose? What can the wit
Of man avail? Why should your Subjects mourn?
Publish in vain your Edict, and with it,
Your Threats, and Fury to the Peoples scorn.
Yet, maugre all, He Will live, and grow, his Birth
Heaven will protect, and hide him here on Earth.
XXXVII.
^ly (Sir) that Infamous, and Foolish Name
Of a King cruel, and with Clemency
Suppress that furious and swelling Flame;
Let your wise breast with prudence tempered be:
Suspend your Anger, be still kind, and calm;
Let Justice from all violence be free;
Search out the Guilty, and on him let all
The punishments, that now are threatened, fall.
XXXVIII.
Farther would this grave Counselor enforce
His fluent speech, with reasons grave, and wise,
But that he saw the King, at his discourse
Offended, did his Eloquence despise;
Tossing his head than a chafed Tiger worse,
Or wounded Bear, he turned his envious eyes;
He saw him in his forehead, and his brow
Resolved, no such good counsel to allow.
XXXIX.
Burucco was a Lord of haughty mind,
Bred up in Court, and hoarse with murmuring;
A false, and envious Knave: Always inclined
To mischief against the Kingdom, and the King;
Hotheaded, and with sudden Fury blind,
Affecting blood, and all to ruin to bring.
A stranger to all Pity: no regard
Of Nature could his cruelty retard.
XL.
Bald-headed, he (his Chin shaved close) had still
A vigorous Body, and an active Mind;
But mong his few black hairs (against his will)
Through cozning time, the scattered silver shin d.
This Flatterer, intent to pick some ill
From this grave Speech, a constant ear inclined:
And, fixing on the King a steady look,
Stood up, and kneeled, then sat again, and spoke.
XLI.
Sir, you have labored much, and toiled in Wars,
And as your valiant, and victorious hand
Has many deadly wounds, and bloody scars
Printed on Foes, that did your Power withstand:
^o, many Mouths to praise, and strongest bars
To lasting Glory, and to high Command,
You Have opened wide, and't may be said, your cares
Have overcome your enemies, and years.
XLII.
Hence we may credit (with this Lord's good leave)
That with good Reason you have ground to fear;
Envy in other shapes does often deceive,
And now perhaps does some great thing prepare,
And plots how she of life may you bereave,
Or make your People Arms against you bear:
For upon Kings, it is decreed by Fate,
That Envy and Ambitious Greatness wait.
XLIII.
You govern (Sir) a People wild, and rude,
Affecting Troubles, ready to rebel;
An heady, and inconstant Multitude,
Prompt to affront, and your Commands repel;
A wise, and prudent Prince will soon conclude
To curb their Folly, and their Fury quell:
Their Mischiefs to repair with punishment,
And providently future Ills prevent.
XLIV.
A little spark may soon extinguished be,
Before 't increase, and into flame be blown;
And a small Leak at Sea, may easily
Be stopped before the Bark be overflown;
Wounds, when fresh opened soon are healed we see;
And Plants will easily bow e're too full grown:
But if this Gangrene a full growth obtain,
Force naught avails, and thoughts of Cure are vain.
XLV.
It will become, that wisdom, you have shown,
By which your head under the cask's made gray,
By which your Nod is formidable grown:
You could your Sword before the Scepter sway;
To choke the Seeds of Mischief: Kings, or none,
Should this observe, to teach men to obey;
Then be upon your Guard, and still intent
To Avoid what tardy care cannot prevent.
XLVI.
He says besides (to which I shall consent)
That Mercy best commends a Princes breast;
Used toward the Loyal, it is an Ornament
But should not toward Traitors be expressed:
Its value, and esteem is lost, if spent
On guilty Traitors, whom the Good detest:
Justice and Mercy are Companions, and
On them all Royal Virtues firmly stand.
XLVII.
But, I Will say more, you know, as yet your Throne
Is not well fixed at Root these stocks to bear;
Tender and young is your Dominion,
And a new Lord's allowed to be severe;
And, that your Power may be with Terror known,
You rather Cruel should than Just appear.
If Duty's Reason, to your Wrath gives way,
Reason of State should have a greater sway.
XLVIII.
When Honor, and a Kingdom are at stake,
The unusual part does Reasonable seem;
And Cases of importance often make
Temerity like Prudence in esteem:
But fear does now the shape of Prudence take,
It Is Cowardice, which some will Pity deem.
You should not have a thought of what is done,
When it concerns your safety, and your Throne.
XLIX.
And, if from this so great severity,
No other good, or wished effect arise,
Yet none, at least, will dare, through Memory
Of this Example, Treason to devise;
If, of so many he Survivor be
Who will assist his Arms and Enterprise;
Since the past slaughter is their Terror made,
And none are left to lend him strength or aid.
L.
But let us grant, that none shall ever dare
To machinate a Plot against your Crown;
Yet need you not the Fame or Title fear
Of a fierce Tyrant, or a cruel one;
But of a Just and Prudent Prince to share
('Mong knowing Men) the Honor and Renown,
If to the Innocent you seem severe,
And Terrible, what should the guilty fear?
LI.
Add then, the Almighty King of Heaven is He
Who always Kings protects, and guards the great;
They are most dear to God, who is pleased to see
That they on earth command, and keep his Seat.
If Herod now by him thus favored be,
That strange, and memorable signs repeat
His Messages, and show what shall be done:
This I Will not urge, since to your self it is known;
LII.
But that so new mysterious Star, that shined
In Heaven, was not a Star by chance placed there;
But as a Tongue by God himself designed
To say O King of Jews now, now beware;
And those strange Kings, who by it led divined,
And among us expressed with voices clear,
Their search of this their King of Palestine.
What were they (Sir) but Messengers divine?
LIII.
That the rude Vulgar, who, with greedy eyes,
Still seek a change, should to his sense adhere,
Is nothing strange: But that a Sage, a wise,
And Royal People should so vile appear;
That they inspired, and full of Prophesies,
Like Sots, should Worship and Adore him here,
Leaving their Kingdoms to another care,
And in so sharp a season come so far.
LIVE.
It Is worth your fear. Let all his Kin, as one
Be punished, since they all will Him conceal;
The Interests most allied unto a Crown,
Are Laws, to which for Justice we appeal:
That now the Traitor's born, if it be known,
And none accuse him, none will him reveal,
Then all are guilty, and it may be said,
All Rebels are, and you are by them betrayed.
LV.
Those whose soft hearts melt with Paternal Love,
Whom Pity to their Children does inflame:
Whom from Domestic Quiet naught can move,
But Injuries light, and Dangers easy name.
^o their own sense, things feigned, as real prove,
their Speech, and Counsel, to what pleases, frame:
Or too much fear of their own loss betray,
Or else, but lightly, others dangers weigh.
LVI.
(...) who before my time, through toil and care,
and (not through Age) gray headed am become;
Who, with thee, against thy Foes, did every where
^ppear, both in Arabia, and at Rome.
shall not at all to aver this Truth forbear:
^uspicion to Great Kings is burdensome.
I Have no design, this Truth commands me say,
I not my safety 'bove your danger weigh.
LVII.
This before the World, and Heaven I do declare,
You Judges are, and witness with the King;
Who would for safety to the shore repair,
Himself in danger, by delay, may bring.
What boots it that you sad and pensive are?
If you rule all you may do any thing.
To this (Sir) which is, now, expressly known,
Neither delay, nor pity should be shown.
LVIII.
In a weak Arm sometimes a Surgeon makes
But a small Orifice, and shows his Art,
In sparing blood, of which he little takes,
To preserve Life in the body and the heart:
And while the Patient, with horror shakes,
Does often ease, by cruel Arts, impart;
He burns, he lances, and confirms the cure,
While the weak parts the Fire and Knife endure.
LIX.
Throw all your Wares and Treasure to the Sea,
So that the Ship may safe on shore arrive;
Take less and more ignoble Limbs away,
If so the Head may be preserved and live;
And justly (Sir) this Hebrew Plant you may
of useless Branches, Buds, and Leaves deprive:
That to the Royal Stock more place be given
To spread, and rise, without restraint, to Heaven.
LX.
Then let the Innocent, and Guilty fall,
If Guilt by Innocence thus nurtured grow
Though Thousands: let us sacrifice them all,
So that the single Traitor feel the blow.
Whether we Friends or Foes these Slaves may call,
By the Royal Sword, let their blood largely flow:
With reason we may slaves to slaughter bring,
If so from danger we preserve the King.
LXI.
Thus He; and straight with a less troubled brow
The wretched King applauds whatever he says;
And standing fixed in's resolution now,
Deluded by the flattering sound of praise,
H' arose, and then does their recess allow;
His damned design contriving several ways;
And like a foaming Viper, swelled with rage,
Makes haste, in blood, his Venom to engage.
LXII.
His silence still provokes him more with cares,
Torments his breast, and sets a fire his mind;
The Furies spur him on, with all the fears
Of Death, and Jealousies, that Empires find;
What is it that an Ins'lent Tyrant dares
Not do, whose heart's to cruelty inclined?
Thus he presumes, and rashly does pursue
To execute what is not in's power to do.
LXIII.
^he guilty Night from Sion now arose,
Surcharged with Arms, and dark Eclipses crowned;
Judaea none so terrible as those,
To rise from the Abyss of Hell had found;
Wherever Juda's Lot the Horizon shows
A Stygian darkness covers all around:
So black the Firmament, as if 'twere made
Of clouds, condensed to Adamantine shade.
LXIV.
The King, mean while, impatient of delay,
Moved, and spurred on by Impious cruelty,
Looks like a Menade, rolling every way,
Her eyes, at sound of the Bacchanalian cry,
He feels his heart within him restless lay,
Wounded with fears, that Vengeance must supply:
Yet such his looks, that he to all appeared,
Rather surpised with fear, than to be feared.
LXV.
He calls his Ministers, and such the vain
Force of his Rage, that he could hardly speak;
But like a Torrent, which, when Rocks restrain
Its course, straight back into it self does break:
Shutting his Teeth, his broken voice again
Returns, and's words, within, harsh murmurs check;
Till from his Bowels the disordered sound
Broke out like Vapors from the trembling ground.
LXVI.
I will that all the Mothers, who reside
In Bethlem's Circle, to that Town repair,
With all their Children, that as yet abide
In Cradles, and but two years aged are;
Your diligence in this shall well be tried,
If their full number be to morrow there.
Thus he; and straight the Royal Trumpets sound,
Sends his Decree through all the Country round.
LXVII.
The Tyrant nothing of his black design,
But's pleasure to conceal't, to all declares:
And that with fair pretenses they should join
To cover all his plots, and cruel snares;
The Women nothing know, nor can divine,
Of The stratagem that against them he prepares.
Some with the Edict are pleased, some frighted are,
Some think to obey, and some with fear despair.
LXVIII.
Pity Divine (if yet thou do abide
In Heaven) since Thou from Earth did thither fly,
Look down on us below; behold the Pride,
And cruel Trophies of thine Enemy:
Will thou not now descend? Have the Hebrews cried
So long, and can their Mis'ries 'scape thine eye?
Oh hear! our only hope is, Thou will give
Some Refuge to keep Israel's Seed alive.
LXIX
Thus of her Children, like to be deprived,
Poor Rachel, in a sad, but pious tone,
Gave up her loud Complaints, which soon arrived
Above. The Goddess (to Compassion prone)
Villing to impede what Herod had contrived,
Prostrates her self before the Almighty's Throne.
Gives freedom to her voice, and with a strain,
Mixed with deep sighs, does thus, aloud, complain.
LXX.
All-seeing eyes! who are alone Divine!
Are you (said she) turned quite another way?
Are you not moved? or do ye now decline
The slaughter of these guiltless Babes to stay?
Behold these Men, who now with Beasts combine
In new sad Arts, that savage hearts betray;
Which are the Infernal Serpents only Food,
From hunger of Gold born, and thirst of Blood.
LXXI.
Art Thou not (Father) now, as heretofore,
The Jealous God of Wrath, and Vengeance too?
Why then does yet thy dreadful Thunder roar?
And thy dire Arrows wicked men pursue?
Cannot the loved Victim of the Lamb restore
Man to Salvation, and pay all that is due?
One drop of that pure Spring's of such esteem,
And Price, as may a thousand worlds redeem.
LXXII.
Oh! call to mind with what affection Thou
The Inhabitants of Sion once did love;
Were It pleased to call them Thine: their choice allow,
Their Priesthood too as Royal did approve.
Of every Gate, of every House did vow
To be their great Defender from above.
These thy Decrees with zeal and love were given,
And can such Laws be now infringed by Heaven?
LXXIII.
Can thou so far be angry? Yet I Am sure
Thine anger's always Just and Holy too.
But, oh, what Angel is before thee pure?
Heavens firmest Pillar trembles at thy view;
I Will not oppose thy will (which must endure
Still fixed) although warm Tears my checks bedew:
Thou know what pleases thee me pleases best,
Thy pleasure only gives me peace and rest.
LXXIV.
I only beg (if yet thou can afford
Any just comfort may my Griefs allay)
That against me thou brandish not thy Sword;
Me (who the sins of Mankind justly weigh)
But that the Hebrew Race, with so abhorred
Slaughter, ought now to perish, who can say?
Or that condemned, and Guilty, he should fall,
Who knows no sin, nor merits pain at all.
LXXV.
But if for this thy Wrath, and dreadful Ire,
With all these Prayers, will not at all relent;
Let these (the only Boon I now desire)
These sad complaints prevail, which now I vent.
Consider these deep groans, which I expire,
And with compassion these warm tears resent;
To quench the flames of such approaching ills,
Thy Mercy often Immortal showers distills.
LXXVI.
Oh if no force of Prayers prevail at all
With thee, who t^ings Impossible can do;
Who sometimes rain'st down flames: Who can recall
Hours past, and stop the Sun's swift Chariot too;
If thou can let thy Rod of Anger fall,
At these sad Charms, with which I prostrate sue!
At length with these my fervent Prayers comply!
Nor Pity unto Pitie's self deny.
LXXVII.
The Bosom of thy favors now expand,
Stretch down that Arm supports the world, and say
Jordan's Fair Nymph shall live: some drops command
Of sweetness, may her bitter things allay;
Upon these cruel flames, with that strong hand
(Which to all Griefs does perfect health convey)
Pour from those everlasting Springs above
The immortal streams of thy eternal love.
LXXVIII.
Thus Pity; straight the winged Orphei round
Double their notes, and on each golden Lyre
They Pity for the Hebrew Babes resound,
The voice of Pity runs through all the Quire;
On her his eyes, where Mercies do abound,
The Almighty turned from's Throne, where still entire
The Trinity in Unity alone
Distinctly shines, eternal Three in One.
LXXIX.
On's Forehead, where full Bliss the Angels view,
Life it self lives, and feeds for ever there;
This only Springs, and Summers can renew;
Trouble with storms, and then serene the air;
From's Brow, the Sun (that he may still pursue
His Course) his light immortal does repair;
And the reflection of his holy eyes,
With Saphirs Heaven, the Stars with Gold supplies.
LXXX.
His Robe, of Texture not to be expressed
So Rich, it hides the Habit every were;
Looks like the Sun (if yet the Sun when dressed
In all his Rays, near him can bright appear)
A shining cloud he seems to make his Vest,
And for a Mantle cloudy Light to wear:
He shines so, that himself his own light hides
And in his proper Rays concealed abides.
LXXXI.
Known only to Himself, He All, within
Himself absconds. He Center is, and Sphere.
Immortal, still the same H'ath ever been,
Nor Life, nor Death from any else does share.
Through all diffused, from Him all things begin
To move, and yield obedience every where;
All comprehends, not to be understood,
But as chief Beauty, chief Delight, chief Good.
LXXXII.
New Pity, which all Rigor did allay,
Showed it was stamped in the Creators heart
And's eyes, toward her fixed kindness straight convey,
And livelier beams, with doubled Love impart.
He burned with Zeal, when an Abyss, a Sea
Of light, and flames from his bright face revert:
Whence Floods of Fire, and splendor over all
The Sacred place like dreadful Torrents fall.
LXXXIII.
His voice shook both the Poles, and the Axeltree
Bowed, which the Worlds great Machine does sustain;
The Spheres straight lost their various Harmony,
And the whole Heavens their former Course restrain;
Tigris, and Ganges to their Fountains flee,
The Bears both trembled, Atlas shrunk again;
When from the Mouth of the Almighty broke,
Irrevocable Fate, and thus he spoke.
LXXXIV.
O Happy, happy Thou! who only can
My Divine anger from its course divert;
Who sweetnest my eternal cares for man,
My pleasure, and celestial Love thou art.
My Glory, Grace! whose tenderness began
First, through my bowels to pierce into my heart.
Thy prayers have gained me, and in all their parts
With pity armed, are penetrating Darts.
LXXXV.
But how (my Muse) with wit so weak as thine,
Seek'st thou a Glory, not to be expresst?
Thou better what he is not may divine,
Then what he is silence in this is best.
O, (with that kissed her) thou (said he) art mine
My dearest, sweetest pledge! for ever blessed.
Can I with thee severely now proceed,
Who art my offspring, nay my self indeed?
LXXXVI.
Of nothing, I all things have made through thee,
The Air extended, fixed the fire above,
Into one pit collected all the Sea,
Prescribed the bounds to which its waves shall move,
Let loose the Springs, the Lakes, and Floods, by Me
The Abysses, Pillars to the vast Earth prove.
I the World's stable Hinges did create,
On which the Heavens turn round, with all their weight.
LXXXVII.
Through thee, the Sun, and Moon: through thee alone,
The Stars with motion I Have adorned, and light;
Have made (amidst the Heavens swift motion)
The Poles stand six'd, raised winds by day, and night.
Made Fish to swim, and the wild Beasts to run,
Serpents to glide, and sitted Birds for flight.
The Earth Heaths, Plants, and painted flowers to bear.
And d^'d the four Quarters of the Year.
LXXXVIII.
Of (...) Wo^^^, I then resolv^d to frame
Man, as the grace, and Glory of the rest;
The Worlds ^ir smage, of illustrious Name,
Which no^ the World alone, but Me expressed.
In him, i am ^^as'd, Him my delight proclaim,
My (...) work, resembling Me the best.
A Glorious, Noble Fabric, and Divine,
In ^his, even all eternal Beauties shine.
LXXXIX.
But when the wicked One had overthrown,
So great a Grace (by whom you understand)
I hast^ed to repair: and thou alone
T'enlarge thy merciful, and thy holy hand.
Who could not die at all, earths spoils puts on.
And Himself s^^teth in the mortal Band,
That He may finish, that great work below,
Which i have committed to him long ago.
XC.
The blood which he shall shed, we, here, decree,
Shall save the blood of all these Innocents;
And my dear Church (which he will build) shall be
Enriched with treasures, and all ornaments.
Nor after this shall justice, unto me
Complain of injuries, and discontents.
I (daughter) will not this pursue, nor may,
And yet I must, in part, thy griefs allay.
XCI.
These my first victims shall be Herod's crime,
And shame, and all their wrongs with honor crowned;
Their griefs with joy, and glory most sublime,
Bright as the Sun shall shine in every wound.
And, if his cruel hand shall, at this time,
On Earth their Lives, and tender years confound,
A thread of Life more glorious shall be given
To them, by an eternal Fate, in Heaven.
XCII.
I Will make the King, of that dark World below,
Delude, and keep the impious Tyrant still;
Till time, and all things else maturer grow,
Which we, for common safty, will fulfill.
They Will search for this great Birth, but he shall go
Secure, and fly safe guarded from all ill.
A flight of scorn, not as by fear pursued,
By which he will vanquish Death, and Hell delude.
XCIII.
He spoke, and it was done, a winged Light;
Of The ever blessed Angelique Family,
Perceived God's mind, which they know all aright,
By a sole glance of his serenest eye;
And from the World of everlasting Light,
To that of fading, and obscurity.
With wings, like feathered Oars, does straight repair;
Ploughs through the winds, and navigates the Air.
XCIV.
The beauteous spoils (in the twincling of an eye)
He of light air, and diverse colors takes;
Then from the highest part of Heaven does fly,
(As from a mighty precipice) and breaks
Through the immovable sphere; and by
Bright sires, and flaming Lamps his way he makes.
Then through the swiftly turning Orbs, and those
That move obliquely, and more slow, he goes,
XCV.
Arriving where the lowest Heaven its pure
Crystal with studs, of light condensed, adornes;
From the cold frost of that moist Orb secure,
He downward glides, between the silver Horns
Of The Queen, whose dewy Veil cannot endure
The drying flame which gloomy shades adjourns.
Nor can the neighboring heat at all impair
His shining Wings, or hurt his golden hair.
XCVI.
From's naked shoulders a fit Vest descends,
By his left side, of a most curious thread;
Where in celestial colors Art contends
With Azure Gold, and white with purest Red.
Two Skirts, girt at the waste, thence each depends
Loosely, nor farther then the knees are spread.
Which, least they waving be too much displayed,
A golden clasp restrains, with gems inlay'd.
XCVII.
Extended on his shining Back a pair
Of ample Wings their glorious colors show;
Most choice perfumes enrich his curling hair,
And to the air the graceful Tresses flow.
Carbuncles, and immortal Rubies are
The Garlands, that invest his ivory brow.
His feet were hid, and lofty dancing, run
Through Gems are Stars, and Gold that is the Sun.
XCVIII.
Night disappeared, and though the greater Light
Of Day, still under ground concealed his Rays;
Yet the celestial flame, let loose to flight,
Like a Vice-Sun, in Heaven its beams displayes.
Which, ventilated by his Wings, a bright,
Long tract of light, his way through the air betrays.
Shepherds deceived, forsake their Beds, and pay
Their Orisons, as to the rising Day.
XCIX.
In Ethiopia there is a Dale, which high,
Aspiring Rocks, as in a ring, surround.
Where Sol from noon, till night can never pry,
Through the thick shade of boughs, that there abound.
Here with his dull, and lazy company,
The King of Dreams dwells, in abodes profound,
And in most solitary Grotts, and Caves,
Night quiet refuge, only there receives.
C.
Of Ivory one, and one of Horn were made
Two Gates, at which Ease, and Oblivion stood,
And near them Silence, who, still listening, laid
His finger on his mouth, and with his Nod,
Through the mute Palace his commands conveyed;
Least beasts, or winds should shake the leaves of the wood,
In those close horrors, more then any where,
The plants, and flowers still languishing appear.
CI.
No birds are heard to sing, the gloomy Sky
From Thunders free, through all this dark retreat;
No Shepherds talk, nor echo makes reply;
Dogs never heard to bark, or Sheep to bleat.
Only a purling rivolet, hard by
A Cave, does through the stones its passage beat;
By whose hoarse murmurs, those who there are laid,
Are to more Sound, and sweeter sleep betrayed.
CII.
Just in the center of this darksome Cave,
The hermit God, affecting secrecy;
Himself to pleasing rest, and quiet gave;
Stretched on a bed of leavy Ebonie.
Crowned with loft Poppy, his left hand does wave
A bough in Lethe steept; and heavily
Nodding, his right supports his drowzy head,
And for his robe, a Badger's skin is spread.
CIII.
Scarce lifting up his dull, and half-shut eyes,
His brows still languishing, appear to frown;
His head nods to, and fro, as if he would rise,
Sometimes he seems, and straight again lies down.
Near him of cups, and bowls most large supplies,
And napkins that the smoaky table crown
With all choice meats, and wines that appetite
Might please, and odours that the sense delight.
CIV.
Directly hither straight the Angel flies,
Down from the Empyrean high degrees;
And round about, in several Troops, espies,
With dusky wings, fallacious Images.
Yet could not their false shapes, celestial eyes
Deceive; but Morpheus he distinctly sees
With Ithaton and Tantalus, who there,
Struck with those Heavenly rays soon disappear.
CV.
Among this black Troop of winged Spirits, a bright
And shining Damsel hovered up, and down;
Her habit most transparent was, and bright,
Through which her limbs (to wonder fair,) were shown.
Her silver wings had eyes of various Light,
(Like Peacock's train) her name was Vision.
A guide to truth: the ancient Prophet's friend,
Whom God was wont on Embassies to send*
CVI.
Her Forehead was of Crystal pure and clear,
On which delineated, and written shined
All Natures forms: all that created were,
Or yet to be created were design^d.
Written by God's own Hand, the character
Of Light (in stead of Ink) l^ke Gold refined.
Here what to others often he concealed,
To's friends, as writ in paper, God revealed,
CVII.
The Hebrew Pilgrim the high mystery,
O'th Heavely Ladder here did comprehend;
Here Egypt's holy Prisoner did foresee,
What did to him the adoring sheaves portend.
The Captain of the chosen Progeny,
From the un-burnt Bush beheld the flames ascend.
And Sacred Poets did the Truths discern
Of Heaven, and here a thousand secrets learn.
CVIII.
Here the beloved Disciple filled with high
Raptures, since leaning on his Mother's Breast,
In Pathmos, with Divine Sagacity,
In writing those great wonders has expresst.
From's Earthly prison freed by ecstasy,
The Doctor of the Gentiles, among the blessed,
Saw things to mortal senses unreveal'd,
That were, and ever shall be still concealed.
CIX.
With her the Heavenly Nuntio the Air ascends,
Then swiftly over the Earth, and over the Sea,
Directly her resplendent wings extends,
To'ards Fethlaem* where Joseph slumbring lay.
The Morn that through the Heaven her blushes sends,
More clear their bright impressions did display
With all that was of wonder to be seen,
Or by the hand of Heaven there carved had been.
CX.
Vision the Morning loves, that season more,
Then any given by time sh'affects the best;
Because the soul is, in that pleasing hour
More from the flesh removed, and less oppresst.
Turned to the Good Old man, she sets before
His thoughts, her face with all its glories dresst.
That Diamantine Book, wherein all forms
Of things are written, and the fancy charms.
CXI.
Joseph through these sure signs, was at a stand,
Till the Angel the internal sense declared;
And he read there distinctly God's command,
Jealous that his escape he should retard.
Oh fly, fly (written in it with his own hand)
Thy dream's no cheating fancy, have regard
To this, which God's true oracle does sing,
Fly this devouring Land, and cruel King.
CXII.
Too long among so great, so many snares,
Thou art secure and slow, -- arise (I say)
Take heed the spise, which Herod now prepares,
Trace not thy steps, nor thy great Pledge betray.
Be gone, and the Holy Child (our chief of Cares)
Directly to Caenopus straight convey.
And till from Heaven, a message thou again
Receive, from travel cease and there remain.
CXIII.
The Cousin of thy might charge, the Great
Son of Elizabeth, shall likewise be,
Far hence removed, and, in a safe Retreat,
Approaching slaughter shun (Heavens care is he)
He (the Divine Forerunner;) shall defeat,
(Though very young) their stratagems; and free
Through Deserts go, there, for a city, take
Some wood, and, in a Cave his dwelling make.
CXIV.
Go then; and from the dire, and impious Foe,
Or from the bloody Tyrant nothing fear;
Among thieves, wild beasts, through armies thou shall go,
Most safe, for God is with thee every where.
This said, the Dream, Sleep, and the Vision too,
To their dark Mansion fly, and disappear.
The Angel left him then, the dazzling light,
And flames, that seemed to scorch him, vanished quite.
CXV.
Astonished, and amazed he wakes at last,
And to his Virgin Spouse does all disclose;
While she, informed from Heaven of all that past,
Fearless, and undisturbed no sorrow shows;
He to the Cradle runs, and there, embraced,
The Heavenly Babe, while tenderness o'reflows
His eyes, and bathed him all in tears, h'express't,
A Father's Love, and hugged him to his breast.
CXVI.
O whither shall we go (my son said he)
(Yet thou my Love, and my Protector art!)
The danger is so near we cannot flee,
Thou Life of my afflicted Soul, and Heart!
Ah how untimely must this exile be?
Sole flowr of Jesse's Root! divinest part!
With feet bound up in swath-bands, and so weak,
Is It fit a Pilgrimage to undertake?
CXVII.
Yet must we fly, and thy celestial aid,
Shall these weak limbs with strength, and spirit supply;
Heaven promises our way shall smooth be made,
Over Mountains, and over Rocks most rough and high.
Let us through all by thee (Lord) be conveyed!
A thousand Lives, in this One's safty ly.
Me (frail old man) in the right way direct!
This tender Infant, and weak Babe protect!
CXVIII.
As thus the Holy Foster-father spoke,
While all to speedy flight now ready tend,
Tears from his eyes like sudden Torrents broke,
And through the Furrows of his Cheeks descend.
The Child embraced him with a smiling look,
And wiped them off: and with a gentile hand,
(Compassionating Humane miseries) strokes
The old man's cheeks, and washed his hoary locks.
CXIX.
He, when he saw the Air 'twixt night and day
Obscure, and all things now persuade to rest;
A burden of his choice, and best array
Composed, and charged upon a gentle Beast.
Where the whole weight of the worlds salvation lay,
In swathbands, and, as in a Cradle dress't.
Oh Lord (said he) this equipage forgive!
And, that nor Gold, nor Purple thee receive.
CXX.
The haughty King, and impious Tyrant lies
On costly beds, with sumptuous Ornaments;
Thee the vile work of laboring hands supplies,
With a poor covering, that the cold prevents.
Although, an ill-made Couch, which we devise
Of straw, and moorish reeds thee, here, contents,
I know thou triumph'st there above, the Sun
Thy Robe, thy Palace Heaven; and thrones thy Throne.
CXXI.
I know full well, all Pride thou do despise,
Thy chiefest Treasure is, a Love sincere;
Thou above all degrees, the pomp do prize,
O'th minds, and Hearts that Humble still appear.
Thus reasons he; and while the Infant lies
On the rude plumes, that now in order were;
The burden fixed He, with the Virgin, slow
A foot behind their homely carriage go.
CXXII.
Infernal monster! (Tyrant is too good
A title) thy sweet country now destroy;
Now feed thy impious rage with civil blood,
And the appetite with griefs of Mothers cloy.
Behold, the eternal Author of all good,
Maugre thy fury, safe a ready way
Retires, where he in a secure Exile*
Sees the high Cataracts of falling Nile.
CXXIII.
That Nile which deafneth all his neighbors ears,
And with fertility the Sands o'reflows;
That like a Sea in pride and rage appears,
And seven full Urns into the Ocean throws.
That from his unknown spring, as Umpire bears
Himself, and bounds to Asia and Afric shows.
And while he limits to the world proclaims,
Imposes on his Banks two several Names.
CXXIV.
He saw the famous Pyramids, those high
Mountains of Art; a Ladder each appears
To scale the Stars; or Pillars to the Sky,
Or stand as firm foundations to the spears.
Under whose wings all Climates seem to ly,
And every hill the mighty shadow wears.
While their vast height denies to all the Groves
The light, and hides the Sun whereere he moves.
CXXV.
He saw the Pharos, whose great light, far round
Diffused, their safest course to Ships assigned;
The Sphynxe's image, with all wonders crowned,
O'th Carver's Art, and truths to come divined.
The stately Labyrinth, where place was found,
For seven large Palaces to stand disjoined;
And the vast wall that far extended is,
And joins Pelusium to Heliopolis.
CXXVI.
As born of the proud Flood he Maeris, there,
Beheld, and the prodigious Lake discerned.
The College where eternal records were,
And Schools whence Greece its Light and Glory learned.
The Caves for Bodies, that eternized are,
By Cedar, Pitch, Bitumen, and are turned
To rare confections which the Merchants thus
Transformed, as wholesome Mummy bring to Us.
CXXVII.
As a true Herald of the Vernal Sun,
The eternal offspring, wheres'ere he goes,
His Light, and warmth dispenses, and upon
The sandy Paretonian land bestows.
The Rubie, Saphyre, Emerald straight begun,
In The barren Earth their riches to disclose.
The Lion, Tiger, Bear their Maker know,
And Crocodiles their sense of duty show.
CXXVIII.
Straight winter his red Mantle laid aside,
And aged Face, while nature wondering stands,
To see how April all her Pomps, and Pride
Poured largely on her, with most bounteous hands,
And with a rich, and stately dress supplied
The needy Regions, and those naked Lands.
Untimely Honors grace each winter Thorn,
And flowers, as wedded to them, Prosts adorn.
CXXIX.
The gentle Breezes of the the wanton Air,
With their inviting and melodious sound;
Pass through the amorous Palms, and Laurels there,
And whispering shake their joyful wings around.
The hills, and dales, that plants odorous bare,
Delight their Maker; and the Mountains, crowned
With trees, their lofty heads in Reverence bow,
And springs with murmurs court him, as they flow.
CXXX.
Nile his lost head, from his close fountain drew,
Hasting to kiss the Virgin's holy feet.
The waters seem to bow, and humbly sue,
With kind refreshment their faint limbs to meet.
Where're they trod, all herbs and stours straight grew,
And their new Sun adore with all that is sweet.
Birds from the trees, and Angels from above,
To praise, and bless him, pleasant Contests move.
CXXXI.
A thousand, thousand flames, straight kindled were,
Of Heavenly Cupids, that in Troops around;
The Pilgrims follow, and through the air,
With various dances spread the harmonious sound.
These from the sleeping Babes sweet face, with care,
Wipe off nocturnal dews, (that there abound.)
Those over him, their plumes, and wings extend,
And from the winters cold, and frosts defend.
CXXXII.
A War like Spirit of the Etherial Band,
Whom Heaven ordained to be their convoy there,
Armed with a shining breast plate, in his hand
A sword, that flames ejected every where.
Like a bright Harbinger through dubious, and
Through crooked ways conveyed the humble pair.
Like him in habit, and in face, whom he,
So lately, sleeping, saw, and waking, she.
CXXXIII.
Like that fair Bird, who of himself is Sire,
And Son, who (like the Sun) is one alone;
Pyropus crowns his brows, his bright head fire:
Saphyrs, and Rubies he, for flight, puts on.
The Winged Troop their pompous King admire,
His Diadem of Gold, and Vermilion.
With joy the attend him, and, with cheerful lays,
The wonder of the blessed Arabia praise.
CXXXIV.
Such among the eternal, holy Troops appears
The immortal Champion, Joseph stands amazed;
While he the Light beholds, the Music hears;
His brows contracting, still, he upward gazed:
At length, while unknown accents fill his ears,
And on his eyes too great a Luster blazed.
Overcome he falls, surpriz' with sudden fright,
At once deprived of hearing, and of fight.
CXXXV.
But divine virtue, with new force supplies
His weakened sight, and fainting sense repaires;
Restrains the Object of his trembling Eyes,
And opens the Obstruction of his Ears.
Then against the Lightning he begins to rise,
And's shaking Hand like an Umbrello bears:
While bowing yet upon his staff he leanes,
Which the whole weight of's weary Limbs sustains.
CXXXVI.
But when fresh spirits had his strength renewed,
And he could stand upon his Feet again,
His eyes he opened by degrees, and viewed
Those Starry Mansions, where the blessed remain.
While sudden tears of joy his cheeks bedewed,
And broke his silence in this humble strain.
You Winged Troops, I thus salute to you,
Bright Squadrons of the Heavenly host I bow.
CXXXVII.
When straight through all the far extended coast,
'Twixt the two Seas, where wanton Natives dwell,
The mighty statues ( Egypt used to boast)
And famous Idols into Ruins fell.
Their foolish Alters Thebes, and Memphis lost,
With those of the conquering Greek, which did excel.
Osiris, Isis, and Anubis, were
Silenced and broken, vanished into air.
CXXXVIII.
As when a Troop of Thieves, that watch for prey,
And lie in ambush, favored by the night;
Soon as they see the Morn her beams display,
Quit their design, and are dispersed by flight.
Or as those ugly Birds, that hate the day,
Soon as they see the glimmering of light,
Return with fear, themselves in shades to hide,
And neither can the Sun or Light abide.
CXXXIX.
Such their false Gods, and profane Deities,
Shaddows of night, and wholly void of power,
Before the true God vanish; their known lies,
And cheats, no more prevail as heretofore.
Amazed, and full of fear, at this surprise
Their Priests collect their Relics, and deplore
The Ruin of their silenced Gods, who all
Together, as by a strange earthquake fall.
CXL.
'Twas then those superstitious, and vain
Rites, which they used of old, did first decline,
And in believing Breasts did place obtain
The Faith, and Worship that is indeed Divine;
But, dear to Heaven, Joseph his holy Train,
After that Light, that did before him shine,
Leads only from frauds, and danger wholly free,
And far removed from Herod's Treachery.
CXLI.
Yet nor in such remote, and distant ways,
Could he his apprehensions lay aside;
Not stately Thebes, whose hundred Gates did praise
Her wealth, and for her Walls was magnified;
Nor yet Hermopolis his fears allays
Of The Sword, so much, that he would there abide;
But, black Siene left, he forward past
To Memphis, that is in Egypt's Center placed.
CXLII.
Nor did the good Old man from thence remove,
Till Heaven recalled him to his Home again;
But with his Spouse, and Pledge of Heavenly love,
In a poor Cottage with a Friend remain:
And there, the skill of's aged Hand to prove,
He could not from his former Trade refrain:
But more than one Piece of his glorious Art,
Rarely engraved, did to the world impart.
CXLIII.
He was an exc'llent Artist, and in high
Designs, could well express his Art, and Skill,
In Silver, Gold, in Wood, or Ivory;
His Style was always ready as his Will.
And now, grown old, a strong Necessity
Rouz^d up his wits again, made cold, and chill.
Necessity, which often counsels well
And makes her Daughter Industry excel.
CXLIV.
Of Cedar, Ebony, and other rare,
And high-priz'd Woods he ample Tables made.
Great Ptolomy's long Line in Figures were
Rarely expressed, and his vast Wealth displayed;
The Pilot's Lamp, and Urns of Kings were there,
And Nile in all his Fertile Robes arrayed;
And, by his labor, thus to gain his Food,
Engraved in all its Glories Egypt stood.
CXLV.
Of these so celebrated Works, which Fame
Through all the Cities had dispersed, and told,
He, with much sweat, and study, had the same
(For the most part) before engraved in Gold:
But scorning Fortunes Crosses, and the Shame,
Turned to this Art, its secrets to unfold;
And what by his care Industry was gained,
His sweetest Consort, and dear Pledge sustained.
Notes upon the Second Book.
Stanza II.
Mariamne was Herod's most beloved Wife, of whom, at length, through many
instigations of his Sister Salome, and her own insolent humor, he became so
jealous that she had a design to poison him, that, at a Council he condemned
her, and put her to death, which she suffered with great constancy and courage.
Vide Jos. Antiq. Jud. l 15.

Stanza XI.
Antigonus (of whom before) was the last of the Asamenaean Family, who had
enjoyed that Crown one hundred and twenty years; his Army commanded by Pappus,
Herod in person defeated, slew Pappus, and sent his head as a Present to his
Brother Pheroras the Governor of Galile, in memory of their Brother Joseph
whom Pappus killed near Jericho.

Atemion was Leader of a strong body of Thieves, who lurked in Caves near
Arbella, a City in Galile, against whom Herod himself led some Troop, and
after a stout resistance (for his Van was defeated by them) he routed them, and
brought all Galile under his Obedience.

Pacorus was Lieutenant to the Parthian King, sent to the Assistance of
Antigonus, and the Arabians, whom Herod subdued.

Hircanus was a Prince of the Jewish Nation, who when once in Antigonus his
power by means of the Parthian, he procured his ears to be cut off, that so
mutilated, he might be incapable to be chosen High Priest, should he recover
his liberty, and return to Jerusalem. Herod procuring his liberty from the
Parthian, took him into his protection, but fearing his popularity, and
designing a Foreign Expedition, unwilling to leave him behind, or take him with
him, got some to accuse him, as a Correspondent with the King of Arabia, and so
put him to death.

Stanza CXXIII.
Nile at whose Original most Writers only guess, having (as Strabo affirms) in
its Course in Ethiopia the addition of several other Rivers, has two
Cataracts: The first, after it has passed Meroe (at the entrance of Egypt)
some miles; and the other near Syene, both falling with that violence, that
strangers are deafned by the noise, and conclude the Inhabitants likewise deaf
because they take little notice of it.

Its Canopaean Mouth passes by the Affrican; and by the Asian shore, that of
Pelusium.

Stanza CXXIV.
Among the many Pyramids, three were most celebrated, the chief situate on the
South Side of the City Memphis, on the Western Banks of Nile, the Foundation
taking up eight Acres of Ground, and growing narrower by degrees, ascended by
two hundred fifty five steps, each step three foot high, till the Top consisted
only of three stones, yet so broad, that sixty persons might stand upon them.
By what Engines raised to that height, how brought thither from the Arabian
Mountains, is difficult to discover. These were built by several Kings, but by
which of them, and when, is best determined by the learned Sir John Marsham, in
his late excellent Work, Chron. Canon. Egypt. page 47.

Stanza CXXV.
The Pharos, was a Watchtower, of prodigious height, built at the expense of
Ptolomy Philadelphus, by Sostratus of Guidos, all of white Marble, with many
Lanthorns for Lights on the Top to guide Sailers by night over the dangerous
Sands, and the Bar of Alexandria.

This Sphynxes Image was carved on a Rock, not far from Cairo, of a vast
bigness: The head breast and back were to be distinguished when Christoph.
Furerus was there, An. 1575. The head adorned with many Hieroglyphical Figures,
was in compass 53 Paces, and near the Navil of it was a great Hole, in which
the Priests (of old) concealed themselves, and gave answers to Votaries, which
the people believed Oracular.

The Labyrinth was built by Psamnitius, and contained within one continued Wall
a thousand Houses, and twenty two Palaces (some say more than as many more) of
white Marble, into which was one entrance only, and so many turnings, and
returnings, that they were impassable without a Guide.

Pelusium (as the learned Sir John Marsham observes) was the most ancient
Fortification of Egypt, Erected by Sesostris, after he had expelled the
Shepherds, and brought the whole Country under his sole subjection: to secure
himself from the Incursions of Syrians, and Arabians he made this vast Wall,
extending from Pelusium to Heliopolis (the Metropolis of that Division) near
1500 Furlongs, which the Prophet Ezekiel, Chap 30.15 calls the strength of
Egypt, in whose time the Guards upon it consisted of 240000 men.

Stanza CXXVI.
The Lake Mareotis of a strange bigness, and profundity, supposed to be made by
Art, because in the midst of it were two Pyramids of fifty ^aces in height
above water, and as many under, built by King Maeris to be epulchres for
himself* and his Wife. The Lake conjectured the rather to be artificial because
the ground about it is very dry, and no Springs near it, but the water conveyed
into it by Pipes and Conduits, answerable to the prodigious Labors of Egypt.

Among the Schools of Egypt, those of Alexandria were the most eminent, where
Ptolomy Philadelphus erected his famous Library, consisting of seven hundred
thousand Volumes, and whence Learning was diffused into all Greece by several
famous Philosophers, as Plato, etc.

Stanza CXLI.
Thebes, situate on the Arabian shore of the Nile, was once the Metropolis of
all Egypt, renowned for its hundred Gates. Its last eminent ruin, in the time
of the Roman Power, was some few years after the Battle of Actium.

Hermopolis, of which name were two Cities, Major, und Minor, this here
mentioned is the Major, where all the Toll was taken for Commodities brought
down from Thebes.

Memphis was built upon the Western banks of Nile, not far from the extreme
part of the Delta, where the River first divides it self, very rich in
Antiquities, and stately buildings, whereof three Temples of Venus, Apis, and
Serapis, beset with Sphynxes, were very famous.

Stanza CXLIV.
After the death of Alexander, Ptolomy, the Son of Lagus, seized on this
Province, as his Part of that Empire, and made himself King of Egypt, and his
Race continued two hundred and four years by the Succession of ten Kings, all
of the same name, and ended in Cleopatra's Brother.

The End of the Second Book.
THE SLAUGHTER OF THE INNOCENTS.
BOOK III. The Execution.
I.
OH that my Tongue, or style as sharp might prove,
And strike as deep, as did the killing Sword;
That with a thousand Wounds, I so might move
All generous Hearts in pity to accord:
Or since, to show such horrors, is above
My vile and obscure Pen, Arpin afford
Thine aid! thy Pensil it will best become
To paint the story of this Martyrdom.
II.
Thy skilful hand, which Life and sense can give
To shadows, and thy paintings animate,
Can make the Murdered Companies to live
Again, feel wounds, deplore anew, their Fate;
The Tyrant, and the Murderers revive,
And them again to slaughter irritate;
That these my Lines may imitate thine Art,
Thy lively Colors to my Ink impart.
III.
The Morning rose, resolving to bewail
The Sons of Israel with doleful tears;
The Scarlet color of the Rose grew pale,
And Blood the Violet, and Lilly wears:
Day hid it self under Nights horrid veil,
Circled with Ominous Lamps, that scattered fears;
The Sun a sad, and dismal Face put on,
From his first Rising till his Course was done.
IV.
Fly Mothers! fly! and your sweet Pledgesbear
In your soft Arms to safer shelter, fly;
See, how a thousand Murderers, to their,
And your destruction armed, straight hither hy;
See! their drawn Swords! See how they cut the Air!
I hear most dreadful plaints, I hear their cry;
Oh fly! I now your cheerful looks discern
Into dire horrors, and sad mourning turn.
V.
In midst of Bethlem was a stately Frame,
Raised on an hundred Columns large, and high;
Built like a Spherick Temple, and of name
For Rooms within, of vast capacity
The Cananean Kings ('it is said by Fame)
Made it (of old) their Court, and there did lie.
The work of that great King, who this the Queen
Of Cities made, and chief of Palestine.
VI.
The cruel Tyrant, in the open air,
Would not survey the bloody Tragedy,
But to a fitter Theater repair,
And so ascends a stately Gallery;
At full view, in an high Balcone, there
The dreadful Execution he could see;
And all their several Forms of Death, a bold
Spectator, and Delighted Judge behold.
VII.
He thought, perhaps, that so, concealed, he might
Hide from the eye of Heaven, his black Design:
But all he did was open to your sight,
Ye Angels! Troops of Pity, most Divine!
You saw their bleeding wounds, in dismal plight,
And with your hands to wipe them did incline,
That so you might, from what they, cruel, shed,
Enrich your whitest Robes with purest Red.
VIII.
Thither, so soon as Day began to rise,
The Cited came, and, as enclosed within
A Camp, unnumbred several Companies
Of Matrons, and of Mothers there were seen;
No sooner entered, but, before their eyes
Appeared a strange Parade of Arms, and Men.
With doubts, and wonder they suspended were
A while, but soon surpriz d with sudden fear.
IX.
Hither the obedient Bands of Mothers brought
Their Sons in Troops, and numbers infinite,
Scarce any one of which was ever taught
To speak, or go, their Parents to delight;
These understood no Form to express a Thought;
Whether they cried, or spoke few judged aright:
And those, as they with doubtful steps came on,
Ready to fall, and staggering they bemoan.
X.
Now when with Murderers, on every side,
Enclosed, themselves the unhappy Mothers found;
Deluded in their thoughts they dumb abide,
And pale, like Flowers new trampled on the ground.
When them thus languishing the children spied,
Frighted, and trembling, shreeks and cries abound;
This to the Bosom flies, that to the Teat,
Those under veils and garments seek retreat.
XI.
Mean while sat Herod on his lofty Throne
His head with Gems enriched, and's back, and breast;
With these a shining Cuirass he put on,
And over all a Royal Purple Vest;
But most pleased with the Childrens doleful moan;
That horror suited with his Fancy best.
He in the Sword, and blood delighted more,
Than in the Gold, and Purple that he wore.
XII.
As when a Bird of Prey, that watching sits
On some high Tree a Flock of Pigeons spies;
He fits his Arms, his Bill, and Pounces whets,
Still keeping them in view with greedy eyes:
So his stern look he turns, with fatal threats,
On the pale Mothers, and the Infants cries,
Then to his Officer, from his high stand,
To sound the Trumpet nods his last command.
XIII.
He from his back, in hand, his Trumpet takes,
Puts to his lips, and e're he did begin,
Of all his Spirits strong collection makes,
And to his Jaws, and Mouth sends from within,
His cheeks now rise, now fall, the blast straight breaks
Into the air, as it had thunder been;
The mighty noise strikes through the marble skies,
And busy Echo to each note replies.
XIV.
The Signal thus dispersed of what they feared,
A thousand hands a thousand Arms extend;
Over a thousand heads the Swords appeared,
And streams of blood from thousand wounds descend;
The Women's shreeks through all the Court are heard,
And the air the doleful cries of Infants rend.
Dire Fury here, there Death offends the eye,
The Murderers rage, the Murdered groan and die.
XV.
How many there expired their last of breath,
Who their first Breathings newly had begun?
How many were surpised by sudden death
Who what it was to live had hardly known?
How many first beheld the shades beneath,
E're the worlds pleasing Light had on them shone?
And from how many the Impartial knife
Cut off (soon as begun) the Thread of Life?
XVI.
Sad to behold! how through the bloody Court
The frighted Mothers with their Children fly;
The ample Cupulos, where they resort,
Tremble with the dire horrors of their cry;
Statues, and Pillars (if Fame truth report)
Continued streams of blood so mollify,
That they were seen to weep, and trembling show
Their Pity at the sound of every blow.
XVII.
And 'twas a Miracle (if Fame say true)
That many, quite of sense, and life deprived,
Their faces from the murdring Sword withdrew,
Perhaps by late excess of fear revived.
The streams of blood began to slow anew,
With tears of Mothers as from thence derived:
Whence even the Blood looked pale, and did appear
To fly from the Impression of their fear.
XVIII.
The clattering of the Swords the Palace shook;
Infamous Palace and most guilty Pile!
The Roof stood firm, that the Sun might not look
Into the Place, and blood his Rays defile;
But how could thou (O Son) in pity brook
Thy usual way, if thou did grieve the while?
Why did thou not, at least, thy Luster keep
Concealed, if thou coldst neither sigh, nor weep?
XIX.
Their Swords, which heretofore were clean, and bright,
(From far their Rays accustomed to reflect)
Now cleave the Air with a most horrid Light,
And with the stains of blood their beams infect.
Herod their groans with greedy appetite
Attends, and seems their slaughter to direct.
And, as a glad Spectator, in the Scenes,
Is pleased to see their tortures, and their pains.
XX.
Not more the Miser, with his heaps of Gold,
Can satisfy his Avaricious mind
Than Herod while their Swords he did behold
Destroying Innocents, content did find;
No less their groans (while they grew pale, and cold)
His cruel thoughts to all delight inclined;
Then Songs of Nymphs, and Lays of Birds, in Spring,
Among flowers, and groves, to others pleasure bring.
XXI.
A Lady, whom Love prodigally, there,
With Graces had enriched was heard apart
To bargain with an Officer; her hair
Disheve'ld, wringing her hands, and to divert
His rage, strike me (said she) this Infant spare!
He Is the best portion of my Soul, and Heart.
The Villain promised, as he promised smiled,
But broke 't, and before her face straight killed the child.
XXII.
The Murderer triumphs over him he wounds;
Nor can forbear to threaten as he dies,
This groans, and weeps, when he his Sword straight drownds
Within his throat, and stops both groans, and cries,
Forced from his Mothers Arms, whom fear confounds,
And rage affrights, here one his hands applies
To his most cruel Neck, and, while he lives,
For wounds to him, who kills him, kisses gives.
XXIII.
So, when as yet scarce weaned, her Yearling slain,
And bleeding by some Butcher's hand she spies,
The frighted Cow runs mad through all the Plain,
And with loud bellowing strikes the Very Skies;
Or as, her Nest robbed by some greedy Swain,
(Who for such prey through groves or thickets pries,)
The loss of her dear Young the Nightingale
Is wont with mournful accents to bewail.
XXIV.
Such she appears, and such the wounds, and pains
Of her sharp grief, nor is she less distressed:
On her fallen Son she falls, her hands enchains
In his; joins face to face, and breast to breast;
The piteous humor melts her heart and rains
Into his wounds, which are, by that oppressed:
He bleeds, she weeps, and her sad flux of tears,
A due proportion with his bleeding bears.
XXV.
On the other side (barbarity most wild!)
A Mother, and a Murderer contest;
She would still keep, He force away the Child:
One pulled the feet, to other the arms possessed;
With Pity one, the other with Fury boiled;
This rants and bauls, the other her groans expressed:
And all the Trophies from this conflict borne,
Were, that the Infant was in pieces torn.
XXVI.
Why, why (said she, as sadly she complains)
Him born of me, do you from me divide?
Him, whom I Have nurtured with such care, and pains:
And will you murder him? damned Homicide!
He is a Work of Nature, which contains
The dearest part of me, whom you deride;
That I should him, whom I have borne within
My womb, 's perhaps your pique, or else my sin.
XXVII.
At least with this dear Branch (nor leave me so
Alone) with this, me, me (the Mother) kill;
My blood, than his, does much more largely flow:
Quench your fierce rage in it, and sat your will:
Let Us, at least, in death together go;
This by the cruel'st may be granted still.
His faults are mine, if he have erred, so I,
It Is mercy, if we may together die.
XXVIII.
What seek'st thou Tyrant? if a guilty Foe,
Why hurt'st thou Him who never did thee offend?
But thou (O Lord!) why why art thou so slow?
When will thou thy most dreadful arm extend?
O blessed Redeemer, promised long ago!
Thy thunder dart, and now, O now descend!
Let this fierce Monster see thy wrath, and fear,
Who sheds our blood so prodigally here.
XXIX.
Robbed of all comfort, while she thus complains,
The ill-defended Cause of all her woes,
In pieces falls, part in her hand remains,
So that, more cruel she, then pious shows.
He, who shape, only, of a Man retains,
Sings, over the Corpse, and as in triumph goes,
Nor feels remorse, but that so great a rage
As his, those little limbs could never assuage.
XXX.
At this surprise of mischief all the rest,
Like Statues fixed, their strange amazement show;
Each minute the vile treachery expresst,
In dire effects, and yet no cause they knew.
Fear for themselves, as for their sons each breast
Invades, and yet, at once, they fearless grew.
For every one esteemed her torments mild,
If, as she died, she might embrace her child.
XXXI.
One among the rest, whose grief had given some pause
To rage, and heat, through all their weapons ran;
And gives this language, -- Proud King! for what cause
Is this to us, thy Loyal subjects done?
But hopes to see revenge, Me now withdraws
From death, if Heaven our just complaints will own;
Or if the Thunderer, who rules the Sky,
Upon the wrongs of Mortals casts his eye.
XXXII.
A Lady young, and elegantly Fair,
Leading a Child, then, lately taught to move
His trembling steps; She, of the lovely pair,
Like Venus seemed; He like the God of Love.
But suddenly he neither did appear
The God-like Boy, nor She the Goddess prove;
While the fierce Messenger of Death him bears
Away, and left Her overwhelmed in tears.
XXXIII.
A Coat of sinest Maile, this Murderer wore
In form, a Cuirace; naked all the rest;
His head a Cap of rusty Iron bore,
His hand an axe, which he with rage, addresst,
Against the wretched throng, where none before
Him stood, but gave large way whereere he presst,
Like a wild Boar, that, as he grunting goes,
His bristles rears, and his sharp Tushes shows.
XXXIV.
Unhappy she laments, but he will not hear,
And snatches, from her hand, her dearest part;
The pupil Orphan (then her eyes more dear)
Eye of her soul, and the soul of her heart.
With steps uncertain staggering here and there,
Him certain errors to new paths divert,
Until the Murderer with a sad surprise
Cut off, at once, his Life, and doleful cries.
XXXV.
Wide was the wound, by which through every vein,
(Not yet well knit) the blood in Rival^ts flows;
From the sweet Inn, that did it entertain,
The newborn Soul, as from a prison, goes.
Nor yet in those small limbs did place remain,
To give another wound; the Dagger shows
Much greater then the Trunk it wounds, the blade
Much broader then the O^ince it made.
XXXVI.
The Mother seized, and hugged him to her breast,
The weight, once easy, then too heavy grew;
Tears from her heart his spirits, by cold possesst,
Seek to revive, and his pale Face bedew;
His looks, and likeness she so just expresst,
That the dead infant she appears, in view.
Scarce could she be distinguished while she kept,
This measure in her grief, but that she wept.
XXXVII.
One among the rest, exposed her naked side,
With snowy breasts, and a most beauteous Face;
Her self a shield she made, her child to hide,
And keep him safe from death, in her embrace.
But in her Golden Looks the Homicide
His arm entwists, to force her from the place:
And all the glories of her shining head
Torn off, are, broken, on the pavement spread.
XXXVIII.
Yet she, as close as Ivy to the Tree,
To her dear pledge of Love still, firmly, clings;
Till him by the foot, her by her tresses, he
(Most cruel) forced, and to subjection brings.
Then with a furious hand immediately,
The child against a neighboring wall he flings.
But first, him, twice or thrice about his head
He swong, and with more violence struck him dead.
XXXIX.
At this so dreadful spectacle, so wild
A rage, fear did so far the Fact out-go,
That the still trembling, and affrighted child
Appeared as dead, before he felt the blow.
At last his limbs all broke, his bones all spoiled,
As bleeding Trophies all the ground bestrow;
While through his mouth, and nostrils, like a flood,
The brains gushed out, and marrow mixed with blood.
XL.
The cruel villain, not yet satisfied,
With his proud feet the mangled carcass spurns,
Her heart with pity melting (when she spied
Her hopes destroyed) to the Almighty turns.
It cannot be a wonder now (she cried)
That in the breasts of men such fury burns,
Nor that such wrongs, and murders they procure,
But that thou (King of Heaven!) should them endure.
XLI.
Near these was one of countenance most stern,
Rude in his Habit, dreadful in his Deeds;
In him they nothing Humane could discern,
No Bear so fierce the Lucane Mountain breeds.
Blood in his hands, his eyes with fury burn,
His dreadful dress, his actions much exceeds:
A heavy Hedg-bill, in his hand he bore,
With which he lopt off limbs, as boughs before.
XLII.
He to a miserable Hebrew there,
Who sucked the spirits of Life from's Mother's breast,
Insulting turns, and cries, i will quickly tare
Thee from that bosom where you are so caresst.
I will unbowel thee, and thee declare,
Son of her bowels, and beloved the best.
This said, H'assailes her, but the undaunted dame
Opposing him, did more his rage inflame.
XLIII.
Alas! what can a woman's weakness do,
Against the armed Fury of a cruel hand?
Fear for her dearest Infant made her slow;
Love drew her back and put her to a stand.
While thus, in doubt, she could no farther go
Betwixt her own, and his defense restrained,
Behold! at once, a blow that mortal proved,
Her from her doubts, and him from life removed.
XLIV.
The Villain with one death unsatisfied,
Murder's the Son, and, at that instant too,
Through the same wound piercing her tender side,
With a new kind of death the Mother slew.
Her trembling heart within he opens wide,
Where yet maternal Love, was quick, in view.
So that now twice her dear delight was slain,
First in her arms, then in her breast again.
XLV.
Against one, who, sadly weeping, begged relief,
A Soldier cruel as an Aspe, or Bear,
To rob her of her Son, and him of life,
Had raised his arm when she in his careere
Of fury stopped him, and, grown bold with grief,
Did both her teeth, and nales, like mad prepare.
The sword then turned against her, she withstands,
And bravely wrests it from his murdring hands.
XLVI.
Then to her self, It must not be (she said)
That thou my Son (these bowels only pain!)
It must not be, that thou the spoil be made
Of that fell heart, and in vile hands remain:
No; I, who first to thee thy milk conveyed,
By this dire Act will take thy blood again,
And me these salvage Troops hereafter shall,
A better Murdress, then a Mother call.
XLVII.
As thus she spoke the new Medea straight
Transfixed, and kills him, and i^ two divides,
And the loved pieces (held so dear of late)
Throws at the Villain's face, who her derides.
Thus from an Hebrew Mother learn to sat
Thy rage, on thine own children, and besides,
In cruel blows (said she) to be more skilled,
From this right hand; with that herself she killed.
XLVIII
Two more there were; this thought herself late blessed
With one sole Son; that in a lovely pair:
They both in silence had their grief suppresst,
And up to Heaven their weeping stars did rear.
Till toward her, who the sole Son possesst,
And in her bosom hugged (then full of fear)
A Jew half-naked, barefoot, and his arm
All bloody, swiftly brought the sad alarm.
XLIX.
A Sleeveless Coat of purple dye he wore,
All torn, and scarce did to his knees descend;
Red, and as stiff as bristles of a Boar,
Two long Mustachoes from his chin descend.
Gaping his mouth, his thick lips foaming over,
His squinting eyes, rough hairy eyebrows bend.
His crooked nose, the Vultur's beak expresst,
In brief, he was a Man, but seemed a beast.
L.
The beauteous woman (as if stupify'd)
All suffered, and gave neither sigh, nor groan,
But even in pity, with his rage complied,
And freely to the Ruffian gave her Son.
Who if he had not turned his eyes aside,
If with her veil she had not hid her own,
At her sweet looks the sword had fallen from
His murdring hand, and she had overcome.
LI.
But what can Beauty against Fury do?
His naked sword straight pierced the Infant's breast;
Who on the Assassin, as he struck him through,
Smiles, and cries Pappa, as by him caressed.
Then wantonly his hand extended to
The weapon, that was through his body presst,
Thinking the blade was silver, and a gift
To play with, which, him then of life bereft.
LII.
He saw not, nor reguarded him, at all,
But where his smiles came forth his weapon drowned;
Yet when he saw the murdered Infants spraul,
And sadly languish, dying on the ground,
He like the Crocodile laments his fall,
And wept for him to whom he gave the wound.
But all his tears, and sorrow soon were gone,
And pity by his cruelty o'rethrowne.
LIII.
Then to the other turned, irresolute
On which of her two Sons he first should fall;
What should she wretched do? who durst dispute
Her cause? on whom should she for succor call?
She flies, he follows, and in the pursuit,
Like a fierce Masrif hunts her over all.
On every side she labors to evade,
But like a Lamb is to the Wolf betrayed.
LIVE.
With the same Love, when Troy was overthrown,
Aeneas from his Native Country fled;
On's back his Father, in his hand his Son,
To safty from the insulting flames he led:
So she, their refuge and Defense alone.
To save them from the Villain (full of Dread)
Now here, now there, with her beloved Sons,
Hugged in her arms (a pleasing burden) runs.
LV.
What should she do? She from one danger runs,
And straight into another mischief flies;
As when the Dog the frighted Partridge shuns,
And in a moment by the Faulcon dies.
Another against the eldest of her Sons,
(Then sucking at her breast) a dart employes
That through his cheeks, into her bosom goes,
Which late with milk, but now with blood o'reflows.
LVI.
But her soon joind the Barbarous Homicide.
With stronger Arms, and threatenings terrifies;
The other child in her embrace he spied,
(Weak safty!) and thus proudly scoffing cries:
There is no reason I should thee divide
From him, whom Love to thee so strictly ties.
And since we may not such dear knots unty,
It Is fit he nailed should in thy bosom die.
LVII.
The silly wretch, like an affrighted Deer,
That to some shady Covert swift retires,
Between those Mounts of Snow, that chosen were
By Love, to keep his Seeds of liveliest fires,
Then under either breast, possessed with fear,
From the flaming sword to hide his face desires;
And so much sense, and wit retained, to fly,
From rage, and understand what 'twas to die.
LVIII.
But all in vain; the horrid Villain bends
The point toward him, and, erring gives a wound
A cruel error! more cruel where it ends,
Which both transfixed, and threw them to the ground.
He both his arms, in falling, wide extends,
She under, him in her embraces bound.
And while at once, her voice and motion fade,
To her Son Crucified, the Cross she is made.
LIX.
One (Arpin) by thy Pensil so renowned,
With painted Charity might well compare;
Where the sweet children in her arms are bound,
And in her bosom all her Bounty share.
(Such seemed the Lady fallen on the ground)
Barefoot, undressed with her disheveled hair;
And above her, tender, and full of Grace,
Shined five most lovely branches of her race.
LX.
For though The King's Edict did only cite,
Mothers with sucking Infants to appear;
Yet some of riper Age, with great delight,
To the fatal Court by her conducted were:
So, that fraternal Love did them invite
To entertain themselves, and prattle there.
And wheresoever she sat her feet, or moved,
To keep them in her view she always loved.
LXI.
The first a Scholar was, but very Young,
Nor could the notes of his small Tablet tell;
Beginning then to learn the Hebrew tongue,
Nor could the scattered lines distinguish well.
When see! his head was with a blow, so strong
Cut off, it straight into his bosom fell,
And on the guiltless Book, as there he stood,
Writ his last Fate, in Characters of Blood.
LXII.
This head thus severed from the body, straight
The Villain to another runs, in have,
Who on an apple (most unfortunate)
Then fed, an apple of the bitter'st taste!
Quite through his throat (as he the pleasing bait
Took in) the guilty steel the Murderer past;
And with one cruel blow, his vital breath
Cut off, he swallowed, with the sword, his death.
LXIII.
The third there, wantonly, leaped to and fro,
Upon a fancied Palfry made of Cane;
Poor wretch! he knew not by what sudden blow,
Of a most cruel Fate, he should be slain.
When see! that Hand, that did no pity know,
Stabbed him, and forc d his careere restrain:
He struck him down, and left him on the place
To tilt with death, then past with smiles in s face.
LXIV.
The beauteous relics of this lovely frame,
The fourth, and fifth, among the rest, were there;
Their grieving Mother's copy (but that name
Must cease hereafter) two fair twins they were.
One ('mong the Troops) pursued his little game,
(Whipping his Top) where streams of blood appear;
And wholly on his childish sport intent,
Thought not at all of the most sad event.
LXV.
Against him the cruel Homicide straight bent
His hand, and weapon, and comes on amain;
But it succeeded not to his intent,
Although the mortal wound was not in vain.
While interposed, by chance, the other went,
Near to his Brother, and was sudden, slain.
Not Me (said he) but thine own folly blame,
Which thus to anticipate thy ruin came.
LXVI.
Then the Surviver of the Five, to hide
Under her Robe the weeping Mother steals;
But he his own escape could not abide,
But, puiling, that detects which she conceals.
She all the means to keep him under tried,
While (childish) he the Pious fraud reveals.
Poor fool! alas! He could not silent there
Continue, 'cause he had not learned to fear.
LXVII.
She most unhappy, and ill-counsell'd too,
(To whom Love, sense, and Life did grief impart)
Dismayed, and pale (as death) no better knew
Then, sadly, through her eyes to pour her heart.
But the Cry still grew loud, as if to show
Whither the sword, and fury should divert:
The voice he follows, and (the fatal sound
Discovered) trace'd the way to give the wound.
LXVIII.
As against the greedy, and rapacious Kite,
The fearful Hen strives to defend her Brood;
So she, against the Murderer, the fight
A while maintained, but all could do no good.
For he, who did in cruelty delight,
Cut with the sword his throat, then all in blood,
Most horribly involved the Infant lies
Among his brothers carcases, and dies.
LXIX.
As when, overwhelmed in tears, the Theban Queen
Beheld the Arrows swiftly fall from Heaven,
Whence in one Day th Delian Powers had been
Revenged, and took away seven lives, and seven.
At length, when the last fatal shaft was seen
To fall, and the last mortal wound was given;
At the sad sight amazed, and weary grown
Of Life, she fixed, and turned into a stone.
LXX.
Such the poor woman, while she yet survived,
Stood stupify'd among her children slain
Of warmth, of Color, and of Sense deprived,
Nothing of Motion, Soul, or Life remain.
You could not say She Is dead, or that She lived,
A Statue of white Marble, free from stain,
All purely white, but when her Sons, who bled
So near, had stained her snowy limbs with Red.
LXXI.
At length the cruel mixture over, and over
She turns (such vigor Pity then supplied)
On all sides the loved relics to explore,
Which there the various forms of slaughter hide.
The mangled members all besmeared with gore,
(Love to her hand in this sad work was guide)
She quickly recollects, together lays,
And of last exequies the Honor pays.
LXXII.
With tears she bathes them, and does thus complain,
Wretch that I am! are these dear pledges mine?
Whose dismal sight pierces my Heart again,
Prompts me to incorporate, and with them join.
Here nothing, but most horrid heaps remain,
Of Fragments raised by rage, and cursed design;
Nothing but bloody Piles, and limbs, that are
Lopped off, and scattered, as in fields of War.
LXXIII.
I late was wont (and 'twas not long ago.)
For you (poor children) silken threads to spin,
Or Coats of linen upon you bestow,
Which, with my own hand, I did first begin.
But now how infamous my labors show!
Where the sword's cruel marks, are only seen,
Made by a murdring hand, these ruins are,
(Though from another) left to my repair.
LXXIV.
Are these (alas!) those lovely limbs! those gay!
Which from your mother you did first assume?
O Stars! that me to ruin did betray!
Is such my miserable Flesh become?
Among all these wounds, and blood, these, these are they,
These beloved Heads I know, is it then your doom,
That I should (while to me you thus return)
For the sad relics of my bowels mourn?
LXXV.
Oh sweetest Faces! mirrours of my Heart!
Where I my self was wont to recreate;
Sons of these eyes! (eyes that with sorrow smart)
In which I tasted all delights of late.
O Lips! where Love with kisses would divert,
And intermingled smiles himself would sat.
Alas, what Hellish monsters now combine,
Thus cruelly to mix your blood with mine.
LXXVI.
Let me these limbs distinctly touch, at least,
Though with my touch (I fear) they will break again;
Wretch! I my sons thus fatally deceas't
Lament, yet know not, for which I complain!
For while with this dire paleness you are possesst,
I must distracted and confused remain;
And all the beauty, that I once might boast,
In this your want of blood, I see is lost.
LXXVII.
Art thou my Firstborn? sure it cannot be;
This Head so late cut off, cannot be thine;
Dire change! to this thy Body, who was He,
Who could another Face so unlike join.
Dear children, now no hopes remain for Me,
All joys, I, in your eyes to Death resign.
Here my griefs swell, yet cannot I more bewail,
Your Fate with tears whose springs are dry, and fail.
LXXVIII.
She faints, her looks all pale no voice, or sound
Of words, but breathless, and unmoved her eyes;
While a black storm, of thousands swords the ground
Shakes all around, and through all quarters flies.
Where such Stars reign, and such a King is found,
They fix a curse on all Nativities.
Happy, who was unborn; or if then born,
Who from his Birth, nere saw a second morn.
LXXIX.
But what afflicts thee? why do thou complain,
(Vile World) that the Age is rude, or bad the Times?
That Fraud now flourishes, and Vices reign?
That Faith, and Truth inhabit not thy climes?
Virtue, brave Minds, and noble Souls, in vain
Languish, and grieve to see the growth of Crimes;
Since clearest Innocence could perish so,
And from that Day lies murdered, here, below.
LXXX.
Rivers of blood now flow; nothing is heard
But doleful mourning, shouts of rage, and ire,
Horror, and Death, Herod alone appeared
with pleasure the sad Objects to admire.
The Slaughter feasts him; and (which others feared)
He praised the wounds, that kept his joys entire.
With greedy appetite he reckons all
The blows, and still observes them, as they fall.
LXXXI.
Mean while the People full of grief, and sad,
With lamentable Cries their Fate bemoan,
Trembling with memory of what they had
Beheld, the King fixed in his joys alone,
(As the Sun s warmth makes poisonous Serpents mad)
Seems through their Pity to all ill more prone:
Biting his Lips, he foames; his eyes with flame
Are filled, and gnashing Teeth his rage proclaim.
LXXXII.
Now from the place he rose from whence before,
The effects of his dire Fury he had seen;
Then nearer went, resolving to explore
The Shambles of Tyranny, and therein
Sees corpse dispersed (like wracks upon the Shore)
Wracks of Mortality, that there had been
Late drowned, in children's blood, whose horrid Tide
Their Swathbands, and their Members seemed to hid^
LXXXIII.
Over these dismal Piles, these bloody Heaps,
(Dreadful to think on) He, insulting, goes;
Over gaping sides, and cloven heads he leaps
Whence of warm blood a reeking deluge flows
There as in streams, clear, flowing in their Deeps,
Himself he views, and's inward pleasure shows;
And as the Wretches lay upon the ground,
Measures with his own hand each fatal wound.
LXXXIV.
So a fierce Dragon from his Den, with green
And shining wings, and Scarlet Crest ascends,
To view the Sun, by him before not seen,
And then his wide and dreadful Jaws extends;
Erects his Scales, that shine, as they had been
With rough, and squallid Gold enlay'd, then bends
His rage against the Light of Heaven and throws
Poison from's trident-tongue where e're he goes.
LXXXV.
Some covered over with ugly stains he there
Beheld lie languishing with deadly pain:
And in their Mothers arms uncertain are
Whether in death or life they yet remain.
Others expose their hearts that open were,
And quite deprived of life; then show again
Their Faces shaped for pity, and for love;
But objects now of grief and sorrow prove.
LXXXVI.
Others whose vital Humor was not spent,
And from their panting hearts yet largely flows
While blood by Vomit from their Mouths is sent,
(As when a sinking Bark near harbor rows)
Some one by swimming, would his Fate prevent,
And himself on some swelling billow throws;
But spent, and breathless in this last effort,
Sinks in his Mothers arms, and dies in the Port.
LXXXVII.
But the sad Women some their tender cheeks
Beat with their hands, their lovely tresses tare;
Here one her naked bosom, Frantic, strikes,
Sighs not, nor groans, but houling rends the air:
Another breast, with lamentable skreeks,
(Like Aetna) fumes; her eyes like Ganges are;
Some against the King, some against Heaven exclaim,
And some their griefs, that had not killed them, blame.
LXXXVIII.
There one, to give her griefs a silent vent,
Near to her Son, late murdered, prostrate lies:
Quite stupid in the Act; her self she spent
In groans, and with deep sighs her self destroys:
Another checks her sorrow, as content
To give her scarce-dead Sons their Obsequies;
And gath 'ring on their Lips their fleeting breath,
Stamps there departing kisses, cold as Death.
LXXXIX.
The squalid, dismal spoils, and torn Remains
Of a pale little Corpse; another there,
Within a covering, cleans'd from bloody stains,
An object of extremest Pity bare;
And while her heart to water, through her veins
Distills, and while her soul dissolves to air,
Her Bosom, late his Cradle, is become
By her so strict Embrace, in Death his Tomb.
XC.
Tired with this sight, not satisfied with blood,
Herod would now his greedy eyes divert
On the soft Torrent, and Vermilion sloud,
And in that tepid Bath caressed his heart;
Of late, like troubled streams, but now, they stood
Like settled Pools, and calm in every part,
Only a Gale of sighs, as they the world
Forsook, with circles had the Surface curled.
Notes upon the Third Book.
Stanza I.
This Painter so commended by our Author was Gioseppi Cesari d' Arpino,
cotemporary with Marino, a Facorite to three successive Popes; for his
excellent Pieces, and for a Piece of St. Michael, presented to Lewis the 13th.
the French King, beside other considerable gratuities, had the Order of St.
Michael conferred upon him.

Stanza V.
Bethlehem was called the City of David, where his Ancesters dwelt from the
time of Obed, of whom J^sse ^ineally descended. It was not the least of the
Tribe of Judah, ^et we no where find it celebrated for any magnificent or
stately building which the Poet here deseribes, till the Birth of our Savior
gave it reputation, and after his death stored it with many stately Edifices of
Devotion, through the Piety of several Princes, as Constantine the Great, his
Mother He^ena, etc.

The End of the Third Book.
THE SLAUGHTER OF THE INNOCENTS.
BOOK IV. Limbus.
I.
Surcharged with storms, such as were never known,
The dismal day, a dismal night succeeds,
As if it had intended to bemoan
The Infants Exequies in saddest weeds:
The rain in Cataracts was poured down,
With all the horrors that thick darkness breeds:
And from this mute Confusion every where,
Her sighs high winds, her groans loud Thunder were.
II.
Thus, as content, though not content within,
The King into his Palace goes again,
And, in that Furnace, where they did begin,
The furious flames does still alive retein;
And against the Children his accursed design
Keeps fresh within his heart, and every vein,
Fearing that in some houses unreveal'd
The Relics of his Fear might be concealed.
III.
He calls Malacche, such a a villain none
Ever knew, of all Mankind the damnedst Knave;
More cruel, then the cruell'st Lestrigon,
Should all that cursed Race rise from the Grave;
Born amongst Thieves, a Jebusite, and grown
Up, among wild beasts, which him their Nature gave;
So very ugly, that if Likeness might
Assume a Body, 'twould himself assright.
IV.
Besides his thin-hair'd Chin, and his bald Head,
His narrow Temples, and thick bristled Brow,
Three Teeth, a Nose that on his Face was spread;
A piercing look his eyes unequal throw,
The best of which by chance had perished;
Over which athwart, an ample scarr did grow;
The stamp, and Character of Jew, and Greek,
In's Forehead, and his Face, as Trophies stick.
V.
Go seek (said he) through all, and with thee take
A Guard, and if (in any place) you find
Children alive, a final slaughter make;
Do, as you are wont, and follow thine own mind.
I Will do it (replied the Villain) for thy sake,
I scorn their loss, and never think Heaven unkind;
For this sole cause, that you would have it done,
To show my obedience, I Will first kill my Son.
VI.
While Herod thus within himself designed
A lasting Monument of his Rage to raise,
Malecche no less impiously inclined,
His Orders for the Fact no more delays;
A strict observer of his Masters mind
To act their parts his Soldiers he conveys:
No Servant to so merciless a Lord
So void of Pity could the world afford.
VII.
As when, the burning Heats of Summer past,
The fair Astraea balances the year,
And Sol more temperate rays, and just does cast,
The days are mild, and Trees ripe Apples bear.
To prey upon their Fruit the Sterlings haste,
And marshalled in their several Troops appear;
And while far off they hover in the air,
The frighted Peasants for their grapes despair.
VIII.
So this perfidious, and guilty Crew,
Where any Branches of the Hebrew stock,
They heard were hid, the bloody tract pursue,
Leaving the slain, and to fresh slaughter flock;
As in the Egaean, when South winds renew
The War, the Palaces, and every rock,
Echo with noise: so, sad and doleful cries
Of Women, and of Children strike the Skies.
IX.
As if they, now, their Walls, and lofty Gates
Surpised beheld, and sinking all in flames;
While the proud Foe, the Houses scales, elates
His Voice, and blood, and death aloud proclaims;
Her breast afflicted Bethlem penetrates
With strokes, and her dire Fate lamenting blames.
And with so loud a voice to God she cries,
That Rama's Hill to the sad sound replies.
X.
As trembling stems of Corn the Sickle reaps,
Or heavy ploughs tear up the tender flowers,
Innumerable Children so in heaps
Fall near their Mothers side. The Sword devours
All that it finds; through all, insulting, leaps,
And, in full streams the blood of Natives pours,
The miserable People cannot fly
Their rage, and know no Refuge, but to die.
XI.
Into a little Cottage, among the rest,
The barbarous Malecche broke his way,
Where two sweet Boys he finds, one at the breast
Of's Mother, at her feet the other lay:
This with her foot she rocked, and lightly pressed,
And would with pleasant Songs to sleep betray:
The other from white Springs sucked milk, and sound
More than the milk, kind kisses to abound.
XII.
Instead of a Salute, the Traitor leapt
To seize the Infant, in the Cradle laid;
And with a dreadful voice, as there he slept,
Awaked him, and most terribly dismayed;
Nor long his murdering sword from's throat he kept,
But to a lasting Lethargy betrayed;
And made him find (alas!) how very near,
The confines betwixt Death and Sleep appear.
XIII.
Soon as this Trial on the first was found,
The Sword, against the other sucking, was employed
And in the Nape of's neck inflicts a wound,
Which through his Jaws straight sent a purple tide,
And with 't his Food. His little soul is drowned
In blood, and milk that flows within beside;
While still the sharp, and cruel point was pressed
Forward, and fixed his Tongue unto his breast.
XIV.
The miserable Mother had, of late,
Another Birth conceiv d within her Womb,
Toward which the Suckling sunk as if with that
He sought to join, and find a living Tomb.
One in her belly, the other in a strait
Embrace she held, till sharing in their doom
She fell. Strange Fate! not to be seen again,
Three in one body by one stroke were slain.
XV.
From thence into another house he made
His way, and there a fair young Lady found;
Where, newly circumciz'd, her Son was laid,
The blood as yet not stanch'd, but fresh the Wound;
He lifting up his armed hand, the Blade
In The blood which she would wipe away was drowned,
And to the Wound was given by Heavens Edict,
His cruel Arm does that of death inflict.
XVI.
She, that she might a little life restore,
As he then languish d, straight the Teat applies,
But he his mothers milk all turns to gore,
And her white bosom with deep purple dies.
His blood to water then is turned, by store
Of tears, which she pours on him from her eyes:
And while her breasts the crimson liquor dashed,
Her Son's sweet face the candid humor washed.
XVII.
This done he left her, and goes, boldly, through
All rooms, in places most retired he pries,
Searches all Cabinets, and with his Crew
Turns up the Beds, and all that on them lies;
At length, within a little Couch (where two
Fair Twins were laid) the lovely Pair he spies;
In Beauty, and in Form so like they were,
That like the Twins of Heaven they did appear.
XVIII.
Born so unhappy, and preserved so Ill,
Alike in Form, in Sex they different are;
One Soul two several Bodies seems to fill,
And in two Hearts a single life they share.
Nature to make them like used all her skill,
And by simplicity they coupled were;
And this new Janus made in Two, one bed
In common shared, as they one Aspect had.
XIX.
But that dear Union fierce Malecche broke,
And quite dissolved. Oh happy chance (said he)
That love, which you does now so strictly yoke,
So sweet in Life, in Death your Tie shall be;
Nor would I, 'twixt you, envy now provoke,
Since Heaven your likeness made to this Degree;
But, as the world you entered at your Birth,
Fair Twins, such Twins you now shall quit the earth.
XX.
His Irresistible, strong hand, upon
The nearest to him seized (as this he said)
Thence through a lofty Window threw him down,
Which light, and air into the room conveyed.
The other down the stairs was headlong thrown,
By's Foot (the stairs of rocky stone were made)
So that all bruised, and broken every stair,
An ample Tribute of his blood did share.
XXI.
Each of them seemed with mutual sighs to mourn,
And their own Exequies accompany,
As two fair branches from one Cyontorn;
She for him languishing, and for her, he;
So guiltless both, and both so lately born!
By stones they died, as for Adultery;
For Fate ordained they at their birth should have
One womb, one Bed, and at their Death, one Grave.
XXII.
Thence, where he sound a poor, and modest Maid,
Who, as a guard, did on two children wait,
The one was, slumbring, in a Cradle laid,
The other in a Bathing Vessel sat;
This with the Linen often laughing played,
Naught could the others forward moan abate:
Born of two Venters, but one Father: One
A living Mother had, the other none.
XXIII.
Soon as the Assailer, their poor Mother spied,
So suddenly within the room arrive,
The Son-in law she quits, her self employed
to her own Son, to keep him still alive:
She takes him in her arms, and terrified,
First thought how she might his escape contrive.
But, an Humane, though not maternal Love
To the other, would not suffer her to move.
XXIV.
With her own Son, toward him, whom she desired
To save, she runs, and (poor Fool!) in her way
Met them, who him whom she had safe retired
Out of the water, did to the Sword betray.
Bald Barabasso, and Malecche fired
With rage, on her kind Folly torments lay,
And, in her sight, to one the Vessel, there,
Is made his Coffin, to others Bed his Bier.
XXV.
Overcome with this surprising Message, cold
Seizes her trembling heart; her looks grow pale,
To the earth she falls, and what she did behold,
So cruel was, her life and spirits fail.
Some strangled in the bands, that them enfold,
Struggle, and strive for life till Death prevail,
While these in water, milk, and tears, and blood
Sink, and are suffocated in the flood.
XXVI.
From thence away with like impetuous rage
Into an house of Citizens he broke,
Among whom one married in her tender age,
Was newly then freed from the Nuptial Yoke:
Yet some fair branches still her love engage,
Two at one birth from her Lucina took,
But now she saw her self, made in one year
Wife, Mother, Widow, and without an Heir.
XXVII.
Of these by the Neck Malecche seizes two;
Another by the feet: by the arm the last,
One with his Lance into the fire he threw,
His feet the second squeezed to death; then past
To a third, whom unto a Beam he drew
And hanged; into a Well, the fourth he chased;
By several torments thus they murdered were
That every Element a Death might share.
XXVIII.
The various spoils (alas!) who can relate
With which death seemed so rich, so full of pride;
This from the Trunk the head does separate:
That from the shoulder does the arm divide.
By strangling this gives the last stroke of Fate:
That with his Sword transfixed a trembling side;
And amidst rage, 'midst terror, grief, and thrall,
Fury, with all the Sisters, runs through all,
XXIX.
The armless Trunks a dismal sight afford,
And strangled Bodies that the ground o'respread,
Heads gasping, newly severed by the Sword,
Some are wrung off, some trampled on till dead;
Even ruthless Cruelty her self abhorred,
While Death in various shapes such Triumphs led,
And yet her Fury was too great to cease,
But malice made the poisonous gall increase.
XXX.
The Morn was risen from the Indian Sea,
And by her blushes showed the approaching Sun,
While Heaven the shades had mixed with every Ray,
And Day late married to the Night begun.
Herod perplexed, and troubled with delay,
His heart enflamed until the deed was done:
He rose, and's Royal Ornaments resumed,
His Scepter, and his Purple Robes perfumed.
XXXI.
Straight through the lofty Palace dismal cries,
Sad houlings, and most loud complaints were heard:
Women, and Men, with all the Ecstasies
Of grief, and sorrow every where appeared:
When see! a Messenger in doleful guise,
Pale in his looks, and all with blood besmeared,
Came breathless, and while sweat his face bedews,
Bows to the King, and thus relates the news.
XXXII.
I am (Sir) an unworthy Instrument,
Of that dire Massacre, which was, last night,
By your command performed: and now am sent
To tell a message neither of delight,
Nor happiness to you; if each event
I should distinctly, as 'twas done, recite
'Twould be a memorable story, and
(I must speak truth) much done by this my hand.
XXXIII.
Under your Royal Ensigns (as enjoined
By you) most readily we went away,
Under Malecche's conduct, all inclined
Your Orders to perform, without delay;
None of us, though a Father, but designed
To his own loss, your pleasure to obey;
On then we silent marched, concealed from sight
Of all, by the shades and horror of the night.
XXXIV.
The Marketplace first seized, and both the gates,
All Streets and Avenues blockt up, and barred;
On every side enclosed, in greatest straits,
Each place so well our faithful Soldiers guard
That no way open Fortune, or the Fates
^ould find to make escape, or death retard;
Our Captain gave the word through all, around,
To give the Signal to the Trumpet's sound.
XXXV.
By virtue of your Royal Edict, he
Commands, that all who arms for use could bear,
Their houses, and the City instantly
should quit, and a strong Guard, without, prepare;
That so the wicked Traitor might not fly
Our search, and none t'assist his flight should dare:
A Traitor, who, there, and inclined
To mischief, something against the King designed.
XXXVI.
The Citizens all promptly straight compli'd
With your command: none backward to obey,
And in a moment from all streets we spied
Children through the dark shades to fly away:
For we believed the number less that did
Than those who yet concealed in secret lay;
'Twas so, and then a thousand Infants slain,
By several sorts of wounds our Weapons stain.
XXXVII.
Nothing but sighs, deep groans, complaints, and cries
From every place, on every side we hear,
With horror in all houses, before their eyes
Murder, and Death triumphant now appear:
Here scattered Swaths, and broken Limbs arise
In heaps; in blood warm Intrails swimming; there,
Should I what then I did my self conceal
'Twere vain (Sir) since my Acts themselves reveal.
XXXVIII.
When thus in slaughter we the night had spent,
And were upon return, at break of day,
A sad, but unexpected Accident,
(Dire chance unheard of) intercepts our way.
O could your Majesty have been content,
That we had been less ready to obey!
But what do silly People know? What ill
Can give them blame, that is done against their will.
XXXIX.
Our hands too ready were (alas) too prone
All our desires to satisfy you were.
With blood, rage, shame our hearts were drunk, and none
Saw what they did; dark and obscure the air.
The Fault might be excused, but it is done;
This said, his Tongue did farther speech forbear:
But Herod urged him on, and he again
Begun, and thus the King did entertain.
XL.
While we (as I have said) your high command
Had thus performed, resolving to be gone,
A cunning Soldier of Malecche's Band,
(His Spy who all his secrets knew alone,)
Met us, in haste, to let him understand,
That he a woman saw (to him unknown)
Who, with two Children, in her garment wrapped,
Fled thence, and to a secret place escaped.
XLI.
Then not far distant from the Palace, where
From the soft stream the Royal Garden sees
With such delight proud Libanus to rear
His head, led on by cruel destinies,
A Postern door our Guide approached, and there
(...) While he desired to act all by surprise)
Through crannies of the broken posts appeard
A little light, and straight a voice was heard.
XLII.
Within a Woman was, whose looks put on
All that of fear or sorrow could be found;
Solicitous for her two Sons, the one
Laid in her bosom, to other on the ground
With sighs, mixed with a sad, and trembling tone,
Drawn from her heart, where doubtful thoughts abound,
To one (dear Child) where shall I save, or hide
Thee? in the Abyss of deepest seas (she cried.)
XLIII.
Samaria once had Women (as it is said
By Fame) so cruel, that with hunger pressed;
Flesh, born of their own bowels, re-conveyd
To them, and so on their own Issue feast.
And may not this, that their Rage lawful made,
To Me, in Pity be allowed, at least?
And to conceal you from these Harpies Pride,
My dearest entrails, in my entrails hide.
XLIV.
But after Patterns of such Ills, so great,
I Have often op^d my bosom unto thee
(Dear Child) that so thou might thy hopes repeat,
After my Death to have a Life from Me.
Nay even my Soul thou may lay open yet,
If with my Soul thou may concealed be;
How greedily should I receive thee, here
Within my very Soul, thou Soul more dear.
XLV.
Thus reasoning with her self, the child held in
Her arms, within a Vessel deep and wide,
That lately filled with Bacchus spoils had bin
(Not yet quite empty) silent, seeks to hide.
Then adds, to thee (O Vessel) free from sin
Of fraud, I all my Joy, and Peace confide;
And let me, 'midst such Ruins, thee, a kind
Depository of my Treasure find.
XLVI.
More she would say, but at her back she hears
Our Captain's rage, and voice, who at the door
Knocked, and straight in he breaks; in pieces tears
The locks, and bars, more furious then before.
One hidden in the Caske; the other her fears
Snatching into her arms, she flying bore
Into the most remote, and secret room
Of all the house, and waited there her doom.
XLVII.
She hid him there, but might have with him fled
From the dire mischief that was then so near,
Had she had time to leave there, in his steed,
Some other Child, that might like this appear.
But from this fatal Risque she hop d this Head
First to secure, which she esteemed most dear;
Or with a wile so merciless, and strange,
Make one to take the other's sad revenge.
XLVIII.
'Twas wonderful she past thus undescry'd
By Us; but through the dark, and gloomy air,
And horrors that appeared, on every side,
None did consider what she acted there.
Besides our rage swelled to so high a Tide,
That we ran blind, and madding every where;
And since she was not in the Palace seen,
None did suspect this chance could e're have been.
XLIX.
But our Malecche, who exactly knew
The place, where this dear Theft then hidden lay;
To boast his power, and his fierce rage pursue,
(As he his furious humor would betray)
Still threatening, and in's actions dreadful too,
Would scofling with her sad misfortune play;
And, with cruel cunning, on her smiled,
To cloak's intent, before her Sons were killed.
L.
And now his hands, then he his feet employed
Against her, now tares her Vest, and then her hair;
Tell me (said he) where is it thou did hide
Thy two Sons; tell me (vile wretch) where they are?
And thou (said she) whose hands with blood are died,
Where are those Babes whom thou have murdered? where?
Eyes of so many wretched Mothers! Thou,
While I of thousands speak, seek'st only two.
LI.
Dear Children! who to Me like Stars did show,
Whom I so fondly Nursed up, and caresst,
What Nest protects you now? did you but know
What cruel talons snatch you from my breast,
That 'midst these wracks, chains, arms, and dangers, tho
Torments of quickest flames did me invest.
This Heart (which now no other light can see)
Robbed of a Mother's faith shall never be.
LII.
Whither, O whither can you now retire?
(My hapless Babes!) what fortune can you save?
You are; perhaps, to Ashes turned by fire;
Or in deep waters now have found a Grave.
Food, or for Dogs, or Birds! or Winds conspire,
With raging Seas, and you for pastime have.
Or the dire thirst, of barbarous swords, late drench
In blood of Innocents, perhaps have quenched.
LIII.
Quenched? alas no; there is nothing can restrain
This barbarous rage, (I see) it flames so high.
To this Malceche says, Thou do, in vain,
What cannot be denied to Me, deny.
Fond Faith, dull Piety, mad Love to feign
That as a Secret, which must open ly.
The violence of the sword, with quickest force,
Deprives a Mother's heart of all remorse.
LIVE.
Art thou the valiant Mother; thou the wise,
Who would conceal, what is already known?
Who Life neglectest, and do Death despise,
For Love of thy dear children this is done.
Like motions of Love in Herod rise,
And him invite too, to preserve his own.
Thus menacing he spoke, and she with brave,
And manly courage this stout answer gave.
LV.
Plant Me, among swords, or hottest flames, if thou
Know how to kill; Death will great kindness be,
If thou desire to terrify me now,
With Life, and not with Death then threaten me.
Thus the brave Woman with a constant brow;
Her courage greater then before they see;
When the poor infant, in the Vessel laid,
Himself, with childish cries (alas!) betrayed.
LVI.
^^lecche seized the Vessel, which upon
The floor he rolled, and with it laughing played;
But when with pointed steel naught could be done,
And that the poignard small impression made;
When all the strength and force of's arm was gone,
What might be done by fire he then essayed;
To the flames he drives it, and the hearth was filled
With blood, and wine, through numerous holes distilled.
LVII.
As when the Agrigentine Bull those dire,
And doleful notes sent from the hollow brass;
The Bull not his own bellowings did expire,
But the contrivers dying voice it was:
So as the unlooked for clement, the fire
Nourished and through the hollow wood did pass
The infused liquors mixed, increased the flame,
And thence most sad, and mournful murmurs came.
LVIII.
Amazed, at this sad fight, the mother stood,
Collecting all the furies in her breast,
Like a fell Tygress in some Hircan wood,
At once, of all her young late dispossessed;
With nimble feet the hunter is pursued
Through all the sands: and in the furious quest,
Her face with threats of cruel pity, scouls,
And high Niphate trembles, while she houls.
LIX.
Straight to take up the other Child she turned,
And amidst us (poor woman!) held him, where
She saw the Pile wherein the first was burned,
And fed the fire, that filled her with despair.
With alike heat, at once, she raged, and mourned,
And her mixed grief, and fury to declare,
To turn him all to Ashes straight (she said)
Let him within this bosom, here, be laid.
LX.
Here as in an Immortal Furnace, here
Love will preserve his Ashes still alive;
And since these murders are, to you, so dear,
And you will me of that best part deprive,
It Is fit that I should cruel too appear,
And quietly to you this other give.
Then take him since I must deprived remain
Of Both: that Dead, this other must be slain.
LXI.
As this she spoke a poignard, yet with gore
Reeking I saw, but knew not in what hand;
Cruel, as stout, who the Child hid before,
Did with an hundred wounds to death command.
So, that the Soul for flight to choose a door,
Among so many, doubtful seemed to stand;
Nor knew, which way it should the sally give,
But a long space did, even in Death, survive.
LXII.
And now at length, have I (the Traitress said)
My dearest Country, and unhappy Son,
At once revenged, and the foundation laid
Of future quiet, by what I have done.
You, who the cruel Tyrant's slaves are made,
You truly ought to vindicate alone
On false Albina's guilty blood, the ill,
And Ruins that the house of Herod fill.
LXIII.
You Have killed my very heart, yet shall not you
Too joyful, at my misery, hence remove;
The last, whom in my bosom here I slew,
Was not my Son by nature, but by love.
And let Albina know, that this is true,
Inurs'd young Alexander: Him above
All other Herod loved, this pretty Boy,
Dead here upon the ground, was all his joy.
LXIV.
This as she spoke, our Captain with a mind
Inflamed, resolved her fury to chastise;
But in an instant (how I could not find)
A sword she drew, or else did it surprise,
With which her hand a valiant act designed,
Above her Sex; wounds him, and straight he dies.
I scarce believed my self, when falling I
Saw him besmeared with his own blood, and die.
LXV.
At this strange chance our company with fear
Were all surpised, and troubled in their mind;
And while this unexpected news they hear,
All thought that something worse remained behin'd.
But we the Nurse have taken prisoner,
And under a strict guard have now confind.
A single death for such a crime as this,
Too small a punishment, and torment is.
LXVI.
All this the Tyrant with impatience hears,
And would not stay till he had made an end;
But furious as the King of Winds appears,
When with the Elements he would contend;
And against the World a dreadful War prepares,
While his fierce Troops from their deep Caves ascend.
Him to an inner Room his fury drives,
Where strait fair Dorida, his Queen, arrives.
LXVII.
Just then, unhappy, She, the private Throne,
Of her withdrawing Room forsook; her Train
Of Damsels who upon her wait, bemoan
The loss, and sadly, full of grief, complain;
Before her, some the bloody spoils upon
Their arms then carried, of the infant slain.
And as she sighing came, with tears her eyes
Enflamed; Where is my Bliss? my Life? She cries.
LXVIII.
As when the Goddess, who did Corn invent,
Sought her lost Daughter in Sicilian plains;
With flaming Pines in Etna steeped she went,
And to her grief, and fury gave the reins.
Through the air their course her rapid Dragons bent,
(While her sick mind no comfort entertains)
In a strict search of the fair straggling Maid,
Who soon as seen, was to a Rape betrayed.
LXIX.
Such, there, she came, and when her swelling eyes
Saw the loved Corpse, such pity seized her heart,
And to so great an height her sorrows rise,
That her fixed silence nothing could divert.
All mangled at her Feet the Body lies;
Pierced in the breast, the sides, and every part.
Engraild with wounds, whose strangeness all surprise,
Like Argos with an hundred bleeding eyes.
LXX.
How the two living Sapphyrs then were quite
Deprived of Luster, and their trembling flames!
How her eyes languish'd, with a dying Light,
While in sad Accents She her grief proclames!
How her deep sighs did then the Stars invite
To pity, while her hand her breasts inflames,
With blows, plucks off the Gold, the Roses breaks,
Of which Love had composed her Hair, and Cheeks!
LXXI.
At length her face to his she pressed, embraced,
And kissed him, then her self upon him threw;
Wh'hath dressed thee thus? (she said) who has defaced
My fairest Picture, and most like Me too?
In what dire rank are my offenses placed,
That in such manner Heaven should Me pursue?
Alas! dear Child must thy kind Father so
His Crown, and Scepter upon thee bestow.
LXXII.
Oh thou wild Beast, of all that are, most wild!
Hircanian Tigers to their Young are kind:
What fury against this, thy dearest Child
Made thee so cruel? or what rage so blind?
The have sated now thy will, thy Soul defiled
With all the cruelties, that fill thy mind.
Enjoy them; may his blood, and these my Woes,
Be thy sole Trophies, and thy Triumphs close.
LXXIII.
Tell Me, thou spirit of Serpents! Soul of Bears!
Thou Heart of Adamant! or hardest stone!
How could an Infant of such tender years
Betray thee, to whom Treason was unknown?
How could he, whose past Age so short appears,
Have will to do, what you fear may be done?
That this sad punishment, before the time,
Should be inflicted for a future Crime.
LXXIV.
Thou art not Man, nor born of Humane kind,
(As I believe) but rather of the rude,
And cruel Syrts, or Seas, enraged by wind,
Or of the Sphynxe's vile, and bloody brood.
Thy Birth Chimaera, or Hell's Dog designed,
With Scylla's and Charibdis rage endu d.
And thee, among devouring Troops of cursed,
Cyrenian Dragons, some dire Harpy nursed.
LXXV.
And do thou see it (Heaven) and suffer't too?
My Son! and yet I live? and thus delay,
With mine own hand this veil of life (for you
Alone valued by me, to take away?
No, no, since the cold frost and palid Dew
Of Death, o'respreads thy cheeks so young, so gay,
It is not fit that mine (which now can boast
No ornament) survive, when thou art lost.
LXXVI.
And since he, who thy Being gave, with thee
Has It cut off, and all my hopes overthrown,
In spite of Him, my soul, from fetters free,
Shall follow thee, wherever thou artgone.
Thy Hearse my Body shall accompany
The Fate of the Tree, and Fruit shall both be One.
And thus the cruel Murderer of my joys,
With one sad slaughter many lives destroys.
LXXVII.
Alas! how much more happy had thou bin,
(My dearest Infant) when with mournful cries,
To view the light of Day thou did begin,
If Death had then for ever closed thine eyes.
If when, with moan (thy language from within)
These breasts thou often did seek, for fresh supplies,
Instead of milk, which kindly from me flowed,
My hand a mortal poison had bestowed.
LXXVIII.
But this my Breast unto it self too kind,
Too foolishly injurious to thee;
When to another I a weight resigned
So dear, and suffered it so nursed to be.
But now as bitter, as beloved, thy mind,
It shall fulfill, and do it liberally.
I will that Debt with interest now make good,
Thy want of Milk, shall be supplied with Blood.
LXXIX.
At this sad language he began to melt,
His heart as hard, as hardest Alpine stone,
With pity touched, seemed to relent, and felt
A passion to his soul before unknown.
When with a Dagger hanging at a belt,
And in a golden sheath beneath her gown,
In her own breast she fixed so deep a wound,
She straight fell pale, and dead upon the ground.
LXXX.
Her Train of Women, at this sad surprise,
Could not the fury of her hand restrain;
Herod himself in have, with weeping eyes,
Endeavored to assist her, but in vain.
He trembled, and grew pale; his faculties,
Grief, wonder, and amazement all enchain.
He seemed a Statue, stiff, and pallid grown;
As late his heart, so now his limbs are stone.
LXXXI.
Thou foolish, barbarous Prince! What can thou say?
See, see how vain all humane Counsels are!
Wherein thou thought thy only safety lay,
Thou now do find thy mortal danger there;
Thy Son, and Kingdom both thou did betray,
While to secure them, thou did thus prepare.
Thy sentence on thee falls, and thou alone
Have punished thine own fault, before 'twas done.
LXXXII.
As when a Limb cut off, by some surprise,
Or by the sword receives to the quick a wound;
The blood straight backward as affrighted flies,
And for a while no signs of bleeding found.
But soon as pain o'th hurt the sense supplies,
Straight warm Vermilion streams overflow the ground.
And from the opened veins, the blood its course
Maintains, like waters from their native sourse.
LXXXIII.
So, sudden grief the cruel Tyrants tongue
A while restrained, and all his sense delayed,
Till through excess of anguish, in a throng;
His sighs broke out, and for words passage made.
Tears from his eyes, in rivulets straight sprung,
Like blood from's Soul, and inward Wounds betrayed.
At length he fell, where is wife, and son then lay,
Like Rocks of Marble, in a Crimson Sea.
LXXXIV.
See! to what dismal sight, these weeping eyes
Heaven has reserved? Will ye never close again?
Or that my griefs may give these warm supplies,
Must ye be forced still open to remain?
O Alexander! do not hear my cries?
Flowr of my Soul, cut off in the Bud, and slain!
O Doris! do not hear? Giv'st no reply?
But hid'st the Sun of thy fair eyes? Oh why?
LXXXV.
Wretch that I am! Which shall I first lament?
My Son? Or Thee? dear consort of my Bed;
Who in the prime of years from me art rent:
And He (alas!) no sooner born, but dead.
On you these tears shall for my self be spent,
Your Fate I Will weep, as ruins on my head.
My Crown shall now no other purple wear,
Then what the Tincture of your blood shall bear.
LXXXVI.
Poor Child! Of a most cruel Father born!
Under the influence of a Star severe;
Are these the Ensigns should thy brows adorn?
Is this the Throne, I have prepared thee here?
Oh with what tragique pomp the Fates here mourn!
My Nuptial Bed, is turned into a Bier.
Those Lights, which I to Hymen did commend,
Must now (alas!) sad exequies attend.
LXXXVII.
Oh my distracted Soul! What was designed
By my Fate, or thy folly? to what end
This mad advice, which made my reason blind?
So, that I could not even mine own defend;
Nor when the edict went out, could call to mind,
To draw him from the danger did impend.
But this (rebellious flames) was your design,
(Perfidious Stars!) your cruelty, not mine.
LXXXVIII.
But you (infernal Furies!) spurred me on,
To act all this, though guilty I remain
Of all these ills, of all this mischief done,
'Twas I contrived it all, I these have slain
My Life from Life, and honor from my Throne
I have cut off, and that which should sustain
With Me, and after Me my Race, and Crown,
I only have overthrown, and trampled down.
LXXXIX.
Now what revenge (thou most unhappy child,
Of an unhappy Mother) can suffice
For expiation of a rage, so wild?
What can thou from thy Sire accursed reprize?
Not thy perfidious Nurse with blood defiled,
Nor Troops, the Actors of my cruelties:
Nor if, at once, my kingdom to thy Shade,
And I, my self, a sacrifice be made.
XC.
The name of King, and Father I Will assume
No more, such titles too injurious were;
Vile Monster, Devil will me best become,
Unworthy thee, whom I have murdered here.
How much (since now too late I find my doom)
Do I, to those dead Infants, envy bear:
For since my Joys no longer now survive,
It Is fit that I this day should cease to Live.
XCI.
Yet could I wish, those naked Souls which I
Spoiled of their bodies, were now clothed again,
That spoiling them anew, their limbs might ly
Exposed to salvage beasts, winds, frost, and rain:
And should kind Heaven collect them, as they die,
That they may hidden from its sight remain;
Yet will I satisfy my grief, though Fame
Shall Me, most cruel through the World proclaim.
XCII.
Oh, who will give me here that sword, which all
My Joys cut off? for it is fit that I,
By the same weapon with my son should fall;
And since that Branch is broke, the stock must die.
Thus his complaints around the Country call,
To moan the Ruins of his Family.
While the most happy Spirits, already fled,
There wings, to'ards the Elysian Mansions, spread.
XCIII.
As at the entrance of some shady grove,
In the declining of a Summer's day,
In Troops the flying, little creatures move,
And in the trembling Light still waving play;
And to the Swains, and Shepherds seem, above,
Atoms inspired with life, by every ray.
So, that the false, and still removing light,
Deceives the Children, who pursue their flight.
XCIV.
Or as the busy, and industrious Bees
In Hybla's fresh, and odorif'rous air,
The spoils of April, from the rosy Trees,
And fragrant Lilies gather every where;
Whence (cunning Architects in all degrees)
Their well built Cells for Winter they prepare;
Ingenious Fabrics! with most stately rooms,
Of Virgin Wax, formed in odorous Combs.
XCV.
So full of Joy, and from their Bodies free;
Those happy souls toward Heaven take their flight
And visibly to some appeared to be
Wrapped up within a glorious cloud of Light,
A joyful Troop, a beauteous company
All crowned with flaming Diadems most bright,
And, in a Circle, which they largely spread,
They starry Garlands weave, and Dances lead.
XCVI.
The Sky was most serene, all clouds gave way,
And brightest Stars upon their triumphs wait.
The South, and Northern Winds their rage allay,
And calm to see their pleasant Dances sat;
The air, and gentle Breezes sport, and play,
And early birds with Songs congratulate.
Of Crimson dew the Morn did then prepare
Gems for her breasts, and Roses for her hair.
XCVII.
The vast Abysses, and death's Prison, where
The shades of ancient Heroes dwell, then smiled,
While those so bright, and glorious Lamps appear,
And the dark, Iron gates with luster guild.
The Royal Poet, and stout Shepherd there
Was seen, who, when a Boy the Giant killed;
His Sling, his Harp, and Scepter on the Shore,
Of Lethe lay, not used as heretofore.
XCVIII.
But then the dusky fields (that border near)
Where mournful birds on barren boughs reside,
And never silent are, impoverished were
While with fresh flowers to braid his hair he tried;
When a new light struck, through the gloomy air,
His eyes, and he their shining Ensigns spied;
His Harp resumed he from his sacred breast
Inspired with holy Fire this Song expressed.
XCIX.
Glad tidings! see, those Messengers of Joy,
Which unto us were promised long ago;
Behold those pure forerunners of the Day,
Who with Vermilion rays approach us so.
Now whatsoever, of old, did us annoy,
Shall cease, and we full liberty shall know.
The Sun is up, which guilds our dark shades over,
Let Us kneel, and all, at once, his Rise adore.
C.
To you, most longed-for Angels! to you Peace,
And Glory! who have that salvation gained,
Which we long, long have hoped: But who are these,
Who are with wounds and blood so strangely stained?
Who cut those throats? Whence did that Rage increase,
That on their Heads so cruel mischief rain d?
What heart against pity could so hardened be?
What hand, what Sword so fired with cruelty?
CI.
And you, that in your selves, your selves retain,
(Destructive storms!) what then did you repress?
What bridled you (ye winds?) What did restrain
(Thunder, and clouds!) Your rage from its excess?
So, that this act unpunished did remain,
And God s most just revenge seemed to be less.
An Act, that 'midst eternal Hate, and Ire
Furies amazed, and made Hell blush like fire.
CII.
O sacred! holy! O most blessed, and dear
Triumphant Martyrs! whom naught could subdue;
Heroes! who by your Captain chosen were
To die for him, before he dies for you.
Embittered Apples, pulled by hands severe!
Flowers, that, unblown, in his own garden grew:
Sweet Roses! died in your own blood, and born
To be cut off with wounds in groves of thorn.
CIII.
Most tender Lilly s! untouched Jessimine!
Wherein sweet'st streams of purple Nectar flow:
Preserved in Gods own Garden, made divine
TO enrich those Feasts he does in Heaven bestow.
Fair branches! that on earth did glorious shine,
Torn from the trunks whereon you once did grow!
Small, broken stones! on which the Church will lay
Its new Foundation, and its Honors pay.
CIV.
To us here languishing, our Saviors name
Upon your Virgin Foreheads writ, you bear.
Sweet sheep! whose looks your Innocence proclaim;
Immaculate, and whitest Doves you are.
Purged Holocausts, bright Offerings, free from blame!
Washed in the Lamb's, and your own blood most fair;
First Victims, that to the King of Saints were paid,
And by the cruel sword were open laid.
CV.
Welcome Illustrious Spirits; souls clear, and fair!
Most happy Bades! who, to us certain news
Of our approaching Jubilee now bear,
And long-expected Joys through all diffuse.
O sacred Drops! and every drop a Star!
Blood, which than Rubies Christ does rather choose,
As richest Gems selected for his own,
TO enrich his Diadem, and his Spouses Crown.
CVI.
O happy wounds! and signs that now declare
Past Martyrdom, with great'st Veracity;
Of Glory and Honor surest Pledges are,
That Grace and Love can loudest magnify.
Now who is he, who will not tears prepare
To bath you, and with kisses wipe you dry?
Or who is he whom pity will not move
To drink those streams are shed for wounded Love?
CVII.
With sprinklings of your blood, even Heaven desires,
It self to adorn, instead of its own Light,
The moon in such sine Purple now aspires
To paint her Face, and mix it with her white,
In such pure rivolets, Angels, and those Fires
That shine above, to view themselves delight;
The Sun's ambitious, in so fair a Sea,
Himself to impurple, and to drown the Day.
CVIII.
O most delightful, O most charming tears!
O dearest Sighs, and Groans that pleasures move!
From sound of which, the most harmonious Spheres
Make their high Consort as they turn above!
O sweetest Grief, which the loved Martyr bears
With all delight, and makes his Joys improve!
O pleasing Death, that does more glorious seem
Than Life it self, in honor and esteem.
CIX.
Loved Spirits! beauteous Souls, how great, how fair
Immortal Arches now does God for you
In The Empyraean Capitol prepare,
With Palms, and Crowns, and Blisses that ensue?
What greater glory, then, when Hell a War
Designs, their King, and Armies to subdue;
With naked Champions, who so took the field
Unarmed, and thus were made your Savior's shield.
CX
In that high starry Court, where now he reigns
In triumph, and from whence he sent you, there
With Angels, your Companions, the Remains
And spoils of his great Victory you shall share.
The Standard, there, of Death, with bloody stains,
And that of Innocence all white appear;
There, for a Trophy, 'mids those Troops displayed,
Large Banners, your torn Swathbands shall be made.
CXI.
Even in your torments O most happy you!
Who rather more of milk than blood did spend;
In your first day, your last night did ensue;
One day gave your Beginning, and your End.
Yet was it fit, before you either knew,
That you with Death and Sorrow should contend;
And with torn Sails your weak Barks first effort
Scarce made into the Sea, should gain your Port.
CXII.
We infirm Wrestlers: we (you now may say)
Fallen in the Lists up to God's bosom rise:
From bloody Paths we now the Milky way,
(New Stars) with purer white shall signalize.
Our Feet, which, now no weakness can betray,
Tread on the highest Spheres, and Earth despise.
We from a loose, and little Veil begun
To survey Heaven, before we saw the Sun.
CXIII.
As thus he sung, those glorious souls his Lays
Abruptly stopped, the shades straight vanish quite,
To Heaven their hands the Ancient Fathers raise,
Hoping a Period of so long a Night.
And through the horrors, of those gloomy ways,
The welcome Children (now a Burden Light)
Bear in their Arms, and iterate upon
Their holy checks their kisses, and their moan.
Notes upon the Fourth Book.
Stanza LXXXIV.
Herod had married this Doris, of his own Country, on whom he begat this
Alexander; whose death among these Innocents, when reported to Augustus: I had
rather (said he) be Herod's Swine, than his Son, because as a Jew he would let
the Swine live, but jealous of his Son, would murder him.

FINIS.
Errata,
Page 36. Stanza 47. for stocks read shocks. page 55. Stanza 112. for spise, r.
Spies.


