The Perfect HORSEMAN Or the Experienced SECRETS of Mr. MARKHAMS 50. Years
PRACTICE


THE PERFECT HORSEMAN* OR THE Experienced SECRETS OF Mr. MARKHAM'S Fifty Years
Practice. Showing how a man may come to be a General Horseman, By the knowledge
of these Seven Offices; VIZ. The BREEDER, FEEDER, AMBLER, RIDER, KEEPER, BUYER,
FARRIER. And now Published by Lancelot Thetford, Practitioner in the same Art
for the space of Forty Years.

The Second Edition.

LONDON. Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1656.

TO THE READER.
WEre not this the Of spring of a long Conception, and (after above fifty years
Experience) fitted for the birth, I would not now produce it into the World,
since so many of the same kind have already crept in before it, that this can
scarce expect the least portion of your Acceptance: Yet when I tell you, that
(notwithstanding all Mr MARKHAMS Promises in his former Books to lay open his
Cabinet Councels) you shall here find many most Rare Secrets of his, and yet
not so much his own, as his most intimate Friends, The Publisher her^of, to
whom as a Legacy, he bequeathed them, and by whom since, for his private use
and experience, and with most approved success, they have been practiced for
above Forty years: For there is no part of HORSEMANSHIP, either for the
Theorick or Practick, but is here exactly discovered: For Breeding, here is the
manner how, the season when, the place where, together with the Colors, Marks
and Shapes, as well of Stallions as Mares. The Feeder, Rider, Keeper, Ambler
and Buyer, have here their most particular Instructions; but above all, the
Farrier (be he never so skilful) may hereby perfect his knowledge, and enrich
himself. But whoever thou be that buyest it, whether for thy pleasure or
profit, if thou art pleased, I have my ends.

Farewell.
A TABLE Of the things handled in the OFFICE OF THE BREEDER.
OBservations in the breeding of horses. page 1 Choice of grounds, 2 Change of
grounds, 3 Choice of Stallions and Mares, ibid: The Age of Stallions, etc. 5
When to put Horse and Mares together, 6 When Mares are fit for Horse, 7 How to
put them together, ibid. How many Mares for one Horse, 8 Ordering after
covering, 9 To help Mares in foaling, ibid. How long Foals to run, etc. 10 To
know true shape, height and spirit, 11 To know goodness, etc. 12 Of weaning,
ibid. Separating, 13 Guelding, ibid. Taming, 14 Breaking, ibid. Colting. 15
A Table of the Rider.
OBservations in Riding, page 17 Times to handle Colts, ibid. When to Sadle, 19
Mounting, ibid. Backing; 21 Helps at the first Backing, 22 What lessons for
what horse, 23 Helps and Corrections, 24 Rod, ibid. Bit, ibid. Calves of the
legs, 25 Stirrup, ibid. Spur, ibid. Ground, 26 Large Rings, ibid. Stopping, 28
Advancing, ibid, Retiring, 29 Biting, ibid: Strait turns and turnings, 30 The
first strait turn, 30 Another strait turn, 33 To help an ill rain, or a
runaway Jade, etc. 34 The help, ibid. Another help for inconstant carriage, 35
How any Lady may spur her horse as well as any man, yet unperceived, 36
A Table of the Feeder.
AN Introduction to the work, touching the limitation of time for preparing the
running Horse, page 39 The first ordering of the running Horse according to the
several estates of Bodies, 46 The first fortnights feeding, 49 Four
considerations in Heats, 57 The second fortnights feeding, 58 The first Bread,
59 The first scouring, 65 Ordering after the scouring, ibid. The third
fortnights feeding, 69 The second Breed, ibid The fourth fortnights feeding, 70
The last Breed. ibid. Certain observations and advantages, etc. 35 Observe meat
and drink, 76 For Lameness, 77 From the estate of the body, ibid. From the
prime parts, 78 For Limbs, 79 For Water, ibid: For ground to run on, 80 From
Sweat, 81 From the Hair, ibid.
A Table of the Keeper.
To keep an Horse for pleasure, hunting or traveling, etc. 83 Dressing and
watering, ibid. Ordinary keeping, 85 Keeping in travel or sport, 86 Of Heats,
87 Ordering after labor, 88 Some especial precepts, ibid. Of washing and
walkings, 89
A Table of the Ambler.
OBservations in Ambling, 91 Men's Opinions and Errors, ibid. Ambling by the
ploughed Field, 92 By Gallop, 93 Weights, ibid. Not Ridden, 94 By Shoes, 95 By
Lists, ibid. By the Hund, 96 By Tramell, 97 Errors in the Tramel, 98 The best
way, 1^0 The form of the Tramel, ibid. The true use of the true Tramel, 103
When to alter the Tramel, 104 When to mount, etc. 105 When to journey, etc. 106
A Table of the Buyer.
OF all the Perfections and Imperfections in an Horse, 109 Observations in
Buying, ib. The end, 110 Election divided, 111 The first rule, ibid Breed, ibid
Color, 112 Paces, ibid Stature, 115 Second rule, ibid How to view, 116 Ears,
Face, ibid Eyes Cheeks, 117. 118. Nostrils, Teeth, 119 Breast, Forethighs, knees
120 Legs, Pasterns, 121 Hoofs, 122 Crest, Main, 123 Back, Ribs, etc. ibid,
Buttocks, 124 Hind-thighs, 125 Hind-legs, ibid Tail, 126 To know age, ibid
A Table of the Farrier.
SIgns of sickness, page 132 Of Dung, ibid Of Urin; 134 Of Sickness, 135 Of
Diahexaple, 137 The Virtues, ibid A drink to open, 136 Cordial Balls; ibid For
Bottes, 141 Another, ibid A Purgation, 142 Laxativeness, ibid The stone, 143
Staling blood, ibd Cold and Coughs, 144 Another, ibid. Another, ibid. Another,
ibid. Another, 146 A Cordial Powder, ibid. For colds and Canker in the nose,
147 For Glanders, ibid Another, 148 Another, ib. A scouring, 149 Outward
Sorrances. Signs, 150 For the eyes, 153 Another, ib. Another, ib. Another, 154
The Mastar Medicine for all strains, 155 Another, ibid. Another, 156 Another,
157 Another, 158 Another, ib. Marks, 159 Sinews extended, ibid. Another, 160 A
charge, ibid. For A^hes, 161 Gourded Legs, ib. Another, 163 Another, ib. For
Scratches, 164 Another, ibid. Another, ibid. For Splent, Spaven, 165 Another,
166 Wyngals, ibid. Pains, Mules, 167 Swiftcut, ibid. Maunge, 168 Another, ibid.
Canker and Leprosy, 169 Affistula, etc* ibid. A Fare, ibid. Another, 170 For a
founder, etc. ibid. For Hoofs, 171 Another, 172 For Surbait, ibid. Quitterbone,
ib. Another, 170 For a prick, ib. For Chaffing, 174 A General salv^, ibid.
Sadle-Bruises, 172 Another, 173 To make hair to grow in bald places, 174 To
stanch blood, ib. For enterfering, 175 To tame an unruly Horse, ib.

FINIS.
THE PERFECT HORSEMAN.
The office of the BREEDER.
Observations in Breeding of HORSES.
MEN may imagine I harp upon one string, or tread the old paths in which I
walked in my first years. But let them not deceive themselves: the meanders and
windings in which I now labor, are of a new discovery; and howsoever I may now
and then come under the same height, yet shall he that follows me find it so
removed, that it shall bring him ^ much nearer way to his journies end. For i^
these short Essays I have striven only to amend mend errors overslipt before,
and to acquaint my friends with all those uncontrollable experiments which I
have found out since in forty years and more: And believe it, he is an ill
Proficient that in such a time cannot find (in the Art he professes) something
worthy his friends acceptance. Therefore thus to my Breeder.

Choice of Grounds.
The Grounds to breed on would be spacious, and not strait, for Horses joy not
in Cages. There accommodate according to your Stock; and though the more the
merrier, yet the fewer the better fare. They would not be extreme fertile, nor
extreme barren; the golden mean is the best temper: yet to incline a little to
hardness, is better then much rankness; the one breeds health, the other
disease.

Let the Situation be ascending, the Air pure, the Laire dry, and the
Foot-tread firm, no matter how rough or uncertain*

As much Ground as will keep a Milch-Cow, will keep a Milch-Mare, and a great
dealless when she is barren or unwrought.

Change of Grounds.
Again, as Change of Pasture makes fat Calves, so Alteration of Grounds raises
gallant Colts. Therefore strive to have one Ground to foal in, another to
summer in, and a third to winter in. The first to be without danger, the second
not without shelter, and the third defended from storms and tempests by Trees,
Hovel, Shed, Barn or Backstable, wherein may be stored winter-provision.

Thus far for those which have ability. But for them which must breed for
necessity, let his Yard, Backside, or Stable serve to foal in, the white
Cornfieldsd to summer in, and the Cratch or Stand-heck to winter at.

Choice of Stallions and Mares
Next the Change of Grounds, I place the Choice of Stallions and Mares, which
is a Theme I have so often written of, that I must needs refer the Curious to
those larger Volumes, and only in this place say, That for as much as all men
covet to be governed by their own passions, therefore I leave them to their own
choice, and the end for which they breed; yet advising them, that of those
Races of which they make election, they choose the best and a blessed, the
highest spirited, the fairest colored, and the finest shaped; whether it be
Neapolitan, Turk, Spaniard, Barbary, English, Dutch, Polander, French or
German. And because it is impossible to find out absolute perfection, I would
have our Breeder to inform himself well of all the natural defects that can be
found in the Stallion, and to amend them in the Mare that shall be joined with
him; and what is amiss in the Mare, to see it repaired in the Horse.

For any singular election of Mares, the Breeder need not be too curious; only
observe, that if you can get true breed, you then pass by the bastard; if you
may have the the gentleman, never make use of the clown. But when you are tied
by necessity or compulsion, then see the mare have a good forehand, a large
womb, sound limbs, fair color, and good metal. For the rest, let nature alone,
she is a brave Mistress.

Now for those Breeders which look not so much into the breed and generation of
the Horse, as into his actions and good days works; accounting because he has
won such a wager, or beaten such a horse, therefore he must necessarily be an
excellent Stallion: let them know they are deceived; for this is no good
consequence; no more then if a robustrous strong skillfull Clown should give a
weak unskilful Gentlemen a fall, therefore all the Clown-breed should be
excellent wrastlers. This can hold for no Maxim; for I am persuaded, that let a
Gentleman have either skill to encounter strength, or strength to encounter
skill, there is no clown that can foil him. In like manner a Clown-horse by
training, feeding, and riding, may beat a true bred horse; but when they
encounter upon equal terms, Truth will show herself for a mistress. Therefore
in this case of Breeding, get as near as you can true Breed, and it will seldom
or never bring forth Repentance.

The Age of Stallions and Mares:
A Horse may beget good Colts from four years old to fourteen; after, he
declineth: and a Mare may bring forth from three years old to thirteen, and
then she decays: yet are neither utterly lost, but both may be made to serve
for the same use a much longer season.

Moderate labor is good for Breed of Mares, when they go over; for it makes
them apt to take the horse, and soon to conceive.

When to put Horse and Mare together.
The absolute best time to put the horse and Mares together, is the beginning
of March, provided there be strength and lust in both. For, the earlier the
Foal falls, finding no want or scarceness, the better Horse is ever produced:
And so consequently from the beginning of May; the Foals that fall after such a
time cannot choose but have imperfection in some condition. For they have two
great enemies to encounter withal (not before known) which daily fall upon
them, that is, Hunger and Cold, with which the early Foal has been before
familiar.

There be some Horsemen which hold that the Lammas Foal proves ever an
excellent Horse; and I dissent not from it, where there is plenty and fullness
of keeping; for he knows the worst of Winter before Summer appear, and so may
be good and hard; but if he chance to be pinched with either, the smalnes of
his statute will lessen his goodness, and his weakness make useless his
hardness.

The Lammas Foals are commonly known by many obscure feathers out of their own
sights, as under their eyes, upon their necks, crests, and under their chaps.
To conclude, it is not good to put the Horse to the Mares at all, till you find
some ready, (speaking of a general putting together) for so the Horse loses
his strength unfruitfully, and she gets nothing but chasing and mischiefs.

When Mares are fit for the Horse.
To know when your Mares are ready (if it be in a wild Stud) observe their
chasing and galloping up and down morning and evening, and their inconstancy
of abiding in any one place, especially throwing their noses to the North and
South, the lifting up of their tails, riding one another backs, wooding one
another, often pissing, or opening of their shares and closing them again, all
are signs of lust: if you will make a more particular trial, then prove them
with some stoned Tit or Jade.

How to put them together.
When your Mares are ready, the question is how they shall be put together,
whether abroad at random for sundry weeks, or at home in private for a night or
two?

If abroad, let your fence be good, your food sweet, and your shelter
sufficient. If in the house, then in some empty Barn or spacious place, which
may be free from danger of posts or other occasion of rushes: And let them
remain from sunset till sunrise, and two nights are sufficient.

Now there is a third manner of covering, and I prefer it for the best,
because it keeps the Stallion longer in ability, and serves the Mare with a
great deal more certainty: And that is, first to be sure to have them both at
one diet, as the Mare at grass and the horse at soil; then finding the Mare (by
trial) ready, put them together into some closewalled Paddock, where there is
store of sweet grass and sweet water, just upon the going down of the sun, and
as near as you can observe, either three days after the change, or three days
before the full of the Moon, and let them remain close together two whole
nights and one day, and take the horse from her at sunrise.

How many Mares for one Horse.
If you cover abroad (as I spoke before, at random) an Horse may well serve
twelve Mares, if you expect no other service of him. If you cover in the house,
where he has extraordinary keeping and little chasing, he will satisfy
fifteen: But if you cover in the Paddock, then I have known an high spirited
Horse for own year serve to keep you Mares ^n an indifferent estate of body;
for too much fatness hinders conception, and too much leanness abates lust.

Ordering after Covering.
After your Mares are covered, keep them as much as you can from disturbance,
especially for a month after covering, and a month before quickening: yet if
necessity compel, you may give them moderate exercise either in journeying or
otherwise: yet remember, if you keep the Mare in the house at had meat, she
will spring early and much, and sudden cold after is dangerous for imborsement.
Also remember that a Mare at her first quickening is like a Fruit-tree, whose
Blossoms at the first appearance are tender and easily destroyed with every
shake of wind, or nip of Frost; but after they are knit and fixed, they are
hardly beaten down with cudgels.

To help Mares in Foaling.
If any of your Mares be hard of foaling, or in danger in foaling, then either
hold her nostrils so that she cannot draw wind: or if that prevail not, then
take the quantity of a Walnut or better of Madder, and dissolve it in a pint of
old Ale, and being warm give it the Mare. If both fail, then take the help of
some understanding Midwife.

Now if after her foaling she do not cleans^ or avoid her Secundine, then boil
two or three handful of Fennel in running water, and take half a pint thereof,
and as much Malmsie, with a fourth part of Sallet-oil, and mixing them together
give it the Mare lukewarm into her nostrils, then hold them close a little
space after it: otherwise for want of this give her green forage, that is,
either green Wheat or Rye, (but Rye is best) and they are as effectual.

By no means let the Mare eat her cleansing (which many will cove^) for it is
unwho^som, and an hinderance to her milk.

How long Foals to run with their Dams.
Let Foals run with their Dams (if you have go^d accommodation for them) a full
year at the least; or if they be choice and principal bred Foals, then two
years, if possibly you can: For the going over the Mare will be no loss, in
comparison of the excellenc^^ to which the Foal will attain by such suff^^^nce
But if you want good accommodation* th^n wean at seven months, but be sure ^^
keep them lustily; for what they lose in the first year, they will hardly gain
in three following. And at the weaning give them saven and butt^r for diverse
mornings, or the Worm or Gargel will hazard to destroy them: Besides* have an
eye to the Strangle, for it is apt to assay them, and not taken in time will
prove mortal.

The first winter, spare neither Hay nor Corn, that is, Oats in the chaff or in
the sheaf; the cha^fing of Wheat, Barley, or Rye, and indeed any Offal that
comes from any Grain whatsoever.

To know a true Shape, Spirit, and Height.
The same shape which a Foal carries at a full month old, he will carry at six
years old, if he be not abused in after-keeping; and as the good shape, so the
defects also.

A large shin-bone that is long from the knee to the pastern in a Foal, shows a
tall Horse. Look what space there is in a Foal new foaled, between his knee and
withers, double that will be his height when he is a complete Horse.

Foals that are of stirring spirits, free from affrights, wanton of
disposition, active in leaping, running and chasing, ever leading the way and
striving for mastery, these always prove excellent metal'd horse^, the contrary
Jades.

To know Goodness.
There is a Rule, and it is a good one, that an Horses ability, and continuance
in goodness is known by his Hoofs: For if they be strong, smooth, hard, deep,
tough, uprightstanding, and hollow, that Horse cannot be evil. For they are the
foundation of his building, and lend fortitude to all the rest. If they be
otherwise, he cannot be good or lasting: Whence it comes to pass, that no Horse
naturally has so good hoofs as the Barbary; and it is indeed the only
character by which to know him from all other horses.

Weaning of Foals.
Wean your ordinary Foals from their Dams at the end of seven months at the
utmost; the better, at a year, two, or more. And observing so to divide them,
that neither the Foals nor the Dams may be within the hearing of one another
call. For which cause it is thought fit to house the Foals for two or three
nights, (on the mornings whereof you shall give the Saven and Butter before
spoken of) that they may forget the Dams; and send the Mares to their Pasture.
Also observe to keep them as high as is possible the second year; but the third
and fourth year you may put them to harder grasing.

Separating of Colts:
As you separate Foals from the Dams, so you must divide the Mare-Colts: for it
is certain, that amongst these high-bred spirits* and with this lofty and full
feeding, the Hors-Colts will cove^ to cover the Mare-Colts at a year, as I have
seen by experience, and it is the destruction of both. Again, if you have such
store of grounds, you may separate one years Breed from another. This is the
safest course, because of continual familiarity for change of quality.

Gelding of Colts.
If you intend to geld any of your Colts* the only best time, and which makes
the finest Geldings, is at nine days old, or as soon as you perceive the stones
to fall; for then is the least danger, and it makes f^^est Crests. The time of
the Moon to geld in, is in the Wane, the sign in Aries or Virgo; the time of
the year in general is the Spring or Fall* and although the earlier you geld,
the better and safer, yet notwithstanding you may safely geld at any time or
any age, even from Foal old age; and although the elder, the greater swelling,
yet more exercise and more chasing will assuage it.

Taming of Colts.
Touching the taming of Colts, or making them domestic or familiar, you shall
begin even from the first weaning, and so winter after winter (in the house)
use them to familiar actions, as rubbing, clawing, haltering, leading to water,
taking up of his feet, knocking his hoofs, and the like.

To Break Colts.
The best time to break Colts to the saddle, according to the ancient opinion
and general custom of men, (and which brings them soonest to the use and
service of the Owner, and therein supposed to be most profitable) is at three
years old, and the advantage or four at the utmost. But say I, he that will
stay and see his horse fully five, shall be sure to have an horse of longer
continuance, less subject to disease and infirmity, and one that (but by death)
will hardly come to the knowledge of Tyring.

All the actions about a Colt in his nonage, or an Horse to break at elder age,
must b^ done first with warning, next constantly and valiantly, not fearfully
or doubtfully: The first begets obedience, the other rebellion.

Coiling of the Stud.
Touching the coiling of the Stud, or making of special elections, I need not
spend much ink, because the Owner best knows which are best bred, and his eyes
can tell him where is the best shape and soundness. I only advise him by no
means to make too early coiling: for some borses will show their best shape at
two and three years old, and lose it at four, others not till five, nay six,
but then keep it ever: Some will do their best days work at six and seven
years old, others not till eight or nine. But be the time when it will, let him
preserve for his own use the best, the most comely, and most sound. Those which
are defective, I mean such as bring incurable deformities, gross sorrances, as
Spavens, Ringbones, imperfect Eyes, or the like, or that show palpable
barstardie, send them away to the market.

When you find any of your Mares grow into barrenness, unnaturalness, or
disease, away with them, and change them.

For all, though I could prescribe you remedies, yet they are not worthy your
use, nor will I ^ue your loss: Therefore let such Mares go, for their profit is
past, and they are useless.

Thus much touching Breeding:
THE OFFICE OF THE RIDER.
Observations in Riding.
IT is not intended that in these few Observations or short Touches I should
discover the whole Art of Riding; it neither fits the brevity of the work,
norsuits with my first promise in the title.

He that looks for such largeness of discourse, I refer him to my greater
Volumes; in this only to be found things new, things certain, set down in way
of principles or infallible Rules, to conduct a man the easiest way to some
perfection.

Times to handle Colts.
To begin then with the first taming or making gentle of a Colt (as I showed
you in the Observations for Breeding) you must begin the first winter after his
foaling, and so continue every winter till he come to the sa^dle, which time I
have also set down in the same place; and then there is no fear of evil
qualities. But if a Colt of contrary education come to your hands and must be
handled, ^hen apply him with all gentleness, and do nothing about him suddenly,
roughly, o^ fearfully; yet with that awe of your voice, your rod, and other
terror, make him know you are his Master when he rebelleth. And when you begin
to do nay thing about him (of what nature soever) never leave it; only take
leisure, and rather win it by gentleness* then cruelty, Forget not to give the
hor^^ reward, when he gives content; and by no mean^ punish, till you are sure
he knows his error; for before you give him understanding, it is im^ossible he
should obey.

Neither does this taming of a Colt consist in the house only, but in the field
also, where with a Cavezan or Chain, and a long Rei^ with an iron Turnel under
his chaps, you shall make him trot large Rings about you readily on both hands,
and change at your pleasure as you shall turn him. And then to your
cherishings, corrections, and all manner of handlings which before you had used
i^ the house.

When to Saddle.
When your Horse is thus made gentle you may then offer him the Saddle: but
with that deliberate carefulness, that he may not take affright or dislike
thereat; suffering him to smell at it, to be rubbed with it, and as it were to
feel it and not to feel it; then in the end to fix it on, and girt it fast; and
at what part and motion soever he seems most coy, with that make him most
familiar.

When he will endure the Saddle, then trot him abroad with it, and make him (as
before) trot his Rings on both hands about you, clap the Saddle as it stands on
his back* shake it, hang and sway upon it, dangle the stirrops by his sides,
rub them on his sides, and make much of him, and familiar with all things about
him, as the straining of the Crooper, fastening and loosning the Gyrths, and
taking up or letting out of the Stirrops.

Of Mo^thing
When he will trot with the Saddle obediently, then you shall wash a Trench of
a full mouth, and somewhat worn, and put it into his mouth, and throw the Reins
over the fore part of the saddle* Bolsters and all, and make them of the
length, that the Horse may have a full feeling of the Trench, and a sense to
play on the same: Then put on a Martingal, and fix it from the Gyrths to the
Chaulband of the Cavezan; but at that length, that the Horse may not find
fault, unless he disorderly throw up his head.

Then take a broad piece of Leather, and put it about the Horses neck, and make
the two ends fast by platting or otherwise at the Withers and mid-part before
his Weisand* about two handful below his Throple: be twixt his neck and the
leather let the Martingal pass; so that when at any time he shall offer to duck
or throw down his head, the Cavesan being placed upon the tender griss^ of his
nose, may correct and punish him. By which means he shall not only lose that
fo^^ quality of winning the head and thrusting i^ between his legs, but also
gain the way o^ raising up his neck, bringing down his head* and fashioning
himself to an absolute Rein.

The Horse thus accoutred, trot him abroad as before showed, and chase him
about you on both hands. And if you find either the Reins of the Trench or
Martingal to grow slack, then straiten them; for where there i^ no feeling
there is no virtue.

Of Backing.
When you have exercised your horse thus diverse mornings, noons or evenings,
and find him both tractable, ready and obedient, you may then take him into
some new ploughed ground (the lighter, the better) and hav^g chased him a
little on both hands, and seeing all your tackle firm, strong and good, and
every thing in his true and due place, you may then (having one to stay his
head, and govern the Chasing rein) take his back; yet not suddenly, but by
degrees, and with diverse heavings and half-raisings. Which if he endure
patiently, then you may take the reins of the trench into your hands and settle
your self. But if he shrink or dislike, then forbear to mount, and chase him
about him again; then offer to mount; and thus do till he receive you
willingly. Then when you are settled, have received your stirrups, and cherisht
him, putting your toes forward, let him that stays his head lead him forward
half a dozen paces, then both cherish him, then lead him forward a dozen paces,
then rest and cherish, and shake and move your self in the saddle: then let him
that stays his head, remove his hand a little from the Cavezan; and as you
thrust forward your toes, so let him also move him forward with his Rein, till
you have made the Horse apprehend your own motions of body and foot (which must
go equally together, and with spirit also) so that he will go forward without
the other assistance, and stay upon the restraint of your own hand, and not the
stay of the Cavezan: then you shall cherish him, and give him grass or bread to
eat, alight from his back, then mount and unmount twice or thrice together ever
mixing them with cherishings. Thus exercise him till you have made him perfect
in going forward, and standing still, at your pleasure.

Helps at first Backing.
When this is effected, you may lay by the long Rein, and the Band about the
neck, and only use the Trenches, the Cavezan, and the Martingal; and instead of
leading in hand, let a Groom on another Horse lead the way before you into the
field: where you shall not strive to teach him any other lesson, then to go
strait forthright forward, and to stand still when you please: which will be
effected in a few mornings, by trotting him forward a mile or two after another
horse, and so bring him home sometimes after the horse, sometimes equally with,
and sometimes before, so that he may fix upon no certainty but your own
pleasure. And in all this labor you must have a special regard to the
wellcarriage of his head and neck; and as the Martingal slacketh, so to
straiten it.

What Lessons for what Horse.
When this work is finished, you may then proceed to teach your horse those
lesson^ which are fit for his practice and the purpose for which you intend
him. As if it be for Hunting, Running, Travel, Hackney, or the like, then the
chiefest things you are to apply your self unto, are to preserve a good mouth,
to trot freely and comely, to amble surely and easily, to gallop strongly and
swiftly, to obey the hand in stopping gently and retiring willingly, and to
turn on either hand readily and nimbly. To all which I will give you lights in
their several places. But if you intend him for the great saddle, or the use
of the wars, then although the lessons be the same, yet they are to be taught
and done in a more punctual manner, and ask more nice and artificial
demonstrations. So that if an horse can be brought to the best, the easier must
needs follow with little industry. And it is a Rule in Horsmanship, that no
lesson which belongs to the wars can be hurtful or do injury to any horse
whatsoever that is kept for any other purpose. Whence it comes, that every
horse for the wars may be trained for a Runner or Hunter at pleasure; but every
Runner or Hunter will not serve the wars: And every Horsman that can make an
horse for the wars, may be a Jocky when he pleases; but no Jocky (that I know)
can make an horse for the wars. Therefore I will run a middle way, and suit my
lessons for both purposes.

Helps and Corrections.
Before you teach your Horse any lesson, you must know there are seven helps to
advantage him in his lessons, to punish him for faults gotten in his lessons;
and they be the Voice, the Rod, the Bit or Snafflle, the Calves of the legs,
the Stirrup, the Spur, and the Ground.

Voice.
The Voice is an help, when it is sweet and accompanied with cherishings and it
is a correction, when it is rough or terrible, and accompanied with strokes or
threatenings:

Rod.
The Rod is an help in the shaking, and a correction in the striking.

Bit or Snaffle.
The Bit is an help in its sweetness, the Snaffle in its smoothness; and they
are corrections, the one in its hardness, the other in its roughness, and both
in flatness and squareness.

Calves of the Legs.
The Calves of the legs are helps when you lay them gently to the horses sides;
and corrections when you strike them hard, because they give warning that the
Spur follows.

The Stirrup and Stirrup leathers are helps when you thrust them forward in a
quick motion, and stir up in the horse spirit and agility. But when you strike
it against the hinder part of the shoulder, it is a correction and awakens
memory.

Spur.
The Spur is an help when it is gently delivered in any motion that asks
quickness and agility, whether on the ground or above the ground; and a
correction, when is stricken hard into the sides, upon any sloth or other fault
committed.

The Ground.
Lastly, the Ground is an help, when it is plain and smooth, and not painful
to tread on; and it is a correction, when it is rough, deep, and uneven, for
the amendment of any vice conceived.

Of large Rings.
When your horse will receive you to and, from his back g^ntly, trot forward
willingly, and stand still obediently: Then, intending him f^^ the wars, or any
other purpose, (for these lessons serve all occasions) you shall in some
gravel^y or sandy place where his footsteps may ^e discerned, labor him within
the large Ring, that is at least fifty paces in compass; and having trod it
about three or four times on the right hand, rest and cherish, then taking
compass, change your hand and do as much on the left hand, then rest and
cherish; then change the hand again, and do as much on the right hand, ever
observing upon every stop to make him retire and go back a step or two.

*Thus labor the horse till you have him so perfect, that he will trot his
ring on which hand you please; changing within the ring in the manner of a
Roman S. with such willingness, nimbleness, and constant rein, that you can
desire no better obedience. Then you may teach him to gallop them as he did
trot them, and that also with true footing, lofty carriage, and brave rein:
Ever observing when he gallops to the right hand, to lead with his left
fore-foot; and when he gallops to the left hand, to lead with his right
forefeet.

Now here is to be cleared a Parodox held by many of our Horsemen, which is,
that the exercise of Rings is not good for Running horses, because it raises up
his fore-feet, and makes him gallop painfully, and so an hindrance unto speed.
But if they consider that this habit (if it be taken) is soon broken either by
the horsmans hand or discretion, who has power to make him move as he pleases
Or if they will truly look into the benefit of the Ring it self, they shall
fine it is the only means to bring an horse to the true use of his feet, and
the nimble carriage of them in all advantages. For every Runner of horses will
allow, that for an horse (in his course) to lead with his right foot, is most
proper; and when at any time he breaks or alter^ it, it must be disadvantage,
because (not well acquainted to lead with the other) he cannot handle it so
nimbly. Now at his first backing, by the use of his Ring and change of hands,
he will become so expert and coming with both, that howsoever mischance shall
alter his stroke, yet shall his speed and nimbleness keep one and the same
goodness.

Of Stopping.
When you come to the place of stop, or would stop; by a sudden drawing in of
our Bridle-hand somewhat hard and sharp, make him stop close, firm and strait in
an eaven line: and if he err in any thing, put him to it again, and leave not
till you have made him understand his error, and amend it.

Advancing.
Now if you do accompany this Stop with an Advancement a little from the
ground, it will be more gallant, and may be done by laying the Calves of your
legs to his sides, and shaking your rod over him as he stops. If it chance at
first he understand you not, yet by continuance and laboring him therein he
will soon attain unto it, especially if you forget not to cherish him when he
gives the least show to apprehend you.

Retiring.
After stopping and advancing, make him retire, as before showed. And this
motion of Retiring you must both cherish and increase, making it so familiar
with him, that no lesson may be more perfect: Neither must he retire in a
confused or disorderly manner, but with a brave rein, a constant head, and a
direct line: Neither must he draw or sweep his legs one after another, but take
them clean, nimbly, and lostily, as when he troted forward.

Of Bitting.
When your horse is come to perfection in these lessons, and has his head
firmly settled, his rein constant, and his mouth sweetened, you may then (if you
intend him for the wars) take away his Trench and Martingal, and only use the
Cavezan of four or three pieces, that is, a Joint or no Joint in the midst, and
to that Joint a strong Ring, and a Joint of each side with Rings before the
Joints, to which you shall put several Reins to use either at the post or
otherwise Into his mouth you shall put a smooth sweet Canon-Bit with a French
Cheek suitable to the proportion of the Horses neck; knowing that the long
Cheek raises up the head, and the short pulls it down. And with these you shall
exercise the Horse in all the Lessons before taught, till he be perfect in them
without either disorder or amazement.

Of strait Turns and Turnings.
When he is thus settled upon his Bit, then you shall teach him to turn roundly
and readily in the straiter Rings: and of these there are diverse kinds, and
diverse methods and manners how to teach them. All which I will omit, and only
fix upon two manner of strait Turns, as the persection from whence all Turnings
are derived.

The one is, when the Horse keeps his hinder parts inward and close to the
post or center, and so comes about and makes his circumference with his
fore-parts, following an enemy that a little avoids him.

And the other is, when he keeps his fact fixed on the post or center, and comes
about and makes his circumference with his hinder parts, opposing face to face
with his enemy.

The first strait Turn.
For the first of these strait Turns, it is thus to be taught.

You shall to the Ring in the mid-part of the Cavezan fix a long Rein of two
fathom or more, and to the other Rings two other shorter Reins: then having
sadled the horse and put on his Bit, bring him to the post, and put the Reins
of the Bit over the forepart of the Saddle, Bolsters and all, and fix them at a
constant straitness on the top of the Pomel, so that the horse may have a
feeling both of the Bit and Curb. Then, if you will have him turn to the right
hand, take the short Rein on the left side of the Cavezan, and bringing it
under the Fore-bolster of the Saddle up to the Pomel, and there fix it at such
a straitness that the horse may rather look from, then to the post on the right
side: Then let some Groom or skillful Attendant hold the right side Rein of the
Cavezan at the post, governing the fore parts of his body to come about at
large: Then your self taking the long Rein into your hand, and keeping his
hinder parts inward, with your rod on his outward shoulder, and sometimes on
his outward thigh, make him move about the post, keeping his hinder parts as a
cen^e^, and making his foreparts move in a larger circumference. Thus you shall
exercise him a pretty space on one hand till he grow to some perfectness and
understanding of your will. Then changing the Reins of the Cavezan, make him do
the like to the other hand. And thus apply hi^ diverse mornings, mingling
cherishing with his exercise, according to his deservings, ti^ you have brought
him to that readiness, the he will upon the moving of your rod couc^ his hinder
parts in toward the post, and lapping the outward fore leg over the inward
trot about the post swiftly, distinctly, and i^ as strait compass as you can
desire, or is convenient for the motion of the horse. And from trotting you may
bring him to flying or wheeling about with that swiftness, the both the fore
legs rising and moving together, the hinder parts may follow in one an^ the
same instant.

When you have made your horse the perfect in your hand, you shall then mou^
his back; and making some other skilfu^ Groom or Attendant govern the long Rei^
and another the short, by the motion of yo^ hand upon the Bit and left Rein of
the Cavezan, keeping the horses head from the po^ and by the help of the Calve
of your le^ laid to his side, and your rod turned to h^ outward thigh to keep
his hinder parts into the post labor and exercise him till you have brought
him to that perfection which your self desire. Then take away the long rein^
and only exercise him with the help of the short rein of the Cavezan, and no
other.

After take both the reins of the Cavezan into your hands, and exercise him
from the Post; making him as ready in any place where you please to ride him,
as he was at the Post.

The other strait Turn.
Now for the other strait flying Turn, which is to keep his face fixed* on the
post as on his enemy, and to move about only with his hinder parts, you shall
take the same helps of the long rein and the short reins of the Cavezan, and
govern them as before showed* only you shall not give the short rein to the
postward so much liberty as before, but keep his head closer to the post, and
following his hinder parts with the long rein, by the help of your rod make him
bring his hinder parts round about the post: And observe that as before he did
lap one foreleg over another, so now he must lap the hinder legs one over
another.

In this lesson exercise him as in the former Then (after a perfectness) mount
his back, and labor him as before showed. Then lastly, leaving the Post and
all other helps, only apply him in such open and free places as you shall think
convenient: For upon the finishing of this work, your horse is made complete,
and can perform all things that can be required either for service in the wars,
for the highway, or any other galloping pleasure: which is the end of mine
aim, and the utmost journey I will take in these observations. Only for a
conclusion I will bequeath you one or two pretty secrets.

How to help an ill Rein, and cure a Runaway Jade.
There be many horses so evil beholden to Nature for giving them short untoward
Necks, and worse, set on Heads; and so little beholden to Art to endeavor to
amend them, that many good horses are left cureless of these two gross
unsufferable faules; which are either a deformed carriage of the head like a
Pig on a broach* or else a furious running away, got by a spoiled mouth, or an
evil habit.

The Help.
To help any, or both of these: If it be a young horse, at the first riding,
then to his Trench; if of old standing, then to his Snaffle, (for I speak not
of the Bit.) Put a pair of Reins, half as long again as any ordinary Reins, and
Loops to fasten and unfasten at the eye of the Snaffle, as other Reins have*
Now when you see that the horse will not yield to your hand, but the more you
draw, the more he thrusts out his nose, or the more violently he runs away;
then undo the buttons of the Reins from the eyes of the Snaffle, and drawing
them through the eyes, bring them to the buckles of the foremost girth, and
there button them fast: Then riding the horse in that manner, labor him with
the gentle motions of your hand, coming and going by degrees; and some times
accompanied with your spur, to gather up his body, and to feel your command,
and assuredly in a small expense of time he will yield and bring his head where
you would place it. And for running away, if you draw one Rein, you turn him
about in despite of all fury; and if you draw both, you break his chaps, or
bring them to his bosom: In the end finding himself not able to resist, he will
be willing to obey.

Another help for inconstant Carriage.
There is another foul error in many horses which these Reins also cure, as
this. When your horse is either so wythie cragg'd (as the Northern man calls
it) or so loose and unsteady-necked, that which way soever you draw your hand,
his head and neck will follow it, sometimes beating against your knees,
sometimes dashing against your bosom, nay sometimes knocking you in the face;
and indeed generally so loose and uncertain, that a man cannot say at any time
he has certain or steady hold of him. A vice wonderful incident to
Running-Horses, especially the hot furious ones. In this case you shall take
these long Reins; and as before you drew them to the buckles of the gyrths, so
now Marting^lwise draw them from the eyes of the Snaffle, betwixt his forelegs
to the gyrths, and there fasten them. Thus ride him with a constant hand, firm
and somewhat hard; correcting him both with the spurs and rod, and sometimes
with sharp twitches in his mouth when he errs; and with a few weeks labor, his
head will come to a constant carriage, provided that you labor him as well upon
his Gallop as his trot, and leave him not till you find him fully reclaimed.

How any Lady or Gentlewoman shall spur her Horse as well as any man, yet
unperceived
Take a strong Whale bone, that is at one end of one side round, of the other
flat, and of a pretty thickness; then rush grown and small to the other end.
All round to the flat end glue a piece of Cord, about an inch and an half
longer, being to the upper end of the bone as thin as may be, but from the end
made wedg-like* thicker and thicker, to half an inch thickness or more, as you
shall find occasion, being a thing only to bear the bone from the Horses sides.
Then you shall cause to be made of Iron a Neck of a spur, an handful or more
long, having at the one end set a sharp Rowel as big as a great French Rowel,
but not set as a man's Rowel, but cross-wise, the pricks looking to the Horses
sides; the other end of this Neck shall be rough, and with a Shoomakers thread
made fast to the small round end of the whalebone. Then make fast the great end
of the whalebone with leather, glue and nails to the forepart of the
Sidesaddle-tree, and look that the Spur stand opposite to the spurring-place of
the Horses sides. Now as you do this side, so do the other side also.

Then take a strong Ribbon, and fasten it with a loop to the Spurneck on the
near side, and draw it under the horses belly upon the far side: Then fasten
another to the Spur on the far side* and fasten both ends at an eaven length
under the Pomel of the Saddle, yet so as she may command it with her bridle
rein.

Now when she will spur on the left side (which we call the near side) let her
draw the Ribbon on the far side (which is the right side) and when she will
spur on the right side, let her draw her Ribbon on the near side; when she will
spur both sides at once, let her draw both the Ribbons equally:

Thus much for the Office of the Rider.
THE OFFICE OF THE FEEDER.
An Introduction to the Work, touching the limitation of time for preparing the
Running-Horse.
I Will not dispute the several opinions of men in this Kingdom touching the
keeping of the Running horse, because I know many are idle and frivolous, some
uncertain, and a few in the right way. Only in this work I would clear one
paradox, which is strongly maintained and infinitely pursued by many of our
best professors; and that is the limitation or length of time for the preparing
or making ready of an Horse for a Match or great wager.

There be diverse, nay some which I know carry the Goddesses on their backs,
that affirm an Horse which is exceeding fat, foul* newly taken from grass,
soil, or lofty, liberal and unbounded feeding, cannot be brought to the
performance of his best labor under six months, five is too little, and four
an act of impossibility. By which they rob their Noble master of half a years
pleasure, thrust upon him a tyring charge* to make the sport loathsome, and get
nothing but a cloak for ignorance, and a few false got Crowns that melt as they
are possessed.

Yet as Heretics cite Scriptures, so these find Reasons to defend want of
knowledge.

As, the danger of too early exercise; the offense of grease suddenly broken;
the moving of evil humors too haistily, which leads to mortal sickness.

And the moderation or helping of all these by a slow proceeding, or bringing
of the horse into order by degrees and time, o^ (as I may say) by an ignorant
sufferance.

These Reasons I know have the show of a good Ground; for too early exercise is
dangerous, but not if free from violence.

To break grease too suddenly is an offense unsufferable, for it puts both
limbs and life in hazard, but not if purged away by wholesome scourings.

The hasty stirring up of humors in a body where they superabound, and are
generally dispersed, and not settled, cannot choose but breed sickness; but not
where discretion and judgment evacuateth them in wholesome sweats and moderate
airings.

And for the moderation of all these, by the tediousness of Time, as two months
for the first; two months for the second, and as much for the last: It is like
the curing of the Gangrene in an old man; better to dye then be dismembered,
better lose the prize then bear the charge: For I dare appeal to any noble
judgment, whose purse has experience in these actions, if six months
preparation and the dependances belonging to it and his person do not devour up
an hundred pounds wager.

But you will demand of me what limitation of time I will allow for this
purpose of preparation? And I answer, that two months is sufficient at any
time of the year whatsoever, for an old horse, or an horse formerly trained,
for I speak not of Colts; and he that cannot do it in two months, shall never
do it in sifteen.

But reply they, No scouring is to be allowed, for they are physical; they
force nature, and so hurt nature; they make sickness, and so impair health: And
that indeed nothing is comparable to the length of time, because Nature works
every thing her self; and though she be longer, yet she has less danger.

I confess that Sybbesauce scourings which are stuffed with poisonous
ingredients, cannot choose but bring forth infirmity; but wholesome Scourings,
that are composed of beneficial and nourishing Simples, neither occasion
sickness nor any manner of infirmity, but bring away grease and all foulness in
that kindly and abundant sort, that one week shall effect more then two months
of dilatory and doubtful for bearance.

I call it dilatory and doubtful, because no man (in this lingering course) can
certainly tell which way the gre^se and other foulnesses will avoid, as whether
into his ordure (which is the safest) into sweat (which is hazardou^) into his
limbs (which is mischievous) or remain and putrify in his body (which is
mortally dangerous?) Since the issue of any o^ all these fall out according to
the strength and estate of the Horses body, and the diligence of the Feeder:
And if either the one fail in power; or the other in care, farewell Horse for
that year.

All this Envy cannot choose but confess; only they have one broken crutch to
support them, which is, They know no Scouring, therefore they will allow of no
Scouring.

Against Barbarism I will not dispute, only I appeal to Art or Discretion,
whether Purgation or Sufferance; when Nature is offended, be the better doers.

But they reply, by a figure called Absurdity, That whatsoever is given to any
Horse more then his natural food, and which he will naturally and of his own
accord with all willingness receive, is both unproper and unwholsom; and
therefore he ought not to be forced with any thing against his appetite. This I
have heard them say, and to this I thus answer.

The natural food of Man is bread only, all other things (according to the
Philosopher) are superfluous, and so to be avoided. At this argument both
Humanity and Divinity laughs: For, other helps, as Physic, diverse meats, and
diverse means ordained for both even by the power of the Almighty himself, tells
the contemners hereof how grossly they err in this foolish opinion.

Nay, allow them a little shadow of truth, That things most natural, are most
beneficial: then it must follow, that Grass, or Hay (which is but withered
Grass) is most natural, and so most beneficial. Now Grass is physical, for in
it is contained all manner of Simples of all manner of mixtures, as hot, cold,
moist, dry; of all qualities, all quantities. So that whatsoever I give (which
is good) is but that which he has formerly gathered out of his own nature,
only with this difference; That what he gathers is in a confused manner,
clapping contraries together so abundantly, that we are not able to judge where
the predominant quality lies; and that which we compound is so governed by art
and reason, that we know how it should work, and we expect the event, if it be
not crossed by some greater disaster.

But will they bind themselves to keep the Running-horse only with Grass or
Hay? They know then the end of their labor will be loss. Nay, they will allow
Corn, nay diverse Corns; some nourishing and loosing, as Oats and Rye; some
astringent and binding, as Beans; and some fatting and breeding both blood and
spirit, as Wheat: nay, they will allow Bread, nay Bread of diverse compositions,
and diverse mixtures, some before heat, and some after, some quick of discresion
and some slow. And if this be not as physical as any Scouring a good Horsman
gives, ^ report me to him that shall read the Bills.

Nay, these Contemners of Scourings will allow an Egg, nay an Egg mixed with
other ingredients: And for Butter and Garlic, they will use it, though it be
never so fulsom. The reason is, because their knowledge can arise to no higher
a stair in physic; and authorized Ignorance will ever wage battle with the
best Understanding: like foolish Gallants on St. Georges day, who neither
having ability to buy, nor credit to borrow a Gold-chain, scorn at them that
wear them; or Martin Marprelate, that not having Learning worthy of a Deacon,
found no felicity but in railing at divine Fathers.

There are another sort of Feeders, which in a contrary extreme run beyond
these into mischiefs; and those are they which overscour their horses, and are
never at peace but when they are giving Potions (which they call Scourings)
sometimes without cause, always without order, bringing upon an horse such
intolerable weakness, that he is not able to perform any violent labor.

From this too little, and too much, I would have our Feeder to gather a mean;
that is, First to look that his Simples be wholesome: then to the occasion, that
he is sure there is foulness: and lastly to the estate of body, that he may
rather augment then decrease vigor. So shall his work be prosperous, and his
actions without controllment.

To conclude, Two months I allow for preparation, and according to that time
have laid my Directions. Mine humble suit is, out of a sincere opinion to Truth
and Justice, so to allow or disallow, to refrain or imitate.

The first ordering of the Running-horse, according to the several estates of
their Bodies.
This office of the Feeder, albeit in general it belong to all Horsemen, yet it
particular it is most appropriate to the Feeder of the Running-horse; because
other general horses have a general way of feeding, these an artificial and
prescript form, full of curiosity and circumspection; from which whosoever
errs, he shall sooner bring his horse to destruction then perfection.

Therefore when an Horse is matched, or to be matched for a Running course, you
art principally to regard the estate of body it which the horse is at the time
of his matching. And this estate of body I divide into three several kinds.

The first is, if he be very fat, foul, and either taken from grass or soil.

The second, if he be extreme lean and poor, either through over-riding,
disorder, or other infirmity.

And the third, if he be in good and wellliking estate, having had good usage
and moderate exercise.

If he be in the first estate of body, you shall take longer time for his feed,
as two months at the least: for he will ask much labor in airing, great
carefulness in heating, art and discretion in scouring, and rather a strict
then liberal hand in feeding.

If he be in the second estate of body (which is poor) then you shall also take
a longer time as you may, yet you need not so much as in the former; both
because Grass cannot much hurt, and exercise may go hand in hand with feeding.

This horse would have moderate and cheerful airing, as not before or after
sun, rather ^o increase appetite then harden flesh; gentle heats, more to
preserve wind then melt glut; and a bountiful hand (but far from cloying) in
feeding.

If he be in the third estate of body, which is a mean betwixt the other
extremes, then a month or six weeks, or a fortnight or less, may be time
sufficient to diet him for his Match* Now as this estate participates with both
the former, so it would borrow from them a share in all their orderings, that
is, to be neither too early, nor too late in airings; ^aborious, but not
painful in heatings, nourishing in scouring, and constant in a moderate way of
feeding.

Now as you regard these general estates of bodies, so you must have an eye to
certain particular estates of bodies: As if an horse be fa^ and foul, yet of a
free and spending nature, apt quickly to consume and lose his flesh, this horse
must not have so strict a^ hand, neither can he endure so violent exercise as
he that is of an hard and kettty disposition, and will feed and be fat upon all
mea^^ and all exercises.

Again, if your horse be in extreme poverty through disorder or misusage, yet
is by nature very hard and apt both soon to recover his flesh, and long to hold
it; then over thi^ horse you shall by no means ^old so l^bera^ an hand, nor
forbear that exercise which otherwise you would do to the horse which i^ of a
tender nature, a weak stomach, and a fre^ spirit provided always you have
reg^rd to his limbs and the imperfection of lameness.

Thus you see how to look into the estate^ of Horses bodies, and what time to
take for your matchings, I will now descend to their several orderings and
dyeting. And because in the fat Horse is contained both the lea^ Horse, and
Horse in reasonable estate o^ bo^y. I will in him show all the secrets a^^
observations which are to be employed in the feeding of all three, without any
omission o^ reservation whatsoever: For truth, Sir, ^ have vowed unto you, and
truth I will prese^^ you.

The first Fortnights feeding of an Horse for Match that is fat, foul, and*
either newly taken from Grass or Soil.
If you match an Horse that is fat and foul, either by running at grass, or
standing at soil, or by any other means of rest, or too high feeding; you shall
(after his body is emptied, and the grass avoided, which will be three or four
days) for the first fortnight at the least, rise early in the morning before
day, or at the spring of day according to the time of the year; and having put
on his Bridle washed in beer, and tied him up to the rack, take away his dmng
and other foulness of the stable; then dress him well, as in the Office of the
Keeper,

When that work is finished, take a fair large Body-cloth of thick Houswifes
Kersie (if it be in winter) or of Cotton or other light Stuff (if it be in
summer) and fold it round about the horses body, then clap on the ^addle and
girt the foremost girth pretty strait, but the other somewhat slack, and wisp it
on each side his heart, that both the girths may be of equal straitness.

Then put before his breast a Breast-cloath suitable to the Body-cloth, and let
it cover both his shoulders; Then take a little Beer into your mouth, and spirt
it into the horses mouth, and so draw him out of the stable, and take his back,
leaving a Groom behind you to trim up your stable, to carry out dung and to
toss up the litter: For you are to understand that the horse must stand upon
good store of fresh dry litter continually both night and day, and it should be
ever Wheat-straw (if possible) or Oat-straw (if forced by necessity) As for
Barley*straw and Rye-straw, they are unwholsom and dangerous; the one does
heart-burn, the other causes scouring*

When you are mounted, rack the horse foot-pace (for you must neither amble no^
trot, for they hurt speed) at least a mile or two, or more upon smooth and
sound ground* and (as near as you can) to the steepest hill^ you can find;
there gallop him gently up those hills, and rack or walk him softly down* that
he may cool as much one way as he warmeth another. And when you have th^^
exercised him a pretty space, and seeing the sun beginning to rise, or else
risen, rack down either to some fresh river, or clear pond that is fed by a
sweet Spring, and there let him drink at his pleasure: After he has drunk:
bring him calmly out of the water, and so ride him a little space with all
gentleness, and not according to the use of ignoran^ Grooms, rush him instantly
into a Gallop, for that brings with it two mischiefs, either it teaches the
horse to run away with you as soon as he is watered, or else refuse to drink,
fearing the violence of his exercise which follows upon it.

When you have used him a little calmly, then put him into a gentle Gallop, and
exercise him moderately, as you did before; then walk him a little space, after
offer him more water: If he drink, then gallop him again (after calm usage;) if
he refuse, then gallop him to occasion thirst. And thus always give him
exercise both before and after water.

When he has drank sufficient, then bring him home gently, without a wet hair
or any sweat about him.

When you come to the stable-door before which your Groom shall ever throw all
his fo^l litter continually; there alight, and by whistling and stretching the
horse upon the straw, and raising up the straw under him, see if you can make
him piss, which if at first he do not, yet with a little custom he will soon be
brought unto it, and it is an wholesome action both for the horses health, and
the sweet keeping of the Stable.

This done, bring him into his stall, and tie him up to the Rack, then with
wisps rub his ^egs well, then unloose his breast-cloth* and rub his head, neck
and breast with a dry clot^ then take off the saddle and hang it by, the^ his
Body-cloth, and rub over all his body and limbs, especially his back where the
saddl^ stood. Then cloth him up, first with a linne^ sheet, then over it a
good strong Housing cloth, and above it his woollen Body-cloth which in the
winter it is not amiss to have lined with some thin Cotton or Plad, or other
woollen stuff, but in the summer the Kersi^ it self is sufficient.

When these are girt about him, stop hi^ Circingle round with reasonable big
soft wisp^ and thick, for with them he will lie at be^ ease, because the small
hard wisps are eve^ hurtful.

After he is clothed, pick his feet and stop them up with cow dung; and then
throw into his Rack a little Bundle of hay, so much as a^ halfpeny bottel in a
dear Inn, well chosen* dusted, and hard bound together. And the he shall tear
out, as he stands on the bridl^*

When he has stood on his bridle an ho^ and better, you shall then come to
him, an^ first draw his bridle, rub his head, face an^ nape of the neck with a
clean rubber made ^^ new rough hempen cloth, for this is excelle^^ for the
head, and dissolveth all gross a^^ filthy humors: Then with a clean clot^ make
the Manger as clean as may be; and i^ he have scattered any hay, take it up and
throw it back into the Rack. Then you shall take a quart of sweet, dry, old and
clean dressed Oats, of which the heaviest are the best, as those which we call
Poland-oats or Cut-oats: For those which are unsweet, breed infirmity; those
which are moist, cause swelling in the body, those which are new, breed worms;
and they which are half dressed, deceive the stomach and bring the horse to ruin.

As for the black Oats, though they are tolerable in the time of necessity, yet
they make foul dung, and hinder a man's knowledge in the state of the horses body.

This quart of Oats you shall ree and dress wondrous clean in a Sive that is
much less then a Riddle, and though bigger then a Reeing-sive, such an one as
will let a light Oat go through, but keep a full one from scattering, and so
give them to the horse; and if he eat them with a good stomach, you may give
him another, and so let him rest till it be eleven a clock:

Then come to the Stable, and having rubbed his head, neck and face, dress him
another quart of Oats (as before) and give it the horse; then closing up the
windows and lights leave him till one a clock.

And here you are to understand, that the darker you keep your horse in your
absence, the better it is, and it will occasion him to lie down and take his
rest, when otherwise he would not; and therefore we commonly use to arm the
Stables wherein these horses stand round about a lost, and over the Rack with
Canvas, both for darkness, warmth, and that no filth may come near the horse.

At one a clock come to him, and dress him another quart of oats, and give them
as before, after you have rubbed his head and nape of the neck: then putting
away his dung, and making the stable clean, give him a knob of Hay, and so
leave him till evening.

At evening come to the Stable, and having made all things clean, bridle as in
the morning take off his clothes, and dress him a^ before.

Then cloth, saddle, bring him forth, urge him to empty, mount, rack him
abroad, but not to the hills, if you can find any other plain ground, as
meadow, pasture, or the like, especially if it lie along by a River, but in
this case you can be no chuser, but must take the most convenient, making a
virtue of necessity. Here air him in all points in the evening, as you did in
the morning, Galloping both before and after water: Then Rack him up and down,
and in your racking observe even from the Stable-dore, in all your passages,
especially when you would have him to empty, to let him smell upon every old and
new dung you meet withal, for this will clear his body and repair his stomach.

When you have watered, and spent the evening in airing till within night, (for
nothing is more wholesome, or sooner consumes foulness, then early and late
airings:) You shall then rack him home to the stable-door; there alight and do
as you did in the morning, both within doors and without, and so leave him on
his bridle for an hour and more. Then come again, and as you did in the
forenoon, so do now; Rub well, draw his bridle, cleanse the Manger, put up his
scattered hay, sift him a quart of Oats, and so let him rest til nine a clock
at night.

At nine a clock come to him, and first rub down his legs with wisps, or with a
clean cloth, or with your bare hands (which is best of all) then with a clean
cloth rub his face, head, chaps, nape of the neck and foreparts, then turn up
his clothes and rub over all his hinder parts; then put down his clothes, and
sift him a quart of Oats and give them him; then put into his Rack a little
bundle of hay, toss up his litter and make his bed soft, and so leave him till
the next morning.

The next morning (as the morning before (come to the horse early, and do every
thing without the omission of any one particle, as has been formerly declared;
and thus you shall keep your horse constantly for the first fornight, in which
by this double daily exercise you shall so harden his flesh and consume his
foulness, that the next fortnight (if you be a temperate man) you may adventure
to give him some heats,

But here give me leave to digress a little for satisfaction sake, and to
answer objections that may be urged touching the quantity of Provender which I
prescribe, being but a quart at a meal, seeing there be many horses that will
eat a much larger proportion, and to scant them to this little were to starve,
o^ at the best to breed weakness.

But if I be understood rightly, I set not this down as an infallible Rule, but
a President that may be imitated, yet altered at pleasure: For I have left you
this Caveat, That if your horse eat this with a good stomach, you may give him
another, leaving the proportion to the Feeders discretion; because it is
impossible in writing, to make one measure for all stomachs. And for min^ own
part, I chose the quart as the most indifferent proportion; for albeit many
horses will eat more, yet I have known some that would hardly eat this: And
believe it, what horse soever shall but eat this, and in this manner, he shall
neither starve, lose strength, nor be much hungry.

So now again to the giving of Heats.

Four considerations in giving of Heats.
Now touching Heats, you are to take to your self these four Considerations.

1. That two Heats in the week is a sufficient proportion for any horse of what
condition or state of body soever. 2. That one heat should ever be given on
that day in the week, on which he is to run his Match; as thus: Your Match-day
is a Monday, your Heating-days are then Mondays and Fridays; and the Monday to
be ever the sharper heat, both because it is the day of his Match* and there is
three days rest betwixt it and the other heat. If the day ^e Tuesday, then the
heating days are Tuesdays and Saturdays; if Wednesday, then Wednesdays and
Saturdays, by reason of the Lords day; if on Thursdays, then Thursdays and
Mondays, and so of the rest. 2. You shall give no heat (except in case of
extremity) in rain or foul weather, but rather to defer hours and change times:
for it is unwholsom and dangerous. And therefore in case of showers and
uncertain weather you shall have for the horse a lined hood, with lined ears,
and the nape of the nec^ lined to keep out rain; for nothing ^ more dangerous
then cold wet falling into the ears, and upon the nape of the neck and Fillets.
4 Lastly, observe to give the heats (the weather being seasonable) as early in
the morning as you can, that is, by the spring of day; but by no means in the
dark; for ^ is to the horse both unwholsom and unpleasant; to the man a great
testimony o^ folly, and to both an act of danger and precipitation.
The second fortnights feeding.
Now to come to the second fortnight feeding: touching your first approaching
to the Stable, and all other by respects, a^ cleansing, and the like, you shall
do all things as in the first fortnight, only before yo^ put on his Bridle,
give him a quart of oats, which as soon as he has eaten, bridle him up, and
dress him, as before showed; then cloth, saddle, air, water, exercise, and
bring him home as before showed; only you shall not put hay into his rack to
tear out, but let him eat it out of your hands, handful after handful, and so
leave him on his bridle for an hour more; then come to him, and after rubbing,
and other ceremonies, sist him a quart of oats and set them by: then take a
loaf of bread, that is three days old, or thereabout, and made in this manner.

The first Bread:
Take three pecks of clean Beans, and one peck of Wheat, mix them together and
grind them, then boult it through a reasonable fine Raunge, and knead it up
with great ^^ore of Barm and lightning, but with as little water as may be,
labor it in the Trough painfully, knead it, break it, and after cover it warm,
and let it lie and swell; then knead it over again, and mould it up into big
loaves, like twelvepeny household loaves, and so bake it well, and let it soak
soundly; after they are drawn turn the bottoms upward, and let them cool.

At three days old, or thereabout, you may give this bread, but hardly sooner:
for nothing is worse then new bread; yet if necessity compel you that you must
sooner give it, or that the bread be clammy or dank, so as the Horse takes
distaste thereat, then cut the loaf into thin shivers, and lay it abroad in the
Sive to dry; then crumbling it small with his oats, you may give it safely.

But to return to my purpose, when you have taken a loaf of this bread, chip it
very well, then cut it into thin slyves, and put three or four thereof (small
broken) into his oats you had before sifted, and so give them to him*

About eleven a clock come to him, and by ceremonies give him the same quantity
of bread and oats, and so leave him till afternoon.

At one a clock in the afternoon (if you intend not to give him a heat the next
day) feed him with bread and oats as you did in the fore-noon, and so
consequently every meal following for that day, observing every action and
motion as before showed.

But if you intend the next day to give him an heat (to which I now bend mine
aim) you shall then only give him a quart of oats clear sifted, but no hay, and
so let him rest till evening.

At four a clock before you put on his bridle, give him a quart of clean sifted
oats, and when they are eaten; bridle him up, dress, cloth, saddle, air,
water, exercise, bring home and order, as before showed, only give no hay at
all.

After he has stood an hour on his bridle, give him a quart of oats, and when
they are caten, put on his head a sweet muzzel, and so let him rest till nine a
clock at night*

Now as touching the use of this Muzzell, and which is the best, you shall
understand, that as they are most useful being good and rightly made, so they
are dangerous and hurtful, being abused and falsely made. The true use of them
is to keep the horse from eating up his litter, from gnawing upon boards and
mud-walls, and indeed to keep him from eating any thing but what he receives
from your own hands.

These Muzzels are sometimes made of leather, and stamped full of holes, or else
close, but they are unsavory and unwholsom: for if it be allomed leather, the
allom is offensive; if it be tanned or liquored leather, the Tanners ouze and
grease are fully as unpleasant. Besides, they are too close, and too hot, and
both make an horse sick, and cause him to retain his dung longer in his body,
then otherwise he would do.

The best Summer Muzzell, (and indeed the best generally at all times, is the
Nermuzzell, made of Strong pack-threed, and knit exceeding thick and close in
the bottom, and so enlarged wider and wider upward, to the middle of the horses
head; then bound about the top with Tape, and on the nearside a loop, and on
the farre-side a long string to fasten it to the horses head.

The best Winter-muzzell (and indeed tolerable at any time) is that which is
made of double Canvas, with a round bottom and a square lattice window of small
tape before both his nostrils, down to the very bottom of the muzzell, and
upward more then a handful: this must also have a loop and a string to fasten
it about the horses head.

At nine a clock at night come to the Stable, and after by ceremonies done,
give him a quart of oats clean sifted, and when they are eaten, put on his
Muzzell, toss up his litter* and so leave him.

The next day early in the morning, come to the horse (if he be standing, but
if he be laid* do not disturb him) and whilst he is lying take a quart of oats
clean sifted and rubbed between your hands, and wash them i^ strong Ale, and
give them to the horse; when they are eaten bridle him up, and dress him then
saddle as before showed; being ready to depart, give him a new laid Egg or two
then wash his mouth after it with a little Beer or Ale, and so lead away: at
the doo^ urge him to empty, then mount and ra^^ him gently to the course, ever
and anon making him smell another horses dung.

When you are come within a mile o^ thereabout of the starting-post, alight and
take off his body-cloath, and Breast-cloath and girt on the saddle again: then
sending away your Groom both with those Clothes, and other dry Clothes to rub
with, let him stay at the la^t end of the course till you come: then your self
rack your horse gently up to the ^tarting post, and beyond, making him smell to
that post, as you should also do to the first post, (which we call the weighing
post) that he may take notice of the beginning and ending of the course. There
start your horse roundly and sharply, at near a three quarters speed, and
according to his strength of body, ability of wind, and cheerfulness of spirit,
run him the whole course through: But by no means do any thing in extremity, or
above his wind; but when you find him a little yield, then give him a little
ease, so that all he does may be done with pleasure and not with anguish; For
this manner of training will make him take delight in his labor, and so
increase it; The contrary will breed discomfort, and make exercise irksome.

Also during the time you thus course him, you shall note upon what ground he
runs best, and whether up the hill or down the hill; whether on the smooth
or on the rough, on the wet or on the dry, or on the levill or the earth
somewhat rising; and according as you find his nature, so maintain him for your
own advantage.

When you have finished the heats, and a little slightly gallopt him up and
down to rate his wind and cheer his spirits, you shall then (the Groom being
ready) ride into some warm place, as under the covert of some hedge, wall,
bushes or trees, into some hollow dry ditch, pit, or other defense from the
air, and there light, and first with a glassing-knife or (as some call it) a
scraping knife, made either of some broken sword blade, some old broken Sithe,
or for war* of them, of a thin piece of old, hard o^ke^ wood, and fashioned
like a long broad knife, with a sharp edge, and using this with both your
hands, scrape off all the sweat from your horse in every part (buttocks
excepted) till you find there will no more arise; eve^ and anon moving him up
and down: The^ with dry clothes rub him all over painfully (buttocks excepted)
then take of the saddle, and having glassed his back and rubbed it near dry, put
on his Body-cloth and Breast-cloath, and set on the saddle again, and girt it,
then mount and gallop him gently forth again a little pace, eve^ and anon
rubbing his head, neck, and body as you sit, then walk him about the field to
cool him; and when you find he driet^ apace, then rack him homeward, sometime
racking and sometimes galloping; but by no means bring him to the Stable, till
you find him thoroughly dry.

When you are come to the Stable door, ^intice him to empty, then set him up
and tie him to the Rack, and (as having prepared it before) give him this
scouring, made in this manner.

The first Scouring:
Take a pint of the Syrope of Roses, or a pint of strong honyed water and
dissolve into it of Cassia, Agarick and Myrrh, of each half an ounce, and
symbolize and jumble them together in a Vyall glass.

Then being muld, and made warm at the fire, and the horse newly come from his
heat (as before showed) give him this scouring, for it is a strong one, and
avoydeth all manner of molten grease and foulness.

Ordering of the Horse after his scouring.
As soon as you have given him this scouring, presently let your Groom fall to
rubbing his legs, and do your self take off his saddle and clothes; and
finding his body dry, run slightly over it with your Curry comb, after with the
French Brush, and lastly, rub him all over with dry clothes, especially his
head, nape of the neck, and about his heart; then cloth him up warm as at
other times, and wisp him round with great warm wisps, and if you throw over
him a loose blanket, it will not be amiss in these extraordinary times,
especially if the season be cold.

The horse must fast full two hours afte^ the receipt of the scouring; but yet
depart no^ out of the Stable, but keep the horse waking* for rest hinder; the
medicine, and mot o^ makes it work.

After he has fastened on the bridle two hours, then you shall take a handful
of wheat ears, being your Polland wheat, that is without Awnes, and coming to
the Horse, first handle the roots of his ears, then put your hands under his
clothes against his heart upon his flanks, and on the nether part of his
thighs; and if you find any new sweat arise, or any coldness of sweat, or if
you see his body beat, or his breath move fast then forbear to give him any
thing, for it shows there is much soulness stirred up, on which the medicine
working with a conquering quality, the horse is brought to a little sickness;
therefore in this case you shall only take off his bridle, put on his Collar,
toss up his litter, and absent your self (having made the stable dark and
still) for other two hours, which is the utmost end of that sickness. But if
you find no such offense, then give him the ears of wheat, by three or four
together, and if he eat this handful give him another.

After he has eaten the wheat ears, give him a little knob of hay clean
dusted, and draw his bridle rubbing his head well.

An hour after his hay, sist him a quart of oats, and to them put two or three
handful of spelted beans, which you shall cause to be reed and dressed so clean
as is possible from all manner of hulls, dust and filth whatsoever, so as there
may be nothing but the clean Beans: to these oats and beans you shall break two
or three shives of bread clean chipt, and give all to the horse, and so leave
him for two or three hours.

At evening (before you dress him) give him the like quantity of oats, beans,
and bread, and when he has eaten them, bridle him, dress and cloathe him; for
you shall neither saddle or air him forth, because this evening after his heat,
the horse being foul, and the scouring yet working in his body, he may not
receive any cold water at all.

After he is dressed, and has stood two hours on his bridle, then take three
pints of clean sifted oats, and wash them in strong Ale, and give them to the
horse; for this will inwardly cool him as if he had drunk water.

After he has eaten his washed meat, and rested upon it a little space, you
shall at his feeding times, (which has been spoken of before) with oats and
spelt Beans, or Oats and bread, or all together, or each several and simple of
it self, according to the appetite and liking of the horse, feed him that night
in plentiful manner, and leave a knob of hay in his rack when ye go to bed.

The next day very early, first feed, then dress, cloth, saddle, air, water,
and bring home as at other times; only have a more careful eye to his
emptying, and see how his grease and foulness wastes.

At his feeding times, feed as was last showed you, only but little hay, and
keep your heating days, and the preparation the day before, as was before
showed without omission or addition.

Thus you shall spend the second fortnight, in which your horse having received
4 heats, horsman like given him, and four scourings, there is no doubt but his
body will be drawn inwardly clean; you shall then the third fortnight order him
according to the Rules following.

The third fortnights feeding.
This third fortnight you shall make his bread finer then it was formerly, as
thus.

The second Bread.
You shall take two pecks of clean Beans* and two pecks of fine Wheat, grind
them on the black stones, searce them through a fine Raunge, and knead it up
with Barm, and great store of lightning, working it in all points, and baking
it in the same sort as was showed you in the former bread.

With this bread, having the crust cut clean away, and being old, as before
showed, with spelt Beans and clean sifted Oats, feed your horse this fortnight
as you did the former, observe his dressings, airings, feedings, heatings, and
preparation, as in the former fortnight; only with these differences.

First, you shall not give your Heats so violently as before, but with a little
more pleasure; as thus,

If the first heat have violence, the second shall have ease, and indeed none
to overstrain him, or to make his body sore.

Next, you shall not after his heats, give him any more of the former scouring;
but instead thereof instantly upon the end of the heat after the horse is a
little cooled and clothed up; and in the same place where you rub him, give
him a Ball as big as an hens egg of that Confection which is mentioned in the
office of the Farrier, and goes by this title,

The true manner of making those Cordial Balls which cure any violent cold or
glanders, which, etc*

The Fourth and last fortnights feeding.
The fourth and last fortnight you shall make your bread much finer then either
of the former.

The last and best Bread.
Take three pecks of fine Wheat, and one peck of Beans, grind them on the black
stones, and boult them through the finest boulter you can get: then knead it up
with sweet Ale, Barm and new strong Ale, and the Barm beaten together, and the
whites of twenty or thirty eggs; but in any wise no water at all, but in stead
thereof some small quantity of new milk, then work it up, bake it, and order it
as the former.

With this bread, having the crust cut clean away, and with Oats well ^unned,
beaten, and rubbed between your hands, then new winnowed, sifted and dressed,
with the purest spelt Beans, and some fine Chiltern Wheat, with any simple or
any compound: feed your horse at his feeding times, as in the fortnight last
mentioned.

You shall keep your heating days the first week or fortnight, as you did the
former fortnight, but the last week you shall forbear one heat, and not give
any five days before the match day, only you shall give him strong and long
airings.

You shall not need this fortnight, to give him any scouring at all.

If this fortnight morning and evening you burn the best Frankincense in your
stable, you shall find it exceeding wholesome for the Horse, and he will take
wonderful delight therein.

In this fortnight, when you give the Horse any washed meat, wash it in the
whites of eggs, or Muskadine, for that is more wholesome and less pursie.

This fortnight give the horse no hay, but what he takes out of your hand
after his heats, and that in little quantity, and clear dusted.

The last week of this fortnight, if the horse be a foul feeder, you must use
the Muzzell continually; but if he be a clean Feeder, then three days before
the match is sufficient.

The morning the day before your match, feed well both before and after airing,
and water as at other times; before noon, and after noon scant his portion of
meat a little; before and after evening airing, feed as at noon, and water as
at other times, but be sure to come home before sunset.

Late at night feed as you did in the evening. Now I do not set you down what
meat to feed withal, because you must be ruled according to the Horses
stomach, and what best he likes, of that give him a pretty pittance, whether
simple or compounded; only as near as you can, forbear bread and beans.

This day you shall coule your horse, shoo him, and do all extraordinary things
of ornament about him, provided there be nothing to give offense or hinder him
in feeding, resting, emptying, or any other natural or beneficial action; For
I have heard some Horsemen say; That when they had shod their Horses with light
shoes, and none other actions of ornament about them the night before the
course; that their horses have taken such special notice thereof, that they
have refused both to eat, lie down, or empty: But you must understand that
those horses must be old, and long experienced in this exercise, or otherwise
find distaste at these actions; as uneasiness in shoes, heat and closness in
the muzzell, disorderly platting or folding tails, and the like, or they cannot
reach these subtle apprehensions:

For mine own part, touching the nice and strait plaiting up of horses tails in
the manner of Sakers, or Docks, with tape or ribban, which is now in general
use, howsoever the ornament may appear great to the eye, yet I do not much
affect it; because I know, if an ignorant hand have the workmanship thereof he
may many ways give offense to the Horse, and in avoiding cumbersomness, breed a
great deal more comber: therefore I wish every one, rather to pass by
curiosity (which they call necessary ornament) then by these false Graces to do
injury to the Horse. Now for the necessary and indifferent things which are to
be done. I had rather have them finished the day before, then on the morning of
the course, because I would have the horse that morning to find neither trouble
nor vexation.

The next morning (which is the match day) come to the Horse very early, take
off his Muzzell, rub his head well, right his clothes, and give them ease by
unwisping, and using the plain Circingle; then give him a pretty quaintity of
oats washed in Muskadine, or the whites of eggs; or if he refuse them, try him
with fine dressed oats mixed with wheat, or oats simple: when he has eaten them,
if he be an evil or slow emptier, walk him abroad, and in the places where he
used to empty, there entice him to empty, which as soon as he has done, bring
him home, and let him rest till you have warning to make ready.

But if he be a good and free emptier, then stir him not, but let him lie quiet.

When you have warning to make ready, come to the Horse, and having washed his
snaffle with Muskadine, take off the Muzzle and bridle him up; but before you
bridle, if you think him too empty, give him three or four mouthsfull of the
washed meat last spoken of, then bridle up and dress him; after pitch the
Saddle and Girths with Cordwainers wax, set it on and girt it gently, so as he
may have a feeling, but no straitness: then lay a clean sheet over the saddle,
over it his ordinary clothes, then his body-cloth and breast-cloath, and wisp
him round with soft wisps; then if you have a counterpane, or cloth of State
for bravery sake, let it be fastened above all. Being now ready to draw out,
give him half a pint of Muskadine, and so lead away.

In all your leadings upon the course, use gentle and calm motions, suffering
the horse ^o smell on every dung. And in especial pla^es of advantage, as
where you find rushes, ^ong grass lying, heath, or the like, walk him ^n, and
entice him to piss. But if you find no such help, then in especial places on
the course and chiefly toward the later end, (and having ^sed the same means
before) break some of ^he wisps under him, and entice him to piss.

Also in your leading, if any white or thick foam or froth rise about the
horses mouth, with a clean handkerchiefe wipe it away, and carrying a bottle of
clean water about you, wash his mouth now and then therewith.

When you come to the place of start, before you uncloath, rub or chase his
legs with hard wisps; then pick his feet, uncloath, wash his mouth with water,
mount his Rider, start fair, and leave the rest to Gods good will and pleasure.

Certain necessary Observations and Advantages for every Feeder to observe in
sundry Accidents.
There is no unreasonable creature of pleasure subject to so many disastrous
chances of Fortune, as the Horse, and especially the running horse, both by
reason of the multiplicity of diseases belonging unto them, as also the
violence of their exercise, and the nice tenderness of their keeping: and
therefore it behooves every Feeder to be armed with such observations as may
discern mischiefs, and those helps which may amend them when they happen.

Of meat and Drink
The first observation therefore that I would arm our Feeder withal, is the
true distribution of meat and drink.

Let him then observe if there be any meat or drink, or other nourishment which
he knows to be good for the horse, yet he refuses to eat it: in this case he
shall not violently thrust it upon him, or by force cram him therewith, but by
gentle degrees and cunning inticements, and by process of time, win him
thereunto, tempting him when he is most hungry or most dry; and if he get but a
bit at a time, it will soon increase to a greater quantity, and ever let him
have less then he desires; and that he may the sooner be brought unto it, mix
the meat he loves best with that he loves worst, till both be made alike
familiar, and so shall the horse be stranger to nothing that is good or
wholesome.

Observation for Lameness.
Our Feeder must observe if his horse be subject to lameness or stifness, to
surbait or tenderness of feet, then to give him his heats upon smooth Carpet
earth, and to forbear strong ground, hard highways, cross ruts and ^urrows
till extremity compel him.

Observation from the estate of the body.
Our Feeder must observe, that the strongest estate of body (which I account
the highest and fullest of flesh, so it be good, hard, and without inward
foulness) to be the best and ablest for the performance of these wagers; yet he
must herein take two considerations: the one the shape of the horses body, the
other his inclination and manner of feeding.

For the shape of body, There be some horses that are round, plump, and close
knit together, so that they will appear fat and well shaped, when they are lean
and in poverty. Others are raw-boned, slender, and loose knit together, and
will appear lean and deformed when they are fat, foul, and full of gross humors.

So likewise for their Inclinations, some horses as the first) will feed
outwardly, and carry a thick rib, when they are inwardly clean as may be. There
be others (as the later) that will appear lean to the eye, and she^ nothing but
skin and bone, when they are inwardly only greasy. In this case the Feede^
has two helps to advantage his knowledge the one outward, the other inward.

The outward help is the outward handling and feeling of the horses body
generally ove^ all his ribs, but particularly upon his sho^^ and hindmost ribs.

If his flesh generally handle soft and loos^, and the fingers sink into it as
into Down* then is the horse foul without all question but if generally it be
hard and firm, only upon the hind most rib is softness, then he h^t^ grease and
foul matter within him, which must be avoided, how lean or poor soever h^
appear in outward speculation.

The inward help is only sharp exercis^ and strong scourings: the first will
dissol^^ the foulness, the later will bring it away.

Observation from the privy parts.
Our Feeder must observe his horses stones for if they hang down side, or low
from h^ body, then is the horse out of lust and hear^ and is either sick of
grease, or other foul humors; but if they he close couched up, and hid in a
small room, then is he healthful and in good plight.

Observation for the Limbs.
Our Feeder must observe ever the nig^t before he runs any match, or sore heat,
to bath his Horse legs well from the knees and cambrels downwards, either with
clarified Dogs grease (which is the best) or Trotters oil (which is the next)
or else the best Ho^s grease, which is sufficient, and to work i^ in with the
labor of his hands, and not with fire: for what he gets not in the first
night, will be got in the next morning; and what is not got in the next
morning, will be got in when he comes to uncloath at the end of the course: so
that you shall need to use the ointment but once; but the Friscase or Rubbing
as often as you find opportunity.

Observation for water.
Our Feeder shall observe, that albeit I give no direction for watering the
horse after the heats, yet he may in any of the later fortnights (finding his
horse clean and his grease consumed) somewhat late at night, as about six a
clock give him water in reasonable quantity being made luke warm, and fasting
an hour after it. Also if through the unseasonableness of the weather, you
cannot water abroad, then you shall at your watering hours water in the house
with warm water as aforesaid. Nor need you in this case heat all your water,
but making a little very hot, put it into a greater, and so make all lukewarm.
If you throw an handful of Wheat-meal, Bran, or Oat-meal finely powdered (but
Oat-meal is the best) into the water, it is very wholesome.

Observation for the ground to run on.
Our Feeder shall observe. That if the ground whereon he is to run his match,
be dangerous, and apt for mischievous accidents, as strains, over-reaches,
sinew bruises, and the like, that then he is not bound to give all his heats
thereon; but having made the Horse acquainted, with the nature thereof, then
either to take part of the Course, as a mile, two or three, according to the
goodness of the ground, and so to run his horse forth and again (which we call
turning heats) provided always that he end his heat at the weighing-post, and
that he make not his course less but rather more in quantity then that he must
run. But if for some especial causes he like no part of the course; then he
may many times (but not ever) give his heat upon any other good ground, about
any spacious and large field, where the horse may lay down his body, and run at
pleasure.

Observation from Sweat.
Our feeder shall take especial regard in all his airings, heatings, and all
manner of exercises whatsoever to the sweating of his horse, and the occasions
of his sweating; as if an horse sweat upon little or no occasion; as walking a
foot pace, standing still in the stable, and the like, it is then apparent that
the horse i^ faint, foul fed, and wants exercise.

If upon good occasion, as strong heats, great labor and the like, he sweat,
yet his sweat is white froth and like sope-suds, then is the horse inwardly
soul, and wants also exercise But if the sweat be black, and as it were only
water thrown upon him, without any frothiness, then is the horse clean fed, in
good lust and good case, and you may adventure riding without danger.

Observation from the Hair.
Our Feeder shall observe his horses Hair in general, but especially his neck,
and those parts which are uncovered, and if they lie slick, smooth and close,
and hold the beauty of their natural color, then is the Horse in good case;
but if they be rough, or staring, or if they be discolored, then is the horse
inwardly cold at the heart, and wants both clothes and warm keeping.

Many other Observations there be, but these are most material, and I hope
sufficient for any reasonable understanding*

THE OFFICE OF THE KEEPER.
How to keep any Horse for pleasure, Hunting or Travel, etc.
I Would have our Keeper of these ordered Horses, to rise early in the morning
of day, or before (according to the season of the year) and to sift the Horse
the quantity of three pints of good, old and dry Oats, and put to them an hand
full or two of spelt Beans, hulls and all, and so give them to the Horse.

Of Dressing and Watering.
After he has eaten them, let him dres him, that is to say, he shall first
curry him all over with the Iron comb, from the head to the tail, from the top
of the shoulder to the knee, and from the top of his buttock to the hinder
cambrell; then dust him all over with a clean dusting cloth, or with an horse
tail made fast to an handle: then curry him all over with the french brush,
beginning with his forehead, temples and cheeks, so down his neck, shoulders
and fore legs, even to the setting on of his Hooves, so along his sides and
under his belly; and lastly, all about his buttocks and hinder legs, even to
the ground; then you shall go over again with your duster, then over all parts
with your wet hands, and not leave (as near as you can one loose hair about
him, nor one wet hair; for what your hands did wet, your hands must rub dry
again: you shall also with your wet hands cleanse his sheath, his yard, his
cods and his tuell, and indeed not leave any secret place uncleansed, as ears,
nostrils, fore-bowels, and between his hinder thighs, Then you shall take an
hair-cloath and with it rub him all over, but especially his head, face, eyes,
cheeks, between his chaps, on the top of his forehead, in the nape of the
neck, down his legs, feetlocks and about his pasterns. Lastly, you shall take
a clean woolen cloth, and with it rub him all over, beginning with his head
and face, and so passing through all parts of his body and limbs before spoken
of. Then take a wet mane-cloath, and comb down his mane and tail.

Then saddle him and ride him out to water, warm him both before and after
water very moderately, and so bring him home dry without sweat; then cloth him
up, after you have rubbed his head, body and legs, and let him stand on his
bridle more then an hour.

Ordinary-Keeping
After he has stood an hour, give him the former quantity of provender, and
the same in kind.

After he has eaten his provender, give him into his rack a pretty bundle of
hay, and so let him rest till noon.

At noon give him the former quantity of provender, and the same in kind, and
so let him rest till evening, only renewing his hay if there be occasion.

At evening dress him as in the morning, then ride him forth to water, and do
as you did in the morning.

When you come home and have clothed him up, let him stand on his bridle as
before, then give him the former quantity of provender, so let him rest till
nine a clock at night; at which time give him the former quantity of provender,
and a pretty bundle of hay, and so let him rest till the next morning.

Also observing ordinary keeping ever after your dressing, and at such times as
you find best convenience, to bathe all his foreleggs from the knees and
Cambrels downward with cold water, for it is wholesome, and both comfort the
sinews, and prevents scabbs and swellings.

Keeping in Travel and Sport.
Thus you shall do concerning his ordinary keeping at home where the Horse has
rest and that you may dispose of hours as you please* but if you be either in
travel, in sport, or other occasion, so that you cannot observe these
particular times, then you must divide the main and whole quantity of mea^ into
fewer parts and greater quantities, and so give them at the best convenience,
ever observing to give the least quantity before travel as a third part before
mounture, and the two other when you come to rest.

Nor would I have you to distract your mind with any doubt or amazement,
because I prescribe you five several times of feeding in one day, as if it
should either over-charge you, or over-feed your horse: questionless there is
no such matter when you look into the true proportion: for it cannot be denied
that whosoever is worthy of a good horse, or good means to keep a good horse,
cannot allow him less then one peck a day; nay, the Carrier. Carter, Poulter
and Packhorse, will allow half a peck at waterings, and this allowance which I
set down comes to no more: for fifteen p nts of oats, and one pint of spelt
beans upheaped, makes two gallons, and that is one peck Winchester measure.

Now to give it at twice it fills the stomach more, makes the digestion wors^,
and the appetite weak: whereas to give less, but more often, the stomach is ever
craving, the digestion always ready, and the appetite never wanting, so that
health (without disorder) can never be a stranger, therefore once again thus
for ordinary keeping.

Of giving Heats, Hunting and Travel.
But if you intend to give an heat, as to hunt, gallop, travel, or the like,
(which I would wish you to do once, twice, or thrice a week according to the
ability of your horse) then observe all your former observations, only the
night before give him little or no hay at all:

In the morning before his heat very early and before his dressing, give him
three or four handful of clean sifted oats, washed either in strong Beer or
Ale. Then dress him, saddle him, and give him his hear, he having first emptied
himself well.

Ordering after Labor:
After his heat*, or end of labor, rub him carefully, and bring him*dry into
the stable; then after he is clothed up, let him stand on his bridle at least
two hours, then give him a little bundle of hay to tear out upon his bridle,
and an hour after feed him as has been before showed, only with his first
oats give him an handful or better of hemp seed well dusted and mixed.

At night warm him a little water and give it him lukewarm, with a little fine
pounded Oatmeal thrown upon it, then an hour after give him his provender, and
a pretty bundle of hay, and so let him rest till the next morning.

The next morning do all things as in his ordinary keeping.

Some especial Precepts.
If he be a choice horse let him stand on litter both night and day, yet change
often and keep the planchers clean. If he be otherwise, then use your own
discretion.

If you intend to travel or journey in the morning, then give no hay, or but
little the night before; if you journey in the afternoon, then give no hay, or
but little in the morning.

If your horse sweat by exercise, take off the sweat (before you rub him) with
the Glassing-knife, which is either a piece of a broken sword-blade, or a piece
of a broken Sith, for this will make a clean, a smooth, and a shining coat.

In journeying ride moderately the first hour or two, but after according to
your occassions:

Water before you come to your Inn, if you can possibly; but if you cannot,
then give warm water in the Inn, after the Horse has fed, and is fully cooled
within, and outwardly dried.

Trotters oil is an excellent ointment, being applied very warm, and well
chafed into your horses limbs and sinews, to nimble and help stifness and
lameness. And Dogs grease is better, therefore never want one of them in your
stable.

Of washing and Walking.
Neither wash your horse nor walk your horse; for the first indangereth
foundring in the body or feet, and breeds all surfaits; the latter is the
ground of all strong colds, which turn to glanders and rottenness; but if
necessity compel you to either, as foul ways; or long stays, then rather wash
your Horses legs with pailes of water at the stable door, then to endanger him
in either pond or river. And for walking, rather sit on his back to keep his
Spirits stirring, then to lead him in his hand, and with dull spirits to
receive all manner of mischiefs.

This I think sufficient for the office of the Keeper.
THE OFFICE OF THE AMBLER.
Observations in Ambling.
THere is not any motion in an horse more desired, more useful, nor indeed
more hard to be attained unto by a right way, then the motion of Ambling; and
yet (is we will believe the protestations of the Professors) not any thing in
all the Art of Horsmanship more easy, or more several ways to be effected,
every man conceiving to himself a several method, and all those methods held
as infallible maxims that can never fail in the accomplishment of the work.

Men's opinions and Errors.
But they which know truths, know the errors in these opinions, for albeit
every man that has hardly a smell of Horsmanship, can discourse of a way how
to make an horse amble, yet when they come to the performance of the motion,
their failings are so great, and their errors so gross, that for mine own part,
I never yet saw an exact Ambler. I confess some one man may make some one horse
amble well and perfectly; nay, more then one, peradventure many, and thereby
assume to himself a name of perfection, yet such a man have I seen err grossly,
and spoil more then his labor was able to recompense.

But leaving men's errors, because they are past my reformation, I will only
touch at some principal observations which in mine opinion I hold to be the
easiest* the certainest and readiest for the effecting of this work; and
withal glance at those absurdities which I have seen followed, though to
little purpose, and less benefit.

Ambling by the plowed field.
There is one commends the new plowed lands, and affirms, that by toyling the
horse thereon in his foot pace, there is no way so excellent for the making of
him to amble; but he forgets what weakness, nay what lameness, such disorderly
toil brings to a young horse nay to any horse; because the work cannot be done
without weariness, and no weariness is wholesome*

Ambling by the Gallop*
Another will teach his horse to amble from the Gallop, by sudden stopping, a
more sudden chocking him in the cheeks of the mouth, thrusting the horse into
such an am^^edness betwixt his gallop and his trot, that losing both he cannot
choose but find out ambling.

But this man forgets not alone the error before spoken, (which is too great
toil) but also spoils a good mouth (if the horse had one) loses a good Rain
(if there were any) and by overreaching and clapping one foot against another,
indangers upon every step an ^oof-breach, or sinew-strain

Ambling by Weights.
Another says there is nothing of such use for ambling, as weights, and
thereupon one ^oads his horse with unmercifull shoes of in^ollerable weight,
and forgets how they make him enterfere, strike short with his hind-feet, and
though his motion be true, yet is so slow that it is not worth his labor.

Another foulds great weights of lead about his feetlock pasterns, and forgets
that they have all the mischiefs of the former, besides the indangering of
incurable strains, the crushing of the crownet, and the breeding of ring-bones,
crown-scabs and quitter bones.

Another loads his horse upon the fillets with earth, lead, or some other
massy substance, and forgets the swaying of the back, the over-straining of
the fillets, and a general disabling of all the hinder parts.

Ambling in hand, or not ridden*
Another struggles to make his horse amble in his hand before he mount his
back, by the help of some wall, smooth pale or rail, and by chocking the horse
in the mouth with the bridle-hand, and correcting him with his rod on the
hinder houghs, and under the belly when he treads false, and never remembers
into what desperate frantickness it drives an horse before he can make him
understand his meaning, as plunging, rearing, sprauling out his legs, and
using a world of other antic postures, which once settled, are hardly ever
after reclaimed: besides, when he has spent all his labor, and done his
utmost, as soon as he mounts his horses back, the horse is as far to seek of
his pace as if he had never known such a motion.

Ambling by the help of Shoes.
Another finds out a new stratagem, and in despite of all opposition in the
Horse, will make him amble perfectly, and thereupon he makes him a pair of
hinder shoes with long spurns or plates before the toes, and of such length,
that if the horse offer to trot, the hinder foot beats the forefoot before it.

But he forgets that the shoes are made of Iron, and the Horses Legs of Flesh
and blood, neither does he remember with what violence the hinder foot follows
the fore-foot, nor that every stroke it gives, can light upon any place, but
the back sinews, then which there is no part more tender, nor any wound that
brings such incurable lameness.

Ambling by the help of fine Lists.
Another (out of quaintness more then strong reason) strives to make his horse
amble by taking of fine soft lists, and foulding them strait about the Cambrell
in that place where you garter an horse for a stiflestrain, and then turn him
to grass for a fortnight or more, in which time (says he) he will fall to a
perfect amble, (for it is true he cannot trot but with pain) then taking away
the lists, the work is finished.

But (under the correction of the professors of this foreign trick, for it is a
Spanish practice) I must assure them, that if they gain their purpose, they
must offend the members. If they hurt not the limbs, they lose their labor;
but however this is most assured, that the amble thus gained, must be
disgraceful, crambling and cringing in the hinder parts, without comeliness,
speed, or clear deliverance.

Ambling by the Hand only.
Another (and he calls himself the Master Ambler of all Amblers) affirms there
is no true way of making an horse to amble but by the hand only, and I am of
his opinion, could the secret be found out, or could a man make a horse do all
that he imagined, and as he imagined; but horses are rebellious, and men are
furious, and the least of either of these spoils the whole work; and it is
impossible for any man to fadge an horse to a new motion utterly unknown,
against which he will not resist with his uttermost powers. Besides, to do this
action with the hand only, it must only be done from the Horses mouth, and
that mouth must of necessity be altered from his first manner of riding; for to
use all one hand must preserve all one motion, and then where is ambling which
was not known at the first backing? Again, we strive at the first backing of an
horse, to bring his mouth to all sweetness, his rein to all stateliness, and
the general carriage of his body to all comeliness. Now in this course of
ambling by the hand only, the mouth must be changed from the chaps to the
^eeks of the mouth, which is from sweetness to harshness, his rein must be
brought from constancy to inconstancy: for the eyes that did look upward, the
nose and muzzell which was couched inward, must be turned outward, and the
general comeliness of the Bodies carriage must be brought to disorder and false
treading, or else he shall never accomplish the true art of ambling by the hand
only.

Ambling by the Tramell.
There is another, (I will not call him the ^ast, because his error may be as
great as any) and he will make his horse amble by the help of the tramell only,
which I confess is nearest the best and most assured way, yet he has many
errors, as follows.

Errors in the Tramell.
First, he loses himself in the want of knowledge, for the length of the
Tramell, and either he makes it too long, (which gives no stroke) or too short
(which gives a false stroke) the first makes an horse hackell and shuffle his
feet confusedly, the latter makes him roll and twitch up his hinder feet so
suddenly, that by custom it brings him to a string-halt, from which he will
hardly be recovered ever after.

Another loses himself and his labor by misplacing the Trammell, and out of a
niceness to seem more expert then he is, or out of fearfulness to prevent
falling (to which the Tramell is subject) places them above the knee, and above
the hinder hough. But the Rule is neither good nor handsome; for if the Tramell
be too long or loose, that it gives no offense to the sinews, and other
ligaments about which they must necessarily be bound, when they are raised so
high, then they can give no true stroke, neither can the fore-leg compel the
hinder to follow it. And if they be so short or strait, that the fore-leg
cannot step forward, but the hinder must go equal with it, then will it so
press the main sinew of the hinder leg, and the veins and fleshy part of the
fore-thighs, that the horse will not be able to go without halting before, and
cringing and crambling his hinder parts so ill-favouredly, that it will be
irksome to behold it: besides, it will occasion swellings, and draw down
tumors, which will be more noysom then the pace will be beneficial.

Another makes his Tramell of such course or hard stuff, or else girts it so
strait, or leaves it fretting up and down so loose, that he galls his horses
legs, and leaves neither hair nor skin upon them, at the best it leaves such a
foul print and mark upon the legs, that every one will accuse both the horse
and his Teacher of disgrace and indiscretion.

As these, so I must conclude with the last error of the Tramell, which is,
men's opinions, and though it be the most insufficient, yet it has the greatest
power to oversway truth, and that is, the Tramell is utterly unnecessary, and
unprofitable, and the defender worthy of no employment, alleging the Land
only to be excellent.

The errors I have already confuted; it now remains (after all these faults
finding) that I show the truest, the easiest, and that way which is most
uncontrollable for the making of an horse to amble, with all the gracefulness
and perfection that can be required.

The best way to amble an Horse.
When you are about undoubtedly to make an horse amble truly, and without
controlment: First, try with your hand by a gentle or deliberate racking and
thrusting of the horse forward, by helping him in the weeks of his mouth with
your snaffell, (which must be smooth, big and full) and correcting him first on
one side, then on another with the calves of your legs, and sometimes with the
spur; if you can make him of himself strike into an amble; but by no means
disorder or displace either his mouth, head, or neck; if you find you can make
him strike into an amble, though shuffling disorderly, there will be much labor
saved: for that proclivity or aptness to amble, will make him with more
easiness and less danger, endure the use of the Tramell, and make him find the
motion without stumbling or amazement: but if you find he will by no means
either apprehend the motions or intentions, then struggle not with him, but
fall to the use of the Tramell in this manne^ following.

The form of the Tramell.
But before I come to the use and virtue thereof, I will show you the form and
substance whereof it ought to be made; because nothing has ever done this
Instrument more injury, then false substances and false shapes.

Therefore some make these tramels all of Leather, and that will either reach
or break, the first marrs the work by uncertainty, the other loses the labor.

Another makes it of Canvass, and that galls.

A third makes it of strong Lists, and that has all the faults of both the
former; for the softness will not let it lie close, and the gentleness makes it
stretch out of all compass or break upon every stumble.

And as these, so there are a world of other us^^ess Tramels; for you must
understand that touching the true Tramel, the side-ropes must be firm, without
yielding an hair: The hose must be soft, lie close and not move from his first
place, and the Backband must be flat, no matter how light, and so defended from
the Fillets that it may not gall. And this Tramell must be thus made, and of
these substances.

First, for the side-Ropes, They must be made of the best, finest, and
strongest packthread, such as your Turky-thred, and twined By the Roper into a
delicate strong cord, yet at the utmost, not above the bigness of a small
Jackline, with a nooze at each end, so strong as is possible to be made;
neither must these side-Ropes be twined too hard, but gentle, and with a
yielding condition, for that will bring on the motion more easy, and keep the
Tramell from breaking, now these siderop^s must be just 36 inches in length,
and so equal one with another, that no difference may be espied.

For the Hose which must be placed in the small of the fore-leg, and the small
of the hinder l^g above the feetlock, they must be made of fine Girth web,
which is soft and pliant, and lined with double Cotton: over the girth web must
be fastened strong Tabbs of white Neats leather well tallowed, ^^d suited to an
even length, and stamped with holes of equal distance, which shall pass
through the noozes of the side-Ropes and be made longer or shorter at pleasure,
with very strong Buckles. These hose; the G^rth would be 4 inches in length,
and the Tabbs ten.

The back-band being of no other use but to bear up the side-ropes, would (if
you Tramell all the forelegs) be made of fine Girthweb, and lined with Cotton;
but if you tramell but one side, then any ordinary tape will serve, being sure
that it carry the sideropes in an even line without either rising or falling;
for if it rise, it shortens the side-rope, if it fall it indangers tangling.

Thus you see what the true Tramell is, and how to be made: touching the use,
it thus follows.

The true use of the true Tramell.
When you have brought your horse into an even smooth path, without rub^ or
roughness, you shall there hose the near foreleg, and the rear hinder leg;
then put to them the side rope, and see that he stand at that just proportion
which nature her self has formed him, without either straining or enlarging
his members, and in that even and just length stay the side-rope by a small
tape fastened up to the saddle. Then with your hand on the bridle, straining his
head, put him gently forward, and if need be, have the help of a by-stander to
put him forward also, and so force him to amble up and down the road with all
the gentleness you can, suffering him to take his own leisure, that thereby he
may come to an understanding of his restraint, and your will for the
performance of the motion, and though he snappe^ or stumble, or peradventure
fall now and then, yet it matters not, do you only stay his head, give him
leave to rise, and with all gentleness put him forward again, till finding his
own fault, and understanding the motion* he become perfect, and amble in your
hand to your contentment. And that this may be done with more ease and less
amazement to the horse, it is not amiss (at his first Trameling) that you give
your side-ropes more length then ordinary, both that the twitches may be less
sudden, and the motion coming more gently, the horse may sooner apprehend it.

But as soon as he comes to any perfectness* then instantly put the side-ropes
to their true length. For an inch too long, is a foo^ ^oo slow in the pace; and
an inch to short causes ralling, a twitching up of the legs, and indeed a
kind of plain halting.

When to alter the Tramell.
When the horse will thus amble in your hand perfectly, being trameled on one
side, you shall then change them to the other side, and make him amble in your
hand as you did before. And thus you shall do, changing from one side to
another, till with this half tramell he will run and amble in your hand
without snappering or stumbling, both readily and swiftly. When this is
attained unto, which cannot be above two or three hours labor (if there be any
tractableness) you ^ay then put on the whole Tramell, and the broad flat
back-band, Trameling both sides equally, and so run him in your hand (at the
utmost length of the bridle) up and down the road diverse times, then pause,
cherish, and to it a gain; and thus apply him till you have brought him to that
perfection, that he will amble, swiftly, truly and readily, when, where and how
you please: then put him upon uneven and uncertain ways, as up-hill and
downhill, where there are clots and roughness, and where there is hollowness
and false treading.

When to mount his back.
Now when he is perfect in your hand upon all these, you may then adventure to
mount his back, which (if you please) you may first do by a Boy, or Groom,
making the horse amble under him, whilst you stay his head to prevent danger,
or to see how he strikes. Then after mount your self, and with all gentleness
and le^^ty increasing his pace more and more, till you come to the height of
perfection. And thus as you did before in your hand, so do now on his back,
first with the whole Tramell, then with the half, and changing the Tramell
often, first from one side, then to another, then altering grounds till you find
that exquisiteness which you desire. And this must be done by daily exercise
and labor, as twice, thrice, sometimes* oftener in the day.

When to journey.
When you have attained your wish in the perfection of his stroke, the
nimblenesse of ^^s Limbs, and the good carriage of his head and Body, you may
then take away the Tramell altogether, and exercise him without it. But this
exercise I would have upon the highway, and not (Horse-courser like) in a
private smooth Road, for that affords but a co^sening pace, which is left upon
every small weariness; therefore take the highway forward for three, four, or
five miles in a morning more or less, as you find the horses aptness and
ability.

Now if in this Journeying, either through weariness, ignorance, or
peevishness, you find in him a willingness to forsake his pace, then (ever
carrying in your pocket the half tramell) alight and put them on, and so
exercise him in them, and now and then giving him ease, bring him home in his
true pace.

This exercise you shall follow day by day, and every day increasing it more
and more* till you have brought him from one mile to many: which done, you may
then give him ease, as letting him rest a day or two, or more, and then apply
him again; and if you find in him neither error nor alteration then you may
resolve your work is finished: For in all mine experience, I never found this
way to fail.

But if any alteration do happen, (as many fantastic horses are subject unto)
if it be in the motion of his pace* then with your hand reform it. But if that
fail, then the use of the half Tramell will never fail you.

Now if the error proceed from any other occasion, look seriously into the
cause thereof, and taking that away, the effect will soon cease, for you are to
understand, that in this manner of teaching an horse to amble, you are
forbidden no help or benefit whatsoever which belongs unto horsmanship, as
Chain, Cavezin, Musroule, Headstrain, Martingale, Bit, or any other necessary
Instrument, because this motion is not drawn from the mouth, but from the limbs.

Many things else might be spoken on this subject, but it would but load paper,
and weary memory, and I aim only at short essays, and true new experiments,
therefore this already writ I hold sufficient.

THE OFFICE OF THE BUYER: Wherein is showed all the perfections and
imperfections that are or can be in a Horse.
Observations and Advertisements for any man when he goes about to buy an
Horse.
THere is nothing more difficult in all the Art of Horsmanship, then to set
down constant and uncontrollable Resolutions by which to bind every man's mind
to an unity of consent in the buying of an Horse: for according to the old
Adage, What is one man's meat, is another man's poison; what one ^ffects another
dislikes. But to proceed according to the Rule of Reason, the Precepts of the
Ancients, and the modern practice of our present conceived opinions, I will, as
briefly as I can (and the rather because it is a labor I never undertook in
this wise before) show you those observations and advertisements which may
fortify you in any hard election.

The end for which to buy:
First therefore you are to observe, that i^ you will elect an Horse for your
hearts contentment, you must consider the end and purpose for which you buy
him, as whether for the Wars, running, hunting, traveling, draught or
burden.

Every one having their several Characters, and their several faces both of
beauty and uncomliness.

But because there is but one truth, and one perfection, I will under the
description of the perfect and untainted horse, show all the imperfections and
attaind^res which either nature or mischance can put upon the Hors^ of greatest
deformity.

Let me then advise you that intend to buy an horse, to acquaint your self with
all the true shapes and excellencies which belong to an horse whether it be in
h^s natural and true proportion, or in any accidental or outward increase or
decrease of any limb o^ member, and from their contraries to gather all things
whatsoever that may give dislike or offense.

Election how divided.
To begin therefore with the first principle of Election, you shall understand
they are divided into two especial heads, the one General the other
Particular.

The general Rule.
The General Rule of election is, first the end for which you buy, then his
Breed or Generation; his Color, his Pace, and his Stature. These are said to
be general, because they have a general dependence upon every man's several
opinions: as the first, which is the end for which you buy, it is a thing shut
up only in your own bosom.

Of Breed.
The other, which is Breed, you must either take it from faithful report, your
own knowledge, or from some known and certain Characters by which one strain or
one Country is distinguished from another; as the Neapolitan is known by his
Hauk-nose, the Spaniard by his small Limbs, the Barbary by his fine head, and
deep hoof, The Dutch by his rough legs, the English, by his General strong
knitting together, and so forth of diverse others.

Of Color.
As for his color, although there is no color utterly exempt from goodness,
for I have seen good of all, yet there are some better reputed then others, as
the daple, gray for beauty, the brown-bay for service, the black with silver
hairs for courage, and the Lyard or true mixed Roan for continuance. As for the
^orrell, the black without white, and the unchangeable Iron-gray, are reputed
choleric, the bright Bay, the flea-bitten, and the black with white marks, ate
sanguinists; the black, white, the yellow, dun, and kiteglewed, and the pie*
balld, are phlegmatic; and the chestnut, the mouse-dun, the red bay, and the
blew-gray, are melancholy.

Pace, as Trotting.
Now for his pace, which is either Trot, Amble, Rack or Gallop, you must refer
it to the end also for which you buy; as if it be for the wars, running,
hunting, or your own pleasure, then the trot i^ most tolerable, and this
motion you shall know by a cross moving of the horses limbs, as when the far
fore-leg and the near hinder-leg; or the near fore-leg and the far hinder-leg
move and go forward in one instant. And in this motion, the nearer the horse
takes his limbs from the ground, the opener, the evener, and the shorter is
his pace: for to take up his feet slovenly, shows stumbling and lamenesse: To
tread narrow or cross, shows enterfeiring or failling; to step uneven, shows
toil and weariness; and to tread long, shows overreaching.

Ambling.
Now if you elect for ease, great persons feats, or long travel, then Ambling
is required. And this motion is contrary to trotting: for now both the feet on
one side must move equally together, that is, the far forelegs and the far
hinder-legs, and the near fore-leg and the near hinder-leg And this motion must
go just, large, smoth, and nimble* for to tread false, takes away all ^ase; to
tread short, rids no ground; to tread rough, shows, rolling; and to tread
un-nimbly, shows a false pace that never continues, as also lameness.

Racking
If yo elect for Buck-hunting; galloping on the highway, post, hackney, or the
like, then a racking pace is required: and this motion is the same that ambling
i^, only it is in a swifter time and a shorter tread; and though it rid not so
much ground, yet it is a little more easy*

Galloping*
Now to all these paces must be joined a good gallop, which naturally every
trotting and racking horse has; the ambler is a little unapt thereunto,
because the motions are both one, so that being put to a greater swiftness of
pace then formerly he has been acquainted withal, he handles his legs
confusedly and out of order, but being trained gently, and made to understand
the motion he will as well undertake it as any trotting horse whatsoever,

Now in a good gallop you are to observe these virtues. First, that the horse
which takes his feet nimbly from the ground, but does not raise them high,
that neither roleth nor beats himself, that fl^etcheth out his fore legs,
follows nimbly with his hinder* and neither cutteth under his knee (which is
called the Swift cut) nor crosses, nor clap^ one foot on another, and ever
leads with his far fore foot, and not with the near this hors^ is said ever
to gallop most comely and most true, and it is the fittest for speed, o^ any
swift employment. If he gallop round, and raise his fore-feet, he is then said
to gallop strongly, but not swiftly, and is fittest for the great Saddle, the
wars and strong encounters. If he gallop slow, yet sure, he will serve for the
high way: but i^ he labor his feet confusedly, and gallop painfully, then is
he good for no galloping service: beside, it shows some hidden lameness.

Stature:
Lastly, touching his Stature, it must be referred to the end for which you
buy, ever observing that the biggest and strongest are fittest for strong
occasions and great burdens, strong draughts, and double carriage; the middle
size for pleasure and general employments; and the least for ease,
streetwalks, and Summer Hackney.

The particular Rule.
Now touching the particular Rule of election, it is contained in the discovery
of natural deformities, accidental outward sorrances, or inward hidden
mischiefs which are so many and so infinite that it is a world of work to
explain them yet; for satisfaction sake I will in as methodicall manner as I
can, show what you are to observe in this accession.

How to stand to view.
When a Horse is brought unto you to buy (being satisfied for his breed, his
pace, color and stature, then see him stand naked before you, and placing your
self before his face, take a strict view of his countenance, and the
cheerfulness threof: for it is an excellent glass wherein to behold his
goodness and best perections. -- As thus --

His Ears.
If his ears be small, thin, sharp, short, pricked and moving; or if they be
long, yet well set on, and well carried, it is a mark of beauty, goodness, and
metal: but if they be thick, laved or lolling, wide set, and unmoving, then
are they signs of dullness, doggedness: and evil nature.

His Face.
If his Face be lean: his forehead swelling outward: the mark or feather in his
face set high, as above his eyes, or at the top of his eyes; if he have white
star: or white ratch of an indifferent size, and even placed, or a white snip
on his nose, or lip; all are marks of beauty and goodness. But if his face be
fat, cloudy or skouling, his forehead flat as a trencher, (which we call
Mare-faced,) or the mark in his forehead stand low, as under his eyes: If his
star or ratch stand awry, or in an evil posture, or in stead of a snip, his
nose be raw and unhairy, or his face generally bald; all are signs of
deformity.

His Eyes.
If his eyes be round, big, black, shining, starting or staring from his head,
if the black of the eye fill the pit or outward circumference, so that in the
moving, none (or very little) of the white appears, all are signs of beauty,
goodness, and metal: but if his eyes be uneven, and of a wrinkled proportion,
if they be little (which we call pig-eyed) both are uncomely signs of
weakness: if they be red and fiery, take heed of Moon-eys, which is next door
to blindness. If white and walled, it shows a weak sight, and unnecessary
starting or finding of Boggards: if with white specks, take heed of the pearl,
pin and web: if they water or show bloody, it shows bruises; and if they
matter, they show old over-riding, festred rhumes* or violent strains If they
look dead or dull, or are hollow, or much sunk, take heed of blindness at the
best; the best is of an old decrepid generation: if the black fill not the pit,
but the white is always appearing, or if in moving the white and black be seen
in equal quantity, it is a sign of weakness, and a dogged disposition.

His Cheeks and Chaps.
If handling his Cheeks or Chaps, you find the bones lean and thin, the space
wide between them, the thropple or windpipe big as you can gripe, and the void
place without knots or kirnels; and generally the jaws so great, that the neck
seems to couch within them, they are all excellent signs of great wind,
courage, and soundness of head and body. But if the chaps be fat and thick, the
space between them closed up with gross substance, and the throple little, all
are signs of short wind and much inward foulness: If the void place be full of
knots and kirnels, take heed of the Strangle or Glanders, at the best, the
horse is not without a foul cold. If his jaws be so strait, that his neck
swells above them, if it be no more but natural, it is only an uncomely
sign of short wind and pursickness, or grosness; but if the swelling be long,
and elose by his Chaps, like a whetstone, then take heed of the Vives, or some
other unnatural impostume.

His Nostrils and muzzell.
If his nostrils be open, dry, wide and large, so as upon any straining, the
inward redness is discovered, and if his muzzell be small, his mouth deep, and
his lips equally meeting; then all are good signs of wind, health and courage.
But if his nostrils be strait, his wind is little; if is muzzell be gross, his
spirit ^is dull; if his mouth be shallow, he will never carry a bit well; and
if his upper lip will not reach his nether, old age or infirmity has marked
him for carrion. If his nose be moist and dropping, if it be clear water, it is
a cold; if foul matter, then beware of Glanders: if both nostrills run, it is
hurtful; but if one, then, most dangerous.

Teeth.
Touching his Teeth and their virtues, they are set down in a particular
chapter; only remember, you never buy an horse that wants any, for as good
lose all as one.

His Breast.
From his Head look down to his Breast, and see that it be broad, out-swelling,
and adorned with many features: for that shows strength and indurance. The
little breast is uncomely, and shows weakness, the narrow breast is apt to
stumble, fall, and enterfeire before: the breast that is hidden inward, and
wants the beauty and division of many feathers, shows a weak armed heart,
and a breast that is unwilling and unfit for any violent toil or strong labor.

His Fore-thighes.
Next, look down from his elbow to his knee, and see that those fore-thighs be
rushgrown, well horned within, sinewed, fleshy and out-swelling, for they are
good signs of strength, the contrary shows weakness, and are unnatural.

His Knees
Then look on his knees that they carry proportion, be lean, sinewy, and close
knit, for they are good and comely; but if one be bigger or rounder then
another, the horse has received mischief: if they be gross, the horse is
gouty: if they have scarres, or hair broken, it is a true mark of a stumbling
jade and a perpetual faller.

His Legs.
From his knees look down to his legs, to his pasterns, and if you find them
clean, ^^an, flat, and sinewy, and the inward bought of his knee without
seames, or hair-broken, then he shows good shape and soundness: But if on the
inside the leg you find hard ^nots, they are splinters; if on the outside
they are serews or excressions; if under his knees be scabs on the inside, it
is the Swift-cut, and he will ill endure galloping; if above his pasternes on
the inside you find scabs, it shows interfeiring: but if the scabs be
generally over his legs, it is either extreme foul keeping, or else a spice
of the Maunge; if his flesh be fat, round and fleshy, he will never endure
labor: and if on the inward bought of his knees you find seams, scabs, or
hair-broken, it shows a Maleander, which is a cankerous ulcer.

His Pasterns.
Look then on his pastern-joynt and his pastern; the first must be clear and
well kni^ together, the other must be short, strong and upright standing: for
if the first be bigor sweld, take heed of sinew-strains and gourdings; if the
other be long, weak or bending, the limbs will be hardly able to carry the body
without tiring

His Hooves.
For the Hooves in general, they should be black, smooth, tough, rather a
little long then round, deep, hollow and full sounding: for white Hooves are
tender, and carry ^ shoe ill; a rough, gross seamed Hoof, shows an age or
over-heating. A brittle hoof will carry no shoe at all; an extraordinary round
hoof is ill for foul ways and deep hunting. A flat hoof that is pumissed, shows
soundering; and a hoof that is empty, and hollow-sounding, shows a decayed
inward part by reason of some wound or d^y founder. As for the crown of the
hoof, if the hair lie smooth and close, and the flesh flat and even, then all
is perfect; but if the hair be staring, the skin scabbed, and the flesh
rising, then look for a Ring-bone, or a crown scab, or a quitterbone.

The setting on of his Head, his Crest and Mane.
After this, stand by his side, and first look ^o the setting on of his head,
and see that i^ stand neither too high nor too low, but in ^ direct line, and
that his neck be small at the setting on of the head, and long, growing deeper
to the shoulders, with an high ^^rong and thin mane, long, soft and somewhat
curling; for these are beautifulll characters: whereas to have the head ill set
on, is the greatest deformity, to have any bigness or swelling in the nape of
the neck, shows the Poul-evill, or beginning of a Fistula; to have a short
thick neck like a Bull, to have it falling at the withers, to have a low, weak,
a thick, or falling crest, shows want both of strength and metal: to have much
hair on the mane, shows intolerable dullness; to have it too thin, shows fury;
and to have none, or shed, shows the worm in the mane, the itch, or else plain
Manginess.

His Back, Ribs, Fillets; Belly, and Stones.
Look on the chine of his back, that it be broad, even and straight, his ribs
well com^assed and bending outward, his Fillets upright, strong and short, and
not above an handful between his last rib and his hucklebone, let his belly be
well let down, yet hidden within his ribs, and let his stones be close trust up
to his body: for all these are marks of health and good perfection, whereas to
have his chine narrow, he will never carry a saddle without wounding: and to
have it bending, or Saddle-backed, shows weakness.

To have his Ribs flat, there is no Liberty for wind.

To have his Fillets hanging, long or weak, he will never climb an hill, nor
carry a burden.

And to have his belly clung up or gaunt, or his stones hanging down, loose, or
a side, they are both signs of sickness, tenderness, foundring in the body, and
unaptness for labor:

His Buttocks.
Then look upon his Buttocks, and see that they be round, plump, full, and in
an even level with his body* or of long, that it be well raised behind, and
spread forth at the setting on of the tail, for these are comely and
beautiful. The narrow pin-buttock, the hog or swine rump, and the falling and
down-let buttock are full of deformity, and show both an injury in nature, and
that they are neither fit or becoming, for pad, foot^loth, or pyllion.

His Hinder-thighs.
Then look to his hinder-thighs, or Ga^ains, if they be well let down even to
the middle-joynt, thick, brawny, full, and swelling: for that is a great
argument of strength and goodness, whereas the ^ank, slender thighs show
disability and weakness.

His Cambrels.
Then look upon the middle joint behind, and if it be nothing but skin and
bone, veins and sinews, and rather a little bending then to ^ait, then it is
perfect as it should be. But if ^^ have chaps or sores on the inward bought ^^
bending, then that is a Selander. If the ^^ynt be sweld generally all over,
then he has got a blow or bruise: if the swelling be particular, as in the
pot, or hollow part, or ^n the inside, and the vein full and proud: ^^ the
swelling be sofe, it is a blood-spaven: ^^ hard, a bone-spaven, but if the
swelling be ^^st behind, before the knuckle, then it is a ^urb.

Hinder-Leggs.
Then look to his hinder-legs, if they be lea^ clean, flat and sinowy, then all
is well; but i^ they be fat, they will not endure labor. If they be sweld, the
grease is molten into them. If he be scabbed above the pasterns, he has the
Scratches: if he have chaps under his pasterns, he has rains, and none of
these but are noisome.

His Tail*
Lastly, for the setting on of his Tail, where there is a good Buttock, the
tail can never stand ill* and where there is an evil buttock there the tail
can never stand well: for i^ ought to stand broad, high, flat and couche^ a
little inward.

Thus I have showed you the true shapes and true deformities, you may in your
choice please your own fancies.

An uncontrollable way to know the age of an Horse.
There are seven outward Characters by which to know the age of every Horse, a
namely, his Teeth, his Hooves his Tail his Eyes, his Skin, his Hair, and the
Bars in his mouth.

His Teeth.
If you will know his Age by his Teeth, you must understand, that an Horse has
in his head just forty teeth, that is to say, six great Wong teeth above, and
six below on one side, and as many on the other, which makes twenty four, and
are called his Grinders: Then six above and six below in the forepart of his
mouth, which are called Gatherers, and make 36. Then four Tushes, one above,
and one below on one side, and are called the Bit Teeth, which makes just
forty.

Now the first year he has his Foals teeth, which are only Grinders and
Gatherers, but no Tushes, and they be small, white and bright to look on.

The secound year he changes the four foremost teeth in his head, that is, two
above and two below in the midst of the rows of the Gatherers, and they are
browner and bigger then the other.

The third year he changes his teeth next unto them, and leaves no apparent
Foals teeth before, but two above, and two below of each side, which are also
bright and small.

The fourth year he changes the teeth next unto them, and leaves no more
Foale^ teeth but one of each side, both above and below.

The fifth year his foremost teeth will be all changed; but then he has his
tushes on each side complete, and the last Foals teeth which he cast, those
which come up in their place, will be hollow, and have a little black speck in
the midst, which is called the mark in the horses mouth, and continues till he
be past eight years old

The sixth year he puts up his new tushes, near about which you shall see
growing a little of new and young flesh, at the bottom of the tush: besides,
the tush will be white, small, short and sharp.

The seventh year all his teeth will have their perfect growth; and the mark in
the horses mouth (before spoken of) will be plainly seen.

The eighth year all his teeth will be full, smooth and plain, the black speck
or mark being no more but discerned, and his tushes will be more yellow then
ordinary.

The ninth year his foremost teeth will be longer, broader, yellower and fouler
then at younger years, the mark gone, and his tushes will be bluntish.

The tenth year in the inside of his upper ^ushes will be no holes at all to be
felt with ^our finger^ end, which tell that age you shall ^^^r feel: besides the
temples of his head will begin to be crooked and hollow.

The eleventh year his teeth will be exceeding long, very yellow, black and
foul, only he may then cut even, and his teeth will stand directaly opposite
one to another.

The twelfth year his teeth will be long, yellow, black and foul; but then his
upper teeth will hang over his nether.

The thirteenth year his tushes will be worn somewhat close to his chaps (if he
be a much ridden horse) otherwise they will be black, foul and long, like the
tushes of a Boar.

His Hooves.
If a horses hooves be rugged, and as it were seamed one seam over another, and
many seames; if they be dry, full and crusty, o^ crumbling, it is a sign of
very old age: and on the contrary part, a smouth, moist, hollow, and well
sounding hoof is a sign of young years.

His Tail.
If you take an horse with your finger and your thumb by the stern of the tail,
close at the setting on by the buttock, feeling there hard, if you feel of each
side the tail a join stick out more then any other by the big*nesse of an
hazell nut, then you may prsume the horse is under ten years old: but i^ his
joints be all plain, and no such thing t^ be felt, then he ^s above ten, and
may b^ thirteen.

His Eyes.
If an horses eyes be round, full, staring, o^ starting from his head, if the
pits over them be filled, smooth and even with his temples, and no wrinckles
either about his brow, or under his eyes, then he is young; if otherwise yo^
see the contrary characters, it is a sign o^ old age,

His Skin.
If you take an horses skin in any part o^ his body, betwixt your finger and
you^ thumb, and pull it from his flesh, then letting it go again, if it
suddenly return to the plac^ from whence it came, and be smooth and plain
without wrinkle, then he is young, and full of strength: but if it stand and
not return instantly to its former place, then he i^ very old and wasted.

His Hayr*
If an Horse that is of any dark color, shall grow grissell only about his
Eyebrows, or underneath his Mane; or any horse of a whitish color shall grow
meannelled with either black or red meannels universally over his body, then
both are signs of old age.

His Bars.
Lastly, if the Bars in his mouth be great, deep, and handle rough and hard,
then is the horse old: but if they be soft, shallow, and handle gently and
tenderly, then is the horse young, and in good ability of body.

And thus much be spoken touching the Office of the Buyer.
THE OFFICE OF THE FARRIER.
The Signs of all Sicknesses, and how to discern them.
IF you find in your horse heaviness of countenance, extreme looseness, or
extreme costiveness, shortness of breath, nothing of meat, dull and imperfect
eyes, rotten or dry cough, staring hair, or hair unnaturally discolored, a
staggering pace, frantic behavior, yellowness of the eyes or skin, faint or
cold sweat, extraordinary lying down, or beating or looking back at his body
alteration of qualities or gestures, not casting of the coat, leanness,
hide-bound and the like. All these are apparent signs of distemperature and
sickness.

Signs from the Dung.
It is necessary to observe the horses dung, for it is the best Tel-troth of
his inward parts; yet you must not judge it by a general opinion, but by a
private discourse with your self how he has been ^ed, because food is the
only thing that breeds alterations, -- as thus --

If he feed altogether upon grass, his dung has one complexion, as green; if
upon hay, then another, as a little more dark. If upon little provender, then
inclining to yelow. But to avoid both curiosity and doubt, observe well the
complexion of his dung, when he is in the best health, and the best feeding;
and as you find it alter, so judge either of his health or sickness, as thus --
--

If his dung be clear, crisp, and of a pale yellowish complexion, hanging
together without separation, more then as the weight breaks it in falling,
being neither so thin nor so thick, but it will a little ^^a^ on the ground. And
indeed both in savor and substance, resembling a sound man's ordure, then is
the horse clean, well fed, and without imperfection:

If it be well colored, yet fall from him in round knots, or pellets, so it be
but the first or second dung, the rest good, as aforesaid, it matters not: for
it only shows he did eat hay lately, and that will ever come away first. But if
all his dung be alike, then it is a sign of foul feeding, and he has either
too much hay, or eats too much litter, and too little corn.

If his dung be in round pellets, and blackish, or brows, it shows inward heat
in the body.

If it be greasy, it shows foulness, and that grease is molten, but cannot
come away. If he void grease in gross substance with his dung, if the grease ^e
white and clear, then it comes away kindly, and there is no danger: but if it
be yellow or putrified, then the grease has lain long in his body, and
sickness will follow if not prevented.

If his dung be red and hard, then the horse has had too strong heats, and
costiveness will follow: if it be pale and loose, it shows inward coldness of
body, or too much moist and corrupt feeding:

Signs from the Urine.
THough the Urine be not altogether so material as the dung, yet it has some
true faces, as thus --

That Urine which is of a pale yellowish color, rather thick then thin, of a
strong smell and a piercing condition, is an health, full, sound and good
urine: but if it be of an high, red complexion, either like blood, or inclining
to blood, then has the horse had either too sore heats, been over-ridden, or
ridden to early after winter grass.

If the Urine be of an high complexion, clear and transparent, like old March
Beer, then he is inflamed in his body, and has taken some surfit.

If the urine carry a white cream on the top, it shows a weak back, or
consumption of seed.

A green urine shows consumption of the body.

A Urine with bloody streaks shows an ulcer in the kidneys: and a black, thick,
cloudy urine shows death and mortality.

Of sickness in general.
Whenever, upon any occasion, you shall find the horse droop in countenance,
to forsake his meat, or to show any other apparent sign of sickness; if they be
not great, you may forbear to let blood, because where the blood is spent, the
spirits are spent also, and they are not easily recovered. But if the signs be
great and dangerous, then by all means let blood instantly, and for three
mornings together (the horse being fastening) give him half an ounce of the
powder (called by me) Diahexaple, and by the Italians, Regin^ medicina, the
Queen of medicines, brewed either in a pint of Muskadine or Malmsey, or a pint
of the syrop of Sugar, being two degrees above the ordinary Molosses, or for
want thereof Molosses will serve the turn; and where all are wanting, you may
take a pint either of dragon water, or a quart of the sweetest and strongest
Ale-wort, or in extre mity take a quart of strong Ale or Beer, but then warm it
a little before the fire.

This must be given with an horn, and if the Horse have ability of body, ride
him in some warm place after it, and let him fast near two hours after the
riding.

At noon give him a sweet mash, cloth very warm, and let him touch no cold
water.

Now touching the exact and true making of this rare powder, which I call
Diahexaple, because no man (that I know) Apothecary or other, does at this day
make it truly, partly because it is an experiment but lately come to my
knowledge by conference with learned Physicians, and partly because our
medicine makers are in Horse physic less curious then they should be; through
which errors there is produced to the world an abundance of false mixtures,
which both deceives the honest Hors-master, kills the harmless horse, and
disgraceth the wellmeaning Farrier, To repair all which, I will here set down
the true manner of making this admirable powder, together with the virtues and
operations thereof.

The true manner of making the true Diahexaple,
Take the roots of round Aristologia, wash them, scrape them, and purify them
as clear as may be, then take Juniper Berries unexcorticated, and Bay Berries
excorticated; take the purest and best drops as Myrrh, and the finest shavings
of Ivory, of each an equal quantity; beat all but the Myrrh together, and
search them fine: Lastly, beat the Myrrh and search it also; then mix and
incorporate all together, press it hard into a gally-pot, and keep it, and use
it as you have occasion.

The virtues of true Diahexaple.
This powder, or indeed Methridate, called Diahexaple, or the Queen of
Medicines, is most excellent and sovereign against all manner of poison, either
inward or outward, it cures the biting of venomous beasts, and helps short
wind and pursickness. Dodoneus.

It mundifieth, cleanses, suppleth, and makes thin all gross humors, it
heals all diseases of the Liver and Stomach, helps digestion, and being given
in a pint of Sack, it cures all colds: it is good against consumptions, breaks
phlegm, helps staggers, and all diseases of the head. Gerrard.

It recovers tyring and weariness, and takes away cramps and convulcions, dries
up the Skurvy, breaks the stone, opens all inward obstructions, and helps the
yellows, the gargil and the dropsy. Diascorides.

It cures all diseases of the lungs, as glanders and rottenness, gives ease to
all gripings and windiness of the belly, provokes urine, takes away infection,
and kills worms. Gale. ^.

A Drink to open an Horses body, and cleanse it.
Take a quart of new milk, Sallet-oyl, honey, each half a pint, an ounce of
London treacle, and the yolks of six, eggs beat all together: and then put to
it licoras, sugar candy, anise-seeds (all in powder) of each an ounce, and
infuse all together, so give it the horse, ride him after it, set up warm, and
let him fast above an an hour.

The true manner of making those cordial Bal^, which cure any violent cold or
Glanders which prevent heart-sickness. which purge away all molten grease,
which recover a lost stomach, which keep the heart from fainting with exercise,
and make a lean horse fat suddenly.
Take Aniseeds, Cominseeds, Fenegreekseeds, Carthumus seeds: Elicampane roots
and Colts foot, each two ounces beaten, and searced to a fine dust, two ounces
of the flower of Brimston: then take an ounce of the juice of Licoras, and
dissolve it on the fire in half a pint of white wine; which done, take an ounce
of Chymicall oil of Aniseeds, then of sallet oil, honey, and the Syrop of Sugar,
or for want of it Molosses, of each half a pint, then mix all this with the
former powders, and with as much fine wheat flower as will bind and knit them
all together, work them into stiff paste, and make thereof Balls somewhat bigger
then French Walnuts ^ull and all, and so keep them in a close Gallipot, (for
they will last all the year:) Yet I do not mean that you shall keep them in the
pot in balls: for so because they cannot lie close, the air may get in and do
hurt; as also the strength of the oils will sweat outward and weaken the
substance, therefore knead the whole lump of paste into the Gallipot, and make
the Balls as you have occasion to use them.

Now for the use of these Balls, because they are cordial, and have diverse
excellent virtues, you shall understand, that if you use them to prevent
sickness, then you shall take a Ball, and aniont it all over with sweet Butter,
and give it the horse in the morning* in the manner of a Pill, then ride him a
little after it (if you please, otherwise you may choose) and feed and water him
abroad or at home according to your usual custom. And thus do 3 or 4 mornings
together.

If you use them to cure either cold or glanders, then use them in the same
manner for a week together. If you use them to fatten an horse, then give them
for a fortnight together. But if you use them in the nature of a scouring to
take away molten grease and foulness, then instantly after his heat, and in his
heat. Again, if you find your horse at any time has taken a little cold, as
you shall perceive by his inward rattling, if then you take one of these Balls,
and dissolve it in a pint of sack, and so give it the horse, it is a present
remedy. Also to dissolve the Ball in his ordinary water, being made luke warm,
it works the life effect, and fatneth exceedingly:

To give one of these Balls before travel, it prevents tyring; to give it in
the height of travel, it refreshes the weariness: and to give it after travel,
it saves an horse from all surfeit and inward sickness.

For the Bots or any Worms.
Take a quart of new milk, and as much honey ^^ will make it extraordinary
sweet, then ^eing lukewarm, give it the horse early, he ^aving fasted all the
night before, then bridle ^im up, and let him stand tied to the empty ^ack for
two hours: then take half a pint ^^white wine, and dissolve into it a good
^poonfull or more of black soap, and being ^^ll mixed together, give it him to
drink, ^en ride and chafe him a little, and let him ^^t another hour, and the
Worms will a^oid.

Another for Worms more ready, more easy.
Take the soft Down-hairs that grow in the ^rs of an horse, and which you clip
away ^hen you coule him, and the little short tuft which grows on the top of
the Forehead, ^derneath his fore-top: and having a pretty ^antity, mix them
with a pottle of oats, and ^^^e them to the horse, and it helps.

A Purgation when an horse is sick of grease, or costiveness.
Take a pint of old white Wine, and o^ the fire dissolve into it a lump as much
a^ an Henns Egg of Castle-sope, and sti^ them together, then take it off, and
put in to it two good spoonfulls of Hempseed beaten, an ounce of sugar candy in
powder and brew all together, then having wa^med the horse, to stir up his
grease another foul humors, give him this to drink and walk him up and down a
little after ^ to make the potion work; then set u^ warm, and after a little
stirring him in h^ stall, if he grow sickish, give him liberty t^ lie down;
then after two hours fasting giv^ him a sweet Mash, then feed as at other times.

For Laxativeness, or extreme Looseness.
Take a quart of red Wine, and on the fire put into it an ounce and an half ^
Bolarmonie in powder, and two ounces a^ an half of the conserve of Sloes, mix
th^^ together, after take it from the fire, a^ put to it a spoonful or two of
the powd^ of Cynamon, brew all together, and give it the horse: but let him
fast two hours after it, and let him eat no washed meat: Hay is wholesome, so is
Bread and Oats, if they be well mixed with Beans or Wheat, but not otherwise.

For the stone, or pain of urine by wind causing sickness
Make a strong decoction, (that is to say) boil your first quantity of water
to an half part three times over, of keen onions clean peeled, and parsley,
then take a quart thereof, and put to it a good spoonefull of London Treacle,
and as much of the powder of Egge-shels, and give it the horse.

And thus do diverse mornings, if the infirmity be great, otherwise, when you
see the horse offended.

For an Horse that staleth blood.
Take knot-grasse, Shephards purse, Bloodwort of the hedge, Polypodium of the
wall, Comphrey, Garden Blood-wort, of each an handful, shread them fine, and
put them into a quart of Beer, Ale or milk, and put to them a little salt, a
little soot and leaven* mix all to gether, and give it the horse to drink.

For a growing cold.
Take the juice of Licoras, London Treacle, Aniseeds, Turmereack, Fenegreek and
long pepper, of each an ounce, the hard Simples in powder: then of Suger-candy
two ounces, and with as much English honey as will suffice, incorporate all
together, and make thereof Balls as big as a good pullets egg, and give the
horse two or three in the morning fasting

After he has taken the Balls, give him two new laid eggs, then rid ehim, and
at noon give him a Mash, keep warm, and do this twice or thrice.

For a more violent cold causing rotting in the head.
Take the big Elecampane root, slice it, and boil it in water from a pottle
to a quart, then strain it, and to that water put a pint of Urine, and a pint
of Muskadine, of Aniseeds, Licoras, Cominseeds, Long Pepper (in powder) of each
an ounce, twenty Raisins of the Sun stoned and bruised, and of Sugercandy two
ounces* let all these symmer on the fire, and not boil, till they be
incorporate, then take i^ off, and to one half thereof (which is a suffiacient
drench) put a quarter of a pound of sweet butter, and four spoonfuls of
salletoyle; then being lukewarm, give the horse a third part of the drench,
and after it a new laid egg: then another third part, and after it another
egg: then lastly, all the rest of the drink. Then ride him pretty roundly
after it for near an hour, and let him fast another hour; keep warm, and
feed as at other timer. At noon give him a mash, and the next day give him the
other half.

For a desperate dry cough.
Take a pint of burnt Sack, Sallet oil and red wine vinegar, of both a quarter
of a pint, of Fenegrick, Turmerick, ^ong peper, and Licoras, of each a
spoonful in powder, and give it the horse half at the one nostril; and half at
another, and do this twice* week, and ride him after it, and let him fast two
hours, and keep his head and breast warm.

For the ordinary water you may give him for a fortnight, let it have good
store of sliced English Licoras steept into it.

For a cold long settled.
Take three heads of Garlic, and roast them in the embers, then mix them with
three spoonfulls of Tar, as much powder sugar, and half a pound of hogs
grease, then with Aniseeds, Licoras, Elicampane, Fenegreek, and Cominseeds,
make it into paste, and give as much at once as a Ducks egg*

For a dry Cough, or wasted Lungs.
Take Elicampace, the flower of Brimstone, Licoras, Fenell seed, Linseed of
each an ounce, searc't, syrop of Elicampane an ounce, and of clarified honey a
pound, work the powders and these together, and to a pint of sweet wine put two
ounces of these, and give it the horse morning and evening, ride him after it,
and let him fast an hour after riding, give no cold water but with exercise.

A Cordial powder for any ordinary cold, and to prepare a horse before
travel, to refresh him in travel, and to preserve him from mischief after
travel.
Take of English Licoras, Elicampane roots, of each an ounce, of Sugercandy an
ounce and a half; beat them to fine powder and searce them.

Keep the powder in a box, and when you have occasion to use it, if it be for a
cold, then give half an ounce in a pint of Sack: if it be in travel, then give
it in sweet wine, or strong Ale; but if in Ale, then take a quart; and give it
both before travel and in your Inn, or at home immediately after travel.

To break a festred cold to dry up glanders, and to heal the ulcer, or canker
in the nose.
Take a pint of verdjuice, and put to it so much strong mustard made with wine
Vinegar, as will make it strong and keen thereof; then take an ounce of roche
Allom in powder, and when you give this to the horse, as you fill the horn, so
with a knife or spoon put some of the Allom into the horn, and so give it the
horse part at both nostrils, but especialy that nostrill which runs most;
then ride him a little after it* and set up warm, and give no cold water
without exercise. Thus do diverse mornings.

For the Glanders.
Take Cominseeds, Grains and Fenegreek in powder, of each half an ounce; of
Diahexaple a quarter of an ounce, beat this in a mortar with a quarter of a
pint of verdjuice, three spoonfuls of Sallet oil, and two spoon^tl of
Aquavitae: then put al together to a quart of old Ale, with a good slice of
sweet butter, and set it on the fire till it be ready to boil; then being luke
warm, give it the horse, part at the mouth, and part at both nostrils: then
ride him pretty roundly for an hour, and set up warm; let him fast an hour, and
if you perceive sickness to grow, give him a pint of new milk.

To stay the glanders for a time, being incurable.
Take the green bark of Elder, and beat it in a mortar, and strain it till you
have a pint thereof, then put that juice to a pint of old Ale, and warm it on
the fire with a good lump of sweet butter, and a nounce of sugarcandy, and so
give the horse, ride him after it, let him fast an hour, and keep warm. Do thus
diverse mornings.

For decayed or stopped Lungs, which we call Broken wind.
Take half a pint of Coltsfoot water, or the syrop of Coltsfoot; but in the
syrop it will best dissolve, and put into it a dram of Balsamum Sulphuris, and
give it the Horse in the morning fasting, then ride him a little after it, be
sure to keep warm, and give no cold water without exercise. Do thus every other
morning, giving it one morning at the mouth, and another at the nostrils till
you find amendment.

A scouring when others will not work.
Take of sweet Butter a quarter of a pound, half so much Castle Soap, and half
an ounce of Aloes, beat them together: then add of Hempseed two spoonfulls, of
rosin half a spoonful, of sugarcandy an ounce, all bruised ^ine, work it into
a paste, and give it the horse in balls immediately after his heat, or when you
have warmed him, and stirred up the grease and foulness within him.

OUTWARD SORRANCES.
The Signs of outward Sorrances.
OUtward Sorrances are discerned when any member or part in an horse is
disfigured or evil affected by the loss of true shape, disability in motion,
the increase or decrease of number and quantity, the disproportion of place, or
the separating of things knit and united. And these accidents have diverse
names, as Imposthumes, Ulcers or wounds when they are in fleshy parts;
Excretions or Fractures on and in the bones; Ruptures in the veins; convulsions
in the sinews, and Excoriations upon the skin.

The first is known by outward swellings, rotten or bloody sores; the next by
utter disability in the member, or else plain halting. The next by Wens and
Knots both soft and hard; the next by gordgings and haltings, and the last by
scurf and leprosy:

Now forasmuch as the greatest part of Sotrances, and especially those which
are most hid and obscure, are found our by halting, I will show you the
several manner of haltings, and what they signify.

If the horse halt before, and lift not up his leg, but in a manner traileth it
after the other, it shows a new hurt on the top of the shoulder.

If he cast his leg outward, or go Bakerlike, and not bend the knee, it is
either an old hurt on the top of the shoulder, or if new, then it is a
shoulder-plat, or rending betwixt the shoulder and the body: if in turning
short he favor his foot, if griping his withers he complain, if he halt more
when he is ridden then led, the offense is on the top of the shoulder: If
standing in the stable, thrust forth his foot and favor it: then search his
foot, and if in that be found no prick, no dry founder, no surbat, then it is
in the mid part of the shoulder, or the coffin joint.

If halting he bow down his head to the ground, and step short and thick, then
it is in the forepart of the shoulder, at the breast. If in handling his elbow
hard, he twitch up his foot suddenly from the ground, the offense is there.

If on his shank bones (in their several places be splents, excressions,
windgalls or Maleanders, and they sore, they will occasion halting, as any
other outward Sorrance upon any other member.

Heat on the Crownet shows pain in the Coffin joint.

In halting before, to trip on the Toe, shows pain in the heel; to favor the
Toe, shows pain in the Toe; to halt more on uneven ground then one ^he even,
shows pain in the feet, and in going from you and coming to you, may be
discerned, whether the outward or inward quarter: but to clear all doubts, the
Pincers will show any pain in the foot whatsoever.

If your horse halt behind, and in halting go sidelong, and not in an even
line, the grief is in the hip, and yet but new, or in the Fillets, and may be
new or old. If it be old in the hip, the hip will fall, and then no cure

If in halting he tread only on his hinder Toe, and no offense in the foot*
then the pain is in the stiffell. If in halting he bend not his hough or ham,
and no outward Sorrance, yet the pain is there.

If he halt through any offense in his leg from the ham to the pastern, outward
Sorrance or swelling will show it; and so likewise for the other parts below it.

For soar Eyes, dim Eyes, and Moon eyes
Take Lapis Calaminaris half an ounce, and heat it red hot, and quenchin it a
quarter of a pint of Plantane water, or white wine: do this eight or nine
times, then beat it to powder and put it to the water; then add half a dram of
Aloes, and a scruple of Camphire in powder, and let them dissolve; drop this
into the eye.

Another for eyes of like nature.
Take a pint of snow water, and dissolve into it three or four drams of white
Vitrioll, and with it wash the horses eyes three or four times a day, and it
helps.

For a white Film or Skin over the Eye.
Take the root of the black Sallow, and burn it to ashes: then put to it a like
quantity of Sugar and grated Ginger finely searc'd, blow this into the eye
morning and evening.

For any sorenses in the eyes, as Pearl, Pin or Web, or Bruise.
Take a new laid egg, and roast it very hard, then cleave it in sunder
longwise, and take out the yelk, then fill the empty holes with white vitriole
finely beaten, and close the egg again; then roast it the second time, till the
vitriole be molten. Lastly, beat the egg shell and all in a mortar, and strain
it, and with that moisture dress the eye.

If in stead of the vitriole you fill the holes with Myrrh finely searc'd, and
hang the egg up that it may drop, and with that moisture dress the eye: it is
every way as good, only it is a little stronger.

For foul eyes, sore eyes or sight almost lost.
There be some that for this great offense in the eye put in two fine small
rowels longwise in the temples of the head, just behind the eyes: But for mine
own part, I not much fancy it, because I fear it breeds more evil humor then it
brings away, besides soreness and disgrace; therefore in this cure my practice
is thus --

Take Tacchamahaca, Mastick, Rosin and Pitch, of each like quantity, and being
molten with flax of the color of the horse, lay it as a defensive on each side
his temples, as big as a twenty shillings piece: then underneath his eyes upon
the cheek bone (with a round Iron*) burn three or four holes, and anoint them
with sweet butter; then take a handful of Seladine, and wash it clean in white
wine, but let it touch no water, then bruise it, and strain it, and to the
quantity of juice, put the third part of woman's milk, and a pretty quantity of
white Sugarcandy, searc'd through a piece of Lawn, and with a feather, quill, or
otherwise, drop it into the sore ey morning and evening.

Thus do for the worst of sore eyes: but if the offense be not extreme, then you
may forbear both the defensitive, the burning and the rowels, and only use the
medicine.

The Master Medicine for a back sinewstrain, or any strain, shrinking, or
numbness of sinews.
Take a fat sucking Mastive whelp, fley it and howell it, then stop the body as
full as it can hold with gray snails and black snails, then roast it at a
reasonable fire; when it begins to warm, bast it with six ounces of the oil of
Spike made yellow with Saffron, and six ounces of the oil of Wax: then save
the droppings, and what moisture soever falls from it whilst any drop will
fall, and keep it in a Gallipot.

With this anoint the strain, and work it invery hot, holding a bar of Iron
before it; and thus do both morning and evening till a mendment:

Another in nature of a charge, for a back sinnew-strain.
Take five quarts of Ale, and a quarter of a peck of Glovers specks and boil
them till it come to a quart: then apply it hot to the grief and remove it not
for five or six days.

For a strain in any yart, new or old.
Take of sheeps suet a pound, of sheeps dung two handful, chopped hay an
handful, Wheat bran a pint, sweet Soap a quarter of a pound; boil all these in
a quart of strong Beer, and a quart of the grounds of strong Ale, till it come
to a thick pultiss, then take it from the fire and col it with half a pint of
wine vinegar, and a quarter of a pint of Aquavitae, then apply this very hot to
the grief, and give him moderate exercise.

For a strain or sinew-bruise.
Take Comin-seeds and bruise it gross, then boil it with the oil of Camomile,
and put to it so much yellow Wax'as will bring it to Cerrot, and spread it on
either Cloth or Leather, and hot apply it to the grief.

For old strains, or cold cramps.
Take Aquavitae, Oil de Bay, Oil of Swallow^, Bolearmonie, Boars grease, black
Soap, of each half a pound, boil them till the Aquavitae be incorporate; then
take of Camomile, Rue, red Sage, and Misseldine, of each an handful, dry them
and bring them to powder, then mix it with the ointment, and bring all to a
gentle salve:

With this anoint the grief, and hold an hot bar of Iron before it, chafing
it in well; and thus do once a day, and in nine days the cure has been
effected.

A sudden cure for a knock or brnise on the sinews:
Take a live cat, wild or tame, and cut off her head and tail, then cleave her
down the chine, and clap her hot b^wels and all to the bruise, and remove it
not for two days.

For a strain newly done to help it in 24 hours.
Take the grounds of Ale or Beer, a quart, as much parsley chopped gross, as you
can gripe, boil them till the herb be soft, then put to it a quarter of a pound
of sweet butter, and when it is molten, take it from the fire, and put into it
a pint of Wine vinegar, and if it be too thin, thicken it with Wheat bran, then
lay it upon hurds, and poultess-wise, as hot as the horse can suffer it, and
remove it once in twelve hours, and give the horse moderate exercise.

Markhams own Balm which has never failed him for any strain in the shoulder
or other parts, hid or apparent, or for any wind-gall or, swelling,
Take ten ounces of Peice-grease, and melt it on the fire, then take it off and
put into it four ounces of the oil of Spike, one ounce of the oil of
Origanum, an ounce and a half of the oil of Exceter, and three ounces of the
oil of St. John's wort; stir them well together, then put it up into a
Gallipot

With this Ointment (or indeed precious Balm) hot, anoint the grieved part and
rub and chafe it in very much, holding an hot Bar of Iron before it: and thus
anoint it once in two days, but rub and chafe it in twice or rhrice a day, and
give the horse moderate exercise.

For Sinews that are extended, overstrained, and so weakened, that the member is
useless.
Take of Cantharides, Euforbium and Mercury, of each like quantity, and of oil
de Bay double as much as of all the rest; bring the hard Simples to powder, and
beat all to a salve, apply this to the grief (being desperate) and though it
make a sore, it willgive strength and straightness to the sinews. For the sore
you may cure it either with Populeon, fresh Butter, or Deers grease warm.

Another of the same nature but, more gentle.
Take Turpentine two ounces, Verdigrease three ounces, Hoggs grease six ounces,
boil them till the Verdigrease be desolved, then take Rosin, Bees wax, of each
two ounces, mix all together, then apply it to the place grieved, hot.

A charge for a new strain or grief, proceeding from heat.
Take the whites of six Eggs, and beat them with a pint of vinegar, the oil of
Roses and Myrtles, of each an ounce, Bolearmony four ounces, as much Sanguis
Dracones, and with as much Bean flower or Wheat flower, but Bean is the best,
as will thicken it, bring it to a salve, and spreading it one hurds, lap it
about the grieved part, and renew it not till it be dry.

For Aches, Cramps, and hid pains.
Take Deers Suet, or for want of it, sweet Butter half a pound, of Aquavitae a
Gill, of Saffron half a dram, Pepper beaten and searc'd three drams, Garlic
bruised three heads; mix all together, and let them stew on the fire, and not
boil till it come to a salve.

With this very warm chafe the grief, then anoint a brown paper therewith, and
very hot apply to the place also, and roll it up. Do this morning and evening

For swelled or guarded legs, whether by Grease or other accident.
If your horses legs be swelled, only because the grease is fallen into them
and there is no other outward ulcer, neither will the bathing with cold
fountain water and other ordinary helps assuage them: then take a pottle of
wine lees, or else the grownds of strong Ale or Beer, and boil it with a pound
of hogs grease; then with as much wheat bran as will thicken it, make thereof a
Pultiss: then having made the horse an hose of woollen cloth, fill it with this
pultiss as hot as the horse can suffer it, then close up the hose and let it
abide two days; the third day open the hose at the top, but stir not the
pultiss, only take molten Hoggs grease very hot, and put it to the pultiss
whilst it will receive any, for that will renew the strength thereof: then close
the hose, and let him stand either two days or three. Then you may open the
leg and rub it down, and if you find strong occasion, you may apply another;
if not, the cure is wrought.

Now, if besides the swelling, your horse have ulcers, chaps and soars, then
apply the pultiss as before showed: and after a weeks application take a quart
of old urine, and put to it half an handful of salt, as much Allume, and half
an ounce of white Copperas, boil them together, and with it wash the sore once
or twice a day: Then after a little drying anoint them with the ointment called
Aegiptiacum, and is made of vinegar eight ounces, of honey twelv ounces, of
verdigreas two ounces, of Alum an ounce and an half, and boiled to the
height, till it come to a red salve, and it will both kill the malignant
humors, and heal and dry up the soars.

For sweld legs, whether by grease, goutiness, wind, or travel.
First, bathe them well with the Pickle, or Brine which comes from Olives being
made hot: then take a pint of Train oil, as much nerve oil, and as much oil de
Bay, a quarter of a pound of Alum, half a pint of Sallet oil, half a pound of
Hogs grease; put all these to a pottle of old urine, and with an handful or
two of Mallows, Oatmeal bruised, and Bran, boil them to a pultiss, and very hot
apply it to the grief: Do thus once in two days.

For gardings in joints.
Make a very strong Brine of Water and Salt, and to a pottie thereof put two or
three handful of Rue, and boil it till the herb be soft: then with this water
very hot bathe the grieved part.

Then take a flat bagg, filled with Salt, and heated hot at the fire, and lap it
about the grief also. And thus do once or twice a day.

For Scratches at the first appearance.
Take Hogs grease and black soap of each eight ounces, Brimstone, Lime,
Gunpowder, each three ounces, and soot as much as will suffice to bring the
rest to a salve; boil the Hogs grease and ^^pe together; and bring the other to
a sine powder, and mix all together and make a black ointment: with this anoint
the soars once a day, after they are cleansed and made raw.

For Scratches of long continuance.
Take honey, Verdigrease, Brimstone bruised small, green Copperas, and Bay salt,
of each like quantity, boil these with a double quantity of Hogs grease, and
put to it a big root of Elicampan bruised in red wine vinegar, apply this to
the sores very hot, after you have cut a way the hair, and made the sores raw,
as also suppled them by bathing them with new milk from the Cow.

For Scratches held incurable.
First let him blood in the shackle veins, the spur veins, and the ^ore toe
veins, only letting it be three days between the bleeding of the one Toe and
the other: then with an haircloth rub the sores til they be raw and bleed; then
take a quart of old urine, and a quart of strong brine, and put to them half a
pound of Alum, and boil it to a quart.

With this hot, wash the sores well, then take the sperm of Froggs (in March)
and put it into an earthen pot, and in a week it will look like oil: then take
both the oil and the round things which you shall see in the sperm and spreading
it on a cloth, bind it to the soars, and do this diverse times.

For any Splent, Spaven, Curb, Ringbone or Excression.
First clip away the hair as far as the excression goes, and a little more,
then take a piece of Allumd Leather made as big as the place you have bared,
and fitted to the ^ame proportion: then take a little Shooemakers Wax, and
spread it round about the very edge or verge of the same, leaving all the
inward part empty and not touched with the Wax: Then take the herb Speargrass,
or Spearwort, which has the virtue to raise blisters, and bruising it, lay
some thereof upon the Leather in the empty place, and bind it fast thereon,
suffering it so to lie (...) if it be in the Spring) or Summer time, when the
herb has its full strength) near half a day; but if it be in winter, then it
is not a miss (to renew the strength of the herb) if you add to it a drop or
two of the oil of Origanum, and let it lie half a day fully, and be sure to tie
up the horses head, for fear of biting it away.

When you take away the herb, rub the place well and anoint it with Train-oyl
warm, or else lay on a Diminium plaster.

Another for a foul Splint.
Take Nerve oil one ounce, Cantharides the weight of sixpence, and as much of
the oil of Vipers, boil them lightly; then with this anoint the Splint cross
the hair, and heat it in with a hot Iron, then tie up the horses head to the
Rack for 24 hours: then squeeze out the corruption, and do this twice o^ thrice.

For a Splint, and to dry up windgalls.
First, heat the Sorrance with an hot pressing Iron, then vent it in several
places with your Fleam; then take a spoonful of salt, half a spoonful of
nerve oil, a penny weight of verdigrease, and the white of an egg: beat all to a
salve: and dipping flax hurds therein: apply it to the grief.

For Pains, M^les and Rats-tails.
First take away all the scabs and make the sore raw, then with strong mustard
made with wine vinegar, anoint them all over, and do this every night. The next
morning take half a pound of green Copperas, and boil it in a pottle of running
water with an handful of sage, and so much hyssop, a quarter of a pound of
Allume, and as much strong mustard, and with this bath the sore twice or thrice
a day.

For Malander or Selander.
Take the oil of bay an ounce, half so much sugar, and a good quantity of the
oil o^ froth which comes from green broom stalks being laid in the fire, mix
it well, and with this anoint the soars, and it kills and dryes them up.

For the Swift-cut and to heal all wounds.
Take a pint of white Wine and put to it two or three spoonfulls of honey, and
stir them and boil them to a salve, then take it from the fire, and put to it
half so much Turpentine as there was honey, and stir all together.

With this salve somewhat hot, anoint the soars twice or thrice a day, and it is
a most speedy healer.

For any Maunge or Scab in a clean fed Horse
First let blood, then take a quart of old Urine or Vinegar, and break into it
a quarter of a pound of good Tobacco, then set it on a fire of embers and not
boil, and so let it stew all night: with this water wash the infected places,
whether it be in the Mane or otherwise, and it helps.

For any Maungie or universal Leprosy in a foul surfeited Horse.
First, let blood in the neck-vein, and take, a way good store, then curry off
all the scurf, and take verdjuce and vinegar a pint, cow-piss a pint, train
oil a pint, old urine a pint, and put to them an handful of wild Tansie, an
handful of Bay salt, a quarter of a pound of brimstone, as much Alome, two
ounces of verdigrease and four ounces of Bolarmonie, boil all well together.

With this (very hot) wash the horse well, and if you put to it the quantity of
a pint of blood you take away, it is not amiss: do this twice or thrice.

For a Canker, foul Ulcer, Leprosy, and to make hair grow.
Take a quart of Tar, and on the fire put to it half a pound of Bores grease,
an ounce of Copperat, a quarter of a pound of Saltpeter, two ounces of wax, a
quart of honey, a quarter of a pound of Rozme, two ounces of verdigrease, a
quart of Lynseed oil, and sees them till half be consumed; then strain it, and
keep it in a close pot. Then, when you will use it, take of it warm, and apply
it to the soar, it does both heal, draw, and make hair grow.

For a Fistula, or Pol-evill.
Take Euforbium with Mastick, mix them together, then sees them well with
French Soap, and make a tent, and put it into the Fistula, and it will consume
the evil moisture.

For a foul Farcy.
Take Tar and fresh Hogs grease, of each half a pound, Hemlock an handful,
Arsesmart three handful, and as many Nettles, boil these in a pottle of old
Urine, and apply it very hot to the swelling, but touch it not with your hand,
for it is too sharp.

Lastly, take a pint of white wine vinegar, a quarter of an ounce of
verdigrease, and a little bundle of Hyssop, beat them in a mortar, and boil it
to an half pint: then with Balls of flax put it lukewarm into both his ears,
and stich the tips together, then tie his head up to the Rack for two hours: Do
thus twice.

For a most desperate Farcy.
Take the herb called Clay-clayes, which is a weed growing by the water side,
having a great broad round leaf, and is green on the upper side and white on
the nether; and Rue of each a like quantity, beat them and strain them: then
to a pint of that juice, put of Housleek a handful, half a pint of Aquavitae,
and two good spoonful of pepper beaten and fearc'd.

Of this liquor take a pint and give it the horse to drink, then with round
balls of flax dipped in the same, stop up both his ears, then with the strained
bruisings of all the herbs, rub the soars, and stop the holes if there be any
hollowness: do thus twice at the least.

For any Founder or Frettize wet or dry.
First, pare thin, open the heels wide, and take good store of blood from the
Toes or shackle veins (which some hold good) then rack on a shoo somewhat
hollow, broad at the heels, and the inside of the web, from the first nail to
the heel turned inward, toward the Frog, yet not touch any part thereof, or
the hoof: so that the horse may tread on the out verge of the shoe, and not on
the inward, then take Burgundy pitch, and rolling it in a little fine
Cotton-wooll or Bombast, with an hot Iron melt it into the foot betwixt the
shoo and the toe, till the orifice where the blood was taken be filled up; then
take a pound of Hogs grease, and melt it, and mix it with Wheat bran, till it
be as thick as a pultiss: then boiling hot stop up the horses feet therewith,
then cover it with a piece of an old shoo, and splent it up, and so let him
stand for three or four days: then if occasion serve you may renew it, or
otherwise the cure is wrought.

To make Hooves to grow quickly, and to be tough and strong.
Take Alum, the juice of Garlic, of each seven ounces, Rue three handful,
old hogs grease two pound, of Asses dung, or for want of it, Cow dung an
handful, mix them and boil them together.

With this both stop the horses feet, and anoint the crownets of the hooves,
the medicine being hot.

For brittle Hooves.
Take Turpentine, Sheeps sue?, unwrought Wax and Hogs grease of each half a
pound, Pitch, Rozin, half a pound, Sallet oil half a pint, and of Dogs grease a
pound; boil all together, and keep it in a Gallipot: with this ointment anoint
the Hooves outwardly, and if you please tie some of the ointment with a cloth
to the crownets, then stop them within with Cow dung, and Dogs grease mixed
together.

For Surbat or soarness in the Feet, whether by travel, too near paring, or
other accident.
Take a lump of course sugar, and with an hot Iron melt it between the shoe
and the Foot, and when it is hardened, take Nettles and bay salt, and stamp
them, stop up the Frog of the foot also.

For a Quitterbone.
First, tent it a day or two with hogs grease and Verdigrease ground together:
then take scalding hot Hogs grease and pour it into the hole, and lay a
plaster of pitch and Tar mixed over it for 24 hours; then if the Bone rise not,
do the same again and it will rise.

For Saddle-bruises, hard swellings, and Impostumations.
First, ripen it with wet hay, or rotten litter; then when it is soft, open it
and let out the corruption, then fill the hollowness with the powder of Rozin,
and lay a plaster of Shoomakers wax over it: and thus do once a day till it be
whole. If it be slow in skinning or drying up, throw on the powder of unslackt
lime, and Bolarmony mixed together. But if any proud flesh arise, take it down
either with burnt Allam or Verdigrease in powder.

Another for a soar back.
Take the juice of Seladine and life Honey, of each two spoonful, beat them
with the yelk of an egg, and with as much Alum and wheat flower as will serve
to bring it to a salve, dress the soar with this once a day; it draws and
heals.

For a prick with a pitchfork on the Crownet or other part.
Take a pottle of Urine, two handful of Mallows, and half a pound of Boars
grease, boil them together, and being reasonable hot, bathe the legs
therewith; then apply the Mallows to the wound: but if the swelling ascend
upward and be great, then rope the leg up, and moist the ropes with his urine.
This is good for any swelling, whether of grease or otherwise.

For any chafing or galling.
Make the sore dry, and then rub it with a raw egg shell and all.

A general salve for any sore, swelling, prick, cloying, or tread.
Take Turpentine, black soap, hogs grease, green Treat and pitch like
quaintity, mix and boil them together, and apply it warm either plasterwise or
tentwise.

To make hair grow in bald places.
Take soap a quarter of a pound, as much Bears grease, and a quarter of a pint
of Aquavitae: boil these together and apply it to the bald places; in a
fortnight it will bring hair.

To stanch blood.
Take wild Tansie, and bruise it in your hand, and apply it. Also primrose
leaves used in the like manner have the same effect. Otherwise take a piece of
an old Felt hat, and burn it to powder, and apply it to the wound, or put it
up, or snuff it up into the nose if it bleed.

For Enterfering.
Take a sharp and knotted Cord, and draw it from his dock, between his legs
to the Girths, and so ride him, or else rub starch between his thighs. This I
allow rather for an Horsecoursers Help, them a present cure.

To tame an unruly Horse that he may be drencht or dressed of anygrief.
Put into one of his ears a little round sharp flint stone, and gripe it hard
therein; if you do so to both, he will be more quiet.

FINIS.

