Actions for Slander, OR, A Methodicall Collection under certain Grounds and
Heads, of what words are actionable in the LAW, and what not?

A Treatise of very great use and consequence to all men, especially in these
times, wherein Actions for Slander are more common, and do much more abound
then in times past: And when the malice of men so much increases, well may
their tongue want a Directory.

To which is added, AWARDS or ARBITREMENTS,

Methodised under several Grounds and Heads, collected out of our Year-Books
and other pirvate authentic Authorities: wherein is principally showed, what
Arbitrements are good in Law, and what not.

A learning of no less use and consequence to all men, then the former: for
that submissions to Arbitrements were never more in use then in these times.
And this learning well observed, would avoid multitudes of suits and
contentions which daily arise through the defects of Arbitrements.

By JO. MARCH of Grayes-Inne, Barister.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for M. Walbank and R. Best, and are to be sold at
Grayes-Inne-Gate. 1647.

Actions for Slander. OR A methodicall Collection, under certain Grounds and
heads, of what words are actionable in the Law, and what not?
THE first part of my labor is, to show what words are actionable in the Law,
and what not? In the prosecution of which, it is not my purpose to run over all
the cases that have bin adjudged, neither can I if I would; my intent is only
to lay down a certain rule or ground, upon which to go (which will indeed be
as a light to all Cases of this nature) and having done so, to follow every
particular thereof, with the most pertinent cases that I find adjudged in the
Law; which done there will be very few cases of consequence hitherto adjudged
omitted.

But before I enter upon this part of my labor give me leave to premise this,
that I do not undertake this work, with an intent ^o encourage men in giving
^ll and unworthy language, or to teac^^ them a lawless Dyalect, but (as my
Lord Cook speaks) to direct and instruct them rightly to manage that, Cook,
l. 4 fol. 20. b.
which [though but a little member] proves often the greatest good, or the
greatest evil to most men. And withal to deter men from words, which are
but wind (as he further speaks) which subject men to actions, in which
damages and costs are to be recovered, which usually trench to the great
hinderance and impoverishment of the speakers.

And in truth that which caused me to enter upon this labor, was the
frequency of these actions; for I may with confidence affirm, that they do at
this day bring as much Gryse to the Mill, if not more, then any one branch of
the Law whatsoever. And it were to be wished and certainly never in a better
time then now) that the greatest part of them were suppressed, that words only
of brangle, heat and choler, might not he so much as mentioned in those high
and honorable Courts of Justice. For I profess for my part, I judge of them
as a great dishonor to the Law, and the professors thereof; especially when I
consider that they are used only as instruments to promote the malice, and vent
the spleen of private jarres and discontents amongst men.

The Apostle calling in question the wisdom of men, 1 Cor. c. ^ verse 5.
for going to Law one with another, is not to be intended [as the learned
observe upon that place generally to condemn all legal prosecutions, be ause
a man may without question maintain his just rights and privileges b^ Law,
but only to reprehend the folly of such, who upon every slight and triviail
occasion (like many in these contention times) care not to intayle a suite upon
them and their posterity; though in Fine they docke their own intayles without
recovery: and justly may actions for words come within the compass of the
Apostles exprobration.

I do not condemn all actions for words neither, for it is but equal, that
where a man's life, liveliehood; or reputation (which is dearer to him then the
former) is much endangered by scandalous words, that in such case the offender
should be enforced by action to make compensation. But that a man should flee
to the Law out of malice, and make the Courts of Justice maintainers of every
small and vain brabble, this seems to me utterly unlawful and intolerable
amongst Christians.

I cannot but take notice of that which Wray Chief Justice, Cook, lib. 4. f.
15. b.
says in Cooks 4th Book, That though slanders and false imputations are to
be repressed because that oftentimes a verbis ad verbera perventum est; which
^confes tends much to the disturbance of the common peace, and therefore by all
means possible to be prevented. Yet he says, that the Judges have resolved,
that actions for scandalls should not be maintained by any strained
construction or argument, nor any favor extended for supportation of them. And
he adds the reason of it, because they do abound more in these days; then in
times past, and the intemperance and malice of men increases; Et malitijs
hominum est obviandum; and further adds, that in our old books, actions for
scandalls are very rare, and such as are brought, are for words of eminent
slander, and of great importance.

I is true that the Law does in some cases discountenance these actions, and
therefore we have a rule, that words if they admit of a double construction,
shall always be taken in the best sense for him that speaks them (as I shall
make evident hereafter) because usually they are spoken in chollar and passion.

This I say the Law does, where the words are amphibolus; but if the words are
clearly actionable, in such case the Law will never aid a man, though they
were spoken in the distemper of passion which seems very hard and
unreasonable.

Nay which is yet more extreme, if counsel shall but inform the Jury of the
quality and reputation of the Plaintiff and also make them understand [if they
be capable the true sense and meaning of the words, and the hainousnes of them;
such words, against such a person; this enforced and pressed on by eminent
Council, shall make a Jury give a hundred pounds damages, whereas it does not
appear to them, that the Plaintiff by the speaking of the words was
prejudiced one farthing, a case of very great extremity, and worthy of relief.

And can any man deny, but that this is a countenancing of these frivolous
Actions: But give me leave Reader, and I will in a word inform you how this
may be remedied: and though the malice of men cannot be stopped, yet their
Actions may.

Let no words be actionable which do appear to have been spoken in chollar
and passion, or if actionable, yet let the Plaintiff recover no more in
damage, then he can upon Oath make appear, that he was actually damnified by
the speaking of them; and if this were provided by Act of Parliament, our new
books would be as little infested with these frivolous actions, as the old
ones are. But I cannot thus baulke that observation of that learned Chief
Justice who^ses that in our old books Actions for scandalls are very rare, and
such as are brought, are for words of eminent slanders and of great importance.

This must needs be acknowledged to be a most exact and true observation, for
in searching of the Books, I cannot find that any Action for scandalous words
was brought before E. 3. time, and so rare then* that I find but one in 50.
years of E. 3. and that is Sir Thomas Setons case of Justice, 30. Ass. fol: 19.
for calling of him Traitor. Felon; and Robber, no frivolous cause of action.

And I find but three Actions for words brought in 22. years of E. 4. and
those for one and the same words, 2 E. 4, 5, 15. E. 4. 32 and 4. 3.
for publishing one to be the Pilleine of I. S. a slander of no small
importance, neither; for so long as that base and slavish Tenure of Pilleinage
held; he that was a Pilleine, was subject both in person and estate, to the
will of his Lord, so that he might seize all his estate real, and personal,
and Vassalize his person at his pleasure, so that he did not kill or mayme him

In all the 21. years of H. 7. there is not one action that I can find brought
for scandalous words.

And in 38. years of H. 8. our books tell us but of five actions brought for
scandalous words; 27. H. 8. 14 and 22. 30. H. 8. Br. Acton upon the case 104.
28. H. 8. Dr. fo. 19 fol. 112 and fol. 26. fol. 1^^.
two whereof were in 27. H. 8. so that I find none before that time neither.
The other were in 30. H. 8. and 28. H. Dyer. And these for no trifling words;
for you shall find that one of them was for calling a man Heretic, another
for saying a man was perjured; and the other three for calling of one Thief
all of which are high scandals to a man's reputation and most of them tending to
the loss of life and fortunes; so that it is very true that that Reverend
Chief Justice observed, that these Actions were very rare in our old books,
and such as were brought were for words of emminent slander, and of great
importance.

But these few have now got such a numerous progeny that I fear we cannot
turn over many leaves in our new books, but we shall find one of these
Actions. They began thus to multiply in the Queens time, as we find in my
Lord Cocks 4. book, where there is no less then 17. adjudged cases together
upon these Actions.

And you may easily judge, they did not abate in King Iamses his time; for (if
I mistake not) there is no less then two and twenty adjudged cases upon these
Actions in my LORD Hobarts Book.

And I am certain they are not fallen in His Majesty's Reign that now is; for
I my self have reported no less then three and twenty judgments upon these
Actions but from Easter Term in the sixteenth year of the King, to Trinity
Term in the eighteenth.

Well therefore might Wray Chief Justice say, that the malice of men does more
increase in these times, then in times past; and as he says, the malice of men
ought to be with stood as much as may be; which I am sure the too frequent
tollerating of Actions of this nature will not effect, Psalm. 37. ver. 1. 2.
no more then fire can be extinguished by adding fuel unto it. You have heard
my advise and direction before, therefore I will here close this with one word,
though the tongues of men be set on fire, I know no reason wherefore the Law
should be used as Bellows to bow the Coals.

It is the saying of the Prophet David; I will take heed to my ways, that I
offend not with my tongue, I will keep my mouth as it were with a Bridle. It
were happy for all men if they could make the like resolution, and keep it. But
seeing that we are but men; whilst we carry this lump of flesh and mass of
corruption about us, we shall be subject to the like passions and affections
that o^^er^ have been before us, and the flesh will rebel against the spirit.
And therefore I have provided this Treatise upon Actions of slander, as a
Bridle for all rash and inconsiderate ^ongues; that seeing the mischief they
may the better know how to avoid it.

And here I shall lay down this as a general rule, which I shall by the way
as I go, make good in every particular.

That all scandalous words which touch or concern a man in his life, Liberty,
or Member or any corporal punishment; or which scandal a man in his Office or
place of Trust; or in his Call^ng or function by which he gains his living; or
which tend to the slandering of his Title or his disinheritance; or to the
loss of his advance, me it, or preferment, or any other particular damage; or
lastly which charge a man to have any dangerous infectious disease, by reason
of which he ought to separate himself, or to be separated by the Law from the
society of men: all such words are actionable.

And first for the first part of this Rule viz. Scandalous words which touch or
concern a man in his life; such words are actionable.

If a man call another Traitor, 30. Ass fol 19. 27. H. 8. 14. and 22.
Felon Thief, or Murderer, an Action lies for these words, because they call a
man's life in question. Cook lib. 4. fol. 16.


So it is all one if one shall say of another that he killed or murdered I. S.
Dyer. fol. 26. ^. 171 and 236. fol 26. Heb. Rep: fol. 8 Pl. 11. and 247. pl.
196.
or that he stole his good^, or that he poisoned him, if it appear to be
intended to be wittingly done, or the like, these words likewise are
Actionable, as appears by the Books in the Margent.

So if one shall say of another he has burnt my B^^ne with Corn, Cook. l. 4.
fol. 20.
which is Felony, this likewise will bear an Action.

I have a Report of a case which was thus: a Servant of one Mr. Roger Brook
said of one Mis. Margaret Passey that she sent a Letter to his Master, and in
the said letter willed his Master to poison his Wife Bridget Brook, and in
this case it is, said that upon a Writ of Error brought in the Cnequer Chamber
it was resolved, Cook, l. 4. fol. 16. b.
the words were actionnable, and the judgment affirmed, which case I confess
I much doubt, because here was but bare advise, and nothing appearing to be
done; like Eatons* case in Cooks 4 Book.

Where the Defendant said of the Plaintiff that He gave his Champion Council
to make a D^ed of gift of his goods to kill him, etc. adjudged that the words
were not Actionable, because that the purpose or intent of a man without act,
is not punishable by the Law.

And I conceive it will not be like the case, Pasch. 5. Iac. in the Kings Bench.
put by Tanfi^ld Just. in Harris and Hixons case, where he says that to say of
another, that he lay in wait to Rob or to murder I. S. will bear an Action,
because that he accuses him of an act viz. The preparation and lying in wait,
which is punishable by the Law; but in the former case there is nothing but
bare advise, Mich. 1 5. Eli^ Dyer fo. 317. fol. 8.
which is not punishable by the Law.

Hawly brought an Action upon the case against Sydnam for these words; h^ is
infected of the Robery and Murder lately-committed, and smells of the murder,
adjudged that the words were actionable, by reason of the word infected.

One said of another thou did kill a Woman great with Child, Mich 2 Iac. in
the Kings Bench.
innuendo Iocosam Vxocem cuiusdam R. S. defunct. and rules by the Court that
the Action would lie, though that the woman were utterly uncertain, because that
the offense, and the party intended to commit it, is certain, and it is not like
the case, where one said that there is one in this company; who has committed
a murder, there it is uncertain of whom the words were spoken, and cannot
possibly be aided by an (innuendo) but here the words are Actionable without
an (innuendo) but quaere whether the Action would lie or no because there is no
express averrement that the Woman was dead for the (innuendo) will not be
suffitient. Pasch. 1. Iac. in Rs. Rs. Rot. 107.


Hassellwood brought an Action against Garr^t for these words (amongst others
agreed not to be actionable) whosoever is he that is falsest Thief, and
strongest in the County of Salop, whatsoever he has stolen, or whatsoever he
has done. Averment
Thomas Hasselwood is falser then he resolved that these words are actionable,
with an averrement that there are Felons within the County of Salop, but for
defan^t of such averrement, the judgment being given in the Common Pleas was
reve^ed in this Court. Pasch. 5. Jac. in the Kings Bench.


Stoner brought an Action for words against Gambell, and declares that the
De^endant dixit deprefato: the Plaintiff thou innuendo, etc. have stolen my
Goods; and upon not guilty pleaded, the Jury found for the Plaintiff, and in
arrest of judgment it was said, that the Count was naught for the words are in
the second person, Words in the second person, though the party be not present,
actionable
and it is not all adged that the Plaintiff was present at the speaking of
them. Et Tota Curia contra, for dixit deprefato, is as much as Dixit ad
prefatum, for cannot he say thou have of the Plaintiff, except that it were
spoken to him? and rule was given for judgment. Cook lib. 4. fol. 5. b


One ^^^mans said of Hext, I do not doubt but within two days to Arrest Hext
^or suspicion of Felony: adjudged that the words were Actionable, because that
for suspicion of Felony, he shall be imprisoned and his life drawn in
question.

Hill. 20. Iac. in the Kings Bench, Winch came to the Bar and showed a Libell
against another in Court Christian for these words, thou art a Witch and
dealest with Witchery, and did procure Mother Bale to witch the Cattle of
I. S. and upon this prayed a prohibition, because that the Plaintiff had
remedy at Law, and by Fenner and Gaudy Justices the others ab^ent and
Prohibition lies, because she has remedy at Law. So that their opinion was
that an Action would lie at the Common Law for calling of one Witch.

And in one Edwards his case Hill. 40 Iac, Hill. 4^ lac: in the Kings Benche:
it was said to have been three (...) adjudged that to call one Witch would
bear an action and also that an action would lie for calling ^ one Hagge but I
doubt of the latter because I take Hag to be a doubtful word. But why Witch
should not bear an Action, I know no reason, Hob. Rep: pa: 155.
being the life may be thereby drawn in question, though I know it has been
doubted.

Marshall brought an Action against Steward for saying the Devil appears to
thee every night in the likeness of a black man riding upon a black Horse, and
thou conferrest with him, and whatsoever thou do ask he gives it thee, and
that is the reason thou have so much money, adjudged the words were Actionable.
Note Reader, that by the Statute of 10 of King James cap. 12. Conjuration or
consultation with the Devil, is Felony.

In the case of Hawes Mich. 17. of the King that now is, Mich. 17
this case was put and agreed by the Judges; Car. in the Kings Bench.
one said of another that he had received a (...), Priest, adjudged
actionable, because it is Felony, he might receive a Romish Priest and yet not
know him to be so, (like the cases I have put you afterward, therefore Quere.

Sir John Sydenham against Timothy Man Clark I think in my conscience that if
Sir John Sydenham might have his will, Hob. Rep. pa: 15^
he would kill all the Subjects in England* and the King too, and he is a
maintainer of Papistry and Rebellious Persons. These words upon a Writ of Error
in the Exchequer Chamber were adjudged actionable.

It seems somewhat hard to me Reader that words of thoug^t or opinion only
should bear an Action as here in the former words. (...) so 32. b.
And for the latter words, that he is a maintainer of Rebellious Persons; they
are Adjective only, Cook lib. 4. fo 1 9. a. b.
and do not import any Act of rebellion in those Persons, but only an
inclination to it, but of this more hereafter.

If a man say of another that he does like or approve of those that maintain
sedition against the King. Coke lib. 4. fo 13
I conceive that these words are actionable and sedition is a violent and
public thing, of which he cannot but have notice.

This Rule was agreed by the Judges in the debate of a case in the Kings Bench,
Pasch. 15. Car. in the Kings Bench.
that many words (though of themselves they be not actionable yet being
equivolent to words that are actionable, will bear on Action.

And it was said by Jones Justice, that in Yorkshire strayning of a Mare is all
one with Buggering of a Mare and therefore he said that an action will sie for
these words, with an averrement that they tantamount to Buggering of a Mare.
Note by his opinion in such case there must be an averrement of the m^^^ning or
importance of the words. Averrement.


Yet my Lord Hobart has several cases adjudged where a man brought an action
for Welsh words, Hob. Rep. pa: 165. and 263 pl. 236. Gibs and Gin kins case.
and did not aver what the words did import in English, and yet judgment was
given for the Plaintiff, and the Court took information upon Oath by
VVelchmen what the words meant in English. Averrement:


And in one of the cases Sergeant John Moore then informed t^^ Court that
judgment had bin given in the Kings Bench in the case of Tu^h upon these
words* 6. Iac. in the Kings Bench.
Thou art a healer of Fellons without any aver^ement, how the words were taken;
because the Court was informed and took knowledge that in some Counties it was
taken for a smotherer of Felons.

The ca^ intended by Sergeant Moore was I conceive the case of Pridham and
Tucker in the Kings Bench, Pasch. 7. Iac. in the Kings Bench.
where the words were adjudged actionable, without an averrement and in this
case ^t was agreed that words may be slanderons in one County and not in
another for in Norf they know not what healer signifies, Words slanderous in
one County and not in another.
but this being in De^^nshire where this word is used for concealer of Thieves,
will be actionable.

And I take this to be generally true that in all cases where a man's life may
be^ drawn in question by scandalous words, that such words are Actionable.

And now I shall cite a case or two, where words spoken which such a man's life,
which are by way of interrogation, or by way of hearesay or relati^n; or lastly
by way of negation only and yet will bear an Action.

It was said at the Kings Bench Bar [which I heard and observed] that it had
bin adjudged in this Court in one Appletons case, Pasch. 15. Car.
that where a man said to another where is my Piece thou sto^lest from me,
Words spoken by way of interrogation.
that these words were Actionable. By way of report or Relation.


And Jones Justice then said that he remembered this case to be adjudged. A.
said that B. told him that C. stole a Horse; but he did not believe him, that
these words* with an averrement that B. did not say any such thing to A. were
actionable. Hill. 4. lac. in the Kings Bench Rot. 1153*


Agreeing with this case is the Lady Morrisons case Widow, who brought an
action for words against William C^de Esquier, and declares that she was of
good fame, etc. and that Henry Earl of Kent was in speech and communication
with her concerning Marriage, the Defendant pre^^issorum non ignarus, said
these words, Arsoot has reported that he has had the use of the Lady
Morrisons body at his pleasure; ubi revera Arscot did never report it; and
alleges that the Earl of Kent upon the hearing of these words surceased his
suit, by which she lost her advancement. etc. adjudged that the words were
Actionable though spoken upon the report of another, for otherwise a man might
maliciously raise slanderous Reports of another, and should never be punished
for it.

But in this case Tanfield Justice said, that if it had been expressly
alleged, that in truth it was so reported by Arscot, then an action would not
lie against Cade for saying that Arscot reported it, because it is true that he
did so.

And Bartley Justice said that an action had bin brought for these words,
Pasch. 15 C^r. negative words actionable.
You are no Thief. In which there was an averrement, which implied an
affirmative, and agreed to be Actionable, and Appletons case was then agreed
for Law.

A. said to Is. have thou been at London to change the money thou stollest
from me? Mich. 15* Car. in the Kings Bench.
In this case it was objected, that these words were not actionable, Words of
Interrogation.
because that they are spoken only by way of interrogation, and are no direct
affirmative. But Jones and Barily Justices (the others being absent) both said
that the words were actionable; for the first words, Have thou been at London,
etc. are the only words of interrogation, and the subsequent words, viz. The
money thou stollest from me, is a positive affirmation; and Ba^tley Just. then
said, that it had been oftentimes adjudged that words of interrogation should
be taken as a direct affirmation, which, Jones Just. also agreed, and further
said that this case had bin adjudged.

One said to another, I dream^ you stole a horse, actionable
I dreamt this night that you stole a horse, these words were adjudged
actionable. And he said that if these and the like words should not bear an
action, a man might be as abusive as he pleased, and by such subtle words as
these always avoid an action.

And how I will put you a case or two, where words which imply an affirmative
shall be actionable.

One said of another, Pasch. 15. Car. in the Kings Bench.
he would prove he had stolen his books. In this case the opinion of the Court
was that the words were actionable, because they imply an affirmative; and are
as much as if he had said, that he had stolen his Books. And so if I will say
of another, that I will bring him before a Justice of Peace, for I will prove
that he has stolen, etc. though the first words are not actionable, yet the
last are.

Whitaer^s brought an action against Lavington for these words; Pasch. 5. Iac.
in the Kings Bench.
I will prove that Whytacre is for sworn, and that ten men can justify, and I
could prove him perjured if I would* adjudged that the words were actionable,
for that it is a great slander to be reported that it is in the power of any
one to prove one perjured; and it is as a direct affirmance.

It will be proved by many vehement presumptions, Pasch. 7. Jac. in the Kings
Bench.
that Welby was a plotter and contriver of Thomas Powels death because he
would not sell his Land to the said Welby; adjudged the words were actionable.

And now I have shown you the affirmative part, where words which touch or
concern a man's life shall be actionable. I shall now show unto you the
negative part, where words in such case shall not be actionable.

Words that touch or concern a man's life may not be actionable in these cases:
Where they are too general, or not positively affirmative; or of a double or
indifferent meaning, or doubtefull in sense; or for that they are incertaine in
themselves, or the person of whom they are spoken; or else by reason of the
subsequent qualification of the words, or because they do not import an Act,
but an intent, or inclination only to it; or for that they are impossible, or
lastly, because it does appear that the speaking of them could be no damage
to the pla^ntiffe, in all these cases the words will not be actionable.

And first, words that are too general, or not positively affirmative, will
not be actionable.

To say of a man that he deserves to be hanged; Mich. 4. Jac. in the Kings
Bench.
adjudged not actionable, because they are too general, for that he does not
show any thing that he has done to deserve it: and b^ Yelverton Justice, he
may deserve it for unnatural using of his Parents, and the like, where he
shall not be punished by the Law.

Cook, lib. 4. f. 15. b. Yeomans and Hexts case* for my ground in Allerton
Hext seeks my life, adjudged not actionable, because seeking his life is to
general, for which there is no punishment.

So if I say of another that it is in my power to hang him, Pasch. 7. Jac. in
the Kings Bench.
adjudged not actionable, in Pr^dham and Tuckers case cited before, because the
words are too general.

James Steward brought an action against Bishop for saying of him, Hob: Rep. p.
247. pl. 196.
that he wa^ in Warwick Gao^e for stealing of a Mare and other Beasts, and
adjudged, that the words would not bear an action because they do not affirm
directly that he did steal them; as if he had said that he stole them, and was
in Goal for it* but only make report of his imprisonment and the supposed
reason of it, and it may very well be, that the Warrant of Mittimus was for
stealing expressly, as is the common form of making of the Calendar of the
Prisoners for the Justices of Assize, and the like.

Georg Bla^d brought an action against A. B. for saying that he was Indicted
for Felony at such a Sessions; Hob: Rep. p. 309. pl. 289.
it was said, that it was questioned, whether an action would lie, because an
Indictment is but a surmise. But I conceave that it is without question, that
no action will lie in such case; because that to say a man was indicted of
Felony, is no more then to say he was impeached or accused for Felony, which
an honest man may be; and is no positive affirmation that he had committed
Felony, and so it has bin often adjudged, I will only cite one case in the
point.

Hasselwood brought an action against Garret for these words; Pasch. 1. Jac. in
the Kings Bench. Rot. 107.
I can find in this Parish a falser knave then Briscoe is the which Briscoe is
indicted of Felony and burglary, and is gone to Stafford Goal; and that false
kn^ve is Thomas Hasselwood, etc. it was adjudged that these words are not
actionable because that Briscoe might be indicted and yet be an honest man.

Thou have laye^ in Fullers Tubbe, 37* Eliz. Chapel and Burroughes case.
in which none come, but those that have the Pox adjudged the words were nor
actionable, because this is no direct affi^mation that the Plaintiff had the
Pox.

Poland brought an Action against Mason, Hob: Rep: p. 425 pl. 381.
for saying, I charge him (meaning the P^aint^ffe) with Felony, etc. adjudged
the words were not actionable, because that he does not affirm that he is a
Felon, but does onl^ say, that he does charge him with Felony, which he may do
in some cases* though he did not the fact* as if a Felony were done* and the
common fame were* that he did it any one that suspects him may charge him with
it.

Hen^y brought an Action against Fit^h for these words; H^b: Rep: p. 308. pl.
286.
I arrest you for Felony: agreed that the words were not actionab^e for this is
no positive charge that he was a Felon, and this may be lawfully done upon a
common fame as is said before, thus you see that words that are not directly
affirmative will not bear an action.

Yet you may see before fol. 7. where words which imply an affirmative only
shall be actionable, as to say, that I will prove that you stole my Books, or
the like, but of this sufficient.

Secondly, fol. 1^. ^. and 11. ^
Words that are of a double or indiff^rent meaning, The Law will take in the
best sense for the Speaker, and s^ adjudge them actionable, for the rule of Law
is (as I have said before) that verba accipienda sunt in mitiori sensu:

Yeomans and Hexts case cited before, Cook l. 4. fol. 15. b.
for my land in Allerton, Hext seeks my life, etc. adjudged these words were
not actionable, because he may seek his life lawfully upon just cause; and his
Land may be holden of him, and so in mitiori s^nsu.

Barham brought an Action upon the case against Nethersall, Cook l. 4. fol.
20. ^
and the words were Master B^rham did burn my barn, (innuendo a Barue with
Corne] with his own hands, and none but he: and after verdict it was moved in
arrest of judgment, that the words were not actionable, for it is not felony to
burn a Barn, if it be not parcel of a Mansion house, nor full of Corn; And
in such case agitur civiliter, and not criminaliter: and words must be taken in
mitiori sensu; and the innuendo will not serve when the words themselves are
not slanderous.

Ieams his case, C^^ke, l. 4. fol. 17.
hang him he is full of the Pox, I marvel that you will eat or drink with
him, etc. adjudged that the words were no^ actionable, because they shall be
taken in mitiori sensu for the small Pox and not the French Pox.

But no^e that in Hawtry and Miles case cited afterward it was said by Fenner
Just: Mich: 20 Iac. in the Kings Bench.
that to say that a man is laid of the Pox, will bear an Action; because that
is the phrase for the French Pox.

Adrian Coote brought an Action against Adrian Gilbert for these words; Hob:
Rep: p. 106. pl. 97.
Thou art a Thi^fe and have stolen a Tree adjudged that the words were not
actionable* and agreed that there is no difference between* and thou have
stolen, and for thou have stolen; for in common acceptance (and) is to be
understood to be but a verifying and making good of the general word (Thief)
and then a Tree shall be understood rather of a Tree standing then felled;
which can be no Felony or Theft for that a man cannot steal a man's
inheritance.

So Clarke brought an Action against Gilbert for these words; Hob: Rep* p. 473.
pl. 406.
thou art a Thief and have stolen twenty load of my Furz adjudged that the
action would not lie for the reasons given in the former case.

The like Law is, Cook* l. ^. 4. so 19. ^.
if a man say of another that he has stolen his Apples, or his Corn, or
robbed his Hoppe ground, or the like, the Law in these cases will adjudge them
rather growing, then gathered or cut down, and so the words not Actionable.

Thus it is evident, that where the words may be taken in a double or an
indifferent meaning that the Law will ever take them best for the Speaker. I
shall only put one case more upon this ground and so pass it over.

Pawlin brought an Action against Ford for these words, T^in. 18. Car. in the
Kings B^nch.
thou art a Theevish rogue, and have stolen my Wood. It was in this case said
at Bar the Action would not lie, because it should be construed rather to be
wood standing then cut down, like those cases put before.

But Bramston chief Justice seemed to incline that the words were actionable*
because that [wood] cannot be otherwise intended then of Wood cut down
according to the old verse; Arbor du^ crescit* lignum dum crescere nescu, and
so it was adjourned without more saying.

Note Reader, Trin. 4. Iac. in the Kings Bench, Rot. 1366.
according to the opinion of Bramston Chief Justice, betwixt Litchfield and
Saunders for the same words, he has stolen my wood, to which the defendant
demurred, it was adjudged that the Action would lie, for Tanfield Justice said
that the words shall be intended according to the most usual sense, Words
must be taken according to common int^nt.
viz. That it was Lignum, and not Arbor, as if one say that the Plaintiff has
committed a murder* it shall not be intended that he has mu^dered a Hare, but
a man.

You may here observe (Reader) that though words of a double or indifferent
meaning ought to be taken in the best intendment for the speaker as I have
sufficiently cleared it unto you yet they ought not to be taken contrary to
common intendment.

For as you shall not strain words to an intent not apparent, to make them
actionable, so you must not wr^st them contrary to common intent, to make them
no^ actionable this is apparent by Sanders his case immediately before, where it
is adjudged that to say of another you have stolen my Wood, shall be intended
to be Lignum, and not Arbor, and so actionable, so to say of a man that he has
committed a murder, shall not be understood murdering of a Har^, but a Man.

Dame Morrison brought an Action against William Cade Esquier and declared
that she was of good same, Hill. (...) Iac. in the Kings Bench Rot. 115^
etc. and that Henry Earl of Kent was in speech and communication with her for
marriage, the defendant pr^misso um non ignarus said these words Arscot has
reported that he has had the use of the Lady Morrisons body at his pleasure;
ubi revera Arscot never reported it. And further alleges that the E. of Kent
upon the hearing of these words surceased his suit by which she lost her
advancement, the Defendant pleaded not guilty, and it was found for the
Plaintiff. It was moved by Hobart Attorney Gener^ll that the words were not
actionable for this reason amongst others all ruled against him ^ because that
the words had the use of her Body were uncertain and of a double intendmen^,
and therefore should be taken in the best sense to have the use of her body as
a Tailor in measuring* or a Physician in giving Physic or the like, and not in
any worse ^ence.

But by Popham chief Justice the words are actionable, Words taken according
unto common intent.
when words are spoken that may have a double intent or meaning, they shall be
expounded according to common intent for otherwise he which intends to slander
another, may speak slanderous words, which by common intendment shall be
expounded a slander and yet no Action lie. And here the words has had the use
of her body at his pleasure shall not be intended in any lawful manner, but
licentiously and dishonestly for this is the common intent, with whom all the
other Justices agreed.

Thirdly, Mich: 15. Eliz. Dyer fo. 317 Pl. 8*
where the words are doubtful in sense or meaning, there likewise they will not
be actio^able.

To say that a man smells of a murder lately committed, will not bear an
Action, Hob: Rep. p^. 350. pl. 323. Coke lib. ^. 15: b.
because the words are of a dubious sense and intendment.

Bradshaw brought an Action against Walker for these words; thou art a
filching fellow, and d^ddest ^^lch from William Parson a 100. l. adjudged that
the words were not actionable, because that they are of incertaine sense and
meaning.

So to call one Harlot will not bear an action. Coke* lib. 4. 15. b.
And upon this ground I conceive (as I have said before) that to call a Woman
Hagge, will not be Actionable.

So to say of a man that he is a Healer of Felons; or that he strained a Mare
as the cases are before put; will not be actinable, because of their doubtful
sense and meaning without the words be ^ spoken to such who knows the meaning
and intendment of them.

Fourthly, where the words themselves are incertaine, or the persons of whom
they are spoken, in such case they will not be Actionable.

And first for the incertainty of the words; ve. fo. 8. ^^ fo. 9.
that is, when the scandal is not certain and apparent in the words
themselves.

Note Reader that all the cases put before upon the double or indifferent
meaning of words are apt to this purpose. As those thou have stolen my Apples,
or my Corn, or so many load of my Furs, or a Tree, or the like the words in
these cases are not Actionable, because the scandal is not apparent and
certain by the words; for in every of these cases* ^for ought appears by the
words] the thing said to be stolen might be growing, and then it is a
Trespass only and no felony, and to charge a man with a Trespass, will not be
actionable.

But if the words were, thou have stolen my Apples out of my Loft, my Corn
out of my Barn, or my Fu^z or Wood out of my Yeard, in such case the words
would be actionable, because the scandal is apparent, for that it is evident
by the words they were not growing.

Edward Miles brought an Action against Francis Jacob for these words, Hob.
Rep. p^. 8. Pl. 11.
thou have poisoned Smith etc. upon a Writ of Error in the Chequer Chamber it
was adjudged, that the Action would not lie, because it did not appear by the
words that it was done wittingly. Hob. Rep. pa. 268. pl. 236.


Gibs and Ienkins case to say of a man that he boar away money, or the like
will not be Actionable.

A. said of B. that he took away money from him with a strong hand, Mich. 15.
Car. in the Kings Bench.
for which, B. brought an Action, adjudged that it would not lie.

Bramstan chief^ Justice in the argueing of Hawes Case, Mich. 1^. of this King
in the Kings Bench, remembered this case; he did assault me and took away my
purse from me; and he said that it was adjudged that the words were not
Actionable. 37. Eliz. in the Common. Pl^as.
The reason of these cases, is because that for ought appears by the words
(which are of them selves uncertain) these might be Trespasses only, and no
Felony.

Again, where the person scandalized is uncertain, no Action will lie.

If one say (without any precedent communication of any person incertaine) that
one of the Servants of B. (he having diverse) is a notorious Felon or Traitor,
Coke lib. 4. fo. 17. b.
etc. here fore the incertainety of the person no action lies; neither can it
be made good by an (innuendo.)

So, Coke ibi.
if one say generally I know one near about B. that is a notorious thief, or
the like, no action will lie, for the same reason.

So as it is in Fleetwoods case in Hobarts Reports; Hob. Rep. pa. 375. pl. 351.
if a man say, lookeing upon three persons one of these murdered a man, no
action will lie for these words by reason of the incertainety of the person,
neither can an innuendo, help the incertainety; and note Reader that these
cases are not like Wisemans Case.

Wiseman of Grayes-Inne, brought an Action against Wiseman of Lincollins-Inne
his Brother for these words, Mich. 3: in the Kings Bench.
my Brother [meaning the plaintiffe] is perjured, and I will justify it, upon
not guilty pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff, and it was moved in arrest
of judgment that the words were not certain enough to ground an Action upon,
because the Plaintiff might have more Brothers, and it does not appear of
which of them the words were spoaken, but it was resolved that the action would
well lie, because it is alleged that they were spoken of the Plaintiff, and
the Jury have found accordingly; and here Tanfield Justice took this
difference; where the words themselves are incertaine, as to say, one of my
Brothers is perjured, there they can never be made good by any averrement, but
where the words are certain in themselves, so that it may appear that the
Speaker intended a person certain; there they may be made certain by such a
Declaration, and the finding of the Jury.

And it was said that if it were true that there were diverse Brothers, the
Defendant should have pleaded it, and then issue should have been taken,
whether the words were spoken of the Plaintiff or no.

Nor are the former cases like a case which I cited before Mich. 2. Iac. where
an action was brought for these words; Mich. 2. Iac. in the Kings Bench.
Thou did kill a Woman great with Child, [innuend* Iocosam Vxorem cujusdam
R. S. defunct] where it was ruled that though the Woman were utterly
incertaine, yet because the Offense, and the party intended to commit it were
certain, the Action would well lie.

Foxcroft brought an Action against Lacy and declared that a communication was
moved between John Walter, Hob. Rep. pa. 122. pl. 118.
and Richard Guyn Esquiers concerning a certain Suit, wherein the Plaintiff
and certain others were Defendants, and that the Defendant Lacy upon the said
communication in their presence, Words certain by relation.
spoke these words; these Defendants [meaning the Plaintiff, and the others]
are those that helped to murder Henry Farrar (meaning one Hen. Farrer deceased
who was murdered by one T. Guldfield, who was hanged for it, adjudged the words
were actionable, and that they were as sufficiently laid to entitle every of
the defendants to a several Action, as if they had been specially named, here
you see the words may be sufficiently certain by relation.

Fifthly, where former words actionable are qualified with subsequent words not
Actionable, there though the former words spoaken generally, and by themselves
would have maintained an Action, yet now, taking altogether, they will not be
Actionable.

Thou art a Thief, for thou have stolen my Apples out of my Orchard; or, for
thou have robbed my Hopground, or, for thou have stolen a Tree; or, for thou
have stolen my Furzes; as I have put you the cases before. Or, thou art a
Thief, and thou have stolen my aples out of my Orchard; or, and thou have
robbed my Hop ground, etc. [aud] and [for] have both one and the same
signification in these cases, as I have cleared it to you before to be
adjudged; and in all these cases no Action will lie.

For [as I have said before] the latter words do qualify the former, for the
former words say him to be a Thief, but the latter prove him to be no^e. I
have given the reason before, because that in all these cases, the Law which
will always construe words the best for the Speaker, will take the Apples,
Hopes etc. to be growing, and then it is Trespass only and not felony to take
them away because felony as I have told you before] cannot be committed of
that which is parce* of a man's inheritance as these are whilst they are growing.

Britteridge brought an Action for these words; Cook lib. 4. fo. 19. ^ b.
Britteridge is a perjured old knave, and that is to be proved by a Stake,
parting the land of H. Martin, and M. Wright, adjudged that the words are not
actionable, because though the former words would bear an Action, the latter
do so qualify and extenuate them, that taking altogether they are not
actionable for the latter words do explain his intent, that he did not intend
any judicial perjury; also it was impossible, that a Stake could prove him
perjured, and therefore for the impossibility, and insensibility of the words
the action would not lie.

Sixthly, where the words do not import an Act, but an intent only, or an
inclination to it, there such words [except where they s^and all a man in his
function or profession] will not bear an Action.

If a man say of another that he is a seditious knave, Coke lib. 4. fo. 19. ^.
b.
or a theevish knave; or a traitorous knave; these words will not bear an
Action; because that the words do not import that he has done or is guilty of
Sedition, Felony, or Treason, but are Adjective words, which import an
inclination to it only.

But if a man say of another that he is a parjured knave, an Action will lie
for these words, because that the Adjective [perjured] presumes an Act
committed, or otherwise he cannot be perjured.

Besides, Coke ibi.
Adjective words will bear an Action* when they scandal a man in his office,
Function or Trade, by which he does acquire his living, though they do not
import an Act done.

My Lord Cook cites this case adjudged, 24. Eliz. between Philips Parson of D.
and Badby, in an action brought for these words, thou have a seditious Sermon,
and moved the people to sedition this day: resolved that the words were
actionable, notwithstanding that the first part of the words were utter
adjective, and the last words were but a motive to sedition, and it does not
appear that any thing ensued; yet because that they scandal the Plaintiff in
his function, they were adjudged actionable.

So, Mich. 43. and 44. Eliz in the common Pleas, Mittons case. 6. E. 6. Dyer,
f. 72.
if a man say of a Merchant, that he is a Bankruptly Knave, or a Bankrupt
Knave, these words will bear an action, though that the Bankrupt be adjective.

Or if one say of a Merchant, that he will be Bankrupt within two days, which
imports but an inclination, ^y^t an action will lie; for these scandalls reach
to the profession.

So if a man say of an Officer or Judge, Cook, lib. 4 fol. 16. a* and 19. a
that he is a corrupt Officer or Judge, though the words be adjective yet an
action lies for both causes; first because the words touch him in his Office,
and then because they do import an act done.

Hob. Kep. page 12. pl. 17. Yardly, and Ellill^ case, to say of an Atorney,
that he is a bribing knave, will bear an action, though the words be adjective.

Words likewise that import an intent only, will not bear an action.

The defendant said of the ^laintiffe for he is a brabler and a quarreller he
gave his Champion counsel to make a Deed of gift of his goods to kill me* etc.
but God preserved me; Cook, lib. 4. fol. 16. b. Eatons case.
The book says, that it was strongly urged, that the action should be
maintainable, and diverse cases cited, which I will remember unto you.

My Lady Cockeins case for these words; Mic. 32. and 33. Eliz. in the Kings
Bench.
My Lady Cockein offered to give poison to one to kill the Child in her body.

Another betwixt Tibets and Heyne in Gloucester for these words: Tibots and
another did agree to hire one to kill B.

Also Cardinals case for these words, if I had consented to Master Cardinal,
T. H. had not been alive.

And the Lord Lumlyes case; My Lord Lumley has gone about to take away my
life, against all Christian dealing

But notwithstanding these cases, the book says, that upon great deliberation
and advisement, it was adjudged, that in the principal case the words were not
actionable, because that the purpose or intent of a man, without act is not
punishable by the Law. My L. Cook in the close of this case says, Note well
this case, and the casue and reason of the judgment.

Certainly Reader there is somewhat more than ordinary in this (Nota be^e) of my
Lord Cooks; and the reason of the case seems to intimate as much unto us;
which is, that the purpose or intent of a man, without act, is not punishable
by the law, which is a certain truth.

But I conceive it is as true, that where that purpose or intent is manifested
by an overt act or attempt that that is punishable.

Mich. 4. of King James in a case in the Kings Bench, Mich. 4. Jac. in the
Kings Bench.
this was agreed for law; to say of a man, that he lay in wait to assault I.
S. with an intent to rob him, or to murder him, an action lies, because that
he does accuse him of an act, viz. the preparation and lying in wait to
assault him, but if he had said that he would have murdered, or would have
robbed I. S. an action would not lie, because he only guesses at his
imagination.

And in Harris and Dixo^s case in the Kings Bench, Pasch. 5. Jac. in the Kings
Bench.
that case was allowed for law by Tanfield Justice, where he said that if one
say of another, that he lay in wait to murder I. S. an action lies, because
such lying in wait is punishable by the law.

By this case it should seem, that to charge a man with an attempt only to
commit Felony, as to say of a man that he offered to rob, or to poison, or to
murder I. S. that these should be actionable; for I think the like punishment
is in these cases, as in the former, which I conceive is only the good
behavior, or at most indictable for it, and thereupon fined.

And if an action should lie in such case; by the same reason, to say of a man,
that he is a common Quarreller, breaker, or perturber of the Peace, or that he
is a Riotter or the like would bear an action, because that for these likewise
the good behavior is grantable, and likewise a man may be indicted for them,
therefore quaere of the former cases.

Seventhly, words which are apparently impossible, will not be actionable.

Benson brought an action against Morley for these words; Pasch. 5. Jac. in the
Kings Bench.
Thou have robed the Church (innuendo Ecclesiam sic Alhagi extra, Creplegate
London) and have stolen the Leads of the Church; Upon not guilty pleaded it
was found for the plaintiff and it was moved in arrest of judgment* that the
words were not actionable, because the Church shall be intended the Universal
Church, and not any material Church, and the Church Militant cannot be
robbed, and so the words are impossible, but by Popham, Chief Justice, and
Tanfield Justice, the action will well lie, and so it was adjudged, because the
words in this case cannot be intended of an invisible Church, as is objected,
but of a material Church, as is explained by the subsequent words; and have
stolen the lead of the Church: which cannot be understood of the invisible
Church.

In this case Reader you may observe that it is admitted, that to say of a man
that he ha^h robbed the Church* generally will not be actionable; because
that it shall be understood of the invisible Universal Church, and so the
words impossible, because that cannot be robbed.

So, I conceive to say of a man, that he has robbed a Church will be
actionable* because this must of necessity be understood of some particular
material Church.

Dickes a Brewer brought an action against F^nne for these words; Mich. 15.
Car. in the Kings Bench.
I will give a pick of Malt to my Mar^, and lead her to the water to drink,
and she shall piss as good beer as Dickes does br^w; adjudged the words were
not actionable, because impossible, and therefore they could be no scandal to
the plaintiff.

Britteridge brought an action for these words, Cook lib. 4. f. 19. a. b.
Britteridge is a perjured old Knave, and that is to be proved by a stake
parting the land of H. Martin, and M. Wright, adjudged the words were not
actionable because that it was impossible that a stake could prove him perjured.

Lastly, where it does appear that the speaking of the words could be no
damage to the plaintiff, there likewise no action will lie.

The Plaintiff shows in his Count, Cook, l. 4. fol. 16. a
that the defendant has a wife yet in life, and that the defendant said of the
plaintiff, Thou have killed my Wife; adjudged that the words were not
actionable, because that it does appear by the plaintiffes Declaration, that
the Wife of the defendant was in life, so that by these words the Plaintiff
could not be in any jeopardy nor scandaled, or damnified by them.

The like case was put in (...) Thomas H^lt and Tailors case Pasch. Pasch. 5.
Iac. in the Kings Bench.
5. of King James; if one say of a woman. That she has murdered her husband;
and she and her husband bring the action, it will not lie, because it does
appear by the Record, that the slander is not prejuditiall.

And as when it does appear by the Record that the speaking of the words could
be no damage to the plaintiff, no action will lie. So where the speaking of
the words might be a damage to the plaintiff yet if the ground of that
damnification do not sufficiently appear by the Record, the action will not
lie.

A br^ught an action against B. for saying That he kept false waytes by which
he did cosen, Mick. 17. Car. in the Common Pl. a.
etc. and declared that he gained his living by buying and sel^ing, but did
not show of what profession he was; adjudged that the action would not lie,
because it cannot appear (without showing of his profession) that the speaking
of the words could be any damage to the Plaintiff.

A. Brought an action against B. for these words; Trin. 17. Car. in the Common
Pleas.
Thou have killed my brother [innuendo G. etc. fratrem, etc. nuper mortuum)
adjudged that the words were not actionable, because the Plaintiff did not
aver, that he was dead at the time when the words were spoken, and if he
were living, then the speaking of the words could be no slander or damage to
the Plaintiff*

So where a man brings an action for Welsh words or the like which are
scandelous, Hob. Rep. page 159. a pl. 145. pa. 165. a pl. 154. and pa. 261. pl.
236.
and does not aver, or set forth that they were spoken to one who understood
the meaning of them, the action will not lie, because it does not appear by
the Record, that the speaking of the words could be any damage to the
Plaintiff. For if they were spoken to one that did not understand the meaning
of them, no action would lie, because they could be no scandal to the
Plaintiff.

And now I shall add to the rest, only this one ground where words shall not
be actionable, and that is in this case.

When a man is charged with a crime or offense by scandalous words, where it
does not appear by the words, that he had notice or knowledge of the ground or
occasion of the crime or offense in such case no Action will lie for such words.

Bridges brought an Action for those words he (prefat Bridges innuendo) is a
maintainer of T'heeves and he keeps none but Thieves in his ^ouse, and I will
prove it, upon a writ of Error in the Chequer Chamber, it was holden the
words were not actionable, because he might maintain Thieves without notice,
and therefore the first Judgment was reversed.

Like the case in my Lord Hobarts Book where an Action was brought against
another, for saying that the Plaintiff kept men which did rob upon the
Highway, adjudged that the words would not bear an action, because that he
might keep them and not know them to be such persons.

In the case of Read and Saul which was Mich. 40. e^ 41. of the Queen, Mich.
40. and 41. of the Queen in the Common Plea*
this case was remembered by Walmesley Justice* a man brought an action in that
Court for these words he [meaning the Plaintiffe] is a receiver of Thieves, and
he said that in this case the Plaintiff could have no judgment, because that
he might receive Thieves, and yet not know them to be so.

A. said of B. that he kept false waits for which B. brought his action; Mich.
57. Car. in the Common Pleas.
adjudged that the action would not lie, because that it did not appear that
he did use them; and besides, for that he might keep false waits, and not
know them to be so.

The case of Miles and Jacob cited before is likewise to this purpose, Hob.
Rep. pa. 8. pl. 11.
where an action was brought for these words, thou have poisoned Smith,
adjudged that the words would not bear an action, because that it did not
appear that he did it wittingly.

Stanhop brought an action against Blithe for these words; Coke lib. 4. fo. 25.
Mr. Stanhop has but one Manor, and that he has got by swearing and
forswearing, resolved that the words were not actionable, for this reason
amongst others] for that he might recover or obtain a Manor, by swearing and
forswaring, and yet he not procuring or assenting to it.

And now I am come to the second part or clause of that general rule laid
down before, where I am to show you.

That scandalous words which touch or concern a man in his Liberty will bear
an Action.

By the Books in the Margent the Law is plain, 2. E. 4. 5. 15 E. 4. 38 17. E.
4. 3. 13. H. 7 K^ilway fo. 26. b. 27. a.
that if I publish and claim B. to be my Villeine, that in such case no action
will lie, because I my self claim an interest in him, and the Law will not in
such case punish a man; for then no man durst claim his own for fear of an
action.

But upon these Books I conceive the Law is evident, that if a man had
published another to be the Villein of I. N. that in such case an action would
have layne, because these words tend to the inslaving of him and his posterity,
and to the utter deprivation of his Libertys, which the Law so much favors,
for, as it is well known, he that was a Villain, he was subject both in
person and estate to the will of the Lord, so^ that he might seize all his
Estate real and personal, and vassalise his person at pleasure, so that he
did not kill or maime him.

But I conceive that at this day an action in such case will not lie, because
that time and inconvenience has quite abolished and worn out this Bondage,
our Books have little upon this ground therefore I shall thus pass it over.

Scandalous words which touch or concern a man in Member, or in any corporal
punishment, will bear an Action.

A man brought an Action for calling him Thief, Hob. Rep. pa. 258. Male and.
Ret^ case, and 27 H. 8. 22.
and that he had stolen 2. Sheep from B. the Defendant justifies the calling
of him Thief, for that the Plaintiff did steal the Sheep* and it was good
by the whole Court, without expressing the value of the Sheep, for if they be
not worth twelve pence, so that it is but petty Larceny, and not capital, yet
it is Felony in its nature.

By this it is evident, that to say a man has stolen sixpence from B. will
bear an Action, though it be but petty Larceny, because the Offender by Law
may be imprisoned and whipped for it.

If a man say of another that he is perjured, or that he has forsworn
himself in such a Court, Cook lib. fo. 15. and 19. Br.
an action will lie for these words. Action upon the case 104. Hob. Rep. pa.
114. pl. 107*
For by the Statute of 5. Eliz. cap. 9. A man convict of perjury forfeits 20.
l. and is to have six Months imprisonment and his testimony taken away while
that conviction stands; and if he have not Goods and Chattels to the value of
20. l. then he is to be put in the Pillary, and his Ears to be nailed, so that
you see here is an immediate corporal punishment given by this Statute, which
is imprisonment.

And if a man say of another that he can prove him perjured, See fo. 7. a. b.
an action will lie, though it be but an implied affirmative.

Hearle against Tresham thou have taken a false Oath in the Session of, Hill. 1.
Iac. in the Kings Bench.
etc. resolved the words were actionable, for the Court shall intend this to
be a Court of Record, as Records of which they ought to take conusance. Hob.
Rep. pa. 396. pl. 360.


Adams against Flemming, he has forsworn himself before the Counsel of the
Marches of Wales in the suit I had against him there for perjury; adjudged
actionable.

In Lelicke and VVrinskemores case Mich. 7. of King James in the Kings Bench,
34. of the Queen Cossimans case.
one Cossimans Case was cited, which was thus, thou wast forsworn in such a
Bishops Court, it was said that these words were adjudged actionable, and so it
was agreed by the Court.

It was moved by Williams in Arrest of Judgment for these words, Mich. 41. and
42. of the Queen in the Common Pleas.
thou art a forsworn knave, thou wast forsworn in Ilcon Court (innuendo the
Court Leete there holden) it was agreed that the (innuendo) should not stretch
the words further then they were spoaken: And Williams put this case, which
was in the Kings Bench, thou art a forsworn man thou were forsworn in White
Church Court, which was affirmed by all the Sergeants to be adjudged not
actionable

Which case I conceive, Coke lib. 4 fo. 15. b.
cannot be Law, Yet quaere whether the Judges can intend this a Court of
Record^*
because it is adjudged (as I have put the case before) that if one say of
another that he has forsworn himself in such a Court, that the words are
Actionable, and in this case judgment was given accordingly.

If a man say of a Woman that she has a Bastard, Cook lib. 4. fo. 17. Anne
Dani^s case.
an action will lie for these words, because that she is punishable by the
Statute of 18. of the Queen cap. 3. at the discretion of the Justices, who
always inflict a corporal punishment upon them, as imprisonment, whipping or
the like.

Morgan and Rookes case Morgan said of the Wife of Rookes she is a Bawd,
Trin. 16 Car. in the Kings Bench.
and keeps a Bawdy house, adjudged that the words were Actionable, upon a writ
of Error brought by Morgan: to reverse the judgment given in the Common Pleas,
and judgment was affirmed.

Chambers and his Wife against Ryly for the same words; Trin: 18 Car in the
Kings Bench^
Chambers his wife is a Bawd, and keeps a Bawdy house. Adjuded the words were
Actonable, and in this case it was agreed that to say of a Woman she is a
Bawd, will not bear an Action; because she is not punishable by the Law for
it, but to say of her that she keeps a Bawdy house, will be Actionable, for
that she is punishable by the Law for keeping a house of Bawdry.

A Prohibition was prayed, because that Elizabeth Thorn had Libelled in Court
Christian against Turnam for defamation for these words, ^ill* 4. Iac. in the
Kings Bench.
thou art a Bawd and do keep a bawdy house, and it was granted by the whole
Court, because that an Action lies at Common Law for these words.

The reason why an Action lies in these cases, is, because the party may be
indicted for keeping of a Bawdy house; and if she be thereupon convicted, she
shall be imprisoned and most ignominiously Carted, which are corporal
punishments.

If a man say of another that he has forged a Leaf, Obligation, Release, or
Accquitrance, or the like, an Action will lie for these words: Because that by
the Statute of 5. of the Queen cap. 14. there are great and grievous corporal
punishments inflicted upon such offenders, if it be to disturb a Title, the
punishment is the greater, but if only in the cases aforesaid, the Offender is
to be put in the Pillory, one of his Ears to be cut off, and to be Imprisoned
for a year. Mic. 17. Car. in the Kings Bench.


Hawes brought an Action for these words; my Cosen Hawes has spoken against
the Book of Common Prayer, and said it is not fit to be read in the Church.
Heath Justice was of opinion that the words were actionable, though the offense
be^ only against a penal law, for the Statute of 1. of the Queen cap. 2.
gives a penalty only for speaking against the Book of Common Prayer; but in
default of payment thereof imprisonment. And he held that all scandalous
words, which if they were true, would make a man liable either to a pecuniary
or a corporal punishment, would bear an action.

But Mallet Justice, and Bramston Chief Justice were of a contrary judgment,
and their reason was because that if this should be law, it would be a great
occasion to increase and multiply actions for words, which the Law labors to
suppress as much as may be for then all words spoken of any man, which if they
were true would subject him to a penalty, either by the Common, or the Statute
Law would bear an action, as to say of a man that he has erected a Cottage,
or committed a Riot or the like, would be actionable, which the Law will not
suffer for the reason aforesaid, and judgment was given accordingly.

Mallet Justice in the arguing of this case said, that there was an action then
pending in the Common Pleas, for calling of a man Recusant, and he said that
his opinion was, the action was not maintainable, I never heard what became of
that case, but I conceive the Law to be with Justice Mallet; for though there
be many penalties and forfeitures provided by Statutes against Recusants, yet
no corporal punishment is given by any of them; no not after conviction.

Thorneton brought an action against Iobson, Heb. Rep. pa. 183. pl. 188.
and laid that he was a Carrier, and of good same, and that the defendant said
of him, that he was a common Barretor. In this case the book says, that the
Court was of opinion, that if these words were spoken of a Justice of Peace, or
public Officer, or of an Attorney, or the like, that they would bear an
action; by which it is evident the Court did incline against the action in this
case.

In an action upon the case for words, Mich. 4. Iac. in the Ki^^g^ Bench.
the words were, I am sorry for thy Wife and children, thou art a common
Barretor, and I will indict thee for it a^ the next Assizes, etc. adjudged the
words were not actionable, and by Yelverton Justice, the action will not lie
for saying that, he is a Barretor, no more then for saying that he is a
Riotor, a peace breaker, or the like, and an action, will not lie for saying,
that a man is a Rogue.

To say of an Attorney, Hob. Rep. pa, 159. pl: 145. Box and Barnabies case*
that he is a Champertor, will bear an action. But I conceive upon the case
aforesaid, that to say of one, who is no Attorney, Justice of Peace, nor other
public Officer that he is a Champertor, or a common maintainer of suites, will
not be actionable, nor is it actionable in case of the Atorney to say that he
is a common maintainer of suites.

The reason of these cases may be, because that though any man may be
indicted for being a common Barretor, Champertor, or maintainer of suites, and
thereupon fined and imprisoned; yet the punishment is only the Fine, and the
imprisonment as a consequent or incident thereunto.

And as it is said before in Hawes case, if an action should lie in these
cases, then in all cases, where a man shall charge a man with a crime or
offense, for which a man might be indicted and fined, an action would lie;
which would occasion multitudes of suites of this nature, that the law labors
so much to suppress.

And now I have shown you what words, which touch or concern a man in member,
or any corporell punishment, will bear an action. I shall in the next place
show you what words in such case will not be actionable; and that may be in
these cases, either by reason of the doubtful or indifferent meaning of them;
or of the incertainty of the words themselves, or of the persons of whom they
are spoken, or of the subsequent qualification of them; or upon the other
grounds and reasons which I have laid down before.

For we must know (that I may speak once for all) that all those grounds which
are before set down, wh^re words shall not be actionable, which touch or
concern a man's life; will agree with all actions for words whatsoever, whether
that the words touch or concern a man in corporal punishment as before; or in
his Office or place of trust or in his calling or function by which he gains
his living, or the like, as is manifested likewise in part before, and shall
be more fully hereafter; but to the point, what words in this case will not be
actionable.

Box and Barnabies case cited before, Hob. Rep. pa. 159. pl. 245.
to say of an Attorney, that he is a Champertor, will bear an action. But to
say that he is a common maintainer of suites, will not b^are an action, for
there is maintenance lawful and unlawful; an Attorney may, and ought to
maintain his Clyents cause* and an Attorney may well be said a common
maintainer, because he is common to as many as will retain him, thus you see,
words of a double intendment, shall be taken best for the Speaker, for the
words in this case shall not be intended of any unlawful maintenance, but of
a lawful maintaining of his Clyents causes.

Stanhope brought an action for these words. Master Stanhope has but one
Manor, and that he has gotten by swearing and forswearing: adjudged the
words were not actionable, for this reason [amongst others] because, that for
ought appears he might be forsworn in ordinary communication, and not in
any juditiall proceeding, which is not punishable by the Law, and where the
words are of an indifferent meaning, the Law will (as is said before) take them
the best for the Speaker.

Smith brought an action for these words; Pasch: 15 Car. in the Kings Bench.
Thou art forsworn, and have taken a false oath at Hereford Assizes: by the
opinion of Jones, and Bartley Justices [the other Justices absent) the action
will not lie, because that he might be forsworn in ordinary communication,
otherwise if he had said that he had taken a false Oath in the Assizes, for
there it shall be intended that he forsworn himself in a juditiall proceeding.

In a case that I have cited before, which was Mich. 41. and 42. of the Queen
in the Common Pleas; this case was remembered by Willi^ms, thou art, etc. thou
were forsworn in the Kings Bench, he said that in this case the Plaintiff
could have no judgment, because of the double intendment of the words, for
they may be taken that he was forsworn either in the Court or the Prison, and
the best shall be taken for the Speaker, viz. that he was forsworn in the
Prison.

Weaver brought an Action against Cariden for these words, Cook lib* 4. fo, 16
a
he is detected for perjury in the Starchamber, adjudged that the Action would
not lie, because that an honest man may be detected, but not convicted, and
every one who has a Bill of perjury exhibited there against him is detected*
here the words do not positively affirm him to be perjured, and therefore not
Actionable.

Thomas brought an Action against Axworth for these words; Hob, Rep pa, 3, pl: 4
this is John Thomas his writing, he has forged this VVarrant; adjudged the
Action would not lie.

Harvy brought an Action against Duckin, Hob. Rep. pa. 36, pl.
for saying that the Plaintiff had forged a Writing, adjudged that the words
were not Actionable, the reason of these cases, is because of the incertainty
of the words, VVarrant and Writing* and as I have given you the rule before,
the scandal must be certain and apparent in the words themselves, otherwise
they will not be Actionable.

By Tanfield Justice in Wisemans case cited before, if a man say that one of
his Brothers is perjured no Action will lie, because of the incertainty.

In the case which I put you before, moved by Williams, Mich. 41. and 42. of
the Queen in the Common Pleas, this case was remembered by Walmseley Justice,
one of you forged a Subp^na out of the Chancery; (innuendo the Plaintiff) he
says that judgment was stayed in this case; because he which is greeved ought
to be certainly defamed and the ( innuendo cannot make the words more certain
here likewise you have examples* that where the person is incertaine that is
scandalized, no Action will lie.

Powell brought an Action against Wind for these words, Hob. Rep. pa. 467. pl.
395.
I have matter enough against him, for Mr. Harley has found Porgery, and can
prove it against him: Resolved the words were not Actionable, because they were
too general and utterly incertaine.

Britteridges case cited before, Coke lib. 4. fo. 19.
Britteridge is a perjured old knave, and that is to be proved by a stake
parting the land of H. Martin, and Master Wright adjudged the words were not
actionble because of the subsequent words which extenuate the former, and
explain his intent, that he did not intend any juditiall perjury, and because
that it is impossible that a Stake should prove him perjured, here you have
words that are not Actionable by reason of the qualification of the subsequent
words, thus you may see, that the grounds formerly laid down, may serve as a
Touchstone for all cases of scandalous words.

The third part of that rule or ground which I have laid down before, and
which I am now to handle is this.

That scandalous words spoaken of a man, which touch or concern a man in his
Office, or Place of Trust, will bear an action.

Skinner a Manchant of London said of Manwood chief Baron that he was a
corrupt Judge, Coke lib. 4. fo. 19. a. and 16. a. Cook, lib. 4 fol. 16. a
adjudged the words were actionable.

Stucley a Justice of Peace brought an Action for these words, Mr. Stucley
covers and hides Felonies, and is not worthy to be a Justice of Peace,
adjudged the Action would lie, because* it is against his Oath, and the Office
of a Justice of Peace, and good cause to put him out of Commission, and for
this he may be indicted and fined.

Pridham and Tuckers case, Pasch. 7 Iac: in the Kings Bench.
to say of a Constable that he is a concealer of Fellons, adjudged actionable.

Stafford Justice of Peace brought an Action against Poler for these words;
Trin. 36. of the Queen Rot: 223. in the Kings Bench.
William Web being Arrested as accessory for stealing his own Goods, Master
Stafford knowing thereof discharged the said Web by and agreement of 3. l. 10
which Master Stafford was party, whereof 30. s. was to be paid to Master
Stafford, and was paid to his man by his appointment upon a Writ of Error
brought in the Chequer Chamber, it was holden the words were Actionable. Pasch.
37. of the Queen in the Kings Bench. Rot 147:


Cotton Justice of Peace brought an action against Morga^ for these words. He
has received money of a Thief that was apprehended and brought before him for
stealing of certain sheep* to let him escape, and to keep him from the Goal,
adjudged the Action would lie.

Morris Gilbert Justice of Peace brought an Action against Adams for these
words; Pasch. 4. Iac. in the Kings Bench. this case commenced Trin. 3:
Mr. Gilbert has done me wrong in returning the Recognizance of Podger in 20.
l. where it was taken in ten, and the suerties in 10. l. a piece by the whole
Court, the words are Actionable. See fo. 18. a.


If a man say of a Justice of Peace, that he is a common Barret or, Champertor,
or maintainer of Suites, the words are Actionable.

Carre brought an Action against Rande for words, Mic. 4. Iac in the Kings
Bench.
and declared that he was Steward to diverse great Lords of their Court
Barrons, and of the Leetes with in their Mannots, and that he was Steward of
one A. of his Court Barron and of the Leete within his Manor, the Defendant of
this not ignorant, said these words Mr. Carre has put a presentment into the
Iuries verdict against me of 3s. 4d. for sueing of Peter West forth of the
Court contrary, etc. without the consent of the Jury by the whole Court the
Action lies, because he does accuse him of falsity in his Office; but by the
better opinion if he had not alleged in his Count that he was Steward, the
Action would not have layen.

Sir George Moore brought an Action against Foster for scandalous words, Sir
George Moore and Fosters case.
and sets forth that he was a Justice of Peace in the County of Surrey, and
that there was a Suit depending in Chancery betwixt the Defendant, and one
Richard King, and that a Commission was awarded to Sir George Moore and others,
to examine Witnesses in the said cause, and also to hear and determine it, and
that he with the others, dealt in the execution of the said Commission, and
that the Defendant said of the Plaintiff these words* Sir George is a corrupt
man, and has taken bribes of Richard King; and at another time, King has set
Sir George Moore on horseback with bribes, where by to defrande equity Justice
and good conscience, resolved that the words were Actionable; because that
though the Plaintiff be neither Officer ^or Judge, nor is sworn yet because
it is a place of great Trust reposed by the King in the Plaintiff, and for
that he is punishable for bribary or corruption in the execution of the said
Commission, in the Court out of which it issues not deserving (if the words
were true) to be employed in the like Commission or any other, for these causes
the words were held to be Actionable, and Popham Chief Justice in this case
made no difference, where the Commission issues to one, and where to many; nor
where they are nominated by the Court, where by the party, for in the first
case (he said) the confidence of the Court is all one; and in the last, though
that they be nominated to the Court; by the party, yet they shall not be
Commissioners without the approbation of the Court.

Sir Richard Greenefield brought an Action against Furnace for these words thou
(innuendo Captain Greenfield) have received money of the King to buy new
Saddles, Pasch. ^^ 17* Car in the Kings Bench.
and have cousened the King, and bought old Saddles for the Troopers. It was
objected that the Action would not lie, and it was likened to these cases,
which I will cite, because they are worth the knowing.

8. Car. the Major of Tivertons case* 8. Car. in the Kings Bench.
one said of him that the Major had cousened all his Brethren, etc. adjudged
not Actionable.

9. Iac. in the Kings Bench, 9. Iac. in the Kings Bench.
the Overseer of the poor has cousened the poor of all their bread, this was
likewise said to be adjudged not Actionable; but I do some what doubt of this
case, because the words do scandal the Plaintiff in his office of Overseer,
but to this it may be said that this is an Office of burden and trouble, and
not of profit.

26. Of the Queen in the Kings Bench* Kerby and VValters case, 26. of the
Queen in the Kings Bench.
thou art a false knave and have cousened my two Kinsmen, adjudged the words
were not Actionable.

18. Of the Queen in the Kings Bench; 18. of the Queen in the Kings Bench.
Sergeant Fenner has cousened me, and all my kindred, adjudged the words would
not bear an Action.

Out of which cases, we may (by the way) observe this for Law; See fo. 23. b.
24. a.
that if a man say of an other (without any precedent communication of his
Office, place of Trust, or profession) that he is accusening, or a cheating
knave^, or that he has cousened any man thus and thus, that no Action will lie
for such words generally spoken, otherwise if they be spoken in reference to a
man's Office, place of trust, or profession.

And in the principal case it was resolved by Heath Justice, and Bramston
chief Justice, (the other Justices being absent) that the Action would lie;
because the words did scandal him in his place of Trust, and they said it was
not material what employment the Plaintiff had under the King, if by the
speaking of these words, he might be in danger of loosing his Trust or
employment.

Bray brought an Action against Hayne and declared that where he had been
Bailey to Sir William M. Knight. for three years last past of his Land in C. and
had the selling of his Corn and Grain, Hob. Rep. pa. 104. pl. 93.
the Defendant said these words unto him, thou art a cousening knave, and thou
have cousened me in selling false measure in my Barley, and the Country is
bound to curse thee for selling with false measures, and I will prove it, etc.
adjudged the words were not Actionable, for every falsehood charged upon a man
in his private dealing will not be Actionable. And in this case it does not
appear that these words were spoken of any sale of Corn whilst he was in his
Office of Bayliffe, Note Reader this case agrees with the cases immediately
before.
nor of his Masters Corn, nor to the damage of his Master.

But it was agreed in this case, that if he had been a common Rider or Badger,
and had been charged with selling false measure, it would have borne an
Action; which is evident, because it is a slander to him in his function by
which he gains his living.

And my Lord Hobart puts this case; if a man [saith he have a Bayliffe, to whom
he commits the buying and selling of his Corn and grain, and gives him the
greater wages in respect of that trust and employment, and charges him to have
deceived him in his Office, by buying and selling of false measure, to his
loss or damage* this will bear an Action, because this discredits him in his
Office, and may not only, because to put him out of that service but to be
refused of all others; this case is evident Reader, because the words do
charge him with selling with false measure, whilst he was in his Office.

In the debate of Sir George Moore, and Fosters case before cited, these cases
were put by Williams Justice, if one say of an Arbitrator that he has done
corruptly, and has taken bribes, no Action will lie, the reason may be,
because being chosen by the parties themselves, and not being sworn, such
corruption is not puni^hable by Law, nor can the countermaunding of his power
be any damage to him.

But if a man say of a Wayer in a Market or Fair appointed to way betwixt the
buyer and seller, that he has done corruptly, and has taken bribes to make
false wait, an Action lies for these words, because he is an Officer.

Miles Fleetwood General Receiver of the Court of Wards for the King, Hob.
Rep. pa. 375. pl. 351.
brought an Action against Curbey for these words; Mr. Deceiver has deceived
and cousened the King, and dealt fals^y with him, adjudged the words were
Actionable.

The like case, where one said of an Auditor, that he was a Frauditor, was
adjudged Actionable.

An Action was ^rought for calling of the Plaintiff false Justice of Peace vil
his similia. 4. E. 6. Br. Action upon the case 112^
I do conceve that thesewords are not Actionable because, though they do
re^^ect upon his Office, yet they are too general. But the Book says that
these words (his similia) were ordered to be expunged or drawn ou^ of the
Book, for the incertainty; and well they might indeed; for certainly if a man
shall bring an Action against another, and shall declare that the Defendant
said of the Plaintiff that he was a Rogue and a These, or words like these,
or to this effect, the Action will not lie, because the words upon the very
face of the Declaration are utterly incertaine.

The Law affords very few Cases, (Reader) where words shall not be actionable
that scandal a man in his office or place of trust upon those grounds which I
have formerly laid down.

But note this, that all those grounds (as I have said before) are as a
touchstone for all Actions for words whatsoever, and therefore if you meet with
scandalous words, which touch a man in his Office or place of trust, examine
them by those rules, if they be too general or not s^fficiently possitive, or
if of a double intendment, or doubtful in meaning, or incertaine in
themselves, or the person of whom they are spoken, or the like in such cases
they will not be actionable, and therefore those Rules ought especially to be
observed.

The fourth part of that general rule which I have laid down before, and
which in course I must now speak of, is this.

That words spoken of a man, which scandal him in his profession or function
by which he gains his living, will bear an Action.

Yardleys case, Hab. Rep. pa. 13. pl. 17.
there being a communication or discourse of him in his profession of Attorney,
one said that he was a bribing knave.

Boxes case, Hob. Rep. pa. 359. pl. 145.
one said of him, being an Attorney, that he was a Champertor.

Byrchlyes case an Attorney; Coke. lib. 4. fo. 16. a.
there being speech of his dealing in his profession one said to him, you are
well known to be a corrupt man, and to deal corruptly adjudged in all these
cases; that the words, because they scandal a man in his profession by which
he does acquire his living, were Actionable. Hob. Rep. pa. 183. pl. 188.


So, by the opinion of the Court, in Thornton and Iobsons case cited before, to
say of an Attorney that he is a common Barretor will bear an action.

Dawtry an Attorney in the Court of Ipswich brought an action against Miles for
these words; Mic^. 2. ^ Iac. in the Kings Bench.
Dawtry is a knave and a cousening knave, and he did take Fees of both hands
in a suit between me and Green, and by knavery suffered me to be condemned at
Ipswich at Greens suit wilfully being Attorney for me. The only words held
considerable in this case were these; the Defendants saying that the Plaintiff
took Fees of both hands, and whether this would amount to as much as if he had
said the Plaintiff was an ambidexter was the question.

Popham and Yelverton, Justices that the action would not lie, because that the
words in this case may have a double intendment, for it may be intended that
he took Fees with both hands lawfully, but if he had said that he was an
ambidexter, an action would lie, for this is vox artis, and cannot be
otherwise intended.

Fenner and Williams Justice* that the Action would lie, for that the words
amount to as much as ambidexter, and are the english of it and a direct
affirm^tion and no Metaphor, if a man say of another that he has the Pox, no
Action will lie, because it shall be intended the small Pox; but if a man say
of another that he has been laid of the Pox, there an Action will lie,
because it is the phrase for the French Pox.

I do rather incline to the latter opinion, because (as has been said) these
words are but the English and proper meaning of Ambidextery; and to construe
them to a taking Fees with both hands would be to make a construction against
the express meaning of the words; which I conceive the Law will not permit;
and the rather as this case is, because that he does charge him with knavery
in suffering of him wilfully to be condemned in a suit, being his Attorney: I
do not find any judgment in the case, therefore I shall leave it to the
Juditious Reader.

Philips Parson of D. brought an action against Badby for these words thou have
made a seditious Sermon, and moved the people to sedition this day: P^sch. 24
of the Queen in the Kings Bench.
in this case, notwithstanding the first part of the words were utterly
Adjective, and the latter were but a motive to sedition, and it does not
appear that any thing ensued thereof; yet because they scandaled the
Plaintiff in his function, it was resolved that they were Actionable.

If a man say of a Merchant that he is a Bankrupt, Cook lib. 4. fo. 19. 6 ^i.
6. Dyer 72.
or that he will be a Bankrupt within two days, the words are actionable.

Edmunds a Merchant brought an action against Whetston for these; Hitt. 3. Iac.
in the Kings Bench. Rot. 855.
words He would prove that Master Edmunds had been a Bankrupt, and had agreed
with his Cred^itors for a Noble in the pound. It was moved in Arrest of
judgment by Hucham that the action would not lie, because that the speech
referres to a time past, and though that he were once a Bankrupt, yet it may be
now that he is of credit. But it was resolved that the Action would lie,
because that it was an impeachment of his credit for if he were once a
Bankrupt, every man will be the more suspicious and feareful^ of him.

A Merchant brought an Action for calling of him cousening knave; Pasch. 15.
Car in the Kings Bench. this agrees with the former cases see fol: 21. a. b
by Jones and Barkley, Justices [the other Justices absent] the Action will not
lie because that the words are too general. But if they had touched him in his
profession they would have borne an action. And therefore to call a Merchant
Bankrupt, will bear an Action; but to say of a Lawyer that he is a Bankrupt,
will not be Actionable the reason may be, because that a Lawyer cannot be a
Bankrupt, for that he does not acquire, his living by buying and selling as the
Statutes speak.

Jones Iestice in the former case put this case. there being a communication of
Serjant Heal in his profession one said of him these words, Tri^: 37 of the
Queen in Came. Icace. Osbeston and Stanleys case.
He has undone many, adjudged that the words were actionable, because they
touch him in his Profession.

A. Shoemaker brought an Action against one for calling of him Bankrupt
adjudged upon a Writ of Error in the Chequer Chamber, that the Action would
lie. Pasch. 15. Car. in the Kings Beech.


Axe a Dyer brought an Action against Mood for these words, thou art not worth
a Groat, and averres that in such a place, where they were spoken they have the
common acceptance, and are equivalent to the calling of a man a Bankrupt,
resolved that the words of themselves were not Actionable, Averrement.
because that many men in their beginnings are not worth a Groat, and yet their
credits are good in the world. And that the averrement was idle and could not
make them actionable, because that the words have a plain and proper
significant meaning of their own, and therefore cannot be taken in another
sense or meaning.

A Journeman and Foreman of a Shoomakers Shop brought an Action for these
words, Pasch. 15. Car. in the Kings Bench.
it is no matter who has him, for he will cut him out of Doors; and averres
that the common acceptance and intendment of these words, Averrement.
inter Calceareos, is that he will beggar his Master, and make him run away;
and averres a particular damage by the speaking of them, resolved that the
Action would lie,

Note Reader, here the averrement is good, because the words cutting out of
Doors, are of a doubtful meaning and intendment, and so may be aided by an
averrement, so that the difference between this and Axes case cited before, is
evident. Trin. 41. of the Queen^ in the Common Pleas.


Knightly an Attorney brought an Action against Childoner for these words
spoken to his Son; my Father was not cast over the Bar as thy Father was;
the parties were at issue, and in this case Walmesley Justice said that he
conceived the words were not actionable.

Box and Bar^abies case before, the defendant said of the plaintiff being an
Attorney these words (amongst others which were held actionable) that he would
have him thrown over the bar the next Term: H^b. Rep. pa. 159.
in this case (agreeing with the opinion of Walmesley before) the opinion of
the Court was, that these words were not Actionable, because of the incertaine
sense and meaning of them.

Dickes a Brewer brought an Action against Fenne, and declares that the
Defendant having communication with some of the Customers of the Plaintiff
concerning him in his profession, said these words of him; I will give a peck
of Malt to my Mare, and lead her to the Water to drink, and she shall piss
as good Beer as Dicks does brew; adjudgeed the words were not Actionable,
because that they are Comparative only; and besides they are impossible, and
therefore, they can be no scandal to the Plaintiff.

In this case, it was said by Rolls Sergeant that it had been adjudged
Actionable, to say of a Brewer that he brewes naughty Beer; which was agreed
by the Court, because that he is presentable in a Leete for it.

And likewise in this case it was said by Bartley Justice that where one said
of a Lawyer, that he had as much Law as a Munkey, that these words were
adjudged not actionable because that he has as much Law and more also then the
Monkey has, but if he had said that he had more Law then a Monkey, these
words would be actionable.

One said of a Counselor at Law, that he was a Concealer of the Law adjudged
actionable.

Sanderson and Rudds case the Plaintiff being a Lawyer and standing for the
Stuardship of a Corporation, Trin. 17. Car. in the Common Pleas.
the Defendant said of him that he was an ignorant man; the Court in this case
inclined that the words were Actionable.

Snag a Counceller at Law brought an Action against Peter Gray for these words;
Trin. 13 of the Queen^ in the Knig^ Bench. Rot. 114. Co^es Entries fo. 22. a. b.
Go ye to him to be of your counsel, he will deceive you, he was of Counsel
with me, and revealed the secrets of my Cause. Adjudged the words were
actionable, because that this cannot be intended of a Lawful revealing to the
Judge by way of motion before whom it was tried, for this were a commendation
for him, but the words are to be taken as they were spoken, that is,
conjunctim, and uno halitu, and then his intention appears contrary, for he
said before, He will deceive you, etc. Also the Plaintiff declared that they
were spoken Malitiose: And these words revealed the secrets, etc. are to be
intended revealed to those from whom they ought to be concealed, and every man
is to make the best of his cause, and therefore secreta sua non sunt revelanda;
and also the words touch the Plaintiff in his Art and Science, which requiers
men of great trust and confidence, and so the words before being spoken in
derogation of the confidence and fidelity of the Plaintiff, are a great
slander to him; for these causes judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Upon this case I do conce^ve, that to say of a Lawyer generally that he
revealed the secrets of his Clyents cause will bear an Action.

One said of a Doctor of Physic that he was a Monntebanke an Empericke, Pasch.
12. Car. in the Kings Bench.
and a base fellow; adjudged the words were Actionable. Pasch. 17. Car. in the
Common Pleas.


Pain brought an Action upon the case for words and showed how that he was a
Farmer and used to sow his land, and to tell the Corn upon it, and by this per
majorem partem he maintained his Family: and that the Defendant said these
words of him, He keeps a false Bushel by which he does cheat and cosen the
poor, and averres the loss of his custom by the speaking of these words. In
this case it was moved by Gotbolt Sergeant in Arrest of Judgment that the
words were not Actionable, because it does not appear that the Plaintiff kept
a false Bushel S^ienter, knowing it to be false.

But it was resolved that the words were Actionable, for (as this case is) it
must of necessity be taken that he kept a false Bushel, knowing it to be
false, for otherwise it could be no co^senedge.

And this case plainly differs from the case where an Action was brought for
saying that the Plaintiff kept false Waits generally, without further saying
in this case the words were adjudged not Actionable, Hill. ^. of the Queen in
the Common Pleas adjudged and after affirmed in a Write of Error, Mich. 26. and
27. of the Queen in the Kings Bench. Rot. 35.
because that it does not appear that he used them, or knew them to be false.

The fifte part of that General Rule, which I have laid down before, and
which now I am in course to speak of, is this. That words spoken in scandal
of a man's Title, or which tend to a man's disinheritance, will bear an Action.

Henry Mildmay brought an Action against Roger Standish for saying and
publishing that certain Land was lawfully assured to one John Talbot and
Oliffe his Wife for a 1000. years, and that they of the interest of the term
were lawfully possessed, whereas in truth there was no such matter, and so for
slandring of the Estate and Title conveyed to his Wife by certain Indentures,
and showed all in certain, and how he was prejudiced by the said words, he
brought the said action.

The defendant pleaded a Proviso in the same Indentures and the said limitation
for 1000 years, according to the said Proviso, as he pretended (whereas in
truth the said limitation was void in Law) by force of which he says that the
said Oliffe had an interest for a 1000 years, and so justified the words, upon
which the plaintiff demurred: adjudged that the action would well lie; though
that the said John Talbot and Oliffe his wife had such a limitation de facto
for a 1000 years, which occasioned the defendant being unlearned in the law
so to publish it, yet for that he has taken upon himself notice of the law,
and meddled in that which did not concern him, and has affirmed and published
that Oliffe had a good estate for a 1000 years in slander of the Title of the
plaintiff and to his prejudice, for this cause judgment was given for the
plaintiff.

Sir Thomas Gresham Knight brought an action against Robert Gunsley Clark, and
shows how his father was seized of diverse Manors and lands. Hill. 3. Iac Rot.
519. B. R. Cooks Ent^ies ^ 35. a.
and amongst them of the Manor of Tittesey, which he did by his will amongst
other lands devise to Beatrice his wife for life, the remainder to the
plaintiff and the heirs males of his body begotten, and had issue William
Gr^sham his eldest son, and the plaintiff the younger, and dyed, and that
William after this death confirmed to Thomas his estate, and that Beatrice
died, and the plaintiff entered into the said Manor of Tittesey. and further
shows that William had issue Elizabeth his heir apparent, and that the
plaintiff had a wife and sons and daughters; and that he had an intent to
conveye some of his lands to his wife for her ioynture, and some to his sons
and daughters for their advancement and to exchange parcel with others, and to
make a lease of another part, but does not show to whom, and that the
defendant premissorum non ignarus in derogation of the Title and estate of the
plaintiff, said these words to the plaintiff. As I before said to your Wife,
I say now that your brother was afoole and never borne to do himself any
good, for that he could not hold his hands from ratefying and subscribing to
his Fathers will: bnt yet notwithstanding I have that to show in my house that
if his heir do not any such Act as he has done, it shall bring her to
inherit Tittesey, by which words he says, that he was hindered in the
conveyances aforesaid.

In this case it was resolved that the Action would not lie, first because that
the words themselves are not scandalous to the Title of the plaintiff: the
words considerable are only these, that he had that in his house, etc. that
shall bring her [that is the Daughter and Heir of William] to inherit
Tittesey; which is apparently feasible, for the Plaintiff being Donee in Tail
of the gift of his Father, the Daughter and Heir of the eldest Brother is
inheritable to the Revertion in Fee; and so no prejudice to the Plaintiff, to
say he has that which shall bring her to inherit.

Besides the action will not lie because that he does not show any special
damnification by the speakeing of these words as that he was upon a sale of
these lands to I. S. who by reason of the speaking of these words refused to
buy them, or the like; and in this case, here was nothing but a purpose or
intent of conveying some of these lands.

And Popham Justice said, that there is a difference when a man declares his
opinion of the Title of another to land this is nothing, and he shall not be
punished for it, but if he does so publish it, that it comes to the hearing of
any one that intended to buy the Land in such case an Action lies, but he must
show specially in his Count in what he was damnified, otherwise the Action will
not lie.

Banister brought an Action against Banister for that the Defendant said of the
Plaintiff (being Son and Heir to his Father) that he was a Bastard, Trin.
25. of the Queen in the Kings Bench.
resolved that the Action would lie, for this tends to his disinherision of the
Land which discends to him from his Father.

But in this case it was resolved, that if the Defendant pretend that the
plaintiff was a Bastard, and that he himself was next heir, there no Action
lies.

So if a man say that another has noe right to land, an Action lies; but if a
Counselor say that his Client has the better right, this will not bear an
Action.

Mich. 3. Jac. in the Kings Bench per Curiam, if one say to me that I am a
Bastard, if I have Land by descent, I shall have an Action upon the case, and
thought that I have Land by descent, and this tends to my disinheritance, if I
sue in Court Christian for it, a Prohibition lies, because that the trial
there may be to my disinheritance.

And if one say to another that he is base borne, an action will not lie, for
the words shall be taken in meliori sensu. And if one say to his Son that he
is a Bastard, or a Leaper, he shall not have an action neither in Court
Christian, nor at Common Law.

Sir Gilbert Gerrard brought an action against Mary Dickinson, Coke lib. 4. fo.
18.
and declares how that he was seized of certain lands in Fee, and that he was
in communication to demise them to Ralph Egerton fot 22. years for 200. l.
Fine and a 100. l. rent per annum, and that the Defendant (premissorum non
ignara) said, I have a Lease of the Manor and Castle of H. (which was the same
lands) for ninety years, and showed and published it, etc. by reason of which
words (he says) the said Ralph Egerton did not proceed to accept the Lease etc.

In this case it was resolved, that no Action would lie for the said words,
though they were false, because that the Defendant pretended an interest in the
said land.

So if the Defendant had affirmed and published that the Plaintiff had not any
right to the said Land, but that she her self had right to it, in this case
because that the Defendant pretends title to it though, that in truth, she
has not any, yet no Action lies. For if in such case an Action should lie, how
could any one make claim or title to any land, or commence any suit or seek
advise and Counsel, but he should be subject to an Action; which would be
very inconvenient.

Agreeing with these cases, 2. E. 4. 5. 15. E. 4. 32
in 2. E. 4. and 15. E. 4. it is resolved that no action upon the case lies
against one for publishing another to be his Villeine.

The sixth part of that general Rule which I have laid down before; and am now
to speak of is this.

That scandalous words which tend to the hinderance or loss of a man's
advancement or preferrement, or which cause any particular damage, will bear
an Action.

Anne Davies brought an Action against Gardener for these words, Coke lib. 4.
fo. 16. b.
spoken to one B. a Suitor to the Plaintiff and with whom a marriage wss
almost' concluded. I know Davies Daughter well, she did dwell in Cheap side
and a Grocer did get her with Child, etc. and she says that by reason of the
speaking of these words, the said B. utterly refused to take her to Wife, so
that thereby she lost her advancement, etc. adjudged that the Action would lie,
because that if she had a Bastard she was punishable by the Statute of 18. of
the Queen cap. 3.

But it was in this case further resolved, that if the defendant had charged
the Plaintiff with bare incontinency only yet the Action would have lain, by
reason that by the said slander she was defeated of her advancement in
Marriage.

And it was in this case likewise resolved, that if a Divine be to be
presented to a Benefice, and one, to defeat him of it, says to the Patron that
he is a Heretic or a Bastard, or that he is excommunicated, by which the
Patron refuses to present him (as he well might, if those imputations were
true) and he loses his preferrement, that in this case an Action will lie. Hill:
4. Iac. in the Kings Bench.


Dame Morrison Widow brought an Action against William Cade Esquier and
dec^ares that she was of good fame, Rot. 11 53
etc. And that Henry Earl of Kent was in speech and communication with her for
marriage, the Defendant premissorum non ignarus, said these words, Arscot has
reported that he had the use of the Lady Morrisons body at his pleasure; ubi
rever^, A^scot never reported it, and alleged that the Earl of Kent upon the
hearing of the words surceased his suit by which she lost her advancement, etc.
upon not guilty pleaded it was found for the Plaintiff, and in this case it
was resolved, that though the words charge the Plaintiff with bare
incontinency only, which is an offense Ecclesiastical, and not civil; nor
punishable by our Law, yet because of the temporal damage, viz. the loss of
her advancement in marriage the Action would well lie, which agrees with the
judgment in An Davies case.

Sanderson and Rudds case cited before; Trin. 17. C^r. in the Common Pleas.
the Plaintiff being a Lawyer, stood for the Stew^r^^ship of a Corporation,
and the Corporation being assembled to elect a Steward, the plaintiff was
motioned to them* whereupon the Defendant being one of the corporation (...) to
his Brothers, he is an ignoran^ (...), and not fit for the place; and (...)
that by reason of these words* they did refuse to elect him St^ward, so that he
th^reby lost his pre^errement, etc. the Court in this case inclined that the
Action would lie.

And now I am fal^en upon a question very necessary to be resolved, and that is.

What words are Actionable of themselves only? and what are not Actionable,
without alledgeing of a particular damage; I take this for a Rule, that
scandalous words which touch or concern a man in life, liberty, or Member, or
any corporal punishment, or which scandal a man in his office or place of
trust, or in his calling or function, by which he gains his living, or which
charge him with any great infectious disease, by reason of which he ought to
separate himself or to be separated by the Law from the society of Men; all
such words will bear an Action, without averring or alleging of any
particular damage by the speaking of them.

Yet I do not deny, but that it is best to allege a particular damage, if the
case will beat it; and it is usual so to do in these cases, for the increase
of damages.

Bramston chief Justice in the arguing of Hawes case which I remembered before
took this for a Rule, Mic. 17. Car. in the Kings Bench.
that if words did import a scandal of themselves, by which damage might
accrue, in such case the words would bear an Action, without alledgeing of a
particular damage.

But now on the other side, words which do not touch or concern a man in any
of the cases aforesaid, will not bear an Action, without alledgeing of a
particular damage.

Words spoken in scandal of a man's Title will not bear an Action; without
averring of a particular damage, as appears by the cases before cited upon
that ground.

There are many words, Cook lib. 4. 10. 15. b
which are words of passion and choler only, as to say of a man that he is
forsworn Generally, or that he is a villain, or a rogue or a varlet,
Averrement.
or the like, these words are not Actionable of themselves; yet I do conceive
that in these cases an Action will lie with an Averrement of a particular
damage by reason of the speaking of them.

There are other words which concern matter merely Spiritual, Cook, lib. 4
fol. 17. a and fo. 20. ^. 27. H. 8. 14 the Register fo. 54.
and determinable in the Ecclesiastical Court only; as for calling of a man a
Bastard a Heretic a Scismatique, an Advo^vterer, a Forni^ato^ or for calling
of a Woman a Whore or charging her wit^ any particular act of incontinency* or
the like, yet in these cases with an averrement of a particular damage, an
Action will lie at the Common Law as it is adjudged in Anne Davies case cited
before.

By Popham Chief Justice if one say of a Woman that is an Inholder, Cook lib.
4. fo. 17. ^
that she has a great infectious disease, by which she loses her guests, an
Action will lie, this must be taken with an averrement of that particular
damage; otherwise an Action will not lie, unless the disease be such for which
she ought to separate her self, or to be separated by the Law from common
society, as I shall show you hereafter.

Axe and Moods case cited before, Pasch. 15. Car. in the Kings Bench.
the Plaintiff being a Dyer brought an Action for these words, thou art not
worth a Groate, adjudged that the words were not Actionable, because that many
man in his beginning is not worth a Groat, (...)
and yet has good credit with the world.

But in this case it was agreed that if the Plaintiff had averred specially
that he was thereby damnified, and had lost his credit so that none would trust
him with such an averrement the Action would have layen. Pasch. 15. Car. in the
Kings Bench.


In the case of the Foreman of a Shoomakers Shop cited before, for these words;
it is no matter who has him, for he will cut him out of doors, the Plaintiff
averred that the Common acceptance of these words, inter Cal^eareos is, that
he will beggar his Master, and make him run away; and showed a special damage
by the speaking of these words, and it was adjuged that the Action would ^ie,
which I conceive was only for the particular damage, for to say of a Servant
that he does Chea^e, Cosen or defraud; or that he will beggar his Master, or
the like, will not bear an Action, without an averrement of a particular
damage.

And in this case it was said by the Court that for some words an Action will
lie, without an averrement of any particular damage, as for calling of a man
Thief, Traitor, or the like, and some words will no^ bear an Action, without
an averrement of a particular damage.

As if a man shall say of another that he kept his Wife basely, and starved
her, these words of themselves will not bear an Action; but if the party of
whom they were spoken, were to be married to another, and by these words is
hindered; in such case, with an averrement of the particular damage, an Action
will lie.

So likewise in the case of Dickes and Fenne which I also cited before, Mic.
15. Ca^ in the Kings Bench.
where one said of the Plaintiff being a B^ewer, that he would give a peck of
Malte to his Mare, and ^ead her to the water to drink, and she should piss as
good Beer as the Plaintiff brewed; it was resolved that the words themselves
were not Actionable, because of the impossibility of them. But it was agreed by
the Court, that if there had been a special damage alleged* as loss of
Custom or the like, the Action would have laien.

Hawes case cited likewise before, Mich. 17^ Car. in the Knigs Bench.
one said of him, that he had spoaken against the Book of Common Prayer and
said that it was not fit to be read in the Church for which he brought his
action, and showed how that by reason of the speaking of these words by the
Defendant* he was cited in to the Ecclesiastical Court and had paid and
expended several sums, etc. adjudged that the words themselves were not
Actionable; because if they had been true* they charge him only with an
offense against a penal Law, which does not inflict corporal punishment, but
for non payment of the penalty.

But it was resolved that for the particular damage the Action would lie, and
of this opinion were Heath and Mallet Justices.

But Bramston Chief Justice, (the other Justice being absent) was of a
contrary judgment, and he took this for a Rule, that if the words did not
import a scandal in themselves (as He conceived they did not in this case) in
such case the averrement of a particular damage should not make them Actionable.

But with all due respect to the judgment of this learned Judge, I do
conceive that the words are in themselves scandalous; because that they do
charge a Man with faction and opposition to established Law, and settled
Government.

But if they were not in themselves scandalous, yet I conceive (according to
the judgment of those reverent J^dges) that for the damage only the Action
will lie* for otherwise the Plaintiff shall suffer through the default of the
Defendant, and be without remedy, which I conceive the Law will not permit; but
I submit this to the judgment of the learned Reader.

Lastly, words which charge a man with any dangerous infectious diseas^, by
reason of which he ought to separate himself, or to be separated by the Law,
from the society of men, will bear an Action.

If a man say of another that he has the French Pox, Coke lib. 4. fo. 17.
an Action will lie.

Tailor brought an Action against Packins for these words, thou art not worthy
to come into any honest man's company, Hill. 4. Iac. in the Kings Bench.
thou art a Leaprous knave, and a Leaper. Adjudged that the words are
Actionable, because that it is cause of separation by the Law of God and Man.

So by Tanfield Justice to say that one is infected with the French Pox, will
bear an Action, but to say that one h^th the falling Sickness, is not
Actionable, except that it disables him in his profession, as to say that a
Lawyer has the falling Sickness, an Action lies* because that it disableth
him for his business.

Upon this ground I conceive, to say of a man that he is infected with the
Plague, will bear an Action, because this also is a dangerous infectious
disease, and a cause of separation.

I have now finished my task of showing you what words are Actionable in the
Law, and what not* And yet Reader I shall not end this Treatise here, for there
are many things not worthy the knowing (which I could not aptly introduce
before) and therefore not to be omitted.

There are two things or grounds very remarkable in all Actions upon the case
for words.

First Causa dicendi, the ground or occasion of the speaking of the words: And
that must be collected out of the precedent discourse or communication
concerning the Plaintiff; or else out of the relation that the words
themselves have to the Defendant, or otherwise, as the case shall fall out to
be.

The next thing is the affection of the Speaker, that is to say whether the
words were spoken Ex malitia, or not?

First, for the first, Causa dicendi, the ground or occasion of speaking of the
words.

And here I shall lay down this as a ground, that scandalous words which of
themselves singly would bear an action yet being joined to other words or
discourse, and so Causa dicendi, or the subject matter being considered, they
will not bear an Action. For Sensus verborum ex causa dicendi accipiendus est,
etc. And words must ever be construed according to the subject matter. Coke
lib. 4. fo. 13. b


Henry Lord Cromwell brought an Action de Scandalis Magnatum against Edmund
Denny, Coke ubi supra.
Vicar of N. in the County of Norfolk, etc. for these words: It is no marvill
that you like not of me, for you like of those that maintain sedition against
the Queens proceedings; the Defendant pleaded a special justification, in
effect thus; that the Defendant being Vicar of N. the Plaintiff procured I. T.
and I. P. to preach there, who in their Sermons enveyed against the Book of
Common Prayer, and affirmed it to be superstitious; wherefore the Defendant
inhibited them, for they had no license nor authority to preach, yet they
proceeded through the encouragement of the Plaintiff, and the Plaintiff said
to the Defendant, Thou art a false varle^ I like not of thee; to whom the
Defendant said, It is no marvill though you like not of me, for you like of
those (meaning the aforesaid I. T. and I. D.) that maintain sedition [meaning
that seditious Doctrin] against the Queens proceedings.

In this case it was adjudged that the justification was good. For though that
in this case, taking the words singly of themselves as the Plaintiff has
declared, they might have been Actionable; because that then they could not be
construed otherwise then of a public and violent sedition, as the word it
self does import.

Yet now the ground and occasion of the words appearing, by which it is
evident, that the defendant did not intend any public or violent sedition, but
only that seditions Doctrine against the proceedings of the Queen, viz. the
Statute de anno primo, by which the Common Prayer was established, and God
forbid [saith the Booke] that words by a strict and Grammatical construction
should be taken contrary to the manifest intent of the Speaker, therefore it
was ruled upon the coherence of all the words, that the justification was good*
and so the words not Actionable.

And in this case it was ruled, that if a man bring an Action against another,
for calling of him murderer, and the Defendant will say that he was speaking
with the Plaintiff of unlawful hunting, and that the Plaintiff confessed
that he had killed diverse Hares with certain Engines, to whom the Defendant
answered and said, Thou art a murderer [meaning the killing of the said Hares]
that this was a good justification, and so upon the whole matter the words not
Actionable.

Byrchley an Attorney brought an Action against one for these words; Coke lib.
4. fo. 16. 1.
you are well known to be a corrupt man, and to deal corruptly: resolved
that the words were Actionable, but in this case it was ruled that if the
precedent speech had been that Byrchley was a Usurer, or that he was Executor
of another, and would not perform the testament, and upon this the Defendant
had said these words, upon a special justificatio^^ as aforesaid^, they would
not bear an Action.

Banister and Banisters case resolved that if I call an heir a Bastard, Coke
lib. 4. 10 l 17. a.
an action will lie* but if the defendant pretend that the plaintiff is a
Bastard and that he is next heir, there no Action will lie. The reason of this
is plain, because causa dicendi, or the occasion of speaking of these words,
is not to defame the Title of the plaintiff, but only to justify the Title of
defendant, and it is lawful for any one to speak in justification of his own
Title, though he do thereby seem to slander the Title of another man,
agreeing with this case is Gilbert Gerrards case cited before.

Molton brought an Action against Clapham and declares how that there being a
cause pending in this Court betwixt the plaintiff and defendant, See fo. 26:
b. 27. a Pasch. 15. Car. in the Kings Bench.
upon reading of certain Affidavids of the plaintiffes in Court, the Defendant
said openly in present^^ and auditu Iusticiariorum and juris peritorum, etc.
There is not a word true in the Affidavids, which I will prove by forty
witnesses: and alleges that the words were spoken malitiose. yet it was
resolved by the Court that they were not Actionable, because as they are usual
words upon the like occasion; so they are spoken in the defense of the
defendants cause, and this case was likened to the case of the Bastard
immediately before.

And Bartley Justice said that there are two things mainely considerable in
words, the words themselves, and causa dicendi; and therefore sometimes though
the words themselves would bear an Action yet causa dicendi being considered,
they will not be Actionable, as in this case.

Now as my Lord Cook ses in Cromwels case before remembered, Coke lib. 4. fo.
14. a.
so I say to you. In these cases, Reader, you may take notice of an excellent
point of learning in Actions for slander; to observe the cause and occasion of
speaking of them, and how this may be pleaded in excuse of the Defendant.

But before I pass this, Coke lib. 4. fo. 13. b. 14. a
Reader, I shall observe unto you that the defendant in these cases might take
the general issue, if he would, viz. that he is not guilty modo and forma, as
the Plaintiff has alleged, and so give in evidence the coherence and
connection of the words, and the occasion of speaking of them, and have them
specially found, if it be conceived to be necessary.

Or the defendant may [as the case shall require] justify the speaking of
other words, and traverse the speaking of the words in question; and so
likewise upon the evidence have the words specially found.

And hereupon; where the special finding of the Jury will warrant the
Declaration of the Plaintiff, and maintain the action, and where not? may be
very questionable, and worthy the knowing.

The Defendants plea is that which must guide us in these cases, if he plead not
guilty* the words are [as I have said before] modo and forma as the plaintiff
has alleged, and if the justify the speaking of other words, and traverse
the words in question, he does it thus, absque hoc, that he spoke the words in
the Declaration modo and forma as the plaintiff has alleged.

Now where the words that are found by the Jury shall be said to agree modo
and forma with the words in the Declaration, this is the question, here I shall
lay down this as a ground.

That where the words that are found do not agree with the Declaration in the
substantial and essential form, that in such case, they do not warrant the
Declaration. But if they do agree in the substantial and essential form^,
though they agree not in every word, yet they do well warrant the Declaration,
and by consequence maintain the Action.

Sydenham against Man for these words; Hob. Rep. pa. 252. pl. 213.
If Sir John Sydenham might have his will, he would kill all the true Subjects
in England, and the King too, and he is a maintainer of Papistry and rebellious
persons. The defendant pleaded other words, and traversed the speaking of the
words modo and forma, etc. the Jury found that he speak these words, viz. I
think in my conscience, that if Sir John Sydenham might have his will, he would
kill, etc. and find all the subsequent words before Alleged, and whether the
Defendant were Guilty of speaking of the words in the manner and form as they
are Alleged by the Plaintiff in his Declaration, was the Question resolved
against the Defendant.

And upon a Writ of Error in the Chequer Chamber, the Court also inclined
against the defendant, for the matter is in effect the same, and the form must
be understood the essential form, not according to every word, here you have
the ground laid down before.

Yet the Book says that Pasch. 16. though the Court inclined that either of
the words would bear an Action, yet it was agreed that the words were not
found so absolute as the Declaration, neither moved credit in the ear so
fully, which is the force of a slander; and then they are not the same words in
force and effect, as if the words were laid, I know him to be a Thief, and it
were found, I think him to be a Thief.

For my part Reader, I doubt in this case whether the finding of the Jury do
warrant the Declaration, because they are not the same words in force and
effect (as is said before) And I conceive they are not the same in the
essential form of them, for I question, (^as I have don before) if a man
should say of another, that he does think if he might have his will, he would
kill all the Kings true Subjects, and the King too; or that he does think such
a one to be a Thief, whether these words be Actionable or no, because the
words are no positive charge out only the thought or opinion of the Defendant.

But to this it may be said that if such words as these should not be
actionable, this would open a gap for scandalous Tongues to slander a man at
pleasure* and yet no Action lie, which were very mischievous* therefore I shall
leave it to the judgment of the Reader.

Fenner against Mutton in an action upon the case for words, Mich. 4. Iac. in
the Kings Bench.
which were thus; Nicholas Fenner procured 8. or 10. of his neighbors to
perjure themselves, the defendant pleaded not guilty; and the Jury find that
the defendant said that Nicholas Fenner had caused 8. or 10. of his Neighbors
to prejure themselves, and if this Verdict were found for the Plaintiff, or
the defendant* was the question, and the doubt was whether this word (cause)
amount to as much as procure. Tanfield Justice seems that it does not, for
he might be a remote cause, as causa fine qua non, and yet no procurer, as if
a Notary writ a writing, and put to this a seal, and another take it and forge
and publish it, the writer was the cause that this was forged, and yet no
procurer of it. I find no judgment in this case, therefore quaere of it.

Chipsam against Ieeke for these words Chipsam is a Thief, Hill: 3. Iac in the
Kings Bench.
for he has stolen a Lamb from A. and Geese from B. and killed them in my
ground, issue was joined whether the Defendant spoake the words modo and forma,
etc. the Jury find that the defendant said that the plaintiff was a Thief,
for he has stolen a Lamb from A. and killed it in my ground, but they find
that he spoake nothing of the Geese, yet it was resolved that the finding of
the Jury did well warrant the Declaration of the plaintiff, because that the
substance of the words is, that he is a Thief, and thee for he has, etc.
only a demonstration in what he is a Thief, which is as well in stealing of
the Lamb, as of the Geese; and then if it be found that he said any of them,
it suffices, and judgment was given for the plaintiff.

Norman and Symons case, Tri^. 7. Car. in the Kings Bench.
the plaintiff brought an Action for words and declared that they were spoaken
false and malitiose; the Jury find the words spoaken falso and injuriose and it
was adjudged that the Action would not lie, because the finding of the Jury
does not warrant the Declaration in the substantial form of it, for if the
words were not spoaken out of malice, they will not be Actionable, as I shall
show you hereafter.

Brugis brought in Action for these words, 6. ^. 6. Dyer fo. 75. fol: 21.
Brugis is a maintainer of thieves and a strong Thief himself, issue was
joined whether the Defendant spoake the words modo and forma, and the Jury
found all the words except the word [strong] and in this case the Plaintiff
had judgment.

Here we may observe that though every word alleged in the Declaration, be not
found, yet the essential and substantial form of the words being found, that
is sufficient to maintain the Declaration. This I say you may observe not only
by this case, but the cases also before put.

Barbar brought an Action against Hawley for these words John Barbar and his
Children be False Thieves, men cannot have their Cattle going upon the Common,
but they will kill them, and eat them, etc. issue was joined whether the
Defendant spoake the words modo and forma, and the Jury fonnd that he spoak
these words, viz. Men cannot have their Cattle going upon the Common, but John
Barbar and his Children will kill them with Barbars Dogs in this case it was
adjudged for the Defendant.

The reason is plain, because the words found by the Jury do vary in the
essential and substantial form, from the words in the Declaration. For the
words in the Declaration do charge the Plaintiff with Tneft, for which an
Action would lie, but the words found by the Jury charg him only with
trespass, for which no Action will lie, I have sufficiently proved the ground
laid down before, and therefore I shall now proceed to the second thing [which
I have touched before] very considerable in all Actions for words, and that is.

Quo animo, with what affection the words are spoken, whether ex malitia or
not? for if it do appear that they were not spoken out of malice, they will
not be actionable.

Ralph Brook, Michl* 3. Iac. ^n the Kings Bench*
York Harrauld brought an Action against Henry Mountague, Knight, Recorder of
London for saying of the Plaintiff that he had committed Felony. The Defendant
p^eaded how that he was a Counselor and earned in the Law and that he was
retained of Counsel against the Plaintiff at such a Trial, and set forth all
the matter in certain, and that he in giving evidence to the Jury spoake the
words in the Count (which words were pertinent to the matter in issue) in this
case* it was resolved that the Action would not lie, because that the words
were not spoken out of malice; for that they were spoken to the purpose, and
being to the purpose, though the words were false, no Action will lie against
the Defendant.

As in an Appeal of Murder, if the Counsel with the Plaintiff says that the
Defendant committed the murder, though it be not true; yet he shall not he
punished for it, because that what he said was pertinent, so that it cannot be
taken to be spoken out of malice, but only as of Counsel for the Plaintiff.

But if that which he says be impertinent, in scandal of him against whom he
speaks it, as in Trespass of battery to say that the Defendant is a Felon,
there an Action will lie, for that they cannot be otherwise taken, but to be
spoken out of malice.

And in this case it was further said, that if a Counselor be informed of any
matter of slander apt to be given in evidence, and he speaks it at other
places, and at another time, then in evidence an Action lies for it, for the
same reason.

In confirmation of the former case, there was this case put and agreed for
Law, which was the case of Parson Prit in Suffolk, the case was thus. In the
Acts and Monuments of Mr. Fox, there is a relation of one Greenwood of Suffolk
who is there reported to have perjured himself before the Bishop of Norwich in
the testifying against a Martyr in the time of Queen Mary, and that afterward
by the judgment of God, as an exemplary punishment for his great offense, his
bowels rotted out of his belly.

And the said Parson Prit being newly come to his benefice in Suffolk, and not
well knowing his Parishoners, preaching against perjury, cited this story for
an example of the justice of God and it chanced that the same Greenwood of whom
the story was written, was in life, and in the Church at that time, and after
for this slander, brought an Action, to which the Defendant pleaded not guilty,
etc. and upon evidence all the matter appeared, and by the rule of Anderson
Justice of Assise he was acquitted, because it did appear, the Defendant spoak
the words without malice, and this rule was approved by the Kings Bench in this
case.

In the arguing of Sanderson and Rudds case which I remembered before, these
cases following were cited by Gotbolt Sergeant, who was of Counsel with the
Defendant, and agreed by the Court for Law.

James and Rudlies case, 40. and 41 of the Queen in Common Pleas.
the Defendant spoake by way of advise to his friend, telling him that the
Plaintiff was full of the French Pox, and therefore advised him not to keep
him company, adjudged (he said) that no Action would lie for these words of
advise, the reason is, because that these words were not spoken out of any
malice to the Plaintiff, but merely cut of good will to his friend.

Norman and Simons case remembered before, Trin. 7. Car. in the Kings Bench.
the Plaintiff brought an Action for words, and declared that they were
spoaken falso and malitiose; the Jury find the words, and that they were spoken
fals^ and injuriose, judgment was given that the Action would not lie, because
that they did not find the malice; for if the words were not spoaken
maliciously, no Action will lie.

And therefore I conceive that if a man bring an Action for words, and do not
declare that the words were spoken malitiose as well as falso that the Action
will not lie.

In the case of the Lady Morrison that I have cited before this case was put by
Popham chief Justice: sil. 4 Iac in the Kings Bench.
If one say in Counsel and good will to his friend, that it is reported that
he has done such or such an ill Act, and advises him to purge himself, and
avoid such occasion afterward, it se mes (says he) that an Action will lie
for such counsel, but quaere says the Reporter, for it is without malice. And
truly for my part I conceive an Action will not lie for that reason, but I
submit it to the judgment of the Reader.

And now I have finished my labor of showing you what words are Actionable in
the Law, and what not. It will, in the next place, be very necessary to be
known, where a man's Suit or prosecution at Law, shall subject a man to an
Action, and where not, and here I shall lay down this as a rule.

That for any Suit or other legal prosecution in course of Justice [if not out
of malice and touching a man's life] no action will Lie. 13. H. 7. Keilway fo.
26. 11. of the Queen Dyer. fo. 2


A Man broug^t a Writ of Forger of false deeds against a Lord, pending which
Writ, the Lord for the slander of the said Forgery by the said Suit brought his
Action de scandalis Magnatum: the Defendant justifies the said flander by
bringing of the said Writ, by the better opinion there [which is also agreed
for Law in Bucklies case in my L. Cokes 4. Book the justification was good,
for [saith the Booke] no punishment was ever appointed for a Suit in Law,
though that it were false and for vexation. Cok^ lib. ^. fo. 14^.


Cutler and Dixons case, adjudged that if one exhibit Articles to a Justice of
Peace against a certain person, containing diverse great abuses and
misdemeanors, not only touching the Petitioners themselves, but many others,
and all this to the intent that he should be bound to his good behavior, in
this case the party abused shall not have for any matter contained in such
Articles, an Action upon the Case, because that they have pursued the ordinary
course of Justice in such case, and if actions should be permitted in such
cases, those which have good cause of complaint, will not dare to complain,
for fear of infinite vexation.

O^en Wood exhibited a Bill in the Starchamber against Sir Richard^ Buckley,
and charged him with diverse matters examinable in the same Court and further
that he was a maintainer of Pirates and Murderers, and a procurer of Murders
and Pyracies (which offenses were not determinable in the said Court) upon
which Sir Richard Buckley brought an Action.

In this case it was adjudged, that so the said words not examinable in the
said Court, an action would lie, because this could not be in course of Justice
for that the Court has not power or jurisdiction to do that which belonges to
justice, nor to punish the said offenses, etc.

Also by the Law no Murder or Pyracy can be punished upon any Bill exhibited in
English, but the offender ought to be indicted of it, and upon this to have his
trial; so that he that preferred this Bill has not only mistaken the proper
Court, but the manner and nature of prosecution, so that it has not any
appearance of an ordinary Suit in course of justice.

But if a man bring an Appeal of murder returnable in the Common bench, for
this no action lies; for though the Writ is not returnable before competent
Judges, which may do justice, yet it is in nature of a lawful Suit namely by
writ of appeal.

Scarlet brought an Action against Styles for these words; Hob. Rep. pa: 268
pl. 238
thou did steal a Sack. The Defendant pleaded that there was a Sack of a
man's unknown stolen and that the common fame was that the Plaintiff had
stolen it, whereupon the Defendant did inform Thomas Kempe a Justice of Peace,
that he had stolen it, and in complaining and informing the said Justice
thereof he did there in the presence of Kempe, and of the Plaintiff say unto
the Plaintiff and of him thou did steal, etc. whereupon the Plaintiff
demurred in Law.

There is nothing spoken to the case in the Book; but I conceive the Law will
be somewhat strong for the Plaintiff, that the demurrer is good, and that the
Action notwithstanding the Defendants justification will well lie.

For though common fame [as it is agreed in C^udington and Wilkins case be a
sufficient warrant to arrest for felony, Hob. Rep. pa 112, pl 105
though the same be not true, as also to charge a man with felony [as it is
agreed in Bland and Masons case] because these tend to the advancement of
Justice* Heb Rep pa 425 pl 381
yet it does not warrant any man to say he is a Felon, or a Thief; or though
common fame be such yet ^he party suspected may be innocent.

Nor does it any way difference the case, that the words were spoken before a
Justice of Peace, because, though common fame may (as I have said) warrant him
to charge him with felony before a Justice of Peace, yet it cannot warrant him
to call him felon.

A man brought an Action against another for ca^ling of him Thief; The
defendant pleaded that there was a Robbery done, etc. and communis vox and fama
patriae was that the Plaintiff was guilty of it, and so justifies; but the
justification was held naught, for common fame that a man is a Thief, will nor
justify any man in the calling of him so. Hob Re^ page 93 pl 71 cr pa 112 pl
105
But there it is agreed, that it would defend a man in arresting and
imprisoning another for it.

Cuddington and Wilkins case adjudged that to call a man a Thief after a
general, or special Pardon, though the Defendant knew it not, will bear an
an Action, but there it is agreed, that to arrest a man for Felony after pardon
if he knew it not may be justifiable; because it is a legal course and an Act
of justice.

In Justice Crooks case it was agreed by the Court, Trin: 16. Car: in the Kings
Bench.
that though it be lawful for a man to prefer a Bill in the Starchamber
against a Judge for corruption, or any other, for any grand misdemeanour,
because it is a proceeding in an ordinary course of justice. Yet if the
plaintiff will publish the effect of his Bill in a Tavern or other place
openly, by this means to scandal the defendant, this is punishable in another
Court, notwithstanding the Bill pending in the Star Chamber, because this tends
merely to scandal, and not to a pursuing of the ordinary course of justice,
and so Jones Justice said it had bin adjudged.

Owen Wood, and Buckleys case cited before does in effect make good that which
Justice Jones said; the case was thus, Owen Wood exhibited a Bill in the
Star Chamber against Sir Richard Buckley, and charged him with very great
misdemeanors: afterward Buckley brought an action against Owen Wood, for
publishing that the said Bill and matters in that contained were true, and had
judgment, [which was afterward reversed in the Chequer Chamber, because that
the plaintiff laid that the defendant published the Bill to be true, without
expressing the matters in particular contained in the Bill, upon which the
action was intended to be founded, so that those which heard only the said
words, that his Bill was true, cannot without further saying, know the clauses
which were slanderous to the plaintiff. So that it is in this case plainly
admitted, that if he had published the particular matters contained in the
Bill, and this had been shown by the plaintiff,] there the action would have
layen.

Note Reader, I have inserted this clause, in the rule before laid down [where
the prosecution in course of justice, is not out of malice, and touching a man's
life] for this reason.

Because I do conceave, That in case where a man is scandaled in his
reputation, and his life in question, by a malitions prosecution in course of
justice, that in such case an Action will lie. F. N. B 114. D. Cook lib. 9 fol.
56. The Poulterer^ case.


If two falsely and maliciously conspire to indict another, and after he that
is so indicted, is acquitted, a Writ of conspiracy lies. So if one only falsely
and maliciously cause another to be indicted, who is thereupon acquitted, an
action upon the case in nature of a conspiracy, lies against him for it; and so
it has bin often adjudged; I shall only remember one case in point.

Marsham brought an action against Pescod, Pasch. 3. Iac: in the Kings Bench
Rot. 372.
and declares how that he was of good fame and report, and that the defendant
intending to defame him, fals^ and malitiose procured the plaintiff to be
indicted of Felony, and to be arrested and imprisoned, quousque fuit
acquietatus; so that the alleging of the acquittall was insufficient, for that
he ought to have said that he was legitimo modo acqui^tatus, the defendant
pleaded not guilty and it was found for the plaintiff, and Richardson said in
arrest of judgment that this action will not lie, if it be not alleged that
he was lawfully acquitted and said that F. N. B. had the like Writ, and there
it is alleged expressly that he was lawfully acquitted, and so it ought here.

Tanfield Justice, A conspiracy, nor an action in nature of a conspiracy will
not lie, if the plaintiff be not legittimo modo acquietatus; but if one
procure another to be ind^cted arrested and imprisoned, falso and malitiose nee
shall have an action upon the case for the slander and vexation, though that
he be never acquitted; and he said that the like action upon the case had
been adjudged to lie well, though that the Plaintiff were never acquitted;
and the Justices relied much upon the words falso and malitiose; and after
judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Thus you may see that where a man is falsely and maliciously procured to be
indicted, if he be acquitted a Writ of conspiracy, or an action upon the case
in nature of a conspiracy, as the case shall be, will lie, and though he be not
acquitted, yet an action upon the case will lie for the slander and vexation.
Yet in all these cases there is a prosecution in course of justice; but because
this prosecution was malicious, tending much to the slander and scandal of the
plantiffe therefore the action lies.

But here I would have you observe, Reader, that the plaintiff ought in these
actions to declare, that the defendant, falso and malitiose procured him to be
indicted, because the malice is the ground of the Action; and if upon the
Trial it do appear that there was Probabilis causa for the indictment and
prosecution thereupon, the Action will not lie. Thus much shall suffice to
show you, in what case a legal prosecution in course of Justice shall Subject
a man to an Action, in what not. In the next place I shall show you, which I
cannot omit.

For what scandal of a Noble man, or great Officer, etc. an action de
scandalis Magnatum will lie upon the Statutes Coke lib. 4. fo. 1^. b. 13. a.
of 3. E. 1. cap. 33. or 2. R. 2. cap. 5.

For a Suit or other legal prosecution in course of justice against a Noble
man, or great Officer, no Action lies, as is adjudged in the case of Forger of
false deeds cited before, so that as to this, there is no difference betwixt a
Noble man* and another person, but what scandalous words may be Actionable in
case of a Nobleman, for which an action de scandal^^ Magnatum will lie, and
what not, may be very considerable. I shall cite only one case to this
purpose, which will be as a light to all cases of this nature, and therefore
give me leave to give it you wholly [without dissection or abbreviation] as I
find reported.

The Earl of Lincoln brought an Action de scandalis Magnatum upon the Statute
of Westminster. Trin. 5. Iac. in the Kings Bench.
1. cap. 33. against one John Righton, and recited the Statute, and said that
the Defendant said of him, my Lord is a base Earl, and a paltry Lord, and
keeps none but Rogues and raseals like himself. Upon not guilty pleaded it
was found for the Plaintiff, and it was moved in arrest of judgment that the
words were not actionable, for though they were unseemely and immodest yet they
were not such defama^ory words upon which to ground an Action, for though they
were true, the Earl could not incur any prejudice by them, Crook cont. this
action de scandalis magnatum, is not to be compa^ed to other actions upon the
case, for words spoken of any other persons for this is inhibited by Act of
Parliament; and if the words be such that any di^cord may arise by them
betwixt the King and his Subjects* or his Nobles, or any slander to them to
bring them into contempt, this action lies, and I have seen a Record of a case
in 4. H. 8. of such an action brought by the Duke of Buckingham, for such words
which might cause him to be in contempt, which were holden sufficient upon
which to ground an action, Hobart Attorney General for the Plaintiff also;
who said that though an Action does not lie for words betwixt common persons,
but in case where they are touched in life or Member, or much in reputation;
yet if one speak any scandalous words of an Earl or other Peer of the
Realm, which impeaches their credit, because that they are of the great
Counsel of the King and State, and a principal part of the body politic, so
that their discredit or disparagement, is a disparagement to all the Realm,
therefore every thing which trenches only to their discredit is a cause of
action, and this was the cause of the judgment in the case of the Ducke of
Buckingham in. 4 H. 8. Fe^ner Just. it seems to me that the action lies for
they are words of great slander to the Earl. But where the Statute of Marleb.
is that Lord shall not distraine the Beasts of the subject of the King, and
carry them into Castles so that they cannot be replevied; and if one say that a
Lord has so done, yet an Action will not lie, Tanfield Justice concesset but
he says if one say of a Lord that he used to distraine and put the Beasts in
his Castle, ut supra, an action lies; for one act against Law will not bring him
into contempt: but if it be usual for him so to do, this is a cause to make
him contemptible. In the case of the Earl of Arundell, who had made
Commissions to his Servants to make Leases and improve Rents, one said of him,
My Lord has sent his Commissioners to spoil the Country, it was adjudged that
this action would lie, and yet in case of a common person it would not lie
without doubt, yet because that it may cause the Lord to be in contempt with
the King and the People, this action lay, and so it seems to me that it will
here, Williams Justice to the same purpose; and that the Earl is conservator
Pacis at common Law and Comes Regis, and if any one speak of them any thing
which may make them to be contemned of the King or his people, an action lies
upon this STATVTE.

Yelverton Justice was absent, judgment was respited to the intent that the
Defendant by his submission might give satisfaction to the Earl.

Here you see the difference between words actionable in case of a Noble man,
and of a common person. For words only of descredit to a Nobleman, and which
may bring him to contempt with the King or his People are sufficient to
maintain an action de scandalit magnatum, otherwise in case of a common person.

I have now Reader, quite finished my labor of showing you for what scandals
an action will lie, for what not. But before I conclude, there are two things
yet in all Actions for words worthy the knowing, which I cannot omit. The first
is to declare unto you the use or office of an (innuendo) And the next is, to
show you where an Averrement will be necessary, and where not.

For the first, you may take this for a certain and infallible rule.

That an (innuendo) shall never make words actionable, which of themselves are
not Actionable.

And therefore, if words be of a double or indifferent meaning; and in the one
sense actionable, in the other not; in such, case an (innuendo) shall never
make them actionable.

As if a man bring an Action against another for saying that he has the Pox [
innuendo the French Pox] or for saying that the Plaintiff burnt his Barn [
innuendo a Barn with Corn.] Coke lib. 4* fo. 17. b. and 20.. a.


In these cases the [innuendo] where the words are of an indifferent meaning,
and may be taken so as not to be Actionable, shall not strain them to such an
intendement, as to make them Actionable; and therefore the [innuendo] in these
cases is idle and to no purpose.

So if the words be incertaine of themselves, or the person of whom they are
spoken, an [innuendo] shall never make them actionable.

If a man bring an action against another for saying that the Plaintiff took
away money from him with a strong hand [innuendo felonice] here the words being
incertaine in the intendment, Mich. 15. Car. in the Kings Bench. cited before.
whether of a Trespass, or Felony the (innuendo) cannot extend them to an
intendment of felony, thereby to make them actionable, and so it was adjudged.

So if a man bring an action against another, Hob. Rep: pa: 3 pl. 4
for saying that he forged a warrant [ innuendo quoddam Warrantum, etc. as
Thomas and Axworths case is cited before, Hob. Rep: pa 63, pl 48.
or for saying that he forged a writing innuendo such a writing] as Harvy and
Duckins case is likewise cited before. In these cases, because the words
themselves are utterly uncertain, adjudged that the [innuendo] shall never make
them actionable.

A Servant of B. brings an action against one for these words; Coke lib. 4. fo.
17 b.
One of the Servants of B. (innuendo the Plaintiff. is a notorious Felon, or
Traitor, etc) And if an Action be brought for these words, I know one near
about B. that is a notorious Thief, ( innuendo the Plaintiff:) In these
cases, because of the incertainty of the persons intended by the words the
[innuendo] shall not make them actionable.

I could multiply cases upon this ground, but because these will be
sufficient; I will add only the Office of an (imnuendo.)

The office of an [innuendo] is only to contain and design the same person,
Cook. lib. 4 fol. 17. b
which was named in certain before: as thus, two are speaking together of B.
and one of them says, he is a Thief; there B. in his Count may show that
there was a speech of him betwixt those two, and that one of them said of him,
he ( innuendo the plaintiff) is a thief.

Or else to declare the matter or sense of the words themselves, which was
certainly expressed before; as thus, A. and B. speaking of C. A. said that C.
was a Traitor, to whom B. said that he was so too; in this case if A. bring an
action for these words, he may show in his Count, that there was a speech
betwixt him and the defendant of C. and that the plaintiff said to the
defendant that C. was a Traitor, and that the defendant said then to the
plaintiff, that he ( innuendo the plaintiff) was so too [ innuendo a
Traitor.]

In both these cases the (innuendo) is good, becuase it does its Office, in
designing of the person, as also in declaring of the matter or sense of the
words which was certain before.

But an [innuendo] Cook lib. fol. 17. b
cannot make a person certain, which was incertaine before, nor alter the
matter or sense of the words themselves; for it would be inconvenient, that
actions should be maintained by imagination of an intent, which does not
appear by the words, upon which the action is founded; but is utterly
incertaine, and subject to deceaveable conjecture.

For by this means, if I should be suffered to be the declarer of the meaning
or intendment of the uncertain and doubtful speeches of another man; I might
judge him to speak that, he never thought or intended, and so punish him for
that wherein he never offended.

The next and last thing to be considered is where an averrement will be
necessary in these actions, and where not: and here I shall lay down this as a
ground.

That in all cases for words where there is any thing that is the cause or
ground of the action, or tends necessarily to the maintenance of it, in such
case the action will not lie, without that thing be expressly averred to be, or
not to be, as the case requires. Hob Rep page 8.


Miles brought an action against Jacob for these words; Thou (innuendo etc.)
have poisoned Smith (quendam, Sam. Smith ad tuuc defunct. innuendo) adjudged
the action would not lie for this reason [amongst others] because that did it
not appear that Smith was dead at the time of the words spoken; and the
(innuendo) for that purpose is no sufficient averrement.

The li^e case was Trin. 17. of this King; Trin. 17. Car. in the Common-Plea^.
A. brought an action against B. for these words, Thou have killed my brother
(innuendo C. etc. fratrem, etc. nuper mortuum) adjudged the action would not
lie, because the plaintiff did not aver that he was dead at the time when
the words were spoken, and it was ruled that the innuendo was not a sufficient
averrement.

The reason of these cases, is, because the death of the party is the ground of
the action, and if he were not dead (which shall the rather be intended,
without the plaintiff do expressly aver him to be dead) then the plaintiff
could not be indamaged by the speaking of the words, and by consequence no
action will lie for them.

I must confess that I have a report of a case which was 5. of King James
adjudged against the former cases, Pasch. 1. Jac. in the Kings Bench
Sir Tho. Holt brought an action against Tailor for these words, Sir Thomas
Holt has killed his Cook, Rot. 107.
etc. and did not aver that he had a Cook, nor that the Cook was dead, and
this was moved in arrest of judgment; and by the whole Court the Declaration
was moved good, because it shall not be intended, that there is any such
purgation of the slander as this is, except it does appear in the Record; as
the life of a man, which is reported to be dead. But if it were expressed in
the Record, that the party reported to be dead, was in life, it were otherwise.

As it words were spoken of a woman, that she had murdered her husband, and she
and her husband bring the action, in this case the action will not lie, because
that it does appear by the Record, that the slander is not prejuditiall, but
is purged notoriously, by the apparent being of the husband in life, like Snags
case in my Lord Cooks 4. Book Quaere tamen, Cook lib. 4 fol. 16. a
for I doubt Reader the Law of this case, because of the cases before adjudged.

A. says that B. told him that C. stole a Horse, these words with an
averrement that B. did not say any such thing to A. will bear an action, like
the Lady Morrisons case which I have formerly cited, fo. 6. b.

Whether Welsh words, or words in English doubtful in sense, yet equipollent,
and of a common intendment and acceptance iu some certain place with words
Actionable, will bear an Action, without an express averrement of the
importance of them, or no? quare and vide fo. 6. a.

Hasselwood and Garrets case cited before, Pasch. 1. Iac. in the Kings Bench.
whosoever is he that is falsest Thief and strongest in the Country of Salop,
Rot. 107.
whatsoever he has stolen, or whatsoever he has done, Thomas Hassellwood is
faller then he resolved that the words were actionable, with an averrement that
there were felons within the Count^ of Salop; but for default of such
averrement the judgment given in the Common Pleas was reversed in this Court.

Note Reader, if there were no felons in that County (which will rather be
intended, if it be not averred that there were some] then the speaking of the
words could be no slander to the Plaintiff, Hob Rep page 309
and so no Action can lie.

Blands case cited before, he brought an action against A. B. for saying that
he was indicted for Felony at a Sessions holden, etc. and did not aver that
he was not indicted, and after a Verdict for the Plaintiff, judgment was
stayed, because there was no Avetrement, ut supra. Note if he were indicted,
which he does tacitly admit, then no cause of action.

Johnson against Dyer, Mich. 15. Car: in the Kings Bench.
the Defendant having communication with the Father of the Plaintiff, said to
him, I will take my Oath that your Son stole my Henns; and the Plaintiff did
not aver that he was his Son or that he had but one Son, and therefore
adjuged that the action would not lie. In this case if he were not his Son,
then no cause of action.

One Clarke said that he had a Son in Nottinghamshire who had his Chest
picked, Pasch. 7. lac. in the Kings Bench.
and a hundred pounds taken out of it, in one Lock. Smiths house; and I thank
God I have found the Thief who it is, it is one that dwells in the next
house called Robert Kinston: upon which Kinston brought an Action and had a
verdict, and it was moved in arrest of Judgment, because that he did not
aver that he dwelt in the next house, Crook one said that Prichards man
robbed him, who brought an Action; and did not aver that he was Prichards
man, and therefore it was held that the Action would not lie. And the Justices
in this case would not give judgment.

Non constat in this case that the Plaintiff was the party of whom the words
were spoken; for there might be another of the same name dwelling else where:
and therefore he ought to aver that he dwelt in the next house, that he may
be certainly intended to be the same person of whom the words were spoken.

Where words shall not be Actionable without an averrement of a special
damage See fo. 28.

I have clearly proved the ground before laid down, and by these cases you
may be sufficiently instructed, where an averrement will be necessary and
where not. And so I have quite finished this small Treatise.

May the Reader find as much profit and delight in the reading of it, as the
Anthor had in composing of it, such is the ardent desire of

Your affectionate friend JOHN MARCH.

Arbitrament.
THe next thing Reader, that I have undertaken to discourse of, is,
Arbitrements, the learning whereof will be very useful to all men; in regard
that Compremises or Arbitrements were never more in use then now. And most men
either have been or may be Arbitrators, or at teast have done, or may submit
themselves to the Arbitration of others. And as long as differences and
contentions arise among men, which will be to the worlds end, certainly the
learning of Arbitrements will well deserve our knowledge. Which being well
observed and learnt by all men, will be a good means to prevent many Suits and
contentions in the Law for the future which are now daily occasioned through
the defects of Arbitrements which rather beget and raise new controversies
amongst the parties, then determine the old. The only cause whereof is the
ignorance of men in this learning. The Composer hereof, Reader, took this
pains, only out of a desire of the Common good, that none might be ignorant
of that which concerns all. And if it shall effect that for which it was made,
the instrvcting of the ignorant, and the good of the public; the Author has
his ends, and abundant recompense for his labor. Which that it may accomplish
is the earnest and affectionate desire of the true Servant to the public.

IO MARCH.

In my Lord Dyer it is said that to every Award, Trin. 4. of the Queen Dyer.
fo. a 17. pl. 6^.
there are five things incident.

1. Matter of Controversy. 2. Submission. 3. Parties to the submission. 4.
Arbitrators. 5. Rendering up of an Arbitrament.
Reader, my purpose is (God willing) to prosecute every one of these parts or
incidents of an Award [though paradventure not in the order before set downe]
conceiving them to be as exact a description or delineation of those things
that are requisite to every award, as possibly can be made: And indeed teaching
to all the cases in the Law, which do principally or chiefly concern Awards
or Arbitrements.

First then there must be a matter of debate, question and controversy.

Secondly, this matter of debate question and controversy must be submitted.

Thirdly, there must be Parties to the submission.

Fourthly, there must be Arbitrators, to w^om the matter in controversy must
be submitted. And lastly the Arbitrators must make an award or an Arbitrament.

Upon these several branches, I shall raise several questions, and debate and
clear them as I go, and first.

Who may submit to an Arbitrament and who not?
I Take this to be regularly true, that no person, which is not of ability in
judgment of Law to make a grant, etc can submit himelfe to an Arbitrament

As men Attainted of Treason, Felony, or a Praemunire, Idiots, mad men, a man
deaf dumb, and blind from his Nativity; a Feme Covert an Infant, a man by
Duress^e for a submission to an Arbitrament must be Spontanea voluntate.
Persons Ontlawed; for they have no Goods: a Dean without the Chapter, a Major
without the Commonalty; the Master of a College or Hospital without his
Fellows, or the like. All these as they are incapble to graut, so I conceive,
that they are not of capability to submit to an Arbitrament, but that the
submission will be absolutely void in these cases.

The reason of these cases may be, because that they have not power of them
selves to dispose of their interest or property, and therefore they cannot
transfer such power over to another; for the rule is, quod ^er me non Possum,
necper alinns.

And Hill 15. of this King in the Kings Bench, Hill. 15. Car. in the Kings
Bench, Rot. 313. see 14. H. 4. 12. 10. H. 6. 14.
betwixt Rudsten and Yates, it was adjudged, that the submission of an Infant
to an Arbitrament was absolutely void.

But now on the other side, I conceive that all persons whatsoever that are not
fettered with these natural or legal disabilities; but are of capacity to
make a grant, that such persons may submit themselves to an Arbitremen, as
persons not attainted, compos mentis, deaf dumb, or blind, Femes sole, men
of full age; and the like, the submission of such persons to an Arbitrament is
good; but enough of this; in the next place I shall consider.

What things may be submitted to an Arbitrament, and what not?
THat is to say, what things are in Law arbitrable, and what not? Things and
Actions which are merely personal, and incertaine, 22. H. 6. 39 4. H 6. 17.
14. H. 4. 2. 4. H. 16. 17. 2 H. 5. 2.
as Trespass, a Ward taken away, and the like, are arbitrable.

But things which are of themselves certain, are not arbitrable, except the
submission be by Deed, or that they be joined with others incertaine, as Debt
with Trespass, or the like.

The reason that is given in 4. H. 6. is, because the nature of an Arbitrament
is, to reduce things to a certainety, which are in themselves incertaine, and
not to make things more certain, which are certain already.

And the reason likewise that is there given, why a thing certain, which is
joined with a thing incertaine should be arbitrable, is because that the
arbitrament is entire, and therefore cannot be good as to that which is
arbitrable, and void for the residue; (which you must understand being of
things within the submission) but being good for the part which is incertaine,
it will make the rest also arbitrable.

Cha^tels reals or mixed, g. H. 6. 60. 14. H. 4. 24 19. H. 6. 37.
are not of themselves alone arbitrable, as Charters of Lands, Leases, or the
like, without the submissien be by specialty.

Debt upon the arrerages of account before Auditors, 4 H. 6. 17. 3. H 4, 5, 6,
H. 4. 9. 9. H. 6. 60. 14 H. 4. 18 3. H. 4. 6. 11. H. 4. 12 14. H. 4. 19. and
24. 54. E. 3. 16 12 Ass. pl. 26. 21. E. 3 15. 23. H. 7. Keilway. 99. pl. 6. 21.
E. 3. 26.
because such Debt is due by Record; Annuities, nor Freeholdes, none of these
are of themselves arbitrable, without the snbmission be by specialty.

I must confess that some of these Books say, that Arbitrators may award a
Freehold without Deed. Others say that the submission must be by specialty [as
you may observe before) and some say that the Arbitrament in these cases must
be by Deed and that then the arbitrament may be pleaded in Bar of an action.

Bnt I take this as a general rule, that no Chattels reals, or mixed, no Debts
by Deed, or Record no Annuities nor Freeholds are of themselves arbitrable
though that the submission be by Deed; and I shall prove it thus.

If they were arbitrable of themselves, then upon an action brought in any of
these cases, an arbitrament were a good plea in Bar of the action but an
Arbitrament in such case is no plea in Bar of the action as appears by the
books before cited therefore I conceive that the argument is plain and evident
that these are not of themselves arbitrable.

But for further proof of this ground that I have laid down; it is taken as a
general rule in Blaks case in my L. Coke 6. Coke lib. 6. fo. 43. b. 44. 2.
Book, that an arbitrament is no plea when an action is founded upon a deed,
when it is in the Realty, or mixed with the realty, but in such cases only, or
at least, regularly, where Damages alone are to be recovered.

I shall conclude this with the Book of 21. E. 3 cited before, 21. E. 3. 26
that an arbitrament that the one party shall have the land our of the
possession of the other, does not give a Freehold; and if he refuse to permit
him to have the Land, he has no remedy, if he has not an Obligation to stand
to the Arbitrament.

By this case we may learn, as also by that which I have told you before,
that though these thing are not of themselves arbitrable; and so the
arbitrament not pleadable in Bar of an action. Yet a man may in such cases
bind himself by Obligation to stand to an award [as it is usual so to do] and
for the non performance of the awrd, the Bond will be forfeited. And this is
the submission by specialty so often spoaken of in the Books before.

And therefore I conceive that the opinion of Greuill and Pollard in 23. H. 7.
is no Law, 23. H. 7. Keilway fo 99. pl. 6.
who say that where there is a submission of the right, Title, and possession
of land, [without any other parsonall difference] to an award, that an
arbitrament in such case is void; and that an Obligation to obey such an
arbitrament is void.

It is true, the Book makes a quaere of it; because that others were, (as the
Book says) clear of another opinion. And certainly the Bond is good; as
common experience teaches; I shall put a case like it, which I conceive will
plainly prove it.

A man makes a Feoffement upon condition that the Feostee shall not take the
profits, Coke upon Littleton fo. 206. b.
the condition is absolutely repugnant and void. But a Bond in such case
conditioned that the Feoffee shall not take the profits, is good.

So I say in this case, though the thing it self be not arbitrable; yet if a
man in such case, will bind himself to stand to an award, the Bond is good.

Lastly, causes matrimonial are not arbitrable; neither are Offenses criminal
as Treasons, Felonies, etc. because it concerns the Commonwealth that such
offenders be punished. But of this sufficient; the nature or kinds of
submissions is now to be considered.

Submission to an Award may be either General, or Special. Absolute. or
Conditional.

A General Submission. Coke lib. 8. fo. 97. 98 Baspoles case.

A general Submission is of all matters, Suits, Debts, Duties, Actions, and
demands whatsoever. Coke ubi supra Trin. 4. of Queen yer fo (...). b.


A special Submission.
A special Submission is only of some certain matters in controversy, as such
land then in question; or all actions of Debt, Trespass, or the like, here I
could observe unto you the difference betwixt a general submission
conditional, and a special submission conditional; but because it will be
more apt and agreeable in case where I shall show you, what will be a good
arbitrament and what not. I shall refer it thither without further saying.

An absolute submission.
An absolute submission, Coke. and Dyer ubi supra.
where the circumstance of time, when; the manner of the arbitrament, how;
whether Sealed or unsealed or the matter of the arbitrament; viz: to arbitrate
part or all or the like, are wholly left to the Arbitrators.

A conditional submission.
A conditional submission, is, where the submission is with an ita quod or
Proviso etc. Coke and Dyer. ubi supra.
the award be made and delivered under in hands and seals of the arbitrators,
before such a time; in such case, if the time manner and matter, are not all
exactly observed, the arbitrament will be void; but of this more fully
hereafter.

Note Reader, Dyel fo. 216. b. pl. 59. and 242. pl. 52.
that a submission may be by word only as well as by Deed or specealty but the
submission by deed is better, for then though the submission be of things not
arbitrable, the party forfeites his Bond if he do not observe it whereas if
the submission were by word only there were no remedy in such case to enforce
the party to perform the award

Who may be arbitrators and who not?
I conceive it most fit, that such only should be Arbitrators who, as they are
indifferently chosen (as it is said in the Condition of the Obligation) are men
indifferent, just and upright, swayed neither with favor fear or affection
to either party men likewise having sufficient parts, and competent
understanding and knowledge in the matter or business referred to Arbitrament
having neither legal (as persons Attainted, convicted of perjury etc.) nor
natural impediments, as Infants, Idiots, madmen, or the like.

These qualifications in arbitrators being duly observed a man need not dout of
a just and upright sentence the want of the observation of which, causes many
unjust and undue sentences in Arbitrations.

But I do not find in our Law that either leg^ll ar natural disabilities, do
hinder any man from being an Arbitrator; or avoid his sentence and certainly
they do not for this differs much from a submission to an Arbitration for in
such case a man ties his interest and binds his person which every one is not
of capacity to do; but in this case what he does as an arbitrator, is only to
charge or discharge others. And besides they are chosen by the parties
themselves, and if they they be not competent Jvdges, the fault is theirs that
chose them.

And now I shall proceed to show you what Arbitrators are and their power by
which you will easily perceive, of what high concernement it is to men, to have
a special care of the choice of Arbitrators.

What arbitrators are and there power.
An Arbitrator is as our books say, a Judge indiff^rently chosen by the
parties, Pasch. 91. of the Queen Dyer fo. 356: pl. 39 19. H. 6. 36. 37.
to end the matter in controversy between them, Ad Arbitrium and therefore
they are said to be Arbitrators because they have an Arbitrary power, and may
judge according to there will and pleasure, so that their judgment be according
to the submission and these Judges are not tied to any formalities, Coke lib.
5. fo. 78. a. 8. E. 4. 1. and 2.
or punctuallities in Law neither are they s^orne, as other Judges established
by public authority are.

Besides, their power is far greater, for as they may judge as they please
keeping themselves to the submission, so their sentence is absolutely
definitive and conclusive from which there lies no Appeal; as it was
excellently well said by Heath Justice, in arguing of the case of Rudston and
Yates cited before the judgment of Arbitrators said he (provided that they
keep themselves to their jurisdiction) is higher then any judgment given in
any Court for if they err, Mith. 17. Car. in Kings Bench.
no Writ of Error lies to reverse their judgment, no, not so much as Equity
against them.

This is true where they keep themselves close to the submission; but if they
do not, in such case (though no Writ of Error lies to reverse their judgment)
upon an Action brought upon a Bond or promise for not performing an awa^d, if
the Defendant plead that the Arbitrators made no award, and the Plaintiff
replies that they did make an award and sets it forth in special, if it do
appear that the award is void (as it may be in many cases which I shall set
forth hereafter) the Action in such case will not lie as every days experience
teaches, and in which our Books are plentiful. By that which I have said
before, it is manifest, how it concerns every man to have a care what
Arbitrators he makes choice of; but of this sufficient. The next thing
considerable, is,

Whether the power of Arbitrators be Assigenable or not?
The Law is clear that Arbitrators cannot assign over their power, the reason
is, because that it is but a nude power or Authority (which is evident in that
it is revocable, as I shall show you hereafter) and therefore by the Law not
assignable. To which may be added, that it is a power coupled with a great
trust and confidence, and therefore not assignable.

I confess that the Book in 47. E. 3 does tacitly admit this power to be
assignable where the case is thus, 47. E. 3. 20
In Debt, the Defendant pleaded that they submmitted themselves to the
Arbitrament of two persons, who did award that they should stand to the award
of W. P. which W. P. made an award which he has performed, etc. here it is
tacitly admitted that the Arbitrators might award that they should stand to
the Arbitrament of another, but Brook in abridging this case says, the Law
seems contrary.

In 8. E. 4. prototam Curiam except Yelverton, where a man is bound to stand to
the award etc. who award that an Action shall be commenced betwixt the parties
by the advice of VV. and P. this is a good award for by this W: and P. are not
Arbitrators, 8. E. 4. 1. and 10.
but only executors of the Arbitrament. And in this case the Arbitrators
judged the Title to be tried betwixt them; but know not what action should be
brought.

But if they had awarded, that the parties should stand to the Arbitrament of W
and P. this had been void, because that they cannot assign over their power.

Yelverton held in the first case, that the award was void for the incertainty
because that W. and P. are to give their advise, which is not certain until
it be notified, and in this case he has made them Judges.

I confess that I do somewhat doubt of the case, because the judgment of the
arbitrators ought to be final, and this is no concluding of the matter in
controversy; but a trans^erting of their power over to the Law, to determine
it.

Besides, W. and P. may never give their advise, or may refuse to do it, and
in such case the arbitrament will prove idle.

And I do not conceive this case to be like the case in 19. E. 4. where the
Arbitrators awarded a certain sum, 19. E. 4. ^.
and in surety of payment thereof, to be bound by the advice of Counsel, for
here their judgment of the matter in controversy is certain, and final, and
here is a some certain awarded for which an Action will lie, only the security
is to be advised by Counsel; which is no assignement of their power, but of
this more hereafter.

Emery, and Emerys case the chief point whereof was thus; Mich. 41. and 42. of
the Queen in the Common Pleas.
the arbitrators award that the plaintiff should make such a Release as one of
the Arbitrators should like of; in this case the arbitrament was held to be
void, because this was an appointing of an authority committed to them all,
unto one which they cannot do.

I shall conclude this point with Samons case in Co^kes. 5. Book, where the
case is ^hus: Arbitrators award that the defendant should enter into an
Obligation to the plaintiff, and do not judge of what some the Bond shall be
adjudged the Arbitrament was void for the incertainety, and that the
Arbitrators could not assign over their power but that themselves ought to
determine it; and therefore neither the plaintiff nor the defendant could
assesse the some^ the next thing considderable is.

Whether the authority of Arbytrators be countermandable or not?
In his case also the Law will be strong and evident, 28. H. 6. ^. 21. H. 6.
30. 49. E. 3. 9. 18. E. 4. 9. 8. E. 4. 10. 5. E. 4. 3. Br. Arbitrament 35. 6.
H. 7. 1a. b.
that this authority is countermandable at any time before the award made; but
not after, because then the authority is executed, and cannot be
countermanded, and so are all our Books but 5. E 4. where it is said that if a
man be bound to stand to the Arbitrament of I N he cannot discharge the
Arbitrator, contrary if he were not bound to stand to his arbitrament, yet
Brook upon this case says, that it is clear that he may discharge the
arbitrator in both cases? but in the one case he shall forfeit his Bond in the
other he shall loose nothing, because that ex nuda submissione non oritur actio,
so likewise it is resolved in Vinyors case which I shall put you presently.

In 28. H 6. by Ashton Justice if there be two plaintiffs and one defendant or
two defendants and one plaintiff put themselves to the award of other neither
the one plaintiff with out th^^ other, 28. H. 6. 6.
nor the one defendant without the other, may discharge the arbitrators, the
reason is obvious, because that they were chosen by the joint authority of
both, and therefore cannot be countermanded by one alone.

But that which is the last and best authority, Coke lib. 8. fo. 82.
is Vinyors case; where it is resolved that though a man be bound to stand to
the Arbitrament, etc. yet he may countermand the Arbitrators; the reason that
is given is, because a man cannot by his own act make such an authority, power,
or warrant; not countemandable which by the law, and its ow^ proper nature is
countermandable, a^^ I make a Letter of Attorney to ma^^ livery or to sue an
Action in my (...) or if I assign Auditors to take an account, or if I make
one my factor, o^ submit my self to an Arbitrament though that these are done
by express words irrevocable, or that I grant, or unbound that al these shall
stand irrevocable, yet they may be revoked; so if I make my testament or last
with irrevocable, yet I may revoke it.

But in this case it was further resolved that by the countermand or revocation
of the power of the Arbitrator, the Bond (according to the opinion of Brook
before cited) is forfited, because he was bound to stand to his award, which he
does not do when he discharges the Arbitrator. I have sufficiently cleared it,
that the authority of Arbitrators is countermandable; but hence arises two
questions more, the first is.

Whether the Authority of Arbitrators be countermandable without Deed, or not?
The resolving of which doubt I conceive will stand upon this difference, where
the submission is by deed* and where without deed; where it is by deed, in such
case I conceive the authority cannot be countermanded but by deed and so is 49.
E^ 3. but where it is without deed, 49. 1. 3. 9.
there the authority may be countermanded without deed and this I ground upon
that rule of law codom modo qu^ (...) creatur dissolvitur. It is but agreeable
to natural equity, that every thing should be dissolved by the same me^nes or
power that it was created.

And in Vinyors case which I have ^^ited before, there the submission (...) by
deed, and the countermand pleade^ by deed, the second, and last do^^^ or
question considerable in this countermand of the authority of Arbitrators i^

Whether there ought to be notice of the countermand or no?
There must be notice of the countermand, 8. E. 4. 10. b. et 11. a. 21. H. 6.
30. 28. H. 6. 6. et 6. H. 7. 10. Coke lib. 8. fo. 81. b. 82. a.
fer without notice, it (...) no revocation or abrogation of the authority and
so it is resolved in the Books which you: have in the Ma^gent.

Vinyors case cited before was th^^ he brought an Action of debt upon Bond
against Wild, conditioned for ^he standing to an award, to which the defendant
pleaded that the Arbitrator made no award, the plaintiff replied, that after
the making of the said writing obligatory, and before the Feast of etc, the
defendant by his deed etc. rovocavit and abrogavit (...) authoritatem etc.
which he had given by his writing obligatory to the arbitrator, upon which the
defendant demurred.

It Is true, that in this case it was resolved that the plaintiff need not
aver that the arbitrator had notice of the countermand; but the reason that
is given, is not because that no notice is requisite, but because notice is
implied in these words, revoca^n and abrogavit, is in the words feoffavit,
dedit and dimisit, a livery is implied.

But it was, resolved that without notice, it is no revocation of the
authority; and therefore if there were no notice in this case (says the Book)
the defendant ought to have taken issue quod non revocavit etc, and if there
were no notice it shall be found for the defendant. I have done with the
countermand of the authority the next thing to be considered is.

What an arbitrament is.
An award or an Arbitrament, is nothing else but the order judgment and decree
of the Arbitrators upon the matter or thing in controvercy referred or
submitted unto them by the parties for their determination, thus in short you
see what an Arbitrament is, the next and maine seruple or question will be.

What Arbitrament is good in Law and what nor?
An award or an Arbitrament may be void in Law in several respects, and first.

Where the award is not according to the submission.
And this threefould either in respect of the persons things submitted, or the
circumstances of the submission.

And first, an award may be void where it is not according to the submission in
respect of the persons; that is where it does award a thing to be done by or to
a stranger who is not party to the submission.

In 22. H. 6. 22. H. 6. 46. 8. E. 4. 1. and 9. 36. H. 6. 8. acc.
the case is thus; in debt upon a bond to stand to an award the defendant
pleaded that the Arbitrators did award him to pay 20 shillings to R. a
stranger, which he paid, in this case by the opinion of the whole Court, the
award was void.

So in 17. E. 4 two submitted themselves to the Arbitrament of I S of all
Trespasses etc. 17. E. 4. 5. 19. E. 4. 1. 18. E. 4. 21. b. and 17. ^^. 7.
Keilway fo. 45. pl. 2
who awarded that the one should pay to the other 40 l. 10 l. in hand, and that
he should find three several sverties, every one of them to be bound with him
in 10 l. to pay the 30. l. residue at a certain day, by the whole Court, the
award was void, as to the finding of the suerties which were strangers to the
submission.

And therefore certainly that oppinion in 5. H. 7. cannot be Law, where it is
admitted that an award to make a feoffement to a stranger is good

Moore and Bedels case was thus, Mich. 28. and 29. of the Queen in the Kings
Bench, Rot. 476.
Bedel recovered by default in an Action of Wast against Moore 45 l. damages,
after which judgment, they submitted themselves to an award, the arbitrators
award that Moore should pay to Bedel 10 l at certain days, and 15 l. at
certain other days, and that for the payment of the 15 l. one William Salter
should be ready to seal^ and deliver 15 obligations etc. and that the said
William Salter should do other things, not within submission.

In this case it was adjudged that as to all that was to be done by William
Salter, Pasch. 24^ at the Queen in the Kings Bench. Rot. 2417.
being a stranger to the submission, the award was void, for they are not bound
to perform any award but that which is within the submission, so likewise it
was adjudged betwixt Ecclessield and Maliard in the Kings Bench.

Two submit themselves to the Arbitrament of A. who Arbitrates thus, Trin. 4.
of the Queen Dyer. fo. ^16, b.
the award of A. indifferently chosen by I. for the behalf of the obligor of
one part, and the oblige of the other part, etc. the doubt was whether the
award were betwixt the parties o^ no, but it was ruled that it was, because
that I. was not party to the award, but a deputy or factor etc.

A. and B. were bound to stand to the arbitrament of I. S. concerning a matter
in controversy which did arise of the part of the wife of B. before covertute,
I. S. awarded that A. should pay so much to B. and his wife. In this case it
was moved by Seriant Rolls that the award of payment of money to the wife was
out of the submission, and therefore naught.

But by the whole Court the award was held good, because it does appear upon
the submission that the controversy did arise on the part of the wife.

Secondly, an award may be void, where it is not according to the submission,
in respect of the things or matters submitted.

If one be chosen arbitrator to make an Arbitrament upon one thing, Pl. Com.
fo. 396. ^
and he makes an Arbitrament upon another thing, the Abitrement is void.

In the case of Moore and Bedel cited before, who submitted themselves to an
Arbitrament of all matters in varience betwixt them; the Arbitrators award
(amongst other things) that whereas Bedle being possessed of a certain copy
hold ^oulden of the Mann^r of L. in the Country of B. had made a Lease for
years of the said Copihould by Indenture contrary to the Custom, that one
William Salter Pro Posse suo should cause that no advantage should be taken of
the forfeiture, in this case it was adjudged that the award concerning this
Coppihould not being within the submission was void.

Two submitted themselves by recognisance to an Arbitrament, 7. et 8. of the
Queen Dyer fo. 242. pl. 52
of the right and interest of 200. Acres of Land, etc. the Arbitrators award
that the Defendant should have Brakes during his life in the land, resolved
that the award was not according to the submission, because that, that was of
the right and interest in the land; 2. R. 3. 12. b. 12. E. 4. 25. b. Coke lib:
5. fo. 8. a
and the award is only of parcel of the profits out of it.

If I. N. and three others put themselves upon an award of I. S. of all Actions
and demands betwixt them. In this case the Arbitrator has good authority to
make an award of all joint matters betwixt them, and of all several matters
also: but he cannot arbitrate any matter betwixt the three only, because they
are one party against the fourth, but he may determine betwixt any of the three
and the fourth.

In 9. E. 4. 9. E. ^4. 43. b. 44. e. 36 H. 6. 8. et 11. acc.
two submitted themselves to the arbitrament of one I. L. de omnibus actionibus
personalibus sectis and querelis, etc. betwixt them, etc. who awarded that,
because the Defendant had committed diverse offenses to the Plaintiff, and that
the Plaintiff was seized of such a house in Fee, that the Defendant should
release to the Plaintiff, all the right which he has in this house, etc

In this case I conceive the better opinion to be, that the Arbitrament is
void, because that the power of the Arbitrator who is a Judge privately chosen
by the parties, shall be taken stricti juris, in that thing only of which the
compremise is, and not in another thing; and here the compremise was but of a
thing personal, and the Arbitrator has awarded a satisfaction real, to wit,
a^release of a right to a house, which was not comprised within the submission.

And Littleton in this case said, that if he had awarded that the Defendant
should serve the Plaintiff two years, this would be void.

And by Choke if we put our selves in Arbitrament de jure, titulo, and
possession^ Manerij de Dale, and the Arbitrator makes an award of the Manor of
Sale, Trin. 3^ Iac. in the Kings Bench, Rot. 216.
this is void.

Haynes against A^nsteed in Debt upon an obligation to stand to an Arbitrament
in all causes that have bin depending betwixt the parties ab initio mundi, the
award is that the Defendant shall release all causes to the Plaintiff from the
beginning of the world, usque etc. Tanfield Justice that the award is void for
it is, that the Defendant shall release all causes generally; and the
submission is of all causes depending then, and so the award void, and then the
obligation not forfeited, quod Curia concessit; and judgment was given for the
Defendant.

In a Writ of Error upon a judgment given in the Common Bench in debt upon an
obligation to stand to the award of I. S. concerning an action of account
pending, Mich. 7. Iac. in the Kings Bench, Cornelius Lawrence and Carres Case.
the arbitrator made an award touching the account; and further awards that
every of the parties should release to the other all Actions; the error in
point of Law was that the award was void, for though the Arbitrament may be
good in part and void in part, yet if it be void in any part, the obligation is
void; An award made for more then is submitted, is good for that which is
submitted and void for the residue.
quod non allocatur; for per curiam when the award is made for more then is
submitted (as in this case) it is good for the thing submitted; and void for
the surplusage, but if the award be made of less then is submitted, then it
is void for the whole.

If diverse Covenants be, and a man is bound in an obligation to perform them,
and some of the Covenants are void and against Law, and the residue good, yet
he ought to perform those that are good, otherwise the obligation is
forfeited, and this was one Alderman Lees case, vide 14. H. 8. wherefore
judgment in this case was affirmed.

Goffe against Brown upon an Obligation dated the 23 of February to perform
an award of all causes until the day of the Date of the Bond. Hob. Rep. pa.
267. pl. 233.
The Defendant pleaded that the Arbitrators made no award. The Plaintiff
replied that the 28 of March following, they made an award* de and super
premissis, that the Defendant should pay the Plaintiff 20. l. at Midsummer
following, in full satisfaction of all matters between them, and that they then
should make the one to the other general releases of all matters between
them, and assigned the breach for the non-payment of the 20. l. The Defendant
demurred; because the award did seem to exceed the submission, being for
discharge and satisfaction of all matters to the day of the award, which was
more then was submitted, for it may be that the Arbitrators might mean some
part of the 20. l. in discharge of the causes that might arise between the 23.
of February, and the 28. of March, which were not within their power, and so
for the release.

Yet judgment was given for the Plaintiff either because de and super
Premissis may import a restraint to the thing submitted, or else that no new
causes shall be supposed except they were alleged. Coke lib. 8. fo. 98.
Basp^les case.
as in pleading of awards of causes they need not aver that these were all,
etc.

There was a case which was betwixt Robert Tiderby the Father and Robert
Tiderby the son, Mich. 9* Iac. in the Kings Bench.
which was thus; they bound themselves to stand to the award of I. S.
concerning all controversies, quarrels, and debates right title, and possession
of, or concerning the Manor of Dale. I. S. awarded a convayance of the Manor
of Dale to certain uses, and that Robert Tiderby the Father should deliver all
evidences, and charters concerning the Manor.

In this case it was objected that the delivery of the evidences was not within
the submission; for they are neither the right nor title, nor possession of the
land. To which it was said that the chart^rs are the nerves and sinews of the
land, and therefore with in the words right and Title, for without the
charters, neither of these can be maintained also by 8 H. 6 and 16 E. 4. Where
Arbitrators have power over the principal, they have power over the accessory;
and therefore the right and Title of the Land being put to the award of I. S.
which is the Principal, he has power to make an award of the Charters which
are the accessory.

Again, an award may in some cases be void, where it is made of part only of
things or matters contained in the submission and not of the whole.

In 19. H. 6 two submitted themselves to an award upon the right title and
possession of Land; the Arbitrator made an award of the possession only; which
was objected by Yelverton to be naught, because it was of part of the thing in
submission only. But by Newton if two submit themselves to an avvard of al
Actions reals and personals, and an award is made of all Actions personals
only, this is good and so was the opinion of the whole Court.

In 39. H. 6. by Prisot where two or three things are put in arbitrament
jointly, 39 H. 6. 9.
and an Award is made of part, and not of the whole, this is a void award.

And in 22 E. 4. where the submission is of all trespasses, 22 E. 4. 25 ^ R. 3.
18. b. ac.
betwixt A. of the one part, and C. and D. of the other part; and an award is
made, that A. shall pay 10 l. to C. and says nothing of D. yet it is a good
award: for it may be that A. has offended C. and has not offended D.

Which books, Coke lib. 8. fo. 98. Baspoles case.
and all others to this purpose, must he understood with these differences:
First, where the submission is by Deed, Trin. 4. of the Queen Dyer. fo. 216. b.
and 7 and 8. of the Queen. Dyer fo. 242. pl. 52.
and where without Deed: where it is without Deed, there the award may be made
of part only, and good.

Again, where the submission is by Deed, there is this difference to be
observed; where the submission is general of all matters, etc. or in special,
of some particular things only, with an Ita quod, or Proviso, the award be made
de premissis; or that the said award be made and given up by such a time: and
where the submission is general or special, without such a conditional
conclusion. For in the first case the award must be made of all the matters
submitted, because of the conditional reference, and in the last the award may
be made of part only, and good.

So it is (where the submission is not conditional) in case of diverse
particular persons (as the case is put before) if two of one part, and one of
another part submit themselves, the arbitrator may make an arbitrament, betwixt
the one of the two of the one part, and the other of the other part, and good.

But note Reader, that there is this difference to be observed between
pleading of an award upon a submission general conditional, and pleading of an
award upon a submission special conditional.

For in the first case, Baspoles case, ubi supra.
if an award be pleaded de premissis modo and forma sequentibus; and alleged
to be upon one single matter in controversy, this is good; because it is shown
that the award was made de premissis, which does import an award of all that
which was referred to the arbitrators; and so it shall be intended, until the
contrary be shown by the other party: for when the submission is general,
Generale nihil certi implicat; and it may well stand with the generality of the
words, that there was but one cause depending in controversy betwixt them.

But in pleading of an award upon a submission special conditional, there the
award must be expressly alleged to be made of all things within the submission,
or otherwise it is naught, because upon the very face of the award it will
appear, whether it were made of all things in the submission or no. For if the
submission be of several things in special, and an award pleaded only of one,
it is apparent that the award is not of all matters contained in the submission.

Again, if upon the pleading of an award upon a submission general conditional
it does appear either upon the showing of the other party (as has been said)
or by the award it self, that it was not of all matters in controversy in such
case also, the award will be void, though the submission were general, because
that it was conditional.

Mote and Menerels case in my Lord Dyer was thus, Trin. 4. of the Queen Dyer,
fo. 216. b.
they were bound to stand to the award of A. for Dilapidations, etc. and all
other suits, quarrels etc. Ita quod, the said award were made, etc. who made an
award of the Delapidations, with a protestation that he would not meddle with
the rest. In this case the opinion of the book is, that the award is naught,
for that it did not extend to all the points in the submission, for he made no
arbitrament of the suits and quarrels, etc. but made an express protestation
that he would not meddle with them; by which he has disabled himself to be an
arbitrator in the premises, because that he refused to make an arbitrament
according to the submission of the parties, who chose him for to arbitrate,
conditionally ut supra: viz. So that the same award, etc. which is as well of
suits and quarrels, etc. as of dilapidations.

In this case* though the latter part of the submission were general, yet
because it was conditional, and it did appear by the award it self, that it was
not made of all things submitted, therefore the award was not held void.

But in this case I conceive, that if the award had been of the dilapidations
generally, without the protestation, that it had been good enough, because that
the latter part of the submission is general: and therefore if the award had
been pleaded de premissis, and aleage the award of the delapidations, it shall
be intended that this was all the matter in controversy betwixt them, until
the contrary be showed.

There is one thing yet in Baspoles case worth the noting, Coke lib. ^ fo. 98. a
which I cannot omit: where it is adjudged, that though there are many matters
in controversy, yet if one only be notified to the Arbitrator, he may make an
award of this; for the Arbitrator is in place of a Judge, and his office is to
determine secundum allegata and probata; and the duty of the parties which are
grieved, and know their particular griefs, is, to give notice of the causes of
controversy to the Arbitrator, An arbitrator may make an award of one matter
only, if he have notice of no more.
for they are privy to them, and the Arbitrator a stranger, and every one ought
to do that which lies in his notice.

And if other construction should be made, most arbitrements might be avoided:
for the one might conceal a trespass done, or other secret cause of action
given him, and so avoid the arbitrament, and expedit* r^ipub. ut sit finis
litium. I shall cite, but one case more upon the former ground, and so pass
this, which is thus.

Barnes brought debt upon an Obligation against Greenly, Hob. Kep. p. 267. pl.
234.
dated the 4 of September, An arbitrament seeming not so large as the
submission.
to perform an award of all causes, till the day of the date: the Plaintiff
pleaded the award de premissis, viz. of all causes till the 3 of December, and
assigns a breach: the Defendant maintained the Bar, that the Arbitrator made
no award, and verdict for the Plaintiff and judgment: here the award was a day
short of the submission. Upon this a Writ of Error was brought, but what issue
it had, that my Lord Hobart says, he does not know.

I do conceive, Reader, that the difference formerly taken, will resolve this
case; for if the submission were conditional, then I think the award is naught,
being not so large as the submission; but if it were absolute, in such case I
think it good.

But to this it may be said, that the Law will not intend any other matter of
controversy to arise betwixt the third of September and the fourth, without it
be shown; and for ought appears, the award is of all causes to the fourth of
September, because no other cause appears then what is awarded: therefore
quaere.

Thirdly and lastly, an award may be void, where it is not according to the
submission in respect of the circumstantes of it.

Page and Parkers case was thus, Page and Parkers case in the Kin. Bench.
in debt upon a bond conditioned for the performance of an award, so that it be
delivered in writing sub manibus and sigillis, etc. the defendant pleaded the
delivery of it in writing, and does not say sub manibus and sigillis, and a
performance, the plaintiff alleged a breach, and judgment given for him,
which was reversed in the Chequer chamber, because the Defendant did not plead
the award sub manibus and sigillis; for if an arbitrament be not made
according to the submission, it is no arbi^rement; if no arbitrament, no cause
of action.

So in this case I conceive, 1 H. 7. 5. 7 and 8. of the Queen Dyer, fo. 243.
pl. 56 31. H. 8. Br. arbitr. 42.
if the award had been pleaded sub manibus, and not sub manibus and sigillis,
it had been naught.

So likewise, if it had not been pleaded that it was delived in writing, it had
been void.

And where there is a submission to an award, 2 R. 3. 13. pl. 32. and 8 E. 4.
11 a.
so that it be made and delivered to the parties in writing, at or before such
a day: in such case, if it have not all the circumstances, that is, though it
be made, yet if it be not delivered; and though it be made and delivered, yet
if it be not delivered to the parties, and though it be made and delivered to
the parties, yet if it be not in writing; and though it have all these
circumstances, yet if they be not all done, at or before the day, in any of
these cases the award will be void, as appears by the books in the margent.

And if the Arbitrators award any thing after the time limited, 8 H. 6. f. 18
it is void.

Two of one part, Coke li. 5. fo. 103. Hungates case.
and two of another submit themselves to an award, so that the award be made
and delivered to both parties, etc. A delivery in this case to one of either
party is not sufficient, but it must be to both the entire parties.

The reason of all these cases may be because (as I have formerly said) that it
is but a bare power or authority which is giveu to an Arbitrator, and therefore
it must be strictly executed according to the qualifications and conditions
annexed to it.

But the reason that comes more close is, because that the submission is
condit^onal; Ita quod, or Proviso, the award of the premises, or the said
award, etc. now it cannot be an award of the premises, or the said award, if it
be not in every thing matter, and circumstance, agreeable to the submission.
And now I have done this part, of showing you where an award shall be void, in
regard that it is not according to the submission. I shall now show you before
I go any further, what I intend by saying that the arbitrament is void, and
hereupon I shall makes this qua^re.

In what case an Arbitrament shall be totally void, and where in part only.
And here I shall lay down these three several grounds or differences, all
warranted by our books.

First, 22 H. 6. 46 36. H. 6. 1 17. E. 4 5 19. E. 4. 1. pl. com. fo. 396. a.
Coke lib: 8 fo. 98.
where the award is of one single matter only, or of many things, all out of
the submission, in such case the award is totally void.

Secondly, Baspoles case 4. of the Queen Dyer fo. 226. b. Coke lib. 5. fo. 77.
Salmons case.
where the award is of one single matter only, or of many things, all within
the submission; yet if it be not lf all submitted, where the award is
conditional, or not agreeing in circumstances (as I have showed you before) or
if it be uncertain, impossible, etc. though but in part (as I shall show you
hereafter) in such cases likewise the award will be totally void. Rudston and
Ya^e^ case cited afterward:


Thirdly, and lastly, where the award is of one thing only, or of several
things, 17. E. 4. 5. 18 E. 4. 22. b.
part within the submission, and part out, there the award is void only as to
that which is out of the submission, 19 E. 4. 1. 21 E. 4. 75 17 H. 7.
and good for the residue.

To these cases that I have cited, Keilway 43 and 45. Moore and Bedels case
before
I shall only add one case remembered before, and that is* Cornelius Lawrence
and Carres case, which was thus: They submitted themselves to the award of I.
S. concerning an Action of account pending; the Arbitrator made an award
touching the account, and further award, that every of the parties should
release to the other all actions. In this case it was adjudged that the award
was good, as to the account, which was submitted, and void for the surplusage.
See fol. 9. b.

But note, Reader, that though an arbitrament may be void in part, and good in
part as in the cases aforesaid, yet it cannot be totally void, An award void
against one of the parties, i^ void against both.
as to one of the parties to the submission, and good against the other; for as
the award must be on both sides (as I shall show you hereafter) so I conceive
the award must be equally and reciprocally obligatory to both parties, and if
it be void against one, it will be void against both.

And I conceive that Moore and Bedels case cited before, In Osburns case. Coke
l. 10. f. 131
will warrant this: The case was thus, Bedel recovered by default in an action
of Waste, against Moore 45. l. damages, and had judgment, after they submitted
themselves to an arbitrament, and an award is made that Moore should pay to
Bedel 10 l. at certain days, and 15 l. at certain other days; and that for
payment of the 15 l. one William Salter should be ready to seal and deliver 15
Obligations, and the award was of other things also out of the submission: and
in consideration thereof, that Bedel should discharge Moore of 20 l. parcel of
the said 45 l. recovered in the said Writ of Waste, and that upon the readiness
of William Salter to seal and deliver the said 15 Obligations, Bedel should
release to Moore all actions and demands, etc.

In this case Moore brought an action against Bedel, and showed how that he
paid the 10 l. etc. and assigned a breach of the award, that the Defendant had
not made the release upon request.

It was resolved, that though that many things are awarded to be done in
satisfaction of another, (as in this case) and some are within the submission
(as here the payment of the money) and some out (as in this case, all to be done
by Salter being a stranger) and so void; and though that all were intended by
the Arbitrators to be one full and entire recompense, for the things that the
other should do in consideration of this (as here the discharge of the 20 l.
and the release by the Defendant) notwithstanding if any to be done or to be
given to the party, though that it be of small value be within the submission,
the award is good; so in this case judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

In this case it is apparent, that if what was awarded on the Plaintiffes part,
had been all out of the submission, and by consequence void, that then the
Defendant in such case had not been tied to perform what was awarded on his
part, for an arbitrament void against one, is void against both.

Rudston and Yates^, case cited before: Hill. 15. Car. in the Kings Bench. Rot.
113.
an Infant and one of full age submitted themselves to an award, it was
adjudged that the submission, and by consequence the award, were absolutely
void as to the Infant; and being void as to the Infant, that it was likewise
void as to the man of full age; for that the award ought to be equally binding.

And now I have shown you where an arbitrament shall be void in the whole, and
where in part only: It will be necessary that I show you, where a bond for not
abiding such an award shall be forfeited, and where not.

Where an Obligation shall be forfeited for not performing of an Award, which
is void in part or in the whole, and where not?
The Law as to this, takes this difference, betwixt an award void in the whole,
and an award void in part only. Where the award is totally void* there the bond
can never be forfeited or the nonperformance of it: because, that a void
arbitrament and no arbitrament, are both one in the judgment of Law.

And therefore no more then a bond can be forfeited, Coke lib. 10. f. 131. b 7
H. 8. Keilway, fo. 175 a.
where there is no award made can it be forfeited where there is a void award
made. For as in the first case, he cannot observe tha^ which is not; so in the
last, the Law requires not the observation of that which is void.

As for the book in 22 Hen. 6. where there was a submission by bond, and an
award to pay 20 s. to a stranger; and it is there said, that the judgment of
the Court was, that though the award were void, yet it ought to be performed by
reason of the bond; for otherwise the bond is forfeited: and therefore says
the book, the Plaintiff traversed the award, quod mirum, says Brook for this
is no award between the Plaintiff and the Defendant.

Well might he wonder at it indeed, for certainly this cannot be Law: but
because it is sufficiently refused by my Lord Coke in his tenth book, the place
cited before, I shall thus pass it. But now on the other side, where the award
is void in part only, there the bond may be farfeited for not observing the
award, for as much as is within the submission, though not for that which is
not contained in the submission: and therefore if a breach be assigned in that
part which is void* the action will not lie.

In Emery and Emerys case cited before, Mich. 41. and 42. of the Queen in the
Common Pleas. 18. E. 4. fo. 22. b. 23. a. Styles case 41. and 42. of the Qu. in
the Common Pleas, ac.
Glanvile cited a case betwixt Hellier and Rendals in the Kings Bench in which
he said, he was of Counsel, where the Plaintiff assigned his breach at a void
matter, and after verdict for the Plaintiff this was spoken in arrest of
judgment; and judgment quod quer. nihil capiat per billam. But now a breach
may be assigned as to that which is within the submission, and the bond
forfeited for it.

In 18 E. 4. it was ^awarded that one of the parties should pay 40 l. to the
other, 10 l. in hand: and that he and three others should be bound for the
payment of the thirty pound residue. In this case by Brian, Neale, and Choke,
though that the award be void, as to the strangers, yet it is not, void as to
the party which submitted, but he must plead the award verbatim, as the
arbitrators gave it, and in performance of it he must say, that he himself was
bound for the payment of the 30 l. rest at a day, and shall not speak of the
sureties.

So in Cornelius Lawrence and Carres case cited before* Mich. 7. Ioc. in the
Kings B.
it was adjudged, that where there is an award of more then is submitted, it is
good for that which is submitted, and void for the surplusage, and that the
bond is forfeited for not performance of that which is within the submission.
See fo. 9. b.

In 17 H. 7. by Vavisor and Fronick. 17 H. 7. Keilway, f. 43. pl 10 and 45. pl*
^
If A. B. be bound to stand to the award of certain persons of, etc. who award
that the said A. B. and E. his wife shall levy a fine of the same lands to the
other party, though that the award be void as to the wife of A. B. yet the said
A. B. is bound upon pain of forfeiture of his bond, In Oshorns case. Coke lib.
10. 131. b.
to do it. And agreeing with these cases, is Moor^ and Bedels case so often
remembered before.

And we must observe, that where a man is tied by promise to stand to an award,
it will be the same with the Obligation, as to those things before laid down, as
you may see in Moor^ and, Bedels case.

And now having declared unto you in what case a bond shall be forfeited for
not performing of an award, and in what not. It will be necessary in the next
place (before I proceed) to clear the point of notice of the arbitrament; that
is,

Whether the Compromittors which have bound themselves to stand to an Award,
are bound to take notice of it at their own peril or not?
This very point is as much controverted and debated in 8 Edw. 4. the Duchess
of Suffolks case, ^ E. 4. 1. 10. 13. and 21.
by all the Judges in the Chequer chamber, as it is possible for a case to be:
and thee ^s as much variety of judgment and opinion in it, as ever I met with
in any one case of the Law.

And though I do conceive the better opinion in that case to be (for it is not
resolved) that the party who (...) bound himself to stand to the ^ward, must
take notice of it at his own peril: Because as Catesby says ^^cellently well,
though that a man by reason shall not be compelled to (...) a thing without
having notice of (...), yet a man may bind himself by his deed to do a thing,
the which by reason he should not be bound to do.

Yet I conceive the judgment of these learned men, viz. Fairfax, Starkey,
Yelverton, and others, ought not to be so undervalued, especially upon no less
then four several debates of the point, Coke lib: 8 fo. 92. b
as to be called a sudden opinion, as it is in Fraunces case in my Lord Cokes 8
book. But for the Law in this point, certainly it is now setlet and in peace,
that the Compromittor must take notice of it at his own peril, having bound
himself to stand to and observe the award.

In 1 Hen. 7. the opinion was clear (says the book) that the Obligor^ ought to
take notice of the award at his own peril, 1 H. 7. f. 5.
because he has bound himself so to do.

And in 18 E. 4. by Brian, 18 E. 4. 18 a.
Vavisor, and Catesby, Justices; where an award is made, the party ought to
take notice of it at his own peril, and they say, that so it was adjudged in
the time of the same King, in the Kings Bench.

Which cases are agreed for Law in my Lord Cokes 4 book, Coke lib. 4. fo. 82.
and li. 8. fo. 9^. b.
as also in his 8 book Fraunces case, where it is said, that so is the Law
without question.

And the reason given there is, because when a man binds himself to do or
perform any thing awarded by a stranger, he does by this, take notice at his
peril, of all things incident to this, for the saving of his obligation.

And therefore we may safely conclude the Book in 7. H. 8. where there is an
opinion to the contrary, 7 H. 8. Keilway ^. 175. pl. 8
to be no Law: but of this sufficient. I shall now proceed to show you in what
respects or for what other rea^ons an award may be said to be void in Law: the
first ground I laid down, was where the award is not according to the
submission, the next shall be the incertainety,

Where an award shall be void in Law for the incertainety;
In all cases where the award is uncertain, it is void: for the arbitrators
(as I have showed before) are Judges, and their judgment must be certain; for
judicium debet esse cer^^^. And the Law does in all cases abhor uncertainty,
because it is the mother of confusion.

Samons case; Coke lib. 5. fo. 77. b. and 78. a.
the Arbitrator awarded, that the one of the parties should enter into a bond
to the other, and does not award in what sum the bond shall be, adjudged void
for the incertainty.

For, as the book says, the arbitrators are judges of the case, and their
judgment awarded, ought to be certain, so that by this the controversy be
decided, that it may not be the cause, through the uncertainty of new
controversy.

Martham and Iennings's case, Mich. 4. Jac. in the Kings Bench. Rot. 32.
in debt upon an Obligation to stand to the arbitrament of Poly of Grayes Inn,
for the title of Copy hold in question betwixt the parties; Poly awarded, that
Iennings should pay to the Plaintiff 20 marks, viz. 6 l. 131. 4d. super
vicesimum primum diem Maii; and 6 l. 13 s. 4d. at the Feast of St. Michael next
following: and that the plaintiff should release to the defendant all his
right in the Coppyhold, super predictum primum diem Maii (omitting vicesimum)
where there was no first day named before.

The Defendant pleaded, that there was no award made: the Plaintiff replied,
that there was an award made, and sets it forth; and that the Defendant has
not paid the 6 l. 131. 4d. upon the first day of May: the Defendant demurred,
intending that the arbitrament was void for the uncertainty, viz. in that it
was to be paid super predict. primum diem Mitij, where there was no first day
named before. Tanfield Justice, the arbitrament is void in the whole, because
that the day to which the release is referred to be made it uncertain, and so
it does not appear when it shall be made: and for that it does appear, that the
intent of the arbitrator was, that it should be made at a day certain, and this
is not certainly expressed, it is void. And though that the arbitrament
consists upon diverse parts, and some are certain, yet if any part be uncertain,
all is void, if it be material and concern a party to the submission, as here
it does. And it is not like the case of 19 E. 4. 1. for there the award which
was void for part, that part concerned a stranger not party to the arbitrament,
but here it concerns both parties to the arbitrament. And though that there be
another clause, that the Plaintiff shall make further assurance; yet his
intent was, that the other should be also done: and because that that is void
for the uncertainty, all is void: for an award is like a judgment, which if it
be imperfect in any part, it is void for the whole; and after, judgment was
given for the Defendant.

Note here Reader, that if an award be made of several things, all within the
submission; if it be uncertain in part only, it is totally void, which does
agree with the differences which I have formerly laid down.

In 8 E. 4. cited before, ^ E. 4. 11. ^
by Yelverton: if an award be made, that an action shall be conceived betwixt
the parties, by the advice of S, and F, the award is void: because says he,
every arbitrament ought to be full and certain, and so it is not here, until
the said S, and F. limit the action.

I must confess the greater opinion in this case is, that the award is good:
but I conceive the opinion of Yelverton (as I formerly said) to be the better
opinion; because the judgment of Arbitrators ought to be final (as I shall
show you hereafter) and nothing ought to be referred to the judgment of other
persons or to the law: for by the submission (which must be their rule) they
themselves are to end al suits and controversies betwixt the parties; and if
they do not, their award is not according to the submission, and therefore void.

Rudston and Yates's case (which I have put often before, Hill. 15. Car. in the
Kings B. Rot. 313. 8 E. 4. 1.
though to other purposes) was thus: an Infant and a man of full age submitted
themselves to an award; the Arbitrators award, that the Infant should pay. 5 l.
to the other party, for quite rents and other small things, etc. It Is true, that
in this case it was adjudged (as I have formerly said) that the submission of
the Infant was absolutely void. But it was also adjudged, that the award in
this case was void, because of the uncertainty of those words, other small
things, it not appearing what those other things were: and it may be they were
such things, for which an Infant by the Law may not be chargeable: and by the
same reason they have assessed 5 l. they might have assessed 20 l.

Here likewise note Reader, that the award being of things within the
submission, was adjudged totally void for the uncertainty of part only.

Two submit themselves to the award of I. S. who awards, Pasch. 15 Car in the
Kings B.
that one of the parties should pay a certain sum to the other, and that the
other in consideration of this, should discharge him of a bond in which they
two were bound to a third person in an 100. l. out t^ circit^r.

In this case it was objected, that the arbitrament is void, because the
Arbitrators have arbitrated a thing uncertain; by reason that it does not
certainly appear of what sum the bond was in which they were bound, and the
^o circiter is utterly uncertain.

But the opinion of the whole Court was, that there was a sufficient certainty;
because that lies not in the power of the Arbitrators to know the direct sum,
and a small variation is not material, and therefore the award was held good.

Nichols and Grummons case* Hob. Kep. p. 68. pl. 54
there the Arbitrators award, that one of the parties should pay 3 l. 101. to
the other, and does not say for what; so that it may appear whether it
concerned him or no, it was held void for the uncertainty. And if this should
not be void, it might be very mischievous to the party; for by this means he
might be doubly charged. For in an action brought for the same thing, for which
this money is awarded to be paid, I doubt the arbitrament could be Tamen quare,
be-because Hob. Kep. ubi supra seems contrary. An averment of the parties
cannot declare the intent of the arbitrators. Mic. 7 and 8 of the Queen, Dyer
fo. 242. pl. 52 Pasch. 4. Jac. in the Kings B. This case commenced Pasch. 3
Jac. Rot. 478.
no plea in bar of the action; because it cannot appear, whether it were for
the same thing or no. And the avertement of the party can never declare the
intent of the Arbitrators, and so help the uncertainty or other imperfection in
the arbitrament, as it is agreed in this case, and resolved also in 7 and 8 of
the Queen, Dyer: and in Girling and Gosnolds case, here immediately following.

Girling and Gosuolds case in the Kings Bench was thus: Debt was brought upon a
bond for not observing of an award; which was, that the Defendant should pay to
the Plaintiff 20 l. per annum, during the continuance of two leases for years
in being of the Parsonage impropriate of Yarmouth, etc. and it was not shown
in the award for what term the leases were; but the Plaintiff showed for what
term they were, and the continuance of them; and alleged a breach for non
payment of the 20 l. etc.

In this case it was objected, that the award was void for the uncertainty,
because that it did not express for what time or term the leases for years
were, and that it could not be aided by the averrement of the party: and for
the uncertainty Samons case was cited; for the averment my L. Dyers case which
I put you before.

But by Popham Chief Justice the award is good: he agreed that where the award
is uncertain, it is void: and that the parties can never aid it by an
averrement; to show the intent of the Arbitrators, if it be not expressed in
the award, either directly, or by circumstance.

Bu^ he said that if Samons case in Cokes 5. book had been, An award which does
refer, or may be reduced to a certainty, is good.
tha^ the party should be bound in such a sum, as he was bound in to stand to
the award, or by other reference, so that it might be reduced to a certainty,
and this infallibly; in such case the award had been good.

And in this case the payment of the 20 l. per annum is referred to the
continuance of the leafes, which is certain; and therefore he conceived the
award to be good. Of the same opinion were Williams, Yelverton, and Tanfield,
Justices.

Here Reader you may observe that an award which is referred or may be reduced
to a certainty, is good enough, agreeing with that rule in law, certum est quod
certum reddi potest.

This shall suffice, to show you in what case an award shall be void for
uncertainty. The next thing considerable is,

Where an Award shall be void in Law for impossibility.
Wheresoever the Arbitrators award a thing impossible to be done, in such case
the award is void, and by consequence the bond not forfeitable for the
nonperformance of it (as I have showed before) for it were a most unjust and
unreasonable thing for to make a man incur a penalty for the not doing of
that which is in it self impossible to be done.

In 8 E. 4. by Yelverton: 8 E. 4. 10. a.
if an arbitrament be made to do a thing impossible, the party for the
nonperformance of this shall not lose his Obligation, notwithstanding that he
be bound to stand to the arbitrament, because he cannot by any possibility do
it.

As if they award that I shall make the Thames to run over the seller of
Westminster within a day: or that I shall pull down Paul's steeple with my hands
within an hour, or the like impossibilities; because I cannot perform it, I am
excused of my Obligation.

So in 8 E. 4. by Moile: 8. E. 4. 1. b and 12. b 9 H. 6. 16. by Keble. 19. E.
4. 1. by Nele. and 22 H. 6 46. ac.
if the arbitrators award a thing impossible, as if I put my self upon an
arbitrament this day, and they award, that I shall pay a sum certain at a day
which was before the submission; I shall not forfeit my Obligation for the
nonperformance of this arbitrament, because that it was impossible to be
performed.

In 21 E. 4. by Genney: if an award be, 21 E. 4. 40 a.
that I shall release all the right which I have in the Manor of I, S. in the
County of M. to Pigot, or levy a fine to him, and in truth there is no such
Manor; this award is void, because it is impossible.

So if the award be, 21 E. 4. 31 39.
that he shall release his suit against B. and he has no suit against him,
this is a void award.

But note Reader. Where the thing awarded is in it self feasible and possible
to be done, though in relation to him that is to do it, it may not be possible;
yet because it carries with it no apparent impossibility, the award in such
case is good.

If the Arbitrators award, 8. E. 4. 1. by Moile.
that he shall pay a 1000 Marks presently, he is bound to do it: and it is the
folly of the party to put such confidence in the parties that are chosen
arbitrators.

So they may arbitrate things, 19 E. 4. 4. by Nele and Choke.
the party cannot do (which are the very words of the book) as that the
Defendant shall pay 10 l. in money, where peradventure he never had 10 d. Or
that he shall pay 20 Tons of wine, or the like; where he has not one: in
these cases the award is good.

In debt upon a bond, 9 H. 7. 15. b.
to stand to an award; the Defendant pleaded, that the Arbitrators did award
that the Defendant within eight-dayes after the award should go to the house of
Sir Henry Collet, and that he should bring a bale of Woad, etc. and the
Defendant says that there was not any bale of Woad in the house of the said
Henry Collet, within eight days after the said award.

By Keble this plea is not good; because he has bound himself to stand to the
award, and to perform it, which he must do, otherwise his obligation is
forfeited. Besides this is a thing feasible, for though Sir Hen, Collet had not
any bales in his house, if he would have performed the condition, he ought to
have bought certain bails, and to have brought them to the house of Sir Henry
Collet, etc. and then departed etc. and because he has tied himself to perform
the arbitrament, he ought to do it, if it may be by any possibility done.

The reason of all these cases is, because it is the folly of the parties to
make choice of, and to put so great confidence in such persons, whom they chose
to be their arbitrators, and it is no news that a man should suffer through
his own folly.

Again, where the thing awarded is in it self possible, and possible also as
to the party who is to do it, yet,

Where the thing awarded lies not in the power of the party himself, without
the aid of a third person, in such case the award is void.
Two submit themselves to an arbitrament, 8. E. 4. fo 2 a by Yelverton 22 H. 6.
46. ^c
the arbitrators. award that one of them shall make I. S. to pay 20. l to the
other the award is void: because in this case* it lies in the will of I.S.
whether he will do it, or no and the party has no means to enforce him.

Two submit themselves to the award of I.S. who does award one of the parties
to pay to the other 40 l. 10. l. in hand, 17. E 4 fo 5. b 19 E. 4 fo 1.
and for the 30 l. residue that he find three several persons to be bound
every one in 10. l. to the party.

In this case by the opinion of all the Justices, the: award was void. And
there it is said that in an arbitrament the Law intends, that the arbitrators
should be indifferent and equal judges betwixt the parties: bu^ what
indifferency is this, to cause a man to make such a thing to be done, which
lies in the will of a stranger whether he will do it or n^.

As put the case (says the book) that an arbitrator will award that I must
cause the King to give the tower of London to the other, such an award is
clearly void.

And by Brian in 19 E. 4. an arbitrament that the party before such a day shall
19 E. 4. (...) H. 7. (...). b. ac. Where I may do the thing awarded my ^^lfe,
or enforce it to be don, the award, is good. 5 H 7. ubi sup^a. 21 E. 436 ac.
levy a fine before us, is good; but if the arbitrament be, that he shall
command us to sit here, and to make him levy a fine this is void for he has
not power to do it.

So in 5 H 7. an award that the parties shall discontinue and make Retraxits of
their suits, is good: the reason of these cases, I conceive may be, because
that though these things cannot be done without the act of Court, yet here is
concurrence of the act of the party also, which does produce the act of the
Court.

And (...) Chief Justice in 21 E. 4. takes the true difference, 21. E. 4 fo 4^^
says he there, where the act may be done by my self, without the aid of a
third person, in such case I ought to do it; but where it cannot be done
without the aid of a third person, there it is otherwise.

There was a case which was 15 of this King, Pasch 15 Car. in the Kings Bench.
which I cited before to another purpose, which was thus; an award was made,
that one of the parties should pay a certain sum to the other, and that the
other in consideration of this, should acquit him of a bond, in which they were
both bound to a third person in a 100 l. etc.

In this case, the award was held good, and this diversity was taken by the
Court: where the arbitrators arbitrate a party to do a thing which lies in his
power without the aid of a third person there the award is good, otherwise,
where it lies not in his power without the aid of a third person.

And here it was agreed that the thing awarded was feasible by the party
himself, without the aid of the oblig^e, and this difference was taken by the
Court, where the bond was forfited, and the penalty incurred and where (...)
where the day of payment was not incurred; there the payment of the^ money, at
the day would be a good discharge of the bond, and by consequence a good
acquit (...) of the party, but where the bond was forfeited, there it could not.

And Ion^^ Justice said that he might compel the oblige^ upon payment of the
money, though the bond were forfeited, to de^iver the bond by subpoen^ in
Chancery; or that he might suffer an action to be brought against him, and then
discharge and pay it.

According to the opinion of Justice Jones in his former case it was ruled, 17
E. 4. fo 5. b.
that where arbitrators do award, that whereas such a one was seized to my
use, that I should cause him to make a release to the other being in
possession, that the award was good; because that I have such an interest and
power that* I may compel my feoffees to do it by subpoena in the Chancery.

Thus you see; that where I may do the thing awarded my self, without the aid
of another, or may enforce it to be done, in such case the award will be good:
the next thing to be considered is,

Where an Award shall be void by reason of the not indifferency of it, or
because it is made of out side only.
As Arbitrator^ are indifferently elected, so the law intends (as it is said in
17 E. 4.) that the arbitrators should be indifferent and equal Judges between
the parties, which they cannot be, if they do not give satisfaction to both
sides, and therefore in such case, where the award is not mutually
satisfactory, it is void.

It was an ingenious saying of Hearu an Emery and Emerys case cited before;
arbitrators, says he, are indifferently chosen, so that both the parties may
have recompense in regard of their Bond, which is equale pondus to both; and an
arbitrament, says he, is like a fine, wherein the Judges are arbitrators, one
has the land, and pro hac concordia the other has money.

If the defendant plead an arbitrament made betwixt him and the plaintiff of
all quarrels between them, 7 H. 6 fo. 40. by Strange. ^0 H. 6. 19 a. ac.
etc. who award that the defendant should go quit of all actions and quarrels
had by the plaintiff against him; and nothing is spoken of the quarrels which
the defendant has against the plaintiff, the arbitrament, is void.

So, 39 H. 6 by dris^^^
if two submit them selves to an award of all Trespasses, and an award is made,
that the one shall make amends to the other, and nothing is awarded that he
shall do to him again, this is a void award, because all is for the one party,
and nothing for the other.

In Trespesse for taking away of goods, 12 H. 7. 14 15
the defendant pleaded an arbitrament, which awarded, that because the
defendant had taken away the goods of the plaintiff, that he should re-deliver
them in satisfaction of the Trespass, which he did and ^here by the better
opinion the plea is naught, because that re-delivery of his own goods, can be
no satisfaction for the taking and detaining of them.

An Arbitrament is no plea in trespass, 43. E. 3. 28
if the defendant do not say that the arbitrators awarded that he should give
something to the plaintiff more, or less, in satisfaction for that is a
satisfaction to neither side; the plaintiff is not satisfied for the trespass
done him, nor the defendant discharged thereof without some satisfaction for
the wrong done by him.

In trespass for goods, 45 E 3. 16
the defendant pleaded an Arbitrament that he should retain part of the goods,
and should deliver the rest, which he has been always ready to deliver and
demands judgment; this is, conceived to be no plea: and this case was put, in
debt of 10 l. the defendant pleads an arbitrament that he should pay part, and
not the rest; or to pay the moity and retain the other moity, this no plea.

^Tis true, B. R, Arbitrament ^.
that Brook makes a quere of the case, because it was not adjudged; but
withal concludes, that it seems it is no plea: and certainly so is the Law.
For if an award for the re-delivery of all the goods could be no plea, because
no satisfaction (as the case is in 12 H. 7. cited before) much less an award
for the re-delivery of party only: for this is no other then to endeavor to
satisfy one wrong with another.

For the latter case, 9. H. 716. a.
as it is said by Keble, in 9 H. 7. that it is against the Law for the
arbitrators to award the party to pay more then of right he ought to pay. So
certainly it is as much against the Law, to award the party to pay less then
of right he ought to pay, for there is no equality nor satisfaction for that
which is more or less in either case.

Nichols and Grummons case, cited before: Hob: Rep pa. 68 l. p. 44.
there was an award, that the defendant should depart from his house, wherein
he dwelt, etc. and should pay 3 l. 10 s, to the plaintiff, and it does not
appear for what, etc. In this case it was adjudged, that the award was void,
because it was of one side only. But now, where there is either an acquittall
or an express satisfaction on both sides, or of one side only, with an employed
discharge of the other; in such case the award will be good.

It is a good award, 19. H. 6. 37. 20. H. 6. 19. 22 H. 6 39. 9. E. 4. 44. a.
that because that the one party has done more trespass to the other, then
the other to him, that he shall give a penny in satisfaction, and that the
other shall be quit against him.

An arbitrament, 22. H. 6. 39 19. E. 4. 8. a 10. H. 6. 14 19. of the Queen.
Dyer. fo. 3 56. a. pl. 39
that the one has done trespass to the other, and that the other has
likewise done trespass to him; and therefore that the one shall be quit
against the other, and that the other likewise shall be quit against him, is a
good arbitrament.

In trespass for the taking away of goods, 12. H 7. 14 b. 15. a.
though an award that he shall re-deliver the goods to the plaintiff in
satisfaction, be no good award; yet by Keble and Tremaile, if the award had
been that he should carry them from such a place to such a place at his own
costs, this had been good.

And by Keble, Dyer, u^i supta,
if a man take my horse from me, and we put our selves upon Arbitrament: in
this case, if the arbitrators award that he shall keep the horse until the
Feast of Easter, and then to deliver the horse; this is a good award, for he
shall be charged with the meat of the horse which is a profit and avail to me:
and I am discharged of the keeping and the meat of the horse, which is my
proffit.

Thus you see, That a small or seeming satisfaction only, so the award be on
both sides, may be good enough. So in Dyer it is said, that there must be
something done by either party to the other, commodious in appearance at the
least.

The reason of these cases, may be, because that the arbitrators are made
judges of the matters in controversy between the parties: and therefore where
the submission is of things uncertain, as trespass* or the like; in such case
if the arbitrators shall adjudge the offenses to be equal where they are not
so, and so a mutual discharge on both sides: or shall award the payment of 10
l. where there was not 5. s. damage; or but a penny, where peradventure there
might be 10 l: damage. In such case there is no remedy because you have made
them your judges, and tied your self to stand to their judgment. Otherwise it
may be where things certain are submitted, as debt; or the like, as I have
shown you before.

And now I shall put you a case or two to the former, where there is an
express satisfastion of the one part, and an implied discharge of the other
only, and yet the award good.

An arbitrament, 22 H. 6. 3^ by Moile.
that the defendant shall pay a penny to the plaintiff in satisfaction of all
manner of actions, which he has paid, is a good harre.

Nichols and Grummons case cited before, Hob. Rep. p. 68. pl. 54
If an award be, that an obligor in a single obligation shall pay the debt*
this is a void award without there be a provision for his discharge; because
payment is no discharge in that case without an acquittance.

But if the award be, 22 E. 4. 25 ac.
that he shall pay 10 l. for a trespass, it is good* because a satisfaction
implies a discharge.

So an award, Coke lib ^ fo 68. a. B^ashpoles* case
that the defendant shall pay a debt that was due to the plaintiff, which he
also promised to pay, is good; for there the award is as well of the one side
as the other; because the one receives the money, and the other is discharged
of the debt, and of his promise to pay it.

Thus you see, that where an award is expressly of one side, and implyedly only
on the other, that in such case the award is good. The next thing to be
considered is, that though the award be on both sides, yet,

Where there is no means by Law for either party to attain unto that which is
awarded him, the award is void.
In trespass, 22 H 6, 12 18 b. ac 19. a.
the defendant pleaded an award, that the plaintiff should pay to the
defendant 10 l* and release to him all actions of trespass, and after the
defendant should release to the plaintiff all trespasses, which he was always
ready to do, and is yet, if the plaintiff had paid the 10 l and released. In
this case this was held no good plea; because, that if the plaintiff had paid
the money and released, he could have had no remedy to enforce the defendant to
have released; and therefore this award is no bar of the action.

So in a Writ of forger of false Deeds, 19. H. 6 37 b. 38. a.
the Defendant pleaded an arbitrament, that the plaintiff should be nonsuited
in that Writ; and that the defendant who has an assize against the plaintiff
should be nonsuit in this, and says, the day is not yet come, and demanded
judgment: in this case the plea was held naught, because, that if he had bin
not-suited in this action, he had no remedy by specialty, or otherwise to
enforce the defendant to be nonsuit in the assize.

And here Newton said, should this be a good plea in a Writ of forger of false
Deeds for the defendant, to say that there was an award, that the plaintiff
should have an acre of land of the defendant in amends: I say (says he) that
it could not, if he does not say, The which he has conveyed to him; for there
is no remedy in this case to constrain him to convey it to him.

If an arbitrament be that the defendant shall be bound by such a day, 5 E. 4.
7. ^. 45. E. 3. 16
which is not come; he shall not plead this in an action of trespass, for then
the plaintiff should be barred, and should have no action to compel the
defendant to make the Obligation. Note Reader, that these cases must be
intended where the submission is without specialty, otherwise he were not
without remedy,

In this case, 28. H 6. 12 2. H. 4. 4. 5 E. 4. 7. 19. E. 4. 8. 20, H. 6. 12
Keilway 121 a
there are these three grounds observable, and warranted by the books.

First, where the award is for payment of money at a day to come, there the
award is good, because an action of debt will lie for the money upon the
arbitrament if it be not paid, 19. H. 6. 38. a by Nuton p, 5. 28.
or the party may resort to his action again, if he please.

Secondly, 19. A. 6. 37, by Ascue, and Nut^on. 9 E, 4. 44, a. qy. Nedahm.
though the award be of a collateral thing for which there is no remedy, yet
if it be executed, it is good.

Thirdly, and lastly, where the award is of a collateral thing not executed;
yet if the submission be by speciallty, the award is good.

Upon these grounds you may observe these four rules to direct you where an
arbitement shall be a good plea in bar of an action in these cases.

First, 20. H 6 18 19 28 H. 6. 12. 2. H 4. 4. 9. E. 4 51. 5. E. 4. 7. 19. E. 4.
8. 45. E. 3. 16 et. 20. H. 6 12.
where the award is for the payment of money, for which you have remedy, and
the day of payment not past; in such case the award is a good plea in bar of
the action.

Secondly, where the day of payment is past* it is no plea in bar of the
action without pleading of payment.

Thirdly, where the day of payment is past, 20. H. 6. 18 Br. Arbitrament. 3. 2.
H. 4. 4.
yet if there be no default in the defendant; in such case, I conceive, the
arbitrament not executed, is a good plea in bar of the Action.

Fourthly, 19. H. 6. 37. 5. E. 4, 7. a 7. H. 4 31.
and lastly, where the award is of a thing for which the party has no remedy,
though the day be not yet come, in which the thing ought to be done or
delivered, in this case the award is no plea in bar of the action. According to
these differences it* has been ruled in a case in the K. Bench, which was thus.

The defendant in trespass pleaded an award that he should instantly pay 20 s.
to the plaintiff, Mich. 9. Iac in the Kings Bench
and so demanded judgment of the action: by Flemming Chief Justice, Williams
and Crook Justices it was holden, that the plea was naught, because that he
did not show the money was paid, and these differences agreed.

An arbitrament pleaded in bar of an action, where the defendant has not
performed the thing, and the day past, is no good plea. But where the day of
the performance of the thing awarded is to come, and the doing of the thing
awarded may be compelled by action, there the arbitrament is a good plea in
bar of the action.

And by Flemming if the arbitrament be ^o make a release, or such other
collateral matter, which the defendant cannot be enforced by action to do, in
such case the arbitrament is no good plea in bar of the action, though the
day of performance be not yet come.

And you must know Reader, that where the arbitrament is to make a Release, or
such other collateral thing, and the day to come, though the sumission were by
specialty, yet the award would be no plea in bar of an action; because that
cannot enforce the doing of it, though it may be forfeited for the thing not
done.

And so says Nedham in 9 E. 4. though the arbitrament be void to this intent
that the plaintiff has no action to compel the defendant to make the
release; 9 E. 4. 44. a
yet it is good to this intent, if the party do not perform it, that he shall
forfeit the penalty of the obligation. But enough of this, the next thing
considerable, is,

Where an award shall be void because it is not final?
The arbitrators (as I have often told you) are Judges of the matters in
controversy referred unto them, and their award is a judgment: now ^udicium,
must not only be certum (as is said before) but determinatum also, it must
determine the matter in controversy.

It Is true, 19 H. 6. 36
an award may in some cases (as I have showed before) be good of part of the
things only submited, but we must understand this so that the award must be
final as to that part, or else it will be void.

An award that either party shall be Nonsuit against the other in actions
commenced by them is void, because it makes no end of the matters in
controversy.

And every arbitrament, says the Book, ought to make an end and final
determination of the things in dispute and controversy; which it does not in
this case, because that notwithstanding the Nonsuits, they may commence their
Suites, de nove.

And upon this ground, as also the former authority, 5 H. 7. fo. 13.
I conceive that the Book in 5. H. 7. is no Law; where there is an opinion
that an award of a Nonsuit may be good, but it is upon this reason, because it
is not only the act of the Court, but the act of the party also. But if it were
wholly the act of the party, yet for the reason before given* because it is no
final conclusion, I conceive it cannot be good for this is but like blowing out
of a candell, which a man may at his own pleasure light again.

So, in all those cases that I have put you before, where the award is of one
side only, it is void also for this reason; because it does not determine the
controversies between them, and the controversies cannot be ended, without they
be ended in respect of both parties.

So likewise in the cases that I have put you before, Coke li. 5. fo. 78. a.
Samons case.
where the award is uncertain, it is also void for this cause, for that it is
not final. For an uncertain award cannot decide the matter in controversy,
but is more apt to beget new strifes and variances, then to conclude the old.

In 8 E. 4. an award is made, 8 E. 4. 11. a
that an action shall be conceived betwixt the parties by the advice of S. and
F. I do conceive in this case the award is void, because it is not final: for
this concludes not the controversy, but leaves it to the judgment of law: See
fo. 16. b.

Warley and Beckwiths case, in debt upon a bond to stand to an arbitrament: the
arbitrators award that the defendant shall pay several sums to the plaintiff,
Hob. Rep. p. 306. pl. 281.
which were aleaged by the plaintiff to be done unto him. And further, that if
the defendant at, or before the Feast of S. Andrew the Apostle, then next
following* should before the said arbitrators disprove the debt, or any part
thereof* then so much should be deducted out of the payment of the several
sums aforesaid, etc.

It Is true, I find no judgment in this case, yet I conceive the Law will be
somewhat strong in it, that the arbitrament is void because it leaves the
matter in suspense and undecided, whereas it ought to be final and conclusive.
And besides, this is upon the matter a reserving of power to make a second
arbitrament, which I conceive they cannot do.

I shall conclude this point with that ingenious conceit of Herne, 41 and 42 of
the Qu. in the Common pleas
in Emery and Emeryes case, remembered before* only a word or two more of his
added.

An arbitrament, says he, is like a fine, wherein the Judges are arbitrators:
one has land, and pro hac concordia, the other has money; therefore fines upon
condition are refused* because not final.

So the Law does reject all arbitrements that are conditional, or which leave
the matters in controversy in suspense, or unconcluded. For as a fine is so
called because that it does finem li^^bus imponere: so the proper work or
office of an arbitrament, is to put an end to controversy.

So Yelverton in 8 E. 4. An arbitrament, 8 E. 4. 12. ^
says he, is used for the Common weal, for to decide debates and wrongs
amongst the people, as fines are; here he likewise joins them both together.

And the very words of the condition in every bond to stand to an award, will
sufficiently instruct the arbitrators what they are to do in this behalf
(which certainly prudent Antiquity put in to that very purpose) where the
parties do submit themselves to the arbitrament; sentence, and final
determination of the arbitrators: and therefore the award is not according to
the submission, if it be not final: the next thing to be considered, is,

Where an award against law shall be void.
It may be aptly demanded, what I intend by an award against law: for every
award that is not according to law; as where it is uncertain, impossible, or
the like (as I have shown before) may be truly said to be against law: and
therefore this will be but actum agere, to show, that an award against law
shall be void.

By Billing in 8 E. 4. an award which is impossible is against the law: 8 E. 4.
12. b
for (says he) the law is upon possibility and reason, therefore that which is
impossible is against law.

So by Nele and Choke, 19 E. 4. 1. a
an award which is made in parcels, or which enjoynes a thing not in the power
of the party, is against law.

By Keble also in 9 H. 7. an award that a man shall pay more then of right he
ought to pay, 9. H. 716. a. b.
is against law.

It Is true, that all these, or the like, in a general acceptance of the words
may be said to be against law, because they do not agree with the law.

But in a more particular and restrained acceptance of the words, Coke,
Littleton, fo. 206. b. 42 E. 3. 6. 2 H. 4. 9. 19 H. 6. 55
that is properly said to he against law; which is either malum in se, or
malum prohibitum; that is, either against the Commandments of God, or the
Decrees Maxims and Principles of the Law, as appears by the books in the
margin. And in this sense properly I conceive the Law is to be understood,
where it speaks of an award against law.

And therefore if an award be, that the defendant shall kill or rob I. S. or
that he shall maintain the plaintiff in such a suit: or that he shall be bound
to the plaintiff, being a Sheriff, to save him harmless if he shall
imbesi^l a Writ, or suffer an escape; or that he shall forge such a deed or
writing for the plaintiff, or the like: in such cases, I conceive, the award
will be void, because it enjoynes things against the law. But of this
sufficient. The next and last thing to be considered is,

Where an award made at several times, or by parcels shall be void?
An award, 19 E. 4 1. ^ by Choke.
that the defendant shall pay a certain sum of money to the plaintiff, and
that the surety for payment thereof should be by the advice of the arbitrators:
this by Choke is a void award, because that the arbitrators cannot make their*
award twice; for every arbitrament ought to be made entirely, and not by
parcels. And here is first an award for the payment of the money: and then here
is another part of the award for the sufficiency of the security, and these at
several times, which cannot be.

By Danby Justice, 39. H 6. 9.
if the arbitrators arbitrate part one day, and part another day, and give
their judgment, there the second is void; but they may commune upon one point
one day, and another, another day: so that they do not give their judgment nisi
unica vice for all.

And by Yaxley, 17 H. 7. Keilway. f. 43. pl. 10.
an arbitrament told in part, is void in the whole; for an arbitrament cannot
be made, by parcels.

I conceive Reader, that this point will stand upon this difference, where
there are several awards made* and where but one award made at several times
or by parcels. I conceive they cannot make several a vards: First, because
that were not agreeable to the submission; in which the parties bind
themselves to stand to the award and arbitrament of the arbitrators; and by
these words in the submission, they have no power to make several awards or
arbitrements: and when they have made one arbitrament, they have executed their
power and authority, and therefore a second arbitrament will be void. And
again* by the same reason that they might make two awards, they might make
twenty, which were very inconvenient.

But now on the other side, I conceive that an award may be made at several
times or by parcells* so that it be not delivered under their hands according
to the submission until the whole be made.

And certainly that which is principaly required in every arbitrament is, that
it be agreeable in substance and circumstance to the submission; which it may
well be, though it be made at several times or by parcells, so that it be made
and delivered according to the submission, at the time appointed.

And I conceive all that is done by the arbitrators, is but as a comuning or
discourse concerning the matters in controversy submited unto them; for that
they may vary in their judgments, as they shall see occasion, for they have
liberty to arbitrate according to their discretions, so they have an eye to the
submission. I say, I conceive all as nothing until they have finished, and
delivered the arbitrament, which is the complement and perfection of it.

Besides, where the submission is* of many things, and those of great
difficulty, if the Law should be that the arbitrators might not make their
arbitrament by parcells, it might be very mischeivous to the parties,
especially considering that submissions are most commonly to illiterate men.

Neither is my opinion groundless or without authority; 39 H. 6. 9.
for by Moile in 39. H. 6. an arbitrament may well be made in parcells, so that
all be made before any day assigned.

I have now finished this poor endeavor of mine of showing you what
arbitrements are good in Law and what not. I shall only add this one Rule
concerning the understanding or exposition of arbitrements, which will be very
useful in that particular, and ^o conclude all; and that is, 21. E. 4. 39 a.


That an award or an arbitrament shall be construed according to the intent or
meaning of the arbitrators* and not according to the words only, 19 H. 6. 36 37.
as you shall find by the Books quoted in the Margin. Coke li. 10 fo. 57. b.


FINIS.

