The ENCAENIA Of St. Ann's Chapel in Sandgate. OR, A SERMON Preached May 3.
1682. Before the Right Worshipful, the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriff, etc. Of the
Town and County of Newcastle upon Tyne, Upon their erecting a School and a
Catechetical Lecture for the Instruction of poor Children, and such as are
ignorant.

By JOHN MARCH, B. D. and Vicar of St. Nicholas in Newcastle upon Tyne.

Non sunt contemnenda quasi parva, sine quibus magna constare non possunt.
Hierom. Ep. ad Laetam de Institut. filiae.

Sic erudienda est Anima, quae futura est Templum Dei; nihil aliud discat
audire, nihil loqui, nisi quod ad timorem Dei pertinet. Ibid.

From a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee
wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy 3. 15.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Randal and Peter Maplisden. Book sellers, at the
Bridge-foot in Newcastle upon Tyne, MDCLXXXII.

TO THE Right Worshipful and Worshipful Timothy Robson, Esquire Mayor. Sir Robert
Shafto, Knight, Recorder. Sir Ralph Carr, Knight. Alderman. Sir Ralph Jennison, Knight.
Alderman. Sir Nathanael Johnson, Knight. Alderman. Henry Maddison, Esquire Alderman.
Henry Brabant, Esquire Alderman. Timothy Davison, Esquire Alderman. Robert Roddam, Esquire
Alderman. Matthew Jeffreyson, Esquire Alderman. George Morton, Esquire Alderman.
Nicholas Fenwick, Esquire Alderman. To John Squire, Esquire Sheriff.
And to the rest of the Common Council of the Town and County of Newcastle upon
Tyne.

Right Worshipful and Worshipful,
THis famous Town, over which you preside, has always been esteemed a place of
very great importance. In the year of our Lord 1139. when David King of Scots
had taken it by M^s. bury in Novel.
Surprise; King Stephen, says one of our a Historians, redeemed it with a
considerable ransom: So considerable, says Baker in Stephen.
another, that he gave all Cumberland, and the Earldome of Huntingdon in
exchange for it. And as it was thus considerable in those early days, so since
that time it has grown to such an height as to receive from our great Camden.
Britan.
Anti^^ary this very honorable Character, ^bs, portu nobilis, commerciorum
frequentia, and opibus florentissima.

Now a Town of this importance, as it well deserves, so in such times of
destruction as we live in, it may justly challenge the greatest care and
vigilance of those that are entrusted with the Government of it. And I do
heartily rejoice, that I need not fear the least imputation of flattery,
whilst I proclaim to the World, that as there is not any Town which can equal
it for Trade, Populousness, and Wealth; so there is none that does surpass it,
and but very few that equal it in point of Loyalty and Conformity.

This Happiness and Glory we owe in great measure to that Loyalty and
Conformity which shine forth in your own Examples; partly also to that great
encouragement you give unto the Loyal and Orthodox Clergy of the place, but
chiefly to the due (...) your Authority, in suppressing Conventicles, those
n^rious Seminaries of Foxes and Firebrands. The Speeches of Kid, etc.
Popery, Schism, and Rebellion e See the Statutes made against (...).


N^^ are you only careful to preserve Loy^ and Conformity for this present
Generation, but willing also to propagate these rare Virtues to posterity, you
have erected a School, and a Catechetical (...) for the instructing poor
ignorant people in the principles of Piety; Loyalty and Conformity. And indeed
catechizing is the surest foundation of future Loyalty and the best expedient
to secure the Protestant Religion both against Papists and Sectaries. Those of
the Church of Rome, (...) long ago (...) thus much. This Age, Catechism
Rom^^^^^.
say they, is sadly sensible what mischief Protestants have done this Church,
especially, by those little Books which they call Catechisms. And it is as
fairly acknowledged by one of note among the Crofton.
Puritans, that the shameful neglect of Catechizing gave birth to those
numerous and dangerous Sects, which were spawned in the late times of Anarchy
and Confusion.

If this plain discourse, which you have commanded to the Press, shall prove
any wise serviceable to these Pious and Loyal designs, it will afford no small
satisfaction to him, who is with all sincerity,

Right Worshipful and Worshipful, Your most humble and most obliged Servant,
John March.

PSALM XXXIV. xi. Come ye Children hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear
of the Lord.
SInce 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16.
all Scripture is given by Divine Inspiration, since it is profitable for
Doctrine, and able to make men wise unto Salvation, it well deserves to be
accounted the choicest treasure of Christians, and ought to be valued by them,
as it was by Holy David, more than Gold, yea, than much fine Gold. But though
all Scripture be of unspeakable worth and excellency, yet some parts of
Scripture are more excellent than others. This Book of Psalms, out of which I
have chosen my Text, has always been allowed precedence of the rest of the
Bible. Every part of Scripture, says Ambr. Pr^fat. in Psalm.
St. Ambrose, breathes Divinity, but the Book of Psalms transcends all the rest
for, sweetness. Athanasius styles it the Epitome totius Scripture, Athan.
Epi^ of Scripture, and Luther Parva Biblia Luth.
a little Bible. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...). Basil. T. 1.
St. Basil goes yet higher, when he calls it the common storehouse, and
treasury of Souls, out of which every Sex every Age* all sorts and degrees of
men may furnish themselves with such instructions, such as will be most
suitable to their respective conditions. These are high Titles, and very
honorable Characters, this excellent Book has received from Holy men; but it
is not possible for the tongues of Men or Angels to invent a greater (...), or
put more honor on it, than it has already receiyed from the Blessed Jesus. For
as the Learned See his Learned Preface to his Annotations on the Psalms.
Hammond observes, Christ, though he had the Spirit without measure, though he
spoke as never man spoke, yet he chose to conclude his Life, to entertain
himself in his greatest Agony, and at last to breath out his Soul, in the words
of this Book of Psalms, rather than his own. And as this Book of Psalms
surpasses other parts of Scripture for its excellency, so among these Psalms
themselves some are more excellent, and more useful than others. It seems it
pleased the Holy Ghost, that the Sacred Penman of these Psalms should take
more pains, and show more Art and Skill in the composition of some, than in the
composition of others; and sure where more Art is used, and more pains taken,
there may we very well expect to find greater excellency. Vide V^tab. and
Genebrard. in Poli Synops. ad Psalm. 25.
Now Learned men observe, that these seven Psalms, 25, 37, 111, 112, 119, 145,
and this 34, are contrived with more Pains and Art than others: They are called
by August. ad Psalm. 118.
St. Austin, Abecedarian Psalms, as being composed according to the Hebrew
Alphabet, each Verse like Acrostick Poems, beginning with the Letters thereof.
And it is a tolerable reason which is given by Ambr. in Psalm. 118.
St. Ambrose, who tells us, they were contrived so, that they might be a better
help for memory, and that Children and young Learners might with their first
elements of other Learning, have an Alphabet of Piety and Godliness taught
them. I shall add further in commendation* of this Psalm, what the Moller.
Pr^fat. Psalm. 34.
Learned Mollerus observes concerning it: It is a Psalm of that excellency,
says he, that the more we (...), the more we shall like it, and the oftener we
meditate on it, the more honey and sweetness will it afford to us. I know not
any Psalm, says he, that has been cited so often by the Fathers, that has been
held in greater esteem amongst Christians, or out of which the Church of God
has in all Ages received more Comfort, or more Instructions. The great worth
and excellency of this Psalm will, I hope, be sufficient to raise your
Attention to those words I have chosen out of it, for this solemn occasion.
They contain in them a serious and passionate Invitation, made by Da^, one of
the best and greatest of men unto such (...) are ignorant: Come ye Children,
hearken unto m^, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. For the fuller opening
and handling of these words, I will endeavor to show you,

1. The great necessity of teaching and instructing* Children.

2. The Persons that are to be taught, and they are Children; Come ye Children.

3. What they are to be taught, namely, the ^^ar of the Lord.

4. The persons that should take care Children be taught the fear of the Lord.
Ye see (...), a Magi^, a King; thought it his duty to look after th^se matters.
Come ye Children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

5. The duties of such as are to be taught, they must come, and they must
hearken: Come ye Children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the
Lord. Of these parts in their order.

I. Let us consider the great necessity of teaching and instructing Children.
These words, as I have told you already, import a solemn, serious and
passionate invitation of exhortation made by King David, and we should be very
injurious both to the Prudence and Piety of that Holy man, if we did not
conclude from hence the great necessity of teaching and instructing Children; a
larger prospect of which necessity I shall give you in these following
particulars.

1. The great necessity of teaching and instructing Children may easily he
concluded from those very significant and emphatical metaphors by which this
duty is set forth in Scripture, you will find it set forth by the metaphors of
Heb. 5. 13. 6. 1.
Milk, of Principles, and of a Foundation. Will any say, it is not necessary to
give Milk to Children for the preservation of their Natural Life? and will it
not then be more necessary to feed them with the sincere Milk of the Word, that
they may grow in Grace, till they come to the Perfect Man? Is it necessary that
Children should learn the first rudiments and principles of knowledge, before
they can attain any perfection in it? And will it not be necessary they should
learn their Catechism, some form of sound words, which shall contain the
principles of Religion, that so a^ length they may arrive at the saying
knowledge of the truth? Is a foundation necessary to the building of an house?
no less necessary is it in the judgment of the Holy Ghost, that Christians be
Ephesians. 2. 20.
I built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, and on Jesus Christ,
who is the chief cornerstone. These are the illustrations of this duty we find
in Scripture, and they sufficiently imply the necessity of it. But,

2. This necessity of teaching and instructing Children, will further appear
from the consideration of origina^ sin, and man's natural avers^^^ss unto all
that is good. Since the fall of Adam we are such wild Trees, as require due
manuring and good husbandry to make us fruitful. In Job 11. 12.
Zophar's comparison, man by nature is like a wild Asses Colt, an Asses Colt
for rudeness, and the Colt of a Wild Ass for unruliness. Aristotle, though a
Great Philosopher, spoke but like a Heathen, when he compared the Soul of man
to a Rasa Tabula, a pair of clean Tables, or a perfect blank; for the Soul is
sadly blotted and blurred by original sin, it is all stained and polluted by
natural corruption.

As the Psalm. 51 5.
Psalmist speaks, we are shapen in iniquity, and conceived in sin, and
therefore let us begin as soon as we can, to instruct and Catechize children,
we shall find sin and Satan have got the start of us; and that they stand in
need of Instruction long before they are capable of it. Great necessity
therefore there is of timely and early instructions, if it be only to root out
these weeds of corrupt Nature. But,

3. These early instructions of Children will be found necessary, if we
consider that delays will make the work more difficult and dangerous. Sin has
its several ages, as well as man: At first it has only the weakness of an
Infant, and may easily be mastered by Religious Education, but in a short time
it will arrive at the strength of manhood: and by custom take a firmer
possession of the Soul. To this purpose is that sad observation of Aug. Conf.
l. 8. c. 5.
St. Austin, Dum servitur libidini, facta est consuetudo; and dum confuetudini
non resistitur, facta est necessitas, etc. Whilst men indulge themselves in
the ways of wickedness, they easily contract an evil custom, and this, if
neglected, ends at last in a fatal necessity. Youth is much more capable of
instruction, than the inveterate sinner. Train up a Child, says Prove. 22. 6.
Solomon, in the way he should go, and he will not depart from it when he is
old. But such as are hardened in wickedness, will receive very small benefit
from instruction: The Ethiopian, as the Jer. 13. 23.
Prophet speaks, may as soon change his skin, and the Leopard his spots, as
those that are accustomed to do evil, learn to do well.

4. The necessity of teaching and instructing Children will yet further appear,
if we consider how necessary it is to fit and prepare the younger sort for the
other ordinances of God. Milk is useful for Babes, that they may grow up unto
men, and be able to digest strong^r meat. Such as are not well grounded in the
rudiments of Religion, will not be much profited or edified by Preaching. Heb.
6. 1.
St. Paul does more than hint this in his Epistle to the Hebrews, leaving the
principles of the doctrine of Christ, says he, let us go on to perfection.
Christians must first be well Catechized and instructed in the principles of
Religion, and then they will more easily advance to higher degrees of saving
knowledge. Nor is Catechizing only necessary to fit and prepare Christians for
the hearing of the word; but it will also prepare them for the due celebration
of both the Sacraments. In the Primitive Church, when any Heathens were so far
converted to the Faith of Christ as to desire Baptism, they were for some time
publicly Catechized: And because Vide Conc. Gerund. Can. 4.
Easter was a solemn time appointed for the Baptizing of such Proselytes,
Consuetudo apud nos ejusmodi est, ut his qui baptisandi sunt, per 40 dies
public tradamus Sanctam and adorandam Trinitatem. Jerome. adv. Joh. Hierosol.
Lent was a time in which Catechizing was more solemnly performed, and this is
one reason why Catechizing at this day is more particularly enjoined in Lent.
But though it be a rare thing now a days to have Adults baptized, yet such as
are baptized in their Infancy, do seldom understand their Baptismal Vow, until
they are well instructed in their Catechism. Hence our Church, according to her
wonted prudence, begins her Catechism with Questions relating unto Baptism,
such as are fit to remind the Catechumens of that Solemn Vow, which their
Godfathers and Godmothers made at the Font in their names. And as these
Catechetical instructions are useful for the better celebration of Baptism, so
they are not less useful for the due celebration of the Lords Supper. For this
end, King James, of happy memory, at the request, and with the approbation of
his Clergy, appointed Vide Conference at Hampton Court, written by Dr. Barlow.
Bishop O^eral, then D^an of Paul's, to frame that very useful part of the
Church-Catechism, which treats of both did Sacraments. Here Catech^mens are
taught more fully the nature and design of Baptism; here also they are
instructed in the nature and design of the Lords Supper; what is represented by
the Bread and Wine, what are the ends for which this Sacrament was instituted,
what the benefits worthy Communicants receive; and what qualifications are
required in worthy Communicants. How necessary then must teaching and
Catechizing Children be, which will thus help ^o f^^ them for all the
ordinances of Heaven.

5. The necess^^y of teaching and instructing Children will yet further appear,
if we consider how much it will contribute to the good and welfare of the
Kingdom. Kingdoms, as the Aristot. Pol. l. 1.
Great Philosopher long ago observed, consist of Towns, Towns of Families, and
Families of such, as either are, or were Children; so that to train up Children
in the fear of the Lord is the best way to make good Families, good Families
will make good Towns, and good Towns will make a good and an happy Kingdom.

By Catechizing the younger sort, Children will understand their duty to their
Parents, Servants to their Masters, Subjects to their Princes, and all of them
that duty which they owe to God. If Children be well grounded in the principles
of Religion, they will not easily be tossed about with every wind of Doctrine,
they will not easily be drawn into Schism and Heresy, or be so apt as many
are, to disturb the peace both of Church and State. By such early instructions,
Religion will be best preserved in the purity thereof, and more safely
propagated to succeeding Generations. All which do so eminently conduce to the
welfare of a Kingdom, that Catechizing cannot but be acknowledged a most
important duty. Hence the Plut. de Audit.
Athenians, when they consul^^d the Oracle, How they might make their
Commonwealth most happy and prosperous: Were answered, They might make it so
by hanging those things which were most precious at their, Childrens Ears; by
which was meant, instructing them in the principles of Piety and Virtue. Having
now shown you at large the great necessity of Catechizing, I come in the next
place

II. To enquire, who those persons are that must be taught and Catechized, and
they are Children, come ye Children. This word Children is allowed some
Latitude in Holy Writ, and does not only signify those that are such in
respect of their age, but such also as are Children, in respect of
understanding. Hence is that exhortation of 1 Cor. 14. 20.
St. Paul, Brethren, be not Children in understanding, but in understanding be
men. Here such as are ignorant are accounted Children by the Holy Ghost, though
in respect of years they may be Men. It follows therefore that all Children as
soon as they are capable of Instruction, and all that are ignorant, whether
through the neglect of their Parents and Sponsors, or their own default, should
diligently attend upon this most profitable ordinance of Catechizing. We find
in the Primitive Church Adults, and such as were stricken in years among their
Catechumens. Nay, we are told, that Arnobius and St. Austin wrote many pieces
of Divinity, when they were Catechumens, and St. Ambrose was but in his
Catechism when he was chosen Bishop of Millaine. I the rather mention these
great examples, that none, whether young or old, rich or poor, married or
unmarried, may deprive themselves of the great benefits of Catechizing, by
reason of some unwarrantable bashfulness. But if there are any who will not
come and answer the Questions of the Church Catechism: I know nothing should
hinder them from being present at the Explications of it. But if men are
unwilling to go so far, I can only add, that they may be welcome to more
private Instructions, whenever they shall desire them. King David in the Text,
solemnly invites such as are ignorant, to come and receive Instructions. So
that it is their duty to come, and it will be a dangerous aggravation of their
sin still to continue in ignorance, when the means of knowledge are plentifully
afforded them, and they solemnly invited to accept of them, etc. I hope they
will be the more ready to come when

III. They are told in the third place, what Children, and such as are
ignorant, are to be taught, and that, says our Psalmist, is the fear of the
Lord: The fear of the Lord is but, another name for Religion, For as our
Psalmist tells us Psalm. 111. 10.
elsewhere, the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a good
understanding have all they that do his commandments. Solomon, who may pass for
a good Interpreter of his Fathers mind, tells us the same, Prove. 1. 7.
that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom; and as it is the
beginning of Wisdom, so it is the end and perfection of it too, and therefore
in his Book of Ecclesiastes Eccles. 12. 13.
he makes this the conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God, and (which is the
proper effect of it) keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man.
Thus the fear of the Lord is but another name for Religion, which like a
perfect circle, begins and ends with this one point. King David does not invite
those that are ignorant, to come and learn the arts and methods of great
Estates, or procuring wordly honors; but the fear of the Lord, which will
enable them to live holily in this world, and happily in the next. He would not
have them come and hearken to a few speculative notions, or some curious
niceties; but he would have them acquainted with the practical truths of
Religion, such as are able to make them wise unto Salvation. Wisdom is the
principal thing, Prove. 4. 7.
says Solomon, and therefore get Wisdom, says he, and with all thy getting
get understanding. Now Job 28. 28.
Behold the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil, that is
understanding. The Church of England out of her pious care of all that are in
communion with her, has provided for those that are ignorant, an exact
Catechism, which does contain all that is here meant by the fear of the Lord.
In it you will not find any old wives fables, or endless Genealogies; in it you
will not find any abstruse points concerning Election or Reprobation: Vide
Hammon L'Estrange Allianc. of Liturg. p. 267.
But throug^^ut the whole frame of it, King James's golden rule is punctually
observed, viz. the avoiding of all odd, eurious, deep and i^e Questions. It is
That most excellent Catechism in the Liturgy. Dr. Hamm^nd of Id^l. 5. 67.
a form of sound words, and an exact form too. E^ v^^o and Catechismum brevem
quide^ ill^, sed in cujus (...) (...) ^sideres. Bish. Andrews in oper. posth.
p. 86. Add a^ that it was acco^ted by that Parliament which first authorized
it, as composed by the aid of the Holy Ghost. 2, 3 Edw. 6. c. 1.
It is not so prolix as to burden the memories of the Catechumens, no^ yet so
short as to leave out any thing that is necessary to be known in order to
Salvation. In the Apostles Creed we have all the ^red^nda, or Articles of our
Faith. In the Decalogue we have all the Agenda, or such things as are necessary
to be practiced by Christians; and in the Lords Prayer, that most absolute form
of Prayer, we are taught to pray for such things as are agreeable to the will
of God. If any thing yet be wanting which a Christian ought to know in order to
his Souls health, it must be what relates to the two Sacraments, and yet both
these Sacraments, as was shown above, are fully explained in that supplement,
which was made by Bishop Overal. So that if men will not be wanting to
themselves, they may out of this excellent Catechism be fully taught the fear
of the Lord. I come now in the

Fourth place to enquire, who those persons are which ought to take care,
Children, and such as are ignorant, be taught the fear of the Lord; and we may
learn this in some measure from King David's example, which is here proposed to
our imitation: Though he was a King, one who had the troublesome affairs of a
whole Kingdom to exercise his parts, and employ his time; yet he is so far from
thinking it either below him, or no part of his duty to instruct others, that
he passionately invites them to come and receive instruction. His Son Solomon
writes after this fair Copy which was set him by his pious Father, and assumes
the title of Ecclesiastes, i. e. an Instructor of the Ignorant: And sure if
such Royal persons who wanted not employment, thought it their duty thus to
promote the Salvation of others, I know none that can plead an exemption from
it. Nay, Solomon will inform us further, That the mouth of the righteous will
be a Well of Life. Bonum est sui communicativum, True Goodness, wherever it
is, will be communicative; and none but a cursed Cain will put the Question, Am
I my Brothers keeper? We know the law of God commands us to extend our pity
even to our Neighbors Ox, when fallen into a pit. And can we think that God
does take care of Oxen, and not of the Souls of men? Sure, for their sakes he
says it, and would have us extend our Christian pity and compassion toward our
Neighbors Soul, when at any time we see it in danger to fall into the
bottomless pit. Our Blessed Savior has told us, that the Soul of man is of
more value than the whole World, and he gave a sufficient proof of it, when for
their Redemption he shed his own most precious blood, one drop of which was of
more value than ten thousand worlds. He must therefore be a very great stranger
to the worth of Souls, and that infinite love which Christ bears toward them,
who does not employ his utmost endeavors to promote their Salvation. We are
all obliged in our respective stations Heb. 10. 24, 25.
to exhort one another daily to love and to good works; and as 1 Cor. 12. 25.
members of the same body, we are bound to take care one of another. But though
this duty be inoumbent upon all Christians, yet some persons are more
particularly obliged to promote the Salvation of others, by teaching and
instructing them in the fear of the Lord.

1. This duty is in a peculiar manner incumbent upon Ministers: It is the very
end and design of their office to promote the Salvation of others by teaching
those that are ignorant, the fear of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12.
We find under the Jewish Economy, the Priests enjoined to teach the Law of
God to children in the public Assembly: For this end and purpose the 48 Cities
of the Levites were dispersed abroad through all their Tribes, that they might
have (as Joseph. Antiq. lib. 4. c. 8.
Josephus tells us they had) in every Village one that was called the
Instructor of Babes; and to this practice of theirs St. Paul fairly alludes
Romans 2. 18.
in his Epistle to the Romans, where he aggravates the sin of the Jew upon this
account, because he ^ad been instructed, or (as the (...)(...)
Greek word properly signifies) Catechized out of the Law. And as God commanded
his Priests under the Law, so Christ under the Gospel commands his Ministers to
teach and instruct such as are ignorant. Hence is that solemn and passionate
charge which our Savior gives St. Peter, and in him all Ministers in St.
John's Joh. 21. 15, etc.
Gospel, Peter love thou me more than these? He says unto him, Yea Lord,
thou know that I love thee; He says unto him, feed my Lambs. These words of
our Savior are very remarkable, for he does not only command his Ministers in
this place to feed his Sheep, but also his Lambs; nay, he first commands them
to take care of his Lambs; nay further, he charges them as they have any love
for him, to take care of these. And we find the Apostles were very observant of
this passionate command of Christ; for we read in Scripture of 1 Cor. 3. 2.
Heb. 5. 12.
milk which they had for Babes; of the Romans 12. 6. See Dr. Ham. ad locum.
Analogy of Faith, and 2 Timothy 1. 13.
a form of sound words. Nay further, we have several heads of the Apostles
Catechism expressly set down by Heb. 6. 1, 2.
the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Therefore leaving the principles of
the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection, says he, not laying
again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God,
of the doctrine of baptisms, and of i. c. Confirmation, as Dr. Ham. de Confirm.
laying on of hands, and of the Resurrection of the dead, and of eternal
Judgment. And to this practice of the Apostles did the practice of the Church
exactly agree in succeeding Ages. For Eusebius lib. 5. c. 10.
St. Peter ordained St. Mark to be the first Catechist at Alexandria, and
Eusebius notes that in the year 181. when Pantaenus was Catechist there, this
office had flourished for a long time; to Ibid. l. 6. cap. 3. 12. 22.
Pantaenus succeeded Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Heraclas, and Dionysius. At
Carthage, Cypr. Ep. 24.
St. Cyprian ordained Optatus Catechist. St. Cyril bore this office Hieron. de
Scriptor. Ecclesiast.
at Jerusalem in his youth, and then wrote those expositions of the Catechism
which are extant at this day. August. de Catech^s. Rudib.
St. Austin also mentions one Deogratias a Deacon, that had this office in his
time. I might add many more testimonies of this nature, but these, I hope, will
be sufficient to remind both my self and my Brethren of that duty our Lord and
Master has laid upon us in a peculiar manner. If we shall neglect a duty so
necessary, so important, a duty commanded by Christ, and recommended by the
practice of the Church of God in all Ages, we shall be very unlike the Holy man
in the Text, a man after Gods own heart, who though he had another employment,
and that a very difficult and troublesome one; yet invites such as are ignorant
to come unto him, and professes his readiness to teach them the fear of the
Lord. Nay, I will add, that we must also forget that obedience which we owe the
church of England, for Can. 59.
she has enjoined this office upon the Curates of every Parish under the
heaviest penalties that are in her power to inflict, viz. a sharp reproof for
the first offense, a suspension for the second, and excommunication for the
third.

2. This duty of teaching and instructing Children is a duty peculiarly
incumbent on Schoolmasters: Our Church therefore requires of all
Schoolmasters that they have a License before they undertake a School; and
before they can get a License they must subscribe the Articles of our Church,
and thereby solemnly engage themselves to teach their Scholars sound doctrine,
as well as good literature. Schoolmasters are, as I may speak, Ministers
Ushers, and must prepare their Youth for the higher Instructions of the Temple.
Hence it was a very good Inscription which was written on the Walls of Paul's
School in London, Schola Catechisationis in optima fide Christi. Intimating
that this famous School (as all others ought to be) was designed by the
Founders of it, for a nursery of Piety, and for the Catechizing Children in the
True Faith of Christ. Lib. 3. 23.
Nicephorus reports of Constantine and Theodosius, that they took more than
ordinary care in the choice of fit Masters for Children. Magdeb. in vita.
One great cause of Julian's Apostasy was his having two Pagan Schoolmasters,
Libanius and Iamblichus: Such Schoolmasters therefore as do not instruct the
youth committed to their charge in the true Religion; they forget the very end
for which Christian Schools were erected, they transgress the Canon. 77. and 79.
Canons of the Church, and sadly disappoint religious Parents of their pious
hopes, and choicest comforts. All other learning without this fear of the Lord
avails nothing; nay, it will only qualify men to do more mischief in this
world, and be more miserable in the next.

3. Parents also must take care their Children be taught the fear of the Lord.
St. Paul lays this injunction on them, and commands them Ephesians. 6. 4.
to bring up their Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. As they
have been instruments in making them Children of Wrath by Natural Generation,
so must they endeavor to make them the Children of Grace by Spiritual
Regeneration. St. Austin has left this character of his Mother Monica, that she
traveled with greater care, and stronger pain for his Spiritual birth, than
she had done before for his Natural.

4. All Masters of Families must take care, that their Servants be taught this
fear of the Lord. We find God Almighty highly commending Abraham, and thinking
him worthy to be acquainted with the secrets of Heaven upon this very account.
Genesis 18. 19.
I know him, says God, that he will command his Children, and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord. Holy Joshua engages not
only for himself Jos. 24. 15.
, but for all his Family, as for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord,
says he. I cannot pass by a remarkable saying of Lewis the Ninth, that pious
King of France, who being found Catechizing a Scullion-boy that belonged to his
Kitchen; and being asked the reason, he returned this most Christian answer, I
know there is not the meanest person in my Family, but he has a Soul as
precious as mine own, and such as was bought by the precious blood of the Son
of God. Thus ye see Parents and Masters of Families must take care their
Children and Servants be taught this fear of the Lord. And if they will
discharge a good Conscience in this particular, they must teach their Children
and Servants, by their holy examples and wholesome instructions at home; and, as
they have opportunity, they must send them to the Church to be Catechized by
the Minister; and because most Parents and Masters of Families are too apt to
slight this most useful ordinance of Christ. I shall set down the words of
that Can. 59.
Canon which our Church has provided in this particular: If Parents, and
Masters of Families do not send their Children, Servants and Apprentices, to be
instructed in the Catechism, for the first offense they shall be punished by
the Ordinary with Suspension, and after a months obstinacy, with
Excommunication.

5. This duty is in a peculiar manner incumbent upon Godfathers and
Godmothers; these are ordinarily called Sureties, because they have bound
themselves by a sacred obligation to secure God and his Church, that their
God-children shall be brought up in the fear of the Lord: And in order hereunto
they solemnly promise to instruct them concerning their Baptismal Vow, to see
they be virtuously brought up, and learn all such things as a Christian ought
to know and believe in order to his Souls health. These must remember
therefore, that as their Charity is great in undertaking so important a trust,
so Mat. 5. 33.
their Sin will be as great, if they deal falsely with God, and prevaricate
with his Church.

6. This duty is also incumbent upon Magistrates, and such as are in Authority,
they must take care that such as are committed to their trust, be taught the
fear of the Lord. This was the practice of King David in the Text; and it will
be the honor, as it is the duty of all Magistrates to follow his example. 1 Timothy 2. 1, etc.
St. Paul commands us to pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority, that
under them we may live quiet and peaceable lives in all Godliness and Honesty.
Magistrates must not only secure the public peace and quiet of the Kingdom,
but they must take care of Honesty, and promote Godliness and Religion in the
World. This is so plain a truth, that Pol. l. 2. c. 8.
Aristotle learned it in the School of Nature, for when he comes to reckon up
those things which most conduce to the happiness of a Commonwealth, he names
these six, Food, Arts, Arms, Money, Justice, and (which I should have named
first) the care of Divine things. Now this they must do by the luster of their
Example, and the influence of their Authority: They are styled Psalm. 82. 6.
Gods in Scripture, to denote they should be holy, as God is holy: They are
styled Is. 44. 48.
Shepherds, and if they will be faithful, they must secure Christ's flock from
the fury of Wolves, and the subtilties of Foxes: they are further called Is.
49. 23.
Nursing Fathers, and must take care their Children be fed with the sincere
milk of the Word. Indeed they must not usurp the Pulpit, or invade the
Ministerial office, Heb. 5. 4.
no man takes this honor upon him, but he that is called as Aaron was; but
yet it is their duty to defend the Faith, to encourage Gods Ministers, by 1 Timothy 5. 17. 3. 2. 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14.
allowing them an honorable maintenance, and 2 Chronicles. 30. 22.
speaking comfortably unto them so long as they teach the good knowledge of the
Lord: nay lastly, they must build Churches, and make the best provisions they
can for the public service and worship of God, and Salvation of Souls. These
matters, as they well deserve, so they would require a uery large discourse;
but as the time will allow me to do no more than name them, so I need nor in
this place insist any longer on them. For we are all witnesses this day of that
pious ^a^e which has been taken by our Godly Magistrates in this particular.
This handsome Fabric they have built, and those other provisions they have
made to promote Piety and Godliness in this part of the Parish, will be a much
better, and more lasting monument of their Piety toward God, and their Charity
toward the Souls of men, than any I am able to erect for them. I pray God
reward these their labors of love into their own bosoms; and give his Grace
to those for whom these charitable provisions are made, that they may make a
right use, and a due improvement of them. Now if they would not have all this
Charity lost upon them, but are indeed willing to improve it to the advantage
of their Souls, they must be serious in the performance of those two duties
King David requires of them, they must come, and they must hearken. Come ye
Children, ^earken unto me.

1. Children and such as are ignorant, must come and learn this fear of the
Lord. It is their duty to attend upon this important ordinance of Catechizing,
and repair to such places where these wholesome instructions are to be had.
Prove. 8. 34
Blessed is the man, says Wisdom, that hears me, watching daily at my Gates,
and waiting at the posts of my doors. These words, says (...) Aben Erra,
import a diligent and constant standing in the Church, or House of Wisdom: And
it is a good comment which is added by Videsis ^stos. RR. ci^at. ap D. Iermin
in Proverb.
R. Solomon, Beatus ille, qui primus ingreditur, exeatque postremus: That man
is Blessed, says he, who uses to be one of the first that comes to Church,
and goes out with the last, always tarrying to take the Ministers Blessing
along with him. And if men would but seriously reflect on the great evils and
mischiefs of Ignorance, a very slight Invitation would be sufficient to bring
them to Church, and make them willing to be instructed in the fear of the Lord.
For Ignorance is that stain and blemish of the Soul which deprives it of the
Image of God, which is said to consist in Coloss. 3. 10.
Knowledge. As Diog. Laert.
Socrates of old observed it is (...), the only evil in the world, as being the
beginning and cause of all others. So far is it from being the mother of
Devotion, as the Papists vainly fancy, that it is the mother of all Sin, and
the unhappy Parent of all misery. Mala men's, malus Animus; Without knowledge,
says Prove. 19. 2.
Solomon, the mind cannot be good. Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the way
which leads unto life, and he that wants eyes will not be able to find it, or
if he stumble on it, be able to walk long in it. Knowledge is that Pilot which
must guide and conduct us in our course toward Heaven; and since in this world
we are exposed to so many damnable Errors, and deadly Sins, we shall
undoubtedly make shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, if we want our
Pilot. And as Ignorance is thus dangerous in it self, so it will be more
dangerous to continue in it, when we are solemnly invited to the means of
Knowledge. Joh. 3. 19.
This is the condemnation, says our Savior, that light is come into the
world, but men love darkness rather than light. To be in a state of Ignorance
is matter of pity, and justly accounted a calamity; but to be in love with it,
and reject Knowledge is the height of wickedness, and brings the heaviest
condemnation along with it; who will not tremble at those comminations which
are thundered in the Book of Proverbs against such who hate knowledge, and
choose not the fear of the Lord? God he tells them plainly, Prove. 1. 26, 29.
He will laugh at their calamity, and even mock when their fear comes: Nay,
Heb. 3. 18.
he swears, They shall not enter into his rest. Such therefore as are ignorant
have all the reason in the world to accept King David's Invitation, and
thankfully embrace all opportunities of learning the fear of the Lord. But

2. They must not only come, but they must hearken to their Instructers. As the
first insinuations of sin were conveyed by the ear into our first Parents, so
the first inspirations of Grace must have the same entrance. Auris est os
Animae; The Ear is the mouth of the Soul, by which she receives Spiritual
nourishment. Hence is that of the Apostle, Romans 10. 17
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. But it is not enough
to come to Church, it is not enough to hear; we must hearken too, if we would
perform that duty which is here injoined in the Text. Now it is a known Maxim
in Divinity, Verba sensus connotant Affectus: To hearken therefore imports no
less than to receive the truth in the love of it, to entertain it with meekness
and due reverence, and to Tu tamen sic audias ista praecepta, quomodo, si tibi
praeciperem qua ratione bonam valetudinem in Ardeatino tuereris. Sen. Ep. 105.
practice it with all seriousness and conscientious obedience. You Will find this
duty thus explained, and a considerable motive to enforce it in the Book of
Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 7. 12.
Wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these Judgments, and keep,
and do them, that the Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the Covenant and the
mercy which he swear unto thy Fathers, and he will love thee, and bless thee,
and multiply thee, etc. Here ye see blessedness is intailed on hearkening, and
not on bare hearing. Knowledge must issue into action, otherwise it will not
save us. The Egyptians of old painted a Tongue and a Hand under it: Now the
Hand is the great instrument of Action, and so this pretty Hieroglyphick
denotes thus much, viz. That it is not enough to know, it is not enough to talk
of Religion, but we must practice it. John 13. 17.
If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. I shall conclude with
that excellent Collect of our Church: Blessed Lord, who have caused all holy
Collect for the Second Sunday in Advent.
Scriptures to be written for our learning, grant that we may in such wise hear
them, read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest them, that by patience and comfort
of thy Holy Word, we may embrace, and ever hold fast, the blessed hope of
everlasting life, which thou have given us in our Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
FINIS.

