WIT RESTORED In several Select POEMS Not formerly published.

LONDON, Printed for R. Pollard, N. Brooks, and T. Dring, and are to be sold at
the Old Exchange, and in Fleetstreet. 1658.

WIT RESTORED.
Mr. Smith, to Captain Mennis then commanding a Troop of Horse in the North,
against the Scots.
WHy what (a good year) means my John?
So staunch a Muse as thine never won
The Grecian prize; how did she earne?
The bays she brought from Epsom Fearne?
There teemed she freely as the hipps,
The Hermit kissed with trembling lips.
And can she be thus costive now
While things are carried (heaven knows how)
While Church and State with fury parch,
Or zeal as mad as hare in March?
While birds of Amsterdam do flutter
And stick as close as bread and butter:
As straw to Jett, or burre to squall,
Or something else unto a wall.
Can such a dreadful tempest be,
And yet not shake the North and thee?
Where is thy sense, of public fears?
Will It sit unmoved as Roman Peers,
Till some bold Gaul pluck thee by th'beard,
Thou and thy Muse (I think) are seared,
As I have heard Divines to tell
The conscience is that is marked for hell.
Ah Noble friend, this rough, harsh way
May pinch where I intended play.
But blame me not, the present times
So serious are, that even my Rymes
In the same hurry rapt, are so,
Indeed whether I will or no.
And otherwise my Numbers fly
Than meant, in spite of Drollerie:
It Is good to end when words do nipp
And thus out of their harness slipp.
Besides, the thing which men mispend
Called Time, as precious is as friend,
Take It not unkindly, I profess
None loves you better then I. S.
From London where the snow has bin
As white as milk, and high as shin
From Viscount Conwaies house in street
Of woman Royal, where we meet:
The day too cold for wine and Burrage
The fourth precedent to Plum-porrage
December month, and year of grace
Sixteen hundred and forty to an Ace.
To friend of mine, Captain John Mennis
At town of York that now and then is,
Or if you miss him there, go look
In company of Hunkes Sir Fook;
They two perhaps may have a pull
At Selbie, Beverley, or Hull,
Or else you will find him at his quarter,
Send it, and let him
Pay the Porter.
The same, To the same.
MY doubtie Squire of Kentissh crew
that have read stories old and new
prick up thine ears unto a tale
that will un-nerve and make thee stale:
When thou shall hear how many pears,
The parliament has had by the ears.
Coming as close as shirt of Nessus,
To privy Counselors (god bless us)
The Judges they are deep in bond,
And fart for fear they shall be Connd,
The Ren of Elte, and the prelate
Of Bath and Wells have had a pellat
And they have placed (his grace's) cod
Under the lash of Maxwoll's rod,
But I am told the Finch is wary
And fled after the Secretary,
And all this is, that men may see
Others can run as well as we.
I hitherto have told, dear Captain,
Of prisons that our peers are clapped in:
And all I wrote was like a groan
Sadd as the melancholy droane.
Of Country baggpipe, now I sing
Matter as cheerful as the spring,
Of wine (dear friend) will make us wanton
Better nere drunck by John of Gaunt, one
That at third glass did mount his Lance
And got a boy whose son got France:
Besides, the reckoning will be more
(Humble I mean) then heretofore;
For now the Alderman hight Abell
Has given his parchment up with labell,
To no more purpose is his pattent
Then that the fool had shitt and sat in it:
Now may we freely laugh, and drink,
And overcharged go piss in the sinck
Then to it again, begin a health
Of twelve goe-downes to th'Com-monwealth
Then mount a stall, and sleep, and when
We rise again be nere the worse men:
This fitt's my freindshipp, but not me,
I must be sober as the Be
That often sippes, yet does not stray
But to his own hive finds the way,
So shall thou not blush to acknowledge
Him that was once of Lincolne-Colledge,
But now of Bromely Hall near Bow
Look, and you will find his name below.
I. Smith.
From spacious lodgings of Lord mine
In street of female majesty, past nine;
The day whereon we whett our knives
As men to eat even for their lives.
He that has none it is time to borrow,
For Christmas day is ee'ne to morrow.
The same, to the same.
MY note which cost thee pennies Six
(It seeme's) still in thy stomach stick's
O had thou but beheld how willing
I was for thine to pay a shilling
(For footeman forth the money laid
Which must with interest be defrayd)
Hereafter thou would not be nice
For every note to part with sice.
Thy journey to the foe with Coin
Would madded have a saint or twain,
So silly Be with weary thighs
Home to her master's storehouse hie's;
Whence (her rich fraught unladed) she
Again returne's an empty Be.
I joy to hear thou raign'st in place
Of the defunct Arch bishop's grace,
For thou (I doubt not) wilt be grea'st:
By friend for prebendry in the fist:
Me thinks I fancy prester James
In Cope envellop't without seames.
With silk and gold embroydred ore,
And brestplat like a belt before:
As Peddler has to bear his pack,
Or Creeple with a child at's back.
Else when my Bettie dropp's away
(That fourteen years has been my Toy)
Some one I Will marry that is thy Niece
And Livings have with Bellie-peece,
This some call Symonie oth'smock,
Or Codpeece, that is against the Nock.
The health you meant me in the Quart
I have, and partly thank you for it,
But yet I muse (as well I may)
At pot so funish't, without pay,
For at that time we were told here
You all were six weeks in arreare;
Have thou made merchandise, of Crop?
Or sold some lands, lef't out oth' mapp?
Or have thou nimm'd from saddle bow
A pistol through thy troop, or so?
Leaveing halfe-naked horses Crest
Like Amazon with but one breast;
Well, let it go: I think this gear
Fit to be scanned, but not too near
However, sure I should find John
Thriftie, but yet an honest man,
Yet tak heed in these pinching times
And age so catching after crimes,
It be not given out how you quaf't
Sugar, and eggs, in morning's draught;
I grudge thee not; for if I met
Vulpone's potion, or could get
Nectar, or else dissolved to dew
Th'Elixir, which the gods n'ere knew:
'Twere thine, yea I would save the dropps
For thee that fell besides thy chopps:
But yet the needy state (I fear)
May think much of thy costly cheer;
The best is, if they bar thy maw
From sodden drink, thou't have it raw:
And reason good, the heavens defend,
That thou should want, and I thy friend.
I. S.
From house of Viscount Conway, where
Kenelme has food, and Down's Count Lare,
December month, day of St. John
That amongst the Evangelists made one,
Forty, (besides the sixteen hundred)
We count years past since Fiend was foundred,
And this Bissextile, that, sans pumps,
Frisk's, and is called the year that Jum'ps.
The same, to the same.
I must call from between thy thighs]
Thy urine back into thine eyes,
And make thee when my tale thou hear'st
Channel thy cheeks with Launt rever'st;
Thy Landladie that made thee broth
When drugge made orifice to froath,
That every fortnight shifted sheet
To keep thy nest, and body sweet;
That heard thee knock at peep of day
When boy snor'de that on pallat lay;
Rose in her smock, and gave thee counsel
To lift thy foot for fear of groundsell,
That often warnd thee of the quart
And praid (in vain) to turn thy heart,
This Landladie in grave is pent
Now shedd thy moisture, man of Kent:
Two rings she left, for thee tone, to' there
For Andrew that does call thee brother,
This dries thy tears that were a brewing;
Now li'st to news of State ensuing.
Judge Littleton is made Lord Keeper.
And feeds on chick and pigeon peeper,
The kings Attorney Sr John Bancks
Succeds him, but may spare his thanks.
Herbert is thought the meetest man
To fill the place of Bancks Sr John,
London-Recorder thence does jogge,
In Herberts room to trudge, and fogg:
And St John's one that is sharp and witty
Is made winde-instrument o'th'Citty.
Thus it is in town; but in the Camp
There Is one preferrd will make thee stamp,
For Sr John Berkly's Sergeant Mayor
To Willmott, let it not bread Jarre,
Nor can the Viscount whom John putts
In trust, prevent it for his gutts
More shall thou know when it is more fit,
When thou and I in Tavern fit;
Till when, and ever, heaven thee send
The wishes of thy constant friend,
I. S.
In street of Coleman from swanne Ally
Where while I stay in town, I shall lie
In house of Mistress Street, relict
Of Robert, whom for mate she picked:
And where, with eeles, and flounders fryde,
And tongve of Neat that never lied
I filld my paunch, but when I belsh,
It utter's language worse than welsh.
Ianus the month that holds us tack,
One, with a face be hind his back:
Full sixteen hundred years we score
And fifty, (bateing six, and fowr)
And this leape-yeare we count to be,
A year that come's but once in three.
The same, to the same.
THy wants wherewith thou long have tug'd
And been as sad as Bear that is lug'd,
Thou Wilt laugh at, when thou hear'st how odly
Thy fellows shift in Town ungodly.
Commodities we took on trust,
And promised Tradesmen payment just,
To be returned from Northern part,
When treasure hence arrived in Cart.
And, but till now of late, they crep
From stair to stair, with trembling step;
So modest, that they blushed to name,
For what they to our Chambers came.
Impatient now, both young and old,
Assault my fort with knuckle bold.
And as in bed perplexed I lie,
I hear one say, The Cart's gone by.
With that they all attempt my door,
With pulse more daring then before;
And of their parcells make a ^inne
Louder, then when they drew me in.
Roused with this rudeness, first, I chop
Upon some foreman of the shop;
Take him by 'th'hand aside, and there
I tell him wonders in his ear.
So by degrees I send them jogging,
Suppled with Ale, and language cogging.
But news of this makes Scrivener wary,
And eight in the hundred Don look awry
That we do stoop to sums as small,
As children venture at Cock-all.
And lives we lead, (I cry heaven mercy)
Worse then a Troop that has the Farfie,
While man that keeps the Ordinary,
Will not believe, nor Landlord tarry.
O happy Captain, that may houze
In Quarter free, and uncheckt brouze
On teeming hedge, when purse is light,
Or on the wholesome Sallat bite:
While we have naught, when money fails,
To bite upon, but our own nails;
And they so short with often tewing,
There Is not much left to hold us chewing;
Or if there were, 'twould only whet
Stomach, for what it could not get,
And make more keen the appetite,
Like tyring-bitt for Faulkner's Kyte.
To mend my commons, clad in jerkin,
On Friday last I rode to Berkin,
Where lowering heavens with welcome saucst us
As when the Fiends were sent for Faustus;
Such claps of thunder, and such rain,
That Poets will not stick to feign,
The gods with too much Nectar sped,
Their truckles drew, and pissed a bed,
And that they belsh'd from stomach musty
Vapor, that made the weather gusty.
Well, it is a sad condition, where
A man must fast, or feed in fear.
I lately thee from North did call,
Now stay, or else bring wherewithal,
Unless thy credit here prove better,
Than does thy friend's, that wrote this Lett^
I. S.
Day tenth thrice told, the morning fair,
The month still with a face to spare.
The same, to the same.
NO sooner I from supper rose,
But Letter came, though not in prose,
Which tells of fight, and Duel famous,
Performed between a man and a mouse.
An English Captain, and a Scot,
The one disarmed, the other not.
It speaks moreover of some stirring,
To make a Covenant new as Herring.
Carr, and Mountrosse, and eke Argile:
Well was that Nation termed a Boil,
In breach of England, that does stick,
And vex the body Politic.
But (whatsoever be the pretense)
Doubtless they strive about the pence;
While English Trooper, like a Gull,
Serves but to hold the Cow to th'Bull.
Pray tell me, John, did it not nettle
Thee, and thy Myrmidons of Mettle,
To see the boy with country-lash,
Drive on the jades that drew the cash?
And by thy needy quarters go,
Asking the way to Camp of fo?
So Tantalus with hungry maw,
And thirsty gullet, daily saw
Water and fruit swim by his chaps,
While he in vain at either snaps.
Or else as Phoebus, when full fraught,
And tipled with his mornings draught,
Reels like a drunken Jackanapes,
With bladder tight, over soil that gapes:
And afterward in corner odd,
Perhaps less thirsty, empties codd.
So fares it with my friends, (god wot)
Whom treasure skips to enrich the Scot.
Leave then that wretched Climate, where
Thy wants have rid thee like the Mare;
And haste to Town, where thou shall find
Thy friend, that now has newly dined.
I. S.
^ay twenty sixth, and when John says,
^aces about, the Month obays.
The same, to the same.
WHy how now friend, why come no^ hither?
Have thou not leave as light as feather?
Here have I marked a Butt of Sack
Whose maidenhead shall welcome Jack,
'Against which when drawer advanced gimlet
I suffered him not, but did him let.
And yet thou comm'st not; Why do pause
And there continue, keeping Dawes?
Does Hostess stay thy steed perforce,
For that which was not fault of Horse?
Thou haste command of more then one,
For I have seen at tail of John,
Full Palfreys sixty in array,
(I mean upon the Muster-day)
Or art thou entertained to give
Physic to one, that else might live,
Some aged Sir, whose wife is bent
To change him for a Cock of Kent.
Well, be it what it will, I Will swear,
There Is something in it, that thou stay'st there
However, let business, wine, or friendship,
Draw thee from out that Northern endship.
If none of those provoke thy straddle,
Take pity on my riming noddle,
That restless runs with numbers fierce,
And's troubled with a flux of verse.
On that condition I Will relate,
Once more to Captain, news of State:
Judge Bartlet sitting on his stall,
In Westminster, with his back to the wall,
Was there surpised, and gripped by th'wrist
By Maxwell, with his clouter fist;
Who trussed the Judge, and bore him hot,
To the Sheriff's house, but plumed him not;
For there he set him down in the Hall,
And left him to them, robes and all.
As when a pack of eager Hounds,
Hunting full cry along the grounds,
Take over some common moor, that is fraught
With old cast Jades, and good for naught:
Who, conscious of their fates, do hale up
Their thin short tails, and try to gallop,
Get out o'th way for life and limme,
Each fearing they are come for him.
So fared the Judges, such fears wrung'em,
When Maxwell spent his mouth among 'em.
Then come away, man, places stoop,
Yet thou remainst in fortune's poop.
If thou were set to ride the Circuit,
In Bartlet's room, how thou would firk it.
The art is, to forget acquaintance,
And break a jest in giving Sentence,
Which thou will learn, and then be quick
With Sherif's, and thou have the trick.
These lessons con, and keep in store,
From S that has an I before.
From Bromely, where I ghuess by the Mill-Dike
That it is the Month surnamed Fill-Dike
Which govern's now, and I believe
The day is Tom of Straffords Eve,
Full sixteen hundred years (I hold)
And fifty (bating five twice told)
Expired are since year of grace
In The Almanac first showed his face:
Or (which is nearer to our trade)
Twelve score and two, since Guns were made.
The Gallants of the Times.
Supposed to be made by Mr. William Murrey of His Majesty's Bedchamber.
COme hither the maddest of all the Land,
The Bear at the Bridge-foot this day must be baited
Gallants flock thither on every hand
Waggswantonly minded, and merry conceited
There Is Wentworth, and Willmott, and Weston an^ Cav^
If these are not mad boys, who the devil^ would you have*
To drink to Will Murray, they all do agre^
And every one cries, To me, boys, to me!
A great Burgandine for Will Murray's sake
George Symonds, he vows the first course to take:
When Stradling a Grecian dog let fly,
Who took the Bea^ by the nose immediately;
To see them so forward Hugh Pollard did smile
Who had an old Curr of Canary Oil,
And held up his head that George Goring might see,
Who then cried aloud, To me, boys to me!
It Is pleasure to drink among these men
For they have wit and valor good store,
They all can handle a sword and a pen
Can court a lady and tickle a whore,
And in the middle of all their wine,
Discourse of Plato, and Arretine.
And when the health coms fall-down on their knees,
And he that wants, cry, to me boys to me
Cornwallais was set in an upper room
With half a duzzen small wits of his size*
He sent twice or thrice to have him come down,
But they would admit him in no manner wise
Though, in a full bowl of Rhenishhe swear,
He Would never tell more, when women were there,
But they all cried alou'd his tongue is too free
He is not company for such as we.
The Answer,
By Mr. Peter Apsley.
THough Marray be, undoubtedlie,
His countrey's chiefest wit;
And none but those converse with him
Are held companions fit:
Yett I do know some Holland blades
Shall vie witth him for it, hey down, ho down
Hay down down derry dery down!
Think not all praises due,
For some that buff do wear
Can whore and rore and swear
And drink and talk and fight as well as you.
Your Wentworth and your Weston
Your Stradling and your Tred,
I know they are as joviall boys
As ever Tavern bred
And can sometimes like soldiers live
A week without a bed, hey down etc.
George General of Guenifrieds
He is a joviall Lad;
Though his Heart and Fortunes disagree
Often times to make him sad:
Yet give him but a flout or two
And strait you will swear he is mad: Hey down, etc.
There Is Sydenham Crofts and Kelligrew
Must not be left behind
And that old smooth-faced Epicure
They call him Harry Wind
For if you do discourse with him
Such company you will find: hey down, etc.
There Is little Geofrey Peeters,
As good as any of those
If he would leave his preventing way
Of abusing his great nose
He s wit and Poett good enough
That he can pawn his clothes: hey down, etc.
There is a joviall Parson
Who to these men does preach:
On the week days he does learn of them,
And on Sundays does them teach.
Of books and of good company
He takes his share of each, hey down ho down,
Hey down down dery dery down!
Think not all praises due
For if he did not wear
A gown he would roar and swear
And drink and talk and fight as well as you.
The Bursse of Reformation.
WE will go no more to the old Exchang,
There Is no good ware at all:
Their bodkins and their thimbles too
Went long since to Guild Hall.
But we will to the new Exchange
Where all things are in fashion
And we will have it hence forth called
The Burse of reformation.
Come lads and lasses, what do you lack
Here is wear of all prizes
Here Is long and short; here is wide and straight;
Here are things of all sizes.
Madam, you may fit your self
With all sorts of good pinns,
Sirs, here is jett and here is hair,
Gold and cornelian rings,
Here is an english conny furr,
Rushia has no such stuff,
Which for to keep your fingers warm,
Excells your sables muffe.
come ladds, etc.
Pray you Madam sit, i will show good ware
For crowding nere fear that,
Against a stall or on a stool
You Will nere hurt a crevatt.
Heers childrens bawbles and men's too,
To play with for delight.
Here Is roundheads when turned every way
At length will stand upright.
Come ladds, etc.
Here Is dice, and boxes if you please
To play at in and inn,
Heers horns for brows, and brows for horns,
Which never will be seen.
Here is a set of kettle pinns
With bowl at them to roll:
And if you like such trundling sport
Here is my ladies hole.
Come ladds, etc.
Here Is shadow ribbon'd of all sorts,
As various as your mind,
And here is a Windmill like your self
Will turn with every wind.
And here is a church of the same stuff
Cut out in the new fashion,
Hard by's a priest stands twice a day
Will serve your congregation.
Come ladds, etc.
Here are some presbyterian things,
Fallen lately out of fashion,
because we hear that Prester John
Does circumcize his nation.
And here are independent knacks,
Raised with his spirits humor.
And here is cheap ware was sequestered,
For a malignant tumor. Come ladds, etc.
Here patches are of every cut,
For pimples and for scarrs,
Here Is all the wandering planett signs,
And some oth' fixed stars,
Already gum'd to make them stick,
They need no other sky,
Nor stars for Lilly for to vow
To tell your fortunes by,
Come ladds, etc.
To eject Powder in your hair,
Here is a pretty puff;
Would for clis^er case serve too,
Were it filled with such stuff.
Madam, here are Pistachie nutts,
Strengthening O^ingo roots;
And heea's a preserved Apricock
With the stones pendant to it.
Com Lads, etc.
Here are Perriwiggs will fit all Hayres,
False beards for adisguise;
I can help lasses which are bare
In all parts, as their thighs.
If you will engage well, here you may
Take up sine Holland Smocks.
We have all things that women want
Except Italian Locks.
Come Ladds, etc.
Here are hot Boys have backs like bulls,
At first sight can leap lasles;
And bearded Ladds hold out like Goats:
And here are some like Asses.
Here are Gallants can outdo
Your Usher or your Page;
You need not go to Ludgate more
Till threescore years of age.
Come Ladds, etc.
Madam, here is a Politicus
Was Pragmaticus of late,
And here is an Elentichus
That Fallacies does prate:
Here is the Intelligencer too,
See how 'bout him they throng*
Whilst Melanchollicus alone
Walks here to make this song.
Com Ladds, etc.
Then lett's no more to the Old Exchange
There Is no good ware at all,
Their Bodkins, and their Thimbles too,
Went long since to Guild Hall.
But we will to the New Exchange
Where all things are in Fashion,
And we will have it henceforth called,
The Burse of Reformation.
Come Ladds, and Lasses, what do you lack?
Here is vvare of all prizes;
Here Is long and short, here is vvide and straight,
here are things of all sizes.
The Answer.
WE will go no more to the new Exchange
Their Credit's like to fall,
Their Money and their Loyalty
Is gone to Goldsmith's Hall.
But we will keep our Old Exchange,
Where wealth is still in Fashion,
Gold Chains and Ruffes shall bear the Bell,
For all your Reformation.
Look on our VValls and Pillars too
You Will find us much the sounder:
Sir Thomas Gresham stands upright
But Crook-back was your founder.
There you have points and pinns and rings,
With such like toys as those,
There Patches Gloves and Ribons gay,
And O our money goes.
But when a Fammily is sunck,
And Titles are a fading,
Some Merchant's daughter setts you up,
Thus great ones lives by trading.
Look, etc.
Mark the Nobility throughout,
Modern and Ancient too,
You Will see what power the City had
And how much it could do.
Not many houses you will observe
Of honor true or seeming,
But have received from the Burse
Creation or redeeming.
Look, etc.
Our wonted meetings are at twelve,
Which all the world approves,
But you keep off till candle-time,
To make your secret Loves.
Then you come flocking in a maine
Like birds of the same feather,
Or beasts repayring to the Arc
Unclean and clean together.
Look, etc,
We strike a bargain on the Exchange,
But make it good else where,
And your procedings are alike
Though not so good I fear.
For your commodities are naught,
How ever you may prize them,
Then corners and dark holes are sought,
The better to disguize them,
Look, etc.
We walk ore cellars richly filled;
With spices of each kind,
You have a Tavern underneath,
And so you are undermined.
If such a building long endure
All sober men may wonder,
When giddy and light heads prevail,
Both above ground and under.
Look, etc.
We have an Office, to ensure
Our ships and goods at sea:
No tempest, rock, or pyrat, can
Deprive us of that plea.
But if your Ladies spring a leake
Or boarded be and taken;
Who shall secure your Capitol
And save your heads from aching!
Look, etc.
Then we will go no more to the new Eexchange
Their credit's like to fall,
Their money and their loyalty,
Is gone to Goldsmiths hall.
But we will keep our old exchange,
Where wealth is still in fashion,
Gold chains and ruffs shall bear the bell,
For all your reformation.
Look on our walls and pillars too,
You Will find us much the sounder:
Sir Thomas Gresham stands upright,
But Crook-back was your founder.
On S. W. S. and L. P.
She that admires her servant's face,
His stature, limbs, or hair,
Does not conceive the modern ways
Of Ladies, wise and fair.
He Is but short,
Care not for it,
There be tall ones enough,
Though his head
Be all redd,
Let his coin be so too.
What though his nose turn in and out
With passage wide and large,
Not much unlike a rainy spout,
His humors to discharge,
Though his back,
Wear a pack
It Is a toy among friends,
So by hook,
Or by crook,
We may compass our ends.
It Is not your wit nor language charm,
That takes a femall ear
A pair of pendants worth a farm
Are held more welcome there.
You abuse
Your poor muse,
When you write us fine fancies;
For no love
Can improve
Without suppers or daunces.
God dam-mee is a good conceit,
If they who swear present us;
For that is your only taking bait
Words nere can circumvent us.
There belongs
More then songs
To a necklace or gown,
When your plays
And essays
May be had for a crown.
The Tytre-Tues, or A Mock- Song
to the tune of Chive-Chase.
By Mr George Chambers.
TWo madcaps were committed late,
For treason, as some say;
It was the wisdom of the State,
Admire it all you may.
Brave Andrew Windsor was the prince
George Chambers favorite.
These two bred this unknown offense
I would they had bine be --
They call themselves the Tytere-tues
And wore a blew Rib -- bin,
And when a dry, would not refuse,
To drink -- O fearful sin!
The Council, which is thought most wise,
Did set so long upon it,
That they grew weary, and did rise,
And could make nothing on it.
But still, the common people cried,
This must not be forgot;
Some had for smaller matters di'd
They Would don -- we know not what:
Hanged, drawn, and quartered, must they be,
So Law does set it down,
It Is punishment for papistrie
That are of high renown.
My Lord of Canterburie's grace
This treason brought ot light
El's had it bin a pitious case
But that his power and might
Had queld their pride which swelled to high;
For which the child ungot
May with him live e'ne till he die
As silie sheep that rott.
Let Papist frown what need we care
He lives above their reach:
And will his silver Mitre wear
Though now forgot to preach.
If he were but hehind me now,
And should this ballad hear;
Sure he would revenge with bended bow
And I die like a Dear.
A Northern Ballet.
THere dwelt a man in fair Westmerland
Ionne Armestrong men did him call,
He had nither lands nor rents coming in,
Yet he kept eight score men in his hall.
He had Horse and Harness for them all,
Goodly Steeds were all milk white,
O the golden bands an about their necks;
And their weapons they were all alike.
News then was brought unto the King,
That there was sick a won as he,
That lived syke a bold Outlaw
And robbed all the north country.
The King he writ an a letter then
A letter which was large and long,
He signed it with his own hand,
And he promised to do him no wrong;
When this letter came Ionne until
His heart it was as blyth as birds on the tree,
Never was I sent for before any King
My father, my Grandfather, nor none but me.
And if we go the King before,
I wolud we went most orderly,
Every man of you shall have his scarlet cloak
Laced with silver laces three.
Every won of you shall have his velvett coat
Laced with sillver lace so white,
O the golden bands an about your neck's
Black hatts, white feathers, all alyke.
By the morrow morninge at ten of the clock
Toward Edenburough gone was he
And with him all his eight score men,
Good lord it was a goodly sight for to see,
When Ionne came befower the King
He fell down on his knee,
O pardon my Sovereign Liege, he said
O pardon my eight score men and me.
Thou shall have no pardon, thou traitor strong
For thy eight score men not thee
For to morrow morning by ten of the clock,
Both thou and them shall hang on the gallow tree.
But Ionne looke'd over his left shoulder
Good Lord what a grevious look looked he;
Saying asking grace of a graceles face,
Why there is none for you nor me.
But Ionne had a bright sword by his side,
And it was made of the mettle so Free,
That had not the king stepped his foot aside
He had smitten his head from his fair bodde.
Saying, fight on my merry men all,
And see that none of you be taine,
For rather then men shall say we were hange'd
Let them report how we were slain.
Then god wott fair Eddenburrough rose
And so besett poor Ionne round
That fowerscore and tenn of Ionnes best men
Lay gasping all upon the ground.
Then like a mad man Ionne laid about,
And like a mad man then fought he,
Until a falce Scot came Ionne behind,
And runn him through the fair boddee.
Saying, Fight on my merry men all,
And see that none of you be taine,
For I will stand by and bleed but a while,
And then will I come and fight again.
News then was brought to young Ionne Armestrong,
As he stood by his nurses knee,
Who vowed if er'e he live'd for to be a man,
Oth' the treacherous Scots revenged hee'dbe.
By Mr. Richard Barnslay.
FAme told me, Lady, your fair hands would make
A willow garland for me; O forsake
That dismal office, it does not agree
With those sweet looks, that fair aspect in thee.
Fairest of women, can thou be my friend?
And with thine own hand hasten on my end?
If I must loose thee, let me loose thee so
As not to be my utter overthrow.
Time lessons sorrow, we endure our crosses,
And happier fortunes may redeem our losses,
But if I wear one branch of that sad tree,
I shall remember it eternally,
What prize I lost; and then in some sad grove
Of discontent, where fearful ghosts do rove
Of the forsaken lovers, there I Will be
And only they shall keep me company.
Until these eyes, in some unpollish'd cave
Running like fountains, wear me forth a grave,
And then I Will dye, yet first I will curse thee
Damned, unlucky, fruitless willow-tree
Still may thou withered stand, may never be seen
Clad in sweet summers pride, may never grow green;
May every bryer, and every bramble be,
Like a full Cedar, or huge Oak to thee:
And when some cankerd axe shall hew thee down,
Come never nearer city, house or town,
But be thou burnd, yet never may thou be
A christmas block for joviall company.
But be thou placed near some ugly ^itch
To burn some murderer, or damned witch.
Cast away Willow, Lady, then, and th^se,
Dog-tree, or hemlock, or the mornfull yewes
Torn from some churchyard side, the cursed thorn
Or else the weed, which still before it is borne
Nine times the devil sees; if you command
I Will wear them all, composed by your fair hand
So that you will grant me, that I may go free
From the sad branches of the willowe tree.
Ad Johannuelem Leporem, Lepidissimum, Carmen Heroicum.
I Sing the furious battails of the Sphaeres
Acted in eight and twenty fathom deep,
And from that There began the Utopian account of years, Mor: Lib. 1. circa
finem.
time, reckon so many years
You Will find Endimion was a handsome young Welshman, whom one Luce Moon loved
for his sweet breath; and would never hang off his lips: but he not caring for
her, eat a bundance of toasted cheese, purposely to make his breath unsavory;
upon which, the lest him presently, and ever since it is proverbially spoken [as
inconstant as Luce Moon.] The Uatican copy of Hesiod, reads her name, Mohun,
but contractedly it is Moon. Hesiod. lib. 4. tom. 3.
Endimion fell fast asleep.
And now assist me O ye For all the Orbs make Music in their motion, Berosus
de sphaera. lib. 3.
Musiques nine
That tell the Orbs in order as they sight,
And thou dread Atlas was a Porter in Mauritania, and because by reason of his
strength, he bore burdens of stupendous weight, the Poets sain'd, that he
carried the Heavens on his shoulders. Cicero. de not. Deorum. lib. 7.
Atlas with thine eyes so fine,
Smile on me now that first begin to write.
There were two others of these names, Aldermen of Rome. Tit. Liu. hist. lib.
28.
Pompey that once was Tapster of New-Inne,
And fought with AEmathia, is a very fair Common in Northamptonshire, Strabo.
lib. 321.
Caesar on the These Myrmidons were Cornish-men, and sent by Bladud, sometimes
King of this Realm, to aid Pompey. Caesar de bello. civili. lib. 14.
AEmathian plains,
First with his dreadful These Myrmidons were Cornish-men, and sent by Bladud,
sometimes King of this Realm, to aid Pompey. Caesar de bello. civili. lib. 14.
Myrmidons came in
And let them blood in the Hepatick veins.
But then an Antelope in Sable blew,
Clad like the It seems not to be meant by Count Henry, but his brother
Maurice, by comparing his picture to the thing here spoken of. Iansen, de
praed. lib. 22.
Prince of Aurange in his Cloak,
Studded with Satyrs, on his Army drew,
And presently Pheander was so modest, that he was called the Maiden Knight;
and yet so valiant, that a ^rench Cava^eer wrote his life, and called his Book,
Pheandir the Mailen Knight. Hon. d'Vrsec. Tom. 45.
Pheanders Army broke.
This seems not to be that King, that was Son of Amyntas, and King of Macedon;
but one who it seems was very lascivious: for I suspect there is some obscaene
conceit in that word Club in the third verse following besides, mark his
violence.
Philip, for hardiness surnamed Chub,
In Beauty equal to fork-bearing Bacchus, was a drunken yeoman of the Guard to
Queen Elizabeth, and a great Archer; so that it seems the Author mistook his
halbert, for a forke.
Bacchus,
Made such a thrust at This was Long-Megg of Westminster, who after this
conflict with Phillip, followed him in all his wars. Justinian. lib. 35.
Phaebe, with his Club,
That made the These were Lancashire-men, and sent by King Gorbadug (for this
war seems to have been in the time of the Heptarchy in England) to the aid of
Caesar. Caesar. lib. citat. prope finem.
Parthians cry, she will becack us.
Which heard, the Delphick Oracle drew nigh,
To wipe fair Phaebe, if ought were amiss,
But And therefore, the herb into which he was turned, was called Turnsole.
Ovid. Metam. lib. 25.
Heliotrope, a little crafty spy,
Cried clouts were needless, for she did but piss
A subtle Gloworme lying in a hedge
And heard the story of sweet cheek't Appollo, was Caesar's Page, and a
Monomatapan by birth, whose name by inversion was Ollopa: which in the old
language of that Country, signifies as much as fair youth: but, Euphoniae
Gratia, called Apollo, Gor. Bec. lib. 46.
Appollo,
Snarch'd from bright Styropes, was a lame Smiths-man dwelling in S.
Iohns-street; but how he was called Bright, I know not, except it were by
reason of the Luster of his eyes.
Styropes his Antic sledge
And to the buttered Flownders cried out, Holla, mistaken for Apollo.
Holla.
Holla you pampered Jades, quoth he, look here,
And mounting straight upon a Lobsters thigh
An English man inflamed with Cervisia (apud Medicos, vinum hordeaceum) potus
est Anglis long charissimus; Inventum Ferrarij Londinensis, Cui nomen Smuggo,
Polydor. Virgil, de Invent. rerum. lib. 2.
double Beer,
Swore never to Impp. Germaniae, antiquitus sol^bant, ^aris temporibus, adire
Basingstochium; ubi, de more, Iusjurandum solenne praestabant, de non viro
propinando, praesente muliere: Hic Mos, jamdudum apud Anglos, pene vim legis
obtinuit; quippe gens illa, long humanissima morem istum, in hodiernum usque
diem, magna Curiositate, pari Comitate conjuncta, usurpant. Pancirol --
utriusque imperij. lib. 6. cap. 5.
drink to Man, a Woman by.
By this time grew the conflict to be It seems this was a great battle, both
by the fury of it, and the aids of each side; but hereof read more, in
Cornel. Tacit. lib. de moribus German.
hot,
Boots against boots against This is in imitation of Lucan -- Signis Signa, and
pila -- etc. Pharsali^. lib. 1. in principio.
Sandals, Sandals, fly.
Many poor thirsty men went to the pot,
Feathers lopt off, spurrs every where did lie. Caetera de^iderantur.
Bagnall's Ballet, supplied of what was left out in Musarum Deliciae.
A Ballet, a ballet! let every Poet,
A ballett make with speed:
And he that has wit, now let him show it;
For never was greater need:
And I that never made ballett before;
Will make one now, though I never make more.
Oh Women, monstrous women,
What do you mean to do!
It is their pride and strange attire,
Which binds me to this task;
Which King, and Court, did much admire,
At the last Christmas mask,
But by your entertainment then,
You should have small cause to come there again.
Oh Women, etc.
You cannot be contented to go,
As did the women of old;
But you are all for pride and show,
As they were for weather and cold,
O Women, women! fie, fie, fie,
I wonder you are not ashamed.
O Women, etc.
Where is the decency become;
Which your fore-mothers had?
With Gowns of Cloth, and Capps of Thrum,
They went full meanly cladd.
But you must jett it in silks and gold;
Your pride, though in winter, is never a cold.
O Women, etc.
Your faces tricked and painted be,
Your breasts all open bare:
So far that a man may almost see
Unto your Lady ware:
And in the church, to tell you true,
Men cannot serve God for looking on you,
O Women, etc.
And at the Devils shopps you buy,
A dress of powdered hair,
On which your feathers flaunt and fly,
But i would wish you have a care,
Lest Lucifer's self who is not prouder
Do one day dress up your hair with a powder.
O Women, etc.
And many thereare of those that go
Attyr'd from head to heel,
That them from men you cannot know
Unless you do them feel,
But oh for shame though they have none,
It Is better believe, and let them alone,
O Women, etc.
Both round and short they cut their hair
Whose length should women grace,
Loose like themselves, their hatts they wear.
And when they come in place,
Where courtshipp and complements must be,
They do it like men with cappe and knee.
O Women, etc.
They at their sides against our laws,
With little punyards go,
Which surely is, (I think) because,
They love men's weapons so;
Or else it is they will stobb all men,
That do refuse to stabb them again.
O Women, etc,
Doublets like to men they wear,
As if they meant to flout us,
Trust round with points and ribbons fair,
But I pray letts look about us;
For since the doublett so well does fit 'um,
They will have the breeches; and if they can get 'um.
O Women, etc.
Nor do they care what a wise man says,
Or preachers in their defame.
But jeer and hold him an ass; but I faith
They Would blush if they had any shame:
For city and country do both deride 'um
And our King, God bless him, cannot abide 'um.
O Women, etc.
And when the mask was at the court,
Before the King to be shown,
They got upon seats to see the sport,
But soon they were pulled down;
And many were thrust out of doors,
Their coats well cudgel'd, and they called whores.
O King, Relligious King,
Godsave thy Majesty.
And so with prayers to God on high,
To grant his highness peace,
We hope we shall find remedy
To make this mischief cease:
Since he in Court has taken so good order,
The city leave to the Mayor and Recorder,
O King, Relligious King,
God bless thy majesty.
And women all whom this concerns,
Though you offended be;
And now in foul and railing terms
Do swagger and scold at me;
I tell you, if you mend not your ways
The devil will fetch you all, one of these days,
Oh Women monstrous Women!
What do you mean to do?
Mr. Smith, to Sir John Mennis, upon the surrender of Conway Castle
by the Ar, BY.
ANd how? and how? have thou cried quittance
With Mountain, Bishop, and his Britains
Who after all his changes, had
Yet one trick more, to make John mad?
Had thou, for this, charge of the Keys
Old as the Castle? and the pays
Of Men unborne? that never took
A name, but from thy Muster-Book?
Have thou been honored with the knee
Of the Time-aged-Porter? He
Who after reverence, humbly sat
Below the Salt, and munch'd his Sprat,
And after all this to be vex't
Past sufferance, by a Man o'th 'Text!
Well! now you are come in sight of Paul's,
Have thou compounded for thy Coals
And swallowed glib in hope to thrive,
The Covenant, and Oath Negative
With hand lift up, like those that are
Indicted for less crimes at Bar?
Believe me, friend, it is a Burden
Worse then a close-stoole with a Turd in.
Yet if from British rocks the have brought
A heard of Goats, or Runts, or ought
That Country yields; Flannel, Carnoggins,
Store of Me^eglin in thy wagons;
Less needst thou dwindle to appear Man
At Goldsmiths-Hall before the Chaire-man:
Or if thou have plundered Pedlars-pack
And trussed it on thy knightly back,
Rich in Box-whistles, combs in cases,
Tape white and blue, points, inkle, laces,
'T may satisfye those hungry Kings;
They Will hang ^ee else in thine own strings.
And now I call to mind the tale,
How mounted in thy nights of ale
Thou rod'st home duly to thy Den
On back of resty Citizen,
Still pressing as the cattle grew
Weary, at every stage, a new:
Some thorough-pac'd, and sure of foot
Some tripping, with string-halt to boot,
Now it is their time, and thou art ore-
Ridden by them, thou roadst before.
So have I seen the flies in Summer,
Yellow as was the neighboring scummer,
With shambling thighs, each other back
By turns, and traverse over the rack.
Ah! worthy friend, it makes me mad
To count the days, that we have had;
When we might freely meet and drink
And each man speak what he did think.
Now every step we doubt, and word
As men to pass some unknown for'd.
As Patridges devide their way
When stooped at by the Birds of prey,
And dare not from their coverts peep
Till night's come on, and all is asleep,
Then from their several brakes they have,
And call together to repast.
So frighted by these buzzards, fly
Our scattered friends, and sculking lie
Till covered in the night, they chant
And call each other to the hant,
Some trusty Tavern, where in bowls
They drown their fears, and chirp pooresouls,
What sad plight are we in? what pickles?
That we must drink in conventicles?
Search all the Centuries, there is none
Like this fell Persecution;
But when Time sorts, do but but command,
At noon I Will meet thee, here is my hand.
I. S.
Dated,
From house of Knight, in Nympton-Regis,
Where one drinks, and another pledges,
I mean at meals, the day is Jack,
The 15 of the month that is black,
Forty eight years, and sixteen hundred
Since that of Grace, away are squandred,
And since Parliament begone
(I hope you will not forget that John)
Nothing remains, but that I say,
Good morrow; that is the time o'th day.
An answer to a Letter from Sr. John Mennis, wherein he ^eeres him for falling
so quickly to the use of the Directory.
FRiend, thou do lash me with a story,
A long one too, of Directory;
When thou alone deserves the Birch
That broughtst the bondage on the Church.
Did thou not treat for Bristow City
And yield it up? the more's the pity.
And saw thou not, how right or wrong
The common prayer book went along?
Did thou not scourse, as if enchanted,
For Articles Sir Thomas granted,
And barter, as an Author says,
The Articles of the Christian faith?
And now the Directory jos^les
Christ out of the Church, and his Apostles;
And tears down the commnion-rayles
That Men may take it on their tails.
Imagine friend, Bochus the King,
Engraven on Sylla's Signet ring,
Delivering up into his hands
Fugurth, and with him all his Lands,
Whom Sylla took and sent to Rome
There to abide the Senate's doom,
In the same posture, I suppose,
John standing in's doublet and hose,
Delivering up, amidst the throng,
The common prayer and wisedom's song
To hands of Fairfax to be sent
A sacrifice to the Parliament:
Thou little thoughtst what gear began
Wrapped in that Treaty, Bus^ John,
There lurked the fire, that turned to cinder
The Church; her ornaments to tinder.
There bound up in that Treaty lies
The fate of all our Christmas pyes,
Our holy days there went to wrack
Our Wakes were laid upon their back;
Our Gossips spoones away were lurch'd
Our feasts and fees for women church'd,
All this and more ascribe we might
To thee at Bristow, wretched knight,
Yet thou upbraidst, and raylst in rhyme
On me, for that, which was thy crime,
So froward Children in the Sun,
Amid' their sports some shrewd turn done
The faulty youth begins to prate,
And lays it on his harmless mate,
Dated
From Nympton where the Cider smiles
And James has horse as lame as Gyles
The fourth of May; and do thou hear,
It Is as I take it, the eighth year
Since Portugal by Duke Braganza
Was cut from Spain without a hand-saw.
I. S.
Mr. Smith's taking a Purge.
IN morn when Phoebus peep't through crevis,
Bold as our British Guy or Bevis
I powder took, and by his beams
Befreinded, made a draught for Ieames.
Long had it not in stomach been
But from each part, came powd^ing in
Of uncouth gear such pregnant store
That gutt 'gan grumble, nock run ore.
Have ye beheld with eager haste
The trewant Citts when scene is past,
(As if they meant their ribs to burst
While each bears up to get our first)
Cloy up the door, till passage small
Into one body rams 'em all,
And then in steed of men and wit
Delivers up a lump of citt.
With no less fury in a throng
Away these tachie humors flung,
And downwards in a rage they drew
To ramble, and bid nock adieu:
But when they came to portall nastie
Bumme was so strait, and they so hasty,
That many a worthy pellett must
Into one Booming shot be thrust,
At rumbling noise the mastive growl^s
The f^ighted mice forsake their holes,
And Soldiers to my window come
Invited thither by my drum,
Tire'd with this hideous coil behind
Nocke laid a b^ut him hard for wind,
He chafed, and fom'd, as buck embo'st,
And painted like a ^oad that is tossed.
At length he gaind a little time,
And cleard his Organ from the slime;
Palewas his look, (for to be blunt),
Arse could not set a good face on it.
But yet he strove with visage wan
To vent himself; and thus began.
Oh dismal Dose! oh cursed geere!
Will all thy body run out here?
Will veins, and sinnews, flesh, and bone
Be gadding, and leave nock alone?
Is it decreed, oh crewell fates!
So Mindus at her city gates
As was suspected there about
Some time or other might run out,
A Devil sure bak^t, and stale
Was grated in my posset-ale,
Or else 'twas powder of the bones
Of some foot soldier dead for the nonce,
For all the way he travailes North
Through stomach, belly, and so forth.
Some what he seizes in each town,
And take's it with him as his own;
Well, what so ere thou were, be sure
Thy vengeance 'ile no more endure,
Nor shall the head or stomach put
More then is fitting into gutt.
Why could not nostrells, eyes, or ear,
By mild expenses vent you there?
Or vomitt, by a nearer way,
Discharge what in the stomak lay?
Or is it not justice they that pas'd
The pleasure, should the bitter taste?
Can you accuse me? ever came
Ought in by me did body blame?
Unless your keeping open my door
Drew wind, to make the fabric roar;
I was contented once a day
While you were temperate, to obey,
But he is cur'st that is forced to stand
All the day long with hose in hand.
Nor was the spincter muscle put
At every turn to open and shut,
But there to stand, and notice take
Who passed, and when, and for whose sake.
Therefore be warned keep better diet
That all of us may live at quiett.
Or i will sto^p up the abuse'd course
And send up fumes will make you worse
And you (as Mayerne does) they say
Divert the vent another way,
Then spite of physic, in a word,
I Will make your pal^e taste a tourd,
And when you belch I Will turn the sent
To perfect smell of fundament.
The Miller and the King's Daughter,
By Mr. Smith.
There were two Sisters they went a playing,
With a hie down, down, a downe-a-
To see their fathers ships come sailing in
With a hy down, down, a downe-o-
And when they came unto the sea-bry^,
With, etc,
The elder did push the younger in;
With, etc.
O Sister, O Sister, take me by the gow^e,
With, etc,
And draw me up upon the dry ground.
With, etc.
O Sister, O Sister, that may not be,
With, etc.
Till salt and oatmeale grow both of a tree;
With, etc.
Somtymes she sanke, Somtymes she swam,
With, etc.
Until she came unto the mil-dam;
With, etc.
The miller run hastily down the cliffe,
With etc,
And up he be took her withou^en her lif^,
With, etc.
What did he do with her breast bone?
With, etc.
He made him a vial to play thereupon,
With, etc.
What did he do with her fingers so small?
With, etc.
He made him peggs to his Violl withal;
With, etc.
What did he do with her nose-ridge?
With, etc.
Unto his Violl he made him a bridge,
With, etc.
What did he do with her Veins so blewe?
with, etc.
He made him strings to his Viole thereto;
with, etc.
What did he do with her eyes so bright?
with, etc.
Upon his Violl he played at first sight;
with, etc.
What did he do with her tongue so rough?
with, etc.
Unto the violl it spoke enough;
with, etc.
What did he do with her two shinnes?
with, etc.
Unto the violl they danced Moll Syms;
with, etc.
Then bespake the treble string,
with, etc.
O yonder is my father the King;
with, etc.
Then bespake the second string,
with etc.
O yonder sitts my mother the Queen:
with, etc.
And then bespake the stringes all three;
with, etc.
O yonder is my sister that drowned me.
with, etc.
Now pay the miller for his pain,
with, etc.
And let him be gone in the devils name.
with, etc.
Mr. Smith, to Tom Pollard, and Mr. Mering.
MY hearty commendations first remembered
To Tom, and Robbin tall men, and well timberd
Hoping of both your welfares, and your bliss
Such as my self enjoyed when I wrote this;
These are to let you understand and know,
That love will creep there where it cannot go
And that each morning I do drink your healths
After our Generals, and the Commonwealths;
For nothing is more fatal then disorder
Especially now Lesly's on the Border;
That done we gather into Ranks and files,
That a far off we look like greeat wood piles;
And then we practice over all our knacks
With as much ease as men make Almanacks,
Size all our bulletts to a dram, we hate
To kill a foe with waste unto the State,
And for our carriage here, it has been such
Declar't I cannot, but I Will give a touch:
Here is noe outrage done, not one that Robbs
Perhaps you think it strange Tom, so does Nobbs
But it is as true as steel, for on my word;
Their worst is drinking Ale, brown as their sword.
But hark the fiendes are come close to Carlisle,
Lidsdale is cope't with Rebell-Scotts the while
To u^ they send for help, the postboy skudds;
And scoures his pallfrie in his propper Sudds,
More I could write dear friends, but bad's the weather
And time's as precious as you both to gether.
But take not this unkindely; I profess
There Is no man more your servant then
I S.
New castle where the drouth has been
That makes grass short, and gelding thin:
July the fifth I wrote this letter
One thousand six hunderd, and somewhat better
Upon John Felton's hanging in Chains at Ports-mouth, for killing the Duke of
Buckingham.
HEre uninterd suspends (though not to save
Surviving friends the expenses of a grave
Fel^on's dead earth, which to the world must be
His own sad monument, his Elegye
As large as fame, but whither bad o^ good
I say not, by himself 'twas writ in blood
For with his body thus entombed in air
Arch't over with Heaven, set with thousand fair
And glorious Diamond-starrs; a Sepulcher
Which time can never ruinate, and where
Th'impartiall worm (which is not bribed to spare
Princes when wrapped in Marble) cannot share
His flesh (which often the charitable skies
Embalme with tears doing those obsequies
Belong to men) shall last till pitying foul
Contend to reach his body to his Soul.
To Felton in the Tower.
ENjoy thy bondage; make thy prison know,
Thou have a liberty thou can not owe
To such base punishment; keep't entire, since
Nothing but guilt shackles they conscience.
I dare not tempt thy valiant blood to whey
^n feebling it with pity, nor dare pray
Thine act may mercy find, lest thy great story
(...) something of its miracle and glory.
I wish thy merit studied cruelty,
Short vengance befreinds thy memory
For I would have posterity to hear
He that can bravely die can bravely bear.
Torture seems great unto a cowards eye
It Is no great thing to suffer, less t^ dye.
Should all the clouds fall out, and in that strife
Lightning and thunder send ^o take my life,
I should applaud the wisdom of my fate
That knew to value me at such a rate
As at my fall to trouble ^ll the sky,
Emptying it self upon me Joves full Armoty;
Thy soul before was straightned, thank thy doom
To show her virtue she has larger Room,
Yet sure if every artery were broke
Thou would find strength for such another stroke.
And now I leave thee unto death and fame
Which lives to shake ambition at thy name,
And (if it were no sin) the Court by it
Should hourly swear before a favorite.
Farewell, for thy beam sake we shall not send
Henceforth Commanders that will foes defend
Nor will it ever our just Monarch please
To keep an Admiral to loose the Seas.
Farewell, undaunted stand, and joy to be
Of public sorrow the Epitome,
Let the Duke's name suffer, and crown thy thrall
All we in him did suffer; thou for all.
And I dare boldly write, as thou dare dye,
Stout Felton, Englands ransom, here does lie.
To the Duke of Buckingham.
THe King loves you, you him; both love the same,
You love the King, he you, both Buck-in-game
Of sport the King loves game, of game the Buck
Of all men you, why you? Why see your luck.
To the Same.
SOme say, the Duke was virtuous, gracious, good,
And Felton basely did, to spill his blood.
If it be so, what did he then amiss,
In sending him the sooner to his bliss?
All deaths seem pleasant to a good-man's Eye
And bad men only are afraid to dye;
Changed he this Kingdom to possess a better,
Then is the Duke become John Felton's debtor.
The Lawyer.
LAwyers themselves up hold the Common weal,
They punish such as do offend and steal;
They free with subtle art the innocent,
From any danger, loss, or punishment,
They can, but will not, keep the world in awe
By mis-expounded and distorted law;
Always they have great store of charity,
And love they want, not keeping amitye.
The Clients Transcription of the same Copy, having experienced the contrary.
LAwyers themselves uphold the Commonweal
They punish such as do offend and steal.
They free with subtle art the innocent,
From any danger, loss, or punishment;
They can, but will not keep, the world in awe
By mis-expounded and distorted law
Always they have, great store of charity
And love they want, not keeping amitye.
The reverend Canvase.
SO loud a lie on Sunday rung,
So thick a troop, so grave a thrung,
Assembled in a Church, to laugh,
At nothing? pardon heavens; when half
Had Gods mark on them? none so good
To satisfy the hungry crowd;
With wholesome doctrine; none so hardy
With an hours talk to quitt the tardy?
All silent brethren, and yet none
Can speak by inspiration?
Dares none so conscious of his merit,
Or presuming on the sperit,
With an edifying greeting
Gratulate this zealous meeting?
Is this a day or place (O sin!)
For such to have a canvse in?
Lord! how we sat like Queen Candace's
Eunuch, reading each other faces!
Expecting when some Philips heir
Would come to ascend the sacred chair.
Whilst cousning Miles the bell still knocked
TO increase the number of the mocked?
But in conclusion all the city
Was bidden to a nunc dimitte,
And yet found no man to supply
The office of dumb Zachary
In our dismission, till we tiring
The bell and pullpit both conspiring,
Deprived of sound, and vesture told us
The tenor only preached that called us;
A non sequitur, by Dr. Corbett.
Mark how the Lanterns clowd mine eyes
See where a moon drake ginnes to rise
Sat^rne craules much like an Ir^n Catt,
To see the naked moon in a slippshott hatt,
Thunder thumping toad stools crock the pots
To see the Meremaids tumble
Leather catt-a-mountaines shake their heels
To hear the gosh-hawke grumble
The rustie thread,
Begins to bleed,
And cobwebs elbows itches
The putrid skies
Eat mulsacke pies
Backed up in logic brecehes
Monday trenchers make good hay
The Lobster wears no dagger
Mealy-mouthed shee-peacockes powle the stars
And make the lowbell ^agger
Blew Crocodiles foame in the toe
Blind meal-bagges do follow the do
A ribb of apple brain spice
Will follow the Lancasheire dice
Hark how the chime of Plu^oes pispot cracks,
To see the rainbowes wheel g^nne, made of flax.
On Oxford Scholars going to Woodstock
to hear Dr. Corbet preach before the King.
THe King, and the Court
Desirous of sport,
At woodstock six days did lie
Thither came the Doctors
With their velvet sleev'd Proctors,
And the rest of the learned fry.
Some faces did shine
More withale then with wine;
So that each man there was thought
And judged by their hue
(As it was then true).
They were better fed then taught.
A number beside
With their wenches did ride
(For Scholars you know are kind)
And riding before
Leand back evermore
To kiss their wenches behind.
A number on foot
Without cloak, or boot
And yet to the Court they would
Which was for to show
How far they would go
To do his Majesty good,
The reverend Deane
With his ruff, starched clean
Did preach before the King
A Ring there was spide
In his band-string tide
Was not this a pretty thing?
The Ring without doubt
Was the thing put him out:
So often he forgot what was next
That all that were there
Did think, and dare swear,
He handled it more then his Text.
Horat. 34. Carm. od 10. ad. Ligurium.
It Is true (proud boy) thy beauty may presume
Thank Venus for it but when thy cheeks shall plume,
When manly down shall shade thy Childish pride
And when thy locks (which dangle on each side
Of thy white shoulders) shall no more remain;
When thy vermilion cheeks (which do disdain,
The glorious color of the purple rose)
Begin to fade, and Ligarinas loose
His lovely face, being rudely stuck with hairs
Hard hearted boy) then will thou say with tears
(When looking for thy fair self in a glass
Thou find another there) Ah me! alas!
What do I now perceive? why had not I?
These thoughts when I was lovely smooth? or why?
To these my thoughts which I now entertain
Do not my Cheeks grow flik and young again?
To his Mistress.
I Will tell you whence the rose did first grow red
And whence the lilly whiteness borrowed
You blush't and then the rose with red was dight.
The lilly kissed your hands and so came white
Before that time the rose was but a stain
The lilly naught but palenesse did contain
You have the native color; these they die
And only flourish in your livery.
Upon a Cobbler.
COme hither, read (my gentle friend)
And here behold a Cobblers End,
Long in length his life had gone
But that he had no Last so long.
O mighty death whose darts can kill.
The man that made him souls at will.
On the death of the Lord Treasurer.
IMmodest death, that would not once confer
Dispose or part with our Lord Treasurer!
Had he been thee, or of thy fatal tribe,
He would have spared thy life, and taken a bribe,
He that so often had with gold and wit,
Perverted law and almost conjured it.
He that could lengthen causes, and was able
To starve a suitor at the councill-table
At last not having Evidence to show
Was feign (perforce) to take a deadly blow.
The lover's Melancholy.
HEnce, hence, all you vain delights
As short as are the nights
Wherein you spend your folly!
There Is naught in this life sweet,
If men were wise to ^ee't
But only melancholy.
Welcome folded arms, and fixed eyes,
A fight that pea^cing mortifies,
A look that is fastened to the ground,
A tongue chained up without a sound,
Fountaines-heades and pathless groves
Places which pale passion loves.
Moone-light walks when all the fowls
Are warmely housed, save Bats and owls;
A midnight knell, a parting groan,
These are the sounds we feed upon;
Then stretch our bones in a still gloomy valley
There Is nothing truly sweet, but melancholy;
The answer, by Dr. Stroad.
Return my joys and hither bring
A tongue not made to speak, but sing;
A joll ye spleen, an inward feast,
A causeless laugh without a jest;
A face which gladness does anoint,
An arm for joy flung out of joint;
A spritefull gate that leaves no print,
And make a ^eather of a flint:
A heart that is lighter then the air
An eye still dancing in its sphere.
Strong which mirth nothing shall control
A body nimbler then a soul:
Free wandering thoughts not tied to muse
Which thinking all things, nothing choose;
Which ere we see them come, are gone,
These, life it self does feed upon.
Then take no care but only to be jolly,
To be more wretched then we must, is folly.
A Blush.
STay hasty blood! where can thou seek
So blessed a place as in her cheek?
How can thou from the place retire
Where beauty does command desire?
But if thou can not stay, then show;
Down to her painting papps below
Flow like a deluge from her breast
Where Venus Swannes have built their nest,
And so take glory to disteine
The azure of each swelling vain;
Thence run thou boiling through each part
Till thou have warmed her frozen heart;
But if from love she would retire
Then martyr her with gentle fire
And having searched each secret place
Fly back again into her face;
Where blessed live in changing those
White lillyes to a Ruddy rose:
To his Mistress.
Last when I saw thee, thou did sweetly play
The gentle theife, and stolst my heart away,
Render't again or else give me thine own
In change, for two for thee (when I have none)
Too many are, else I must say, Thou art
A sweet facd creature with a double heart.
On Christ-church window, and Magd^len College wall.
Ye men of Galilee why gaze ye so
On Mandlins necessary print, as though
T'had bin enough for that pure virgin's son
That was incarnate, dyed, and rose, to have done
Those heavenly acts, that ransomed al from hell
And yet no visible effigies tell
The eye, the manner how. Ye misconceive
Who think these sacred mysteryes must leave
Impression only in the soul; how then
Shall those that bear more shape than mind of men,
(Unless their outward sense inform them) know
What accidents their Savior long ago
Sustained? each wise man sees it is not the fate
Of every idiot to be literate.
And who can then forbid (ye Lay) to look
And read those things without or line or book.
Besides (if modestye may judge) what is it
But a supply to each Evangelist?
Long may the learned study, peace and scratch
Before the form of the mainger, or the cratch
Wherein Babe Christ was laid be understood.
Each bungling joyner now may ken what wood
The stall was made of where the long eared steed
And his associate Ox did stand and feed.
Each practiced oastler knows their meat, can say
There is their provender, this is their hay.
Ye now may learn the naked shepherds hew
The stripling boy, and him in the cap of blew,
As perfectly as it had seen the clownes
Each day a sunning on the jewish downs;
It Is strange the dogg's not there, perhapps the Curr
Was left behind, for fear of noise or stir:
But veiw the venerable face whereon
The horn and candle cast reflection,
Observe it well if ere you chance to meet
In paradise, you will know it as soon as see it,
It Is reverent Joseph's portraiture, see how*
The very image seems to cringe and bow,
Mark well his beard, his eyes, his nose, if ought
Be mist, it is yours, and not the painters fault.
Then lead your eyes unto the beauteous one
Who nere knew man, yet mother to a son.
Does not her face more fully speak her heart
And joy, than text or comment can impart?
But oh how little like her self when she
Whose upcast, down cast looks, behold the tree?
That fatal tree whereon the Lord of breath
Exposed himself to th'tyranny of death;
Was ever sorrow so set forth? and yet
To make the quire of heaviness complete,
The loved disciple bears his part, and so
Does that brave less that clips the Cross below.
Consult allauthors, English Greek and Lattin,
You nere saw truer grief or finer satin.
Foul fall the bird whose undiscerning mute
Presumes to turpifye so rich a suite;
It Was very strange they durst so boldly greeve
When those untutored hacksters of the Shreeve
Close by sat armed Cap-a-pee with spears,
And swords, and glittering helmets, over their ears
Bestriding fiery steeds so marked so made
Bucephalu's himself was but a jade
Compared to these, why? who would be but vexed
To see such pal^ryes here, and none in the text?
Next let your eyes and thoughts be fixed upon
The sad-sad story of the passion;
See how from side, from feet, from hands as yet
The crimson blood trills down, you will swear twere wet;
Were Thomas here himself, he would not linger
But sooner trust his eyes then erst his finger.
Mark how death's sable cloud does overspread
His lips, his cheeks, his eyes, his sacred head.
Behold death drawn to th'life, as if that he
Thus wrackt and stretched upon the accursed tree,
Had been of purpose nayld to the cross to try
The Painters cunning hand, more than to dye.
He left him dead, but it was not in the power
Of grave, or hell to keep him, there one hour
Beyond his own determination.
Three days are past, and Ionah's type is done
He walks, and in full glory leaps from tomb:
As Lazarus from the earths insatiate womb,
But not to dye again: mean while the guard
Who vigilantly slept, soon as they heard
Deaths prisoner, and their's so strangely rise
Start up with frighted hearts and ghastly eyes.
They stare and muse, and swear, the heardsmen talk
Strange things, but nere till now saw dead men walk:
Do but take notice how the rascals look
As if some prodigy had thunderstrook
The villains hearts, or some strange power had shown
Medufae's head, and turned them all to stone.
Sure small persuasion would have made the Elves
For fear of further pains to hang themselves:
And blame them not, the Lord was now calcined
Bright as the Sun, his body so refined
That not the sauciness of mortal eye
Could stare upon such luster and not dye.
His glorified humanity can stay
No more on earth, heaven calls, he must away;
Yet ere he part he will take his leave, th'eleven,
Attend, and see him ravished into heaven.
Their eyes (until an interposing cloud
Did interdict access of sight, and shroud
His godlike countenance from mortal ken)
Still wait upon th'ascending Lord; but when
Distance had snat cht him from their view, they lift
Their hands to the sky, as if they made some shift
To draw him down again, such was their love
Thei^e scarce assent to his ascent above.
Where once more, note, the text supplied which tells
The Apostles were spectators and none else
But count byth' pole you will find the eleven increast
Their troops amount to five or six at least.
Were Luke alive, he would thank the painters wit,
Who saw his oversight and mended it.
Let Us yield to reason then, let him that lists
Dispute the number of the Evangelists;
If Judgment ever please this thing to lift
Or Greenbury or none must be the fifth
I Have done, bur first I Will pray, hayle holy cloth
And live in spite of rottenness or moth.
Nor time nor vermin ere shall dare to be
Corruptors of so much Divinity;
But men of Galilee why do ye gaze,
On that which may delight, but not amaze?
That Is left for us; let any wise man bend
His eyes toward our oriental end
Hee'^e bless himself indeed, grow wise; withal
Approaching take the window for a wall
And then conclude that Wadehams perspective
Nor Lincolnes stately types can long survive;
They Will break for envy (spite of wise) to find
Us to transcend themselves so far behind;
But I Will not praise our own, it is far more fit
To leave the talk to some fine Maud'lin wit,
Who may enroule in some well languish^t stain
As we their walls, so they our lights again
Only I fear they will, (least we surpass)
Pull down their hall to build up Eastern glass.
An Elegy.
WHy fair vow-breaker, have thy sins thought fit
That I be cursed example of thy wit
As well as scorns? (bad womn) have not I
Deserved as much as quiet misery?
Be wise and trouble not my suffering fit
For every sin I have repentance yet,
Except for loving thee; do not thou press
My easy madness to a wickedness
As high as that, least I be driven so
As far from heaven as thou art, which I know
Is not thy aim, for thou have sinned to be
In place, as in affection, far from me.
Am I thy friend or kinsman? have I ought
That is familiar with thee bettring thought
A dream and some few letters too, yet lie
Neglected records of my injury.
I know no itch my silent sorrows moves:
To beg a bridal kiss or pair of gloves
These are the lighter duties which they seek
Whose sleep is sound and constant as the week
Is in her nights, who never met the chance
Of love amiss, but in a dreameing trance
And wak't to gladness; it is not so with me
My night and day are twins in misery.
These spend-thrift eyes have been prepared with fears
To keep a solemn revelling in tears;
Had thou been silent I had known the shame
Of that days union by my grief, not fame.
Priva'te as sorrows lodging had I dwelt
Followed with my despair and never felt
Anger except for livinge had thou bin
Content with my undoinge It Is a sin
My love cannot forgive there to upbraid
Awret chednesse which thou thy self have made*
Heaven knows I sufferd, and I sufferd so
That by me it was as infallible to know
How passive man is, fate knew not a curse
Except thy new contempt to make me worse
And that thou gav'st when I so low was brought
I knew not if I lived but yet I thought,
And counted sighs and tears, as if to scann
The air and water would make up a man.
Had thou not broake the peace of my decay
Ere this I think ^'de wept some sins away,
Being diseased, diseased past mine own cure
Thou would needs kill which made me to endure
My patience: why (Joys murdresse) would thou prove
Whether that be as passive as my love?
Had woman such a way as she can give
To man denial, as of love to live?
Why then the abhored reason meers me; why
Successless lovers do so quickly dye,
So be it with me, but if any curse
First can be fastened on thee which is worse
Then thy unwept for vow-breach may it come
As my grief heavye; may the tedious sum
Of thy great sins stand sentinel to keep
Repentance from thy thoughts reach. May thy
Sleep Be broken as my hopes, 'bove all may ^e
Thou choosest husband ripe to jealousye.
And find it true, to tell thee; may the theames
On which thy sleep does paraphrase in dreams
Be my sad wrongs: and when some other shall
(Whom chance has made with me apocryphal
In loveing stories) search an instance forth
To curse his Mistress for her little worth,
May thy name meet him, under whom must be
The Common place of woman's perjury.
May heaven make all this: and if thou pray
May heaven esteem as that thou did that day
Of thy last promises, I Have said, be free
This penance done, then my days destinye
By thee is antedated. But three sighs
Must first pay my admission to the skies.
One for my madness, loving woman so
That I could think her true; the next i will throw
For wounded lovers, that i will breath a new;
The third shall pray my curses may prove true.
In imitation of Sir Philip Sydnie's Encomium of Mopsa.
ASsist me Love, and Lov's, great Queen of Paphos
Inspire my muse with strains more rich then Saphos!
Approach you Heliconiau lasses, even
Chaste Erato, Thalie and the other seven.
Direct my quill whilst I her praises caroll out
Whose paralle's not found in all the world about
In loveliness sh' excells (and it is no wonder)
Those brave Cicilian, forgers of Joves thunder,
For chastity Im'e sure her equal none is
Not Venus self that loved the fair Adonis.
Medea's not more mild, who as the talk is
Made Jason steal the golden fleece from Cholchos.
For modest silence, I dare say she will fit ye
Wherein she is not an ace behind Zantippe,
But Oh! the comely graces of her feature
Great Plutoes Cour affords not such a creature,
Her golden tresses far surpass Megaera's
In compassing her lofty forehead, whereas
No frown nor wrinckle ere appears to fright ye
But still more calm than smooth faced Amphirite.
Beneath those vaulted cells are fixed those torches
From whence proceeds that flame so fiercely siorches.
Between both which her precious nose is placed,
With fairest pearls and rubies rich encased.
Next comes her heavenly mouth whose sweet composure
Falls not within expressions, limmits, no sure.
This even unto her precious ears does guide us,
Which makes her full as fair as great King Mydas.
She Is smooth as Pan, her skin (which you will admire) is
Like purest gold, more glorious far then Iris,
And to close up this Magazin of pleasures
She most exactly treads god- Vulcans measures
This is my Mistress Character, and if in
These lines her name you miss; it is fair Befs Griffin.
A Scholar that sold his Cussion.
TOm I commend thy care of all I know,
That souldst this Cushion for a pipe of To --
Now art thou like though not to studdy more
Yet ten times harder then thou did before.
On the death of Cut. Cobbler.
DEath and an honest Cobbler fell at bate
And finding him worn out, would needs translate;
He was a trusty so'le, and time had bin
He would well liquord go through thick and thin.
Death put a trick upon him, and what was it?
The Cobbler called for All, death brought his last;
'Twas not uprightly done to cut his thread,
That mended more and more till he was dead:
But since he is gone, it is all that can be said,
Honest Gut-Cobler here is underlayd.
A Letter to Ben. Johnson.
DIe Johnson, cross not our Religion so
As to be thought immortal; let us know
Thou art no God; thy works make us mistake
Thy person, and thy great creations make
Us I doll thee, and cause we see thee do
Eternal things, think thee eternal too,
Restore us to our faith and dye, thy doom
Will do as much good as the fall of Rome:
'Twill crush an heresy, we never must hope
For truth till thou be gone, thou and the Pope.
And though we may be certain in thy fall
To lose both wit and judgment, brains and all,
Thou Sack, nor Love, nor Time recover us
Better be fools then superstitious.
Dye! to what end should we thee now adore
There is not Schollership to live to more,
Our language is refined: professors doubt
Their Greek and Hebrew both shall be put out
And we that Latin studied have so long
Shall now dispute and write in Iohnsons tongue,
Nay, courtiers yield, and every beauteous wench
Had rather speak thy English then her French.
But for thy matter fancy stands aghast
Wondering to see her strength thus best at last.
Invention stops her course and bids the world
Look for no more; she has already hurld
Her treasure all on one, thou have outdone
So much our wit and expectation,
That were it not for thee, we scarce had known
Nature her self could ere so far have gone.
Dye! seems it not enough thy verse's date
Is endless; but thine own prolonged fate
Must equal it; for shame engross not age
But now (the fith act ended) leave the stage.
And let us clap, we know the Stars that do
Give others one sife, give a laureat two.
But thou, if thus thy body long survives,
Have two eternities, and not two lives.
Die for thine own sake, see thou not thy praise
Is shortened only by this length of days.
Men may talk this, and that, to part the strife,
My tenet is, thou have no fault but life.
Old Authors do speed best, methinks thy warm breath
Casts a thick mist betwixt thy worth, which death
Would quickly dissipate. If thou would have
Thy Bays to flourish, plant them on thy grave.
Gold now is dross, and Oracles are stuff
With us, for why? Thou art not low enough.
We still look under thee. Stoop, and submit
Thy glory to the meanest of our wit.
The Rhodsan Colossus, ere it fell,
Could not be scanned and measured, half so well.
Lie level to our view, so shall we see,
Our third and richest University.
Art's length, Art's height, Art's depth, can never be found,
Till thou art prostrate, stretched upon the ground.
Learning no farther then thy life extends,
With thee began all Arts, with thee it ends.
On a young Lady, and her Knight.
A Virtuous Lady sitting in a muse,
(As fair and virtuous, Ladies often use,)
With elbow leant upon one knee so hard,
The other distant from it half a yard.
Her Knight, to quip her by a secret token,
Said, Wife, arise, your Cabinet stands open.
She rising, blushed, and smilingly did say,
Lock it then, if you please, you keep the key.
On a Welch-man's devotion.
THe way to make a Welch-man thirst for bliss,
And daily say his prayers on his knees,
Is, to persuade him, that most certain it is,
The Moon is made of nothing but green cheese:
Then he will desire naught else, nor greater boon,
Then placed in heaven, to feed upon the Moon.
On a Maid's Leg.
FAir Betty used to tuck her coats up high,
That men her foot and leg might soon espy.
Thou have a pretty leg, (says one) fair Duck.
Yea, two, (says she) or else I have ill luck.
They Are two indeed, they are twins, I think, quoth he,
They are, and yet they are not, Sir, said she;
They Are birth was both at once, I dare be sworn
And yet between them both a man was born.
To his Sister.
LOving sister, every line
Of your last Letter, was so fine,
With the best metal, that the grain,
Of Scriveners pin-dust had been vain.
The touch of gold did sure instill
Some virtue, more than did your quill.
And since you write no cleanly hand,
Your tokens make me understand.
Mine eyes have here a remedy,
Whereby to read more easily.
I do but jest; Your love alone,
Is my interpretation,
My words I will recall, and swear,
I know your hand is wondrous fair.
On the death of Hobson, the Cambridge-Carrier.
HEre Hobson lies, amongst his many betters,
A man not learned, yet of many Letters;
The Scholars well can justify as much,
Who have received them from his pregnant pouch.
His carriage is well known, often has he gone
An Embassy, 'twixt father and the son.
In Cambridge few (in good time be it spoken)
But will remember him by some good token.
From thence to London rode he day by day,
Till death benighting him, he lost his way.
Nor wonder is it, that he thus is gone,
Since most men know, he long was drawing on.
His Team was of the best, nor could he have
Them mir'd in any ground, but in the grave;
And there he sticks indeed, still like to stand,
Until some Angel lend his helping hand.
So rests in peace the ever toiling Swain,
And supreme Waggoner, next Charles his wain.
Another on the same.
HEre lies one, who did most truly prove,
That he could never die, whilst he could move.
So hung his destiny, never to rot,
Whilst he could but jogg on, and keep his trot.
Made of Sphere metal, never to decay,
Until his resolution made of stay.
Time numbers motion, yet without a crime,
Against old truth, motion numbered out his time.
And like some Engine moved, with wheels and weight,
His principles once ceased, he ended straight.
Rest, that gives all men life, gave him his death,
And too much breathing put him out of breath.
For had his doings lasted as they were
He had been an immortal Carrier.
Another.
HEre lies old Hobson! Death has his desire,
And here (alas) has left him in the mire;
Or else the ways being foul, twenty to one,
He Is here stuck in a slough, and overthrown.
'Twas such a shifter, that if truth were known,
Death was half glad that he had got him down.
For he has any time this ten years full,
Dog'dd him 'twixt Cambridge and the London-Bull.
And surely death could never have prevailed,
Had not his weekly course of carriage failed.
But lately finding him so long at home,
And thinking now his journey's end was come;
And that he had taken up his latest Inn,
Death in the likeness of a Chamberlin,
Showed him his room, where he must lodge that night,
Pulled off his boots, and took away the light.
If any ask for him, it shall be sed,
Hobson has supt, and newly gone to bed.
Fr. Clark, Porter of St. John's, To the President.
HElp Silvanus, help god Pan,
To show my love to this kind man,
Who out of's love and nature good,
Has well increased my store of wood.
And whilst he the same peruses,
Wood-Nymphs help instead of Muses.
Oh thou that sitst at St. John's helm,
I humbly thank thee for my Elm;
Or if it chance an Oak to prove,
With heart of Oak I thank your love.
This Tree (to leave all Ovid's fables)
Shall be the Tree of Predicables.
Or if you like not that opinion,
The kindred Tree of great Justinian.
Thus finer Wits may run upon it,
But I do mean to make fire on it:
By which I Will sit and sing, in spite of wealth,
And drink in Lambs-wool to your Worship's health.
An Epitaph.
HEre underneath this stone does lie,
That worthy Knight, brave Sir John Dry;
At whose funeral there was no weeping,
He died before Christmas, to save housekeeping.
A Wife.
A Lusty young Wife, that of late was sped,
With all the pleasures of a marriage bed,
Often a grave Doctor asked, whether's more right
For Venus sports, the morning or the night.
The good old man replied, as he thought meet,
The morn's more wholesome, but the night more sweet.
Nay then (said she) since we have time and leisure,
We Will to it each morn for health, each night for pleasure.
The constant man.
HE that with frowns is not dejected,
Nor with soothing smiles erected;
Nor at the baits of pleasure biteth,
He whom no thoughts nor cross affrighteth
But, center to himself, controleth,
Change and fortune when she rouleth.
Who when the silent night begins,
Makes even reckoning with his sins:
Who not deferreth till to morrow,
To wipe out his black scores of sorrow.
Who sets hell-pains at six and seven,
And fears not the fall of heaven.
But's full resolved without denial,
To yield his life to any trial;
Making his death his meditation,
And longing for his transmigration.
This is the constant man, who never
From himself, nor God does sever.
To his Mistress.
COme let us hug and kiss each other,
Sacrificing to Love's mother:
These are duties which she loves,
More then thousand milky Doves
Fresh bleeding on her altars. We
Will not use our piety
In such slaughters. Cruelty
Is no devotion, nor can I
Believe, that she can pleasure take
In blood, unless for Mars his sake.
No: Let us to Cythera's Queen,
Burn for sacrifice our green,
And tender youth, with those divine
Flames, which thine eyes begot of mine.
And lest the while our zeal catch cold,
In warm embraces we will enfold
Each other, to produce a heat.
Thus pleasing her, we pleasure get.
Then let us kiss and hugg each other,
Sacrificing to Lov's mother.
Swearing.
IN elder times, an ancient custom was,
In weighty matters to swear by the Mass.
And when the Mass was down, as all men note,
Then swore they by the cross of the gray Groat.
And when the cross was likewise held in scorn,
Then faith and troth was all the oath was sworn.
But when they had out-worn both faith and troth,
Then, Dam my soul, became a common oath.
So custom kept decorum in gradation:
Mass, cross, faith, troth out-sworn, then came damnation.
On a good Leg and Foot.
IF Hercules tall stature might be guessed
But by his thumb, the Index of the rest,
In due proportion, the best rule that I
Would choose, to measure Venus beauty by,
Should be her leg and foot: Why gaze we so
On the upper parts, as proud to look below,
(In choosing Wives) when it is too often known,
The colors of their face are not their own.
As for their legs, whether they mince or stride,
Those native compasses are seldom wide
Oftelling truth. The round and slender foot,
Is a proved token of a secret note,
Of hidden parts, and well this way may lead,
Unto the closet of a mayden-head.
Here emblems of our youth, we Roses tie;
And here the Garter, love's dear mystery.
For want of beauty here, the Peacock's pride,
Let Us fall her train, and fearing to bespy'd,
Shuts up her painted witnesses, to let
Those eyes from view, which are but counterfeit.
Who looks not if this part be good or evil,
May meet with cloven feet, and match the devil.
For this did make the difference between
The more unhallowed creatures, and the clean.
Well may you judge her other parts are light,
Her thoughts are wry that does not tread aright.
But then there is true perfection, when we see,
Those parts more absolute which hidden be.
Nature never lent a fair foundation,
For an unworthy frame to rest thereon.
Let others view the top, and limbs throughout,
The deeper knowledge is to know the root.
In viewing of the face, the weakest know
What beauty is, the learned look more low:
And in the feet the other parts descry,
As in a pool the Moon we use to spy.
Pardon, sweetheart, the pride of my desire,
If but to kiss your toe it should aspire.
Upon the view of his Mistress face in a Glass.
AH cruel Glasse^ did thou not see,
Chloris alone too hard for me?
Perceiv'dst thou not her charming sight,
Did ravish mine in cruel fight?
But then another she must frame,
Whose single forces well might tame
A lovers heart; no humane one,
Is proof against her force alone.
Yet did I venture, though struck mute,
The beauteous vision to salute.
But that like air in figured charms,
Deceived the ambush of my arms.
'Twas some wise Angel her shape took,
That so he might more heavenly look.
I her old captive, now do yield
Her shaddowed self another field:
By such odds overcome, to die,
Is no dishonored victory.
On Bond the Userer.
HEre lies a Bond under this tomb,
Sealed and delivered to, god knows whom.
To the Duke of Buckingham.
WHen I can pay my Parents, or my King'
For life, or peace, or any dearer thing,
Then, dearest Lord, expect my debt to you
Shall be as truly paid, as it is due.
But as no other price or recompense
Serves them, but love, and my obedience.
So nothing pays my Lord, but what is above
The reach of hands, his virtue, and my love.
For when as goodness does so overflowe,
The conscience binds not to restore but owe,
Requital were presumpt^n, and you may,
Call me ungrateful, when I strive to pay.
Nor with this moral lesson do I shift
Like one that meant to save a better g^ift.
Like very poor or connterfeit poor men,
Who to preserve their Turkey or their hen
Do offer up themselves. No, I have sent
(A kind of gift, will last by being spent)
Thanks-starling, far above the bullion rate
Of horses, hangings, jewels, coin, or plate.
Oh you that should in choosing of your own,
Know a true Diamond from a Bristow stone,
You that do know they are not always best
In their intent, that lowdest do portest
But that a prayer from the Convocation,
Is better than the Commons protestation,
Trust them that at your feet their lives will lay
And know no arts but to perform and pray
Whilst they that buy perferment without praying
Begin with bribes, and finish with betraying.
The Gentleman's verses before he Killed himself.
Have Night unto thy Center, are thy wings
Ruled by the course of dull clockt plummetings?
If so, mount on my thoughts, and we will exceed
All time that is past t'gain midnight with ou^ speed
The day more favorable hasted on
And by its death sent me instruction
To make thy darkness tomb my life, let then
Thy wonted hours seize on the eyes of men
Make them imagine by their sleep, what I
Must truly act, let each starr veyle his Eye
With masks of mourninge clouds: methinkes the owls
Prodigious summons strike me, and she houles
My Epicedium, with whose tragic quill
I Will pencill in this map my hapless ill.
Caused first by her, whose foul apostasy
In love for ever brand her; and when I
Am dead, dear paper (my minds heir) convey
This epitaph unto her veiwe, and pray
Her to inscribe it on my tomb.
Here lies
One murdered by a woman's perjuryes
Who from the time, she scorned him, scorned to live
No rival shall him of his death deprive.
A Song in commendation of Music.
WHen whispering strains do softly steal
With creeping passion through the heart
And when at every touch we feel
Our pulses beat and bear a part
When threads can make
A heart string quake
Philosophy
Can scarce deny
The soul consists of harmony.
When unto heavenly joys we feign
What ere the soul affects most
Which only thus we can explain
By music of the winged host.
Whose lays we think
Make stars to wink
Philosophy
Cannot deny
Our soul consists of harmony.
O lull me, lull me, charminge air
My senses rockt with wonder sweet
Like snow on wool, thy fallings are
Soft, like a spirit, are thy feet
Grief who need fear
That has an ear
Down let him lie
And slumbring dye
And change his soul for harmony.
A Dialogue betwixt Cupid and a Country-Swaine.
AS Cupid took his bow and bolt
Some birding-sport to find;
He lightt upon a shepherds swain
That was some good man's hind.
Swa. Well met fair Boy, what sport abroad
It is a goodly day:
The birds will sit this frosty morn
You cannot choose but slay.
Gods-ouches look, your eyes are out
You will not bird I trow:
Alas go home or else I think
The birds will laugh at you.

Cup. Why man thou do deceave thy self
Or else my mother lies
Who said that though that I were blind
My arrows yet had eyes.

Swa. Why then thy mother is a voole
And thou art but an elfe,
To let thy arrows to have eyes
And go with out thy self,

Cup. Not, so Sir Swain, but hold thy prate,
If I do take a shaft
I Will make thee know what I can do
(At this the young Swain laughed:)
Then angry Cupid drew his bow

Swa. For Gods sake kill me not.

Cup. I Will make thy lither liver ache

Swa. Nay I Would be loath of that.
The singing arrow hit the mark
And pierced his silly soul
You might see by his hollow eyes
Where love had made a hole.
And so the Swain went bleeding home,
To stay it was no boot:
And found that he could see to hit,
That could not see to shoot.

Sighs.
O Tell me, tell, thou god of wind
In all thy cavernes can thou find
A vapor, flame, a gale or blast
Like to a sigh which love does cast?
Can any whirlwind in thy vault
Plough up Earths breath with like assault.
Go Wind and blow then where thou please
Yea breathless leave me to my ease.
If thou be wind, O then refrain
From wracking me whilst I complain;
If thou be wind, then leight thou art
And yet how heavy is my heart?
If thou be wind, then purge thy way
Let care, that cloggs thy force, obey,
Go wind and blow, etc.
These blasts of sighing raised are
By th'influence of my bright star;
The AEolus from whence they came
Is love that strains to blow the same:
The angry Sway of whose behest
Makes hearth and bellows of one breast.
Go wind and blow, etc.
Know it is a wind that longs to blow
Upon my Saint where ere she go,
And stealing through her fan it bears
Soft errands to her lips and ears,
And then perhaps a passage makes
Down to the heart when breath she takes.
Go wind and blow, etc.
Yea gentle gale, try it again,
Oh do not pass from me in vain;
Go mingle with her soul divine
Engendring spirits like to mine:
Yea take my soul along with thee
To work a stronger Sympathy.
Go wind and blow, etc.
My soul before the grosser part
Thus to her heaven should depart,
And when my body cannot lie
On wings of wind, she soon shall fly;
Though not one soul our bodies join,
Our bodies shall our souls combine.
Go wind and blow thou where thou please,
Yea breathless leave me to my ease.
Weomen.
WEomen are borne in Wilsheire,
Brought up in Cumberland.
Lead their lives in Bedfordsheire
Bring their husbands to Buckingame
And dye in Shrewsbury.
On a dissemble^.
COuld any show where Pl^es people dwell
Whose head stand in their breasts, who cannot tell,
A smoothinge lie, because their open heart
And lips are joined so near. I would depart
As quick as thought, and there forget the wrongs
Which I have sufferd by deceitful tongues.
I would depart, where souls departed be
Which being freed from clowdy flesh, can see
Each other so immediately, so clear,
That none need tongues to speak nor ears to hear:
Were tongues intended to express the soul
And can we better do with none at all?
Where words first made our meanings to reveal?
And as they used our meaning to conceal;
The air by which we breathe, will that turn fogg?
Or breath turn mist; will that become a Clogg
Which should unload the mind? fall we upon
Another Babells Sub-confusion?
And in the self same language must we find,
A diverse faction of the words and mind?
Dull as I am, that hug such empty air,
And never marked the deeds, (a phrase more fair
More trusty and univocall) join well,
Three or four actions we may quickly spell
A hollow heart; if these no sight will lend,
Read the whole sentence and observe the end.
I will not wait so long: the guilty man
(On whom I ground my speech) no longer can
Delude my sense, nor can the graceful art
Of kind dissembling, button up his heart.
His well-spoke wrongs, are such as hurtful ^ords
Writ in a comely hand, or bloody swords,
Sheathd up in velvet, if he draw on me
My armor proof is incredulity.
To a Friend.
LIke as the hand which has bin usd to play
One lesson long, still runs the usual way:
And waits not what the ^earers bid it strike,
But does presume by custom this will like.
So run my thoughts which are so perfect grown,
So well acquainted with my passion;
That now they do prevent me with their haste
And ere I think to sigh, my sigh is past;
Is past and flown to you, for you alone
Are all the object that I think upon;
And did not you supply my soul with thought
For want of action it to none were brought.
What though our absent arms may not enfold
Real embraces; yet we firmly hold
Each other in possession; thus we see
The Lord enjoyes his Lands where e're he be.
If Knights possessed no more then where they sat
What were they greater then a meaner state?
This makes me firmly yours, you firmly mine
That something more than bodies us combine.
A Poetical Poem, by Mr. Stephen Locket to Mistrisse Bess Sarney.
TO my Bess Sarney, quintessence of beauty,
I Steven Locket do present my duty.
In rythem daigne goddess to accept my verses,
I wis with worse wise men have wiped their A --
O thou which able art to take to task all
(Pox! what will rythme to that?) oh, I Am a rascal,
But I Am turned poet late, and for thy credit,
Have pend this poem, prithee take it and read it.
Thou needs not be ashamed often, for it raises
Trophyes as high as maypoles to thy praises.
But first in order it thy head does handle
That Is more orbicular than a quadrangle.
On top of which does grow a Turst of tresses
Winter her self, rayd in her hoary dresses
Of frost, looks not more lovely; thy brows truly
Have larger furrows, than a field ploughed newly.
Thy eyes, ha eyes (Zounds I Am so full of clinches)
Are not sunck in thy head above six inches;
From which distraining gently, there does stream
Rivers of whey, mixed with curdled cream.
Straight as a Rams horn is thy nose, more marrow
Lies in thy nostrills, than would fill a barrow.
And at your lip to mak't more ornamentall,
Hangs down a jewel of S -- Oriental.
The bright gold and thy face are of one color,
But if compared with thine, that is the duller.
Thy lips are white as tallow, never man did
Buss sweeter things, (sure they are sugarcandid.)
Thy teeth more comely than two dirty rakes are,
Thy breath is stronger than a douzen j^kes are.
A fa^t for all perfumes, a turd for roses
Smell men but thee, they wish them selves all n^ses.
Thy voice as sweet, as musical, as fine is,
As any phlegmy Hagg's, that ninty nine is.
And when thou speakst, (as if they had bin the wonder
Of women kind) thy tongu's as still as thunder
But oh thy shoulders large; it is six to seven,
Should Atla's fail, but thou would bear up heaven.
Thou do excel, I warrant thee for a button,
Hercules and Cacus too, that stole mutton.
About the wast, there thou art three times fuller,
Then was the Wadham G^ragantuan Buller.
Thy buttock and thy fashion are so all one,
That I Would a swore thou had a Fardingall on
Thy legs are Badg^t like, and go as even,
As do Iambick verses or I Steven,
And now I Am come unto thy feet, where I do
Prostrate my self, with reverence to thy shoo,
Which for antiquity never a jot behind is.
Tom Coriats, that traveled both the Indies.
For thy sweet sake, I will go down to Pluto,
And in thy quarrel beat him black and blew too;
And lest Sr Cerberus should be too lusty,
I have a loaf will hold him play, it is crusty.
I Will bring the Dev'll back with me in a snaffle,
For in that kind I scorn to take a baffle.
And so I take my leave; prithee sweet Thumkin,
Hold up thy coats, that I may kiss thy bumkin.
Thanks for a welcome.
FOr your good looks, and for your Claret
For often bidding, Do not spare it;
For tossing glasses to the top,
And after sucking of a drop,
When scarce a drop was left behind,
Or what does nickname wine even wind:
For healthful mirth and lusty Sherry,
Such as made grave old Cato merry;
Such are our thanks that you may have
In blood the Claret that you gave.
And in your service shall be spent
The spirits which your Sack has lent.
To Phillis.
Fie on this Courtly life, full of displeasure
Where neither frowns nor smiles keep any measure,
But every passion governs in extremes,
True love and faith from hence falshod does banish:
And vows of friendship here like vapors vanish,
Loyalty's counted but a dream,
Inconstant favors like rivers gliding,
Truth is despised
Whilst flatterie's prized,
Poor virtue here has no certain abiding.
Then let us no longer stay, my fairest Phillis,
But let us fly from hence where so much ill is;
Into some some desert place there to abide
True love shall go with us and faith unfeigned
Pure thoughts, embraces chaste, and vows unstained.
Virtue her self shall ever be our guide,
In Cottage poor where neither frowning fortune,
Nor change of fate
Can once abate,
Our sweet content, or peace at all importune.
There will we drive our flocks from hills and valleys,
And whilst they feeding are, we will sit and dally;
And thy sweet voice to sing birds shall invite
Whilst I with roses, violets, and lillies
Will flowery garlands make to crown my Phillis.
Or numbered verses to thy praise indite
And when the Sun is Westwardly declining,
Our flocks and we,
Will home wards flee
And rest our selves until the Suns next shining.
Women.
ONce I must confess I loved
And expected love again,
But so often as I proved
My expectance was in vain.
Women joy to be attempted,
And do glory when they see
Themselves from loves force exempted,
And that men captived be.
If they love, they can conceal it,
And dissemble when they please,
When as men will straight reveal it
And make known their hearts disease.
Men must beg and crave their favor,
Making many an idle vow;
Whilst they froward in behavior,
Feign would yield, but know not how.
Sweet stolne-sport to them is grateful,
And in heart they wish to have it;
Yet they do account it hateful
Upon any terms to crave it.
But would men not go about it
But leave off at all to woe,
Ere they would be long without it,
They would beg and crave it too.
The World.
WHether men do laugh or weep,
Whether they do wake or sleep,
Whether they feel heat or cold,
Whether they be young or old;
There is underneath the Sun
Nothing in true earnest done.
All our pride is but a jest,
None are worst and none are best;
Grief and joy, and hope and fear,
Play their pageants every where;
Vain opinion all does sway
And the world is but a play.
Powers above in clouds does sit,
Marking our poor apish wit,
That so lamely without state,
Their high glory imitate.
No ill can be felt but pain,
And that happy men disdain.
On his absent Mistress.
ABsence, hear thou my protestation
Against thy strength,
Distance and length;
Do what thou can for alteration:
For hearts where love's refined
Are absent joined, by time combined.
Who loves but where the Graces be,
His mind has found
Affectious ground
Beyond time place mortality,
That heart that cannot vary,
Absence is present time does carry.
By absence this good mean I gain
That I can catch her,
Where none can watch her,
In some close corner of my brain,
There I embrace her, and there kiss her
And so enjoy her, and so miss her.
The Constant Lover.
I Know as well as you, she is not fair,
Nor has she sparkling eyes or curled hair;
Nor can she brag of virtue or of truth,
Or any thing about her save her youth.
She is woman too, and to no End
I know, I verses write and letters send:
And naught I do can to compassion move her
All this I know, yet cannot choose but love her.
Yet am not blind as you and others be;
Who think and swear they littile Cupid see
Play in their Mistress eyes, and that there dwell
Roses on cheeks, and that her breast excel
The whitest snow, as if that love were built
On fading red and white' the bodies quilt.
And that I cannot love unless I tell
Wherein or on what part my love does dwell.
Vain Heretics you be, for I love more
Then ever any did that told wherefore:
Then trouble me no more, nor tell me why,
It Is! because she is she, and I am I:
The Irish Beggar.
I Pray you save poor Irish knave,
A hone a hone
Round about the town throughout
Is poor Shone gone,
Master to find,
Loving and kind
But Shone to his mind's
Near the near,
Poor Shone can find none here
Which makes him cry for fear,
A hone a hone.
Sh^n being poor, his feet being sore,
For which heel no more
Trot about,
To find Master out,
He had radir go without
And cry a hone,
I was so cursed that I was forced
A hone a hone.
To go bare foot and strips to boot
And no shoes, none,
None English could I speak,
My mind for to break,
And many laughed to hear the moan I made,
I like a tired jade,
That had no work or trade,
Cried, a hone a hone.
In stead of breakfast,
Was feign runn a pace
To get more stomach to my hungry throat,
And when for friend I sought,
They called me all to naught,
A hone a hone.
For Ladies sake some pity take;
A hone a hone.
I served a less where was no mass
No faith none;
Often was I beat 'cause I Would not eat,
On frydayes, beef and meat,
Twice a day,
And when I went to pray,
Took holy bead away;
A hone a hone.
Make Church to go
Whether will or no
I Will dye, or I do so,
Grace a Christ,
Poor Shone loves Popish Priest,
Good Catholic thou see.
A hone a hone.
Answer.
I prithee Shone make no more moan
For thy Mr lost.
I do intend something to spend,,
On Catholics thus Crossed.
Take this small gift,
And with it make a shift;
And be not thou bereft of thy mind,
All though he be unkind;
To leave thee thus behind
To cry a hone.
Buy thee some beer,
And then some good cheer,
There Is naught for thee too dear;
What ere ensue
Be constant still and true,
Thy country do not rue
Nor cry a hone.
Shone
Good shentry men that do intend
To help poor Shone at's need
Mine patron ^eer has given me beer
And meat whereon to feed,
Yea and money too
And so I hope that you,
Will do as he did do for my relief,
To ease my pain and grief;
I Will eat no powdered beef;
What ere ensue
I Will keep my fast
As in times past,
And all my prayers and vows I will renew
Cause friends I find but few,
Poor Shone will still prove true,
And so adieu.
A Question.
I ask thee whence those ashes were
Which shrine themselves in plaits of hair?
Unknown to me, sure each morn dies.
A Phoenix for a sacrifice.
I ask whence are those aires that fly
From birds in sweetest harmony?
Unknown to me, but sure the choice
Of accents ecchoed from her voice.
I ask thee whence those active fires
Take light which glide through burnisht air?
Unknown to me, unless there flies
A flash of lightning from her eyes.
I ask thee whence those ruddy bloomes
Pierce on her cheeks on scarlet gowns?
Unknown to me? Sure that which flies
From fading roses, her cheek dies.
I Will ask thee of the lilly, whence
It gaind that type of innocence?
Unknown to me, sure natures deck^
Was ravished from her snowie neck.
The Reply.
Ask me no more, whither do stray
The golden atoms of the day;
For in pure love, heaven did prepare
Those powders, to enrich your hair.
Ask me no more whither does haste
The nightingal when summer's past;
For in your sweet divided throat
She winters, and keeps warm her noate.
Ask me no more where those stars light
Which downwards stoop in dead of night;
For in your eyes they set; and there
Fixed become, as in their sphere.
Ask me no more where Jove bestows,
When June is past, the fading rose;
For in your beauties Orient deep,
All flowers as in their bedds do sleep.
Ask me no more if East or West,
The Phoenix builds her spiced nest;
For unto you at last she flies,
And in your fragrant bosom dies.
The Mock-Song.
I Tell you true, whereon does light
The dusky shade of banished night,
For in just vengeance heavens allow
It still should shine upon your brow.
I tell you true where men may seek
The sound which once the owl did shreek,
For in your false deviding throat
It lies, and death is in its noate.
I tell you true whither do pass
The siniling look out of a glass;
It leapes into your face, for there
A falser shadow does appear.
I Will tell you true whither are blown
The airy wheels of Thistle down,
They fly into your mind, whose care
Is to be light as thistles are.
I tell you true within what nest
The stranger Cuckoe's eggs do rest,
It is your bosom which can keep
Nor him, nor him, where one should sleep.
The Moderatix.
I Will tell you where another sun
That setts, as riseing it begun.
It is my self who keeps one sphere
And were the same if men so were.
What need I tell, that life and death,
May pass in sentence from one breath;
So issue from my equal heart
Both love and scorn for men's desert.
I Will tell you in what heavenly hell
An Angel and a friend may dwell:
It is mine eye whose glassy book
Sends back the gazers diverse look.
I Will tell you in a diverse scale
One weight can up and downwards hale:
You call me thistle, you a rose;
I neither am, yet both of those.
I Will tell you where both frost and fire
In peace of common feat conspire;
My frozen breast that flint is like,
Yet yields a fire if you will strike.
Then you that love, and you that loath.
With one aspect I answer both;
For round about me glowes a fire,
Can melt and harden gross desire.
The affirmative answer.
OH no, heaven saw men's fancyes stray
To idolize but dust and clay;
That emblem gave that they might see,
Your beautye's date but dust must be.
No Philomel when summers gone
Hasts to the wood her rape to moan;
(Unwilling hers) a shamd to see
Your (unlike hers) unchastity.
Oh no, those stars fly but the sight
Of what you act in dead of night,
A shamd themselves should Pandars prove
In your unsatiate beastly love.
Oh no, that rose when June is past
Looks pale as with a poisonous blast;
And such your beauty, when as time
Like winter shall oretake your prime.
Oh no the Phoenix shuns the place,
And fears the lustful fires to embrace,
Of your hot breast and barren womb,
As death or some perpetual tomb.
A discourse between a Poet and a Painter.
Poet. PAinter, I p^ithee pencill to the life
The woman thou would willingly call wife,
Fashion her from the head unto the heel,
So perfect that but gazing thou may feel
Pigmaleons passion: color her fair hair,
Like amber, or to something else more rare,
Temper a white shall pass Pyrenean snow,
To raise her temples, and on it bestow
Such artificial azure, that the Eye,
May make the heart believe the ma^ble sky,
To perfect her had melted in soft raines,
Lending a blew to brauuch her swelling veins,
Then Painter, to come lower, her sweet chin,
I would have small and white, not much trench'd in;
Nor altogether plain, but such an one
The nicest thought may judge equal to none.
Her nose I would have comely, not too high,
Though men call it, in Physiognomy,
A type of honor; nor too low* f^r then
They I say, sh^'s known (God knows) how many men;
Nor broad, nor flat, that is the hard favored mould:
Nor thin, nor sharp, for then they will call her scold.
Apparel it in such a speaking grace,
That men may read Majesty in her face.
Her lips a pair of blushing twins so red,
Nice fancy may depart away full fed.
But, Painter, when thou com^st unto her eye,
There let thy Pencill play; there cunningly
Express thy self, for as at feasts* so here
The dainties I keep last to crown the cheer.
Make her eye Love^ ^veet argument, a look
That may discourse* make it a well w^it book,
Whereas in fair set (...) of art,
Men there may read the story of her heart.
Whiter than white, if you would po^rtray ought,
Display her neck cure as the purest thought.
To make her gracious give her a broad breast
Topt with two milkie mountains; down her chest.
Between those hills let Loves sweet valley lie,
The pleasing thraldom of a Lovesick eye.
Still, Painter, to fall lower paint her waste
Straight as the Cedar, or the Norway Mast,
To take a modest step, let men but guess
By her neat foot a hidden handsomnesse.
Thus, Paint^r, I would have her in each part,
Remain unmatcht by nature or by art.
Can thou do this?

Pa^nter. -- Yes Sir, I Will draw a feature,
You shall conclude that art has outdone nature,
The Pencill Sir, shall force you to confess,
It can more lively than your pen express.

Poet. That by this then let me find,
To this body draw a mind;
O Painter, to your pencill fall,
And draw me something rational:
Give her thoughts, serious, secure,
Holy, chaste, religious, pure.
From virtue never known to start,
Make her an understanding heart.
Seat the Graces in her mind,
A well taught truth, a faith refined
From doubts and jelousies; and give
Unto her heart a hope may live
Longer then time, until it be
Perfected by Eternity.
Give her an honest loving mind,
Neither too coy, nor yet too kind:
But let her equal thoughts so raise her,
Loose thoughts may f^are, and the chaste praise her.
Then, Painter, next observe this rule,
A principle in Apelles School;
Leave not too much space between
Her tongue and heart, it is seldom seen
That such tell truth; but let there be,
Between them both a sympathy:
For she whose tongue and heart keep even
In every syllable, courts heaven:
If otherwise, this maxim know,
False above's not true below.
Thus mind and body let her be all over,
A golden text bound in a golden cover.
Can thou do this?

Painter. -- But Sir, 'Is't your intent
I should draw her in both parts excellent?

Poet. It is.

Paint. Then in plain words, not in dark sense to lurk,
Find you the woman; and 'Ile fall to work.

To B. R. for her Bracelets.
It Is not (Dear Love) that Amber twist
Which circles round thy captive wrist,
Can have the power to make me more
Your prisoner then I was before.
Though I that bracelet dearer hold,
Than Misers would a chain of gold.
Yet this but ties my outward part,
Heart Strings alone can tie my heart.
It Is not that soft and silken (...),
Your hands did unto mine bequeath;
Can bind with half so powerful charms,
As the Embraces of your arms;
Although not iron bands (my fair)
Can bind more fiercely than your ^aire.
Yet that will chain me most will be,
Your heart in True Love's-knot to me.
It Is not those beams, your hairs, nor all
Your glorious outside does me thrall;
Although your looks have force enough
To make the stateliest Tyrants bow:
Nor any angel could deny,
Your person his idolatry.
Yet I do not so much adore
The temple, but the goddess more.
If then my soul you would confine
To prison, tie your heart to mine;
Your noble virtues, constant love,
The only powerful chains will prove;
To bind me ever, such as those
The hands of death shall never unloose.
Until I such a prisoner be
No liberty can make me free.
On Tom Holland and Nell Cotton.
A Light young man lay with a lighter woman,
And did request their things might be in common;
And gave her (when her good will he had gotten,
A yard of Holland for an ell of Cotton.
A We lchman.
JEnkin a welchman having suites in law
Journying to London chance to steal a Cow;
For which (pox on her luck as ere man saw)
Was burnt with in the fist, her know not how.
Being asked how well the case did with him stand
Wee's have her now (quoth Ienkin) in her hand.
A Woman that scratcht her Husband.
A Woman lately fiercely did assail
Her husband with sharp speech, but sharper nail;
On that stood by and saw her, to her sed
Why do you use him so? he is your head.
He is my head (quoth she) indeed it is true,
I do but scratch my head, and so may you.
A Mistress.
HEr for a Mistress, would I feign enjoy,
That hangs the lipp and pouts for every toy:
Speaks like a wag, is bold, dares boldly stand
And bid love welcome with a wanton hand.
Laughs loud, and for one blow will give you three
And when she is stabbd, will fall a kissing me.
If she be modest wise and chaste of life,
Hang her she is good for nothing but a wife.
One fighting with his wife.
MEg and her husband Tom, not long ago,
Were at it close, exchanging blow for blow.
Both being eager, both of a stout heart,
Endured many a bang ere they would part.
Peter looked on and would not stint the strife,
He Is cursed (quoth he) that parts man and wife.
Ambition.
THe whistling winds me-thinkes do witness this,
No grief so great as to have lived in bliss.
Then only this poor plain song will I sing.
I was not borne, nor shall I dye a King.
To leap at honor is a dangerous case,
See but the gudgeons they will bite a pace.
Until the fatal hook be swallowed down,
Wherewith ambition angles for a crown:
Then be content and let the bait pass by,
He has enough that lives contentedly.
But if thou must advancement have, then see
This is the way thou must advanced be.
True temporizing is the means to climb
There is no music without keeping time.
Upon a Gardener.
COuld he forget his death? that every hour
Was emblem'd to it by the fading flower:
Should he not mind his end? yes needshe must,
That still was conversant'mongst bedds of dust.
Then let no on yon in an handchercher
Tempt your sad eyes unto a needless fear;
If he that thinks on death well lives and dies,
The gardner sure is gone to paradise.
On his first Love.
MY first love whom all beautyes did ado^
Fireing my heart, suppressed it with her scorn.
And since like tynder in my heart it lies
By every sparkle made a sacrifice.
Each wanton eye now kindles my desire
And that is free to all which was entire.
For now my wandering thoughts are not confined
Unto one woman, but to womankind.
This for her shape I love, that for her face,
This for her gesture, or some other grace:
And sometimes when I none of these can find
I choose her by the kernel not the rind.
And so do hope though my chief hope is gone
To find in many what I lost in one.
And like to merchants which have some great loss
Trade by retayle which cannot do in gross.
She is in fault, which caused me first to stray
Needs must he wander, who has lost his way*
Guiltless I am, she did the change provoke,
Which made that charcole which at first was ok^
For as a looking glass to the aspect,
Whilst it was whole does but one face reflect;
But crac^ or broak in pieces, there is shown^
Many less faces, where was first but one.
So-love unto my heart did first prefer
Her image, and there planted none but her:
But when it was cracked and martyrd by her scorn
Many less faces in her seat were borne,
Thus like to tinder I am prone to catch
Each falling sparkle, fit for any match.
To his Mistress.
I Will not do sacrifice
To thy face, or to thy eyes
Nor unto thy lilly palm
Nor thy breath that wounding balm:
But the part
To which my heart
In vows is sealed,
Is that mine
Of bliss divine
Which is concealed.
What Is the golden fruit to me
So I may not shake the tree?
What Is that golden architecture
If I may not touch the nectar?
Bare enjoying all the rest
Is but like a golden feast,
Which at need,
Can never feed
Our love sick-wishes
Let me eat,
Substantial meat,
Not view the dishes.
To his letter.
FLy paper, kiss those hands
Whence I am bard of late:
She quickly will unloose thy bands,
O wish me thine estate.
Appear unto her eyes
Though they do burn to fumes:
For happy is the sacrifice,
Which heaven-fire consumes.
Yet even with this depart
With a soft dying breath,
Whisper the truths into her heart,
And take them on thy death.
Tell her thou can not now
New oaths or give or take,
Or to repeat the former vow
We did each other make.
Say thou came to complain
But not of love, nor her
But on my fortune being feign
Thus absent to confer.
When thou have offered this
Perhaps then for thy pain,
She will inpart to thee a kiss
And read the ore again.
Perhaps when form my sake,
Her lips have made thee blessed,
That so embalmd ^hee, she will make
Thy grave within her breast.
Oh never then desire
To rise from such a room:
Who would not leave his life t'aspire
In death to such a tomb.
And in these joys excess,
Melt, languish, faint, and dye*
For might I have so good access
To her, even so would I.
An Epitaph upon Hurry the Tailor.
WIthin this tomb is honest Hurry laid,
Who in good fashion lived, good fashion died.
It Is strange that death so soon cut off his thread
Some say his end not full done, he was dead.
But here the knot is, and I thus it scann
He took a yard, whose due was but a spann.
How er^ he is happy, and I know full well
He Is now in heaven since here he had his hell.
Scylla toothlesse.
SCylla is toouthlesse; yet when she was young,
She had both tooth enough, and too much tongue:
What should I now of toothlesse Scylla say?
But that her tongue has worn her teeth away.
AVicar.
AN honest Vicar riding by the way,
Not knowing better how to spend the day
Did sing unto himself Genevaes psalms;
A blind man hearing him straight asked an alms
To whom (quoth he) with coin I cannot part,
But god bless thee good man with all my heart,
O said the man the greater is my loss,
When such as you do bless without a cross.
On a Ribband.
THis silken wreath that circles-in my arms
Is but an emblem of your mystic charms;
Wherewith the magic of your beauty binds
My Captive soul, and round about it winds;
Time may wear out these soft weak bands, but those:
Strong chains of brass fate shall not discompose
This holy relic may preserve my wrist,
But my whole frame by the other does subsist:
To that my prayers and sacrifice, to this
I only pay a superstitious kiss.
This but the idol, that the deity;
Religion there is due, here ceremony.
That I receive by faith, this but in trust;
Here I may ^ender duty, ther^ I must:
This other like a layman I may bear
But I become loves priest when that I wear;
This moves like air, that as the center stands,
That knot your virtue ^yes, this but your hands.
That nature framed, but this is made by art
This makes my arm your prisoner, that my heart.
To a Gentlewoman, desiring a copy of Verses.
Fair Madam, cast those Diamonds away,
What need their torchlight in so bright a day:
These show within your beauties glorious noon
No more than spangles fixed in the moon:
Such jewels then the truest luster bear
When they hang dangling in an Aethiop's ear
But placed near a beauty, that's so bright
Like stars in daytime they are lost from sight
In this you do your sex a great abuse,
These are not precious stemmes for women's use.
Nature to men has better jewels sent,
Which serve for active use not ornament.
Then let us make exchange, since that those be
Fitter for you, and these more fit for me.
On Dr. Corbett's Marriage.
COme all ye Muses and rejoice,
At our Apolloes happy choice.
Phoebus has conquered Cupids charm,
Fair Daphne f^yes into his arm.
If Daphne be a tree, then mark,
Apollo is become the bark.
If Daphne be a branch of bay,
He wears her for a crown to day:
O happy bridegroom which do wed
Thy self unto a virgins bed.
Let thy love burn with hot desire,
She l^kes no oil to feed the fire.
You know not poor Pigmaleons lot
Nor have you a mere idol got.
You no Ixion, you no proud
Juno makes embrace a cloud.
Look how pure Dianaes skin
Appears as it is shadowed in
A crystal stream; or look what grace,
Shines in fair Venus lovely face;
Whilst She Adonis courts and woes
Such beautyes, yea and more than those,
Sparkle in her; see but her soul,
And you will judge those beautyes foul.
Her rarest beautye is within,
She Is fairest where she is not seen;
Now her perfection's character
You have approved and chosen her.
Oh precious she! at this wedding,
The jewel wears the marriage ring.
Her understanding's deep, like the
Venetian Duke you wedd the sea,
A sea deep, bottomless, profound,
And which none but your self may sound.
Blind Cupid shot not this love-dart,
Your reason chose, and not your heart;
You knew her little, and when her
Apron was but a muckender,
When that same Corrall which does deck
Her lips, she wore about her neck:
You courted her, you woed her not
Out of a window; she was got,
And borne your wife; it may be se'd,
Her cradle was her marriadge bed.
The ring too was laid up for it
Until her finger was grown fit;
You once gave her to play withal
A babie, and I hope you shall
This day your ancient gift renew,
So she will do the same for you:
In Virgin wax imprint upon
Her breast your own impression,
You may (there is no treason in it,)
Coin sterling, now you have a mint.
You now are stronger than before,
Your side has in it on ribb more.
Before she was a kin to me
Only in soul and amity.
But now we are, since she your bride,
In soul and body both allyde.
It Is this has made me less to do,
And I in one can honor two.
This match a riddle may be styld,
Two mothers now have but on child;
Yet need we not a Solomon
Each mother here enjoyes her own*
Many there are I know have tried,
To make her their own lovely bride;
But it is Alexanders lot,
To cut in twain the Gordian knot:
Claudia to prove that she was chaste,
Tied but a girdle to her wast;
And drew a ship to Rome by land
But now the world may understand;
Here is a Claudia to fair bride,
Thy spotless innocence is tried,
None but thy girdle could have led,
Our Corbet to a marriage bed.
Come all ye muses and rejoice,
At this your nursling's happy choice:
Come Flora straw the bridemayds bed
And with a garden crown her head,
Or if thy flowers be to seek,
Come gather roses at her cheek.
Come Hymen light thy torches, let
Thy bed with tapers be beset.
And if there be no fire by,
Come light thy taper at her eye,
In that bright eye there dwells a star,
And wisemen by it guided are.
In those delicious eyes there be,
Two little balls of ivory;
How happy is he then that may
With these two dainty balls go play,
Let not a tear drop from that eye
Unless for very joy to cry.
O let your joy continue; may
A whole age be your wedding day.
O happy virgin, it is true,
That your dear spouse embraces you.
Then you from heaven are not far,
But sure in Abraham's bosom are,
Come all ye muses and rejoice
At our Apollo's happy choice.
Mart. Epigr. 59 lib: 5.
Thou Wilt mend to morrow, thus thou still tell me
Feign would I know but this, when that will be?
Where might a man that bliss-full morning find,
In vast Armenia, or in urmost Inde?
This morning comes as slow as Platoes year,
What might this morning cost (for sure it is dear?)
Thou Wilt mend to morrow: Now Is too late; I say
He Is only wise that mended yesterday.
In Richardum quendam, Divitem, Avarum.
DEvising on a time what name I might
Best give unto a dry illiberall chuffe,
After long search on his own name I light,
Nay then (said I) No more, I have enough;
His name and nature do full well agree
For's name is Rich and hard; and so is he.
In Thomam quendam Catharum.
THomas the puritan, cannot abide
The name of Christmas, Candlemas, or such
But calls them ever Christide, Candletide,
At all to name the mass (forsooth) to much:
Thomas by this your rule the sacred font
In Baptism must be-wash your limbs again,
And a new name you must receive upon it
For superstitious Thomas you will disdain.
Then might I be your god^e, or his guide,
Instead of Thomas you shall have Tom-tyde.
Epilogus Incerti Authoris.
LIke to the mowing tone of unspoke speeches,
Or like two lobsters clad in logic breeches;
Or like the gray fleece of a crimson catt,
Or like a moone-calfe in a slippshoo hatt;
Or like the shadow when the sun is gone,
Or like a thought, that never was thought upon,
Even such is man who never was begotten,
Until his children were both dead and rotten.
Like to the fiery touchhole of a cabbage,
Or like a crablowse with his bag and baggage.
Or like the guilt reflection of the wind,
Or like the abortive issue borne behind,
Or like the four square circle of a ring,
Or like high down a ding a ding a ding.
Even such is man who breathless without doubt
Spoke to small purpose when his tongue was out.
Like the fresh colors of a withered Rose
Or like a running verse that is writ in prose.
Or like the umbles of a tynder box,
Or like a sound man, troubled with the pox.
Or like to hobbnayles coined in single pence,
Lest they should lose their preterperfecttence
Even such is man who dyed, and yet did laugh,
To read these strong lines for his Epitaph.
THE INNOVATION OF PENELOPE AND ULYSSES, A Mock-Poem.

By I. S.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1658.

The Epistle Dedicatory to the Reader.
COurteous Reader, I had not gone my full time, when by a sudden flight
occasioned by the Bear and Wheel-barrow on the Bank-side, I fell in travail,
and therefore cannot call this, a timely Issue, but a Mischance, which I must
put out to the world to nurse; hoping it will be fostered with the greater
care, because of its own innocence. The reasons why the Dedication is so
general, is to avoid Carps in the Fishpond of this world, for now no man may
read it, but must patronize it. And must protect what he would greet perchance,
If he were not the Patron with def-iance.
You see here I have much ado to hold in my muse from her jumping meeter: it is
time to let slip. For as the cunning statuarist did by Alcides foot guess at
the proportion of his whole body, so do I forbear the application of this
Simile and rest,

Yours ever. I. S.

To his Worthy Friend Mr. I. S. upon his happy Innovation of Penelope and
Ulysses.
IT was no idle fancy, I beheld
A real object, that around did gild
The neighboring valleys and the mountain tops,
That sided to Parnassus, with the drops
From her disheveld hair. I sought the cause.
And lo, she had her dwelling in the jaws
Of pearly Helicon, assigned to be
Guide ore the Comic straynes of poetry.
She lowr'd her flight, and soon assembled all,
That since old Chaucer had taken leave to call,
Upon her name in print: But O the rabble
Of pamphleteers even from the court toth' stable,
Knights, and dis^arded Captains, with the scrib^;
Famous in waterworks, besides the tribe
Of the true poets, they attended on
The birth of this great Convocation.
Sacred Thalia, in an angry heat
That well became her zeal, rose from her seat;
And beckoning for silence, there disclaym'd,
Protection of the poets, and then named
The cause of her revoke, for that (quoth she)
So many panders 'long to poetry:
A crew of Scriblers that with brazen face
Prostitute art and work unto disgrace
My patronage, each calling out on me
For midwife to his bastard progeny.
Thus standing as ^rotectresse of that brood
My care's ill construed by the sister-hood.
With that she paused a while, and glanc'st her eye
Among st the mingled pen-wrights, to descrie
One to d^stinguish by a different style,
Dull Latmus from Diviner Pindus soil,
At length she six't on thee, and then anon
Proclaym'd the her selected champion.
Then was this work presented to her care.
She smiled at it, and was pleased to hear
Dunces so well traduced; and by this rule,
Discoverd all that nere were of the school
Of noble poesy, and them she threw
Far from her care and her aquantance too;
Thus were they found and lost, and this the test,
They writ in earnest what is here meant in jest.
James Atkins.
To his Precious Friend I. S. upon his choice conceit of Penelope and Ulysses.
LOng looked for comes at last; it was said of old^,
I Will use the proverb; herein I am bold:
For if the ancient Poets don't belie us
Nihil jam dictum quod non dictum pri^s:
But let that pass: the thing I would intend,
With my unpolist lines, is to commend
A work that may to an ingenious care
Be its own or ator; for nothing here,
But grate's this stupid age, wherein each ma^e
That can but ^yme, is poet laureat.
It is the scorn of time, and for m^ part
That at the best am but af^eind to art,
My senses ache to hear the cry advance
And dot^ upon the works of ignorance;
Let focles admire folly: while I thee
That into pastime turn'st their poetry.
To his Son, upon his Minerva.
THou art my son, (...) ^y choice is spoke;
^hine with thy fathers muse strikes equal stroke,
It showed more art in Virgil to relate,
And make it worth the heareing, his Gnats fate;
Then to conceive what those great minds must be
That sought and found out fruitful Italic.
And such as read and do not apprehend
And with applause the purpose and the end
Of this neat Poem, in themselves confess
A dull stupiditie and barrenness.
Methinks I do behold in this rare birth
A temple built up to facetious mirth,
Pleased Phoebus smiling on it; doubt not then,
But that the suffrage of juditious men
Will honor this Thalia; and for those
That praise Sr. Bevis, or what is worse in pros^,
Let them dwell still in ignorance. To write
In a new strain, and from it ra^se delight
As thou in this have done, does not by chance
But merit, crown thee with the laurel branch.
Phillip Massenger.
To his Dear Friend Mr. I. S. upon his quaint Innovation of Penelope and
Ulysses.
FLy, Fly my muse, this is the time if ever
(...) try thy ^ings, now sore aloftor ne^;
Importune fame, for it is her hand must owe
A glory to this temple. Bid her blow,
Till her lungs crack and call the world to see
A work that else will ^'ts own trumpet be.
I would not have the squeamish Age to jeare
Or slight my muse for bringing up the rear:
Nor let the garish rabble look a squint,
As though I were one of their tribe in print;
It is a Trust that fitly does become
My matchless freindship to have such a Rome
For know no vulgar pen could ever glory
To be the Master of so choice a story.
Blush, Blush, for shame, ye wood-be-poets all,
Here see ^our faces, let this glass recall
Your faults to your remembrance, numbers, rym
Your long parentheses, and verse that clim^
Up to the elbow; here you may descry
Such stuff as weaker wits call poetry:
From henceforth let no pedling rimers dare
Profane Thalias alters with such ware.
For which great cure, this book unto thy name
Shallbe a trophy of immortal fame.
I. M.
The Author to the Author. To his worthy Friend I. S. upon his happy
Translation of Ulysses and Penelope.
LEt joy possess the universal Globe,
The work is done, bright Sol is in his robe,
Let time and nature breathe, and let the arts,
Pause here a while, they have performed their parts
And as a Man, that from the Alps does fall
Being in drink, and has no hurt at all:
When afterward he has considerd well,
An^ veiw'd the Al^itude, from whence he fell,
When in his sober thoughts he has the hint on it
It frights him more then to endure the dint on it;
Even so our Author, when he veiwes aright
What time and industry have brought to light,
May more be troubled both in M^nd and Wit,
^o think what is done, then in the doing it,
If at the spring and Birthday of Glendour,
Whom stories treat of for a Man and more,
If then I say there was such notice taken,
That Wales and all her Mountaniers were shaken,
What Alteration must there needs be now,
To usher in thine Issue! who knows how
To fadom thought, or tie the stars in strings?
Such must his learning be that kens these things.
Methinks the spheres should falter, and the sage
Should from this time reckon another age,
Gossips shall make it famous, It shall be
The common Meatpole to Posterity:
The time of Edmonds and of Gertrude's birth,
Was three years after such aworke came forth,
Then was the great eclipse, and that the time
When this Man's Granfather was in his prime;
Hackster the Back-sword-man then broke his Arm,
That year old Honyman his Bees did swarm,
And if I guess aright, began that year
The Hollanders Plantation in Yorkshire.
Thus shall all Accidents be brought about,
And this the only time to find em out.
Men did of old count from the days of Adam,
And Eve the spinster (no news then of Madam,)
Some from Diana's Temple, that rare piece,
Some from the stealing of the Golden fleece;
From modern Matters some their Reckoning make
From the great voyage of Sr: Francis Drake,
Other's from 88, and some there are
That count from bringing of the Brook from VVare.
But all these things shall be abolished quite,
And no Man now shall aprehend delight,
To have a son a daughter or a niece,
Their age not dated with this masterpiece.
More I would say, much more; but that I fear
My liberal commendations would appear
Like to the Gates of Thebes, where all, and some,
Feared lest the city should run out at 'um,
Such may my error be, whilst here I sing,
Great Neptunes Anthems, to salute a spring,
But such a spring, as all that ere have seen it
Confess there is naught but spirit of waters in it.
And here let me excuse that prity Elfe
Thy froward Muse that left thee to thy self;
Whom thou upbraidst for that; which I replye,
Was naught but Advantageous Policy;
It Was a good Omen when she backward went
That she would arm her self with double hint
And so she did, they will say, that do peruse ore
This seeming pamphlet which a^onensues your
Loving Friend. I. S.

The Author to himself.
HIgh as the Alps my towering muse dos wing it,
To snach the laurel from fames fane, and fling it
Even at thy crown, thy crown; where may it sit,
Till time it self, being non-plus'd, wither it.
Each stroke that herein of thy pen made proof,
Is like the stamp of Pegasus his hoof,
And does uncurtaine where does sit and sing,
The Heliconians, round about the spring.
I wish the world this pamphlet had not seen,
Or having veiw'd it, it had faulty been.
Then might I still have loved thee, cruel fate
Has made the now the object of my hate:
For envy feeds on merit, but believe me,
I love thy person, though thy worth does grieve me.
I. S.
The Preface to that most elaborate piece of Poetry, entitled, Penelope and
Ulysses.
NO, I protest, not that I wish the gains
To spoil the trade of mercenary brains,
I am indifferently bent, so, so,
Whether I ever sell my works or no.
Nor was it my aim when I took pen in fingers,
To take employment from the Ballad-singers;
Nor none of th^se: But on a gloomy day,
My genius stepped to me, and thus began say;
Listen to me, I give you information,
This History deserves a grave translation;
And if comparisons be free from slanders,
I say, as well as Hero and Leanders.
This said, I took my chair, in colors wrought,
Which at an outcry, with two stoo^es I bought.
The stools of Dornix, which that you may know well
Are certain stuffs, Upholsters use to s^ll.
Stuffs, said I? No: some Linsey- Wolsey-monger mixed them,
They were not Stuff nor Cloth sure, but betwixt them.
The Ward (...) bought them in, it was without
High^ Faringdon, and there a greasy lout
Bid for them shillings six, but I bid seven,
A sum that is accounted odd, not ^ven:
The Crier thereat seemed to be willing,
Q^oth he, there is no man better then seven shilling,
He thought it was a reasonable price,
So struck upon the Table, once, twice, thrice,
My pen in one hand, Penknife in the other,
My Ink was good, my Paper was no other.
So sat me down, being with sadness moved,
To sing this new Song, sung of old by Ovid.
But would you think, as I was thus preparing
All in a readiness, here and there staring
To find my implements, that the untoward Elfe,
My Muse, should steal away, and hide her self,
Just so it was, faith, neither worse nor better.
A way she run, er'e I had writ a Letter.
I after her a pace, and beat the Bushes,
Rank Grass, Firrs, Fern, and the tall Banks of Rushes
At last I found my M^se, and wot you what,
I put her up, for lo she was at squat.
Thou sl^t quoth I, had thou not run away,
I had made Verses all th^s live-long day.
But in good sooth, over much I d^rst not chide her,
Lest she should run away, and hide her
But when my heat was over I spoke thus to her;
Why did thou play the wag? I Am very ^ure.
I have commended thee, above old Chaucer;
And in a Tavern once I had a Sawcer
Of White Wind Vinegar, dashed in my face,
For saying thou deservedst a better grace:
Thou know that then I took a Sawsedge up,
Upon the knaves face it gave such a clap,
That he repented him that he had spoken
Against thy Fame, he struck by the same token,
I often have sung thy Meeters, and sometimes,
I laughed to set on others at thy rimes,
When that my Muse considered had this gear,
She sighed so sore, it grieved my heart to hear,
She said she had done ill, and was not blameless,
And Polyhym^ey (one that shall be namelesse,
Was present when she spoke it) and before her,
My Muses lamentation was the soarer.
And then to show she was not quite unkind,
She sounded out these strong lines of her mind.
THE INNOVATION OF Ulysses and Penelope.
O All ye The harder the word is, the easier it is to be un^stood.
Cliptick Spirits of the Sphaeres
That have or In varying the use of the senses, the Author shows himself to
be in his wit^.
sense to hear or In varying the use of the senses, the Author shows himself
to be in his wit^.
use of ears,
And you in number There the Author shows himself to be well versed in the
Almanac.
twelve Caelestiall Signs
That Poets have made use of in their lines,
And by which men do know what Seasons good
To gueld their Bore-piggs, and let Horses blood;
List to my doleful glee, o Being twice repeated, it argues an elegant fancy
in the Poet.
list I say,
Unto the Complaint of Penelopay.
She was a Lo^er, I, and so was he
As loving unto her, and he to To makefalse English, argues as much knowledge
as to make true latin.
she:
But mark how things were al^er'd in (...) moment
Ulysses was a Grecian born, I so meant
To have informed you first; but since 't is or'^,
It is as Better once done then never.
well, as had it been before:
He being as I said, a Greek there rose
A Quarrel 'twi^t the Trojans and their For sometimes there may happen a
quarrel amongst friends.
foes,
I mean the Graecians, whereof he was Till he was married, he could be but one.
one,
But let that pass, he was La^rtes Son.
Yet least some of the difference be ig-norant,
It was about a There is no mischief, but a woman is at one end of it.
Wench, you may hear more The more you hear on it, the worse you will like it.
on it
In Virgils Aeneids, and in Homer too;
How Paris loved her, and no more ado
But goes and steals her from her Husband: wherefore
The Graecians took their Tools, and fighted therefore.
And that you may perceive they were stout There was a Spanish regiment amongst
them.
Signiors,
The Combat lasted for the space of ten That may be done in an hour, which we
may repent all our life after.
years.
This Gallant bideing where full many a Mother
Is often bereaved of Child, Sister of Brothe,
His Lady greatly longing for his presence
Being up to the Elbowes in trouble, she expressed it in this line.
Writ him a Letter, whereof this the Sense.
"My pretty Duck, my Pigsnie, my Ulysses,
"Thy poor Penelope sends a Even Reckoning, makes long friends.
thousand Kisses
"As to her only Joy, a hearty greeting;
"Wishing thy Company, but not thy meeting
"With enemies, and fiery Spirits in Armor,
"And which perchance may do thy bedy harmeor
"May take thee Pisoner, and clap on thee bolts
"And locks upon thy legs, such as wear Colts.
"But send me word, and e're that thou want r^some
"Being a man so comely, and so handsome,
"I Will sell my Smock both from my back and As a pudding has two ends, so a
smock has tw^ (...).
belly
"E're you want Money, Meat, or Clothes, I tell ye.
When that Ulysses, all in grief enveloped,
Had marked how right this Letter was Peneloped.
Laid one hand on his heart, and said't was guilty,
Resting the other on his Dagger-hilty,
Thus began to speak: O thou that do control
All beauties else, thou have so banged my soul
With this thy lamentation, that I swear,
I love thee strangely, without wit or fear;
I could have wished (quoth he,) my self the Paper
Ink, Standish, Sandbox, or the burning Taper,
That were the Instruments of this thy writeing
Or else the Stool whereon thou sat'st inditing:
And so might have bin near that lovely breech
That never yet was troubled with the As Love does commonly break out into an
itch, yet with her it did not so.
Itch.
And with the thought of that, his Sorrow doubled
His heart with woe, was so Cuff'd and Cornubled,
That he approved one of his Ladies Verses,
(The which my Author in his book rehearses)
It Is true quoth he, There the Author translates out of Ovid, as Ben Johnson
does in Sejanus out of Homer.
Loves troubles make me tamer,
Res est Soliciti plena timoris Amor.
This said, he blamed himself, and chid his folly
For being so ore-rul'd with melancholy,
He called himself, Fool, Coxecombe, Ass, and Fop,
And many ascurvy name he reckoned up,
But to himself, this language was too rough,
For certainly the Man had wit enough:
For he resolves to leave his Trojan foes,
And go to see his Love in his best Clothes.
But mark how he was crossed in his intent,
His friends suspected him incontinent:
And some of them supposed he was in love,
Because his eyes all in his head did move,
Or more or less then used, I know not which
But I am sure they did not move so mich
As they were wont to do: and then 'twas blasted.
Ulysses was in love, and whilst that lasted
No other news within the Camp was spoke of,
And many did suppose the Match was broke off,
But he concealed himself, nor was over hasty
To shift his Clothes, though now grown somewhat nasty.
But having washed his hands in Pewter Basin,
Determines for to get a Girl or a Son,
On fair Penelope, for he looked trimmer
Then young Leander when he learned his By this you may perceive, that primers
were first printed at Abidos.
Primer,
To Graece he wends apace, for all his hope
Was only now to see fair Penelope:
She kemb^d her head, and washed her face in Cream
And pinched her cheeks to make the For distinction sake, because many men's
noses bleed white blood.
read blood stream
She don'd new clothes, and sent the old ones packing,
And had her shoes rubbed over with Lamp Black is the beauty of the shoe.
blacking,
Her new rebato, and a falling band,
And Rings with several poesies on her hand.
A stomacher upon her breast so bare.
For Strips and Gorgets was not then the wear.
She thus adorned to meet her youthful Lover
Heard by a Post-boy, he was new come over:
She then prepares a banquet very neat
Because a Cow, was amongst the ancient Graecians called a Neat, Gesner in his
Etymolog. lib. 103. Tom 16.
Yet there was not a bit of Butchers meat
But Pyes, and Capons, Rabbits, Larkes, and Fruit;
Orion on a Dolphin, with his Better falsifye the Rhyme, then the Story, etc.
Harp,
And in the midst of all these dishes stood
A platter of Pease-porridg, wondrous good,
And next to that the god of Love was placed,
His Image being made out of Rye-paste,
To make that good, which the old Proverb speaks
[The one the Heart, 't other the belly breaks.]
Ulysses seeing himself a welcome Guest
Resolves to have some Fiddlers at the Feast:
And amongst the various Consort choosing them
That in their sleeves the arms of Agamem-
Non, in the next verse, wore: Cried in a rage
Sing me some Song made in the Iron-Age.
The Iron-Age, quoth he that used to sing?
This to my mind the Black-Smith's Song does bring
The Black-Smiths, quoth Ulisses? and there holloweth,
Whoope! is there such a Song? Let Us have it. It follows,
The Blacksmith. As it was sung before Ulysses and Penelope at their Feast,
when he returned from their Trojan Wars, collected out of Homer, Virgill and
Ovid, by some of the Modern Family of the Fancies.
OF all the trades that ever I see,
There Is none with the Blacksmith compared may be,
With so many several tools works he
Which Nobody can deny,
The first that ever thunderbolt made,
Was a Cyclops of the Blacksmiths trade,
As in a learned author is said,
Which Nobody, etc.
When Thunderingly we lay about
The fire like lightening flasheth out;
Which suddenly with water we d'out.
Which No, etc.
The fairest Godesse in the skies
To marry with Vulcan did devise,
Which was a Blacksmith grave and wise
Which, etc.
Mulciber to do her all right
Did build her a Town by day and by night,
Which afterward he Hammersmith hight
Which, etc.
And that no Enemy might wrong her
He gave her Fort she need no stronger,
Then is the lane of Ironmonger,
Which, etc.
Vulcan farther did acquaint her
That a pretty estate he would appoint her,
And leave her Seacoale-lane for ajoynture.
Which, etc
Smithfeild he did free from dirt,
And he had sure great reason for it
It stood very near to Turn* mill street
venus court
Which, etc.
But after in good time and tide,
It was to the Blacksmiths rectifyed,
And given'em by Edmond ^rouside,
Which, etc.
At last Vulcan.
he made a Nett or train,
In which the God of war was t'ane,
Which ever since was called Paul's chain
Which, etc.
The common proverb, as it is read,
That we should hit the nail of the head:
Without the Blacksmith cannot be said,
Which, etc.
There is another must not be forgot
Which falls unto the Blacksmiths lot,
That we should strike while the I'rons hott,
Which, etc.
A third lies in the Blacksmiths way
When things are safe as old-wives say,
They have 'em under lock and key,
Which, etc.
Another proverb makes me laugh
Because the Smith can challenge but half;
When things are as Plain as a Pike staff,
Which, etc.
But't other half to him does belong;
And therefore, do the Smith no wrong,
When one is held to it hard, buckle and thong,
Which, etc.
Then there is a whole one proper and fit
And the Blacksmith's justice is seen in it,
When you give a man rostmeat and beat him with spitt,
Which, etc.
Another proverb does seldom fail,
When you meet with naughty beer or ale,
You cry it is as dead as a door nail,
Which, etc.
If you stick to one when fortunes wheel
Does make him many losses feel
We say such a friend is as true as steel.
Which etc.
There Is one that is in the Blacksmith's books,
And from him alone for remedy looks.
And that is he that is offo'the hooks.
Which, etc.
There Is ner'a slutt, if filth over-smutch her
But owes to the Blacksmith for her leatcher:
For without a pair of tongs no man will touch her
Which, etc.
There is a law in merry England
In which the Smith has some command
When any one is burnt in the hand;
Which, etc.
Banbury ale a halfe-yard-pott,
The Devil a Tinker dares stand to it;
If once the tossed be hizzing-hott.
Which, etc.
If any Tailor has the Itch,
Your Blacksmith's water, as black as pitch,
Will make his fingers go thorow-stitch.
Which, etc.
A Sullen-woman needs no leech,
Your Blacksmiths Bellows restores her speech
And will fetch her again with wind in her Breech.
Which, etc.
Your snuffling Puritans do surmise,
That without the Blacksmiths mysteries,
St: Peter had never gotten his keys,
Which every one can deny,
And further more there are of those
Tha^ without the Blacksmiths help do suppose
St: Dunstan had never taken the Devil by the nose
Which Nobody can deny.
And though they are so rigid and nice
And rail against Drabs, and Drink, and Dice
Yet they do allow the Blacksmith his vice
Which, etc.
Now when so many Haeresies fly about,
And every sect grows still more in doubt
The Blacksmith he is hammering it out,
Which, etc.
Though Sergeants at law grow richer far,
And with long pleading a good cause can mar
Yet your Blacksmith takes more pains at the Bar,
Which, etc.
And though he has no Commander's look
Nor can brag of those he has slain and took,
Yet he is as good as ever struck.
Which, etc.
For though he does lay on many a blow
It ruins neither friend nor foe;
Would our plundering-souldiers had don so,
Which every one can deny.
Though Bankrupts lie lurking in their holes
And laugh at their Creditors, and catchpoles,
Yet your Smith can fetch em over the coals.
Which Nobody can deny.
Our laws do punish severely still,
Such as countersit, deed, bond, or bill,
But your Smith may freely forge what he will
Which, etc.
To be a Jockey is thought a fine fear,
As to train up a horse, and prescribe him his meat
Yet your smith knows best to give a heat.
Which, etc.
The Roreing-Boy who every one quayles
And swagge^s, and drinks, and swears and rayles,
Could never yet make the Smith eat his nayls.
Which, etc.
Then if to know him men did desire,
They would not scorn him but rank him higher
For what he gets is out of the fire.
Which. etc.
Though Ulysses himself has gone many miles
And in the war has all the craft and the wiles,
Yet your Smith can sooner double his files.
Which, etc,
Say thou so, quoth Ulysses, and then he did call
For wine to drink to the Black-Smiths all,
And he vowed it should go round as a Ball
Which Nobody should deny.
And cause he had such pleasure t'ane,
At this honest fiddlers merry strain,
He gave him the Horse-Shoe in Drury Lane
Which Nobody can deny.
Where his posterity ever since
Are ready with wine, both Spanish and French,
For those that can bring in another Clench
Which Nobody can deny.
The song being don they drank the health, they rose
They would in verse, and went to bed in prose.
A Prologue to the Mayor of Quinborough.
Lo I the Mayor of Qu^borough Town by name,
With all my brethren saving one that is lame;
Are come as fast as fyery mil-horse gallops,
To meet thy grace, thy Queen, and her fair Trollops,
For reason of our coming do no look,
It must be don, I find it in the Town-book:
And yet not I my self, I scorn to read,
I keep a Clarck to do these jobbs at need.
And now respect a rare conceit before Thong castle see thee,
Reach me the thing, to give the King, that other too, I prithee,
Now here they be, for Queen and he, the guist's all steel, and leather,
But the conceit of mickle weight, and here they 're com together,
To show two loves must join in one, our Town presents to thee,
This gilded scabberd to the Queen, this dagger unto Thee.
A Song.
He that a happy life will lead,
In these times of distraction,
Let him list'n to me and I will him read
A lecture without faction.
Let him want three things whence misery springs,
They all begin with a letter.
Let him bound his desires to what nature requires,
And with reason his humor fetter.
Let not his wealth prodigious grow,
For that breeds care and dangers;
Makes him envied above, and hated below,
And a constant slave to strangers.
They Are happiest of all whose estats are small
Though but enough to maintain 'um
They may do, they may say, having nothing to pay,
It will not quit cost to arraigne u'm.
Nor would I have him clogged with a wife,
For househould care and cumber,
Nor to one place confine a man's lise:
Cause he cannot remove his lumber.
They are happier far that unwedded are,
And forage on all in common,
For all storms they may fly, and if they should dye
They undo neither child nor woman.
Nor let his brains overflow with wit,
That savours on discretion;
It Is costly to get and hard to keep
And dangerous. in the possession.
They are happyest men that can scarce tell ten,
And beat not their brains about reason;
They may say what will serve, themselves to preserve,
And their words are near taken for treason.
Of fools there is none like to the Wit
For he takes pains to show it,
When his pride and his drink brings him into his fit;
Then straight he must be a poet
Now his jests he flings at States and at Kings
For applause of bays and shadows;
Thinks a verse serves as well, as circle or spell
Till he rhimes himself to the Barbados.
He that within his bounds will keep,
May baffle all dysasters;
To fortune and fate commands he may give
Which worldling^ call their masters;
He may dance, he may laugh, he may sing, he may quaffe,
May be mad, may be sad may be jolly,
He may walk without fear, and sleep without care,
And a fig for the world and its folly.
The drunken Lover. J. D. Delight.
I Door, I dote, but am a sott to show't,
I was a very fool to let her know it;
For now she does so cuning grow,
She proves a friend worse then a foe:
She will not hold me fast nor let me go,
She tells me, I cannot forsake her;
Then straight I endeavor to leave her,
But to make me stay throw's a kiss in my way,
Oh then I could tarry for ever.
Then I retire, salute, and sit down by her,
There do I five in frost, and freeze in fire,
New Nectar from her lips I sup.
And though I do not drink all up;
Yet am I drunk with kissing of the cup:
For her lips are two brimmers of Clarret,
Where first I begin to miscarry:
Her breasts of delight, are two bottles of white,
And her eyes are two cups of Canary.
Drunk as I live, dead drunk beyond reprieve
For all my secrets dribble through a sive,
Her arm about my neck she laith,
Now all is Scripture that she says
Which I lay hold on, with my fuddled faith,
I find a fond lover's a drunkard;
And dangerous is when he flies out,
With hipps and with lips, with black eyes and white thighs,
Blind Cupid sure tippled his eyes out.
She bids me, Arise, tells me I must be wise,
Like her, for she is not in love she cries;
Then do I fret and fling and throw,
Shall I be fettered to my foe?
Then I begin to run but cannot go
I pray thee, sweet, use me more kindly.
You had better for to hold me fast,
If you once disengage your bird from his cage,
Believe me he will leave you at last.
Lik a sot I sit that filled the town with wit,
But now confess I have most need of it;
I have been drunk with duck and dear,
A bove aquarter of a year:
Beyond the cure of sleeping or small beer,
think I can number the months to,
July, August, September, October
Thus goes my account a mischeife upon it
But sure I shall go when I am sober.
My legs are lame, my courage is quite tam'de,
My heart and all my body is inflamde;
Now by experience I can prove.
And swear by all the powers above;
It Is better to be drunk with wine then love.
Good sack makes us merry and witty,
Our faces with jwells adorning;
And though that we grope yet, there is some hope,
That a man may be sober next morning.
Then with command she throws me from her hand,
She bids me go yet knows I cannot stand;
I measure all the ground by tripps,
Was ever Sot so drunk in sipps,
Or ever man so over seen in lips,
I pray, maddam fickle, be faithful,
And leave off your damnable dodging,
Pray do not deceive me, either love me or leave me,
And let me go home to my lodging.
I love too much but yet my sollie's such
I cannot leave, I must love to 'ther touch.
Here Is a Health unto the King, how now?
I am drunk and speak treason I vow;
Lovers and fools say any thing you know,
I fear I have tired your patience,
But I am sure, it is I have the wrong on it,
My wit is bereft me; for all that I have left me
Will but just serve to make me a song on it,
My mistress and I shall never comply,
And there is the short and the long on it.
To the Tune of The beginning of the World.
R. P. Delight.
O Mother, chave bin a batchelour,
This twelve and twanty year;
And I'ze have often been a wowing,
And yet cham never the near:
Ione Gromball chee'l have non s' me,
Ize look so like a lowt;
But I vaith, cham as propper a man as zhe.
Zhee need not be zo stout.
She zaies ifize, cond dance and zing,
As Thomas Miller con,
Or cut a cauper, as little Jack Tailor:
O how chee'd love me thon.
But zoft and fair, chil none of that,
I vaith cham not zo nimble;
The Tailor has naught to trouble his thought
But his needel and his thimble,
O zon, thou art of a lawful age,
And a jolly tidy boy,
I Would have thee try her once a gain,
She can but say thee nay:
Then O Gramarcy mother,
Chill zet a good vace of the matter,
Chill dress up my zon as fine as a dog
And chill have a fresh bout at her.
And first chill put on my zunday parrell
That Is lac't about the quarters;
With a pair of buckram slopps,
And a vlanting pair of garters.
With my sword tide vast to my zide,
And my grandvathers dug'en and dagger
And a Peacocks veather in my capp
Then oh how I'ch shall swagger.
Nay tak thee a lockrum napkin son,
To wipe thy snotty nose,
T's noe matter vor that, chill snort it out,
And vlurt it athart my cloths:
Ods, bodikins nay fie away,
I prithee son do not so:
Be mannerly son till thou can tell,
Whether she will have thee or not,
But zirrah Mother hark a while
Whoes that that comes so near?
It Is Ione Grumball, hold thy peace,
For fear that she do hear.
Nay on it be she, chill dress my words
In zuch a scholards grace,
But virst of all chall take my honds,
And lay them athwart her vace.
Good morrow my honey my sugger-candy,
My little pretty mouse,
Cha hopes thy vather and mother be well,
At home at thine own house.
I'ch am zhame vac't to show my mind,
Cham zure thou know my arrant:
Zum zen, Jug, that I mun a thee.
At leisure Sir I warrant.
You must (Sir Clown) is for the King,
And not for such a mome,
You might have said, by leave fair maid.
And let your (must) alone.
Ich am noe more nor clown that's vlat,
Cham in my zunday parrell,
I'ch came vor love and I pray so take it,
Che hopes che will not quarrel.
O Robbin do thou love me so well?
I vaith, abommination,
Why then you should have framed your words
Into a finer fashion.
Vine vashions and vine speeches too
As schollards volks con utter,
Chad wrather speak but two words plain
Thon haulfe a score and stutter.
Chave land, chave houss, chave two va^ beasts,
That's better thon vine speeches;
T's a sign that Fortune favors fools
She lets them have such riches.
Hark how she comes upon me now,
I Would wish it be a good zine,
He that will steal any wit from thee
Had need to rise betime.
An Old Song.
BAck and sides go bare go bare,
And feet and hands go cold,
But let my belly have Ale enough
Whether it be new or old,
Whether it be new or old,
Boys, whether it be new or old:
But let my belly have ale enough,
Whether it be new or old,
A beggar's a thing as good as a King,
If you ask me the reason why
For a King cannot swagger
And drink like a beggar
No King so happy as I:
Some call me knave and rascal slave,
But I know, how to collogue
Come upon Um, and upon 'um;
Will your worships and honor um,
Then I am an honest rogue, then I
Come upon um, and upon 'um will you worships:
If a sart fiye away where he makes his stay,
Can any man think or suppose?
For a fart cannot tell, when its out where to dwell,
Unless it be in your nose, unless it be in your nose boys, Unless it be in
your nose.
For a fart cannot tell, when its out where to dwell
Unless it be in your nose.
The Sowgelder's Song, in the Beggers-Bush.
I Met with the Devil in the shape of a Ram,
Over and over the Sow-gelder came,
I took him and haltred him fast by the horn,
And picked out his stones as you would pick out your corns.
Oh quoth the Devil and with that he shrunk,
And left me a carkase of mutton that stunk.
Walking alone but a mile and a half,
I saw where he lay in the shape of a calfe;
I took him and gelt him e're he thought any evil,
And found him to be but a sucking Devil.
Bla quoth the Devil and clapped down his tail,
And that was sold after for excellent veale.
I met with the Devil in the shape of a Pigge,
I looked at the rogue, and he looked something big;
E're a man cold fart thrice, I had made him a hog,
Oh quoth the Devil and then gave a Jerke
That the Jew was converted by eating of porke.
In woman's attire I met him full fine,
I took him at least for an Angel divine;
But viewing his crabb-face I fell to my trade,
And I made him forswear ever acting a maid.
O quoth the Devil, and so ran away,
And hid him in a Friars gray weeds, as they say.
For half a year after it was my great chance
To meet with a gray coat that lay in a Trance,
I took him and I graspt him fast by the codds;
Betwixt his tongue and his tail I left little odds.
Oh, quoth the Devil, much harm have thou done,
Thou art sure to be cursed of many a man.
My ram, calfe, my porke, my punk and my friar,
I have left them unfurnish't of their best Lady ware;
And now he runs roaring from alehouse to Tavern,
And swears he will turn tutor to the swaggering gallant:
But if I catch him I Will serve him no worse
For I Will lib him, and leave him not a penny in his purse.
A Song.
Three merry ladds met at the Rose
To speak the praises of the Nose,
The nose which stands in middle place
Sets out the beauty of the face;
The nose with which we have begun,
Will serve to make our verses run,
Invention often barren grows;
But still their's matter in the nose.
The nose is of so high a price,
That men prefer't before their eyes;
And no man counts him for his friend,
That boldly takes his nose by the end.
The nose that like Euripus flows,
The sea that did the wiseman pose.
Invention, etc.
The nose is of as many kinds,
As mariners can reckon winds,
The long, the short, the nose displayed;
The great nose which did fright the maid;
The nose through which the brotherhood
Did parley for their sisters good.
Invention, etc.
The slat, the sharp, the roman snout,
The hawks nose Circled round about:
The crooked nose that stands awry,
The ruby nose of Scarlet dye,
The Brazen-nose without a face
That does the learned College grace;
Invention, etc.
The long nose when the teeth appear,
Shows what is a clock if the day be clear,
The broad nose stands in buckler place,
And takes the blows from off the face;
The nose being plain without a ridge,
Will serve sometimes to make a bridge.
Invention, etc.
The short nose is the Lovers bliss,
Because it hinders not a kiss.
The toating nose is a monstrous thing,
That Is he that did the bottle bring:
And he that brought the ^ttle hither,
Will drink; oh monstrous! out of measure.
Invention, etc.
The fiery nose, in Lanthornes stead,
Will light its Master to his bed;
And who so ere that treasure owes,
Grows poor in purse, though rich in nose.
The brazen nose that is over the gate,
Maintains full many a Latin-pate.
Invention, etc.
If any nose take this in snuff,
And think it more then is enough;
We answer them, we did not fear,
Nor think such noses had been here.
But if there be, we need not care;
A nose of wax our Statutes are.
Invention now is barren grown;
The matters out, the nose is blown.
Phillada flouts me.
Oh! what a pain is love,
How shall I bear it?
She will inconstant prove,
I greatly fear it.
She so torments my mind,
That my strength fails;
And wavers with the wind,
As a ship that saileth.
Please her the best I ^y,
She looks another way.
A lack and well a day
Phillada floutes me.
All the fair yesterday,
She did pass by me;
She looked another way,
And would not spy me.
I wooed her for to dine,
But could not get her.
Will had her to the wine,
He might entreat her.
With Daniel she did dance,
On me she looked a sconce.
Oh thrice unhappy chance,
Phillada floutes me.
Fair Maid, be not so coy,
Do not disdain me:
I am my mothers joy
Sweet entertain me.
She Will give me when she dies,
All that is fitting,
Her Poultrey and her Bees
And her Geese sitting.
A pair of mattrisse bedds,
And a bag full of shredds.
And yet for all this goods,
Phillada floutes me.
She has a cloute of mine
Wrought with good Coventry,
Which she keeps for a sign
Of my fidelity.
But in faith, if she flinch,
She shall not wear it.
To Tibb my the other wench
I mean to bear it.
And yet it grieves my heart,
So soon from her to part.
Death strikes me with his dart,
Phillada floutes me.
Thou shallt eat Curds and Cream,
All the year lasting;
And drink the Crystal stream,
Pleasant in tasting;
Wigge and whay whilst thou burst,
And ramble berry;
Pye-lid and pasty crust,
Pears, Plums, and Cherrey.
Thy raiment shall be thin,
Made of a weavers skin,
Yet all is not worth a pin,
Phillada floutes me.
Fair maidens, have a care,
And in time take me:
I can have those as fair,
If you forsake me.
For Doll the dairy-maide,
Laughed on me lately,
And wanton VVinifrid
Favors me greatly.
One throws milk on my clothes,
The Other plays with my nose;
What wanton signs are those?
Phillada flouts me.
I cannot work and sleep
All at a season;
Love wounds my heart so deep,
Without all reason.
I'gin to pine a way,
With grief and sorrow,
Like to a fatted beast,
Penned in a meadow.
I shall be dead I fear,
With in this thousand year;
And all for very fear.
Phillada flouts me.
The Milk-maids.
WAlkeing betimes close by a green wood side,
Hy tranonny, nonny with hy tranonny no;
A pair of lovely milk maids there by chance I spide
With hy tranonny nonny no, with tranonny no,
One of them was fair
As fair as fair might be;
The other she was brown,
With wanton rolling eye.
Syder to make sillibubbs,
They carried in their pailes;
And suggar in their purses,
Hung dangling at their tails.
Wa^-coats of flannell,
And petty-coats ofredd.
Before them milk white aporns,
And straw-hats on their heads,
Silk points, with silver taggs,
A bout their wrists were shown;
And jett-Rings, with poesies
Yours more then his own.
And to requite their lovers points and rings,
They gave their lovers bracelets,
And many pretty things.
And there they did get gowns
All on the grass so green,
But the tailor was not skillful,
For the stitches they were seen.
Thus having spent the long summers day,
They took their nut brown milk pailes,
And so they came away.
Well fare you merry milk maids
That dable in the dew
For you have kisses plenty,
When Ladies have but few.
The old Ballet of shepherd Tom.
AS I late wandered over a Plain,
Upon a hill piping I spide a shephards swain:
His slops were of green, his coat was of gray,
And on his head a wreath of willow and of bay.
He sighed and he pip't,
His eyes he often wiped,
He cursed and ban'd the boy,
That first brought his annoy:
Who with the fire of desire, so inflamed his mind,
To doat upon a less; so various and unkind.
Then howling, he threw his whistle a way,
And beat his heels again the ground whereon he lay.
He swore and he star'dhe was quite bereft of hope,
And out of his scrip he pulled a rope:
Quoth he, the man that wooes,
With me prepare his noose;
For rather then I Will fry,
By hemp I Will choose to die.
Then up he rose, and he goes straight unto a tree,
Where he thus complains of his lasses cruelty,
A pox upon the devil, that ever it was my lot,
To set my love upon so wooddish a trot.
Had not I been better took Ione of the mill,
Kate of the cream house, or bony bouncing Nell:
A Proud word I speak
I had them at my beck;
And they on holidays
Would give me prick and praise.
But Phillis she was to me dearer then my eyes,
For whom I now endure these plaguey miseryes.
Often have I wooed her with many a tear,
With ribband for her head tire, and laces from the fair,
With bone-lace and with shoone, with bracelets and with pinns,
And many a toy besides: good god forgive my sins.
And yet this plaguey flirt
Would ding them in the dirte
And smile to see me tear,
The locks from of my hair.
To scratch my chops, rend my slops, and at wakes to sit
Like to a sot bereft both of reason sense and wit.
Therefore from this bough Tom bids a dew
To the shepherds of the valley, and all the joviall crew.
Farewell Thump, my ram, and Cut my bobtaild curre,
Behold your Mr, proves his own murderer.
Go to my Philis, go,
Tell her this tale of woe.
Tell her where she may find
Me tottering in the wind.
Say on a tree she may see her Tom rid from all care,
Where she may take him napping as Moss took his Mare.
His Philis by chance stood close in a bush,
And as the Clown did sprawle, she straight to him did rush.
She cut in two the rope and thus to him she said,
Dispairing Tom, my Tom, thou have undone a maid.
Then as one amazed.
Upon her face he gazed;
And in this woeful case,
She kissed his pallid face,
He whoopt amain, swore, no swain ever more should be,
So happy in his love, nor half so sweet as she,
Obsequies.
DRaw not so near
Unless you shed a tear
On the stone,
Where I groan,
And will weep,
Until eternal sleep
Has charmed my weary eyes.
Flora lies here,
Embalmed with many a tear,
Which the swains,
From the plains,
Here have paid,
And many a vestall Maid
Has mourned her obsequies:
Their snowy breasts they tear,
And rend their golden hair;
Casting cries.
To Celestial deityes,
To return
Her beauty from the urne,
To reign
Unparallel on earth again.
When strait a sound,
From the ground,
Peircing the air,
Cries, she is dead,
Her soul is fled,
Unto a place more rare.
You spirits that do keep
The dust of those that sleep,
Under the ground,
Hear the sound
Of a swain,
That folds his arms in vain,
Unto the ashes he adores.
For pity do not fright
Him wandering in the night:
Whilst he laves
Virgins graves
With his eyes,
Unto their memoryes,
Contributing sad showers.
And when my name is read,
In the number of the dead,
Some one may,
In Charity repay
My sad soul,
The tribute which she gave,
And howl
Some requiem on my grave.
Then weep noe more
Grief willnot restore
Her freed from care.
Though she be dead,
Her soul is fled
Unto a place more rare.
Of a Tailor and a Lowse.
A Lowse without leave a Tailor did molest,
The Tailor was forced the lowse to arrest;
The Tailor of courtesy the lowse did release,
But she bitt the harder and still broke the peace.
In this doubtful matter, your counsel I crave,
What law of the lowse the Tailor may have,
A jury of beggars debating the cause,
Decreed in their verdict that lyce should have laws,
And therefore they say without further reciting
That lyce must be subject to the law of bacbiting.
Which law does provide for the party so greived
The low^e so offending not to be repreived.
But straight to be taken and had to the jayle,
And after to suffer the crush of the nail.
The old Ballad of Little Musgrave and the Lady Barnard.
AS it fell one holy day, hay down,
As many be in the year,
When young men and maids
Together did go,
Their Mattins and Mass to hear,
Little Musgrave came to the church door,
The Priest was at private Mass
But he had more mind of the fair women;
Then he had of our lady grace
The one of them was clad in green
Another was clad in pale,
And then came in my lord Bernards wife
The fairest amonst them all;
She cast an eye on little Musgrave
As bright as the summer sun,
And then bethought this little Musgrave
This lady's heart have I woonn.
Quoth she I have loved thee little Musgrave
Full long and many a day,
So have I loved you fair Lady,
Yet never word durst I say.
I have a bower at Buckelsfordbery
Full daintyly it is geight.
If thou will wed thither thou little Musgrave
Thou's lig in mine arms all night.
Quoth he, I thank ye fair lady
This kindness thou showest to me,
But whether it be to my weal or woe
This night I will lig with thee.
With that he heard a little tyne page
By his ladies coach as he ran,
All though I am my ladies foot page
Yet I am lord Barnards man
My lord Barnard shall know of this
Whether I sink or sin;
And ever where the bridges were broake
He laid him down to swim.
A sleep or wake thou Lord Barnard,
As thou a^t a man of life
For little Musgrave is at Bucklesfordbery:
A bed with thy own wedded wife.
If this be true thou little tinny Page,
This thing thou tellest to me,
Then all the land in Bucklesfordbery
I freely will give to thee.
But if it be a ly, thou little tinny Page,
This thing thou tellest to me;
On the highest tree in Bucklesfordbery
Then hanged shall thou be.
He called up his merry men all
Come sadle me my steed,
This nigh^ must I to Buckellsfordbery,
For I never had greater need.
And some of them whistl'd and some of them sung,
And some these words did say;
And ever when my lord Barnards horn blew,
A way Musgrave a way.
Methinks I hear the Thresel-cock,
Methinks I hear the Jaye,
Methinks I hear my Lord Barnard,
And I would I were away.
Lie still, lie still, thou little Musgrave
And huggell me from the cold,
It Is nothing but a shephards boy,
A driving his sheep to the fold.
Is not thy hawke upon a perch?
Thy steed eats oats and hay;
And thou fair Lady in thine arms,
And would thou be away?
With that my lord Barnard came to the door
And lit a stone upon
He plucked out three silver keys,
And he opened the doors each one.
He lifted up the coverlett,
He lifted up the sheet,
How now, how now, thou littell Musgrave
Do thou find my lady sweet?
I find her sweet, quoth little Musgrave
The more it is to my pain,
I would gladly give three hundred pounds
That I were on yonder plain.
Arise arise thou littell Musgrave,
And put thy ^loth-es on,
It shall ne^re be said in my country
I have killed a naked man.
I have two Swords in one scabberd,
Full dear they cost my purse:
And thou shall have the best of them
And I will have the worse.
The first stroke that little Musgrave stroke,
He hurt Lord Barnard sore
The next stroke that Lord Barnard stroke
Little Musgrave never struck more.
With that bespake this fair lady,
In bed whereas she lay,
Although you are dead thou little Musgrave,
Yet I for thee will pray,
And wish well to thy soul will I
So long as I have life,
So will I not for thee Barnard
Although I am thy wedded wife.
He cut her paps from off her breast,
Great pity it was to see,
That some drops of this ladies heart's blood
Ran trickling down her knee.
Woe worth you, woe worth, my merry men all,
You were never borne for my good:
Why did you not offer to stay my hand,
When you see me wax so wood.
For I have slain the bravest Sir Knight
That ever rode on steed,
So have I done the fairest lady
That ever did woman's deed.
A grave, a grave, Lord Barnard cried
To put these lovers in:
But lay my lady on upper hand
For she came of the better kin.
The Scots arrears.
Four hundred thousand pounds
A lusty bag indeed*
Was It ever known so vast a sum
Ere past the river Tw^de?
Great pity it is, I swear,
Whole carts was thither sent,
Where hardly two in fifty knew,
What forty shillings meant:
But 'twas to some perceived,
Three kingdoms were undone.
And those that sit here thought it fit,
To settle them one by one,
Now Ireland has no haste,
So there they will not begin;
The Scottish aid must first be pai'd,
For ye came freely in,
And William Lilly writes --
Who writes the truth you know;
In frosty weather they marched hither.
Up to the chins in snow.
Free quarter at excess,
They do not weigh a feather,
Those Crowns for coals brought in by shoals;
Scarce kept their men together,
Of plunder they esteem
As trifles of no worth,
Of force ye dote because recruite
Issued no faster forth.
If once this cash is paid
I hope the Scot be spedd,
He need not steal but fairly deal
Both to be clothed and fedd.
Our sheep and oxen may
Safe in their pastures stand,
What need they filch the cow
That's milch to sojourne in their land.
I wonder much the Scot
With this defiles his hands,
Because the summ's a price of Rome
Raised out of the Bishops lands,
But too too well ye know
To what intent they in came
It Was not their pains produced this gains
It Was sent to pack them home,
Me thinks I hear them laugh
To see how matters proved,
And give ashout it so fell out,
Ye were more feared then loved,
(...) ^key after this
^nge has forgott
(...) fires he much retires
(...) shows himself no Scott.
Rebellis SCOTUS.
CUrae Deo sumus, ista si cedant Scoto?
Variat^ spleniis ^omina Ps^che ^st suis.
Aut stell^ yea. (...),
Campanu^ae omn^s; totus Ucalegon suo,
Coriaceae cui millies mill hydriae,
Suburbicants pensiles par^ciis
Non sint refrigerio. Poeticus furor,
Cometa non min^s, vel ore flammeo
Commune despuente fatum stellula,
Dirum ominatur. Ecquis, e Stoa, suam
Iam temperet bilem? patria quando ^ue
Tam Pym^iana, id est pediculosa, perit?
Bombamachidisque fit bolus myrmeciis?
Scotos nec ausim nominare, carminum
Nisi inter amuleta, nec meditarier
Nisi c^ebello, quod capillitio rubens
(Quale ^umo coluberrimum ^uriis caput)
Quot inde verba, tot v^nena promp^erit.
Rhadamantbe^, fac, gutt^r esset nu^c mihi,
Sulphurque, patibul^mque copiosius
Ructans, Magus qu^ c^nias b^nbycinas;
Poteram ut Agyr^ ^or, pill^as
Vomicas loqui, (...) (...) ^yga:
Aut ut Gen^vae Sie^, Pe^ers
Tartara, (...) equ^leos boar pulpitis:
At mchinan^ p^r f^rem nunquam Scoto,
Cun^is Scl^tis hi^ gutturalibus.
Ut dig^ D^i du^nt, vorem par est pri^s,
(P^giator u^) sicas, and acinaces.
Is^, h^c, I ambe, gressibus faxo tuis
At huc, ^ambe, mo^sibus faxo magis.
Satyr^que tortri^, tot huc adducite
Flagella, qu^t pr^sens mere^ur seculum
Scoti ^enfieis pares; audax s^ylum
Hor^re tinge, sic nocent minus.
Vt Martyrs olim induebant belluis.
(Quasi sisterent Regis sacros hypocritas)
En hos eodem Sch^mate (at retro) Scotos,
Extra Scotos, intus feras, and sine tropo.
Fallax Ierna viperae nihil foves
Scoto Colono? Non ego Britanniam.
Lupis carentem dix^rim, vivo Scoto.
Quin Thamesinus pyrgopolinices Scotus
Poterat leones, tigrides, ursos, cane^
Proprii inquilinos pectoris spectaculo
Monstr^sse; pro obolis omnibus quibus solet
Spectare monstra Cratis, and Fori simul
Poene ocreatum vulgus. Et patria fera
Scotos eremus indicat terrae plag^
Vel omnipraesentem negans Deum, nisi
Venisset inde Carolus, cohors nisi
C^afordiana, miles and Montro^s,
Feritatis eluens notam pagan^,
Hanc pr^sset semivictimam Deo;
Nec Scoticus est, totus L^pardus, Leo;
Habent and Ara^ sicut Arcam f^deris
Velut tabellae bifi^is pictae plicis
Fert Angelos pars haec, and haec Cacodaemonas:
Cui somnianti tartarum su^ pavor
Sic poenitere, viderat regnum velim
Nigrius Scotorum semel, and esset innocens.
Regio, maligna quae facit votum prece,
Relegetur ad Gyares breves nunquam incola!
Pun^sset ubi Cainum nec exilio Deus,
Sed, ut ille trechedipnum, magis Domicaenio.
Vt gens vagans recutita, vel contagium,
Aut Beclzebub, si des ubiquitarium.
Hinc crro fit semper Scotus, cer^os locos,
Et hos and illos quoslihet cito nauseans,
Vt frusta divisi orbis, and Topograp^iae
Mend^citatis offulas, curt^s nimis.
Ipse universitatis haeres integrae,
Et totus in toto, natio Epidemica,
Nec gliscit ergo jargonre Gallice,
Exoticis aut Indicis modis, neque
Iberio nutu negare, nec studet
Callere quem de Belgicis Hoghen moghen
Venture tumens, aut barba canthari refert.
(Quae Coriatis una men's nostratibus)
Pugna est in eni^o, atque animus in patina Scoto.
Huic Struthioni sugger^t cibum chalybs,
Et denti-ductor appetitus, baltheo,
Pro more, pendulos molares inserit.
At interim nostras quid involant dapes?
Serpens Edenum, non Edenb^rgum appetit.
Aut Angliae, cui jam malum est Hemorrhois,
Haematopotas h^s posteris meatibus
Natura medica supposuit hirudines
Cruore satiandos licet nostro prius,
Nostro sed and cruore moribundos quoque.
Nec computo credant priori, nos item
Novum addituros, servitutem pristinae
Aliam, gemellam nuperae, fraterculos
Palpare quando caeperant charos nimis,
(Suff^agiorum scilicet poppysmata)
Et crustulum impertire velut ^ffam Cerbero
Subblandiens decreverat Senatulus.
Nos era locu^s arma visc eribus prius
Indemus usque and usque vel capulo tenus.
Seri videmus quo Scotum tractes modo.
Princeps rebelli mitior tergo quasi
Sellas equino detrahen^ aptat suo.
At jus rapinas hasce defendit vetus?
Egyptus ista perdit, aufert Israel
An bibliorum nescis hos satellites?
Praetorianis queis cohortibus,
Hier^salem triariis) spes nititur novae
Sororcularum? Cardo, cardo vertitur
Cupediarum, primitivae legis, etc.
O bone Deus! quanti est carere linte is!
Orexis ut Borealis, and fames, movet!
Vi^uque, vestibusque cassi, hinc Knoxio
Su^ore simul, and Knoxio utuntur coquo,
Pie quod algeant, quod esurian^ pie.
Larvas quin usque detrahas, and nummulis
Titulisque, (ut animabus) su^est fallacia.
Librae, and Barons (detumescant interim
Uocabulorum tympani) quanti valent!
Hic Cantianum paene, paene villicum,
Solidosque totos illa, sed gratis, duos.
Apage superbae fraudulentiae, simul
Prosapia pictos, fide and pictos procul:
Opprobrium poetico vel stigmati
Etiam cruci crux. Non aliter Hyperbolus
Hyperscelestus ostracismo sit pudor.
Americanus, ille, qui coelum horruit
Quod Hispanorum repat eo sed pars quota!
Videra^ in Orco si Scotos, (hui tot Scotos!)
Roterodamus pependerat medioximus.
Sat musa! semissa fercularia
Medullitus v^rans, diabolis invides
Propriam sibi suam Scoti paropsidem.
Vt Berniclis enim Scoti, sic Lucifer
Saturatur ipsis Berniclatioribus.
Nam lapsus a furca Scotus, mox and Styge
Tinctus, suum novatur in Plaut-Anserem.
FINIS.
The Rebel SCOT.
HOw! Providence! and yet a Scottish crew!
Then Madam Nature wears black patches too?
What shall our Nation be in bondage thus
Unto a Land that truckles under us?
Ring the bells backward, I am all on fire,
Not all the buckets in a Country Quire
Shall quench my rage. A Poet should be feared,
When angry, like a Comet's flaming beard.
And where is the Stoic, can his wrath appease
To see his Country sick of Pym's disease?
By Scotch-invasion, to be made a prey
To such Pig-widgin Myrmidons as they?
But that there is charm in verse, I would not quo^
The name of Scot without an antidote;
Unless my head were red, that I might brew
Invention there that might be poison too.
Were I a drowsy Judge, whose dismal note
Disgorgeth halters as a Juglers throat
Does ribbands: could I (in Sir Emp'rick tone)
Speak Pills in phrase, and quack destruction:
Or roar like Marshall, that Genevah Bull,
Hell and damnation a Pulpit full:
Yet to express a Scot, to play that prize,
Not all those mouth-Granadoes can suffice.
Before a Scot can properly be cursed,
I must (like Hocus) swallow daggers first.
Come, keen Iambicks, with your badgers feet,
And Badger-like, bite till your feet do meet
Help, ye tarc Satyrists, to imp my rage,
With all the Scorpions that should whip this age,
Scots are like Witches; do but whet your pen;
Scratch till the blood come, they will not hurt you then.
Now as the Martyrs were enforced to take
The shapes of beasts, like hypocrires at stake;
I Will bait my Scot so, yet not cheat your eyes,
A Scot, within a beast, is no disguise.
No more let Ireland brag, her harmless Nation
Fosters no Venom, since the Scot's plantation;
Nor can our feigned antiquity maintain;
Since they came in, England has Wolves again,
The Scot that kept the Tower, might have shown
(Within the grate of his own breast alone)
(...) Leopard and the Panther, and ingrost
^t all those wild Collegiats had cost:
(...) honest high-shooes, in their termly fees,
(...) to the salvage Lawyer, next to these.
Na^re her self does Scotch-men beasts confess,
Making their Country such a wilderness,
A L^nd that brings in question and suspense
Gods omni-presence, but that Charles came thence,
But that Montrosse and Crawfords loyal band
Atton'd their sins, and christ'ned half the Land;
Nor is it all the Nation has these spots;
There is a Church, as well as Kirk of Scots:
As in a picture, where the squinting paint
Shows fiend on this side, and on that side saint:
He that saw Hell in's melancholy dream
And in the twilight of his fancy's theme,
Scared from his sins, repented in a fright,
Had he viewed Scotland, had turned Proselyte.
A Land, where one may pray with cursed intent,
O may they never suffer banishment!
Had Cain been Scot, God would have changed his doom,
Not fore't him wander, but confined him home.
Like Jews they spread, and as infection fly,
As if the devil had Ubiquity.
Hence'tis they live at Rovers, and desie
This or that place, rags of Geography.
They Are Citizens ot'h' world; they are all in all,
Scotland's a Nation Epidemical.
And yet they ramble not, to learn the mode
How to be dressed, or how to lisp abroad;
To return knowing in the Spanish shrug.
Or which of the Dutch-States a double Jug
Resembles most, in belly, or in beard.
(The Card by which the Mariners are steered.)
No; the Scots-Errant sight, and sight to eat;
Their Ess^rich-stomacks make their swords their meat
Nature with Scots, as Tooth-drawers has dealt,
Who use to hang their teeth upon their belt.
Yet wonder not at this their happy choice;
The Serpent's fatal still to Paradise.
Sure England has the Hemeroids, and these
On the North-posture of the patient seize,
Like Leeches, thus they physically thirst
After our blood, but in the cure shall burst.
Let them not think to make us run o'th score,
To purchase villenage as once before,
When an Act passed to stroke them on the head,
Call them good Subjects, buy them Ginger-bread.
Nor Gold, nor Acts of grace, it is Steel must tame
The stubborn Scot: a Prince that would reclaim
Rebels by yiedling, does like him, (or worse)
Who sadled his own back, to shame his horse.
Was it for this you left your leaner soil,
Thus to lard Israel with Aegypts spoil?
They are he Gospels Lifeguard, but for them
(The Garrison of new I^rusalem)
Wha^ would the Brethren do'the cause! the cause!
Sack possets, and the fundamental Laws!
Lord! what a goodly thing is want of shirts!
How a Scotch-stomack, and no meat, converts!
They wanted food and raiment; so they took
Religion for their Seamstresse, and their Cook.
Unmask them well; their honors and estate
As well as conscience are sophisticate.
Shrive but their titles, and their money poize,
A Lord and twenty pounds pronounced with noise,
When construed, but for a plain Yeoman go,
And a good sober Twopence, and well so.
Hence then, you proud Impostors, get you gone,
You Picts in Gentry and devotion;
You scandal to the stock of Verse, a race
Able to bring the Gibbet in disgrace.
Hyperbolus by suffering did traduce
The Ostracism, and shamed it out of use,
The Indian, that heaven did ^orsweare,
Because he heard the Spaniards were there,
Had he but known what Scots in hell had been,
He would Erasmus-like have hung between:
My Muse has done. A Voider for the nonce;
I wrong the devil, should I pick their bones.
That dish is his; for when the Scots decease,
Hell, like their Nation, feeds on Barnacles,
A Scot, when from the Gallow-tree got loose,
Drops into S^yx, and turns a Soland-Goose.
The End.

