A Plain and Candid Account of the Natures, Uses and Quantities of some
Experienced MEDICINES.
Published to the Intent the Afflicted with Sickness may have the Benefit of
them.
Truly Prepared by Charles Marshall.
READER;
COnsidering the Variety of Medicines published of late Years, with the strange
Commendation of them, together with the Observations thereon, it was ready to
deter me from publishing this. But seeing the daily Cures, and the frequent
Accounts from several places, not only in this Nation, but also from parts
beyond the Seas, I was persuaded and importuned to publish this, the Fruit of
great Labor, Expense and many Years Experience; desiring all Persons that read
this, or make use of these Medicines, to be both careful and considerate in
both, and the Weak, Pained, Fainty, Wearied, laboring under Diseases will reap
the Comfort thereof.

To publish those considerable Cures these Medicines have effected (through the
Blessing of the Lord) I have no willingness, nor to write much in their Praise,
knowing the patient prudent Experiencer will have cause to speak enough of
them.

Spiritus Mundus
IS an Astersive Medicine, powerfully cleansing the Stomach, and effectually
opening Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and Miserick Veins, and prevalent
against Plague, Surfeits, For it greatly helps Women in both conditions, and it
is safe given when with child.
Fevers of all sorts, Plurisies (without Blood-letting) Dropsies, Jaudice,
Illiack Passion and Chollick: It has been very helpful to many in the Stone
and Strangury; is of great use to Women in Travail, and also after they are
delivered. In a word; against Diseases and in assisting Nature this Medicine is
Efficacious.

The Manner of Using, and Quantities of this true Medicine.
Mix an Ounce, If the Stomach be sick after taking the Spiritus Mundus, be not
discouraged, for it is then working on the offending matters, and generally
quickly goes off; if it cause a Puking or Vomiting, take it again presently;
and if it do so again, take it again and again, and in a little time it will
get through the offending matter and pass through the small Vessels cleansing
and comforting.
which is about two spoonfuls, in half a Pint, 3 parts of a Pint, or a Pint of
Sassafrass, Balm, Angellico, Burrage, Black-Cherry Water, or in want of any of
these, in pure fresh Rain Water, or good Spring Water, sweetened first with the
best White Sugar; and being mixed thus, a Man or Woman may take at a time two or
three spoonfuls; carefully Noting these two general Rules;

First, That every one may mix it stronger or smaller, as they can take it, and
as necessity calls for it:

Secondly, That the more distilled Water is mixed with it, the more should
(when mixed) be taken at a time.

Noting, That in Surfeits of all sorts, Gripes, Plurisies, the beginnings of
Fevers, Stone and Gout, and such Distempers that call for Immediate Relief, it
should be mixed pretty strong, and taken often, viz. Every half Hour (or
oftener) for an Hour, or two, or three Hours together; and then staying three or
four hours, take it so again; and so do for some time, until the Distemper be
in good Measure conquered; and after, take it as in old Distempers, which is
two or three times in a Morning early, in one hours time, or less, and then lie
an hour or two after it and sleep, if the Patient can; and again an hour before
Dinner, and at five in the Afternoon. Note, For Children it must be mixed
according to their Strength and Age, Note, That in the times of resting 3 or 4
hours between the taking the Spiritus Mundus, any convenient cordial Posset, or
clean Food, eafie of Digestion, may be taken. It increases Appetite to Food,
and helps Digestion.
and as one can get them take it: For Babes in the first Month against
Convulsion Fits, mix it in Black-Cherry-Water sweetened, so as it only just
taste of the Medicine, and give a Pap spoonful pretty often, as occasion
requires: Against Wind, mix it with on part Spire-Mint-Water, and another part
Sassafrage-Water. Noting, That if Persons want Rest, mix it with one part
Poppy-Water, and another Sassafrass, or any other Water mentioned, as above
directed, and give it several times in the Night to cause sweet Rest, which
often it performs, and thereby gives great and strong Relief to weak and
afflicted People.

Sassafrass-Water is the most general Water I mix the Spiritus Mundus in; made
thus,

Take six or eight Ounces of good Sassafrass-Wood, with the Rhine on, thinly
chipped, put it with a Gallon of Rainwater, or in want thereof, any other good
Water, and distill off five Pints; if it be twice distilled it is the better.

Spiritus Sedativus and United Spirit in one entire Medicine.
THis is a Balsomick Medicine, resisting Putrefaction, Women with child may
take this Medicine safely, not exceeding forty drops in a day.
and strengthening the Stomach, and Nature in general; purifies the Blood, after
taking the Spiritus Mundus; is helpful against those Distempers
beforementioned; and is very Efficacious in the Plague, Sported-Feaver,
Smallpox and Measels, prevailing against the Malignancy of all such
Distempers; effectual against Coughs, Consumptions and Weakness, etc. This
Medicine is both a Restorative and a Preservative, taken after the use of the
Spiritus Mundus.

Its manner of Taking, and Quantities.
If there be occasion of Sweating, as before an Ague, With this Medicine add
but a little Clothes more than at another time on the Bed.
or one taking Cold or great Pain in their Limbs, or on any occasion where
Sweating is needful (and relieving) give unto a Man or Woman forty Drops, or
half a small Spoonful in a full Spoonful of hot Sack or Cordial-Water, or in
want thereof, in hot strong-Beer sweetened, or Mace-Ale, and let the Patient lie
still with their Hands on their Stomach, and patiently expect the coming forth
of the Sweat; if the Patient be not relieved, and Sweat does not come, as
expected in one Hour, The Sack or Mace-Ale being hot put in the Drops, and
immediately give it; for otherwise much of the Medicines will be lost: And take
care to keep both this and Spiritus Mundus, Cordial Spirit and Aqua Rubra close
stopped.
give the same quantity again, especially in the Plague, Spotted-Feaver or
Smallpox, or any Malignant Fever, or great Oppressor on the Heart, etc. And
after one hour give some Posset, wherein is boiled Cardus, Marigold-flowers,
Angellico, or Marjorem, or Winter-Savory and Balm; minding, that any of these
Herbs being boiled in Posset, let the Vessel be close covered; let the length
of the time of Sweating be proportioned to the strength of the Patient, and the
necessity. Noting, That some Persons (as I have seen) the longer they have
sweat, the better able to bear it, and have found themselves stronger and
stronger; in the time of such sweating, they may often smell to the Cordial
Spirit, which will not only keep up their Spirits, but helps nature against the
Distemper; where Persons do not take it thus to sweat, give it once in six
hours for a few days in the Distempers aforesaid, and as before directed: For
Chronick or Old Distempers, give it every Night, as before directed. For
Children, from one Drop (to the newborn) in some Breast Milk, to fifteen,
twenty or thirty Drops, according to their age, strength and necessity. For
Coughs give it in Hysop-Water sweetened well with Sugar Candy. Of which
Medicine, more shall be said in the Applications of the Medicines.

Cordial Spirit.
THis Medicine is a great Cordial, truly helping and relieving Nature, and both
inwardly and outwardly administered, is of admirable Benefit to poor fainting
drooping Spirits and weak Natures, and a great Reliever and Comforter of Old
Age, and mightily prevails against all Bruisings and Squats, whether inward or
outward, dispersing bruised Blood, inward or outward, and relieves weak,
withered, nummed Members, which either come from inward Distempers, or outward
Accidents; its prevalent inward and outward against Pains in the Head, and
Diseases there, Apoplexes, Palfies, Megrims, and against Convulsions.

Its manner of Taking, In cases of great faintings or extreme Pains in the Head
or Apoplexes, a little may be poured forth in the Palm of ones hand, and then
rubbing both hands together clap both hands to the Nose, that the flavor may
ascend up; this do often, as occasion calls for it, in cases of greatest
necessity.
and Quantities.
Against inward Diseases a Man or a Woman may take half a spoonful in two or
three spoonfuls of warm Sack, as a Cordial, or as a small spoonful, in two
spoonfuls of hot strong Beer, sweetened (or Mace-Ale) it may be taken two or
three times a day, as occasion calls for it. For Children, give it according to
their age and strength, in Mace-Ale, or mix it into a Cordial thus, Mix an
Ounce of Poppy-Water, with as much Cowslip-Water, sweeten it with Syrup of
Cowslips, then put a little Cordial Spirit, as it may taste of it; and give
Children a Pap-spoonful of it two or three times a day, or as occasion calls
for it, against Weakness, Faintness and Convulsions. Outwardly applied, it is
of as great use as Inwardly, and may be used when Cordials cannot be given so
frequently inwardly, with great Refreshing and good Success; thus, Pour forth a
Thimbleful into a Spoon, and with a fine Cloth wetting it, and then apply it to
the Nostrils, drawing up the flavor: This do often in Faintings, Pains of the
Head, and the Distempers before mentioned, in application of this Medicine.
Note,That when the chief of the Spirit is gone from the wet Cloth, then rub the
Temples; for it is of great use to rub the Temples with it, and Forehead, and
Cords of the Neck.
Thus doing long together, I have found satisfactory admirable Effects against
Conuvlsions, great Faintings and dyings away. Against Rickets in Children,
weakness, and pained benumbed Limbs, warm a full spoonful in some convenient
thing, and chafe it in once or twice a day; and so do against Bruises, and such
like, putting on a fine Cloth double, wet in the Medicine, on the part bruised,
especially if it be in any part of the Head. Use it thus, repeating the Use of
it twice a day, if occasion require it.

Aqua Rubra
IS a Preservative Medicine, and is of great Use against Fevers, as well
Hectic as others; its good against all Coughs and Ptysicks, helps the Stomach,
and stirs up Appetite to Food; very helpful against sore Mouths in Children,
and that Distemper called the Thrush in Children, and against the Quincy, and
all sore Throats; for it takes away Inflammations.

Its Quantities, and Manner of Taking.
In intermitting Fevers, or Agues and Fevers; when the Fever and Thirst
comes on, give of this Medicine, from four Drops to forty, or half a Spoonful,
in as much Beer as the Medicine may only taste a little sharpish in: If the
Dries be great, and Fever burning very much, it may be given every Hour, or
half Hour, for three times; against continued Fevers two or three times a day;
against Hectic Fevers, an Hour before Dinner, and at five in the Afternoon;
against Coughs and Ptysick, give it mixed in Hysop Water, in which Liquorish
has been infused, and sweetened with Sugar candy; A Plaster for Worms; Mix.
powder of Allows, Joyce of Rue and Wormwood together, boil them to a Plaster,
and spread on a few drops of Balsom of Sulpar; secure the Navil with Cotton.
These directions for Worms may be of service to Thousands, if carefully made
use of.
against Worms give it fasting in Wormwood-Beer, seven Mornings together, and
after give some Milk and Honey mixed, in which is a little fine Powder of Rubarb
to bring away the Worms, dead or alive.

The Applications of the Medicines.
And first, against the Plague, Agues, Fevers of all sorts, Smallpox and
Measels, Gripes, Plurisies, and such like Distempers that seize suddenly many
times on People.
When Persons are first taken, give of Spiritus Mundus, following of it close,
as it is directed before, concerning the Spiritus Mundus in particular; and
then give the Spiritus Sedativus, etc. 3 for Agues every night, and 4 hours and
1 hour before the Fit. These Medicines work variously; for sometimes 'twill
gently vomit; Otherwise, if Persons vomit much, it will effectually stop
vomiting. And so, sometimes they will sweat much, sometimes little.
either to sweat, or every six Hours, as is before directed; minding, that if
the Spiritus Mundus make sick in Stomach, or War there, and so cause Puking or
Vomiting, stop not its motion, but take it again and again, until it pass
clear. Now where Nature inclines to cast off the Offending Matter by Sweat,
there the Medicines will mightily assist and work that way, and sometimes very
much by Urine, opening and making way through the Vessels, warming and
comforting, which the Patient will sensibly feel; if Fainty, then use the
Cordial Spirit, as before directed; use it much to smell to, taking up the
Flavor in Faintings or Weakness, in any of those or such like Distempers, as
in the Direction of Cordial Spirit before. Against Dries in Fevers and
Burnings, take the Aqua Rubra in Beer, as is before directed: If Costive, use
opening Meats, as Water Grewel, and such like: If Patients want Rest, mix the
Spiritus Mundus with Poppy Water, and give it two or three times in a Night,
two Spoonfuls at a time, sweetened a little, as before directed.

For Purifying the Blood, After ten days respit the Mundus should be taken
again in the same manner; and then rest again, and so continue as occasion call
for; minding and to forbear it at Nights, when the Sedativus is to be given.
Curing the Scurvey, Jaundice, Dropsies, opening Obstructions, and such like
Distempers.
Take of the Spiritus Mundus, mixed with Sassafrass Water, sweetened a little
with Sugar, three times in a Morning, two Spoonfulls at a time, staying a
little time between, and two Spoonfuls an Hour before Dinner, and at five in
the Afternoon, and going to Bed, as before directed: This do for ten days: Then
take of the Sedativus, etc. mentioned before, forty or fifty Drops, as before
directed, in a full Spoonful of Sack, or Cordial Water, or in want of it, in
hot strong Beer sweetened: This do for forty Nights. If any Faintiness attend,
use the Cordial Spirit, as before directed; if any Fever, the Aqua Rubra.

Against Consumptions.
Take the Spiritus Mundus, mixed with good Saffafras Water, sweetened with
Sugar Candy, twice in a Morning in Bed, two Spoonfulls a time, lying an Hour or
two after it; so do forty days, taking thirty Drops of Spiritus Sedativus in a
Spoonful of Syrup of Hysop, or in Mace-Ale, every Night for forty Nights. Use
the Cordial Spirit, as before directed; and the Aqua Rubra before Dinner, and if
Hectic, at five in the afternoon, as directed. If the Patient waste in Flesh,
I advise to Asses Milk, and in want of that, Cows Milk (one and the same Cows
Milk) every morning, the first or last milking, and quantity which agrees best,
milk it into a sprig of Spire Mint and a sprig of Rosemary, To make Syrup
against Consumptions, take of double distilled Hysop-Water and Sack, of each a
Pint, tops of Maiden Hysop and Thime, half a handful of both, three tops of
Horehound, one ounce of Liquorish thin sliced: Infuse these things in a close
covered Pipkin 24 hours, then strain it out, to the Liquor add two pound of
Sugar Candy in Powder; let it infuse again 12 hours in a close covered thing;
then its done.
one or both, sweetened with a little Sugar of Roses, or Pearl Sugar. The Syrup
directed in the Margent is proper to take Sedativus, etc. in, as directed,
thirty or forty drops in a spoonful, and is good to take the Aqua Rubra in, or
Cordial Spirit; and with any of these is good against Coughs and Ptysicks, and
stoppings of the Breast, and against shortness of Breath.

Against the Gout, Stone and Sciatica, and Pains in the Limbs, and Aches.
Take the Spiritus Mundus, Sedativus and Cordial Spirit, as directed before;
minding, in the Fits to anoint the pained places with strong Spiritus Mundus,
chasing it in with a warm Hand, and apply strong Yeast, alias Barme, spread
like a Plaster on Colwort Leaves, anointing with Spiritus Mundus, and changing
the Colwort Leaves, as occasion requires. Give the Spiritus Mundus every half
hour in the Fits of the Stone and Chollick, or stoppings of Urine, as before
directed; minding to drink good store of Camomile Posset, sweetened with Syrup
of Althea; and for Pains in the Limbs take the Sedativus, etc. to Sweat, with
the Possets ordered as aforesaid, in the Directions for the Use of the
Sedativus, etc. and for weak Limbs, use the Cordial Spirit, as directed before,
in the Directions for taking Cordial Spirit.

Thus I have given Plain and Candid Directions for the Use of these truly safe
and efficacious Medicines. If it please Physicians to make use of them
thoroughly in their Practice, they will see the Comfortable Effects thereof, to
their great satisfaction. So having done my Duty to Benefit many with my
Experience, I commit it under the Provident Hand of the Almighty to bring forth
those Commendable Fruits, with Increase, which they have done in many places,
and will, I am satisfied (abundantly) as they are known and experienced, etc.

To be Sold at the places following.
These Medicines are to be had at the Authors House at Tetherton near
Chippenham: And at Nathaniel Harrises, Apothecary in Chippenham, in Wiltshire,
etc. Charles Jones elder, in Ratliff-street in Bristol. John Ware in
Castle-green-street, near Newgate in Bristol. Mary Timbril in Cirencester.
Nathaniel Ocburne of Sadbury. Jonathan Johnson at Haverill in Suffolk; Robert
Silvester of Nailsworth, Mercer, in Glocestershire. John Cox in Gloucester. John
Hubbard, Grocer, in Stoak near Lyn, in Norfolk. And the Widow Shewell in
Colchester. And diverse others in the Countries may be put in by the Disposers
themselves.

And at London, By John Staploe, Grocer, at the Harrow in Aldersgate Street.
Richard Whitpane at the Horse-shoe in little East-Cheap. William Wiggins at the
Anchor in Martins le Grand, Who have Quantities of them to dispose off to all
others that fell them in City or Country.
Samuel Streeten at the Rose in Watlin-street. Ewen Wynn at the 3 half Moons in
Newgate-street. Edward Blake, next door to the black Boy and white-Horse, near
Smithfield Bars. John Stringfello at the Unicorn in Long-Lane. Anne Wrenn in
Vine Court without Bishops-Gate. Magaret Drinkwell over against Whitegate-Ally
in Bishops-Gate-street. Andrew Soul in Devonshire-Buildings. Thomas Webb at
the Fox in Bishops-Gate-street. Thomas Cox at the White Lion in White-Chappel.
John Forgison at the Cheese-Fat in White-Chappel. Thomas Lee at the three half
Moons on Little Tower Hill. Matthias Jones at the Lamp in Fanchurch street.
Benjamin Clark in George Yard in Lumbard street. John Bringhurst at the Book in
Grace Church street. Robert Bridgman at the Golden Lion in Leaden Hall street.
Sarah Huxly in School-house Lane, Ratcliff. Peter Boss at Reddref
Church-Stairs. Gabriel Harwood Cheesemonger, at Horse-lie-down. Samuel Martin,
Cheesemonger, at the Horseshoe over Stone Bridge in Bemondsey-street. Henry
Jefferson over against Gleane-Ally in Tooly-street. Thomas Spire at the Park in
Southwark. William Clark in James's Market, near Charing Cross. And Francis
Stampher, Clock-Maker, living (...)


