REFORMATION AND DESOLATION: OR, A Sermon tending to the Discovery of the
Symptoms of a People to whom God will by no means be reconciled.

Preached to the Honorable House of Commons at their late solemn Fast,
December. 22. 1641.

By Stephen Marshall B. D. Minister of Finchingfield in ESSEX.

Published by order of that House.

Zeph. 2. 1, 2. Gather your selves together, yea gather together O Nation not
desired, before the decree bring forth. LONDON, Printed for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND,
at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's Churchyard, 1642.

To the Honorable House of Commons, now assembled in Parliament.
IT pleased this Honorable Assembly to require my service in preaching at the
late solemn and religious afflicting your souls before the Lord, to which not
only my duty but experience of your former acceptance of my endeavors, made me
yield a ready obedience. But although I knew your goodness would bear with
that weakness which would be discovered in speaking to so grave and judicious
an auditory; yet could I not expect to receive so large a testimony, not only
of your acceptance, but thanks, as I and my Colleague have done, much less
that you should so expressly send to have them published; because now what blame
shall be cast upon my insufficiency in handling and prosecuting such a subject,
must in some sort reflect upon your selves. For my self I answer all
objections against my sending them abroad, with this, that they are yours, and
it is fit for me to yield unto your disposing of them.

For the maine lesson handled, the Lord grant that our seeking him while he may
be found, may prevent us from being a further proof of it to other Nations,
and succeeding generations.

And to this end, the same Lord guide and bless unto us, and reward into your
own bosoms, and your posterities, all the many, long, and unwearied labors
which you have undergone, and still continue in for the glory of his name, the
reformation of his Church, the honor of his Majesty, the peace and prosperity
of the whole Realm. This is so generally desired and sought for at Gods hands,
that I hope the God who hears prayers, will not leave the happiness
imperfect, which he seems to have prepared by your means, nor deprive us of
the good which you are working. To his wisdom, protection, mercy, and grace,
he leaves you, who is your daily Remembrancer at the Throne of Grace.

STEPHEN MARSHALL.

A SERMON PREACHED at the late Fast, before the COMMONS House of PARLIAMENT.
2 KINGS 23. 26. Read also Verse. 25. And like unto him (that is King Josiah)
there was no King before him hat turned to the Lord with all his heart, and
with all his soul, and with all his might according to all the Law of Moses;
neither afterward arose any like unto him.

Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath,
wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations
that Manasseh had provoked him withal.


Introduction.
THis King Josiah (Right Honorable and beloved) may most truly be counted,
not only one of the Worthies of the world, but also one of the worlds wonders:
There is hardly any thing recorded of him but what is wonderful, his very
birth was wonderful, he being prophesied of by name about three hundred and
fifty years before he was borne: And 1 King. 1^
Introduction.
therein fore-promised to do those great things which he effected against
Idolaters, and the relics of Idolatry. And it was as wonderful to think in
what a desperate condition, and time of the Church he was borne, in the darkest
midnight of apostasy, when the ten Tribes were carried away captive, and Judah
and Benjamin only lest, and they (as far as the eye of man could see) wholly
and generally fallen from the Lord their God to all manner of Idols and
Idolatries; when the very Temple of God was made a den of Idols; nay, 2 Chr
33.
his Altar the only Altar of Israel destroyed, to make room for Altars
erected to Idols: When the true Church had hardly any visible being upon the
face of the earth; yea I am persuaded that in the darkest times of
Antichristianity; the true Church of Christ was never more invisible, then it
was about that time when Josiah was borne. And it was another wonder, that in
such a strong faction as Idolatry then had, that any could possibly so prevail
in the Court as to give such education to the young Prince: Nor is it less
wonderful that by that time he was but sixteeen years old, he stood out a
perfect godly man, undertaking the cause of God, and the reformation of
Religion, and that with such a perfect 2 Chro. 34. 3.
heart to make the most complete and absolute reformation of the Church that
ever was wrought by any mortal man since God had a Church on earth. But the
success of his labors seems to me the most wonderful of all the rest,
whether you look upon the success it had with the people, or the success it
had with God.

The success with the people was this, that although at Iosiahs first
appearing as a right Orient, and illustrious Star in a dark night there was
hardly any visible worship or worshipper to be found; yet he carried all
before him like a torrent, and walked like a man of fire, (as his name
signifies the fire of the Lord) and brought the whole Nation so about, that
there was scarce ever such a Covenant made as he procured, and that not by a
prevailing party, but the universality of his Kingdom joined with him in it,
and continued in it, and held close to it all the time that Josiah lived in the
world. 2 Chr. 2 4 31. 32. 33
This was the success that he found among the people.

But now the success that all this found with God is yet more wonderful, and
this my Text will tell you of, viz. That not withstanding such a rare man was
thus wonderfully stirred up, thus miraculously carried on with such a perfect
heart, with such an unanimous consent of his people, to set upon the work of
reforming Religion; and did it so as never mortal man did the like before, nor
any arose afterward like unto him; yet notwithstanding all this the Lord turned
not away from the fierceness of his great wrath, etc.

The scope of the Text and parts of it.
And so now you see my Text is a description of the altogether hopeless and
helpless condition of the Church of the Jews, though there was a Physician
risen up who had found out the most precious balm that ever was, and
faithfully applyied it, yet the hurt of Gods people could receive no cure, but
they must die for it.

And this may be reduced to these two heads.

First, you have their miserable and forlorn estate in these words.
(Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath
which was kindlcd, against Judah.)

Secondly, you have the cause of all this, what it was that made God
irreconciliably and inexorably set against them in these words: Because of all
the provocations wherewith Manasses had provoked him; though he were dead
between thirty and forty years before Josiah ended his days, yet his
provocations were the cause that God would never be reconciled to his people,
though he was reconciled to Manasses person before he dyed. I purpose not any
exact or large handling of this Text, nor is it possible to be done in one
Sermon: I shall only cull out such things as are most intended by the holy
Ghost, and most suitable to the occasion of our meeting.

Observation from the connection.
And first, let us in a few words consider it in relation to the former Verse,
and secondly, as it lies in it self. As it stands in relation to the former
description made of Josiah, and the high praises which God there bestows upon
him, I thence observe, That when God raises up any excellent instruments to
appear in his cause, they are most graciously accepted with him, though their
endeavors should come to nothing: There shall be glory and honor, and
immortality, and eternal life to themselves, though there be indignation, and
wrath, tribulation, anguish and woe, upon the people whom they would willingly
do good unto. This you see plainly in this Text, Ioshiah sets up a building
which was instantly thrown down stick and stone, yet never man received
better wages and greater reward than he did. God has raised up many
instruments to do him service who have had admirable success in their way.
Moses brought Gods people out of the bondage of Egypt, carried them through a
desolate, Deuteronomy. 29. 5. Josh. 23. 4. 5.
wastefull, howling wilderness, and that miraculously for forty years
together: Joshua gave them the possession of the promised land, and left them
in it in peace. David subdued all their enemies about them, until they were
all put under the soles of their feet, leaving King. 53. 4
them neither adversary nor evil occurrent. Solomon built Gods Temple, and
established the Church in the purity of Gods Worship and Ordinances, and the
Commonwealth with admirable peace and prosperity; yet, not any of these more
magnified by the Lord than Josiah, whose work came to nothing. This is my first
observation; and it has these two branches; first it implies that the
endeavors of rare Instruments may come to In two branches.
nothing, that men may be stirred up with admirable spirits to attempt great
things for God, and yet their work miscarry.

Secondly, that though their work come to nothing, yet themselves shall be
highly magnified with the Lord.

I could easily give abundant testimonies and instances 1. Branch, The
endeavouts of rare instruments may come to nothing.
of such whom God has raised up with extraordinary spirits; men that we might
think had been fit to carry the world before them who have effected little or
nothing: Elias for one, a man (as it were) made of fire, who at one time called
a Parliament of the King, and all the Heads of Israel together, convinced them
of their halting between God and Baal, and wrought so at 2. King. 18 19.
the present, that all the people cried out the Lord is God, and seemed to have
their hearts brought back again to the Lord their God; and likewise that eight
hundred Idolatrous Priests and false Prophets were put to the sword; yet the
very next day, he was feign to run away to save his life, undertaking a journey
of forty days to keep himself from the fury of Iezabel. Jeremy was another
rare man, one of the most zealous Instruments that ever God employed; insomuch
that he said of himself that he was a man of contention to all the earth, and
Jer. 15. 10.
Gods word was in him like fire in his bones which he could not keep in; yet
this man in his almost forty years Jer. 20. 9.
preaching, could neither prevail with King nor Princes, Prophets. Priests,
nor people, all grew worse and worse, and himself in the end was carried away
by a rebellions company into that accursed land of Egypt, and there died.

And it has been often observed, that the Lord has seen it fit for reasons
best known to himself, to let abundance See to this purpose, Matthew. 23. 34.
37. Act. 7. 52. Heb 11. 37. 38.
of the Worthies whom he has employed even (so far as men could judge) to
perish in the work he has set them about.

Second Branch. Yet themselves highly magnified and rewarded by God.
But secondly, what ever their success has been amongst men, they have been
never a whit less regarded, or rewarded by the Lord; for this the Scripture is
plain, Esaias 49. 5. There the Prophet in Christ's name, and in his own name,
and in the name of all Gods instruments, concludes, That though they spend
their strength for naught, and in vain; yet surely their work is with the
Lord, and though the people be not gathered yet they shall be glorious in the
eyes of the Lord, and their God will be their strength. And Paul says, 2 Cor.
2. 15. We are a sweet savor to God in them that perish, as well as in them
that are saved.

And there is plain reason for it, because sincere endeavors to do Gods
service is our whole work, but the success of these endeavors is Gods work.
Now the Lord has tied himself in his covenant to reward every man according
to his own work, and not according to the work of another: God never
required at the hands of any Minister to save souls; or at the hand of any
Magistrate to preserve a Nation, of any husbandman to produce a crop out of the
ground, etc. this belongs only to himself; he only requires at their hands to
be his servants, to obey his will; wherein if they be faithful, they shall not
miss of their reward. God compares Esaias 49. 2. 3. 1. These. 2. 7
Kings and Princes, and other of his servants, to nursing fathers, and nursing
mothers: Now you that are persons of quality, if you put forth a child to
nurse, and can have perfect information that the nurse loves, attends, suckles
your child, and performs all the duties belonging to a nursing mother; this
nurse, I say, is by you esteemed and rewarded, whether the child live or die:
yea it may be the more when the child dies, because you see her afflicted in
losing your child which she would gladly have enjoyed.

Application to the Parliament.
I do but name this, you are wise to apply it to your selves, you (Right
honorable and beloved) are employed in great services, God has raised you up
to attempt glorious things for his name, for the purging of his house, and the
establishing of this great people in the peace of the Gospel: how far God
will use any of you, I cannot tell; and how far this unworthy Nation will
acknowledge your indefatigable pains, I cannot tell; as yet you have the
prayers and blessings of all sorts of people, high and low, rich and poor,
that wish well to Sion. But however go on, ye Worthies of the Lord, with
sincere hearts to do what God requires at your hands; and whether this Nation
be gathered or not, you shall be glorious in the eyes of God, and the Lord will
be your strength. Josiah you see had the greatest commendation of all others,
notwithstanding the Lord turned not from his fierce wrath: and this is all I
have to say from the connection of the words, that God magnified Josiah, though
his work came to nothing.

Now let us consider them in themselves, where I shall not need before so grave
and intelligent Assembly, to waste the time in analyzing or giving the
grammatical interpretation of so plain and easy a Text, I shall only take up
three doctrinall observations (which you will see to lie clearly in the words)
and handle them as the Lord shall please to enable me, and the time permit;
whereof the first is:

Doct. 1.
That Gods wrath is a most fearful and dreadful thing when it is once
thoroughly kindled:

Doct. 2.
The second and maine doctrine is, That the sins of a Church and people may
come to that height, and Gods wrath may be kindled to that heat,
notwithstanding their reformation, God will inexorably go on to a desolation.
Notwithstanding all that Josiah did, the Lord turned not from his fierce wrath.

Doct. 3.
The third is, this being done for Manassehs provocations, I observe, That the
sins of one generation may be the ground and cause of the destruction and ruin
of the succeeding generation. The abominations that Manasses committed and
commanded in his time, were the cause why God was unappeasably bent to the
destruction of the generation that lived after him.

First Doctrine from the Text, that the wrath of God is exceeding fierce.
I begin with the first, That the wrath of God, when it is greatly kindled, is
extreme fierce, or it is a most dreadful thing to be under Gods wrath when
it is once kindled. Mark how the words here are eg'd, how wonderfully
emphaticall, how dreadfully expressed. God turned not from the fierceness of
his great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled. David says, if his Psalm. 2.
wrath be kindled but a little, blessed are they that trust in him, implying
their misery that be under it; but when there is the fierceness of his great
wrath, they are miserable indeed who are under that.

Explain it.
In clearing of this, I shall first briefly discuss two or three questions,
and then endeavor (as the Lord shall help me) to set it home to you in an
application.

Quest. 1. What the wrath of God is.
What the wrath of God is? what is the wrath of God, of which the Scripture
speaks so often, and such dreadful things?

Answ.
In men we use to say, that anger or wrath is perturbatio concitati animi, the
perturbation of a troubled spirit; but in God it is tranquilla constitutio
justi supplicii, a calm and quiet appointment of just punishment. Plainly,
wrath or anger in God is never attributed to him, in regard of any troublesome
passion, or affection; but only in respect of the effect. I say, that wrath or
anger is attributed to God, not secundum perturbationis affectum, but secundum
ultionis effectum. In a word then, Gods wrath is nothing but his revenging
justice; which justice of God, as it simply burns against sin, the Scripture
calls his anger: when it does more fiercely excandescere, or sparkle out, it is
called his wrath: the same justice, when it pronounces sentence, is called his
judgment; when it is brought into execution, it is called his vengeance: so
that wrath, anger, judgment, and vengeance in God are all one: Gods wrath is
his revenging justice, and when I say, his wrath (when greatly kindled) is
exceeding fierce, I mean it is a dreadful, horrid, and fearful thing to
fall under the dint of Gods revenging justice.

The fierceness of Gods wrath
How may the fierceness of Gods wrath appear?

I answer briefly, it is impossible for any tongue to set it forth. Moses tells
us, no man knows the power of Quest. 2. Answ. Psalm. 9^. 11 The fierceness of
it illustrated from diverse comparisons.
Gods wrath: God is not easily provoked, he is slow to wrath: his wrath is as
a great Bell long raising, but when it is once up, makes such a dreadful
sound, as no tongue can express. Many a poor soul feels a great deal of
it, whole Nations have lain under it; but never was any creature able to say
what the power of Gods fierce wrath is. But if you will give your reverent
attention one quarter of an hour, I shall (God willing) out of the holy
Scriptures open something, which may in some degree make you conceive, how
fearful the wrath of God is, when it is once kindled. And do not think that I
shall speak of what concerns strangers, and not your selves; for I greatly
fear, that before we part it will be too evident, that this fierce wrath is
kindled against some of our own souls who are here present. Indeed your
calling and meeting this day for humiliation, fasting, and prayer seems to
tell all the world, that you believe that Gods wrath is kindled; and therefore
being kindled, it is fit you should know what kind of flame it is.

First, Consider by what dreadful comparisons the holy Ghost uses to set out
the fierceness of Gods wrath. As the roaring (...) a Lion: the Lion has
roared, Amos 3. 4.
who will not tremble? the Lord has uttered his voice, who will not fear? To a
terrible earthquake, that makes Psalm. 18. 7. 8.
the foundation of the hills to quake and tremble. But most usually it is set
out by devouring fire, the most terrible of all the creatures which Gods hand
has made* and mark what kind of fire it is: Sometimes it is compared to a
shower of fire; God raines down upon the wicked fire and brimstone and
horrible tempest: raining down of snares, and fire, and brimstone, is a
horrible Psalm. (...). 11.
tempest indeed. If any mortal man had stood with Abraham, and seen the Lord
raining down flakes of Genesis 1^. 24.
fire and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrha, he would have thought it an
horrible tempest. Yea it is compared to a lake or river of fire, Esai. 30. ult.
The breath of the Lord (speaking of Tophet) like a river of fire and brimstone
kindles it. Imagine the anger of the Lord thus set out, as if from Gods
nostrils, and out of his mouth should come huge lakes or floods of fire and
brimstone, streaming out upon the people with whom he is angry: What dreadful
things are these? Yet further, Gods wrath is set out to be such a fire as is
altogether irresistible; so that the poor creatures on whom it falls, cannot
possibly stand before it: and therefore usually when God is said to arise in
wrath and fury, the people, that be the vessels of this wrath, are said to be
wax, and straw, and stubble, dry leaves, and rotten hedges; and what are these
to stand before huge storms and floods, lakes of fire and brimstone?

And as it is irresistible, so it is intolerable; which is usually set out by
weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

And lastly, Such a fire, when once thoroughly kindled, can never be quenched.
There be two expressions (among many others) in the Scripture, which be very
dreadful, to this purpose: The one is Deuter. 32. 26. Where the Lord says,
that a fire is kindled in his anger; and mark what a fire it is, it shall burn
to the lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on
fire the foundations of the Mountains. Such a fire as when once kindled burns
up Mountains, earth, and world, and all, and never rests till it abide in
hell, where there is no bottom, and there it burns for ever. The other is in
Nahum (...). where Gods fury and fierce anger is compared to fire which throws
down rocks, licks up the sea, burns up the forests, melis and burns the
earth and world, and all that dwells therein. Certainly, that must needs be a
dreadful and horrid thing which the Spirit of God thus describes.

2 By the effects of it.
Secondly, Consider some of the effects of Gods wrath, and then you will
conceive in some measure what it is. The throwing of many millions of Angels
out of heaven into the lowest hell, was nothing but the effect of Gods wrath.
The opening the flood-gate of all sin and misery upon all mankind, was nothing
but an effect of Gods wrath. The deluge that overwhelmed all the world, all
the plagues of Egypt, burning of Sodom, the earths opening and swallowing up
Korah and his company, all the famine, pestilence, blood, that ever the world
lay under, are but so many effects of Gods wrath. Nay, the dreadful appearance
at the last day, when the Potentates and Princes of the world will be humble
Suitors to the hills and mountains to fall on them, will be nothing but an
effect of the Lords coming in wrath, to render vengeance to his enemies. Yea,
to be thrown to all eternity into the pit of hell, into utter darkness, into
the fire that never is quenched, and among worms that shall never cease
gnawing, all these are nothing but to be under the wrath of God. But above all
these, and if ten thousand more could be named, that one effect of it, in the
Lords pouring out his vial of his revenging justice upon the body and soul of
our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, is most able to in form us, how
great and fierce the wrath of God is: that when he had but one Son who was his
fellow (as the Prophet says, Awake sword, and smite the man that is my
fellow;) Zach. 13. 7.
yet this revenging justice being powered out upon him, made him (who in his
person was no other than God himself, yet in his humane nature) when this Cup
was put into his hand, yea the very first taste of it, made him sweat drops of
blood trickling down to the ground, in a Luk, 22. 41
cold winters night; and when he had drunk it off, it made him cry out in the
anguish of his soul, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? These effects
may help us to conceive what a dreadful thing it is to wrestle with the wrath
of God.

3. From the cause of its
But thirdly, Were I able to open the thing it self, and let you see it in the
causes, you would instantly conclude, that it is beyond all apprehension.
Conceive it thus, The revenging justice of God is Gods opposing himself
against the creature; When God takes his creature into his hand, and by his
almighty power upholds the being of it, that it may feel what the Lord Jehovah
can do upon it, and against it. This no living creature can conceive. When God
has only hid himself from his dearest friends, this very hiding of himself
has been so dreadful, that it has made them go roaring all the day long,
dried up their moisture, neade their lives uncomfortable, and a burden to
themselves, turned all other comforts into gall and wormwood. Now if only an
Eclipse of his loving countenance be thus intolerable, what is it for God to
fall upon a creature as his enemy? When a poor worm must not only stand under
the weight of a huge rock falling upon it, but of an almighty God. You that
have large thoughts may now easily conceive what a fearful thing the wrath of
God is.

Quest 3. Who are the objects of this wrath of God.
The third Question is; Against whom is this wrath of God thus kindled?

Answ.
I Answer; First, Gods wrath may be kindled mildly, and gently against his own
dear children, when they walk not faithfully in his Covenant, when they lay
aside their filial obedience, when they give occasion to his enemies to
blaspheme his Name: though he Deuteronomy. 4. 21. 2 Samuel 11. 27. Psa. 89, 3^.
will not suffer all his indignation to arise, yet his fatherly displeasure may
be kindled against them. And even this fatherly wrath, this gentle wrath, (if
it be not a contradiction to call it so) these small drops of his displeasure,
are more unsupportable to them than all the miseries of the world: Yea, they
could more willingly submit to the torments in hell (provided that Gods
countenance did but shine upon them) than to undergo that which this wrath of
God sometimes distills upon them: And yet all this while we may truly say of
them, they are children under wrath, but not the children of wrath; not the
people of his wrath, not the vessels of his wrath.

But if you will know, Secondly, What are the people against whom God has
indignation for ever; the Scripture tells it you in this expression ordinarily,
they are the children of Belial; so they are usually called in the Old
Testament; that is, such as will not bear Gods yoke; master-lesse children,
yoke-lesse children: And in the New Testament, they are called children of Col.
3. 6.
disobedience; as the Apostle, For which things sake the wrath of God comes
on the children of disobedience.

Now who these children of Belial, and of disobedience are, I must a little
explain to you, and then the Application will be easy. I say therefore that
these children that will not carry the yoke, are, First, all unbeleevers. I do
not mean Negative unbeleevers, that is, those that do not believe in Christ,
because they never heard of him; but Positive unbeleevers, who have had the
glorious light of the Gospel shining to them, to whom the Lord Jesus has been
freely offered, as a Savior to deliver them from wrath to come; and yet they
refuse to come in, and to accept of him, as he offers, himself in his Gospel;
because they do not like to take him upon such hard terms: you may be sure
the wrath of God rests upon these men. Turn but to John 3. ult. He that
believes in Christ shall be saved, he that believes not is a damned man: and
how? the wrath of God abides on him. Mark that expression, abides on him: The
wrath of God takes up, as it were, his habitation in an unbeleever. So that
what Gods grace sometimes said of Solomon's Temple, Here will I dwell for I have
a delight in it: So the wrath of God seems to say of an unbeleever, Here I
will dwell, here I will abide for ever.

Secondly, The children of disobedience and sons of Belial, are such, whose
lives and conversations are contrary to the rules of the Gospel; who as they
will not take Christ to be their portion by faith, so they will not take
Christ's word in the Gospel to be their guide; but they will live indeed without
all yoke, doing what is good in their own eyes; these are the sons of
Belial. You may see a notable description of them in the prophecy of Zachary,
chapter 7. v. 8. where the wilful disobedience, obstinate stubbornness and
intractablenesse is expressed by diverse similitudes, all tending to the same
purpose. They refuse to hearken, stop their ears, as not willing to hear Gods
counsel, they pulled away the shoulder, as an Ox or Bullock that shrinks back
from the yoke, or as one that should carry a burden, pulls away his shoulder,
when he should take it, and lets it fall: so these deal with the easy yoke,
and the light burden of Gods commandments. Yea, they make their hearts as an
Adamant Stone; there is in them a stiff and wilful resolution to sin, whereby
their hearts are as intractable to any goodness, as the hardest sort of
stones, Flints, or Diamonds are to be wrought by the tool into any fashion we
desire: when you have said all you can against their wantonness, uncleanness,
prophanness, pride, covetousness, etc. you prevail no more than when an hammer
strikes upon an anvile: Their hearts can easily reject all ye cannot beat a
splinter off from them: then immediately it follows in the next verse,
Therefore there came a great wrath from the Lord of Hosts. These are the sons
of Belial, these are the vessels of Gods wrath.

Applic^^. To praise God for deliverance from it.
Now to apply this to our selves, it might first teach all who are reconciled
to God by Christ, what infinite cause they have every day of their life, to
bless that grace of God, which has not appointed them unto wrath, but by the
blood of his own son, has delivered them from wrath to come, and provided
for them everlasting glory and happiness.

2 Not to covie the prosperity of such as are under it.
Secondly, it may likewise teach all that fear God never to envy the
prosperous estate of any child of Belial, though waters of a full cup be wrung
out for them, though they swim in wealth and honor, and pomp in this world,
and have all their hearts can desire, and in the mean time account it their
glory that they carry not the Lords yoke, never envy their lot; If any here
knew of half a score good fellows set at a banquet of wine, furnished with all
the helps of mirth and jollity, if he knew withal, that the shot to be paid
for it, must be every man's heart blood, he would be loath to be one of the pack
with them. I confess it is hard not to be troubled at the prosperity of wicked
men: even David and Jeremy found it a hard thing not to envy Psalm. 73. 3. Ier
12. 1.
their prosperity. But stay till the shot be paid, enquire how able they will
be to undergo the wrath of God, enter into the Sanctuary, understand their
end, and thy envy will be at an end, but these I intended not to insist upon.

3 To help forward our repentance.
There is one only proper use for the present occasion and that is this; you
are met this day together to Fast and Pary and mourn before the Lord; and (as
I touched before) hereby you acknowledge that the wrath of God is kindled, and
that your selves are called to take a course to turn away Gods wrath: and I
verily believe this is the very end you aimed at, in calling us the unworthy
Ministers of Christ to your help this day, that we might be assistant to you
in whatever might turn away the wrath of God from you. Now two things were at
large pressed upon you in the morning, as well befitting the work of this day.
The one was to rent, and break, and tear every one of your hearts in the sense
of your sins, kindly and thoroughly to humble you in the sight of God. The other
was to provoke you to a strong resolution to leave the ways of sin in time to
come.

In which two things, humiliation and Reformation, stands the very life of
unfeigned repentance, and the spiritual part of a Religious Fast; without which
all our abstinence and sackcloth, and bodily exercises in watching, hearing,
etc. are mere abominations in the sight of God. I rejoice that you had these
things set so home in the morning, some of my work being thereby spared. But
the bringing this lesson home, if God set In humiliation for sin, which has
kindled it.
it on to your hearts, may help to fasten the counsel given you in the
morning, as a nail in a sure place. I shall endeavor to further your
humiliation and reformation from the meditation of the fearfulness and
dreadfulnesse of the wrath of God.

I must therefore entreat you all, (Honorable and beloved) since you have
vouchsafed to call for the labor of a poor man to help you, let me be as free
with you, as if you were so many mean people: my duty this day is to do that
which Jeremy did: God calls him in Ier. 13 1^
a mourning time, and says, go to the King and Queen, and say come ye down,
sit in the dust, humble your selves: So I say to you, comedown, forget that any
of you are Earls or Lords, Knights, or Gentlemen, lay for a while these
thoughts aside; and give me leave to ask you two or three Questions, and be so
faithful to your own souls as to think how you can answer them before the
Lord. Are ye not children of Belial? (that is the very thing which you must
answer in your own bosom) that is, are there not amongst you such as refuse to
carry the yoke of Christ? who will not take Christ to be your Savior as he
offers himself to you in his Gospel? you will have him upon other terms than
to make him your King, Prophet, and Priest; you would have him to deliver you
from hell, but he shall not be your Lord, so, as for you to resign up your
selves to him, as a dutiful wife resignes up her self to her husband. And for
your conversations, you will do what is good in your own sight; if you have a
mind to swear you will swear, you will lie, be unclean, dissemble, these
things please you well and you will do them. Now hear what I say, what thy
outward quality or condition is I know not: but this I know, persons of your
quality do not use much to be scared; men are afraid to speak any thing that
may make you tremble: but you must be scared, or we shall do no good to you.
You are now called to have your hearts rent, I have that to say, might rent the
very cawle of your heart, even this, oh thou miserable and wretched worm!
great is the wrath of God that is kindled against thee. This terrible Lion
roares against thee, a dreadful fire is kindled, a horrible tempest is ready
to fall upon thy head, showers and floods of fire and brimstone are even ready
to be powered out upon thee: how art thou able to live with everlasting
burnings? how will thou dwell with devouring fire? Thou that art crushed before
a moth, how can thy heart endure, or thy hands be strong in the day that God
shall deal with thee? Thou that dare not think of lying one day upon a
wrack, that can not endure for two or three days to be wrung with the
cholick, that art not able to bear the thoughts of lying under the tearing of
a Quartane Ague from Michaelmas to Easter; how will thou be able to stand
under the fall of such a huge rock as the wrath of the Almighty God? which
every moment is ready to break down upon thee. How will thou do when these
rivers of fire and brimstone shall be powered out upon thee? and thou no more
able to stand before them, than a few dry leaves are able to resist the huge
breaking in of many waters? Oh beloved, would you with due care apply these
things to your own hearts, and present them to your souls as things present,
how would they bring down the most stubborn spirit! how would they help to
break the hardest of your hearts before the Lord!

How this may be done.
But there are two things which keep most people frombeing affected with them.
The first is, These things are looked upon as things a far off: Now it is a
rule in Optics, That things far off, though they be mavelous great, yet
seem very little: a Star that is bigger than all the earth, seems no bigger
than a candle being many miles distant from us. So while men look at the wrath
of God, as they did at the Prophets Vision, The Vision that he sees is for many
days to come, and he prophesies of Ezekiel. 12. 27.
the times that are far off: And put the evil day from them: All these
threatenings are but light matters. Secondly, it fares with most men in this
point, as with some men that have shrewish wives; though their business lie
within doors, yet they have no heart to be there for fear of chiding: So
though it be the most necessary work to think of these things; yet because
their unquiet consciences upon the least serious meditation, are ready to gnaw
and tear them, and make them sleep uncomfortably, they labor to drive off the
thought of this thing as far as they can, and will not think of Gods wrath
due to sin, from years end to years end. Whereas if men would bring it in
rempraesentem, and keep their eyes open to behold it, as a thing which
unavoydably will come upon them, how admirably would it work upon men's hearts!

To this end, let me tell you a story which I have often read to this purpose.
It is reported of a certain Christian King of Hungary, who being on a time
mavelous sad and heavy, his brother that was a resolute Courtier would needs
know what he ailed; Oh brother, (says he,) I have been a great sinner against
God, and I know not how I shall appear before him, when he comes to judgment:
These are (said his brother) melancholy thoughts, and makes a toy of them, as
Gallants use to do: The King replies nothing for the present; but the custom
of that Country was, that if the Executioner of justice came and sounded a
Trumpet before any man's door, the man was presently to be led to execution:
the King in the dead time of the night sends his Deaths-man, and causes him to
sound his Trumpet before his brothers door, who hearing and seeing the
messenger of death, springs in pale and trembling into his brothers presence,
and beseeches the King to let him know wherein he had offended. O Brother,
replies the King, thou have loved me, and never offended me, and is the sight
of my Executioner so dreadful to thee; and shall not I, so great a sinner,
fear to be brought to judgment before Jesus Christ? If we would thus suppose
with Hierom, that we heard this Trumpet sounding, Arise ye dead, and come to
judgment, it would work to the purpose. O set your selves therefore in Gods
presence, and behold the Lord shaking his lap, (as Nehemiah when he shook his
lap, and said, so God shake Neh. 5. 1^.
out everyman from his house:) Thus will I shake into eternal destruction all
the children of Belial, and then evidence be brought in against thee, (how
great soever thou art amongst men) that thou have a huge pile of sin heaped up
against God, and still have gone on to add drunkenness to thirst, opposing
God, his ways, and his cause, refusing grace offered freely not willing to be
at peace with God, while thou have any means to fight against him: when all
these things shallbe laid open before thee, and (as thy just reward) God strike
theea full blow, and sink thee to the bottom of hell, where thou shall wish
that thou had been a toad, or (as one in desperation sometimes wished) that
thou might live there a thousand years, so thou might have any hope in the
end, that the wrath of God might cease toward thee. Would not these things
then work upon thee? Could thou then pass such a day as this, without
trembling? Could thou be before the Lord, and not have thy heart rent and
torn? Be persuaded therefore once more to bring it home to thy own soul, and
say, as he said of his green fig, this grew in Carthage yesterday: This wrath,
this sea of misery may break in upon me the next moment: I am yet joviall and
merry, but Gods vengeance with woollen feet follows me close at the back, Raro
antecedentem scelestum descruit pede poena claudo, Horace.
and will overtake me; if I cannot mourn at the hearing of wrath, I must burn
at the feeling of it. The good Lord melt our hearts with the fear of these
things, lest we be swallowed up in them.

And then for the second part, for your Reformation, would the Lord make this
day, a day of Reformation to 2 For Reformation.
this honorable Assembly, what glorious things would be done by you! Now what
more effectual motive, what Furies whip would more restrain from the practice
Meditation of wrath how it may promote it. Esaias 33. 14.
of sin, or more drive to seek a shelter under the wing of Christ, and to get
into the safe condition of the servants of God, than the beholding of this
devouring fire, these everlasting burnings, which sinful men will never be
able to abide? I know such is the depravation of man's nature, that if there
were any possibility of avoiding Gods wrath without leaving their sins, many
men would resolve with that wicked Cardinal not to leave their part in Paris,
for their part in Paradise: And with that noble man (which Luther speaks of)
who professed, that if this life of going from whorehouse to whore-house might
last ever, he would not envy any man's going to heaven. But this will not
last; There is great wrath prepared for the workers of iniquity. And therefore
my humble request is, that if any of you find your hearts unwilling to submit
to that godly counsel, given you in the morning, of turning to God, do but
think what your sins, which you prize so much, will cost you. They say the
Pope has a book called Taxa camerae Apostolicae, wherein men may know the rate
of any sin; upon what terms a man may keep a whore, be a Sodomite, or murder
his Father, etc. But here is a rate-book, where any of you may know what a
beloved sin will cost you; not a farthing token less, than to lie under the
devouring fire of Gods wrath to all eternity. Porters will try their burdens
upon their shoulders before they engage themselves to carry it, do thou so. It
is reported of Master Bilney when he thought he should be burnt, he would put
his finger into the candle to see how he could endure burning, do thou often
so; go often alone and say, here is a sin mavelous pleasant, such a sin
gains me thus much every year, but there is wrath to come: And therefore as
Elihu said to Job, Because there is Job 36. 18.
wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his stroke; a great ransom cannot
deliver thee, he will not esteem thy riches, no not gold, nor all the forces
of strength. 4. To the Parliament, o make it their great care to pacific it.
Fourthly and lastly, there is one use peculiar to you that be our Noble
Senators, the Lords and Commons gathered in Parliament: we know your care is
for our good, but this I humbly propound to you, you will never do us good, if
Gods wrath be not taken away from us: were you so many Gamaliels, so many
Hemans, so many Solomon's, so many Angels gathered together, and all of one
heart to study Englands good; you can do England no good, if Gods wrath, which
is kindled against it, be not pacified. And therefore let your great study be
both to find out what has kindled Gods wrath against us, and what may remove
it from us: of which I shall be able to give you further knowledge in the next
and maine lesson to which now I pass, viz.

Doct. 2: In reformation God may go on to desolation
That the sins of apeople may come to that pass, and Gods wrath may be
kindled to that height, that notwithstanding their reformation, God will go on
to a desolation. In handling whereof I shall (the Lord helping me) discuss
these three things. First, I shall open the thing in Thesi, clear the
conclusion, and see if I can make you understand it. Secondly, enquire in
hypothesi, whether it concern us or not; whether our Nation, Church, or State,
may be thought to be in any danger of it. And thirdly, I shall endeavor to
make some uses which may be fitting for such an Assembly as this is.

For clearing the conclusion, I shall endeavor these three things. First, I
will demonstrate the truth of it. Secondly, I will enquire whether the signs
of it may be known, and how far they may be known: Whether the Lord has left
any footsteps or rules for us to prognosticate by, and so to judge when a
people is come to that pass: And if so, then, Thirdly, what those tokens are:
And I shall endeavor to speak plainly and freely of them all.

God may go on to desolation.
For the truth of it, were there no other Instance to be found in any other
story, but this in my Text, it were sufficient to prove that such a thing may
be. That which has been already, may be so again. Josiah, Proved by
Scripture. 2 Chro. 34.
we see, wrought such a Reformation, that the whole Kingdom did, all his
days, follow the Lord; and notwith standing all this, God turned not from his
fierce wrath; but went on to destroy them. The Lord threatens elsewhere that
he would do it, Zeph. 2. 1, 2. Gather your selves together before the decree
bring forth, before the day pass as the chafe, before the fierce anger of the
Lord come upon you: As if he should have said, The decree is not yet come
forth; but if once it bring forth, it will be too late for you to seek for
mercy. There be other examples (though not so full as this) sufficient to prove
this truth: As Nineveh for one: The Lord sent the Prophet Jonah to preach
repentance or destruction to them; and you know it is said, The King laid aside
his Crown, and called them all to repentance; and repent they did; and God saw
their works, and for a while forbore that City; and Jonah 3.
yet the judgment of most Interpreters is, that within forty years after, the
City was destroyed, even in the same age wherein the Reformation was made.

That Instance of the Jews is most remarkable, in our Savior Christ's time:
John Baptist came before him, and turned the hearts of the parents to the
children, and the children to the parents; made ready a people prepared for the
Lord; there went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the region about
Jordan, and were baptized of him, confessing their sins. And Christ had so many
followers, that the Scribes and Pharisees said, all the world went after him;
that is, the body of their Nation. And the Apostles converted so many, that
they said to Paul, that Act. 21 2^.
there were many myriads, many ten thousands of Jews Notwithstanding
Reformation.
that believe, who are all zealous* yet notwithstanding, in that very age,
wherein the Gospel wrought thus effectually among them, the wrath of God came
upon that Nation to the utmost, and scattered them over all the world.

It is likewise recorded of the Roman Empire, which for a matter of six or
seven hundred years had been a dreadful enemy to the Kingdom of the Lord;
first against the Church of the ^ewes, and afterward against the Christians
(while it was unconverted; in Constantines time the Empire turned to
Christianity, and in the very first age of the Empires Christianity, came the
destruction and dissolution of it. So that there is a truth in it, that Gods
wrath may be so far kindled, that he will accept of no atonement, but will
inexorably proceed to desolation.

That this may be known.
The second Question is, Whether this may be known; whether we may possibly
find out any direction, whereby to judge of Gods purpose of thus coming
against a people. Answ. And for that, I confess, a great many men, especially
such as are not willing to have any dangerous truth preached to them, do
think that all preaching and study, in such points as these, is of no more
certainty, than the judgment of judicial Astrology: Tell them of wrath to
come, or desolation of Churches, or destruction of Commonwealths; they look on
such as shall tell them of these things, as upon a company of ignorant people,
who will be of their Authors faith; or esteem them as proud men, who would be
thought to have more acquaintance with Gods secrets than their neighbors, and
therefore they must adventure upon such high points; or at best, conceive them
to be sullen, discontented, melancholic people, who look on every thing with
black spectacles; but in the mean time themselves will never be persuaded,
that any can give them rules of directions to judge in this kind: But you are
wise: and if you please to take two or three places of Scripture into your
serious thoughts, you will conclude quickly* that this is a point may be known:
The one is Ierem. 8. 7. where the Lord blames the stupidity of the people, that
whereas the Stork in the heavens knows her appointed times; and the Turtle,
and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the times of their coming; but his
people would not know the judgments of the Lord: arguing them to be more
filly and simply than the very birds and fowls, who could observe what seasons
were fit or unfit for their staying or removing in such or such a Country; and
Gods people remained ignorant of the seasons of Gods approaching judgments.
Another place you shall find Hos. 7. 9. where the Lord says of Ephraim, that
is, the ten Tribs, gray hairs are scattered here and there upon him, yet he
knows it not: The meaning, plainly, is this; That as gray hairs are
remembrances, and plain tokens of declining old age coming upon men; so there
were symptoms and tokens of Ephraims ruin coming upon him, and yet he would
take no notice of it. Our blessed Savior also in Mat. 16. v. 1, 2, 3. tells
his hearers, that they could make Almanacks for weather, and discern the face
of the sky, and yet could not discern the signs of the times, (implying that
Prognostications might also be made, if men would study the right way) whereby
they might know what God intends to do with a people. So then, there is one
step gained, that something may be known of Gods approaching judgments.

And how far it may be known.
But that I may not deliver any thing but what you shall have a sull suffrage
for, I add in the next place, and confess, that because all seasons are in
Gods hands, and all people under his absolute prerogative; so that, if he
pleases, he may destroy a Nation for one sin; and again, if he pleases,
he can exercise so much mercy, that no sins of a people can set any bounds
or limits thereunto; nothing but his own holy will setting limits to his
patience, long-suffering and mercy; and because also God does always bear
such a tender regard to his own children, that wherever they live, he does
often for their sakes (as it were) reverse his sentence of desolation. In
regard of these things and some others which might be Psa. 106 23
suggested, I think I may say, no mortal man can possibly determine when the
precise time of this or that Nations utter ruin is certainly come. What Christ
said of the day of Judgment, may fitly be applied here, the very day and
hour of the last Judgment no man knows, but only the Father, and the Son,
to whom it is revealed from the Father, and that also since his Resurrection;
but yet there be signs whereby we may know the approaching of that Mat. 24.
36
day: So we may say of this, though we cannot know the very time of a Nations
desolation; yet we may know when the ruin of it comes near at hand. And what
learned men say of them, who have studied for the Philosophers stone, though
they could never find out the Elixar; yet in their search after it they have
found out many excellent things, admirably useful for mankind: so in this
search if we cannot determine that such a Nation will infallibly be ruined,
yet we may certainly find such things as thereby to learn what to fear,
what to expect, what to pray against, what to strive after, etc. And so
consequently the handling of this question may be exceedingly useful to such
an Assembly, as I am now called to speak to in the name of God.

This then is a second step that we may know such things as may make us fear
desolation, and consequently labor to prevent it, or prepare for it.

And how it may be known.
Thirdly, the maine question is to enquire what are the Tokens, the gray
hairs, the flourishing of the Almond tree, whereby we may guess at man's
going to his long home.

I answer, Politicians, and some Divines will tell you of the fatal period of
Kingdoms, that they have their youth, their strength, and after a time their
declination; and show by abundance of experience, that States seldom continue
above five or six hundred years without some fatal change: But we must go by
a surer rule than this. It is not length of time, which makes God weary of
showing mercy; but, what Solomon says of Prove. 28.
Kings, for the transgressions of a land many are the Princes thereof: so for
the transgressions of a land, and the transgressions only, many are the ruins
thereof. Now there is one rule which God has always proceeded by in the
dissolution of Churches and Kingdoms ever since the beginning of the world, and
that is this. That whenever the sins of any Church, Nation, City, Fullness of
sin the evidence of it.
Family, or Person (you may take it as large or as narrow as you will) are come
to a full measure, then God infallibly brings ruin upon them. This is the rule
which I shall make plain to you: God has set several vessels to limit the
sins of all Nations, beyond which they shall not go; as once God said to the
waves of the Sea, hitherto thou shall go, but here* thy proud waves shall be
stayed: so God has said of the sins of Nations, Families, Persons: thus
far I will forbear thee, but farther thy wickedness shall not exceed; then
comes thy end. Take four or five clear evidences for it in the Scripture.
First that speech of God to Abraham: I will give thy posterity all this land,
but not yet, because the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet Genesis 15. 16.
full: though they were Amorites, God would bear with them, till their
iniquities were come to the full, and then he would spare them no longer.
Another is Zachary 5. verse 6. The prophet in a vision saw an Ephah, a thing
like a bushel, and moreover the Lord told him, this is the resemblance of the
Ephah, throughout all the earth: as if God should have said, this is not only
proper to this people, but this rule I go by throughout the whole world: and
what was that? the Ephah is brought out, and into the Ephah is cast a Woman;
this woman sat and filled the Ephah: then one brings a talent of lead for a
cover to it, and that stops the mouth of it, and shuts the woman in; then come
two women with the wind in their wings, and they take up the Ephah and carry it
between heaven and earth, and place it in the land of Shinar or Babylon, there
to build it an house, and to set it upon its own base. Now what is the meaning
of all this? there is one word in the vision, which is a key to open this lock,
viz. this is wickedness: the meaning whereof is, That the Lord had brought the
Jews from the captivity of Babylon, where they had been seventy years: as
soon as they came home; though they turned not to idolatry, yet they proved
stark naught. God sets them their Ephah, puts their iniquity into a vessel,
and does (as it were) say, Go on, till ye have filled the Ephah; but as soon
as that is full, I will clap a talent of lead in the mouth of it, I will take a
course ye shall sin no longer in this land, but will scatter you into
Mesopotamia, into the land of Shinar, and there be as wicked as ye will. So
you see when the measure is full, then vengeance comes.

Take another instance, in the first of James verse 15. When lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin; and sin when it is finished, brings forth
death; which is of the same interpretation with the former, and shows us sins
progress in the rising, reigning, and ruin. First a man has lust, a wicked
corrupt heart that he brings into the world; every man* comes into the world
with a heart full of lust, now this lust brings forth iniquity; God leaves
people to go on in wickedness, if they be not such as he means to save; and
when their sin is perfected, it brings forth death; when it comes to the full
forty weeks, and has gone the full time, then comes destruction. Take yet two
instances more, both in the fourteenth of the Revelation verse 14, etc. in the
Parables of the vintage, and of the harvest; when they were ripe, then ruin
comes. Till then God uses to bear with people: smaller judgments often come
before sin is ripe, and are removed again; but when once the measure is
full, then God says, as in Nahum chap. 1. verse 6. He will make an utier end,
affliction shall not rise up the second time; he will so do it at once, that
they shall not need to fear a second.

Why God defers till sin be full.
Now if by the way you desire to know why God defers so long, and rather cuts
not off wicked men sooner. I answer, it should suffice us, that it is his will
to do it; but further he does it, partly that they may be for exercise to his
people to purge and humble them, as Ashur was his rod to whip his people,
before the rod was Esaias 10.
burnt. And partly to declare his long-suffering, and patience, thereby to
leave them without excuse if they prove incorrigible. Thirdly, this is for
salvation Romans 2. 4, 5.
to some, who in the mean time are to be gathered in: and this I take it, the
Apostle means, 2 Pet. 3. 9. when he says, the Lord defers his coming to
judgment, because the Nation of the Jews is first to be gathered in. So that
as the Angel staid till Lot was plucked out of Sodom: so God has some brands
to snatch out of the fire, for whose sakes he defers the execution of vengeance
against them, whose sins call for it. For these causes, and it may be others
not known to us, but secret to himself, does God defer the full execution of
his wrath till sin be ripe.

How the fullness of a Peoples sin may be known.
But how may we judge when the sins of a people grow to the full? I answer
(and but briefly, because I would not be burdensome to an attentive auditory;
the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak in the best;) to find out sins
fullness four things must come into consideration. First, what kinds of
sins they What sins are desolating sins.
are which are land-destroying sins. Secondly, the quantity of these sins.
Thirdly, the aggravation of them. Fourthly, which is the upshot of all, the
incorrigiblenesse of them.

Idolatry.
First, the kinds of them, I mean thus, there was never any Church or Nation
without sin, but all sins are not Church-wasting sins, nor Landdestroying
sins; but there are sins which are called abominations, such as make a land
spue out the inhabitants: Levit. 18. 28 Deuteronomy. 9 5.
such as make God drive them out: And they are some against the first Table,
some against the second Table. Against the first Table, first, the sin of
Idolatry. Evermore as Idols come in, God Ezekiel 8. Ezekiel. 43. 8. Hos. 13.
goes out: When there was an Image of jealousy set up, God goes far from his
Sanctuary. God likes no such neighbors. When Ephraim offended in Baal, he dies
for it: when the mean man bows himself, and the great man humbles himself to
stocks and stones, God will spare them no longer. When the Esaias 2. 9.
glory due to Jehovah, is communicated to dumb Idols, this God will bear at no
peoples hand. And the reason is plain, this is as the marriage bed to God,
this provokes his jealousy, which is his rage, then he will accept of no
ransom: This therefore is the abomination that makes all desolation.

Profaneness and contempt of Gods Ordinances, day, (...).
Secondly, the sins of profaning, contemning, scorning and persecuting of Gods
holy things, his holy day, his holy servants. I join all these sins
together, because they come all from the same root, that is, malignancy
against God: God himself is profaned, slighted, contemned in all these. Thou
have despised my holy things, and profaned my Sabbaths, therefore thou have
caused thy day to draw Ezekiel. 22. 4. 8.
near. God therefore would make Moab as Sodom, Zeph. 28. 9. 10.
and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, because they reviled his people; but
there is one proof may serve in stead of an hundred. 2 Chronicles. 36. The Lord did
a long time bear with them, but when once they came to that pass they
polluted his House, despised his Word, mooked his messengers, misused his
Prophets, his wrath grew hot against them till there was no remedy. God could
the^ bear them no longer, but utterly would destroy them. And it is our
Countryman, Venerable Bedes observation, that when the old Britains grew to
that height of sin, as to cast odium in religionis professores, tanquam in
adversaries, God presently sent in the Saxons; who destroyed them all.

Sins destructive to humane society.
There are also some sins against the second Table which greatly help to
fill the measure of a peoples iniquity: As first, such sins as are
destructive to humane society, cruelty, blood, oppression, deceit, these were
the sins which brought the flood upon the world of the ungodly. These are the
sins which the King of Nineveh saw would Genesis 6. 11. Jon. 3. 8. Ezekiel. 22. 3. 4.
6. 9. 12. Hos 12 7. Hos. 4. 2. Sensual lusts of drunkenness and uncleanness.
ruin him and his Kingdom.

Secondly, the sensual lusts of drunkenness and whoredom; I join these
sins together, because they are usually joined in Scripture, and seldom
severed in men's practice: And you shall clearly in the search of the Scripture
find them to be among the abominations which help to fill up the measure of a
peoples sin, and prepares them for judgment. I have seen a horrible thing in
the house of Israel (says God, speaking of the sins which Hos. 6. 10.
made God hew them down) there is the whoredom of Ephraim; whoredom and
wine, and new mine take away their heart: This was one of the things that made
God have controversy with the Hos. 4. 2. 11.
land to make it mourn, and to take them all away. I have not time to
prosecute these things, you shall easily find that these are gray hairs in
any Nation where ever they are found

Secondly, the quantity of these sins is very Esaias 28. 1. 3. ver. 7. 8. The
generality of these sins. Genesis 6. 12.
considerable, when they are universal, no Nation ever was without them, but
when once they come to spread as a Gangrene over the whole body, then the
measure quickly grows full: When all flesh had corrupted their ways, then the
flood came rushing in: When from the crown of the head, to the sole of the
foot, the whole body was full of Esaias 1. 5, 6.
wounds, and bruses, and putrified sores, then it was to no purpose for God to
strike them any more with any hope of healing.

You shall find in the 24. of Ezekiel, (...) notable description of Jerusalems
condition when Nebuchadnezzar Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4.
came to destroy them, the Prophet compares the City to a great pot, whereinto
all the choice pieces were put to be boiled, the thigh and the shoulder, and
all the choice bones, but they were all rotten flesh whose scumme would not
boil out, meaning, that the Princes and Rulers, Prophets and Priests and
People were all overspread with abominable wickednesses. So in the 22. of
Ezekiel, all states are brought in, the Prophets Verse. 15. etc.
devouring souls, the Priests violating the Law, profaning holy things,
Princes and Rulers oppressing, the people robbing, etc. then God powers out his
indignation, and consumes them with the fire of his wrath.

But this must be understood with this caution, Yet to be understood with a
caution.
that when I say all, it is not to be understood, as if God would spare a
people until the whole multitude grew wicked, and none remaining on his side:
God had seven thousand in Israel who were faithful to him in the worst time of
Ahabs apostasy; but the meaning is, when the number of such as abstain from
these abominations, is so small, that they are not considerable, to God they
are always considerable, but not always considerable as to the turning away
of judgment, or to the preventing of ruin. Ten righteous men would have been
considerable in Sodom for the sparing of it, when five would not. So the sum
is, that when these abominations are generally spread, and very few in
comparison abstaining from them, a people grows ripe apace for destruction.

The aggravation of these sins.
3. The third thing considerable, is the aggravation of these sins, and
therein I shall only give this one brief rule, that in all places and
Countries, houses, families, or persons, the more mercy, light and means these
sins are committed against, the sooner is the vessel of their iniquity come
to the full. Amos 3. 2. You only have I known of all the Nations of the
world, and therefore I will visit you for all your iniquities, Ezekiel. 9. God
begins at his sanctuary, Dan. 9. 12. This is the very argument of the whole
Chapter of the second of Jeremy. See also Mic. 1. 5.
and with the ancient men, who had stood longest before him. And Daniel makes
this the reason why God brought a greater evil upon them than upon any other
Nation, because no other Nation had enjoyed the like means to keep them from
sin, or to bring them to repentance. And in the 22. of Esaias. The valley of
vision had the greatest burden of wrath of all others; that is, the people of
Israel, to whom God had sent all his Prophets from time to time. And there is
great reason why sins against light and covenants, mercies and Conscience
should be most provoking; It is thus even amongst all ingenuous men, he that
eats my bread, (says David, has lift up his heel against me, if it had
been a stranger, I could have borne it: Is Psalm. 41 9. 2. Sam. 16. 17.
this thy kindness to thy friend, could unnatural Absolon say to Hushai? This
then is a plain case, that the more mercies a people sin against, the
greater is their sin, and the sooner comes their judgment.

Incorrigiblenesse of these sins, when they are too strong for
4. The last thing considerable to find out the fullness of sin, is the
Incorrigiblenesse of it, and if the Lord grant that we can quit our selves of
this, we shall yet do well: by this Incorrigiblenesse, I mean, when the
sins of a people are grown so great, that they are too strong for the mounds
and banks which God has set to keep them in compass. Now God has set Four
Boundaries for sin, and when sin is grown too strong for all these, you may
conclude that (reserving or excepting what God may do in his absolute
prerogative) if he go by his wonted rules, that Nation is going to her long
home.

First, God has set Conscience and shame to be Conscience and shame.
boundaries among all people, to keep sin in compass: Conscience to make them
stand in awe of God: shame to make them stand in fear of men: These two God
has set up (as his Officers and heralds) in all men's hearts; and when once
men Prove. 2. 14. Es. 3 9.
can run into sin, as the horse into the battle, rejoicing to do evil,
proclaiming their sins as Sodom, not being ashamed and past all feeling, there
is one bank broken down, one Boundary plucked up.

Secondly, another bank that God has set, is the example, and conversation,
and prayers of his own people, whom he scatters here and there amongst men,
and great is the power and force of their presence to keep sin in compass,
partly by the For prayers examples and counsels of the godly.
Majesty of the Image of God, shining in them, partly by their holy examples,
partly by their wise and seasonable counsels, admonitions, reprehensions
partly by their prayers, whereby they bring down restraining Job 22. ult.
and constraining grace: Now when these are either taken away from a place by
death or driven Esaias. 57. 1. Genesis 19.
away by persecution, as Lot out of Sodom; or living amongst them, God takes
off their edge to 18. Genesis 33. Ier. 14 11.
pray no longer, as Abraham for Sodom, or Jeremy for the Jews: There is a
second Boundary pulled up.

For Magistrates and Ministers, which comes to pass either,
The third is, that of Magistrates and Ministers, whom God has invested with
his own authority, and put upon them some beams of his own Majesty and
Image, put his sword into their hands, and arms them with power to keep sin
in, and beat it down; The Magistrate having the sword of Justice, and thereby
being made custos utriusque tabulae; and Ministers having the sword of the
Spirit, these two are strong Rampires, and Banks, they are the (...), to hinder
sins course, they are Physicians to the hurts of Gods people, and when once
the sins of a Land grow too strong for these, farewell all, you will soon
hear the days of their visitation are at hand. And this is done in three
Cases.

When they take part with it.
First, when Magistrates and Ministers take sins part, and in stead of
joining with God against sin, they join with sin against God: as if the dogs
should join with the wolves against the sheep, and the Shepherds.

Thus it was in Ieremies time, he found the people harder than a rock to be
wrought upon, but he said, Surely these are poor and foolish, who know not the
way of the Lord I will get me to the great men, and Ier. 4. 5.
I will speak to them, for they have known the way of the Lord, and the
judgment of their God; but were they such, or did they so? mark what follows,
these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bands, in stead of
maintaining Gods yoke, and strengthening Gods hands, they broke them a pieces:
and what follows, therefore a Lion Hos. 9. 7,
out of the forest shall slay them, an evening Wolf shall spoil them, a
Leopard shall watch over the cities, every one that goes out shall be torn in
pieces. Thus it was likewise in Hoseaes time, when the Prophet was a fool, and
the spiritual man was mad when the Princes would be drunk with bottles of
wine, etc. Thus it was in Ezekiels time (as Ezekiel. 22. 15. etc.
was before touched) immediately before their desolation.

Ordare not oppose it.
Secondly, when Magistrates or Ministers are dastardly, when they are afraid
of sin and sinners, and dare not appear for God, when such men have God,
Conscience, their office, the laws, all on their side, and yet dare not
appear against Idolatry, profaneness, violence, sensuality, as it shows the
men to be of a base spirit, so it argues the sins of that place to be of great
strength, even fit for judgment. Thus it was in the 22. of Ezekiel, verse. 30.
when all such were grown corrupt, I sought for a man among them, that is some
Phinehas to stand in the gap, to make up the hedge, some zealous Ministers to
stand up and mediate with God for them, and testify in their ministry against
them, but I found none, and therefore I powered out my indignation upon them.
See also Ier. 5. 1. Or doing their duty cannot yet prevail against it.


Thirdly, in case any Magistrates or Ministers do appear on Gods part, as
Josiah, Jeremiah, and others did in these forlorn times, yet they prove too
weak stakes, they are able to do nothing; the inundation of wickedness
bears them down, and runs over their heads: In a word, when some Magistrates
take part with sin, others afraid of it, and the remainder, who are faithful
can prevail nothing, this Rampire is likewise overthrown.

And for the judgments of God.
4. There is but one more, which when it is likewise cast down, destruction is
at the very door, and that is, Gods lesser judgments: God sometimes keeps
petty-sessions, to prevent great Assizes, inferior executions, to prevent utter
desolations, which when they prevail not, it is a certain token of extreme
wrath. Sometimes God afflicts neighbor Nations, destroying their Cities, that
the rest might receive Instruction, and their dwelling not be cut off: As
Judges will hang up Zeph. 3. 6 7.
a thief upon a Gibbet, to keep others from the gallows. I have overthrown
some of you (says God) as Sodom, I have smitten you with blasting and mildew,
I have sent among you the pestilence, yet ye have Ames 4.
not turned to me, why should ye be smitten any more? You shall see this
notably expressed in the 24. of Ezekiel. Where God compares Jerusalem to a pot,
and all the Inhabitants to flesh boiling in the pot, but all the boiling would
not ferch out their scum, no threatenings, no visitations, no inferior
Judgments could prevail with them, but still their scumme, their blood, their
filthiness and lewdness abode in them; mark then in the 13. v. what doom
God gives of them, because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, I have
tried all means to do thee good, and thou will not be reformed, thou shall
never be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest
upon thee, I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it. And that example in
the sixth of Jeremy, is most remarkable, where God uses such a parable as
this, the bellows are V. 29, 30.
burnt, the lead is melted in the fire, the founder works in vain, for the
wicked are not taken away, reprobate silver shau men call them, for the Lord
has rejected them. God here compares himself to a Silver-smith, who takes a
piece of oar, and tryes all his art to divide betwixt the dross and the
metal, but cannot do it, and at last throws it away with indignation, says
it is base stuff, on which he will never bestow any more labor. So God seems
to say, my Ministers have spent their lungs, dried up their throats, all my
other judgments have been tried, but the wicked are not taken away, they are
all base dross, I will bestow no more pains upon them.

And now you understand what the gray hairs of a State or people are, and when
a people are ripe for destruction, when the time is come that God will pass
them no more, you shall not need to enquire by what means he will do it, he
has all in his own hands, he has famine, and pestilence, and sword, and
wild beasts, and fire, and earthquakes, and if none of all these do it, he
has flies, and lice, and grasshoppers, and rats, and mice enough to destroy the
strongest Kingdom in the world in a moment; if he but whistle, hiss, or call
for them.

What kind of Reformation may meet with desolation.
Objection. It is true may some say, if people go on in their wickedness, and
prove Incorrigible, no marvel though God proceed thus against them: but that
it should be the case of a people, who set upon Reformation, this is strange:
And how will this stand with the doctrine preached in the forenoon, that when a
nation repents, God will repent, etc?

Answer. In such an assembly as this, a short Ier. 18. 7. 8.
answer (if true) will satisfy. First, God never promised that the sincere
Reformation of a few should prevent the judgment of a multitude: if Gods time
of Execution be come, Noah, Daniel and Job shall deliver neither son, nor
daughter, who are not turned home to God. Secondly, I answer, Ezekiel 4.
that though the Nation joined in the Reformation, it was not in sincerity, if
it had been sound, the doctrine in the morning would have carried it away, and
I must have had another Interpretation of my Text. It is true, Josiah carried
it by his authority, but the peoples hearts were not right. And Jeremy says
no less, when I removed Ier. 3. 20.
Samaria out of my sight, her treacherous sister Judah turned not to me. Yes
might the people say, we did turn to thee under good King Josiah, but it was
but fainedly (says the Prophet) and it appears to be so, for as soon as ever
Josiah was dead, they made a universal Apostacy from the Lord, and so their
Reformation was but like that of the Nation of the Jews in Christ's time, which
our Lord Matt. 22. 43. 44, 45.
compares to the unclean spirit, going out for a while, and returning again
with seven Devils worse then himself. As if England by the help of this noble
Parliament, who lay the cause of God to heart, should join in a reformation,
though against the hair, it would come to nothing in the end. And so I have in
some measure cleared this doctrine in Thesi, how far the approaching ruin of a
Nation may be known, and what the signs of it are. The second follows, and
that is;

Whether this may be thought to be our own case.
Whether this concern us. And what answer would you have me give you? I could
willingly answer in this, as Daniel did Nebuchadnezzar, when he was to
interpret a dream to the King, which in the true exposition foretold
Nebuchadnezzars Dan. 4 19.
fall: It is said Daniel stood still for an hour, and his thoughts troubled
him, and in the end speaks out, My Lord, the dream be to them that hate thee,
and the interpretation of it to thine enemies. So say I, Oh let the parallel
of this be some other people: Oh that it might not fit England, but does it fit
it? Right honorable and beloved, your great wisdoms, your diligent
inspection, your ample intelligence, your faithfulness and sincerity makes you
better able to judge, then my meannesse can attain unto, who am none of the
wisest observers of the time; but I must speak, and what I speak, I shall
speak freely and humbly, I would I could speak sorrowfully: I know I speak
to wise men, who can well judge what I say.

It is hoped that we are not yet in that condition.
First, I hope verily we are not yet come to that pass that God should say of
us, I will pass by England no more; blessed be God, we have a gracious King,
many Noble Peers, many excellent Commons, who have already done great things
for God; I need not repeat them, all the Kingdom knows them to their comfort.
Yea, and blessed be God, the same gracious Sovereign And why.
and Honorable Assembly of Parliament do yet enquire what is further to be
done, what wrath is kindled, and how it may be quenched, and have called the
whole Kingdom, to afflict themselves before God, that his great wrath might
be turned away from us. And as yet we have a sprinkling of Phinehazzes,
worthy Magistrates, who in their several Countries and Counties dare appear
in Gods cause against sin, and the boldest sinners. And we have also a good
sprinkling of faithful Ministers, who stand on the Watch tower, and blow the
Trumpet, and give the people warning. And for ever blessed be the Lord (which
is not the least pledge of our hopes, for the lengthning out of our
tranquillity) we have many ten thousand Saints in England, who not only
abstain from the abomination of the times, but mourn for them, and give God
no rest night nor day, until he bow the heavens and come down, and set up
for himself a glorious Throne amongst us: And unto these God has made many
promises of sparing the land for their sakes, and that their posterities after
them shall be blessed.

Yet feared that we are very near it.
But as I hope this, so the Lord will be a witness with me, that I fear
whether all these persons, and their graces do bear a just proportion to the
means and mercies, which God has given to England; or to that huge Inundation
of finne, wherewith England is overrun at this day. And here; had I a tongue
to speak, and you and I hearts and eyes to power out tears and sorrow, we
might make this place a Bochim a place of weepers. For, what because all these
sins are found amongst us.
kind of these sins do not overflow us? You will say at first, not Idolatry;
but I tell you, neither were the Germans carried away with Idolatry, when
their desolations broke in upon them; nor the Jews, before their last
destruction. The measure of our Iniquity may possibly be full, though this sin
come not in; but God knows, and you know that we have not only abundance of
Idolatrous Papists, who are proud, insolent and daring, but abundance of Popish
Idolatrous spirits, superstitiously addicted, willing to embrace any thing that
goes that way, only they will not have it go under the name of Popery. And
for the other sins of contempt of Gods holy Ordinances, his day, his
servants, and all his ways, oppression, cruelty, defrauding of brethren, the
sensual sins of uncleanness, especially that of drunkenness; Go but to
the places of greatest resorts, Market-Townes, populous Cities, and Fayres,
etc. and your hearts would tremble to think, how our Land is overspread with
these: Oh Beloved, the And that in great measure, which prevails
generality of the people of England, is extremely wicked, and which argues our
case to be most miserable, it seems to bear down, and to break over all our
Banks, multitudes sinning with a whores forehead, proclaiming their sins as
Sodom: And the vox populi is; that many of the Nobles, Magistrates, over
Magistrates.
Knights and Gentlemen, and persons of great Quality are arrand Traitors and
Rebels against God, taking part with wicked men, and wicked causes against the
Truth, Patrons of Alehouses and disorders, checking inferior Officers, who
discover any zeal for God against an ill cause: That in many of their families
(not to mention Religion) there is not so much as a face of Civility: Many
others of them, who seem to wish well, dare not draw out the sword which God
has given them, and some few others borne down in their places with the
torrent of wickedness. And as for our Ministers, how many sad complaints and
petitions has this Honorable Assembly received Ministers.
against many hundreds of them? multitudes of them rotten and unsound in their
doctrine, and so vicious and corrupt in their lives, that they fulfill that
which Archbishop Abbot said in his Lectures upon Jonah, professing that his
heart bled within him, to think of the miserable condition of the precious
souls of many people who had such Ministers, as Johannes Aventinuus speaks
of, who (if they were not in the Ministry) would not be thought fit
hog-heards to keep swine. Besides thousands of others, who (God knows) want
either will or skill to do the Lords work faithfully. And the residue who
have endeavored to give the people warnning, and to teach them the good way of
the Lord, have been a long time both down and opposed as the troublers of our
Israel. Sure I am, what ever our Ministers are, or do, the sins of the land
are too strong for them, and our people remain unsubdued to Jesus Christ.

And the very judgments.
Yea which is yet worse, the very judgments of God have wrought little upon
us, all the long and heavy pressures of the Neighbor Churches, his rods upon
our selves, terrible and wasting pestilences and famine, his blasting all our
enterprises, his scaring us with rumors of wars and blood prevail nothing;
we still grow worse and worse: Indeed if any sin grow out of fashion, (as
clothes do) then we leave it, otherwise we go on boldly and impudently,
let God threaten or do what he will. And all these evils are aggravated by
being committed and mercies of God.
against greater means and mercies, than any nation under Heaven enjoyes this
day besides our selves.

And which is yet sadder, (oh that I were mistake^ upon condition I were tied
to a recantation) our dealing this last year is more injurious against God,
than heretofore. The Lord has gathered such an Assembly of Noble Peers and
Commons, who have done such great things, that many of us began to hope our
Pilgrimage through this wilderness had been almost ended, and that England
would now turn to the Lord, and become a people zealous of And God begins to
appear against us.
good works: But verily so far as I can understand, the body of the Nation
makes little other use of all the mercies of this last year, but to abuse all
the liberties procured both for Church and Common and wherein.
wealth, to greater and bolder sinning against God: and now also, which yet
speaks more sadly, the Lord God begins to appear against us, not only in
permitting many unexpected blocks and rubbs, huge trees cast in the way of our
Worthies that they cannot march on in their strength, and so the much expected
Reformation sticks long in the birth; but God has dra wne out, and fourbished
the sword, and made it begin to drink blood in the Neighbor Nation, which
when it once begins to drink, seldom is put up again, till it be drunk
with blood: this God has suffered to be drawn out upon our dear brethren in
Ireland, upon our own flesh and blood, and that by a Nation, by whom (though
they may seem contemptible to some, as being barbarous, unarmed, etc. yet) we
may fear that God will plague us, because we have not labored to bring them
to the knowledge of God and our Lord Jesus Christ. Mean tekel. The Lord grant
that being put into the balance we be not found too light.

Application to our selves.
What shall we do then? First believe it, not that England shall be ruined; I
say not so: but believe that great is the wrath of God which is kindled against
us, that we stand upon ill terms before First, to believe that we are in
danger,
him; that though he may save us by his Prerogative, yet if he proceed with us
at common Law, according to his usual rule with other Nations, we are in
great danger to be utterly lost. I press this the rather, because we are a
secure nation, not willing to believe any thing that may disturb our ease. One
Zedekiah who will preach pleasing 1 King 22. Which we are loath to do.
things, shall be believed more then twenty Micaiahs: such as tell us we are
the most flourishing Church in the world, the strongest people by Sea and Land,
all other Nations court us, and have their own hands full, the Irish be only
discontented, weak men, and will soon be quieted: such I say shall be
believed more then an hundred Ieremies, who would put us in fear. It is
reported that Honorius the Emperor lying at his pleasure at Ravenna, when
news was brought him that Rome was taken and spoiled, he thought they had
meant a fighting Cock which he called Rome: so when we are told of danger, we
slight all that is spoken, and believe nothing in that kind: But the Lord grant
that this security of ours be not a Calm before an earthquake: When they say
peace, peace, then sudden destruction 1 These. 5. 3. Prove. 22. 3.
comes upon them. But let us believe and tremble: the Wise man never hides
himself till he sees the evil coming; and Ion. 3. 5.
the first step to Ninevehs peace was their believing that God was coming
against them.

But till we do it our danger increases:
But you will say that is the way to discourage men, and you do not well to
discourage the^ in whose hand and courage our welfare lies. Oh beloved, let me
not be so interpreted; were this objection fit in other cases? suppose one
should come and truly tell us the enemy were landed, the Sea were broke in, the
House or City, were on fire, were it fit to object, oh say not so, you will
discourage men? Discourage or not discourage, if this be not told, how shall
the enemy be driven back, the And we shall never use the rightmeans for sa^^^.
2 Kings 22.
breach of waters stopped, or the fire quenched? But neither need this
discourage, but rather furnish us with matter of humiliation and action. Josiah
sat down and wept, when he understood Gods wrath was kindled, and fell to
reformation. Ezra rent his garment and plucked off his hair, and fell to his
work, and so let us do: Let us believe that Gods displeasure is against us,
that we may fear before this Great God, and labor to get his wrath turned
quite away; and that is the second Use.

2 Let us all labor in the right way to turn this wrath of Use. To prevent it,
First by mourning for it. Number. 12 14 Amos 3. v 9 etc.
God from us, and that, First, by mourning under it; God looks we should be
ashamed when he spits in our face, and takes it wonderful unkindly, if we
tremble not when this Lion roares. Consider seriously of that place, Esaias 22.
There you shall see an enemy was coming against Jerusalem and God was much
displeased, because they took not the right way for their safety, and so ill
that he said that iniquity should never be purged from the^ till they dyed, and
yet see what they did, they scoured up their armor, they gathered the waters,
that the enemy might have no benefit by them, they repaired the breaches in the
walls, made a deep ditch for greater fortification: what hurt was there in all
this? Oh but they begun at the wrong end: the Lord called the^ to weeping and
mourning, and to baldnes, and to girding with sackcloth, to tremble before him
because of his wrath, and this they regarded not, and therefore God would never
pardon it. Till therefore we mourn because of Gods displeasure, all other means
of welfare will fail of that comfortable effect which we desire. I know the
world makes a scorn of this, you are one of the mourners, but let our souls be
numbered among those mourners; God will restore comfort to these mourners: and
no man knows the power which these poor mourners have to turn away Gods
wrath.

By p(...)onall (...)formation.
Secondly, and as we must mourn for this fullness of our sins, so every one
must help to empty the vessel, as we have helped to fill it: the fuller our
vessel is with sin, the nearer our ruin is, and if we could knock out the
bottom of the vessel, or by any means empty it, Gods wrath would pass away
with our sins: oh help to empty it, your Atheism, your profaneness, your
opposing of good men, and good causes, your adulteries, lies, etc. get them out
by all means; all Gods threatenings speak to us, as the waves of the Sea seemed
to speak to the Mariners in the first of Jonah. Jonah had told them that the
tempest came for him, and till he was cast over the sea would never be quiet,
yet they rowed hard to carry Jonah to land, but the waves seemed to tell them,
cast Jonah over board, or we will fetch you overboard. Out therefore with your
lusts, God has no other quarrel against us, he does not afflict us willingly,
he says to us as Ioab said to the wise woman of Abel, 2. Sam, 20. 20.
far be it from me to swallow up or destroy a City in Israel deliver only
Sheba the Son of Bichri, or throw his head over the wall, and I am gone. Do
thou so, find out all thy beloved sins, say to thy darling lust, as Iunius
Brutus said to his son, thou villain, shall I nourish thee to destroy the
Commonwealth? and stabs him: shall I walk in these ways, to be the ruin of
the Church and Commonwealth? the Lord rather strike me dead with a
Thunderbolt. Let us therefore every one, begin to sweep before our own door,
and we know not how soon the whole street may be made clean.

What the Parliament should do for our safety.
Thirdly and lastly (right Honorable and Beloved) you are to be our
Physicians, and repairers of our breaches; the horns of Gods wrath begin to
push at us, you are the Carpenters that must cut off these horns: I therefore
make this humble fuit to you, that (as you have besought his Matie to call a
day of Fasting and Prayer throughout England, and we hope we shall have many
more, till the fierce wrath of God be turned away) so in all your thoughts to
do England, Scotland and Ireland good, you would set down this, that the
turning away of Godswrath is of greatest consequence: if you let God go on to
be angry, do what you can we shall lose all at home and abroad. Thus did Josiah,
when once he understood out of the Following Iosiahs example.
Book of God, that the Lords wrath was kindled, he presently sends to Hulda the
Prophetess, to enquire what was to be done that they might quench it,
esteeming all other business unseasonable and fruitless, while that fire was
burning. And here I shall only in a few words commend to you the example and
practice of this brave King, whom this Text so magnifies. 1. He mourns, and
calls all the people to mourn with 1. In mourning, because of Gods wrath. 2 Kin.
2^. 11, etc. 2 Rooting out idolatry, etc. 3 Inexecution of Gods vengeance upon
his enemies.
him: and that through Gods mercy you have done. 2. He goes out in that way,
whereof you heard more in the forenoon, and breaking down all the Images and
relics of Idolatry: the Lord set it close to your hearts, that you may leave
nothing which is contrary to Gods pure worship. 3. He executed the justice and
vengeance of God upon the Instruments of the kingdoms ruin, the idolatrous
Priests, digging the very bones of some of them out of their graves: the same
Lord direct you, that in your great wisdoms you may be as the Angels of God,
to discern what is to be done with them who have been the troublers of our
peace, and the greatest kindlers of Gods wrath against us: spare whom ye may
spare with Gods good will; but remember, it is foolish pity that destroys a
City let not the men escape, whom God appoints out to punishment. 4. He
resolves to reform Religion, and the worship God, and to set it up, and
maintain it according to the word: and 1 Kin. 20. 42 4. Insetting up and
maintaining Gods true Religion and Worship. 2 Kin 23. 1, 2, etc.
to that end he calls together the Priests, and Prophets, the Elders of Judah
and Jerusalem, and with them enters into a covenant before the Lord, to walk
after the Lord, and to keep his commandments, etc. O that the Lord would put it
into the heart of you all to do the same; you know what you have bin often
petitioned for, the God of all wisdom direct you in due time to proceed in this
cause, and if in your wisdoms you shall find it fitting that a grave Synod of
Divines should be called, to inform your consciences what is to be done, I
beseech you follow the direction of Gods word in it. Fifthly, And then for the
manner. He did all according to Gods law, he consulted not with flesh and
blood, enquired not into terms o^ Exactly, according to the Word.
policy, how far the state would bear it, or how far the people would concur
without grumbling: but did according to (...) which God had appointed in his
word. And lastly, he did it with zeal and fervency, he laid not out his
strength in his own cause, and then use diversions and diminutions in Gods
cause but there was his strength laid out, where he knew Gods jealousy lay.
The Lord make you such Iosiahs, such zealous men what Anakims or Giants would
you prove; you might (with Briareus the Giant with 100 hands, of whom the Poets
feign And that with all their strength.
take thunderbolts out of the hand of God, and so save you selves, your
families, and the Nation. Go on, ye Worthies of t(...) Lord, and thus deliver
us. If there be any healing, any deliverance, you shall be our Saviors; if
there be none, you may Encouragement thereunto. Obad. 21. Esaias 58. 8.
with Josiah get the judgment respited for your life time: le(...) the worst
come, the glory of the Lord shall not only be yo(...) reward, but your
rereward, your safety: you shall deliver yo(...) souls, and your children
after you shall be blessed. Do th(...) and the Lord God be with you.

FINIS.

