AN EXPEDIENT TO PRESERVE PEACE AND AMITY, AMONG DISSENTING BRETHREN.

By a Brother in CHRIST.

LONDON, Printed for H. R. and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the
three Pigeons in Paul's Churchyard, 1647.

AN EXPEDIENT. TO PRESERVE PEACE and Amity, among dissenting BRETHREN.
SEeing it has pleased Almighty GOD, (...)* at this time to put a stop to the
effusion of Blood, so prodigally powered out in our native Country, and thereby
given a hope of speedily stating the whole Kingdom, in a firm and durable
Peace: It does not a little grieve my soul, that this happiness should be
clouded or retarded, under the pretense of Religion, which is the best cimenter
of Peace. But herein I take comfort, that God has his own work, no less in
these controversies, then before he had in the wars, and will reap glory out
of both. We must neither start nor stagger, when we see Schisms and Heresies
rise, in the visible Church They are the Tares, which the envious man sows,
among Gods Wheat; and Christ has forewarned us, and so has his Apostles,
that through the rage of Satan, and corruption of men, there must of necessity
in all times and ages arise scandals, dissentions, and Heresies in the Church;
for the exercise of the godly, that their faith might be proved and manifested
to the world, by holding their ground, and cleaving to the truth. Yea, the very
Gospel of Christ, which in it self, is a Gospel of peace, by the blood of
the Son, reconciling of us, to the Father. Meets with such Malignancy and
opposition in the world, that to the true professors of it, it becomes, a
Gospel of war and hatred, and persecution. This is the condition of the
faithful, to be always in outward troubles, wherein were they not supported
with inward peace, they were of all men, most miserable. Upon this ground
Martin Luther, that undanted champion of the truth, being taxed by the Emperor
in a great Council, that he was the man, who by his Doctrine had disturbed the
long continued Peace in Germany: Answered, that what others thought he could
not tell, but it rejoiced his heart, to see that there was divisions, about the
word of God; for Christ came not to bring peace but the Sword. By all this it
appears, that as every true believer must expect tribulation in this world,
so he shall have peace with God, and ought to have peace and communion one
with another; Christ when he left his Disciples, left them Peace for a Legacy,
and a commandment, to love one another; we are also frequently exhorted, to
follow after Peace; to be of one mind, and preserve the unity of the spirit,
in the bond of Peace. How comes it then about that we see so many minds, among
brethren, who will all pass for the Disciples of Christ; and that from the
diversity of minds, we see, so many rents and separations* whereby the bond of
Peace is broken, and the spirits of men, disunited! Certainly when it comes
so far, it can proceed from no other root then from our lusts, which war in our
earthly members. Otherwise difference of judgment, among true believers, in
the sincere search of truth, may well stand with unity of affections, without
breach of Peace. For it is manifest enough, that the true believers over the
whole world, are not of one mind, in all things that concern Religion, and the
worship of God. Witness the several forms of outward worship, among all
Nations, no less various then their fashions. And this may also happen, among
the faithful, as well in the same, as in several Nations; nay if we consider
it home, we shall find, the like difference in our selves, that we need not
wonder at it, in others; for what Christian is there, who in pursuit and study
for truth, observes not in himself, degrees, and diversities of judgment;
every day teaches knowledge this life being a time of growth, not of
perfection; nevertheless, no man hates himself, because he formerly knew not
so much, as now he does, but rather praises God, for having revealed to him, a
greater measure of knowledge by this rule, we should deal with others, as we
do with our selves, for that is the rule of Charity. We are all Gods building,
and albeit, they may chance to differ among themselves. They are not for that
to make a breach in the building; but in Love and Peace, suffer their opinions,
to be tried, by the word of God, making that the decider, not the breeder of
controversies.

This being premised, I will proceed to the subject, lying before me, and take
my beginning, from the beginning it self.

Almighty God doing all his own works in order, was pleased to make Man, a
sociable creature; first in himself, associating an earthly and heavenly
nature, that one might guide and govern the other; and himself receive glory
from both. Then by ingrafting in that compounded nature, rules of spiritual
and humane duty, whereby he might be fitted for a well-being, in the society of
others.

For as the conjunction of flesh and spirit, though parts far differing in
nature, make one man; so the conjunction of many men, though of several ages,
complections, humors, passions, callings and degrees, make up a commonwealth,
for the good of all, in their temporal well-being. Even so likewise, the
conjunction of many spirits and minds of men, though dissenting in opinions,
ways and strength of judgment, yet aiming at the same end, by faith in
Christ, to attain salvation. Makes a common union or a Church, for the good of
all, in their eternal wel-being. Flesh alone, nor spirit alone, cannot make a
man, but the union of both, no more can a Commonwealth by it self, nor a
Church by it self, make men temporally and eternally happy, but the unity and
harmony of both. They are so conjoined and intwined together, that as the soul
is in the body, so is the Church in the Commonwealth: single they cannot
subsist. For there never was nor can there be, any multitude of men, that
bodied themselves, into a Commonwealth, who agreed not in some kind of
Religion; neither can any multitude of men body themselves, into a Church, but
they must be subject to some kind of government. These two cannot be separated,
without the ruin of both. Separation destroying Society, wherein consists
the happiness of man; for in heaven, we cannot be happy alone, nor on earth
without society. These principles are written by the God of order, in the
tables of humane nature, which are commonly called, the light or the Law of
nature. But sin and time having so fullyed that Character, that it was scarce
legible by posterity. God was pleased to revive it again, to his peculiar
people; writing it, with his own finger, in Tables of stone, to authorize and
moralize it, to all generations, for their good, therein giving power to the
Magistrate to take care, for the keeping and preserving, of both Tables;
placing our duty to him, between our duty to God, and toward our neighbor,
that he might look, for the good of man both ways. Our duty to God, is
contained in fewer precepts, but more words; it seeming necessary, that God
should explain himself, in his own cause, leaving no power to any man, to
add or diminish, or interpret his Laws, but by his own word; which made
Moses* though he were a Lawgiver in Israel, yet he would not judge, the
gatherer of sticks upon the Sabbath day, without consultation with the Lord.
Before the written Law, every father of a family was both Priest and
Magistrate, to look to both; and the greater the family or society was so much
higher was the Magistrate, and reverenced with more honor, as being the common
parent, caring for the whole Country. This Law therefore of Nature, being the
very dictate, of God himself, may not improperly be termed a divine Law. There
were also other Laws, which God prescribed by his servant Moses, to the people
of Jsrael, politic and Judicial Laws, for preserving humane society, and
governing the Commonwealth; and Ceremonial Laws, for the outward manner and
form of his public worship; for performance whereof, he ordained diverse
Sacrifices and Sacrificers; allotting maintenance for them both*

But when the time fore-appointed came, that God would restore man, to that
happiness, he had deservedly lost, by the sin of the first Adam; he sent his
only Son Jesus Christ the second Adam, in the flesh; who after he had
manifested his divine power to the world, by his Doctrine and miracles, did by
his last words on the Cross, and by the first visible testimony of the power
of his death finish and consummate the Law, and rent from the top to the
bottom, the veil of separation; by both declaring, the necessity of types,
and ceremonies, places and times of worship differences of people, Sacrifices
and Sacrificers, fixed and impropriated maintenance; for any of them, was no
longer to be continued strictly in the letter, although a moral equity
shadowed by them was to be perpetual. Neither did our Savior in the
constitution of his Evangelicall Church, revive any of them, nor ordain any set
form of worship, rule for government, or a certained and special maintenance
for his Ministers; but only repaired and restored man, to that way and manner
of worship, which Adam had in his innocence, prescribing him, to serve God the
Father of spirits, in spirit and in truth, without otherwise confining him to
time, place, gesture, posture, or other circumstances, which of their own
nature* are not permanently confineable. In like sort, the blessed Apostles,
whom Christ sent into the world, to publish the glad tidings of Salvation, laid
no other foundation, as necessary thereunto, then Jesus Christ, and what he had
laid himself, for they were only master builders, on that corner stone Christ
Jesus. What they declared to any people converted to the Gospel concerning any
rule of order, about the outward man, or his Christian behavior, in public
service; it was only a temporary advise, suitable to the times, Countries, and
occasions, wherein they lived; not universally binding to all Nations, and
generations to come. In their days, there was neither Christian State, nor
Christian Magistrate, nor any public power, to countenance or appoint the
outward government of the Church; in default whereof, it was necessary for
them, to make such orders and constitutions as might serve* for those present
times; nevertheless, as Christ himself, took upon him, no civil authority,
so, gave he none; to his Apostles, nor they, to the Ministers succeeding. For
when Christ was required, to divide an inheritance, betwixt two brothers, he
asked with indignation, who had made him a Judge or divider over them; and when
the case of the Incestuous person, fell out at Corinth, St. Paul inflicted no
temporal punishment upon him, only advised the brethren, that whiles he stood
obstinate against all reproof, to shun his company, and cast him out of their
communion, that the shame thereof, making him sensible of his sin, it might
beget repentance; and make him return, to the fellowship of true believers. I
verily think, that if all the directions, which the Apostles have left
recorded in Scripture, were laid in one view together; no man, nor multitudes
of men, how learned soever could collect, or frame out of them all, an exact
body of Church government, in all the parts and Circumstances thereof, to be
imposed as a divine* binding, infallible rule, upon all Christian Churches and
Kingdoms, in the world. Indeed where we meet, with any Councels or
constitutions of the blessed Apostles, who were holy men, endued with more
immediate power, from Christ, with a larger measure of the spirit of truth, and
consequently with a greater certainty of judgment, then any of their
Ministerial successors; we may rely upon them, and make them our patterns;
only remembering the distinction of times, that the Apostolical Church, was in
infancy, and under persecution, and the English, in full growth and dominion;
in so much, that in the framing of Ecclesiastical orders, an eye and regard
must ever be had, to the civil Government, which always aymeth at the
public good, both of Church and State, wherein the Church is lodged. The
Ministers doubtless, have power by their office, to advise and instruct,
exhort and rebuke out of the word, in a brotherly way, but it is as doubtless,
that the power is in the Christian Magistrate, upon hearing their advice, to
constitute and establish, under the natural notion of order, such decrees, as
upon due debate, and deliberation, they shall find most wholesome and agreeable
to the present State. This is also to be observed, that no man ought to take
unto himself, the office and honor, to Minister for his brethren, in things
pertaining unto God, unless he be lawfully called thereunto* Christ himself,
was sent by the Father, and anointed by the spirit, to his heavenly office; by
Christ, the holy Apostles were sent into the world, from whom they had their
immediate Commission, and the blessed Apostles following their pattern, did not
only send and appoint Pastors over all Churches in their present times; but
also lest rules and directions, for ordaining all others, for the time to come,
till the worlds end. I make no question, but God does in our days, call and
stir up many to this holy office* by particular motions of his Spirit; yet
that exempteth not the persons so called, from manifesting and approving their
vocation, according to the rules left in Scripture: where we are commanded, to
try the spirits of men, whither they be of God; and the Spirits of the
Prophets, peculiarly such as are called to the Ministry, are subject to the
Prophets, as fitting to be tried and examined by them, who by long experience;
and without reproach, have conversed in the Church, and dispensed the mysteries
of Salvation.

From this brief and plain deduction, I shall lay down some few Positions, as
ground-lines of the discourse ensuing.

1. That God has by his Son, taken away all ties of necessity, for observing
any part or parcel of the Ceremonial Law. 2. That God by Christ, has
restored men to that spiritual worship, which Adam had in time of his
Innocence. 3. That Christ has not appointed, any set or absolute form of
Government in his Church, binding to all times and Nations. 4. That whatsoever
the Apostles wrote concerning outward Government, it was not* in nature of an
universal Law, but only by way of order and advice, answerable to these
Primitive times and occasions. 5. That the Ministers of the Church, as they are
Ministers, have no temporal Power, Judicature, or maintenance positively and
particularly allotted them, by Christ or his Apostles, but only in the general,
that it be sufficient and plentiful, that thereby they may be examples unto
others of hospitality and good works, learning the manner and special
determination, to the Christian Magistrate and the Laws of the Land. 6. That
the Christian Magistrate has the highest power, of ordering and governing the
Church of God, which is a visible company, not only of Ministers and Officers,
but of all Believers; and is entrusted to him, forasmuch, as the Church is in
the Commonwealth, and not the Commonwealth in the Church. 7. Whosoever has a
Mission, to undertake the Ministry, ought first to find himself inwardly
called, then undergo a lawful Trial, and receive approbation, with the
prayers and benediction of the Presbitery.
Now concerning this great controversy in our Commonwealth, about the
government of the Church. I shall from these Principles, according to the small
ability God has given me, unbyassed, by any opinion or affection, to any kind
of Government, nor yet for any covetous, nor ambitious desire or design in my
self, but merely aiming at the good of Gods Church and of my Country; set down,
how I conceive, our supreme Magistrate; may establish such a Church government,
as might preserve Amity among Brethren, yet not oppugn any rules Christ has
left behind him.

The two houses of Parliament, have already, upon ripe deliberation, passed an
Ordinance for a Presbyteriall government, with all the limitations thereof:
Which government I am verily persuaded; if it be duly executed* will prove the
best Moderator, betwixt dissenting Brethren, For it is such a government, as
takes away the ill and exorbitance of any other, reserving that which is good
in them, and so much the better it ought to be liked; because it disliketh
those parties that oppose it; for surely he is esteemed the best and most
unpartiall Moderator, who in reconciling parties in such indifferences*
displeases them all; yet if this government, may not have so much as an
Vmpires power, to constrain obedience; or else puts not, that power in
practice; then it will be vilified, and of no esteem. Therefore that it may not
prove a dead useless letter, I do first conceive, that it should be
established with Penalties, and put in present execution, and made positive;
without allowing a limited time unto it for approbation. For without that, it
may be altered in whole or in part, at the Judgment of the Makers* but with
that, it would leave every man, doubtful and indifferent* which will lessen or
take away, the true value, and operation of it.

In the next place, I conceive, as an especial wheel* of this motion, and a
strong fortification of the Government, that care be taken to keep and
encourage the Ministers of the word, in a perpetual and constant practice, of
their Function; and to remove all occasions, which might any way divert them,
from their holy calling.

Howsoever it comes about, I know not, but certain it is, that ^^thence, the
Church was poisoned, with a temporal revenue and carnal estimation, given to
Ministers, for their masters sake* Pride and covetousness, have predominated
amongst them; who have bin, and ever will be; the roots of much evil, and
combustions in those States and Churches, where they have had any power* so
far as forgetting their calling, and the pattern of Christ* they have ever
bin observed* for the maintenance of their secular pomp and greatness* to be
the chief hinderers of Reformation to the purity and humility of the Gospel;
knowing it must first begin at themselves. Therefore for the rooting out and
preventing ambition among them, it might be good to take away those titles of
separation and division, which have had their original from (...). As to be
called Clergy, as if they were holy and the people profane; or Divines, as if
they were all heavenly, and (...) formed of the same earth, with the people;
certain^y they can have (...) higher title, then to be called Ministers of the
Gospel: bringing from God to man, the glad tyding; of reconciliation and
(...)* For place and dignities, they are either Official, which are (...)
taken away; or Personal, which should be left, to the (...) discretion of
every man; for if in humility, they strive (...) behind all men in place, and
before them in goodness, the people will be ready to give, even their eyes, in
testimony of their love and estimation of them. I shall forbear in this place
to set down particularly, how Covetuousnesse may be also removed from the
Ministry; because the remedy thereof, as of many other things conducing to the
good of the Church; how Religion may be kept and perpetuated in truth and
purity; freed from the danger of relapsing to Popery; how the Ministers may be
for ever provided with a plentiful maintenance over all the Kingdom, how
their Widows and Orphans, (if there be need) may be relieved, are already
plainly and largely laid down, in another Treatise, by a well-wisher, to the
Peace of our Sion; which wayteth only for a fit occasion to be produced.
Wherein no new charge is laid upon the people; but only part of the pious
donations of our Ancestors to the Church, and good uses, are rectifyed and
reduced.

This being done, it may then seem necessary, so to hedge and defend this
Government, held forth by Parliament; that it may neither receive damage* from
Enemies without, not be uncharitably torn and shattered* by Schisms and
opinions within.

It has pleased God so miraculously to bless this Kingdom; that we have
thrown off the yoke of Rome, which neither we nor our Fathers could bear. The
Pope, and the Bishops, the head, and the tail, are sent back from whence they
came. The gap which they had made, is by Gods goodness, and care of this
Parliament, filled up, with a moderate Presbyteriall government, sufficiently
armed to keep out the wild Boar, that destroyed our Vineyard, and that common
implacable enemy from returning. But there are some little Foxes yet among us,
that earth in our ground, and annoy our Vineyard, and by craft or rudeness,
weakness or wilfulness, bring scandals upon our holy profession. That
therefore; our Church may enjoy her peace, and be only Militant against sin
and Satan. The Magistracy must take care, to preserve it from disturbance. As
the present conjuncture of our Church stands; they who seem most to distaste
or oppose this kind of government, are known amongst us, by the name of
dissenting Brethren; which are of two sorts. Rigid Presbyterians, Independants.
I know not, how nor by whom these names, were invented, but I make use of them,
as current terms, by which they are distinguished. Though indeed* in one
seeming regard, disclaiming as some say the power of the Magistrate, they are
both Independants, in effect; for so they both would hang on their own hinges*
nor have any other judge of their Religious actions, but themselves; a thing
wholly inconsistent with our civil Governmen. t Of the rigid Presbyterians* we
may account, as of younger brethren, men and minds ^eerer a kin to ours: yet
rather aiming to invest themselves, with Will and Power* then, in humility
submit to the Ordinances of the Magistrate, who is the Ordinance of God. Yea,
they seem to be so greedy of this absolute power* over the actions and
Consciences of men, that rather then want it, they will derive their right from
Jesus Christ* making it Iure divino to be in themselves. This was also the
Bishops claim, and these brethren seem to set up, Episcopacy disguised; for
they drive at the same ends, shunning to give an account of their actions to
the supreme Magistrate, and subjecting all men, to a separated government of
their own erection; but because I have already shown, that no such divine
sanction, ratifyed by Christ or his Apostles, can be found, in the records of
holy Scripture; and I shall hereafter prove more at large, that this pretense,
directly crosses, and supplanteth the Ordinance and obedience of the eivill
Magistrate, which are indeed Jure divino. I shall desire these our brethren, at
their leisure, to let us know, whither Christ did ever appoint any thing to be
universally received jure divino, which was not necessary to salvation; and
whither lawful obedience to the Magistrate in outward government of the
Church, neither adding nor diminishing from the precepts of Christ, necessary
to salvation; be an impediment thereunto, or prejudice to any man's Conscience.
In the mean time, be they entreated, in the fear of God, and by the love of
brethren* to lay aside these ungrounded opinions, and prefer the Peace and
Unity of the Church, before any needless disputes, which may breed a rupture
in the Commonwealth. The other sort called Independants, go a degree further,
most of them refusing to mingle with us, in the Ordinances of Gods worship* and
Communion of Saints, and when they are desired to show their reasons, their
strongest plea is, that so long, as they are not convinced in their judgment,
they ought not, to be constrained in their Consciences, nor forced, to assent
to that, which they disapprove; And this indeed is no unbrotherly plea, but
some say they slay not there, requiring further a liberty of Conscience, not
only to be subject, or not subject, to the said Government, but to have also a
toleration, to set up another government against it, under the same authority,
that disallowes it, telling us that we ought not, to bruise the broken reed,
nor quench the smoking Flax, nor offend our weak brethren, for whom Christ
dyed.

Whether this be (as some say) only a popular flag* to call in multitudes, to
the Standard of liberty or not, I shall bestow a little time, to search and
sift, this point to the Bran: and for the more orderly clearing thereof, I will
lay down, as I have formerly done, some few assertions which I presume, will
not be denied, on either side; the opening whereof, will discover the truth,
we seek for, and make the objections, that obscure it, vanish.

1. That the nature of Conscience is so free in it self, that it cannot be
constrained, by any Power of man. 2. That there is no Rule, to bind the
Conscience, but only the infallible word of God. 3. That the Christian
Magistrate judging and decreeing by that Rule, ought to be obeyed, for
Conscience sake.
FOr the first point, it will not be amiss to look into the nature of
Liberty, and then of Conscience, from whence will appear the
unconstrainednesse thereof. Liberty in general is a faculty of the Will,
whereby it is enabled to accept or refuse any medium or object represented to
it as conducible to its end* This Liberty is taken diverse ways; there is a
Natural, a Civil and a Supernatural or Divine. Natural Liberty wherein we
are borne, is a faculty of willing and nilling, flying or following* choosing or
refusing, doing or not doing any thing in order to the conservation of a
natural State. The subject thereof is properly the Will* and the objects good
or evil in order to preservation. Civil liberty is a freedom which we
exercise under the constitutions of some Political society. The Natural
liberty of every particular man, would be the greatest servitude of all. Hence
happily we have Leges a ligando, which do not permit us the roving liberty of
Nature, to choose or refuse do or not do what naturally we list. The Will
cannot be constrained in the act of willing (for it were a contradiction to
will unwillingly) but by a Civil power it may be restrained from the effect
in some penalty prescribed. It Is to be observed, that this Civil liberty in
some respects, is both larger and narrower then the Natural: It is larger,
because in a Civil constitution the preservation of all men is better
cautioned and cared for* And it is narrower, because many things which we
might all naturally do, are restrained by the laws of Society.

Here is therefore a Liberty, but still under some power coercive, or rather
corrective of Natural liberty: So that we may well say, when a man is
released out of Prison, he is set at liberty, though he be still under the
Civil tie of the Law; and when he has paid his debts, that he is freed of
his bonds, yet so as always to be bound with those of civil Society: And
because we are exempted from the will and tyranny of the Prince, we are called
Freemen, having the liberty and protection of our Laws, though otherwise,
they bind us to obedience: In this place all kind of Dispensations, Pardons,
releasments, absolutions, exemptions and the like; are said to give us a Civil
liberty, by taking of some restraint. Supernatural liberty, is the restitution
from Natural servitude; for pure nature, wherein Man was created, had a
perfect Liberty; but nature corrupted by sin, fell into slavery; from wh^nce,
it can only be restored by Grace.

Conscience, is a faculty of the Soul, which fitteth in the throne, and has a
superintendency, and dominion over the whole man; as it were a Lieutenant
deputy, under God. Nothing escapes ^^e Court of Conscience: hither are brought
the errors of the Understanding, the depravations of the Will, the tumults of
the Affections, the distempers of the Mind, the disorders of the Body, to
receive their doom, to be approved or disapproved, condemned or acquitted. She
is furnished with all things, concurring to judgment; She has right to
accuse, credit to witness, power to judge; in her, these things are nor
incompatible. When she accuses, you cannot implead her, for her bill is good
in law. When she witnesses, you cannot disprove her, for she was present at
the fact; when she judges, you cannot appeal from her, for there is no higher
power on earth. Therefore let us take the Conscience of man, either in his
estate corrupted, or regenerated; we see all humain Power is below, and
consequently can have no power to constrain her. As the sight, cannot be
forced, to discern that cloth black, which is white; nor the taste, to judge
honey, bitter, which is sweet; no more can the Conscience be any way compelled,
to allow that which she condemns, or condemn that which she allows. There
be two engines, commonly made use of, to b^tter the Consciences of men;
Sophistication, and Persecution, first to ensnare men, with deceitful shows,
and arguments; then if that will not serve, to fright and terrify men, with
violence and torments; these two, are exquisitely planted, and practiced* in
the kingdom of Antichrist, by that old Engineere of all mischief, the Devil.
Where the Jesuits and other Emissaries, docompasse Sea and Land, and are sent
abroad, like Frogs and Locusts, to seduce and captivate poor Proselites,
making them seven times more, the children of the Devil; And the Inquisition,
that Court of darkness, and antichamber of Hell* is set up, as a chief pillar
of Popedom, to torture men's bodies, and rack their Consciences, and drive men
to death and desperation. Yet all this, can go no farther, then to force and
afflict, and kill the body, but the Conscience still triumphs, she is free;
though the hands be bound* and the feet be fettered; this was well known, by
that constant Martyr who stood out, the brunt of both. -- Disputare non possum
mori possum.

Dispute I cannot, but I can Dye; and so refute both your Arguments, and your
torments. Death is the uttermost, that the power and malice of Man can do; and
no man, but he may if he will, as well dye with a free Conscience, as live in
it. But some man may say; have not many for fear of death or disgrace,
renownced the Truth, against their Conscience? Many have indeed, but in doing
thereof, they have rather defiled their Conscience, then forced it, for still
it is their own voluntary act, judging by a false, erroneous light, that it is
better for them, to forsake Christ, then to lose their estates, honors, or
their lives* and that it is their own act; appears, by the punishment, which
the justice of God, will lay upon them, for their own sin; and not for the sin
of others, who went about to constrain them.

2. Nevertheless, the Conscience sits like a Queen, i^ the soul of man,
commanding over all, and uncontrouled by any humane power. Yet she vaileth and
submits to the higher Powers, of God and his word, by which she stands
bound, to give full obedience, under the fearful penalties, of Rebellion and
sin. The reason is, because the word of God is infallible, but the word of man,
very deceitful; any thing propounded without the word of God, unless it be
demonstrative in it self, is subject to Error, though it be never so well
meant. But when the Conscience, finds in the word, a bottom, to fix, and to
stand upon, she judges it, needless any longer, to halt or hold off; to
doubt, or dispute, but shuts her eyes, and believes. The Conscience of her
self, has in every man, a natural light, though it be but dim and clouded,
this was never quite extinguished, by the fall. By which diverse Peoples and
Nations, who never heard of Jesus Christ, nor had any glimpse of the light of
his word, have bin ble to discern, not only the truth of natural things, but
also groped after supernatural; acknowledging a GOD by his works, though not
knowing, how to worship him by his Word; and by the improvement of this light,
they have attained, to many excellent moral Precepts, for the planting of
virtue, in the hearts of men, and to admirable Laws and Constitutions, for the
government of them, in Societies and Statutes. Whereof many of them in both
kinds, have been ratifyed and approved by the light of the Word revealed. Which
plainly declares unto us, that the natural light of Conscience, is a beam,
and remainder, of that divine light, which was at first infused into our
Natures, afterward obscured, by disobedience; and again restored by
Regeneration, in the souls of all true believers. All light we know,
transmitteth, and disputes it self. Ad modum recipientis, to the capacity of
the receiver. It leaves stone Walls in darkness, but shadeth it self, through
glasse-windowes.

Now, transparent bodies, are like illuminated souls, where Jesus Christ, the
light of the World enters, there is light indeed; there the Consciences of
men, are so already enlightened, that they can judge of all things, and are
judged of nothing, forasmuch, as they swerve not from the touchstone of
judgment, the word of GOD. Now if any shall say, that the word of GOD is
called a Law of liberty, rather freeing, then binding us up. I answer; that it
is, truly so called, because it freeth us, from the bondage of Sin, the
servitude of Lust, and captivity of Satan; But by the same reason, that it
releaseth us, from sin, it binds us to obedience, and to the service of
GOD, which is perfect freedom. There is a friendly way in the conversation of
men; to bind those, who keep a loose governance, of themselves, from hurtful
things; some from Wine, some from fruit, some from unwholesome food, to which
they have an irregular appetite, Such is the singular love of GOD toward us,
to tie up, by the Law of his Word, our unruly and inordinate Appetites, from
the pursuit of sinful and unlawful things, which would prove our poison, and
perdition, in which regard we have great cause, to rejoice in these bonds;
which are not irons of imprisonment, but bonds of perfection; retaining and
with holding us, from relapsing into sin, and leading of us, into the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God, in these bones there is no constraint, for God
himself who made us, by his word, and can dissolve us, at his pleasure, will
not use his power to constrain us; he delights not in a forced worship, but
only obliges us to a willing obedience, by setting of us free.

3. The conscience therefore, unconstrained in it self, yet tied up by the word
stands bound, to obey these laws and decrees of the Magistrate, which are
made by the light and the rule thereof, for the voice of the Magistrate
speaking according to Gods word is like the voice of God among men, where God
has spoken clearly and expressly to the spirit and conscience of man there need
no other laws, but his own, and so he has done, in all matters, that
concern the substance of his own worship, or our salvation, but in such
things, which he has not punctually determined, only left them wrapped up in
general precepts; it behooves us to learn from his deputies upon earth asking
council of the Lord what his mind and pleasure is, and such for the most part,
are the outward rites, forms, and circumstances of his Evangelicall worship,
these things fall within the compass of order and decency, which are rather
civil notions then devine, yet as Armies in the field, easily fall into a
rout, not well arrayed, so assemblies in the Church, and Churches in the
Commonwealth prove but rude, and tumultuous meetings, if they be not decently
ordered, a lute or violl is seen played upon; but there is much ado, to tune
many instruments, into one consort; private Christians may dispose of
themselves, in their own houses, but when they meet, in a public body, they
must be tuned by the public Magistrate; the world would never have stood,
without societies, nor can societies hold without government, neither can there
be any government where some rule not, and some obey, all the question is, to
set due limits and bounds to the civil government; wherein I conceive, that
there is the self, the same measure, betwixt the Magistrate and the
conscience, for as the word of God binds the conscience to obey, so it
prescribes, the Magistrate to govern; otherwise if, as the high Priest forbad
the Apostles, to teach in the name of Jesus; so the Magistrate shall impose any
thing upon the people, contrary to divine law, or the word revealed, the case
is plain, that we ought to obey God rather then men.

These rubbs thus remooved in our way, I shall proceed, to the solving of such
objections, as are commonly made by those brethren, that challenge a liberty
and exemption from this lawful obedience.

1. First, they build upon our own ground; alleging, that since the nature of
conscience, is so free and voluntary in it self, it must needs be, a manifest
violation of her freedom to constrain her, by laws, or penalties, or
impositions of men. To which I answer, that we must remember to put a
difference, betwixt the constraint, and the restraint of men's consciences, no
law nor power of man, can constrain the conscience, in her voluntary act; to
go against her own light, or approve that which she condemns, or say to her
self, conscience, I lie, no, she may and ought, rather to suffer, then undergo
such a constraint* but the laws of man, may so far, restrain their liberty,
that she produce not the act, of her private sense and freedom, into hurtful
effects, such as may endanger and disturb our christian and public peace* it
has bin always observed that it is as natural and appetitions for error, to
beget error, and opinion, to spread opinion; as for one kind, to generate and
multiply the same, insomuch* when an erroneous conscience, will not be limited
nor contained within it self, it may and ought to be restrained and inhibited
from infecting others, and dispersing the contagion.

2. Secondly, it may be again objected, that although it be granted, nothing
can bind the conscience, but the pure word of God, yet forasmuch, as no word of
Scrirture is produced, expressly confirming this from of polity and Presbyterian
government, which we are commanded to obey; it will plainly follow, that the
consciences of men, are therein left unto their liberty.

To give a full answer hereunto, it would be necessary to take the frame of
this government in pieces* as the Levites did the Tabernacle, when they removed
their Tents, and then bring it piece by piece, to the light of Gods word, to
see what is thereby confirmed, and what unfirmed; But because this is already
done by diverse worthy brethren, of the holy calling, I shall forbear to
insert, their volumes, into these few sheets, and shall only say, that this
kind of government, is either expressly, or by good consequence included, and
allowed by the Scripture, as not repugnant to it in any thing: Of the
Presbytery it self, where the government is inherent, I hear no question
made, but that it is expressly mentioned in the Scripture, the main doubt and
difference is, whither it be Independent, in particular Congregations,
subordinate to Synods and Assemblies, as the urgencies and occasions of the
Church may require; Those Brethren, that maintain Independency of single
Congregations stand upon a ground, feeble and unfirm, saying that in the
Apostles time, there were no other Churches, but only congregationall, in
which alone, all government was confined. This assertion will hold no further
true, then in such Churches as were gathered whiles Christ was upon earth: then
indeed we may conceive, that the first Evangelicall Church, consisted in the
congregation of the Apostles, and afterward of the Disciples; but when Christ
ascended into heaven, and the holy Ghost descended upon earth, we shall find,
that when the multitude of believers increased so much in several Cities, as
one Congregation could not contain them; their manner was to distribute
themselves into several meetings, accordinp to the commodity of their
habitations in the said Cities, or else as it might most stand with their
safety. Now The Apostles themselves, and their coadjutors th'Evangelists and
other Founders of Churches under them, did usually constitute and ordain Elders
in every City, but not in every Congregation, who had power in common and
colle^gially to teach and govern the whole flock, though severally congregated
in the same City. Thus we read of the Elders of Jerusalem, of Antiochia, of
Ephesus, of Corinth, of Philippi, and many mo, where the numbers of the
faithful were enlarged. Whereby it appears, that in the Apostles times, and
the times succeeding, those primitive Churches* were City Churches, consisting
of diverse Congregations, and not congregationall, as is pretended, Independent
within themselves. True it is, the City church was commonly independent within
it self, but thereof the reason was, because the Cities in their civil
policy, were free and unsubjected; otherwise the government of the City Church,
reached as far as the jurisdiction of the City. If all this be true, as it is
made most evident, by the unpartiall searchers of Antiquity, we may herein
observe a pattern, though not a precept for the subordination of Churches; for
if in the Apostles time, a City church consisted of many congregations, by the
same proportion, according to the increase of Believers, a Provincial Church,
may consist of many Cities, and a National Church of many Provinces, and the
Catholic Church of many Nations; the lowest step was laid by the Apostles, the
highest step is a point of our belief, and from the lowest to the highest,
there is no passage but by gradations, which is the scale of that government,
now held forth by Parliament. But to this may be replied; All this, that you
say, is but conjecturall, and that has no power to bind the conscience, which
must have a word infallible to rest upon. To this I answer* That for the
substance of this government, we have the infallible word of God, whereof
neither part doubts; for the frame and circumstances thereof, we have also
the word of man as infallible, as man's can be, for that we may take upon good
trust, to be morally infallible, which proceeds from men, who neither deceive,
nor are deceived. Now I suppose, that the Parliament has so fully declared,
their sincerity, and discharged their trust, in establishing this government,
that the most opposite thereunto cannot admit of such an unworthy thought, as
if they intended to impose any government upon the people, which in conscience,
they thought not most agreeable to Gods word; which as it clears them, from
the least suspicion of deceiving, so it is also manifest, that they have used
the best, and most approved means allowed to mortal man, not to be deceived;
For in this weighty work they have begun, with the invocation of Gods
infallible Spirit, which is the Author and leader into all truth; and have
assembled Learned and religious men of the holy calling, to enter into free
deliberation, and debate, of that kind of Church Government, which they should
find most consonant to Gods word; and if after all this, we can imagine they
have erred in their decrees; How can we, without presumption, conceive the
judgment of any private men to be more infallible. Now if any shall think that
this kind of government in every part thereof is established, with such a
perpetual decree, that it can never be changed; We must know that many things
may be infallibly true, yet not always necessary to be continued. True in the
Author of truth, and true in the means of truth* and yet may be laid aside,
when they are no longer useful for edification, an example hereof, we may see
in the ceremonial Law, which being appointed by God himself, no man will
doubt, but it was infallibly true, and being abolished by the same power that
ordained it, no man need doubt, but that it was justly removed. Infallibility
does not always infer immutability. Things are not only continued for their
truth, but also for their goodness, and fitness, and applicablenesse to
present use. So long as the Ceremonial Law, was to endure, it was of divine
infallibility, needful for the Church of the Jews, and during that time,
immutable, by any power but divine: but when the Evangelicall Law succeeded,
which by fulfilling, ended the Ceremonial; the worship of God became more
spiritual, leaving the decencies, circumstances, and outward manner, to the
humane infallibility of the Magistrate, set in authoriiy by God, whose decrees
in such matters, are unchangeable by any inferior power, yet alterable by the
same power that decreed them.

Moreover the Papists object against our doctrine that before Luther it was not
known in thy world, and the Prelates object against our discipline, that before
Calvin it was never known: by both with aspersions, they think to disgrace our
doctrine, and our discipline, putting upon them the stamp of novelty, as though
they were but inventions of men. But as our doctrine has been sufficiently
asserted against their calumnies, to be the very doctrine of the spirit of God,
left and recorded in the holy Scriptures. So it is also plain, that this
government of Gods Church, by the Presbytery was known and practiced in the
world, before either Popery or Prelacy was in being, both which are indeed
novelties, and the very spawn of corrupted men. It is clearly demonstrated from
the bosom of Antiquity; That the Apostles and Evangelists knowing the mind of
Christ did in all Cities and places where they collected Churches, ordain a
College of Presbyters called the Presbytery, with equal power to feed and
govern the same. This form of government continued in the Primitive Church
about 1500 years in purity, and parity. Afterward by pride, and contention
of the leaders, Bishops were set up above Presbyters, and when that equality
was once broken there was no stop. Then Metropolitans were put above Bishop,
and Patriarks above Metropolitans, and at the last whereunto all tended, they
brought forth that man of sin, or son of perdition the Pope, who perked above
all; and has ever since contrary to the rules of Christ and his Apostles,
maintained by fraud, fire, and blood, a prodigious tyranny and oppression in
the Church. B^t there is one testimony more, which we can produce, as a clear
light out of the very darkness, and dungeon of popery, when there was no day
of knowledge in the Christian world, but all was overspread with Antichristian
error, and that was about 500 years ago, when God moved Waldo a Citizen of
Lions to discover the impostures of the popish Church, who drawing after him
many disciples were persecuted by the bloody Synagogue, and driven from the
society of men, into mountains among beasts, which they found less savage then
their own kind, there they multiplied into many Congregations, and spreading
themselves into diverse places, were called by diverse names. Then they found it
necessary that the worship of God might be perfect among them, to establish a
discipline and government over all their Churches. In which deliberation they
had no pattern to follow, no steps to tread in, no helps from stories or
records of antiquity, which were all destroyed or corrupted. Their only guide,
and light to direct them was the word of God, which the world was never able to
extinguish, and by his divine power was preserved among them. There they
sought, and there they found the platform of their discipline, and what was it?
no other then Presbyterian; every Congregation governed by Pastors, Elders and
Deacons, and as occasion required by a combination of them into Synods,
Counsels and Assemblies. Now if this way was practiced among them, wherein
they were only led by divine light. How unjustly do some despise it as a
novelty, others reject it as a humane ordinance. When as our own age also,
searching in the same holy monuments has pitched upon the same discipline, as
in them held forth to the Churches of God. Me thinks this would move the
spirits of meek and sanctified men not to be wise above sobriety, nor contest
against such a cloud of witnesses. For if the Primitive Apostolical times; the
middle age of the Church under persecution, and now the last generations
wherein we live, have all by the light of Gods word, and guidance of his
spirit, concurred in one and the same discipline. Why should any combine
against it, or suffer themselves to be persuaded rather to disturb the peace
and unity of Gods Churches, then yield a Christian conformity thereunto.

3 But against this power of the Magistrate, it may be further objected, that
although power be given him, over the bodies and estates, and outward adjuncts
of men; yet the conscience is the peculiar Court of God, wherein man has
nothing to do, but by intrusion; when the body lies in prison, the Judge by a
habeas corpus can remove it, but when the conscience is under bond, no Judge
can send a habeas conscientiam, to deliver it, and having no power to release,
he can have none to bind it. Hereunto I answer, that the Magistrate pretends
not to take power upon himself, as a man equal to his brethren* but the power
he has is derived from the supreme power, which he holds by Commission from
God. His Office is the Ordinance of God, and his power is ordained of God, and
so long as he rules for good, aiming at the public order and edification of
the Church, we read that of necessity he must be obeyed, a double necessity
both for fear of bodily punishment, God having put into the Magistrates hand a
sword of justice, which he has not done into the Ministers; as also for
conscience sake, and fear of divine punishment, for men that make no conscience
of breaking the precepts of God shall certainly not go unpunished; conscience
therefore yielding sometimes in lawful as well as in absolute necessary
things, this obedience to the Magistrate, is not bound by the will of the
Magistrate, but by the word of God himself, which, expressly commands us to
obey the Magistrate for conscience sake; but we no where find that for
conscience sake in such things we should disobey him. If any reply that if all
this collected and spoken to maintain the power of the magistrate is no more
then was before alleged, in the times of Episcopal Prelacy; who by giving
credit to the Magistrate, and the Magistrate to their cause imposed and
enjoined what they pleased in Gods worship, and government of the Church. I
confess indeed that they argued very strongly for upholding the authority of
the Magistrate, so far, that by exalting his will, they diminished his power,
but leaving them in their excess, I answer, that if their government had been
as good as their argument, or had they stuck as close to the word of God, in
framing their Cannons and injunctions, as they did in asserting the lawful
power of the Magistrate, no man could have justly been grieved in conscience,
but their government being bad in it self, could not be bettered by the
goodness of the argument. But it may be rejoyned again, that for all this, the
Scripture does no where appoint or confirm this Presbyteriall government, as it
is held forth and established by the State, and therefore just it is, that men
should be left in liberty of their consciences, whether they would conform
thereunto or no. This has in part been answered before. That it is not the
mind of the Magistrate to compel any man to conform thereunto against his
conscience, neither could he do it, although he so intended, and therefore in
effect that is but a vain, feigned, and frivolous plea, to pretend that liberty
against the Magistrate, which no Magistrate can constrain, only as the Apostle
says of faith about indifferent things; have thou faith, have it to thy self
before God. So we may say in this case, have thou liberty, have it to thy self
betwixt God and thee, till he shall give thee a further light, and a liberty to
obey, as well as to disobey, but if thou contentest not thy self with this
sober and moderate liberty; but whilst also leap over the hedge, and withdraw
others from their Christian obedience; then thou runnest upon the sword of the
Magistrate, which God has put into his hands for the common good, by which he
is bound to restrain thy inordinate and offensive liberty, that it disturb not
the public peace committed to his charge. To this may be added, that although
this Presbyteriall government, in every part and parcel thereof, as it is now
established, be not expressly commanded in Scripture (as likewise no other kind
of government whatsoever) yet much may be brought for the approbation of it,
and to show that it is repugnant to Scripture. First, government by a
Presbytery, is expressly set down in Scripture; Secondly, for execution thereof,
some general rules are also clearly expressed, That all things should be done
decently, and in order, without contention, and for edification. Thirdly, to
whom can we imagine the ordering, and decencies, and edification should belong,
but only to the Magistrate, assisted by the advice of Gods holy word and
Ministers, wherein we find another express command, that the Magistrate so
judging for the good of all, ought to be obeyed for conscience sake. Bring we
this cause to a pair of scales, and there we shall see it decided; put into
one scale the judgment of the Magistrate, into the other the judgment of
private men; put into either, the profession of them both, to make the word of
God the rule of their judgment; put in again, that upon search therein, they
meet with two several governments, neither of them directly commanded* nor
directly forbidden, nor yet unconsonant to the Word. Hitherto the beam goes
even betwixt them. Search again, what is to be put in more, and we shall find
an express word of God, commanding every private soul to obey the higher
powers, judging and governing for good, and that for conscience sake, put this
into the Magistrates scale, and it must needs preponderate till we can find any
other word, that bids the higher power be subject to the lower. And indeed,
were there no word of Scripture to confirm this truth, the very light of
reason might convince us, for if we allow that reason should rule our
affections we must also allow the Magistrate to rule the people and when any
difference arises between them in such things wherein they pretend to judge by
one and the selfsame rule, reason requires that the determination of the
Magistrate should stand, and that the people should no longer be wise in their
own conceit, but be wise with sobriety suffering their judgments to be
overruled by their Rulers, whose office is to watch over them for good in the
order of such things; Whiles things are debating every one may have liberty to
speak their conscience* but when things are determined* the liberty of
conscience must yield to the duty of obedience, otherwise that sweet harmony
would be broken, which God has set in the world between parties commanding,
and parties obeying, wherein alone consists the outward happiness of all
societies. In the mean time I am glad to observe, that they disclaim not civil
obedience, to the civil power of the Magistrate, hoping that in time they will
for the same reason cease to contend against this government* for that it is
now indeed, or intended to be made a civil sanction, and a statute law. And
then denying subjection thereunto; Liberty of conscience may as well transport
them to claim exemption from many other civil laws. If one of them were
accused of murder, and knew in his own conscience that he was innocent* and had
beside^ twenty witnesses to clear him, yet if one single witness shall make
oath against him, in behalf of the King, he shall be condemned by the law. May
he not stand upon terms of his liberty, and his innocence, and justly plead
that it is against his conscience to obey this law, and suffer sentence being
innocent? Suppose another had lived many years separated from his wife, in
which time she had diverse children by another man; by the law he shall be
enjoined to father them all; may he not plead, that it is against his
conscience to take upon him the fathering of another man's children? Many such
examples might be brought, wherein the consciences of men seem to have more
just pretenses, to withdraw their obedience, from such civil laws, then from
this law of government, so fully debated, and ^o duly established. Besides,
inasmuch, as our brethren require a toleration, of their own government, they
do tacitly acknowledge a power in the Magistrate, to gratify them, or deny
them; and consequently, they may also acknowledge, that this power, is either
lawful, or unlawful; if it be lawful, they are with us, bound to obey it; if
unlawful, they are bound to disprove it; which when they go about; godly pens
will not be wanting, to endeavor, to give them satisfaction.

4. Moreover, it is said by some, that whatsoever is imposed by man in the
worship of God, not directly specified in his Word, falls under the
condemnation, of will worship, humane traditions, or inventions of men. This is
too large an assertion to be ever well proved, for it is true neither way.
Neither whatsoever is omitted in Scripture, to be rejected as will worship; nor
whatsoever is recorded in Scripture to be retained of perpetual necessity. We
read, that the first administration of Baptism, used to be performed in open
rivers, which with us would be thought rude and dangerous; The Saints had a
custom in the close of their holy meetings, to salute one another with a holy
kiss, which in our Congregations might be thought carnal and lascivious; they
also were wont, after the celebration of the blessed Eucharist, to bring their
provisions together, and make love-feast, which among us would be esteemed
loose and luxurious. When a Brother or Sister was sick, the Elders of the
Church were sent for, to pray over them, and anoint them with oil, which in
our visitations might be held superstitious, or perhaps fitter for a Physician
then a Minister. All these customs, and many others passed with edification,
in the innocence and infancy of these first times; which not consorting with
ours are universally disused. On the other side, the times and places of divine
worship, the seats and gestures of the worshippers, the manner of public
Praying, and Preaching, of singing of Psalms* of collecting Alms, of
assembling and dismissing the people, the form of administration and receiving
the holy Sacraments, and many other things concerning the outward public
communion of Saints, are for the most part undeclared in Scripture, yet in full
use and practice among us without offense, that therefore must be understood
for a will worship, and humane invention, which is set up for some humane and
carnal end, repugnant to Gods word, and to his glory.

5. There be yet remaining two more objections, arising from two contrary
grounds, one from pretense of weakness, the other from presumption of strength.
Those that lay forth the tenderness of conscience, forget not to produce those
heavenly exhortations, whereof the Scripture is full; that we should not bruise
the broken reed, nor offend the least of the little ones, nor cast stumbling
blocks before our brethren, nor use our liberty to the destroying of the weak,
but rather spread the covering of love over our brethrens infirmities, to raise
up one another in the spirit of meekness; to bear with the weak, and please
one another for good edification; yea, rather to abstain from matters, which we
think lawful, then to compel others to things, they judge unlawful: This
they say was the doctrine and the pattern, which Christ, and his Apostles
taught, and practiced among the faithful; which, because I intend not to deny,
I shall only examine, how fitly they are applied to the controversy in hand,
and whether they be of force, to absolve weak brethren, from their due
obedience, to Gods Magistrate.

We are therefore to understand, that all those excellent rules set down by the
Apostles, for tendering of weak consciences, receive a double limitation;
First, they were limited to the state of those times, with respect to the
condition of private Christians, and their carriage one toward another. For in
the Apostles age, nor long after, there was in the world neither Christian,
Kingdom, Commonwealth, nor Magistrate, whereby these Rulers, were neither
given to them, who were not then in being, nor for ought we find, intended so
for them, when God should raise them, up in his Church. The contrary rather
appears; for Christ himself coming to set up a spiritual Kingdom, in his
Church, intended only to pull down the kingdom of Satan, but not the Kingdoms
of the world, those he left standing, not refusing, to pay for himself and his
Apostle, tribute to Caesar, nor yet to answer before the Courts and Tribunalls
of the Jews. After Christ's example, The Apostles were very careful to instruct
the faithful, that they should walk with circumspexion, without blame or
reproach, lest if they should transgress the law* or commit scandalls, or fall
into divisions among themselves, they should make the name of God, and that
holy profession, which they had undertaken to be blasphemed among the heathen;
ordaining them moreover to make prayers, and supplications for all in
authority, and to give them obedience for conscience sake, indeed the Gospel
is called a law of liberty, because through Christ it freeth us from the
bondage of sin, the slavery of Satan, and the fear of death, not because, it
discharges us of our Christian duty and obedience to the Magistrate; in which
case, it gives no liberty nor exemption. From whence we may conclude, that if
Christ and his Apostles subjected the believers of those times, both by their
precept and practice, to unbe^ieving powers; It was never their meaning, to
exempt the faithful of our times, from their due obedience, to Chrsitian and
believing Magistrates. Secondly, these Evangelicall rules, for the ease of
tender consciences, respected especially indifferent things. The Christians of
those days consisted of two sorts; the converted Jews, and converted
Gentiles. The Jews trained up in the Ceremonial Law, which they knew was
appointed by God, made a conscience of meats, and days, and other rites, and
rudiments of the time, as yet not convinced that they were abolished by the
coming of Christ. These were then the weak Christians. On the other side, the
Gentiles were fully instructed in their liberty, that they might use them, or
not use them, as they pleased; They were then the strong Christians; The
Apostle therefore, to lay the foundation of charity aright, and preserve these
dissenting brethren in the unity of the Spirit, and bond of Peace* gives these
rules about indifferent things; That the strong should not despise the weak,
nor the weak* censure the strong, because whether they eat, or eat not, they
do it* to the Lord, and are of him accepted; and being both accepted of the
Lord, they ought not to be condemned* by one another. In this case therefore,
things, by nature indifferent, should make no difference betwixt brethren; but
so to be used, or not used, that now and then, for charity sake, the expediency
of them, should suspend their lawfulness. This is the Apostles doctrine,
instructing private Christians, about indifferent things. Which though they
reach not, the Magistrate in his office, yet they do, in his profession; having
given up his name to Christ, and living in a Christian society. And has our
religious Magistrate transgressed these rules? Let us see what he has done,
for the relief of tender consciences; many grievances were complained of, in
the Episcopal times, which the Parliament has removed; They have taken away
consecration of days and places, the superstition of meats and drinks, Images
and Altars, Crosses and Surplices; the usurpation of spiritual Courts, and
temporal Bishops; which were all abused with a danger to introduce Popery and
Idolatry: will not these things, satisfy weak and tender consciences, unless
they take away Government also, which is commanded, and sanctified by the Word?
therefore we must know, that government of the Church, in public Assemblies,
is no indifferent thing, nor to be reckoned in their number; God is not the
Author of anarchy and confusion; but of order, comeliness, and peace: and when,
the manner of government, and Gods worship, in the circumstances thereof, are
rightly ordered, according to the light of nature, and Christian prudence,
deducted from the general rules set down in the Word, and settled by just and
lawful authority. It is no longer left to the liberty of any man, subject to
the same authority, to conform, or not conform thereunto* as though it were a
thing indifferent, much less, to pretend, that because their consciences
cannot approve thereof, it should be permitted to them, to set up another
government; which seems to be a most unreasonable demand, that whiles they
deny obedience, to the Magistrates laws, they should nevertheless seek for
liberty and power from them, to overthrow their own orders, and make them,
cross shinns, with their own authority. The power of the Magistrate and
liberty purchased by Christ, do not destroy, but support one another; for they
are both truths, avowed in the Word, and no truth can overthrow another. And if
any man say, that a weak conscience, though it be in an error, yet till it be
convinced, should sin, in obeying the truth; it may be replied a fortior^* that
the Magistrate determining the truth, cannot tolerate any error, without
sinning against his conscience, and partaking of those errors, he condemns.

6. But the other objection, proceeding from a conceit of strength, marches
with more assurance; for some imagine, that forasmuch, as they are justified by
grace* and freed from sin, and heirs of the promise; they are consequently in a
state of pe^ection, able to fulfill the law of God, and delivered from all
laws of men. For, lex non ponitur justo; They have no need of repentance,
being secured from falling. Nor much of faith, being already in fruition* they
are a law unto themselves* under no Magistrate, above all penalty, as if they
were out of the flesh, having shaken off frailty and mortality, and climed up,
to the new Jerusalem, where there is neither sin nor sorrow. This being a sweet
fancy to them that are possessed with all, will hard^y suffer it self to be
removed, by force of argumentation: Otherwise we might say; That never any man,
was without sin, but Christ alone, who was like to man in all things, sin
excepted. That the blessed Apostle felt a law in his members* which made him
do that he would not* and will, that he did not. He bids us work out our
salvation, with fear and trembling, not with surquedry and presumption; when we
have done our best, and seem to be most perfect* we are but unprofitable
servants. Many such divine testimonies, might be brought, to convince this
opinion; but it refuteth it self, being contrary to the rule of faith, and
condition of humanity. We must not think, that the grace of God, works
against his will; his will is* that we should be militant, in this life;
wherefore we must not expect to be triumphant, till the war be done: his will
is, that we should grow to our full stature by degrees; and scale the ladder of
heaven, not be taken up in a whirlwind. His will is, that we should be tempted
and buffeted, and fall and rise; that seeing our frailty and our misery, we
should seek for the renewing of his grace, and every day beg, our daily pardon,
more duly, then our daily bread. Forasmuch as by strength of nature, we may
abstain awhile from food, but by corruption of nature, we cannot abstain awhit
from sin. This error puffing up the hearts of unstable men, has heretofore
brought forth furious, and pernicious effects.

The story of John a Leyden, and Knipperdolling, and of their phrensies at
Munster, is not yet forgotten. I pray God our times be not pregnant, of some
such monster. What is the meaning, that so many in our days, separate from
their brethren, as if all others were profane? Why do they gather in heaps
together, like biles and ulcers, drawing the corruption with them, and yet say
the body is unclean? In such manner, began they of Munster; they took upon them
a garb of simplicity, they seemed grave and dejected, fervent in long prayers,
full of revelations, lamenting the fashions and profaneness of the times,
contemning honors, despising money, and neglecting Matrimony, wishing, and
weeping for reformation; by such hypocrisies they captivated, weak and wandering
souls, who took them only, to be the little flock of heaven* that lived
among wolves, and was persecuted on earth. Till having made up their musters,
and assembled their troops, they set up a standard, calling the multitude, into
their snare, under the promise, and proclamation of liberty. Now the blessed
time was come, that the meek* should inherit the earth; that the Kings and
Potentates, and Adonibezecks of this world, who had done dispite and violence
to the Saints, should be broken with a rod of iron, and dashed in pieces like a
Potters vessel. Thence they fell into revelations, and found it written in the
beams of the Sun, that John a Leyden* was appointed by Christ, to be King over
all the world, and rule the Nations in righteousness and in power. After this,
the King was inspired, to set up sundry Queens, and to take to himself many
wives at once, to increase and multiply the holy seed upon earth. But this
imaginary kingdom, was of short durance; for the neighbor Princes, finding
their design, joined against them, as against the enemies of mankind: and
after they had endured a long siege; their King, by revelation, assured them,
that before Easter, they should have deliverance. But when none appeared, he
told them, that he had been in a trance six days, in which time, he had ridden
on a blind Ass, and that God the Father, had laid upon his back* the sins of
them all, whereby they were set free and delivered from them; And this was the
deliverance he promised, wherewithal, they ought to rest contented; Thereupon
the Town was taken, the deluded people, disabused, the King impostor, executed
to death, and hung up in chains, upon the highest steeple, thus ended this
tragedy, and ever tragical is the end of such follies; The Apostle notes,
that factions and divisions, are signs of carnality; first, men separate from
others, as unclean, then they speak evil of government, the next step, is to
blind the people with revelations; from thence they fall into snares of the
flesh; at last, they stir up sedition, and last of all, their end is
destruction.

Hitherto, I have labored to show* that the Magistrate, by his office, being
an ordinance of God, is bound to provide for the Public peace and safety in
Church and Commonwealth, which is done first by enacting just laws, and
wholesome orders, consonant to wisdom, and the word of God; and secondly, by
using his power, to preserve them, in vigor and execution; as also to show,
that the people are bound in conscience, to give willing obedience, to such
Laws and orders of the Magistrate, whose duty it is, to restrain the
disobedient, and reduce them, to their duty; Nevertheless, forasmuch* as the
power, wherewithal God has invested the Magistrate, is always to be used for
public good; and requisite it is, that a due distinction be made in the
punishment of offenders, between such as err out of mistake or ignorance, and
those that resist, out of wilfulness and contempt. I shall in all humbleness
propound some few expedients how far the Magistrate may please to slacken his
power, and so temper the laws, and penalties thereof; as they may serve both
ways, as lenitives for the simple, and corrasives for the stubborn, who will
not otherwise be reformed.

1. I conceive, that as it is unreasonable to demand so it would be dangerous
to grant, any toleration of Religion, besides that which is established, for
such a liberty of conscience, would breed a freedom of will, and freedom of
will would beget liberty of life, which would breed a fearful Independency,
when every one might do what they list; In matters of faith, necessary to
salvation, there is but one way, and one truth; all the rest, is obsiquity and
error. Therefore when the truth, has been tried, by the Word, and ratified by
the Magistrate, he cannot suffer any falsehood, without being accessory
thereunto; Yet in matters of discipline and government, there is a greater
latitude; for when it shall appear, that weak brethren, agreeing in the same
confession of faith but dissenting in outward forms, out of tenderness or
ignorance; to such a toleration, or connivence, or suspention of laws, may be
harmless and charitable, till they be further satisfied and instructed.

2. That whosoever living under the subjection of this state, should be so far
destitute of grace, as to renounce Christ, or speak blasphemously of him, or
any person of the Trinity; contrary to the faith established in the Church; he
shall upon conviction, be informed of the truth, with a brotherly admonition
not to divulge his error, to the corruption or scandal of others, or
disturbance of the civil peace. For the second offense, he shall endure a
years imprisonment, be disabled in his testimony, put out of protection of the
Laws, and wear some public mark, noting him for a Blasphemer: For the third
offense, he shall suffer banishment; or close and perpetual imprisonment; and
if banished it shall be capital for him to return, without license of the
State. For if he by our laws deserves death, that seduceth any subject, from
the allegiance of his natural Prince; what deserves he, that seeks to
alienate the soul of any Christian, from the dependence of God, unto the
devil?

3. If any one, out of an evil heart, shall break forth into open reviling,
scorning, disgraceful words against the present Church Government* now
established, he shall not be connived at, as a man of tender conscience: for as
he gives himself power and liberty to dis-joyn from it, so it is also in his
power, not to speak evil of it, but doing it by choice and deliberation; he
cannot fall within the compass of weakness. For he that makes no conscience,
of giving offense and scandal to the Christian Magistrate, and all his godly
brethren, living in peaceable obedience* cannot imagine, that his private
fancies* though covered with weakness, should be more tendered, then the
public conscience of the Commonwealth. Such a one therefore ought to be
punished, as a contemner of the civil power. First, by reproof and
exhortation, not to disquiet, the peace of the Land; Secondly, by a pecuniary
mulct* for some public use, with disability of his credit* Thirdly, if he
still persist, with close imprisonment, till* he give public satisfaction of
his repentance.

4. Forasmuch, as no man ought to undertake the office and function, of the
holy Church Ministry, without he be well assured of his inward calling
thereunto; neither can such men conceive themselves, awhit the worse, or that
it might be any prejudice to their spiritual gifts to have an outward
approbation* by laying on the hands of the Presbytery, and praying for divine
blessing upon their persons, and giving them an orderly mission, into Gods
harvest? Therefore whosoever shall take unto himself the holy calling,
presuming to preach the Word or administer the Sacraments, not being admitted,
nor ordained thereunto, by lawful authority; he ought to be punished as the
former were, that contemned the civil power, or rather more severely;
especially if they be found in their public preaching, to sow sedition among
the people; provided, that such persons, Masters of families, or others,
meeting in their own houses, or in their neighbors, to repeat what they heard
or learned, out of Sermons preached by authority; and upon that or the like
occasion, worship God by praying or singing of Psalms, conferring or arguing,
upon any part of the Word preached, as also such, who being required, by any
friend or neighbor (when the advice of Ministers, cannot be had) to open or
expound some text of Scripture, or deliver his judgment upon any case of
conscience* for satisfaction of the parties, be not comprehended under this
Article, or any penalty thereof, because we are commanded* to exercise the
gifts and talents, God has given us* in a sober and orderly way, for the
edification of one another.

5. Whereas out of all doubt, many things are contained in holy Scripture,
which are not yet fully manifested, nor clearly understood; and we know the
Spirit of God, blows where he lists and is not confined, to time, place,
nor person, but inspireth whom he pleases. If therefore any man shall pretend,
to have a new opinion* or new light revealed unto him, of the sense of any part
of Scripture* fitting it were, he should bring his knowledge to some godly
Minister, approved of; or to the next Classi^* where he lives, there to be
tried and examined by the spirit of the Prophets judging and determining by the
word of God, and if perchance they neither approve of his opinion, nor yet be
able to convince him; then to refer him, to the next National Council to
which he must stand or fall. In the mean time, if he publish his opinion under
hand, to the breach of brotherly unity in the Church; he ought to be taken, as
a disturber of public peace, and subject to the penalties mentioned in the
third Article.

By these and such like means, the power of the civil Magistrate, may be
preserved from contempt; and the consciences of weak brethren from constraint;
till they shall pluck off their mask, and discover themselves to be obstinate*
and unsufferable; clamouring for toleration, under pretense of weakness; but
indeed, making a breach and separation, in confidence of their own strength and
perfection* disdaining with supercilious eyes, the infirmities of their
brethren; by which falacie, they think to blear the eye of the Magistrate and
make the weak, to overthrow the strong. To such wolves in sheeps clothing,
whether they be Papists, Heretics* Schismatics, or whatsoever they be (for a
weak conscience is now-adaies, become a cloak, for all shoulders) my meaning is
not, that any indulgence or connivence of the Magistrate, should be extended to
them, who it is plain enough are employed in malicious designs, working
underground, the divisions and ruin of the State.

Therefore to conclude with the same spirit, as I began; which is a spirit of
unity, peace, and love. In the fear, and before the face of Almighty God, and
by the bowels of that love* wherewith Christ Jesus loved us all; I do beseech
the brethren, whether they be leaders or followers, that agree with us in the
same doctrine, but dissent in government; to lay their hands upon their hearts,
and examine, what they would be at. Is it, at the advancement of truth, the
practice of holiness, the purity of Gods worship? Let them consider, whether
all these may not be had, as they are all intended under the present
government; is it at spiritual perfection, whiles they are present in the
flesh? Let them consider, that the perfection of a Christian, consists, in
humility, love* peace, meekness, sobriety and uprightness, which are truly
spiritual, and none of them excluded, by this government. Is it at the setting
up of the kingdom of Christ Jesus; that he might reign, as Lord omnipotent
upon earth? Let them consider, that the kingdom of Christ Jesus, is not of
this world, he prescribes no forms, nor modells of civil government, as he
finds them, so he leaves them, where he is received; he sublimeth and
refineth them where he is not received, he does not destroy them. Let them
consider, that this present governmet, does no ways eclipse the kingdom of
Christ Jesus; for whither it be placed in a single Congregation, or in a
general Assembly, or in the last resort of the supreme Magistrate; all are
under the government of Christ Jesus, who rules among them, by his Word,
whereunto, they conform their government: is it at the setting up of any other
government, which they think is only divine, and necessary to salvation? Let
them consider, that by such assertions, they do not only blast all reformed
Churches at this day, and leave them in a state of condemnation living under
another government, but also condemn multitudes of souls departed, which under
other governments, lived Saints upon earth, died martyrs for the faith of
Christ, and are now triumphants in heaven. Or else is it at no government at
all, till they receive on revealed from heaven? Let them consider, whether any
such promise be made us in Scripture, which we ought to expect; This we find,
that God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace, order, and government,
which ought to be settled in all Churches of the Saints. Or lastly, is it to set
up an infallibility of private judgment, taking themselves to abound in the
spirit, and be able to judge all above them? Let them consider, that the hearts
and spirits of men, are deceitful, above all deceits, a^^ that to strive and
contend to make rents and separation for these things, to despise the powers
and ordinances of God, are reckoned among the works of the flesh, rank and
carnal. But if it be as I will hope it is, a pure and sincere weakness of
conscience, arising from a weakness of judgment; not yet seeing the
clearness of that light, which has in lightened the Magistrates and Ministers,
and greatest part of the Kingdom. Let them be entreated in the fear of God* to
seek to him for further illumination; and in the mean time, to suspend their
opinions and forbear contentions by Christian modesty and moderation, becoming
the Saints, to maintain Christian charity, which is the bond of perfection, and
make it manifest unto the world, and to the Angels in heaven, that they are
not led, by the spirit of error, strife and vainglory, but by the spirit of
truth, which works by love; and lowliness, patience and meekness; minding
the same things, and improving the gifts of faith, and grace and knowledge,
whereunto they have already attained. And in other things of lesser moment,
concerning the forms of discipline and government, and the outward face of
order and decency in the public worship, whereunto perhaps not having yet
attained, they may be otherwise minded therein to wait Gods time, with quiet
and patience, who has promised to reveal, even that also unto them, that one
may not be perfect, without another. It may be, they may think themselves
unkindly dealt withal, and very ill requited, that having so frankly
adventured their lives and estates, and done so valiantly, against the enemies
of God and the Land, they should after all this, be denied any request,
especially, that which so nearly touches, their freedom of conscience, and
inward peace. Truly it is on all hands confessed* and no man that I know,
seeks to cast a veil over their worth, or suppressed their achievements.
God has done wonderful things; by many of their hands and the less honor,
they take to themselves, the more will be given them, by the voice of the
Nation, and Rulers of the band, who ought to take care, that their names be
written, in the Registers of fame, from generation to generation. But what will
our dissenting brethren say, if Jesuits and Malignents converse among them, in
sheeps-clothing; If transformed into Angels of light, they carry on these
works of darkness, and by secret suggestions, and insinuations of the
Serpent, make them blow this cole and widen this breach against their own
intentions? It is not for naught* that there be so ma^y popish spies and Agents
among us; whose employment is* to weaken the hands of the Magistrate, by sowing
factions and disobedience among the people. They feel their blow, and know
well enough that their form is broken, they are upon their last gasp, and
their last refuge is this, to compass that by treachery and mischief, which
they could not do, by force in the field; If they can divide the civil and
Military power, and fling fireballs of division into the tents of brethren,
they have yet a fainting hope to recover strength and destroy them both. Let
not our brethren think this, to be an eary or empty admonition; for there be
men so finely spirited and rarefied to the invisibility of the devil; that if
it were possible, they would deceive the very Elect, and weave their
hypocritical webbs, with liberty, that commonly the simple, and many times the
circumspect are involved, and taken. Happy it were, that by some mark, they
might be known, for then they were easily avoided; but when they come* to
strike up division, and separate the hearts of the brethren; the safest remedy
is to stop our ears as against Inchanters, and Negotiators for the devil.
Return then o Shulamite, return, return; be not intrapped in the snares of
division; but return to the tents of peace: what will ye see in the Shulamites?
we shall see, when he returns and joyneth his body to the State, and his
conscience to the Church, that his countenance is fair as the Moon, clear as
the Sun* terrible* as an Army with banners; and that his company united to the
Commonwealth, is like the association of two Armies, linked together by one
heart, invincible and undissolvable, by the powers of darkness and of
Antichrist.

Thus have I delivered my poor judgment, and discharged my duty, which I owe
to the public peace. I pretend not to revelations, nor an unerring spirit; but
being privy to the evennesse of mine own heart, and unbyassed intentions; my
conscience is my testimony, that I have not erred, to cause any other man to
err. In regard whereof, I may hope, that all men, who are spiritual, and
dis-interessed in their ends, will acknowledge this to be the mind of Christ,
so far-forth at least, as it aims and tends to piety and peace.
Nevertheless, if any will be still contentions and dissent, neither I, nor the
Churches of God, have any such custom; nor do I intend, for this difference of
judgment, to break charity and communion with them. But I rather beseech
them, for a close of all; to put on mild and gentle affections; and whiles
they approve of our faith, not to disapprove our works, by excommunicating of
us, or separating from us; till our works go before us, and condemn our
selves. Leaving them, in this assurance, that when our Lord Jesus Christ shall
come, the Judge and Master of us all, to whom we must stand or fall; it will be
better for them, and for us in that day that he find our hearts established in
grace, then our selves at variance about Church Government.

FINIS.

