SMECTYMNUUS REDIVIVUS. BEING An Answer to a Book, entitled, AN HUMBLE
REMONSTRANCE.

In which, The Original of LITURGY EPISCOPACY
is discussed.

And Quaeres propounded concerning both.

The PARITY of Bishops and Presbyters in Scripture Demonstrated.

The occasion of their IMPARITY in Antiquity discovered.

The DISPARITY of the Ancient and our Modern Bishops manifested.

The ANTIQUITY of ruling Elders in the Church vindicated.

The PRELATICALL Church Bounded.

JEREMY 6.16. Thus says the Lord, stand in the ways, and behold, and ask for
the Old way, which is the way, and walk therein.

Tertul. de praescr. adv. haeres. Id Dominicum and verum, quod prius traditum:
id autem extraneum and falsum quod sit posterius.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for John Rothwell, at the Fountain and Bear in
Goldsmiths-row in Cheapside. 1654.

TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
SOlomon told us long since, that there is no end of many books, Eccles. 12.12.
Scripturiency (it seems) is no novell humor, but abounded then, even when
the means of transmitting knowledge was more difficult; if there were cause for
the complaint then, there is much more now; since the Press has helped the
Pen, every one will be scribbling, and so better books are neglected, and lie
like a few grains of Corn under an heap of Chafe and dust: usually books are
received as fashions; the newest, not the best and most profitable, are most in
esteem; in so much that really learned and sober men have been afraid to
publish their labors, lest they should divert the world from reading the
useful works of others that wrote before them. Videbat enin^ passim laborari
mole and copia variorum in hoc genere commen^^tiorum; novis editionibus
ancipitem reddi little delectu^; sed meliores etiam, id est veteres illos et
probatos Authors e studiosorum manibus excuti etc* Praefat. Scriptorum
Theolog. Henric. Alting.
I remember Dr. Altingius a terse and neat spirit, stood out the battery of
twenty years importunity, and would not yield to divulge any thing upon this
fear. Certainly (Reader) it is for thy profit sometimes to look back and consult
with them that first labored in the mines of knowledge, and not always to
take up with what comes next to hand. In this controversy of Discipline many
have written, but not all with a like judgment and strength, which I believe
has been no small rock of offense, and stone of stumbling to the adversaries,
who are hardened with nothing so much as a weak defense of the truth, as Quaedam
noxia victoria paene mihi semper in disputationibus proveniebat cum Christianis
imperitis: August. contra Manich. cap. 19.
Austin complains, that when he was a Manichee he had had too too often the
victory put into his hands by the defenses of weak and unskilful Christians.
This work which the Stationer has now revived (that it may not be forgotten,
and like a Jewel after once showing shut up in the Cabinet of private studies
only) was penned by Mr. Stephen Marshall. Mr. Edm. Calamy. Dr. Th. Young. Mr.
Matthew Newcomen. Dr. William Spurstowe.
several worthy Divines of great note and fame in the Churches of Christ,
under the borrowed and covert name of SMECTYMNUUS, which was some matter of
scorn and exception to the adversaries, as the Papists objected to Calvin his
printing his Institutions under the name of Alcuinus, and to Bucer his naming
himself Aretius Felinus, though all this without ground and reason, the
affixion of the name to any work being a thing indifferent; for there we should
not consider so much the Author, as the matter, and not who said it, but what;
and the assumption of another name not being infamous but where: it is done out
of deceit, and to another prejudice, or out of shame because of guilt, or
fear to own the truths which they should establish: I suppose the reverend
Authors were willing to lie hid under this ONOMASTICK, partly that their work
might not be received with prejudice, the faction against which they dealt,
arrogating to themselves a Monopoly of Learning, and condemning all others as
ignorants and novices not worthy to be heard; and partly that they might not
burden their Frontispiece with a voluminous nomenclature, it not being usual
to affix so many names at length to one Treatise.

For the work it self, it speaks its own praise, and is now once more
subjected to thy censure and judgment: This second publication of it was
occasioned by another book for vindication of the Ministry by the Provincial
Assembly of London, wherein there are frequent appeals to Smectymnuus; though
otherwise I should have judged the reprinting seasonable; for the Lord has now
returned us to such a juncture of time, wherein there is greater freedom of
debate without noise and vulgar prejudice; and certainly if the quarrel of
Episcopacy were once cleared, and brought to an issue, we should not be so much
in the dark in other parts of Discipline, the conviction of an error by solid
grounds being the best way to find out the truth; reformations carried on with
popular tumult, rather then rational conviction, seldom end well; though the
judgment of God be to be observed in pouring contempt upon those which are
partial in his law, yet the improvident leapes which a people are wont to make
upon such occasions, lay the foundation of a lasting mischief. I hope that by
the review of these matters we shall come to know more of the Lords counsel
for the ordering of his house, or at least that by weighing what may be said on
all sides, we shall learn more to (...). Ephesians. 4.15.
truth it in love, which is the unfeined desire of him who is

Thine in the Lord, THO. MANTON.
Newington, June 23. 1653.
Most Honorable Lords, And ye the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the
Honorable House of COMMONS.
ALthough we doubt not, but that book which was lately directed to your
Honors, bearing the name of an Humble Remonstrance, has had access unto your
presence: and is in the first approaches of it, discovered by your discerning
spirits, to be neither Humble, nor a Remonstrance; but a heap of confident and
ungrounded assertions; so that to your Honors a Reply may seem superfluous:
Yet left the Author should glory in our silence, as a granting of the cause;
we humbly crave your Honors leave to present, not so much to your selves, as
to the world by your hands, a view of this Remonstrance; in which the Author
after too large a Preface, undertakes the support of two things, which seem to
him to be threatened with danger of a present precipice, the Liturgy, and the
Hierarchy.

It was a constitution of those admired sons of Justice the Areopagi; (...).
that such as pleaded before them should plead without prefacing and without
passion: had your Honors made such a constitution, this Remonstrance must have
been banished from the face of your Assembly; for the Preface fills almost a
fourth part of the book, and the rest swells with so many passionate
Rhetorications, as it is harder for us in the multitude of his words to find
what his argument is that we have to answer, then to answer it when it is found.

We would not trace him in his words, but close immediately with his arguments,
did we not find in him a sad exemplification of that divine Axiom, Page 23.
in Multitudine verb^rum non deest peccatum, in the multitude of words, there
wants not sin: for though the Author is bold to call upon your Honors to hear
the words of truth and confidence, yet how little truth there is in his great
confidence, the ensuing discourse shall discover.

His very words are confident enough, and yet as false as confident; wherein he
Impropriates all honesty unto these his Papers, and brands all others with the
name of Libellers, and yet himself sins deeply against the rule of honesty,
and lies naked to the scourge of his own censure.

First, Page ^
in setting a brand upon all writings that have lately issued from the press,
as if they had forgotten to speak any other language then Libellous: it seems
himself had forgotten that some things had issued by authority of the King and
Parliament.

none of the peaceable and well-affected Sons of the Church of England.

Thirdly, in censuring the way of petitioning your Honors, the ancient and
ordinary free way of seeking redress of our evils, Page 2.
for a Tumultuary underhand way.

Episcopal Cause, as none of his Majesty's good Subjects, engrossing that
praise only to his own party, Page 3.
saying, The eyes of us the good Subjects of this whole Realm are fixed upon
your Success, etc.

Impropriating to the same party the praise of Orthodox, Page 6.
page 6. as if to speak a word, or think a thought against Episcopacy, were no
less Heresy, then it was in former time to speak against the Popes supremacy,
or the monks fat belly; whereas whether the Episcopal part be the Orthodox,
peaceable, well-affected part, and his Majesty's only good Subjects, we leave to
your Honors to Judge, upon the numerous informations that flow in unto you
from the several parts of this Kingdom.

Page 2.
Nor can they decline your Judgment, seeing now you are (through Gods blessing)
happily met in a much longed for Parliament: but whither so much longed for by
him and his accomplices, as by those against whom he whets his Style, the
prayers that have obtained this happy meeting, and the praises that do attend
it, will decide in that great day.

The Helena, whose Champion this Remonstrant chiefly is, is that Government
which he calls Sacred, viz. that Government by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes,
Archdeacons, etc. which, says he, through the sides of some misliked persons
some have endeavored to wound. Misliked Persons? and why not offending
persons? why not guilty persons? when this Honorable house has found just
cause to charge some of them with crimes of the highest nature, Our zeal for
your Honors makes us fear, lest your assembly should suffer in this word; as
if your proceedings against such persons should be grounded upon compliance
with such as do mislike them, rather then upon their own demerits or the
Justice of this Court.

But whatever those Persons be, the Government it self is Sacred; Page 7.
which by the joint confession of all reformed Divines, derives it self from
the times of the blessed Apostles, Untruths.
without any interruption, without contradiction of any one congregation in the
world unto this present age. This is but an Episcopal Bravado; therefore we
let it pass, till we come to close and contend with him in the point; where we
shall demonstrate, that in the compass of three lines he has packt up as many
untruths, as could be smoothly couched in so few words, as any man of common
understanding, that looks upon the face of the Government of almost all
reformed Churches in the Christian world may at first view discover.

But before we come to this, there are yet two things in this Preface which we
count not unworthy observation. The First is, the comparison which he makes
between the two Governments, the Civil which with us is Monarchy: and the
sacred which with him is Episcopaey. Of the first he says, Remon. page 8.
if Antiquity may be the Rule (as he pleades it for Episcopacy) or if Scripture
(as he interprets Scripture) it is VARIABLE, and ARBITRARY: but the other
DIVINE and UNALTERABLE: so that had men petitioned for the altering of
Monarchical Government, they had (in his Judgment) been less culpable, both
by Scripture and Antiquity, then in petitioning the alteration of the
Hierarchicall: Had he found but any such passage in any of his Lewd Libellers
(as his modesty is always pleased to term them) certainly if we may borrow
his own phrase, the ears of the three Interessed Kingdoms, yea all the
neigbbour Churches, and if we may say, the whole Christian world, and no small
part beyond it, had run with the loud cries of no less then Treason, Treason.

Truth is, in his Antiquity we find that this his uninterrupted sacred
Government has so far invaded the Civil, and so yoked Monarchy, even in this
Kingdom, as Malmesbury reports: That William Rufus oppressed by Bishops,
persuaded the Jews to confute them; Malmsbury lib. 4.
promising thereupon to turn England to their Religion, that he might be free
of Bishops. And this is so natural an effect of unalterable Episcopacy, that
Pius the fourth to the Spanish Ambassador, importuning him to permit Bishops to
be declared by the Council of Trent to be Iure Divino, gave this answer: Hist.
Council. Trid.
That his King knew not what he did desire; for if Bishops should be so
declared, they would be all exempted from his Power, and as independent as the
Pope himself.

The second thing observable is the comparison he makes between the late
Alterations attempted in our Neighbor Church by his Episcopal faction, and
that Alteration that is now justly desired by the humble Petitioners to this
Honorable House. The one being attempted by strangers, endeavoring violently
to obtrude Innovations upon a settled Church and State, The other humbly
petitioned to the Heads and Princes of our State by Multitudes therein almost
ruined by an Innovating Faction: yet does not this Remonstrant blush to say; if
these be branded, (so he calls the just censures of this Honorable House) for
Incendiaries, how shall these Boutefeux escape, etc. thus cunningly
endeavoring either to justify the former by the practice of the latter, Page
9.
or to render the latter more odious then the former.

The attempts of these men whom he would thus render odious, he craves leave to
present to your Honors in two things, which are the subjects of this quarrel:
The Liturgy and Episcopacy; and we humbly crave your Honors leave in both to
answer.

SECT. II.
FIrst, the Liturgy of the Church of England (says he) has been hitherto
esteemed sacred, Liturgy.
reverently used by holy Martyrs, daily frequented by devout Protestants, Page
10.
as that which more then once has been confirmed by the Edicts of religious
Princes, and your own Parliamentary Acts, etc. And has it so? whence then
proceed these many Additions and Alterations? that have so changed the face and
fabric of the Liturgy, that as Dr. Hall spoke once of the pride of England: if
our forefathers should revive and see their daughters walking in Cheapside
with their fannes and farthingales, etc. they would wonder what kind of
creatures they were; and say Nature had forgot her self and brought forth a
monster: so if these holy Martyrs that once so reverently used the Liturgy
should revive and look for their Letany stamped by Authority of Parliament, they
would be amazed, and wondering say; England had forgotten her self and brought
forth, etc. Martyrs? what do we speak of Martyrs, when we know Sir, that one
of your own Ad hoc ma^orum devoluta est Ecclesia Dei and sponsa Christi, ut
haereticorum exempla Sectentur, and ad celebranda Sacramenta coelestia,
disciplinam, Lux mutuetur de tenebris, and id faciant christiani quod
Antichristi faciunt. Cypr. Ep. 74.
Bishops said it in the hearing of many not so long since, but you may well
remember it, That the Service of the Church of England was now so dressed, that
if the Pope should come and see it, he would claim it as his own, but that it
is in English?

It is little then to the advantage of your cause, that you tell us, it is
translated into other languages; and as little service have they done to the
Church of England, who have taught our Prayers to speak Latin again: For if it
be their Language chiefly that overthrows the Popes claim, take away that, and
what hinders then, but the Pope may say, these are mine?

As for other Translations and the great applause it has obtained from
foreign Divines, which are the fumes this Remonstrant venditates; what late
days have produced we know not; but the great lights of Former ages have been
far from this applauding: we are sure judicious Calvin says, that in the
Liturgy there are sundry Tolerabiles Ineptiae, which we think is no very great
applause.

To vindicate this Liturgy from scorn (as he calls it) at home or by your
Honors aid to reinforce it upon the Nation, is the work of his Remonstrance,
for the effecting whereof he falls into an unparalleled discourse about the
Antiquity of Liturgies; Page 13.
we call it unparalleld, because no man that we have seen ever drew the line of
Liturgy so high as he has done.

Concerning which, if by Liturgy this Remonstrant understand an Order observed
in Church assemblies of Praying, reading, and expounding the Scriptures,
Administering Sacraments, etc: Such a Liturgy we know and do acknowledge both
Jews and Christians have used. But if by Liturgy he understand prescribed and
stinted forms of Administration Composed by some particular men in the Church,
and imposed upon all the rest (as this he must understand, or else all he says
is nothing) we desire and expect that those forms, which he says are yet
extant, and ready to be produced, might once appear.

Liturgy of this former sort we find in Iustine Martyr and Tertullian. Just.
Mar. Apost. 2.
But that there were not such stinted Liturgies as this Remonstrant disputes
for, appears by Tertullian, Tert. Ap. ad. Genesis c. 39.
in his Apol. Cap. 30. where he says the Christians of those times did in
their public assemblies pray sin^ monitore quia de pectore, without any
Prompter but their own hearts. And that so it should be, the same Father proves
in his Treatise de Oratione: Sunt quae petantar, etc. There are some things to
be asked according to the occasions of every man: the lawful and ordinary
prayer (that is the Lords prayer) being laid as a foundation; It is lawful to
build upon that foundation other prayers according to every ones occasions. And
to the same purpose St. Austin in his 121. Ep. liberum est; etc. it is free to
ask the same things that are desired in the Lords Prayer, aliis atque aliis
verbis, sometimes one way and sometimes another: And before this, in that
famous place of Just. Mar. Apo. 2. Just. Mar. Apost. 2. (...).
He, who instructed the peeple, prayed according to his ability. Nor was this
liberty in prayer taken away, and set and imposed forms introduced, until the
time that the Arian and Pelagian Heresies did invade the Church, and then
because those Heretics did convey and spread their poison in their forms of
Prayer and Hymns, the Church thought it convenient to restrain the liberty of
making pro Arbitrio, sed semper eaedem preces, that none should use liberty to
vary in prayer, but use always the same form, Conc. Laod. Can. 18. Council.
Laod. Can. 18.
yet this was a form of his own composing, as appears by another Canon,
wherein it was ordered thus: None should use any form, unless he had first
conferred Cum fratribus instructioribus: with the more learned of his brethren.
Conc. Carth. 3^ Can. 23. and lastly that none should use set prayers, Conc.
Carth. 3. Can. 23. Anno 397.
but such as were approved of in a Synod, which was not determined till the
year 416. Conc. Milev. 2. Can. 12. Conc. Milev. 2. Can. 12. An. 416.
And had there been any Liturgies of Times of the first and most venerable
antiquity producible, the great admirers of them, and enquirers after them
would have presented them to the world ere this.

We know that Bishop Andrews in his zeal for Liturgies pursued the enquiry
after the Jewish Liturgy so far, that he thought he had found it; and one there
was which he sent to Cambridge to be translated: but there it was soon
discovered to have been made long after the Jews ceased to be the Church of
God; and so himself suppressed it, that it never saw the light under a
translation.

Page 10.
We wonder therefore what this Remonstrant meant to affirm so confidently, that
part of the form of prayer which was composed by our blessed Savior, was
borrowed from the forms of prayer formerly used by Gods people. An opinion we
never met before; indeed, we have read that the Rabbines since the days of our
Savior have borrowed some expressions from that Prayer, and from other
Evangelical passages: But we never read till now, that the Lord Christ the
wisdom of the Father borrowed from the Wisdom of the Rabines expressions to
use in Prayer.

Page 11.
And as much we wonder by what Revelation or Tradition (Scripture being silent
in the thing) he knew, that Peter and John, when they went up to the Temple to
pray, their Prayer was not of a sudden and extemporary conception, but of a
Regular prescription. Sure we are, some as well read in Jewish antiquity, as
this Remonstrant shows himself to be, have told us that the hour of Prayer
was the time when the Priest burnt Incense; and the people were at their
private prayers without, as appears Luke 1.9. where we read, that while
Zachary the Priest went in to offer Incense, all the people stood with out
praying in the time of the Oblation. Which Prayers were so far from being
Prescript Forms or Liturgies that they were not vocal but mental Prayers, as
Master Meade tells us in his exposition upon the eighth of the Revelations.

And whatever Peter and John did, this we know, that when the Publican and the
Pharisee went up to the Temple to pray (as the Apostle did at the hour of
prayer) their prayer was not of Regular prescription, but of a present
Conception. Page 18.


But if this Remonstrant be in the right, concerning the Jewish Liturgies, then
the Evangelical Church might better have improved her peace and happiness,
Page 11.
then in composing Models of Invocation and Thanksgiving, when there is one
extant and ready to be produced, that was constantly used by Gods people ever
since Moses days, and put over to the times of the Gospel, and confirmed by
Apostolical practice: or else great is our loss, who are so unhappily deprived
of the best improvement, the Church made of her peace and happiness in the
first 300. years: for rejecting those Liturgies that are confessed by the
Learned to be Spurious: we challenge this Remonstrant to produce any one
Liturgy that was the issue of those times. Eusebius. de vit. Con. li. 4. Cap. 18.
And blessed Constantine was herein as unhappy as we, who needed not have
composed forms of prayer for his Guard to use upon the Lords day, but might and
would have taken them out of former Liturgies, if there had been any; And can
ye with patience think that any ingenuous Christian should be so transported,
Page 11.
as upon such weak and unproved premises to build such a Confident conclusi^n,
as this Remonstrant does? and in that Conclusion forget the state of the
controversy, sliding from the question of a prescribed and imposed Liturgy to
an arbitrary book of prayer.

In his Rhetorical Encomium of conceived prayer we shall more willingly bear a
part with him, then they whose cause he pleads; for had that been in their
hearts, which is in this book: to hate, to be guilty of pouring water upon the
Spirit, and gladly to add oil rather: so many learned, able, Page 12.
Conscientious Preachers had not been molested and suspended, for letting the
constant flames of their fixed conceptions mount up from the altar of their
zealous heart unto the throne of grace: nor had there been so many advantages
watched from some stops and seeming soloecismes in some men's prayers, to
blaspheme the spirit of Prayer, which though now confessed to be so far from
being offensive, Page 12.
that they are as pleasing Music in the ears of the Almighty: yet time has
been, when they have sounded as mere Battologies; nay no better then mere
Blasphemies in the ears of some Bishops.

And if this conceived prayer be not to be opposed in another, Page 13.
by any man that has found the true operation of this grace in himself: with
that spirit then are those possessed, that have not only thus raged with their
tongues against this way of prayer, but by sealing up the mouths of Ministers
for praying thus in public, and imposing penances upon private Christians for
praying thus in their families: and compelling them to abjure this practice,
have endeavored with raging violence to banish this divine ordinance from our
Churches and dwellings, and professed in open Court, it was fitter for Amsterdam
then for our Churches. D. Corbet. M. Nevel.


But howsoever this applause of conceived prayer may seem to be Cordial, yet he
makes it but a vantage ground to lift up public forms of sacred Church
Liturgy (as he calls it) the higher, that they may have the greater honor,
that by the power of your authority they be reinforced, which work there would
have been no need to call your Honors to, had not Episcopal zeal broke forth
into such flames of indignation against conceived prayers, that we have more
just cause to implore the propitious aid of the same Authority to re-establish
the Liberty of this, Page 13.
then they to reinforce the necessity of that.

Yet there are two specious Arguments which this Remonstrant brings to persuade
this desired re-inforcement, the Original and Confirmation of our Liturgy.

For the first, he tells your Honors, it was selected out of ancient. Models
not Roman but Christian, contrived by the holy Martyrs and Confessors of the
blessed reformation of Religion; Page 13.
where we beseech your Honors to consider how we may trust these men, who
sometimes speaking and writing of the Roman Church, proclaim it a true Church
of Christ, and yet here Roman and Christian stand in opposition: sometimes they
tell men, their Liturgy is wholly taken out of the Roman Missal, only with
some little alteration: and here they would persuade your Honors there is
nothing Roman in it. But it is wholly selected out of pure Ancient Models, as
the Quintessence of them all. Whereas alas the original of it, is published to
the world, in that Proclamation of Edward the sixth.

And though here they please to style the Composers of it, holy Martyrs and
contrivers of the blessed Reformation: yet there are of the Tribe for whom he
pleads, not a few that have called them Traitors rather then Martyrs, and
Deformers rather then Reformers of our Religion.

supply of strength it has received from the recommendation of four most
Religious Princes, and your own Parliamentary establishments: and more
especially from the Proclamation of King James of famous memory: the validity
of which plea, your Honors are best able to judge, and therefore we leave it
at your Bar; yet these two things we know: first, that this form was never
established to be so punctually observed, so rigorously pressed, to the casting
out of all that scruple it, or any thing in it (as many of his Majesty's
Subjects now do) to the ( almost) justling out of the preaching of the Word
and Conceived Prayer altogether.

And secondly, as sure we are, that your Honors think neither your own Laws,
nor the Proclamation of that most famous and ever admired Prince, to be as
unalterable as the Laws of the Medes and Persians.

And now having briefly showed, that Liturgies are not of that antiquity that
this Remonstrant pretends, but that conceived prayer was in use in the Church
of God before Liturgies, and is justified from their own mouths, and not to be
found fault with by any but a graceless man: and having likewise showed that
our Liturgy was taken out of Models, not only Christian but Roman, and had
since the first compiling of it suffered alteration to the worse; and though
established by Law, and confirmed by Proclamation, was never intended to the
justling out, either of preaching or conceived prayer; these things declared,
we humbly crave your Honors leave to propound these two Queries.

QUERE. I.
Whether it be not fit to consider of the alteration of the present Liturgy.

First, because it symbolizeth so much with the Popish Mass,

It was made and composed into this frame, on purpose to

Because many things therein contained are stumbling blocks some are made to be
so essential to the prayer, as that all which the Minister says, is no prayer
without them; as in the Letany.

England, and is now made the upholder of a non-preaching Ministry, and is
cried up to that height, as that some are not ashamed to say; Abbot against
Church-forsakers.
that the wit of men and Angels cannot mend it: and that it is a sufficient
discharge of the Ministers

There are such multitudes of people, that distaste this book, that unless it
be altered, there is no hope of any mutual agreement between Gods Ministers and
their people.



QUERE II.
Whether the first reformers of Religion did ever intend the use of a Liturgy
further, then to be an help, in the want, or to the weakness of a Minister.



Edwards book left it unto the discretion of the Minister, what and how much to
read, when there was a Sermon.



The ground of the first binding of it upon all to use, was not

That which makes many refuse to be present at our Church service, is not only
the Liturgy it self, but the imposing of it upon Ministers. And we find no way
to recover our people to a stinted prayer, but by leaving it free to use or not
to use.

If it be objected, Ob^
that this will breed divisions and disturbances in Churches, unless there be
a uniformity, and that there are many unable.

It has not bred any disturbance in other reformed Churches. Ans.


Why should the free liberty of using or not using a Liturgy,

If there be a care taken in those that have the power to make Wrens days, who
forbad all use of conceived prayer in the Church.

SECT. III.
WE come now with your Honors favor, to the second point disputed in this
Remonstrance, Episcopacy it self, against which, whatsoever has been either
spoken or written by any, either learned Divines, or well-reformed Churches (as
his conscience knows, Page 17.
there are of both that have writ against it) is Taxed by him as no other then
the unjust Clamors either of weak or factious persons. Sure the man thinks he
has obtained a Monopoly of learning, and all Knowledge is locked up in his
bosom; and not only Knowledge but piety and peaceablenesse too; Page 17.
for all that are not of his opinion, must suffer either as weak or factious,
if he may be their Judge. We know not what this Arrogance might attempt to
fasten upon your Honors, should the bowels of your compassion be enlarged, to
weigh in the Balance of your wisdoms, the multitude of Humble petitions,
presented to you from several parts of this Kingdom, that has long groaned
under the Iron and Insupportable yoke of this Episcopal Government, which yet
we doubt not, but your Honors will please to take into your prudent and pious
consideration: Especially knowing it is their continual practice to load with
the odious names of Faction all that justly complain of their unjust
oppression.

Page 17.
In his address to his defense of Episcopacy, he makes an unhappy confession
that he is confounded in himself. Your Honors may in this believe him; for he
that reads this remonstrance, may easily observe so many falsities and
contradictions, (though presented to public view, with a face of confident
boldness,) self-confounded man* which though we doubt not but your Honors
have descryed; yet because they are hid from an errant and unobserving eye,
under the Embroyderies of a silken Language, we Humbly crave your Honors leave
to put them one by one upon the file, that the world may see what credit is to
be given to the bold assertions of this confident Remonstrant.

First, in his second page, he dubs his book Page 2.
the faithful messenger of all One of these Sons of the Church of England
whose messenger this Remonstrant is, was he who swore by the Eternal God, he
would be the death of those that did appear to move against the grievances of
Episcopacy; and if the rest of these Millions mentioned page, 2. whose thousands
are so punctually calculated p. 41. be of his spirit, they are an army of very
peaceable and right-affected men.
the peaceable and right affected sons of the Church of England: which words
(besides that unchristian Theta, which as we already observed, they set upon
all that are not of his party,) carry in the bowels of them a notorious falsity
and contradiction to the phrase of the book; for how could this book be the
m^ss^nger of all his own party in England, when it is not to be imagined, that
all could know of the coming forth of this book before it was published? and
how can that book crave admittance in all their names, that speaks in the
singular number, and as in the person of one man almost tht whole book through.

But it may be some will say, this is but a small slip; well be it so: but in
the seventh page he lays it on in four lines, asserting these four things:
First, that Episcopal Government, (that very same Episcopal Government, which
some he says seek to wound, that is Government by Diocesan Bishops) derives
it self from the Apostles times; which though we shall (...) more fully confute
anon, yet we cannot here but rank it among his notorious --: for how could
there be such Government of a Diocese by a Bishop derived from the Apostles
times, when in the Apostles times there were no Bishops distinct from
Presbyters, as we shall show? Page 7.
or as most agree 260. before Parishes were distinguished, Evaristus. 100.
and there must be a distinction of Parishes before there could be an union of
them into Diocesses.

Dionysius. 260.
Secondly, it is by the joint confession of all reformed Divines granted, that
this sacred Government is derived from the Apostles: What all reformed Divines?
Some say 267. as P^l. Virg.
was Calvin, Beza, Iunius, etc. of that mind? Are the reformed Churches of
France, Scotland, Netherlands, Page 13, 14.
of that Judgment? we shall show anon that there is no more truth in this
Assertion then if he had said with Anaxagoras, snow is black, or with
Copernicus, tho Earth moves, and the Heavens stand still.

Thirdly, he says this Government has continued without any What does he
mean, at Rome? for we read in some places of the world this Government was
never known for many years together: as in Scotland, we read that in Ancient
times the Scots were instructed in the Christian faith by Priests and Monks,
and were without Bishops 290. years: John Mayor l. 2. Hist. de gest: Scot.
Cap. 2.
yea to come to England, we would desire to know of this Remonstrant whether
God had a Church in England in Q. Mary's days or no? and if so, who were then
the Bishops of this Church, for some there must be, if it be true that this man
says, this Government has continued without any interruption unto this day,
and Bishops then we know not where to find but in the line of Popish
succession.

Fourthly, he says it has thus continued without the contradiction of any one
Congregation in the Christian world. It seems he has forgotten, what their
own darling Heylin has written of the people of Biscay in Spain, that they
admit of no Bishops to come among them; for when Ferdinand the Catholic came
in progress accompanied among others with the Bishop of Pampelone, the people
rose up in Arms, drove back the Bishop, Heylins Geog. p. 55.
and gathering up all the dust which they thought he had trod on, flung it
into the Sea.

Which story had it been recorded only by him, Gener. Hist. of Spain l. 22
would have been of lighter Credit. But we read the same in the Spanish
Chronicle, who says more then the Doctor: for he tells us that the People threw
that dust that the Bishop or his Mule had trod on, into the Sea with Curses
and Imprecations: which certainly says he was not done without some Mystery,
those people not being void of Religion, but superstitiously devout as the
rest of the Spaniards are: so that there is one Congregation in the Christian
world in which this Government has met with contradiction.

And are not the French, Scottish, and Belgic Churches worthy to be counted
Christian Congregations? and who knows not that amongst these this Government
has met not only with verbal but real contradiction?

Yet he cannot leave his --: But within two pages is at it again; and tells us
of an unquestionable clearenesse wherein it has: how unquestionable? Page 9.
when the many volumes written about it, witness to the world, and to his
conscience, it has been as much questioned as any point (almost) in our
Religion.

had a form of prayer as ancient as Moses, which was constantly practiced to
the Apostles days, and by the Apostles, etc. though we have showed how bold
and false this assertion is, yet we mention it here as deserving to be put into
the Catalogue.

Contra mentem ire, but to be of the same mind still, Page 18.
p. 18. he says, Episcopal Government has continued in this Island ever since
the first plantation of the Gospel without contradiction. Had he taken a less
space of time, and said but since the resuscitation of the Gospel: we can prove
it to him and shall, that since the reformation, Episcopacy has been more
contradicted, then ever the Papacy was before the extirpation of it.

page 21. he says; Certainly, except all Histories, all Authors fail us,
nothing can be more certain then this truth: Os Durum! Nothing more certain!
what is it not more certain that there is a God? is it not more certain that
Christ is God and man? is it not more certain that Christ is the only Savior
of the world? Nothing more certain! must this th^n be an Article of our Creed,
the corner stone of our Religion? must this be of necessity to Salvation?
Nothing more certain! O that men should not only forget themselves, but God
also: and in their zeal for their own Honor utter words bordering upon
Blasphemy.

Indignation will not suffer us to prosecute these falsities of his any
further; we will leave this displeasing service, only retorting the words of
this Remonstrant upon himself, Page 18.
Surely could he look with our eyes (or any eyes that were not partial) he
would see cause to be thoroughly ashamed of these his gross injurious
miscarriages, and should be forced to confess, that never good cause (if cause
be good) had more reason to complain of a sinful prosecution.

SECT. IV.
WE will now come with your Honors patience, to weigh whether there be any
more strength in his arguments, then there is truth in his assertions.

His Plea for Episcopacy consists of two parts. In the first he brings
arguments for the supporting of it. In the second he undertakes to answer the
objections that may be made against it.

His first argument for it, is couched in these words; Were this Ordinance
merely Humane or Ecclesiastical, if there c^uld no more be said for it, but
that it is exceeding Ancient, of more then 15. hundred years, etc. The strength
of which argument lies in this, that they have been in peaceable possession of
this government fifteen hundred years and upwards; and in this Island ever
since the Gospel, without contradiction.

In which words he speaks two things which deserve just c^nsure. First, that
the Hierarchical Government has continued for fifteen hundred years; therefore
should not now be altered; which may well be called, as Hierom in another Case,
Argumentum Galeatum, an Argument calculated for the Meridian of Episcopacy, and
may indifferently serve for all Religions in the World: For thus the Jews might
have pleaded against Christ the Antiquity of more then so many hundred years;
and thus the Heathens did plead against the Christian Religion, which Justin
Martyr in his Apology answers. And by this Argument the Pope sits as fast
rivetted in his chair at Rome, as ours in theirs: whose Plea for Antiquity
runs parallel with theirs. It is a good observation of Cyprian, that Christ
said, Ego sum via, veritas and vita; not Ego sum consuetudo; and Frustra
co^saetudinem nobis opponunt, quasi consuetudo major sit veritate, aut nonid
sit in spiritualibus sequendum, quod in melius fuerit a Spiritu Sancto
Revelation: Cy^r* Ep. 73.
that Consuetudo sine veritate est vetustas erroris, Christ is Truth, and not
Custom; and Custom withou Truth, is a moldy error: and as Sir Francis Bacon
says, Antiquity without Truth, is a Cipher without a Figure.

Yet had this It is well observed by Gerhard, that a Bishop Phrasi Apostolica,
that is, the Bishop that is the same with a Presbyter, is of fifteen hundred
years standing; but a Bishop Phrasi Pontificia, that is, a distinct order
superior to a Presbyter, invested with sole power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction, is but a Novell Invention.
Remonstrant been as well versed in Antiquity, as he would bear the world in
hand he has, he might have found Learned Ancients affirming, there was a Time
when the Church was not governed by Bishops, but by Presbyters. And when by
Bishops, he might further have seen more affinity between our Bishops and the
Pope of Rome, then between the Primitive Bishops and them. And that as King
James of famous memory, said of the Religion of England, that it differed no
more from Rome, then Rome did from what it was at first; may as truly be said
of Bishops, that we differ no more from them then they do from what Bishops
were, when first they were raised unto this eminency: which difference we shall
show in our ensuing Discourse, to be so great, that as he said of Rome, he did
Roman in Roma quaerere, he sought Rome in Rome; so we Episcopatum in
Episcopatu, may go seek for a Bishop among all our Bishops.

And whereas in his application of this Argument to the Bishops of this Nation,
he says, It has continued in this Island ever since the first plantation of
the Gospel, without contradiction; which is his Second in this Argument: Page
19.
How false this is, we have declared already; and we all know, and himself
cannot but know, that there is no one thing since the r^formation, that has
met with so much Contradiction as Episcopacy has done; witness the several
Books written in the Reigns of our several Princes, and the many Petitions
exhibited to our several Parliaments, and the many speeches made therein againg
Episcopal Government: many of which are yet extant.

Page 19.
As for that supply of Accessory strength, which he begs to this Argument, from
the light of nature, and the rules of just policy, which (says he) teaches us
not easily to give way to the change of those things which long use and many
What the establishment of Episcopacy by the Laws is, and upon what grounded,
the learned Sir Edward (...) informs us, who reports, That in an Act of
Parliament holden at C^^^ile in the 25. year of Edw. 1. it is declared that the
holy Church of England was founded in the state of Prelacy within the Realm of
England, by the King and his Pregenitors, etc. for them to inform the people in
the Law of God, and to keep hospitality, and give alms, and do other works of
charity. And the said Kings in times past were wo^t to have their advice and
counsel for the safeguard of the Realm, when they had need of such Prelates
and Clerks so advanced. Cook de jure Regis Ecclesiastico. But whether Bishops
have observed the Orders of their first foundation, etc.
Laws have firmly established, as Necessary and Beneficial; it is evident, that
those things which to former Ages have seemed Necessary and Beneficial, may to
succeeding Generations, prove not Necessary but Noxious, not Beneficial, but
Burdensome; And then the same light of nature, and the same just policy, that
did at the first command the establishment of them, may and will persuade their
Abolishment; if not, either our Parliaments must never Repeal any of their
former Acts (which yet they have justly and wisely done) or else in so doing
must run Counter to the light of nature, and the Rules of just policy; which to
think were an impiety to be punished by the Judge.

SECT. V.
Page 19.20.
THe Second Argument for the defense of Episcopal Government, is from the
Pedigree of this holy Calling, which he derives from no less then an
Apostolical, and in that right divine institution; and assayes to prove it from
the practice of the Apostles and as he says, the clear practice of their
Successors, continued in Christ's Church to this very day: And to this Argument
he so much confides, that he concludes it with this Triumphant Epiphonema, Page
21.
What scruple can remain in any ingenuous heart? And determins, if any continue
yet unsatisfied, it is in despite of reason, and all evidence of History, and
because he wilfully shuts his eyes with a purpose not to see the light. Bona
verba.

By your favor Sir, we will tell you notwithstanding the supposed strength of
your argumentation, there is one scruple yet remaining; and if you would know
upon what ground, it is this; because we find in Scripture (which by your own
confession is O^iginal Authority) that Bishops and Presbyters were Originally
the same, though afterward they came to be distinguished: Page 8.
and in process of time, Episcopacy did swallow up all the honor and power of
the Presbytery, as Pharaoh's lean Kine did the fat.

Their Identity is discernable: first, from the same names given unto both:
secondly, from the same office designed unto both in Scripture. As for the
names, are not the same names given unto both in Sacred Writ? Let the fifth,
sixth, and seventh verses of the first Chapter to Titus testify: in the fifth
verse, the Apostle shows that he left Titus in Creet to ordain Elders in every
City; in the sixth verse, he gives a delineation of the persons that are
capable of such Ordination: and in the seventh, the Reason, why the person to
be ordained, must be so qualified: for a Bishop, etc. Now if the Bishop and
Elder be not here the same, but names of distinct office and order, the
Apostles reason rendered in the seventh verse of his direction in the fifth and
sixth verses, is (with reverence be it spoken) inconsequential, and his demand
unjust. If a Chancellor in one of the Universities should give order to his
Vice Chancellor to admit none to the degree of Batchelour in Arts, but such as
were able to preach, or keep a Divinity Act: For Batchelours in Divinity must
be so: what reason or equity were in this? So if Paul leaving Titus as his
Lecum tenens, as it were in Creet for a season, should give order to him not to
admit any to be an Elder but one thus and thus qualified, because a Bishop must
be so: had a Bishop been an Order or Calling distinct from, or superior to a
Presbyte^, and not the same, this had been no more rational or equal then the
former: therefore under the name of Bishop in the seventh verse the Apostle
intends the Elder mentioned in the fifth verse. Consonant to this is the
Language of the same Apostle, Acts. 20. v. 17.18. where such as in 17. verse he
calls (...), Elders, in the 18. he calls (...), in ordinary English, Bishops,
though our Translation there, (we know not for what reason) reads it Overseers:
not so rendering the word in any other Text.

And though this Remonstrant undertakes to show a clear and received
distinction of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, as three distinct subordinate
Callings in Gods Church, with an evident specification of the duty and charge
belonging to each of them, or else let this claimed Hierarchy be for ever
hooted out of the Church: Yet let us tell him, that we never find in Scripture
these three Orders, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, mentioned together: but
only Bishops and Deacons, as Phil. 1. and 1. Tim. Nor do we find in Scripture
any Ordination to the office of a Bishop, differing from the Ordination of an
Elder: Nor do we find in Scripture, the specification of any Duty charged upon
a Bishop, that Elders are secluded from: Nor any qualification required in a
Bishop, that is not requisite in every Presbyter; some of which, if not all,
would be found, were they not the same.

But if this Remonstrant think to help himself by taking Sanctuary in
Antiquity (though we would gladly rest in Scripture, the Sanctuary of the Lord)
yet we will follow him thither, and there show him that Hierome from the
Scriptures proves more then once, Presbyters and Bishops to be the same. And
Chrysostom in Philip. 1. Homil. 2. with his admirer Theophilact in Philip. 1.
affirms that while the Apostles lived, Hierony. Ep. ad Evag. and ad Ocea.
the names of Bishops and Presbyters were not distinguished: and not only
while the Apostles lived, but in after ages. Does not Irenaeus use the name of
Bishops and Presbyters (...), Iren. a^ver. ^aer. l. 4. c^p. 43.44.
in a promiscuous sense? Are not Anicetus, Pius, Hyginus, Telesphorus, Sixtus,
whom the Papists call Bishops, and the Popes predecessors, termed by Eusebius
Presbyters? Nor was it strange in the Primitive times to hear Bishops called
Presbyters, Hist. Lib. 5. Cap. 23.
when Presbyters writing to their Bishop have called him Frater. So Cyprian
(Epist. 26. in the beginning) is styled by his Presbyters, Deacons and
Confessors; nor was that holy Martyr offended with that title, nor they
condemned of insolency that used it.

But what should we burden your patience with more testimonies, when the
evidence of this truth has shined with so strong a beam that even our
Adversaries have stooped to it, and confessed that their Names were the same in
the Apostles time? Bellarm. de Cleric. Lib. 1. cap. 15.
But yet say they, the Offices were distinct.

Now here we would gladly know, what these men make the distinct Office of a
Bishop.

Is it to edify the Church by Word and Sacrament? is it to ordain others to
that work? is it to rule, to govern, by admonition and other censures? if any
of these, if all these make up the proper work of a Bishop; we can prove from
Scripture that all these belong unto the Presbytery, Presbytery sicut
Episcopis, Dispensatio Mysteriorum Dei commissa est: Praesunt enim Ecclesiae
Christi: in Consecratione Dominici corporis and sanguinis* consortes sunt cum
Episcopis: and similiter in Doctrina Populorum and in officio praedicandi: ac
solum propter auteritatem, summo Sacerdoti Clericorum Ordinatio reservata est:
Council. Aquisgran. primum, Can. 8.

Euangelium tribuit his qui praesunt Ecclesiae Mandatum docendi Evangeli,
remittendi peccata, administrandi Sacramenta: praeterea jurisdictionem;
videlicet Mandatum Excommunicandi eos quorum notae sunt crimina, and
Resipiscentes rursum absolvendi: Ac Omnium Consessione, etiam adversariorum
liquet, hanc potestatem Jure Divino communem esse Omnibus qui praesunt
Ecclesiae, sive Pastores vocentur, sive Presbyteri, Sive Episcopi. Scriptum
Philip. Melanch. in conventu Smalcald. Anno. 1540. a praecipuis illarum
Ecclesiarum Doctoribus communi Consensu comprobatu^ de potestate and
jurisdictione Episcoporum,


which is no more then was granted by a Council.

For the first, Edifying of the Church by word and Sacraments, their proper
work (for some have been cited into the High Commissision for saying, it
belongs to them) yet Sir we are sure, Scripture makes it a part, a chief of
the Episcopal office; (...).
for so in the 1 Pet. 5.2. they are said to do the work of a Bishop, when they
do feed the flock of God. And this is such a work as we hope their Lordships
will give the poor Presbyters leave to share with them in: or if not, we will
tell them that the Apostle Peter in that forecited place, and the Apostle Paul,
Acts. 20. binds this work upon our hands, and Woe unto us if we preach not the
Gospel.

But this branch of Episcopal and Presbyterial office we pass with brevity,
because in this there lies not so much controversy as in the next, which they
do more wholly Impropriate to themselves: the power of Ordination.

Which power, that it was in former times in the hands of Presbyters, appears
1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not the gift which was given thee by Prophecy, and by the
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. The gift here spoken of is the
Ministerial gift, the exercise whereof, the Apostle exhorts Timothy not to
neglect, which says he, he had received, not by the laying on of the hands of
one single man, whether Apostle, or Bishop, or Presbyter, but (...) the
Presbytery, that is, the whole company of Presbyters, for in that sense only
we find (...) taken in Scripture, as in Luke 22. verse. 66. Act. 22. verse. 5.
which the Christian Church called the Ecclesiastical Senate as Ierom in Isay 3.
Ierom. Isa. 3.
Nos habemus in Ecclesia Senatum nostrum, Coetum Presbyterorum, and an
Apostolical Senate: (...) Ignatius Epis. ad Magnes. and some times (...)
Council. Ancyr. Can. 18. Igna. Epis. ad Magnes. Conc. Ancyr. Can. 18.


And though the Apostle in his second Epistle to Tim. 1.6. makes mention of the
laying on of his hands: yet to maintain the Harmony of Scripture, it must not
be denied but there was imposition of hands by the Presbytery as well as by
himself, and so it was a joint act; So that in this there is no more difference
then in the former.

And if there be no difference between Presbyters in feeding or ordaining, let
us see if there be any in the third part of their office of Ruling, which
though our Bishops assume wholly to themselves, yet we shall discover, that it
has been committed to and exercised by Presbyteriall hands.

For who are they of whom the Scripture speaks, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that
have the Rule over you? for they watch for your souls, as they that must give
an account, etc.

Here all such as watch over the souls of Gods people, are entitled to rule
over them. So that unless Bishops will say, that they only watch over the
souls of Gods people, and are only to give an account for them, they cannot
challenge to themselves the sole rule over them. And if the Bishop^ can give us
good security, that they will acquit us from giving up our account to God for
the souls of his people, we will quit our plea, and resign to them the sole
rule over them.

So again in the 1 Thessa. 5.12. Know them which labor amongst you, and are
over you in the Lord, and admonish you.

In which words are contained these truths; First that in one Church (for the
Thessalonions were but one Church, 1, Ca.) there was not (...) but (...); not
one chief Bishop or President, but the Presidency was in many.

Secondly, that this Presidency was of such as labored in the word and
Doctrine.

Thirdly, that the Censures of the Church were managed not by one, but by them
all in Communi. Them that admonish you.

Fourthly, that there was among them a Parity: for the Apostle bids know them
in an indifferency, not discriminating one from another: yea such was the rule
that Elders had, that S. Peter thought it needful to make an exhortation to
them to use their power with Moderation, not Lording it over Gods Heritage, 1
Pet. 5.3.

By this time we have sufficiently proved from Scripture, that Bishops and
Presbyters are the same in name, in Office, in Edifying the Church, in power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction: we sum up all that has been spoken in one
argument:

They which have the same Name, the same Ordination to their Office, the same
qualification for their Office, the same work to feed the flock of God, to
ordain pastors and Elders, to Rule and Govern; they are one and the same
Office: but such are Bishops and Presbyters: Ergo.

SECT. VI.
BUt the dint of all this Scripture, the Remonstrant would elude, by Page 20.
obtruding upon his reader a commentary (as he calls it) of the Apostles own
practice (which he would force to contradict their own rules) to which he
superadds the unquestionable gloss of the clear practice of their immediate
successors in this administration. For the Apostles practice, we have already
discovered it, from the Apostles own writings; and for his Gloss he superadds,
if it corrupts not the Text, we shall admit it; but if it do, we must answer
with Tertullian; Tertul.
Id verum quodcunque primum: id adulterum quod posterius, whatsoever is first
is true; but that which is latter is adulterous.

In the examination of this Gloss, to avoid needless Controversy, First, we
take for granted by both sides, that the first and best Antiquity, used the
names of Bishops and Presbyters promiscuously. Secondly, that in process of
time, some one was honored with the name of Bishop, and the rest were called
Presbyters or Cleri. Thirdly, that this was not Nomen inane, but there was some
kind of Imparity between him and the rest of the Presbyters.

Yet in this we differ; that they say, this Impropriation of name, and Imparity
of place, is of Divine Right and Apostolical Institution: we affirm both to be
occasional, and of humane Invention; and undertake to show out of Antiquity,
both the occasion upon which, and ^he Persons by whom this Imparity was brought
into the Church.

On our parts stands Jerome and Ambrose, and others, whom we doubt not but our
Remonstrant will grant a place among his Glossators: Saint Jerome tells us in 1
Tit.

Idem est ergo Presbyt^r qui Episcopus: and antequam Diaboli instinctu, studia
in Religione fierent, and diceretur in populis, eco sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego
Cephae, Communi Presbyteroru^ Consilio ecclesiae gubernabantur. Postquam vero
unusquisque eos quos bap^izaverat suos putabat esse, non Christi; in toto Orb
decretum est, ut unus de Presbyteris electus superponeretur caeteris, ad quem
omnis Ecclesiae Cura pertineret, and schismatum semina tollerentur. Putat
aliquis non Scripturarum, sed nostram esse sententiam, Episcopum and
Presbyterum unum esse, and aliud aetatis, aliud esse nomen of^ic^i, relegat
Apostoli ad Philippenses verba, dicentis, Paulus and Timothaeus servi Jesus
Christi qui sunt Philippis, cum Episcopis and Diaconis, etc. Philippi una est
urbs Macedoniae, and certe in una Civitate non poterant plures esse (ut
nuncupantur) Episcopi, etc. sicut ergo Presbyteri sciant se ex Ecclesiae
consuetudine ei qui sibi praepositus fuerit esse subjectos; Ita Episcopi
noverint se magis consuetudine, quam dispositionis Dominicae veritate
Presbyteris esse majores, and in Communi debere Ecclesiam regere.

A Presbyter and a Bishop is the same: and before there were through the Devils
instinct, divisions in Religion, and the people began to say, I am of Paul, and
I of Apollo, and I o^ Cephas, the Churches were governed by the Common Council
of the Presbyters. But after that each man began to account those whom he had
baptized his own, and not Christ's; it was decreed through the whole world, that
one of the Presbyters should be set over the rest; to whom the care of all the
Church should belong, that the seeds of schism might be taken away. Thinks
any, that this is my opinion, and not the opinion of the Scripture, that a
Bishop and an Elder is the same? let him read the words of the Apostle to the
Philippians, saying, Paul and Timothy, the servants of Jesus Christ, to them
that are at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons, Philippi is one city of
Macedonia, and certainly in one city there could not be many Bishops (as they
are now called etc.) and after the allegations of many other Scriptures, he
concludes thus; as the Elders therefore may know, that they are to be subject
to him that is set over them by the custom of the Church; so let the Bishops
know, that it is more from custom, then from any true dispensation from the
Lord, that they are above the Presbyters, and that they ought to rule the
Church in common.

In which words of Jerome, these five things present themselves to the Readers
view;

First, that Bishops and Presbyters are originally the same; Idem. ergo est
Presbyter qui Episcopus.

Secondly, that that Imparity that was in his time between Bishops and Elders,
was grounded upon Ecclesiastical custom, and not upon devine Institution;
Episcopi noverint, etc.

Thirdly, that this was not his private judgment, but the judgment of
Scripture; Putat aliquis, etc.

Fourthly, that before this Priority was upon this occasion started, the Church
was governed Communi Presbyterorum Consilio, by the Counsel of the Presbyters
in common, and that even after this imparity, it ought to be so governed;
Sciant Episcopi se Ecclesiam debere in communi regere.

Fifthly, that the occasion of this Imparity and Superiority of Bishops above
Elders, was the divisions which through the Devils instinct fell among the
Churches; Postquam vero Diaboli instinctu.

Saravia would take advantage of this place, to deduce this Imparity as high as
from the Apostles times, because even then they began to say, I am of Paul, and
I of Apollos: but sure S. Jerome was not so weak as this man would make him,
to speak Inconsistencies; and when he propounds it to himself, to prove that
Bishops and Presbyters are in Scripture the same, to let fall words that should
confute his own proposition: whereas therefore S. Jerome says, that after men
began to say, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, etc. it was decreed that one of
the Presbyters should be set over the rest, etc. This is spoken indeed in the
Apostles phrase, but not of the Apostles times, else to what purpose, is that
coacervation of texts that follows?

But suppose it should be granted to be of Apostolical antiquity (which yet we
grant not, having proved the contrary) yet it appears, it was not of
Apostolical intention, but of Diabolical occasion: And though the Devil by
kindling Divisions in the Church, did minister Occasion to the invention of the
primacy or prelacy or one for the suppressing of Schism; yet there is just
cause to think, that the Spirit of God in his Apostles was never the author of
this invention.

First, because we read in the Apostles days there were Divisions, Romans 16.7.
and Schisms, 1 Cor. 3.3. and 11.18. yet the Apostle was not directed by the
holy Ghost to ordain Bishops for the taking away of those Divisions. Neither
in the rules he prescribes for the healing of those breaches, does he mention
Bishops for that end: Nor in the Directions given to Timothy and Titus for the
Ordination of Bishops or Elders, does he mention this as one end of their
Ordination, or one peculiar duty of their office. And though the Apostle says,
Oportet haereses inter vos esse, ut qui probati sunt manifesti fiant inter vos;
yet the Apostle no where says, Oportet Episcopos esse, ut tollantur haereses,
quae manifestae fiunt.

Secondly, because as Doctor Whitaker says, the remedy devised

Thirdly, because the holy Ghost, who could foresee what would ensue thereupon,
would never ordain that for a remedy, which would not only be ineffectual to
the cutting off of evil, but become a stirrup for Antichrist to get into his
saddle. For if there be a necessity of setting up one Bishop over many
Presbyters for preventing schisms, there is as great a necessity of setting up
one Archbishop over many Bishops, and one Patriarch over many Archbishops, and
one Pope over all, unless men will imagine, that there is a danger of schism
only among Presbyters, and not among Bishops and Archbishops, which is
contrary to reason, truth, History, and our own Experience.

And lest our adversaries should appeal from Hierome as an incompetent Judge
in this case, because a Presbyter, and so a party, we will therefore subjoyne
the judgments of other ancient Fathers who were themselves Bishops.

The Commentaries that go under the name of Saint Ambrose upon Ephesians. 4.
mention another occasion of this Discrimination or priority; and that was At
ubi omnia Loca Circumplexa est Ecclesia, Conventicula constituta sunt: and
caeperunt Rectores: and Caetera Officia in Ecclesiis sunt ordinata. Caepit
ali^t ordine and Providentia gubernari Ecclesia. Ideo non per omnia convenient
Scripta Apostoli ordinationi quae nune in Ecclesia est, quia haec inter ipsa
primordia scripta sunt. Nam and Timotheum a se Presbytorium Creatum Episcopum
vocat, etc. Sed quia experuli^ sequentes Presbyteri indigni inveniri ad
primatus tenendos, immutata est ratis, etc.
the increase and dilatation of the Church upon occasion whereof they did
ordain Rectors or Governors, and other officers in the Church; yet this he
grants, that this did differ from the former orders of the Church, and from
apostolical Writ.

And this Rectorship or Priority was devolved at first from one Elder to
another by Succession, when he who was in the place was removed, the next in
order among the Elders Succeeded. But this was afterward changed, and that
unworthy men might not be preferred, it was made a matter of Election, and not
a matter of Succession. Thus much we find concerning the occasion of this
imparity, enough to show, it is not of Divine Authority.

For the second thing, the persons who brought in this Imparity: the same
Authors tells us, the Presbyters themselves brought it in; witness Hierome ad
Evag. Alexandriae Presbyteri unum ex se electum in Excelsiori gradu collacatum,
Hierom ad Evag.
Episcopum nominabant, quomodo si exercitus Imperatorem faceret, aut Diaconi de
se Archidiaconum. The Presbyters of Alexandria did call him their Bishop, whom
they had chosen from among themselves, and placed in a higher degree; as if an
army should make an Emperor, or the Deacons an Archdeacon.

Ambrose upon the fourth of the Ephesians tells us, Ambros, ubi prius.
it was done by a Council, and although he neither name the time nor place of
the Council, yet ascribing it to a Council he grants it not to be Apostolical:
this gave occasion to others to six it upon Custom as Hieronym, in Tit. and
August. Epist. 19. secundum honorum vocabula quae Ecclesiae usus obtinuit
Episcopatus Presbyterio major est, And had that (...) or Prelacy had the Seal
and confirmation of Divine or Apostolical Authority, Gregory Nazianzene would
never in such a Pathetick manner have wished the Abolition of it, as he does in
his 28. Oration. Grego, Naz. Orat. 28.


And now where is that acknowledgement, and conveyance of Imparity and
Jurisdiction which says this Remonstrant was derived from the Apostles hands,
Page 21, 22.
and deduced in an uninterupted l^ne, unto this day: where is it? we find no
such Imparity delivered from Apostolical hands, nor acknowledged in Apostolical
writings; yet had there been such an acknowledgement and conveyance of
imparity: how this should have been deduced to us in an uninterrupted Line, we
know not, unless our Bishops will draw the Line of their Pedigree through the
^oynes of Antichrist, and join issue, and mingle blood with Rome: which it
seems they will rather do then lose this plea for their (...) their
tyrannical prerogative, as Nazianzen calls it, Greg. Nazi. ubi priu^.


Suffer us therefore humbly to appeal to your Honors, whether this
Remonstrant has not given sentence against himself, who is so confident of the
Evidence of his cause, that he does not fear to say, if there can be better
Evidence under Heaven for any matter of fact then there is for his Episcopacy:
Let EPISCOPACY BE FOR EVER ABANDONED OUT OF THE CHURCH OF GOD. Page 22.


SECT. VII.
YEt it seems himself in the height of his confidence was not without
Jelousies, of some thing might be spoken against his cause, therefore he seems
to hear, what is spoken against it.

That the Apostles Bishops and ours are two: there was no other then a
Parochial Pastor, a Preaching Presbyter without inequallity, Page 23.
without any Rule over his brethren. Ours claim an eminent Superiority, and a
power of Ordination and Jurisdiction unknown to the Primitive times.

That this which he supposes he hears us say is Scripture Truth we have
showed already, etc. that there was a parity between Presbyters and Bishops:
and that eminent superiority and power of Ordination and Jurisdiction which our
Bishops claim, was unknown to Scripture: and are now prepared by Gods
assistance to prove, it was unknown to primitive times.

But how does this Remonstrant meet with this Reply: ALAS, ALAS, HOW GOOD
PEOPLE may be abused by misinformation! Page 23.
It seems the man Judged this Reply so poor as in his thoughts it was more
worthy of his pity, then of his pains to answer, or rather knew there was
more in this Reply, then he knew how to answer, and therefore waves it with his
Rhetoric.

And this we rather think, because he knows but little in Antiquity, that
knows not, that there is so vast a difference between our Bishops, and those
that were not only in the Apostles days (whom we have proved to be
undistinguished from Presbyters) But those Bishops that were in the Church 400.
years after, when there began to be some discrimination, that Episcopacy may
well be likened to the Ship Argo, that was so often repaired, as there was
nothing left of the First Materials; yet still it challenged the first Name.

Which difference we spread before your Honors in three particulars: first in
point of Election to their office; secondly, in point of Execution of their
office; thirdly, in point of State-Imployment.

First (having discovered already upon what occasion this priority began to
have existence in the Church, and from whom it first received its being, not
from God but from Consent and Custom of the Churches, according to Ambrose,
Jerome, Augustine, etc.) We come now to Declare what was the manner of Election
unto this Priority in these times, and to show first, how therein these Bishops
did differ from ours: for all their Elections were ordered by the privity,
consent, and approbation of the people, where the Bishops was to serve. Were
there no other Authors to make this good, Cyprian alone would do it, among
other places let his 68. Epistle witn^sse, where he says Plebs ipsa Maxim
babet potesiatem vel Eligend^. Dignos Sacerdotes, vel indignos vecusandi, qu^d
and ipsum Videmus de Divina Authoritate de scendere: ut sacerdos plebe
praesente sub omnium oculis deligatu^, and dignus atque Idoneus publico Iudicio
ac testimonio comprobetur. By Priests the Author here understands Bishops, as
the whole Series of the Epistle shows.
plebs Maxim habet potestatem, etc. The people specially have power either of
choosing worthy Priests, or rejecting the unworthy: for this is derived from
Divine Authority, that the Priests should be chosen in the presence of the
people, before all their eyes and approved as fit and worthy by their public
vote and Testimony. This he proves by the Testimony of Sacred writ both Old and
New. Where we observe first, that the special power of Judging of the
worthiness or unworthiness of a man for the Prelacy was in the breast of the
Peogle. Secondly, the special power of choosing or rejecting eo his place
according as they Judged him worthy or unworthy resided in the People, Plebs
maxim Habet potestatem, etc. Thirdly, that this power did descend upon the
People De Divina Authoritate.

Nor was this the Judgment of one Sole man, but of an Affrican Synod consulted
by the Spanish Churches in point of Election, as the inscription of the Epistle
shows.

(...), -- (...) -- (...).
The Obtrusion of a Bishop upon the Church of Alexandria without the Presence,
desire and vote of the Clergy or People is condemned by Athanasius not only as
a breach of Canon, but as a Transgression of Apostolical prescript, and that it
did compel or necessitate the heathen to blaspheme.

Nor did only Christian Bishops, but Christian Princes acknowledge the Right
and power of Election of Bishops to be in the People, so that admired
Constantine the great Promover and Patron of the peace of the Christian Church
writing to the Church of Nicomedia against Eusebius, and Theognius, tells them
the ready way to lay asleep the Tumults that did then disturb the Church about
the Election of a Bishop was, si modo Episcopum fidelem and integrum nacti
fuerint, quod quidem in praesentia in vestra situm est potestate, quodque etiam
dudum penes vestrum Iudicium fuerat, nisi Eusebius de quo dixi pravo little, qui
cum juverunt Consilio hac praeceps ruisset and rectum Eligendi Ordinem
impudenter conturbasset. Gelas in Act, Council. Nicen. part. 3. if they would
get a faithful and upright Bishop which says he, Athanas. Epist. ad Orthodoxos.
is in your power presently to do; and was long ago, if Eusebius with the
aid of his faction, had not rushed in upon you, and impudently disturbed the
right Order of Election.

That which this sacred Emperor calls the right order of Election, what is it
but the Election by the people? in whose power, he says it then was and long
had been to choose a Bishop; and by whose power the next Bishop was chosen. So
the same Author tells us, that after Eusebius and Theognius were cast out of
their several seats for Arianisme, by the Council of Nice, Idem ubi supra.
others were appointed in their rooms by the Clergy and people of each
Diocese.

To this Election in Nicomedia, we could (if it were needful in so clear a
Truth) add many the like Presidents of popular Elections; which for brevities
sake, we pass over. Not questioning, Cyprian, Cornelius, Athanasius and others.
but that which has been spoken, is sufficient to inform the intelligent
Reader, that our Bishops and the Bishops of former times, are TWO in point of
Election.

SECT. VIII.
A Second thing wherein we have undertaken to show, that our Bishops and the
Bishops of former times are TWO, is in the Execution of their Office: and here
there are three things, wherein he that will not wilfully shut his eyes against
all light, may see a Latitude of difference between ours and former Bishops.
First, in that Sole Jurisdiction which our Bishops assume to themselves.
Secondly, in the Delagation they make of the power of exercising this
Jurisdiction unto others. Thirdly, in the way of the exercise of that power.

For the first of these, Their sole Jurisdiction; That our Bishops assume this
to themselves, it is known and felt, and that this Sole Jurisdiction was a
stranger, a Monster to former times, we shall now prove, and make clear; that
the power of Ordination, Admonition, Excommunication, Absolution, was not in
the hands of any sole man.

First, for Ordination, Cyprian in his exile writing to his Charge, certifies
them, that Aurelius was ordained by him and his Colleagues, Cypr. Epist. 33.
who were present with him; (who were these Colleagues, but his Presbyters; as
he himself expounds it, writing to Lucius in his own name, and the name of his
Clergy and people, Ego and Collegae and fraternitas omnis, etc. Epist. 58.
I and my Colleagues and my whole people send these Letters to you, etc. So
that it is clear in Cyprians time, Presbyters had a hand in Ordination, and
Bishops did not Ordain alone. Firmilianus says of them that rule in the
Church, Quod baptizandi, Apud Cypr. Epist. 75.
MANVM IMPONENDI ET ORDINANDI, poffident potestatem. And who those he, he
expresses a little before, SENIORES and Prapositi: by whom the Presbyters as
well as the Bishops are understood.

And as these places prove, that Bishops in the Primitive time, could not
ordain alone without the Presbyters; so there are that give us light to
understand, that the Presbyters might ordain without the Bishop. The Author of
the Comment upon the Ephesians, that goes under the name of of Ambrose, says,
Apud Egyptum Presbyteri consignant, si praesens non sit Episcopus, In Egypt the
Presbyters ordain, if the Bishop be not present; so says Augustine in the same
words; and the Cum jure Divino non sint diversi gradus Episcopi and Pastores:
Manifestum est ordinationem in sua Ecclesia factam IVRE DIVINO RATAM esse.
Itaque cum Episcopi ordinarii fiant hosts Ecclesiae aut nolunt ordinationem
impertire, Ecclesia retinet jus suum. Melanch. ubi supra, page Council. Antios.
Can. 10. and Aneyr. Can. 13.
Corepiscopus, who was but a Presbyter, had power to impose hands, and to
ordain within his precincts, with the Bishops License. Now Licenses confer not
a power to him that has it not, but only a faculty to exercise that power he
has.

The iniquity of our times has been such, that a Minister may not Preach to
his own flock, without a License: does this License make a man a Minister, and
give him power to preach, or only a faculty and liberty to exercise that power?
Should a Bishop give a Laike a License to preach, or to ordain, does that
License make him a Minister, or a Bishop? Sure all will say, no: why? because
in the Laike there is not Actus primus, the root and principle of that power,
which License only opens a way to the exercise of; and therefore that must be
concluded to be in those Chorepiscopi; or Presbyters, by virtue of their place
and calling, and not by virtue of a License. So that the power of Ordination
was so far from residing in the Bishop alone, as that the Presbyters and
Corepiscopi had power to ordain as well as he.

Neither was this only a matter of Ecclesiastical custom, but of
Ecclesiastical constitution, which bids the Bishop;

First, in all his Ordinations to consult with his Clergy; Vt Episcopus sine
Concilio Clericorum suorum Clericos non ordinet: Council. 4. Cathag. Can. 22.
That the Bishop shall not ordain a Clergy man without the counsel of the
Clergy: this was Cyprians practice, Epist. 33.

Ibid. Can. 3.
Cum ordinatur Presbyter, Episcopo eum benedicente, and manum super caput ejus
tenente, etiam omnes Presbyteri qui praesentes sunt, manus suas juxta manum
Episcopi sut er caput illius teneant. When a Presbyter is ordained, the Bishop
blessing him, and holding his hand upon his head, all the Presbyters that are
present, shall likewise lay their hands upon his head, with the hands of the
Bishop. In which Canon, we have the unanimous vote of two hundred and fourteen
Bishops, declaring that the power of Ordination is in the hands of Presbyters
as well as Bishops. Hieronym. in Epist. ad Evag. Chrysostom. Hom. II. in I. ad
Tim.


And whereas it may be objected, that Hierome and Chrysostom, affirming
Bishops to differ from Presbyters in the power of Ordination, seem to imply,
that that power is soly theirs: Here we desire it may be observed.

First, that these Fathers put all the difference that lies between Bishops
and Presbyters, to be in point of Ordination. Quid facit Episcopus, quod non
facit Presbyter excepta Ordinatione. And therefore Chrysostom himself
confesses, that in his days there was little or no difference between a Bishop
and a Presbyter. Inter Episcopum and presbyterum interest ferme nihil, etc.
Chrysostom. upon the 1. Tim,


Secondly, That this difference is not so to he understood, as if these Fathers
did hold it to be by divine right (as Bellarmin and our Episcopal men would
make us believe) but by a humane constitution. And therefore they do not speak
De jure but de facto, Libro de septem Ordinibus.
Quid facit, etc. not quid debet facere. And this Hierom confesses. So Leo
prim. ep. 88. upon complaints of unlawful Ordinations, writing to the Germane
and French Bishops, reckons up what things are reserved to the Bishops, among
which he set down Presbyterorum and Diaconorum consecratio, and then adds,
Council. Aquisgra. 1. Can. 8. Solum propter authoritatem Clericorum ordinatio
and consecratio reservata est summo Sacerdoti*
Quae omnia solis deberi summis Pontificibus Authoritate Canonam praecipitur:
So that for this power of Ordination, they are more beholden to the Canon of
the Church, then to the Canon of Gods Word.

Thirdly, we answer that this very humane difference was not in the Primitive
Antiquity. It was not so in Cyprians time, as we even now showed. And when it
did prevail, it was but a particular custom (and sometimes usurpation) of
some Churches. For it was otherwise appointed in the Council of Carthage, and
in Egypt, and other places, as is declared in the former part of this Section;
and even in Chrysostomes time, it was so little approved of, that it was one
great accusation against Chrysostom himself, That he made Ordinations without
the Presbytery, and without the consent of his Clergy, this is quoted by Bishop
Downam, lib. 1. cap. 8. page 176.

SECT. IX. Bilson. Spalat. Franc. a Sancta Clara. Cyp. Epist. 6. and 28.

NO^ had the Bishops of former times more right to the power of sole
Jurisdiction, then of sole Ordination: And here we have Confitentem reum, our
very Adversaries confess the Votes of Antiquity are with us.

Cyprian professes, that he would do nothing without the Clergy; Council. 4.
Carth^g. Can. 23. Vid Ruff. Hist. lib. 10. cap. 9. Sozo. l. 2. c. 23. Possiden.
de vita. Aug. c. 4. Orig. Ham. 11. in Exo. page 97.
nay, he could do nothing without them; nay, he durst not take upon him alone
to determine that which of right did belong to all; and had he or any other
done so, the fourth Council of Carthage condemns the Sentence of the Bishop, as
Irritanisi Clericorum sententia confirmetur.

Would ye know the particulars, wherein the Bishops had no power of Judicature
without their Presbyters.

Decret. part. 2. Can. 15. quae. 7. Per totum and parts Did. 93. cap. 5, 6.
For this the Canon Law in Gratian is full and clear: Episcopus non potest
Iudicare Presbyterum vel Diaconum sine Synodo and Senioribus: Thus Basil
counseled and practiced, epist. 75. So Ambr. lib. 10. epist. 80. Cyril in
epist. ad Iohannem Antiochen. Thus Gregory ad Johan. Panor mitan. lib. 11.
epist. 49.

Clem. Alex. Stromat. lib. 7.
Penes Presbyteros est Disciplina quae facit homines meliores; That Discipline
that works emendation in men, is in the power of the Elders. And therefore
when any was questioned in point of conversation, he was brought, says
Tertullian, into the Congregation where were Exhortations, Castigations, and
Divine censures: Tertul. Apol. advers. Gent.
And who had the chief stroke in these Censures, he tells us after: President
probati quique seniores: All the approved Elders sit as Presidents.

And those censures that passed by the whole Presbytery were more approved by
the Church in ancient times, then such as were passed by one man; for we find
that when Syagrius and Ambrose passed Sentence in the same case, the Church was
unsatisfied in the Sentence of Syagrius, because he past it sine alicujus
fratris consilio, without the counsel or consent of any of his Brethren. But
were pacified with the sentence of Saint Ambrose: because, says he, Hoc
Iudicium Nostrum cum fratribus and consacerdotibus participatum processerit.
Ambros. Epist. ad Syagrium.


Nor was there any kind of censures that the Bishops did administer alone:
Admonitions were given by the Elders; Augustine tells us the Elders did
admonish such as were offenders* Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 19.
to the same purpose speaks. Origin. contra Celsum. Lib. 3.

Constat. Iurisdictionem illam excommunicandi reos manifestorum criminum
pertinere ad onnes Pastores, hanc ad se solos tyrannice transtulerunt, and ad
questum contulerunt Episcopi, Melanc. ubi sup.
So excommunication, though that being the dreadfullest thunder of the Church,
and as Tertullian calls it, sumntum praejudicium futuri Iudicij, the great
forerunner of the Judgment of God, was never vibrated but by the hand of
those that labored in the Word and Doctrine: yet was no one man in the Church
invested with this power more then another.

Therefore says Hieron. Epist. ad Heliodor. Ep. ad Demet.
Hierom; Presbytero si peccavero licet me tradere satanae in interitum carnis.
If I sin, a Presbyter (not a Bishop only) may deliver me to Satan, to the
destruction, etc. where the Reader may please to take notice that Saint Hierom
speaks not of one particular Presbyter, but of the Order of Presbyters.

The same S. Hierom says again, Sunt quos Ecclesia reprehendit, quos interdum
abijcit, in quos non nunquam Episcoporum and Clericorum censura desaevit. There
be some whom the Church reproves, and some which she casts out; against whom
the censures of Bishops and Presbyters sharply proceed; where we see, the
Censures whereby wicked men were cast out of the Church, were not in the sole
hands of the Bishops, but likewise in the hands of Presbyters.

Syricius Bishop of Rome signifies to the Church of Millaine, that Iovinianus,
Auxentius, etc. were cast out of the Church for ever, and he sets down how they
did it, Ambros. lib. 10. Epist. 80.
Omnium Nostrum tam Presbyterorum quam Diacon^rum, quam totius etiam cleri
sciscitata fuit sententia. There was a concurrence of all Presbyters, Deacons,
and the whole Clergy in that sentence of Excommunication.

The truth herein may be further evidenced by this, because the whole Clergy as
well as the Bishops imposed hands upon such, as repenting were absolved: Nec ad
communicationem (says Cyprian) venire quis possit, nisi prius ab Episcopo and
Clero Manus illi fuerit imposita: Cypr. Epist. 12.
No man that has been excommunicated might return to Church Communion, And
this was the custom, says Cyprian in minoribus delictis.
before hands had been laid upon him by the Bishop and Clergy.

Also writing to his Clergy concerning lapsed Christians, he tells them,
Exomologesi facta and manu eis a vobis in poenitentiam imposita, etc. that
after confession and the laying on their hands, they might be commended unto
God: so when certain returning from their heresy were to be received into the
Church at Rome in the time of Cornelius, they came before the Presbytery, and
therefore confessed their sins, Cypr. Epist. 46. vide etiam Cypr Epist. 6.
and so were admitted.

But though the sentence of Excommunication was managed only by the hand of
those that labored in the Word and Doctrine, yet we will not conceal from
you, that neither Excommunication not absolution did pass without the
knowledge and approbation of the body of the Church, to which the Delinquent
did belong.

So we have learned out of Tertullian, Tertul. Apol. adver. Gent. cap. 59.
that their censures were ordered in their public assemblies; and good reason,
because the people were to forbear communion with such. 2 These. 3.6, 14, 15.
and public censures of the Church were inflict^d not only for the Emendation
of delinquents, but for the admonition of others, and therefore ought to be
admistr^d in public that others might fear, 1 Timothy 5.20. Origin speaking of
the Duty and Power of the Church in cutting off a scandalous Person though a
Presbyter, Origin. Ham. 7. in Josh.
making the case his own, he says thus: In uno consensu Ecclesia universa
conspirans excidat me d^xtram suam and projiciat a se, He would have the
consent of the whole Church in that Act.

And when the lapsed Christians were received again into the Church, the
Peoples consent was required therein; else why should Cyprian say, Vix plebi
per suadeo imo extorqueo ut tales patiantur admitti: Cypr. Epist. 55.
I can scarce persuade the people to suffer such to be admitted: and in another
Epistle written to his people in his Banishment, he promises to examine all
things, they being present and judging. Cypr. Epist 11. ad plebem.
Examinabuntur singula praesentibus and judicantibus vobis.

But of this power of the People we shall have a further occasion to speak
afterward, when we come to discourse of Governing Elders.

Only may it please your Honors from hence to take notice, how unjustly our
Bishops have invaded this right and power of Presbyters and people in Church
censures, and devesting both of it, have girt it wholly upon themselves, and
how herein they and the Bishops of former times are TWO.

SECT. X.
ANd as our Bishops, and the Bishops of former times are TWO in point of Sole
Jurisdiction, so also in the Delegation of this power of Jurisdiction unto
others: to their Chancellours, Commissaries, Officers, Indecoru^ est Laicum
vicarium esse Episcopi, and seculares in Ecclesia judicare: in uno enim
eodemque opere non decetdispar professio quod etiam in lege Divina probibetur
dicente Mose, Non arabis in bove and asino simul, Council. Hispal. 2.
etc. Was ever such a thing as this heard of in the best primitive Times? that
men that never received imposition of hands, should not only be received into
assistance, but be wholly entrusted with the power of Spiritual Jurisdiction:
Even then when it is to be exercised over such persons as have had hands laid
upon them.

We may observe in Cyprian, whilst persecution separated him from his Church,
when questions did arise among his people, he does not send them to his
Chancellor or Commissary; No, he was so far from substituting any man (much
less a lay man) to determene or give Judgment in such cases, that he would
not assume that power wholly to himself, but suspends his Judgment, till the
hand of God should restore him to his Church again, that with the advice and
Counsel of the Presbyters, he might give sentence: as may appear to any that
shall peruse his Epistles.

Sure if God had ever led his Church to such a way of deputation, it would have
been in such a case of Necessity as this was: or had any footsteps of such a
course as this been visible by this holy Martyr in the goings of former ages,
he needed not have deferred the determination of the question about the
receiving of some penitent lapsed ones into the bosom of the Church again,
till his return and the return of his Clergy, as he does.

Cypr. Epist 28.
We will instance in his 28 Epistle, wherein giving direction for the
excommunicating of such as would rashly communicate with lapsed Christians, he
gives this charge not to his Chancellor or Commissary, or any other man upon
whom he had devolved his power, and set him as his Deputy or Viccar general in
his absence, but ad clerum, to the whole Presbytery.

This Truth is so clear, that Bishop Downam the great Advocate of Episcopacy
confesses, Downham in the defense of his Son
that in Ambrose his time, and a good while after (which was about 400 years)
till the Presbyters were in a manner (...)

SECT. XI.
A Third branch wherein the difference between our Bishops, and the Bishops of
former times, in point of Exercising their Jurisdiction, is visible, is the way
or manner of exercising that power.

For brevities sake we will only instance in their proceedings in causes
criminal; where let them tell us, whether any good Antiquity can yield them one
President for THEIR OATH EX OFFICIO, which has been to their COURTS, as
Purgatory fire to the Popes Kitchen: they have forgotten that old Maxim in the
Civil Law, Nemo tenetur prodere seipsum, which as it is grounded upon natural
equity, so it is confirmed by a Law enacted by Dioclesian and Maximilian, Nimis
grave est quod petitis, etc. It is too grievous that the adverse part should be
required to the exhibition of such things as should create trouble to
themselves. Cod. li. 4. Tit. 20. l. 7.
Understand therefore that you ought to bring proofs of your intentions, and
not to extort them from your adversaries against themselves.

Shall the Lamp of Nature in the night of Ethnicisme enable Heathen Princes,
(yea Persecutors) to see and enact thus much, and shall not the glorious Sun
of the Gospel convince these of their iniquities in transgressing this Law,
that call themselves the Fathers of the Church?

If neither the light of Nature, nor Gospel light can, yet the custom of the
Church, to which they so often appeal, may both convince them of this iniquity,
and discov^r to all the world the contrariety of their proceedings, to the
proceedings of former times, in this particular.

For of Old, both the Plantiffe and Defendant were brought face to face, before
the parties, in whose power it was to judge: Athan. Apol. 2.
which way of proceeding, Athanasius affirms to be according to Scripture, the
Law of God. And because those that condemned Macarius, did not thus proceed, he
condemns their Sentence as malicious and unjust.

Of old, no Sentence passed against any man, but upon the Testimony of other
witnesses besides the Accusers: after complaint exhibited, the first thing they
applied themselves to, was to consider the person and quality of the Accuser,
Apud ^naram.
Council. prim. Constant. Can. 6 Then they heard the witnesses, who were two at
least, Can. Apost. Can. 75. And these witnesses must be such, as might not be
imagined to be partial, nor to bear enmity nor malice against the party
accused. Ambros. Epist. 64. so Gratian, Cause. 3. quae. 5. cap. Quod suspecti.

Of old, None might be party, witness, and Judge, which Gratian proves at
large. Cause. 4. qu. 4. cap. Nullus unquam praesumat accusator simul esse, and
Iudex and testis, Greg. Deceet. lib. 3. Tit. 2. cap. 8. qua vos. Decret. Greg.
lib. 5 Tit. 4. cap. 24.


We grant indeed the Canon Law permits in some cases Trial without witnesses;
Si crimen ita publicum est, ut merito debeat appellari notorium; If the crime
be so public, that it may deservedly be called Notorious. Which Law further
determines what is notorious, saying, Offensam illam nos intelligimus
manifestam, quae vel per confessionem vel probationem legitime nota fuerit, aut
evidentia Rei, quae nulla possit tergiversatione celari; We count that offense
manifest, which eith^r by confession, or by lawful proof comes to be known, or
by evidence of fact, so as it can be hid by no tergiversations.

So that all was done in former times with mature deliberation, upon
examination and evidence produced, and proved by such witnesses, as against
whom the Defendant could lay in no just exception. And not as now an Accusation
whispered against a man, he knows not by whom, to which he must take his oath
to answer, before he knows what his Accusation is. Which Oath, if he takes,
without further witness, he is censured upon the witness of his own Oath. If
he takes it not, he is sent presently to prison, there to lie without Bail or
Mainprize, till the insupportable miseries of his long durance, compel him to
take on Oath against Nature, Scripture, Conscience, and the just Defense of his
own innocence.

That our Bishops therefore and former Bishops are Two, in the point of
executing their Judicatory power, we need spend no more time to prove. But come
to the third thing, in which the difference between ours and former Bishops is
to be evidenced.

SECT. XII.
ANd that is State Employment, or attendance upon Civil and Secular affairs,
etc. which both Christ and Saint Paul prohibits, which prohibition reaches
every Bishop (to speak in Chrysostomes words) as well as Timothy, Chrysostom:
Hom. 40. in. 8* Tim
to whom it is directed; Nullus ergo Episcopatu praeditus haec audire
detrectet, sed agere ea omnia detrectet, Let no man that is a Bishop, refuse to
hear what the Apostle says, but to do what the Apostle forbids.

We deny not but that Bishops were in the Primitive times often encumbered with
secular business: but these were put upon them, sometimes by Emperors, who
sought the ruin of the Church, as Julian, of whom Niceph. lib. 10. cap. 13.
does report, Recording* this among those things that he did Dolo modo ducere,
(...), Sozo. 1.9. Nicep. 18.^1
that in Clerum coaptatos Senatorum munere and ministerio perverse fungi
jussit. Sometimes the gracious disposition of Princes toward Christian
Religion, made them thus to honor Bishops, thinking thereby to advance
Religion: as Constantine the Great enacted, that such as were to be tried
before Civil Magistrates, might have leave to appeal ad Iudicium Episcoporum,
atque eorum sententiam ratam esse tanquam ab ipso Imperatore prolatum, And this
the Historian reckons as one argument of his reverend respect to Religion.
Sometimes the excellency of their singular parts cast civil dignities upon
them. Tiberius granted a Questors dignity unto a Bishop for his eloquence:
Chrysostom for his notable stoutness and freedom of speech, was sent as the
fittest man to Gainas, with the Emperors command. Sometimes the people
observing the Bishops to be much honored by the Emperor, would solicit them
to present their greivances to the Emperor. And sometimes the aspiring humor
of the Bishops raised them to such places, as appears by Cyrill, who was the
first Bishop in Alexandria, who had civil dignities conferred upon him, as
Socrates relates it, Socra. 7.7.
from whom civil authority did descend upon succeeding Bishops. (...): of whom
Nicephorus therefore recorded, Episcopatum majoricum fastu, prophanorum
Magistratuum more, quam praedecessores ejus Episcopi, ingressus est, unde adeo
initium sumptum est in Ecclesia Alexandrina ut Episcopi etiam, profana negotia
curarent: Lib. 14. c. 14,
He entered upon his Episcopacy with more pomp then his predecessors, with a
pomp conformable to the Heathen Magistrates.

Both these Historians relate the sad consequence that followed upon this, Soc.
l. 7. c. 19.
that Orestes the Roman Governor seeing his power much weakened by the Bishops
interposing in secular affairs, hated the Bishop: and this (as the Historian
calls it) his usurped power.

This president of the Alexandrian Bishop, the Bishop of Rome did soon follow;
Et Romanus Episcopatus non aliter quam Alexandrinus, Niceph. l.
quasi EXTRA SACERDOTII FINES egressus ad secularem principatum erat jam
delapsus; The Bishop of Rome as well as the Bishop of Alexandria breaking the
limits of the Priestly function, did degenerate into a secular Principality:
which purchased no less envy to him then that to the other.

And though these two Bishops went at first abreast in this point, yet in a
short time the Roman had out stripped the Alexandrian in that power, till the
Church degenerating more and more, that Roman Priest advanced his power not
only above all the Bishops, but all the Monarchs in the Christian Orb.

Yet notwithstanding, he that shall look into the Ancients, shall find; first,
that the best of them held, that they were not to be molested with the handling
of worldly affairs, Cyprian Epist. 66.1. Singuli divino Sacerdotio honorati
non nisi altari and sacrificiis deservire and precibus atque orationibus vacare
debent, Molestiis secularibus non sunt obligandi, qui divinis rebus and
spiritualibus occupantur.

Secondly, that they complained of them as of heavy burdens, Aug. calls it
Angaria, yea Austin himself in his 81. Epistle complains, Possidou^ in vini
August.
that worldly business hindered his praying and so pressed him, that vix
respirare potuit: and Gregory the great, non sine dolor in secularibus
versabatur, praefat. in Dial.

Thirdly, Cyprian construed it as one great cause of persecutions raised
against the Church, de lapsis, Sect. 4.

Fourthly, it was much cried down as unlawful by the holy Fathers, many Canons
forbidding it, and that under pain of being removed from their places. Can.
Apost. Can. 6. Can. 81. he that did presume to administer (...), a Roman
command or Administration of Military affairs or civil place (as Zonaras
there) he should be desposed, Can. Apo. Can. 83. hiring of ground, meddling with
worldly affairs is to be laid aside by them. Otherwise they are threatened to
be liable to Ecclesiastical censures, Conc. Call. Can. 3. Conc. Carth. Can. 16.

We will add this for a conclusion in this point, it is observed by
Athanasius, Sulpitius, Severus, and other Ecclesiastical Historians, that the
Arians were very expedite in worldly affairs, which experience they gained by
their constant following and attendance upon the Emperors Court; and what
troubles they occasioned to the Church thereby, is notoriously known to any
that have seen the Histories of their times. And in this our Bishops have
approved themselves more like to the Arian Bishops then the purer Bishops of
purer times: but how ever clear it is, that our Bishops and the Bishops of
former times are Two* Two in election to their office; Two in the discharge of
their office; Two in their Ordination, Jurisdiction, Processes, Censures,
Administrations; and the difference between our Bishops and those of former
times, is greater then between the great Bishop of Rome and them.

SECT. XIII.
But it seems our Remonstrant soared above these times even as high as the
Apostles days, for so he says, If our Bishops challenge any other spiritual
power, then was by Apostolic Authority delegated to, and required of Timothy
and Titus, and the Angels of the seven Asian Churches, let them be DISCLAIMED
as VSVRPERS. And the truth is, so they deserve to be, if they do but challenge
the same power that the Apostle did delegate to Timothy and Titus; for Timothy
and Titus were Evangelists, and so moved in a Sphere above Bishops or
Presbyters. For Timothy, it is clear from the letter of the Text, 2 Timothy 4.5.
(...): Do the work of an Evangelist: if Timothy had been but a Presbyter or
Bishop, Paul had here put him upon employment, Vltra Sphaeram Activitatis.

And to any man, that will but understand and consider what the Office of an
Let the Reader please to consult Eusebius. Hist lib. 3: cap. 33. according to
some, after others cap. 37. and view the description, he there makes of an
Evangelist, and then judge of what we speak*
Evangelist was; and wherein it differed from the Office of a Presbyter or
Bishop, it will be manifest that Timothy and Titus were Evangelists, and no
Bishops: for the title of Evangelist is taken but two ways; either for such as
wrote the Gospel, and so we do not affirm Timothy and Titus, to be
Evangelists: or else for such as taught the Gospel; and those were of two
sorts, either such as had ordinary places and ordinary gifts, or such whose
places and gifts were extraordinary; and such Evangelists were Timothy and
Titus, and not Bishops, as will appear if we consider, what was the Difference
between the Evangelists and Bishops. Bishops or Presbyters were tied to the
particular care and tuition of that flock over which God had made them
Overseers, Acts 20.28. But Evangelists were not tied to reside in one
particular place, but did attend upon the Apostles by whose appointment they
are sent from place to place, as the necessity of the Churches did require. As
appears first in Timothy whom Saint Paul besought to abide at Ephesus, 1. Tim.
1.3. which had been needless importunity, if Timothy had the Episcopal (that
is the Pastoral) charge of Ephesus committed to him by the Apostles, for then
he might have laid as dreadful a Charge upon him to abide at Ephesus, as he
does to. Preach the Gospel. But so far was Paul from settling Timothy in
Cathedra in Ephesus, that he rather continually sends him up and down upon all
Church-services, for we find Acts. 17.14. that when Paul fled from the tumults
of Berea to Athens, Anno, Aerae. Christi receptae, 47.
he left Silas and Timothy behind him, who afterward coming to Paul to
Athens, Paul sends Timothy from Athens to Thessalonica, to confirm the
Thessalonians in the faith, as appears 1 These. 3.1.2. from whence returning to
Paul to Athens again, the Apostle Paul before he left Athens and went to
Corinth, sent him and Silas into Macedonia, who returned to him again to
Corinth, Anno 48
Act. 18.5. afterward they traveled to Ephesus, from whence we read Paul sent
Timothy and Erastus into Macedonia, Anno 51
Act. 19.22. wither Paul went after them, and from whence they and diverse other
Breathren journied into Asia, Acts 20.4. All which Breathren Paul calls, Anno 53
as it is probable, (...), the messengers of the Churches, 2. Cor. 8.23. And
being thus accompanied with Timothy, Anno 53
and the rest of the Brethren he comes to Miletum, and calls the Elders of the
Church of Ephesus thither to him, of which Church had Timothy been Bishop, the
Apostle in stead of giving the Elders a charge to feed the flock of Christ,
would have given that charge to Timothy, and not to them.

And secondly, the Apostle would not so have forgotten himself, as to call the
Elders (...), before their Bishops face.

Thirdly, It is to be conceived, the Apostles would have given them some
directions, how to carry themselves toward their Bishop; but not a word of
this though Timothy were then in Paul's presence, and in the presence of the
Elders. The clear evidence of which Text demonstrates, that Paul did not leave
Timothy at this time as Bishop of Ephesus. But it is rather evident that he
took him along with him in his journey to Jerusalem, and so to Rome; Paraeus.
Capellus. Heb. 13.23.
for we find that those Epistles Paul wrote while he a prisoner, bear either in
their inscription or some other passage of them, the name of Timothy as Paul's
companion, viz. We find not only that Timothy was with Paul at Rome, but a
prisoner with him there.
The Epistle to the Philippians, C^lossians, Hebrews, Philemon, which Epistles
he wrote in bonds as the contexture, which those two learned professors; the
one at Heydelburg, the other at Saulmur, make of Saint Paul's Epistles, does
declare.

So that it appears that Timothy was no Bishop, but a Minister, an Evangelist,
a fellow labourer of the Apostles, 1 These. 3.1. an Apostle, a Messenger of the
Church, 2 Cor. 8.3. a Minister of God, 1 These. 3.2. these titles the Holy Ghost
gives him, but never the title of a Bishop.

The like we find in Scripture concerning Titus, whom Paul as it is conceived
by learned men, did first assume into the fellowship of his Labors in the place
of John, and made him his companion in his journey through Antioch Anno 43
to Jerusalem, Anno 45
so we find Gal. 2.1. from thence returning to Antioch again; from thence he
passed through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the Churches; and from Cilicia, he
passed to Creet, where having Preached the Gospel, and plainted Churches, he
left Titus Anno 46
there for a while, to set in order things that remain,

Yet it was but for a while he left him there, for in his Epistle which he
wrote to him not many years after, he injoynes him to come to him to Nicopolis
Anno 51
where he did intend to winter, but changing that purpose sends for him to
Ephesus, where it seems his Hyemal station was, and from thence sends him
before him to Corinth, to enquire the state of the Corinthians Anno 51
. His return from thence Paul expects at Troas Anno 52
, and because coming thither he found not his expectation there, he was so
grieved in his spirit, 2 Cor. 2.12. that he passed presently from thence into
Macedonia, where Titus met him; and in the midst of his afflictions joyed his
spirits with the glad tidings of the powerful and gracious effects, his first
Epistle had among the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7, 5, 6, 7. Paul having there
collected the Liberalities of the Saints, sends Titus again to the Anno 53
Corinthians, to prepare them for the same service of Ministering to the
necessities of the Saints, 2 Cor. 8.6. And makes him with some others the
Conveyers of that second Epistle to the Corinthians.

All these journey es to and fro did Titus make at the designment of the
Apostle, even after he was left in Creet. Nor do we find, that after his
first removal from Creet Anno 64
; he did ever return thither. We read indeed, 2 Timothy 4.10. he was with Paul at
Rome, and from thence returned not to Creet, but into Dalmatia. All which does
more then probably show, it never was the Intendment of the Apostle to fix
Titus in Creet as a Bishop, but only to leave him there for a season for the
good of that Church, and to call him from thence, and send him abroad to other
Churches for their good, as their necessities might require. Now who that will
acknowledge a Distinction between the Offices of Bishops and Evangelists, and
knows wherein that Distinction lies, will not upon these premises conclude
that Timothy and Titus were Evangelists and NOT Bishops.

I but some of the Fathers have called Timothy and Titus Bishops. We grant it
true; and it is as true, that some of the Fathers have called them Archbishops
and Patriarks; yet it does not follow, they were so. We add, secondly, that
when the Fathers did call them so, it was not in a proper but in an improper
sense; which we express in the words of our Learned Orthodox Raynolds;
Raynolds contra Ha^t ^a: 6:


You may learn by the Fathers themselves, says he, that when they termed any
Apostle a Bishop of this or that City (as namely S. Peter of Antioch or Rome)
they meant it in a general sort and signification, because they did attend that
Church for a time, and supply that room in preaching the Gospel, which Bishops
did after; but as the name of Bishop is commonly taken for the Overseer of a
particular Church, and Pastor of a several flock; so Peter was not Bishop of
any one place; therefore not of Rome. And this is true by Analogy of all
extraordinary Bishops, and the same may be said of Timothy and Titus, that he
says of Peter.

But were it true that Timothy and Titus were Bishops: will this Remonstrant
undertake, that all his party shall stand to his Conditions* If our Bishops
challenge any other power then was by Apostolic Authority delegated to, and
required of Timothy and Titus, and the Angels of the seven Asian Churches, let
them be disclaimed as usurpers. Will our Bishops indeed stand to this? then
actum est. Did ever Apostolic Authority delegate power to Timothy or Titus, to
ordain alone? to govern alone? and do not our Bishops challenge that power?
Did ever Apostolic Authority delegate power to Timothy and Titus, to rebuke
an Elder? no; but to entreat him as a Father: and do not our Bishops challenge
themselves and permit to their Chancellors, Commissaries, and Officials power
not only to Rebuke an Elder* but to rail upon an Elder? to reproach him with
the most opprobrious terms of fool, knave, jack-sauce, etc. which our paper
blushes to present to your Honors view? Did ever Apostolic Authority delegate
to Timothy and Titus power to receive an accusation against an Elder, but
before two or three witnesses? and do not our Bishops challenge power to
proceed Ex Officio, and make Elders their own Accusers? Did ever Apostolic
Authority delegate power to Timothy or Titus, to reject any after twice
admonition, but an Heretic? and do not our Bishops challenge power to reject
and eject the most sound and Orthodox of our Ministers, for refusing the use of
a Ceremony? as if Nonconformity were Heresy. So that either our Bishops must
disclaim this Remonstrance, or else themselves must be disclaimed as usurpers.

But if Timothy and Titus were no Bishops, or had not this power, it may be the
Angels of the seven Asian Churches had; and our Remonstrant is so subtle as to
twist these two together, that if one fail, the other may hold.

To which we answer; first, that Angel in those Epistles is put Collectively,
not Individually; as appears by the Epistle to Thyatira, cap. 2. verse. 25.
where we read (...), etc. But I say unto you (in the plural number, not unto
thee in the singular) and unto the rest in Thyatira, etc. Here is a plain
distinction between the members of that Church. By you, is signified those to
whom he spoke under the name of the Angel. By the rest, the residue of the
people. The people governed, and the Governors in the plural number. What can
be more evident to prove, that by Angel is meant not one singular person, but
the whole company of Presbyters that were in Thyatira.

This also further appears, because it is usual with the holy Ghost, not only
in other Books of the Scripture, but also in this very Book of the Revelation,
to express a company under one singular person. Thus the Civil State of Rome,
as opposite to Christ, is called A beast with ten horns: and the Ecclesiastical
State Antichristian is called the whore of Babylon, and, the false Prophet; and
the Devil and all his family is called An old red Dragon. Thus also the seven
Angels that blew the seven trumpets, Revel. 8.2. and the seven Angels that
poured out the seven Vials, are not literally to be taken, but Synecdochically,
as all know. And why not then the seven Angels in those Epistles? Mr. Mede in
his Commentaries upon the Revelation, page 265, has these words; Denique (ut
jam femel iterumquemonuimus) quoniam Deus adhibet angelos providentiae suae in
reru^ humanaru^ motibus and conversionibus ciendis, gubernandisque administris:
idcirco, quae multorum manibus peraguntur, Angelo tamen tanquam rei gerendae
praesidi and Duci pro communi loquendi modo tribuuntur.

Add, thirdly, that the very name Angel is sufficient to prove, that it is not
meant of one person alone, because the word Angel does not import any peculiar
jurisdiction or pre-eminence, but is a common name to all Ministers, and is so
used in Scripture. For all Ministers are Gods Messengers and Ambassadors, sent
for the good of the Elect. And therefore the name being common to all
Ministers, why should we think that there should be any thing spoken to one
Minister, that does not belong to all? The like argument we draw from the word
Stars used Revel, 1.20. The seven Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches.
Now it is evident, that all faithful Ministers are called Stars in Scripture,
whose duty is to shine as lights unto the Churches, in all purity of doctrine
and holiness of conversation. And in this sense, the word is used, when it is
said, that the third part of the stars were darkened, Revel. 8.12. and that the
Dragons tail drew the third part of the stars of Heaven, and cast them to the
Earth, Revel. 12.4. Which is meant not only of Bishops, but of other Ministers,
unless the Bishops will appropriate all corruption and Apostasy unto
themselves.

Add, fourthly, out of the Text it self, it is very observable, that our
Savior in opening the mystery of the Vision, Revel. 1.20. says; The seven
Candlesticks which thou saw, are the seven Churches, but he does not say,
The seven Stars are the seven Angels of the same Churches, But the Angels of
the seven Churches; wherein not without some mystery the number of the Angels
is omitted, least we should understand by Angel, one Minister alone, and not a
company. And yet the Septenary number of Churches is twice set down.

Lastly, though but one Angel be mentioned in the forefront, yet it is
evident, that the Epistles themselves are dedicated to all the Angels and
Ministers in every Church, and to the Churches themselves: And if to the whole
Church, much more to the Presbyters of that Church. This is proved Revel. 1.11.
What thou see, write in a Book, and send it to the seven Churches which are
in Asia. And also by the Epiphonema of every Epistle; He that has an care to
hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. Upon which words,
Ambrosius Ausbertus in his second book upon the Revelation, says thus; Vna
eademque locutione and Angelos and Ecclesias unum esse designat. Nam cum in
principio locutionum quae ad septem fiunt Angelos dicat, and Angelo illius
Ecclesiae scribe; in fine tamen earundem non dicit, Qui habet aurem audiat quod
spiritus dicat Angelo, sed quid Ecclesiae dicat. By one and the same phrase of
speech he shows, the Angels and the Churches to be one and the same. For
whereas in the beginning of his speech, which he makes to the seven Churches,
he says, And write to the Angel of the Churches; yet in the close of the same,
he does not say, He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to
the Angel, but what he says to the Church. And this is further proved by the
whole argument of those Epistles, wherein the admonitions, threatenings,
commendations, and reproves, are directed to all the Ministers of all the
Churches. Revel. 2.10. The Devil shall cast some of you into prison, etc.
Revel. 2.16. I will fight against them with the sword of my mouth, Revel. 2.24.
I will put upon you no other burden, etc. I say unto you and the rest of
Thyatira, as many as have not this Doctrine, and which have not known the
depths of Satan, etc. And when it is said in the singular Number (as it is
often) I know thy works and labor, etc. verse. 2. and verse. 4. Repent and do
thy first works; and verse. 13. Thou have not denied my Faith, etc. and cap.
3.26. Because thou art neither hot nor cold, etc. All these and the like
places, are not to be understood as meant of one individual person, but of the
whole company of Ministers, and also of the whole Church, because that the
punishment threatened, is to the whole Church; Revel. 2.5. Repent and do thy
first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly and remove thy Candlestick
out of his place; Rev. 2.16. Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and
will fight against thee with the sword of my mouth; Revel. 2.24. I will not put
upon you any other burden. Now we have no warrant in the Word to think that
Christ would remove his Gospel from a Church for the sin of one Bishop, when
all the other Ministers, and the Churches themselves are free from those sins.
And if God should take this course, in what woeful and miserable condition
should the Church of England be, which groaneth under so many corrupt Prelates?
By all this it appears, that the word Angel, is not to be taken, (...), but
(...); not properly, but figuratively. And this is the judgment of Master
Perkins upon the second Chapter of the Revelation: and of Master Brightman: and
of Doctor Fulke, who in answer to the Rhemists in Apoc. 1.20. has these words:
S. John by the Angels of the Churches means not all that should wear on their
heads Myters, and hold crosier staves in their hands, like dead Idols, but them
that are the faithful messengers of Gods word, and utter and declare the same.
Again, they are called the Angels of the Churches, because they be Gods
messengers.

Master Fox likewise in his Meditation upon the Revelation (page 7.9.17.) is of
this opinion, and has gathered to our hands the opinions of all Interpreters
he could meet, and says that they all consent in this that under the person of
an Angel, the Pastors and Ministers of the Churches were understood. S. Austin
in his 132. Epistle, says thus, Sic enim in Apocalypsi legitur Angelus, etc.
Quod si de Angelo superiorum colorum, and non de Praepositis Ecclesiarum vellet
intelligi, non consequenter diceret, Habeo adversum te, etc. And so in his
second Homily upon the Revelation (if that book be his) Quod autem dicit Angelo
Thyatirae. Habeo adversum te panca, dicit Praepositis Ecclesiarum, etc, This
also Gregory the Great, lib. 34. Moral. in Job. cap. 4. Saepe sacram scripturam
praedicatores Ecclesiae pro eo quod patris gloriam annunciant, angelorum nomine
solere designare: and hinc esse, quod Johannes in Apocalypsi septem Ecclesiis
scribens, angelis Ecclesiarum loquitur, id est, Praedicatoribus populorum.
Master Box cites Primasius, Haymo, Beda, Richard, Thomas, and others, to whom
we refer you.

If it be here demanded (as it is much by the Hierarchical side) that if by
Angel be meant the whole company of Presbyters, why Christ did not say, to the
Angels in the plural number, but to the Angel in the singular?

We answer, that though this question may savor of a little too much curiosity,
yet we will make bold to subjoyn three conjectural reasons of this phrase of
speech.

First, it is so used in this place, because it is the common language of other
Scriptures in types and visions to set down a certain number for an uncertain,
and the singular number for the plural. Thus the Ram, Dan. 8.3. is interpred
verse. 20. to be the Kings of Media, and Persia. And the enemies of Gods Church
are set out by four horns. And the deliverers by four Carpenters, Zach.
1.18.20. And the wise and foolish Virgins are said to be five wise and five
foolish. And many such like. And therefore as we answer the Papists, when they
demand why Christ if he meant figuratively when he says, this is my body, did
not speak in plain language, this is the sign of my body? We say, that this
phrase of speech is proper to all Sacraments: So we also answer here, this
phrase of speech, Angel for Angels, is common to all types and visions.

Secondly Angel is put, though more be meant, that so it may hold proportion
with the vision which John saw, Chap. 1.12.20. He saw seven golden
Candlesticks, and seven Stars. And therefore to hold proportion, the Epistles
are directed to seven Angels, and to seven Churches. And this is called a
mystery, Revel. 1.20. The Mystery of the seven Stars. etc. Now a mystery is a
secret which comprehends more th^n is expressed; and therefore though but one
Angel be expressed, yet the mystery implies all the Angels of that Church.

Thirdly, to signify their unity in the Ministerial function, and joint
commission to attend upon the feeding and governing of one Church, with one
common care, as it were with one hand and heart. And this i^ more fitly
declared by the name of one Angel, then of many. We often find the name of
(one) Prophet or Priest to be put for the general body of the Ministry, or
whole multitude or Prophets or Priests, in the Church of Israel or Judah, when
the Spirit of God intends to reprove, threaten, or admonish them. Thus it is
Iere. 6.13.18.19. Isa. 3.2. Hos. 9.8. Ezekiel. 7.26. Hos. 4, 6. Mal. 2.7. Neither
should it seem strange, that a multitude or company of Ministers should be
understood under the name of one Angel, seeing a multitude of Heavenly Angels
(employed in one service for the good of Gods Saints) is sometimes in the
Scripture shut up under one Angel in the singular number, as may be gathered
from Genesis 14.7. 2 Kings 19.35. Psalm 34.7. compared with Psalm. 91.11. Genesis 32.1.
2. Kings 6.16, 17. And also a multitude of Devils or evil Angels, jointly
laboring in any one work, is set forth under the name of one evil or unclean
spirit, 1 Kings 22.21, 22. Mark 1.23, 24. Mark 5.2.9. Luke 4.33.34. Luke
8.27.30. 1 Pet. 5.8. Heb. 2.14. Ephesians. 6.11.12.

But now let us suppose (which yet notwithstanding we will not grant) that the
word Angel is taken individually for one particular person, as Doctor Reynolds
seems to interpret it, together with Master Beza, yet nevertheless^, there will
nothing follow out of this acception* that will any ways make for the upholding
of a Diocesan Bishop, with sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, as a
distinct Superior to Presbyters. And this appears,

First, because it never was yet proved nor ever will (as we conceive) that
these Angels were Diocesan Bishops, considering that Parishes were not divided
into Diocesses in S. John's days. And the seven Stars are said to be fixed in
their seven Candlesticks or Churches, not one Star over diverse Candlesticks.
Neither can those Churches be thought to be Diocesan, when not only Tindal and
the old translation, calls them seven Congregations, but we read also Acts 20.
that at Ephesus which was one of those Candlesticks, there was but one flock.

And secondly, we further find that in Ephesus one of those seven Churches,
there were many Presbyters, which are all called Bishops, Acts 20.28. and we
find no color of any superintendency or superiority of one Bishop over
another. To them in general the Church is committed to be fed by them without
any respect had to Timothy, who stood at his Elbow, and had been with him in
Macedonia, and was now waiting upon him to Jerusalem. This is also confirmed by
Epiphanius who writing of the Heresies of the Miletians, says, that in ancient
times this was peculiar to Alexandria, that it had but one Bishop, whereas
other Cities had two. And he being Bishop of Cypres, might well be acquainted
with the condition of the Churches of Asia, which were so nigh unto him.

Thirdly, there is nothing said in the seven Epistles that implies any
superiority or majority of rule or power that these Angels had over the other
Angels that were joined with them in their Churches. It is written indeed, in
commendation of the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, that he could not bear
them that were evil, and that he had tried them which say they were Apostles
and are not, and had found them liars. And it is spoken in dispraise of the
Angel of Pergamus, that he suffered them which h^ld the Doctrine of Balaam,
etc. But these things are common duties requirable at the hands of all
Ministers, who have the charge of souls.

But suppose that there were some superiority and prehemenency insinuated by
this individual Angel, yet who knows not that there are diverse kinds of
superiority? to wit, of Order, of Dignity, of Gifts and Parts, or in degree of
Ministry, or in charge of power and jurisdiction. And how will it be proved
that this Angel if he had a superiority, had any more then a superiority of
Order, or of Gifts and Parts? Where it is said, that this Angel was a superior
degree or order of Ministry above Presbyters? In which Epistle is it said that
this Angel had sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction? And therefore as our
learned Protestants prove against the Papists, that where Christ directed his
speech to Peter in particular and said, I will give unto thee the Keys of the
kingdom of Heaven; etc. That this particularization of Peter did not import any
singular pre-eminence or majority of power to Peter more then to the other
Apostles; But that though the promise was made to Peter, yet it was made to him
in the name of all the rest, and given to all as well as one. And that
therefore it was spoken to one person, and not to all; that so Christ might
fore-signifie the unity of his Church, as Hoc erant tique and eteri Astoli quod
erat Peus, pari usortio editi and noris and estatis, exordiab unie profi^itur,
ut clesia umontur.
Cyprian, Austin, Hierome, Optatus, and others say. So when Christ directs an
Epistle to one Angel, it does not imply a superior power over his
fellow-Angels, but at most only a presidency for order sake. And that which is
written to him, is written to the rest as well as to him. And therefore written
to one, not to exclude the rest, but to denote the unity that ought to be
between the Ministers of the same Church in their common care and diligence to
their flock. And this is all that Doctor Reynolds says, as you may read in his
conference with Heart, cap. 4. divis. 3. ad finem. For it is evident that Doctor
Reynolds was an utter enemy to the Ius Divinum of the Episcopal preheminency
over Presbyters, by his Letter to Sir Francis Knolls. And learned Master Beza
also says something to the same purpose in his Annotations upon Revel. 2.1.
Angelo. i. (...) quem nimirum oporuit imprimis de his rebus admoneri, ac per
eum caeteros collegas totamque adeo Ecclesiam. Sed hinc statui Episcopalis ille
gradus postea humanitus in Ecclesiam Dei invectus certe nec potest nec debet,
imo ne perpetuum quidem istud (...) munus esse necessario oportuisse, sicut
exorta inde Tyrannis Oligarchica (cujus apex est Antichristiana bestia)
certissima cum totius non Ecclesiae modo, sed etiam orbis pernicie, nunc tandem
declarat.

If therefore our Remonstrant can produce no better evidence for his Hierarchy
then Timothy and Titus, and the Angels of the Asian Churches, Let not this
Remonstrant and his party, cry out of wrong, if this claimed Hierarchy be for
ever booted out of the church, seeing it is his own Option. And yet we cannot
conceal one refuge more out of Scripture, to which the Hierarchy betake
themselves for shelter. And that is the two Postscripts in the end of Paul's
second Epistle to Timothy, and of that to Titus; where in the one, Timothy is
said to be the first Bishop of Ephesus, and in the other, Titus is said to be
the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians: to both which places we answer.

That these two Postscrips (and so all the rest) are no part of Canonical
Scripture. And therefore our former and ancienter English translations, though
they have these Postscripts, yet they are put in a small character different
from that of the Text. Although our Episcopal men of late in newer impressions
have enlarged their Phylacteries, in putting those Postscripts in the same full
character with that of the Text, that the simple might believe they are
Canonical Scripture. The Papists themselves (Baronius, Serrarius, and the
Rhemists) confess that there is much falsity in them. The first Epistle to
Timothy, is thus subscribed: the first to Timothy was written from Laodicea,
whoch is the chiefest City of Phrygia Pacatiana. Here we demand, whether Paul
when he writ the first Epistle to Timothy, was assured he should live to write
a second, which was written long after? And if not; How comes it to be
subscribed, the first to Timothy, which has relation to a second? Besides, the
Epistle is said to be writ from Laodicea, whereas Beza in his Annotations
proves apparently, that it was written from Macedonia; to which Opinion
Baronius and Serrarius subscribe. It is added, Which is the chiefest City of
Phrygia Pacatiana. But this Epithet is nowhere read in the Writers of those
ages, says Beza, Sed apud recentiores illo^, qui Romani imperii jam
inclinantis provincias descripserunt. So that by this place it is evident, that
the subscription was added a long while after the writing of the Epistles by
some men, for the most part vel indoctis, says Beza, vel certe non satis
attentis, Either by a Learned, or negligent man.

The second Epistle is thus subscribed; The second Epistle unto Timothy,
ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the Ephesians, was written from
Rome, when Paul was brought before Nero the second time. Now these words
Ordained the first Bishop, is wanting, says Beza, in quibusdam vetustis
codicibus, in veteri vulgata editione, and apud Syrum interpre^^m. If Saint
Paul had written this Postscript, he would not have said, To Timothy the first
Bishop, etc. whereas it was not yet certain whether ever there should be a
second. Neither would it be said when Paul was brought, etc. But when I was
the second time brought before Nero. The Syriack Interpreter reads it, Here
ends the second Epistle to Timothy written from Rome.

The Epistle to Titus is thus subscribed: Written to Titus, Ordained first
Bishop of the Church of the Cretians, from Nicopolis of Macedonia. Here it is
said that this Epistle was written from Nicopolis, whereas it is clear that
Paul was not at Nicopolis when he wrote it. Tit. 3.12. Be diligent to come to
me at Nicopolis, for I have determined there to winter. He does not say, Here
to winter, but There; Where note, for the present he was not there. And besides
it is said, that Titus was Ordained the first Bishop, etc. And who was the
second? or was there ever a second? And also He is said to be Bishop, not only
of a Diocese, but of all Creet. Was there ever such a second Bishop? Add,
lastly, that it is said, Bishop of the Church of the Cretians; Whereas it would
be said of the Churches of the Cretians. For the Christian Churches of any
Nation are called Churches by Luke and Paul, not Church. Therefore Codex
Claremontanus subscribes; Here ends the Epistle to Titus, and no more. So the
Syriack; Finitur Epistola ad Titum quae scripta fuit e Nicopoli. The old Vulgar
Edition has nothing of the Episcopacy of Titus. By all this it appears, that
if the Bishops had no more authority to urge us to subscribe to their
Ceremonies, then they have authority for their Episcopal Dignity by these
Subscriptions, there would be no more subscription to Ceremonies in the
Churches of England.

But some will say, that there is one objection out of Scripture yet
unanswered, and that is from the inequality that was between the twelve
Apostles, and the seventy Disciples.

To which we answer;

First, that it cannot be proved that the twelve Apostles had any superiority
over the seventy, either of Ordination, or Jurisdiction, or that there was any
subordination of the seventy unto the twelve: but suppose it was, yet we answer

Secondly, that a superiority and inferiority between Officers of different
kinds, will not prove that there should be a superiority and inferiority
between Officers of the same kind. No man will deny but that in Christ's time,
there were Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, and Teachers, and that the
Apostles were superior to Evangelists and Pastors But it cannot be proved, that
one Apostle had any superiority over another Apostle, or one Evangelist over an
other. And why then should one Presbyter be over another? Hence it follows,
that though we should grant a superiority between the twelve and the seventy,
yet this will not prove the question in hand. Because the question is
concerning Officers of the same kind, and the instance is of Officers of
different kinds, amongst whom no man will deny but there may be a superiority
and inferiority, as there is amongst us between Presbyters and Deacons.

And now let your Honors judge (considering the premises) how far this
Episcopal government is from any Divine right, or Apostolical Institution: And
how true that speech of Hierome is, that a Bishop as it is a superior Order to
a Presbyter, is an Humane presumption, not a Divine Ordinance.

But though Scripture fails them, yet the indulgence and Munificence of
Religious Princes may support them, and to this the Remonstrant makes his next
recourse, yet so as he acknowledges here, Engagements to Princes only for
their accessory dignities, titles, and Maintenance; not at all for their
stations and functions, (wherein yet the author plainly acknowledges a
difference between our Bishops and the Bishops of old by such accessions.)

For our parts, we are so far from envying the gracious Munificence of pious
Princes, in collating honorable maintenance upon the Ministers of Christ, that
we believe, that even by Gods own Ordinance, double Honor is due unto them.

And that by how much the Ministry of the Gospel is more honorable then that
of the Law, by so much the more ought all that embrace the Gospel, to be
careful to provide, that the Ministers of the Gospel might not only live,
but maintain Hospitality, according to the Rule of the Gospel. And that
worthy Gentleman spoke as an Oracle, that said, That scandalous Maintenance is
a great caves of a scandelous Ministry.

Yet we are not ignorant, that when the Ministry came to have Agros, d^mos,
lecationes, vehicula ^ques, la^if^ndia, as Chrysostom. Hom. 86 in Matthew. That
then Religio peperit divitias, and filia devoravit Matrem, Religion brought
forth riches, and the Daughter devoured the Mother; and then there was a voice
of Angels heard from Heaven; Hodie venenum in Ecclesiam Christi cecidit. This
day is poison shed into the Church of Christ.

And then it was that Ierom complained, Christi Ecclesia post quam ad
Christianos principes venit, potentia quidem and divitiis major, sed virtutibus
minor facta est. Then also was that Conjunction found true; That when they had
wooden Chalices, they had golden Priests; but when their Chalices were golden,
their Priests were wooden.

And though we do not think, there is any such incompossibility, but that large
Revenues may be happily managed with an humble sociablnesse, yet is very rare
to find History tells us, that the superfluous revenues of the Bishops not
only made them neglect their Ministry, but further ushered in their stately
and pompous attendance; which did so elevate their spirits, that they insulted
over their brethren, both Clergy and People, and gave occasion to others to
hate and abhor the Christian Faith, Which Eusebius sets forth fully in the
pride of Paulus Samosatenus, who notwithstanding the meannesse and obscurity
of his birth, afterward grew to that height of insolency and pride in all his
carriage, especially in that numerous train that attended him in the streets,
and in his stately throne raised after the manner of Kings and Princes, Eusebius.
lib. 7. cap. 29.
that Fides nostra invidiae, and odio, propter fastam and superbiam cordis
illius, facta fuerit obnoxia; The Christian Faith was exposed to envy and
hatred through his pride.

And as their ambition (fed with the largeness of their revenues) discovered
it self in great attendance, stately dvvellings, and all Lordly pomp, so Hierom
complains of their pride in their stately seats, qui velut in aliqua sublimi
specula constituti, vix dignantur videre mortales and alloqui conservos su^s:
who fitting aloft as it were in a vvatch-tovver, will scarce deigne to look
upon poor mortals, or speak to their fellovv-servants.

Here we might be large in multipying several testimonies against the pride of
Ecclesiastical persons, that the largeness of their revenues raised them to:
but we will conclude with that grave complaint of Sulpitius Severus.

Ille qui ante p^dibus aut as^lloire consueverat, spumante equ^ superbus
inv^hitur; parva prius ac vili cellula contentus habitare, erigit celsa
Laquearia, construit multa conclavia, sculpit p^stes, pingit a^maria, vestem
respuit g^ossiorem, indumentum molle desiderat, etc. Which because the practice
of our times has already turned into English, we spare the labor to translate.

Only suffer us (being now to give a Vale to our Remonstrants arguments) to
recollect some few things.

First, whereas this Remonstrant says; If we do not show out of the true and
genuine writings of those holy men, Page 22.
that lived in the Apostles days a clear and received distinction of Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deacons, as three distinct subordinate callings, with an
evident specification of the duty belonging to each of them: Let this claimed
Hierarchy be for ever routed out of the Church: We beseech you, let it be
remembered how we have proved out of the genuine and undeniable writings of the
Apostles themselves, that these are not three distinct callings: Bishops are
Presbyters, being with them all one, Name and Office, and that the distinction
of Bishops and Presbyters was not of Divine Institution, but Humane: and that
these Bishops, in their first Institution did not differ so much from
Presbyters, as our present Bishops differ from them.

Secondly, Whereas this Remonstant says, If our Bishops challenge any other
power then was by Apostolic authority delegated to, Page 23.
and required of Timothy and Titus, and the Ang^ls of the Asian Churches: Let
them be disclaimed as usurpers. We desire it may be remembered, how we have
proved first; that Timothy and Titus and the Angels who are Diocesan Bishops;
and secondly, that our Bishops challenge (if not in their Polemickes, yet in
their Practicks) a power that Timothy and Titus, and those Angels never did.

Thirdly, Whereas this Remonstrant says, If there can be better evidence under
Heaven for any matter of fact, Page 2^.
let Episcopacy be for ever abandoned out of Gods Church: We beseech you
remember how weak we have discovered his Evidence to be; and then the
Inference upon all these we humbly leave to your Honors Wisdom and Justice.

SECT. XIV.
HAving thus considered the validity of those arguments, whereby this
Remonstrant would suffult Episc^pacy, we descend now to inquire, what
satisfaction he gives to those objections, which himself frames as the main, if
not the ^ole arguments, that Episcopacy is assaultable by, and they are two*

First, that pleading the Divine right of Episcopacy is to the prejudi^e of
Sovereignty. Secondly, that it casts a dangerous imputation upon all those
Reformed Churches that want this Government.

To the first, the prejudice of Sovereignty; he answers there is a
compatibleness in this case of Gods Act, and the Kings: it is God that makes
the Bishop, the King that gives the Bishopric.

But we have proved already, that God never made a Bishop, as he stands in his
Superiority over al other Presbyters, he never had Gods Fiat: and if they
disclaim the influence of sovereignty unto their creation to a Priority, and
assert that the King does not make them Bishops, they must have no being at
all. Sure we are, the Laws of the Land proclaim, that not only Bishoprics, but
Bish^ps and all the Jurisdiction they have, 37. H^n. S. cap. 1^.
is from the King: whereas the Remonstrant acknowledges no more, but the bare
The Remonstrant here acknowledges the same of the King, that Friar Simon a
Floren^ine did of the Pope, who affirmed the degree of a Bishop was de jure
divino, but every particular Bishop de jure Pontificio. Hist. con Trid.
place and exercise to be from Regal donation, which cannot be affirmed
without apparent prejudice of that Sovereigntie which the Laws of the Land
have invested our Princes with.

And for his unworthy comparison of Kings in order to Bishops, and Patrons in
order to their Clerks, when he shall prove that the Patron gives ministerial
power to his Clerk, as the King according to our Laws gives Episcopal power
to the Bishop, it may be of some conducement to his cause; but till then, we
leave the unfitness of this comparison, and the unthankfulness of those men
to the indulgence of their Sovereigne, to their deserved recompense.

His learned answer to such men as borrowing Saint Ieroms phrase, speak Saint
Paul's truth, is in sum this:

That he knows not how to prescribe to men's thoughts, but for all his
Rhetoric, Page 28, 29.
they will think what they list; but if they will grant him the question, they
shall soon be at an end of the quarrel: which one answer if satisfactory,
would silence all controversies to as good purpose as he did Bellarmine, who
said, Bellarmine says it is thus, and I say it is not, and where is Bellarmine
now?

Page 29.
To the second objection, that Episcopacie thus asserted casts an imputation
upon all the reformed Churches, that want that Government, he says, that the
objection is intended to raise envy against them, who (if they may be
believed) love and honor those sister-Churches, and (...) God for them.

But do they out pluck all this envy upon themselves, who in their
Conferences, Writings Pulpits, Universities, Disputes, High Commissi^n,
Declamations, have disclaimed them as no Churches, that (...) disclaimed the
Prelates and have honored the most glorious Lights of those Reformed Churches,
Calvin, Beza, and others with no better titles then of Rascals, Blasphemers?
etc.

But the pith of his answer after a few good words is this, that no such
consequent can be drawn from their opinion; for their Ius divinum pleads only
for a Iustifiablenesse of this holy calling: not for an absolute necessity of
it, warranting it where it is, and requiring it where it may be had; but not
fixing upon the Church that wants it, the defect of any thing of the Essence of
a Church, but only of the glory and perfection of it; neither is it their sin,
but their misery.

And is it so, does not this Ius divinum argue a Necessity, but only a
Iustifiablenesse of this calling? nor is the want of it a want of any thing of
Essence, but only of perfection? we had thought, that page the 20th, where
this Remonstrant strives to fetch the pedigree of Episcopacie from no less
than Apostolical, and in that right Divine institution he had reckoned it
among those things, which the Apostles ordained for the succeeding
administration of the Church in essential matters: but here it seems he is
willing to retract what there fell from him: there it was to his advantage to
say, this Government was a thing essential to the Church, and here it is no
less advantage to say, it is not essential.

But if it be not Essential, then what is the reason that when a Priest who
has received Orders at Rome, turns to us, they urge not him to receive
ordination among us again: but when some of our brethren, who flying in Queen
Mary's days, had received Imposition of hands in the Reformed Churches beyond
the Seas, returned again in the days of Queen Elizabeth, they were urged to
receive Imposition of hands again from our Bishops, and some did receiv^ it.
If those Churches that want Bishops, want nothing essential to a Church; then
what Essential want was there in the Ordination of those Ministers that
received Imposition of hands in those Churches, that might deserve a
Reordination, more than if they had first received their Ordination at Rome?

And what is the reason that Bishop Mountague so confidently affirms, that
Ordination by Episcopal hands is so necessary, ^spara^
as that the Church is no true Church without it, and the Ministry no true
Ministry, and ordinarily no salvation to be obtain^d without it? And if this
Remonstrant should leave Bishop Mountague to answer for himself, yet
notwithstanding he stands bound to give us satisfaction to these two questions,
which arise from his own Book.

First, whether that Office, which by divine right has the sole power of
Ordaining, and Ruling all other Officers in the Church, (as he says
Episcopacie has) belong not to the being, but only to the glory and
perfection of a Church? Secondly, there being (in this man's thoughts) the same
Ius divinum for Bishops, that there is for Pastors and Elders, whether if those
Reformed Churches wanted Pastors and Elders too, they should want nothing of
the Essence of a Church, but of the perfection and glory of it?

But this Remonstrant seems to know so much of the mind of those Churches,
that if they might have their option, they would most gladly embrace Episcopal
Government, as little differing from their own Moderatorship, save only in the
perpetuity of it, and the new Invention (as he odiously calls it) of
Lay Elders. But no question those learned Worthies that were entrusted by the
Churches to compile their Confessions, did comprise their Judgments better
than the Composer of this Remonstrance. And to his presumtion, we oppose their
Confession. We will begin with the French Church, who in their Confession
speak thus:

Credimus veram Ecclesiam gubernari debere ea politia, quam Dominus noster
Jesus Christus sancivit, ita videlicet, ut fint in ea Pastores, Presbyteri,
sive Seniores, and Diaconi, ut doctrinae puritas retineatur, etc. Art. 29.
Credimus omnes Pastores ubicunque collocati sunt, eadem and aequali potestate
inter se esse praeditos sub uno illo capite summoque and solo universali
Episcopo Jesus Christo. Art. 30. Gallicae Confessionis Credimus veram hanc
Ecclesiam aebere regi, ac gubernari, spirituali illa politia, quam nos Deus
ipse in verbo suo edocuit; ita ut sint in ea Pastores ac Ministri, qui pure and
concionentur, and Sacramenta administrent; sint quoque Seniores and Diaconi,
qui Ecclesiae Senatum constituant, ut his veluti mediis vera Religio
conservari, Hominesque vitiis dediti spiritualiter corripi and emendari
possint. Tunc enim rite and ordinate omniae fiunt in Ecclesia, cum viri
fideles, and pii ad ejus gubernationem deliguntur juxta Divi Pauli
praescriptum, 1 Timothy 3. Confess. Belgic. Art. 30. Caeterum ubicuuque locorum
sunt verbi Dei Ministri, candem atque aequalem Omnes habent tum Potestatem tum
Authoritatem, ut qui sunt aeque Omnes Christi unici illius universalis Episcopi
and capit is Ecclesiae Ministri.

We believe that the true Church ought to be governed by that policy which
Christ Jesus our Lord established, viz. that there be Pastors, Presbyters, or
Elders, and Deacons. And again, We believe that all true Pastors wherever they
be, are endued with equal and the same power, under one chief Head and Bishop
Christ Jesus. Consonant to this the Dutch Churches: We believe (say they) the
true Church ought to be ruled with that spiritual policy which God has taught
us in his Word, to wit, that there be in it Pastors to preach the Word purely,
Elders and Deacons to constitute the Ecclesiastical Senate, that by these means
Religion may be preserved, and manners corrected. And so again, We believe
wherever the Ministers of God are placed, they All have the same equal Power
and Authority, as being All equally the Ministers of Christ.

In which Harmony of these Confessions, see how both Churches agree in these
five points:

First, That there is in the Word of God, an exact form of Deus in verbo suo
edocuit.

Secondly, That this form of Government Christ established Jesus Christus in
Ecclesia sancivit.

Thirdly, That this form of Government is by Pastors, Elders,

Fourthly, That the true Church of Christ ought to be thus governed; Veram
Ecclesiam debere regi.

Fifthly, That all true Ministers of the Gospel are of equal

For the reason he assigns, why those Churches should make this Option, we
cannot enough admire that such a passage should fall from his pen, as to say,
There is little difference between their (...), and our Episcopacy, save only
in perpetuity and Lay Elders; for who knows not that between these two there is
a vast a difference as between the Duke of Venice and an absolute Monarch. For,
1, the Moderator in Geneva is not of a superior order to his Brethren; nor 2,
has an Ordination differing from them; nor 3, assumes power of sole Ordination
or Jurisdiction; nor has he 4, maintenance for that Office above his Brethren;
nor 5, a Negative voice in what is agreed by the rest; nor 6, any further power
then any of his Brethren. So that the difference between our Bishops and their
Moderators is more then Little: But if it be so little as this Remonstrant here
pretends; then the Alteration and Abrogation of Episcopacy will be with the
less difficulty, and occasion the less disturbance.

SECT. XV.
BUt there is another thing, wherein our Episcopacy differs from the Geneva
Moderatorship, besides the perpetuity; and that is the exclusion of the
Lay-Presbytery, which (if we may believe this Remonstrant) never till this age
had footing in the Christian Church.

In which assertion, this Remonstrant concludes so fully, with Bishop Halls
Irrefragable Propositions, and his other Book of Episcopacie by Divine right,
as if he had conspired to swear to what the Bishop had said.

Now, though we will not enter the Lists with a man of that learning and fame,
that Bishop Hall is, yet we dare tell this Remonstrant, that this his assertion
has no more truth in it, then the rest that we have already noted. We will (to
avoid prolixity) not urge those 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Cor. 12.28. Romans 12.8.
three known Texts of Scripture, produced by some for the establishing of
Governing Elders in the Church, not yet vindicated by the Adversaries,

Nor will we urge that famous Text of Vnde and Synagoga, and pastea Ecclesia
seniores habuit, quorum sine Consilio nihit agebatur in Ecclesia. Quod qua
negligentia obso^verit nescio, nisi forte Doctorum desidi^, aut magis superbia,
dum soli ^olunt aliquid videri.
Ambrose in 1 Timothy 5.

But if there were no Lay Elders in the Church till this present age, we would
be glad to learn, who they were of whom Origin speaks, when he tells us, it was
the Custom of Christian Teachers, first to examine such as desired to hear
them, of whom there were two orders; the first were Catechumeni, or beginners;
the other was of such as were more perfect: among whom (...), etc. Nonnulli
praepositi sunt qui in vitam and mores eorum qui admittuntur inquirant, ut qui
turpia committant eos communi Caetu interdicant qui vero ab istis abhorrent,
Origin. Lib. 3. contra Celsum.
ex anima complexi, meliores quotidie reddant: There are some ordained to
inquire into the life and manners of such as are admitted into the Church, that
they may banish such from the public Assembly, that perpetrate scandalous
Acts; which place tells us plainly:

First, that there were some in the higher form of hearers (not Teachers) who
were Censores morum over the rest. Secondly, that they were designed or
constituted to this work, (...). Thirdly, that they had such Authority
entrusted into their hands, as that they might interdict such as were
scandalous from the public Assemblies. We would gladly know, whether these
were not, as it were, Lay-Eelders?

That there were such in the Church (distinguished from others that were called
to teach) appears. Epist. 137.
Augustine writing to his Charge, directs his Epistle, Dilectissimis fratribus,
Clero, Senioribus, and universae Plebi Ecclesiae Hipponensis: where first there
is the general compellation, Fratribus, Brethren; Then there is a distribution
of these Brethren into the Clergy, the Elders, and the whole People; so that
there were in that Church Elders distinguished both from the Clergy, and the
rest of the People.

So again, Contra Cresconium Grammaticum: Omnes vos Episcopi, Presbyteri,
Diaconi, and Seniores scitis; All you Bishops, Elders, Deacons, and Elders do
know. What were those two sorts of Elders there mentioned in one comma, Lib. 3.
cap. 1.
and ibidem cap. 56. Peregrinus Presbyter and Seniores Ecclesiae Musticanae
Regionis tale desiderium prosequuntur; where again we read of Elder and Elders,
Presbyter, and Seniors in one Church.

Both those passages are upon record in the public acts, which are more fully
set down by Baronius, Anno 303. Number. 15, 16, 17. As also by Albaspineus, in his
Edition of Optatus: in which Acts the Seniors are often mentioned. In that
famous relation of the purging of Caecilianus and Felix, there is a copy of a
Letter; Fratribus and filiis: Clero and Senioribus, Fratribus in Domino
aeternam salutem: Another Letter is mentioned a little before, Clericis and
Senioribus Cirthensium in Domino aeternam Salutem. These Seniors were
interessed in affairs concerning the Church as being the men, by whose advice
they were managed.

The Letter of Purpurius to Silvanus says, Adhibete conclericos, and seniores
plebis, Ecclesiasticos Viros, and inquirant quae sint iste Dissensiones: ut ea
quae sunt secundum fid^i Praecepta fiant, Where we see the joint power of these
Seniors, with the Clergy in ordering Ecclesiastical affairs; that by their
wisdom and care peace might be settled in the Church; for which cause, these
Seniors are called Ecclesiastical men; and yet they are distinguished from
Clergy men.

They are mentioned again afterward by Maximus, saying, Loquor nomine SENIORUM
Populi Christiani. Greg. Mag. distinguishes them also from the Clergy:
Tabellarium cum consensu SENIORUM and Cleri memineris Ordinandum.

These Seniors had power to reprove offenders, otherwise why should Augustine
say, Aug. Sermon. 19. de Verb. Dom.
Cum ob errorem aliquem a Senioribus arguuntur, and imputatur alicui cur
aebrius fuerit, cur res alienas pervaserit, etc. when they were by the Elders
reproved for their errors, and drunkenness is laid to a man's charge, etc. So
that it was proper to the Seniors to have the cognizance of Delinqents, and to
reprove them.

August. in Psalm 38. Conc. 2.
The same Augustine in Psalm. 36. Necesse nos fuerat Primiani causam, quem, etc.
Seniorum literis ejusdem Ecclesiae po^tulantibus audire. Being requested by
Letters from the Seniors of that Church, it was needful for me to hear the
cause of Primian, etc.

So again, Optatus, who mentioning a persecution that did for a while scatter
the Church, says, Erant Ecclesiae ex auro and argento quam plurima Ornamenta,
quae nec defodere terrae, nec secum portare poterat, quare fidelibus Senioribus
commendavit Albaspineus, that learned Antiquary, on that place acknowledges,
that Besides the Clergy there were certain of the Elders of the people, men of
approved life, that did tend the affairs of the Church, of whom this place is
to be understood.

By all these testimonies it is apparent; first, that in the ancient Church
there were some called Seniors, Secondly, that these Seniors were not Clergy
men. Thirdly, that they had a stroke in governing the Church, and managing the
affairs thereof Fourthly, that Seniors were distinguished from the rest of the
people.

Neither would we desire to choose any other Judges in this whole controversy;
Page 32.
then whom himself constituted; Foreign Divines, taking the general Suffrage
and practice of the Churches, and not of particular men.

As for the learned Spanhemius whom he produces, though we give him the
deserved honor of a worthy man: yet we think it too much to speak of him, as
if the judgment of the whole Church ^f Geneva were incorporated into him, as
this Remonstrant does. And for Spanhemius himself, we may truly say, in the
place cited, he dilivered a complement, rather then his judgment, which in
Dedicatorie Epistles is not unusual. We know that reverend Calvin's and learned
Beza have said as much upon occasion in their Epistles, and yet the Christian
world knows their Judgment was to the contrary

Little reason therefore has this Remonstrant, to declaime against all such as
speak against this Government as unlawful, Page 33
with the terms of Ignorance and spiteful Sectaries, because they call the
Government unlawful: Page 33
had they proceeded further to call it Antichristian, (which he charges upon
them) they had said no more, then what our ears have heard some of their
principal Agents, their L^gat^ a Latere speak publicly in their visitations:
That howeve^ the Church of ^ngland be as sound, Doct. Duck.
and Orthodox in her Doctrine as any Church in the World yet in our Discipline
and Government we are the same with the Church of Rome, which amounts to as
much as to say the Government is Antichristian, unless they will say, the
Government of Rome is not so, nor the Pope Antichrist.

SECT. XVI.
NOw our Remonstrant begins to leave his dispute for the Office, and flows
into the large praises of the Persons, and what is wanting in his Arguments for
the Place, thinks to make up in his Encomiasticks of the Persons, that have
possessed that place in the Church of God: and tells us, that the Religious
Bishops of all times are and have been they that have strongly upheld the truth
of God against Satan and his Antichrist. It is well he sets this crown only
upon the heads of Religious Bishops, Page 34
as knowing that there are and have been some Irreligious ones, that have as
strongly uph^ld Satan and his Antichrist against the truth of God. But the
Religious Bishops are they that have all times upheld the truth. What? they?
and only they? did never any uphold the truth, but a Religious Bishop? did
never any Religious Minister or Professor preach, or write, or die, to uphold
the truth, but a Religious Bishop? if so, then there is some persuasive
strength in that he says; and a credulous man might be induced to think, If
Bishops go down, truth will go down to^: But if we can produce for one Bishop
many others that have been valiant for the truth, this Rhethoricall insinuation
will contribute no great help to their establishment. Nor indeed any at all;
unless he were able to make this good of our times, Page 35.
as well as of all others, We may rather think that they would have done more.
Remembering what Martinus was wont to say to his friend Sulpitius, Nequaquam
sibi in Episcopatu eam virtutum Gratiam suppetisse, quam prius se habuisse
mominisset. Sulpitius Severus Dial. 2.
which he assaies; for says he, Even amongst our own how many of the reverend
and learned Fathers of the Church now living, have spent their spirits, and
worn out their lives in the powerful opposition of that man of sin? how many?
I Sir, we would fain know how many: that there are some that have stood up to
bear witness against that Man of sin, we acknowledge with all due respect, to
the Learning and worth of their Persons. But that their Episcopal dignity has
added either any flame to their zeal, or any Nerves to their ability, we cannot
believe, nor can we think they would have done less in that cause, though they
had been no Bishops.

But what if this be true of some Bishops in the Kingdom, is it true of all?
are there not some that have spent their spirits in the opposition of Christ,
as others have in the opposition of Antichrist? and are there none bu Zealous,
Religious Prelates in the Kingdom? are there none upon whom the guilt of that
may meritoriously be charged, which others have convincingly and meritoriously
opposed? Page 35.
And are there not some Bishops in the Kingdom, that are so far from opposing
the Man of sin, that even this Remonstrant is in danger of suffering under the
name of Puritan for daring to call him by that name? we doubt not but this
Remonstrant knows there are.

Page 35.
But if he will against the light of his own Conscience, bear up a known
error out of private respects, (we will not say these papers) but his own
Conscience, shall one day be an evidence against him before the dreadful
Tribunal of the Almighty.

But there is yet a second thing that should endeare Episcopacie, and that is
the careful, Page 35.
peaceable, painful, conscionable mannaging of their Charges; to the great
glory of God, and the comfort of his faithful people. Which (in not seeming to
urge) he urges to the full and beyond. This care, conscience, pains of our
Bishops, is exercised and evidenced, either in their Preaching, or in their
Ruling; for their Preaching, it is true, some few there are that Labor in the
Word and Doctrine; whose persons in that respect we Honor: but the most are so
far from Preaching, that they rather discountenance, discourage, oppose,
blaspheme Preaching.

It was a Non-preaching Bishop, that said of a Preaching Bishop, He was a
Preaching Coxcomb. As for the discharge of their office of ruling, their
entrusting their Chancellors, and other Officers with their visitations, and
Courts (as ordinarily they do, whiles themselves attend the Court) does
abundantly witness their care in it. The many and loud cries of the
intolerable oppressions and tyrannies of their Court-proceedings; witness
their peaceablenesse, their unjust fees, exactions, commutations; witness
their conscionablenesse in managing their Charges, to the great glory of God,
and the comfort of his faithful people.

And hence it is that so many at this day hear ill; (how deservedly, says this
Remonstrant, God knows; Page 36.
) and do not your Honors know, and does not this Remonstrant know? and does
not all the Nation (that will know any thing) know how deservedly Some, nay,
Most, nay, All the Bishops of this Nation hear ill, were it but only for the
late Canons and Oath? Page 36.
But why should the faults of some, diffuse the blame to all? Why? by your own
argument, that would extend the deserts of some, to the patronage of All; and
if it be a fault in the impetuous and undistinguishing Vulgar, so to involve
all, as to make Innocence it self a sin; what is it in a Man able to
distinguish, by the same implication, to shroud sin under Innocence, the sin
of many under the Innocence of a few?

But have our Bishops indeed been so careful, painful, Page ^7.
conscionable, in managing their Charges? how is it then that there are such
manifold scandalls of the inferior Clergy presented to your Honors view,
which he cannot mention without a bleeding heart; and yet could find in his
heart (if he knew how) to excuse them? and though he confess them to be the
shame and misery of our Church, yet is he not ashamed to plead their cause at
your Honors BAR, Onuphrius-like, that was the Advocate of every bad cause;
and to excite you by Constantines example (in a differ^nt Cause alleged) if
not to suffer those Crimes, which himself calls hateful, to pass unpunished,
yet not to bring them to tha^ open and public punishment they have deserved.

But what, if pious Constantine (in his tender care to prevent the Divisions
that the emulation of the Bishops of that age, enraged with a spirit of envy
and faction, were kindling in the Church, le^t by that means the Christian
Faith should be derided among the Heathens) did suppress their mutual
accusations, many of which might be but upon surmises; and that ^ot in a Court
of Justice, b^t in an Ecclesiastical Synod; shall this be urged before the
highest Court of Justice upon earth, to the patronizing of N^toriou^ scandall^,
and hateful en^rmities, that are already proved by evidence of cle^^e witness?

But ^o forbid it to tell it in Ga^h, etc. What the sin* ^as, Page ^^
that is done already; Do we not know, the drukennesse, profaneness
superstition, Popishnesse of the English Clergy rings at Rome already? yes
undoubtedly; and there is no way to vindicate the Honor of our Nation,
Ministry, Parliaments, Sovereigne, Religion, God; but by causing the
punishment to ring as far as the sin has done; that our adversaries that
have triumphed in their sin, may be confounded at their punishments. Do not
your Honors know, that the plaistring or palliating of these rotten members,
will be a greater dishonor to the Nation and Church, then their cutting off;
and that the personal acts of these sons of Belial, being connived at,
become National sins?

But for this one fact of Constantine, we humbly crave your Honors leave to
present to your wisdom three Texts of Scripture, Ezekiel 44.12.13. Because they
ministered unto them before their ^dol^, and caused the house of Israel to fall
into iniquity, therefore have I lift up my hand unto them, says the Lord, and
they shall bear their iniquity. And they shall not come near unto me, to do
the Office of a Priest unto me, nor to come near unto any of mine holy things
in the most holy place, etc.

The second is Ier^m. 48.10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
negligently: and the third is, Judges 6.31. He that will plead for Baal, let
him be put to death while it is yet morning. We have no more to say in this;
whether it be best to walk after the President of Man, or the Prescript of God,
your Hunours can easily judge.

SECT. XVII.
BUt stay, says this Remonstrant; and indeed he might well have stayed and
spared the labor of his ensuing discourse, Page 39.
about the Church of England, the Prelaticall and the Antiprelaticall Church:
but these Episcopal Men deal as the Papists that dazzle the eyes, and astonish
the senses of poor people, with the glorious name of the Church, the Church;
The holy Mother the Church. This is the Gorgons head, as Doctor In his Preface
to his Book called, The way to the True Church. S^linus.
White says, that has enchanted them, and held them in bondage to the^r
Errors: All their speech is of the Church, the Church; no mention of the
Scriptures, of God the Father; but all of the Mother the Church. Much like as
they write of certain Aethiopians, that by reason they use no marriage, but
promiscuously company together, the children only follow the Mother; the Father
and his name is in no request, but the mother has all the reputation. So is it
with the Author of this Remonstrance, he styles himself, a Dutiful son of the
Church. And it has been a Custom of late times to cry up the holy Mother the
Church of England, to call for absolute obedience to holy Church; full
conformity to the orders of holy Church; Neglecting in the mean time God the
Father, and the holy Scripture.

But if we should now demand of them, what they mean by the Church of England?
Page 39.
this Author seems to be thunder-stricken at this Question; and calls the very
Question, a new Divinity; where he deals like such as holding great revenues
by unjust Titles, will not suffer their Titles to be called in Question.

For it is apparent, Ac si solaribus radiis descriptum esset (to use
Tertullians phrase) that the word Church is an Equivocall word, and has as
many several acceptions as letters; and that Dolus latet in universalibus. And
that by the Church of England; first by some of these men is meant only the
Bishops; or rather the two Archbishops; or more properly the Archbishop of
Canterbury: Just as the Iesuited Papists resolve the Church and all the
glorious Titles of it into the Pope; so do these into the Archbishop, or at
fullest, they understand it of the Bishops and their party met in Convocation;
as the more ingenuous of the Papists make the Pope and his Cardinals to be
their Church: thus excluding all the Christian people and Presbyters of the
Kingdom; as not worthy to be reckoned in the number of the Church.

And which is more strange, this Author in his Simplicity (as he truly says)
never heard, nor thought of any more Churches of England then one; and what
then shall become of his Diocesan Churches, and Diocesan Bishops? And what
shall we think of England, when it was an Heptarchy? had it not then seven
Churches, when seven Kings? Or if the Bounds of a Kingdom must constitute the
Limits and Bounds of a Church, why are not ^ngland, Scotland, and Ireland, all
one Church? when they are happily united under one gracious Monarch, into one
Kingdom? We read in Scripture, of the Churches of Judea, and the Churches of
Galatia: and why not the Churches of England? not that we deny the
Cons^ciati^n or Combination of Churches into a Provincial or National Synod
for the right ordering of them. But that there should be no Church in England,
but a National Church: this is that which th^s ^mb^r ^o his simplicity
affirms, of which the very rehearsal is a (...)

SECT. XVIII.
THere are yet two things with which this Remonstrance shuts up it self, which
must not be past without our Obelisks.

First, he scoffs at the Antiprelatical Church, and the Antiprelatical
Divisions; for our parts, we acknowledge no Antiprelatical Church. But there
are a company of men in the Kingdom, of no mean rank or quality, for Piety,
Nobility, Learning, that stand up to bear witness against the Hierarchy (as it
now stands:) their usurpations over Gods Church and Ministers, their cruel
using of Gods people by their tyrannical government: this we acknowledge; and
if he call these the Antiprelatical Church, we doubt not but your Honors will
consider, that there are many thousands in this Kingdom, and those pious and
worthy persons, that thus do, and upon most just cause.

It was a speech of Erasmus of Luther, Vt quisque vir est optimus, it is illius
Scriptis minime offendi; The better any man was, the less offense he took at
Luthers Writings: but we may say the contrary of the Prelates, Ut quisque vir
est optimus, it a illorum factis magis offendi; The better any man is, the more
he is offended at their dealings. And all that can be objected against this
party, will be like that in Tertullian. Bonus vir Cajus Sejus, sed malus
tantum, quia Antiprelaticus. Tertull. advers. Gent.
But he upbraids us with our Divisions and Subdivisions, so do the Papists
upbraid the Protestants with their Lutheranisme, Calvinisme, and Zuinglianisme.
And this is that the Heathens objected to the Christians, their Fractures were
so many, they knew not which Religion to choose if they should turn Christians:
And can it be expected that the Church in any age should be free from
Divisions, when the times of the Apostles were not free? and the Apostle tells
us, It must needs be that there be divisions: in Greg. Naz. days there were
600 Errors in the Church; do these any ways derogate from the truth and worth
of Christian Religion?

But as for the Divisions of the Antiprelatical party, so odiously exaggerated
by this Remonstrant: Let us assure your Honors, they have been much fomented
by the Prelates, whose practice has been according to that rule of Machiavil:
Divide and Impera, and they have made these divisions, and afterward
complained of that which their Tyranny and Policy has made. It is no wonder,
considering the paths our Prelates have trod, that there are Divisions in the
Nation. The wonder is our divisions are no more, no greater; and we doubt not
but if they were of that gracious* spirit, and so entirely affected to the
peace of the Church as Greg, Naz. was, they would say as he did in the tumults
of the people, Mitte nos in mare, and non erit tempest as; rather then they
would hinder that sweet Concordance, and conspiration of mind unto a
Government that shall be every way agreeable to the rule of Gods Word, and
profitable for the edification and flourishing of the Church,

A second thing we cannot but take notice of, is the pains this Author takes to
advance his Prelaticall Church: Page 2.
and forgetting what he had said in the beginning: that this party was so
numerous, it could not be summed; tells us now, Page 4^.
these several thousands are punctually calculated. But we doubt not but your
Honors will consider that there may be multi homines, and pauci viri; and that
there are more against them then for them.

And whereas they pretend, that they differ from us only in a Ceremony or an
Organ-pipe, (which however is no contemptible difference) yet it will appear
that our differences are in point of a superior Alloy. Though this Remonstrant
braves it in his multiplied Queries What are the bounds of this Church? Page 41
what the distinction of the prefessours and Religion? what grounds of faith?
what new Creed do they hold differenc from their Neighbors? what Scriptures?
what Baptism? what means of Salvation other then the rest? yet if he pleased
he might have silenced his own Queries: but if he will needs put us to the
answer, we will resolve them one by one.

First, if he ask what are the bounds of this Church? we answer him out of the
sixth of their late founded Canons: where we find the limits of this Prelatical
Church extend as far as from the high and lofty Promontory of Archbishops, to
the ^erra incognita of an, etc.

If what Distinction of professors and Religion; we answer, their worshipping
toward the East, and bowing toward the Altar prostrating themselves in their
approches into Churches, placing all Religion in outward formalities, are
visible differences of these professors and their Religion

If what new Creed they have, or what grounds of Faith differing from their
Neighbors? we answer, Episcopacy by divine right is the first Article of their
Creed, Absolute and blind obedience to all the Commandments of the Church
(that is, the Bishop and his Emissaries) election upon faith foreseen, the
influence of works into Justification, ^alling from grace, etc.

If what Scripture? we answer, the Apocrypha and unwritten Traditions.

If what Baptism? a Baptism of absolute Necessity unto salvation; and yet
unsufficient unto salvation: as not sealing grace to the taking away of sin
after Baptism.

If what ^u^harist? an Eucharist that must be administered upon an Altar or a
Table set Altar-wise, railed in an Eucharist, in which there is such a presence
of christ, (though Modum nesciunt) as makes the place of its Administration the
throne of God, the place of the Residence ^f the Almighty; and impresseth such
a holiness upon it as makes it not only capable, but worthy of Adoration.

If what Christ? a Christ who has given the same power of absolution to a
Priest that himself has.

If what Heaven? a Heaven that has a broad way leading thither, and is
receptive of Drunkards, Swearers, Adulterers, etc. such a heaven as we may say
of it, as the Indians said of the heaven of the Spaniards: Unto that heaven
which some of the Prelaticall Church living and dying in their scandalous
sins, and hateful enormities go to, let our souls never enter.

If what means of Salvation? we answer, confession of sins to a Priest, as
the most absolute, undoubted, necessary, infallible means of Salvation.

Page 41.
Far be it from us to say with this Remonstrant, We do fully agree in all
these and all other Doctrinall, and practical points of Religion, and preach
one and the same saving truths. Nay, we must rather say as that holy Martyr
did, We thank God we are none of you.

Page 42.
Nor do we because of this dissension fear the censure of uncharitableness from
any but uncharitable men. But it is no unusual thing with the Prelates and
their party, to charge such as protest against their corrupt opinions and
ways, with uncharitableness and Schism, as the Papists do the Protestants:
and as the protestants do justly recriminate, and charge that Schism upon the
Papists, which they object to us; So may we upon the Prelates: And if Austin
may be judge, the Prelates are more Schismatics then we. Quicunque (says he)
invident bonis, ut quaerant occasiones excludendi eos, aut degradandi, vel
crimina sua sic defendere parati sunt (si objecta vel prodita fuerint) ut etiam
conventiculorum congregationes vel Ecclesiae perturbationes cogitent excitare,
jam schismatici sunt. Whosoever envy those that are good, and seek occasions
to exclude and degrade them, and are so ready to defend their faults, that
rather then they will leave them, they will devise how to raise up troubles in
the Church, and drive men into conventicles and corners, they are the
Schismatics.

And that all the world may take notice what just cause we have to complain of
Episcopacie, as it now stands, we humbly crave leave to propound these Queries.

Queries about Episcopacie,
WHether it be tolerable in a Christian Church, that Lord Bishops Iure Divino;
And yet the Lords day by the some men to be but Iure Humano? And that the same
persons should cry up Altars in stead of Communion-Tables, and Priests in stead
of Ministers, and yet not Iudaize, when they will not suffer the Lords Day to
be called the Sabbath Day, for fear of Iudaizing? Whereas the word Sabbath is
a general word, signifying a day of rest, which is common as well to the
Christian Sabbath, as to the Jewish Sabbath, and was also used by the Ancients,
Ruffinus in Psalm. 47. Orig^n. Hom. 23. in Number. Gregory Nazian.

Whether that assertion, No Bishop, No King; and no Ceremony,

Whether seeing it has been proved, that Bishops (as they are

Whether the advancing of Episcopacie into Ius Divinum, does Colos. 2.20, 21,
22. Matthew. 15.9. But now since Episcopacy comes to be challenged as a Divine
Ordinance, how shall we be responsible to those Texts? And is it not, as it
is now asserted, become an Idol, and like the Brazen Serpent to be ground to
powder?

Whether there be any difference in the point of Episcopacy between Ius
Divinum and Ius Apostolicum? Because we find some Ius Divinum; others by Ius
Apostolicum. But we conceive that Ius Apostolicum properly taken, is all one
with Ius Divinum. For Ius Apostolicum is such a Ius, which is founded upon the
Acts and Epistles of the Apostles, written by them so as to be a perpetual
Rule for the succeeding Administration of the Church, as this Author says,
Page 20. And this Ius is Ius Divinum, as well as Apostolicum. But if by Ius
Apostolicum they mean improperly (as some do) such things which are not
recorded in the Writings of the Apostles, but introduced, the Apostles being
living, (...) be rightly said to be Iure Apostolico, nor such things which the
Apostles did intend the Churches should be bound unto. Neither is Episcopacie
as it imports a superiority of power over a Pre^byter, no not in this sense
Iure Apostolico, as has been already proved, and might further be manifested
by diverse Testimonies, if need did require. We will only instance in Cassander
a man famous for his immoderate moderation in controverted Points of Religion,
who in his Consultat. Articul. 14. has this saying, An Epis^opatus inter
ordines Ecclesiastic^s ponendus sit, inter Theologos and Canonistas non
convenit? Convenit autem inter omnes, Apostolorum aetate inter Presbyterum and
Episcopum nullum discrimen fuisse, etc.

Beza, between Episcopus Divinus Hum^nu^, and Diabolicus, be not worthy your
Honors consideration? By the Divine Bishop, he means the Bishop as he is
taken in Scripture, which is one and the same with a Presbyter. By the humane
Bishop he means the Bishop chosen by the Presbyters to be President over them,
and to rule with them by fixed Laws and Canons. By the Diabolical Bishop, he
means a Bishop with sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, Lording it over
Gods heritage, and governing by his own will and authority. Which puts us in
mind of the Painter that Limned two pictures to the same proportion and
figure; The one he reserved in secret, the other he exposed to common view. And
as the fancy of beholders led them to censure any line or proportion, as not
done to the life, he mends it after direction: If any fault be found with the
eye, hand, foot, etc. He corrects it, till at last the addition of every man's
fancy had defaced the first figure, and made that which was the Picture of a
man, swell into a monster: Then bringing forth this and his other Picture which
he had reserved, he presented both to the people. And they abhorring the
former, and applauding the latter, he cried, Hunc populus fecit: This deformed
one the People made: This lovely one I made. As the Painter of his Painting, so
(in Beza's sense) it may be said of Bishops, God at first instituted Bishops,
such as are all one with Presbyters; and such are amiable, honorable in all
the Churches of God. But when men would be adding to Gods institution, what
power, pre-eminence, Jurisdiction, Lordliness their fancy suggested unto
them, this divine Bishop lost his Original beauty, and became to be Humanus.
And in conclusion (by these and other aditions swelling into a Pope)
Diabolicus. H^nc populus ^ecit.


Peter Mark, James, Timothy, and Titus Bishops, did not speak according to the
Language of the times wherein they lived, rather then according to the true
acception of the word Bishop? and whether it be not true which is here said i^
this Book, that they are called Bishops of Alexand^iae, Ephes^s, Hierus^lem,
etc in a very improper sense, because they abode at those p^ac^s a longer time
then at other places? For su^e it is, if (...)and and I^mes Apostles (which are
Bishops; over the whol^ (...)) and the Apostles made Mark^, ^imothy and Titus
(...), etc. it seems to us that it would have been a great sin in them to
limit themselves to one particular Diocese, and to ^eave that calling in which
Christ had placed them.

Whether Presbyters in Scripture are called (...) and (...), Mat. 16.19. where
the power of the Keys is promised to Peter, in the name of the rest of the
Apostles, and their successors; and given to all the Apostles, and their
successors, Mat. 18.19. John. 20.23. And that Presbyters succeed the Apostles,
appears not only, Mat. 28.20. but also, Acts. 20.28. where the Apostle ready
to leave the Church of Ephesus commends the care of ruling and feeding it to
the Elders of that Church* To this Irenaeus witnesses, lib 4 cap. 43.44. This
Bishop Jewel against Harding, Artic. 4. Sect. 5, 6. says, that all Pastors
have equal power of binding and loosing with ^eter.

Whether since that Bishops assume to themselves power temporal endeavor to
(...) Spiritual usurpations as well as their Temporal.

A^rius be justly branded by Epiphanius and Austin for a Here^^cke (as some
report) sor affirming Bishops, and Presbyters to be of an equal power?

E^i^han^^s says he did, (...) says in (...) accus^d (...), because he s^id
tha^ (...) d^d n^^ (...). And Aust^n accused Arrius, because he said, Non licet
orare, vel offc^re pro mortu^s oblationem.
We say, as some report, for the truth is, he is charged with heresy merely
and only because he was an Arrian. As for his opinian of the parity of a
Presbyter with a Bishop; this indeed is called by Austin, proprium dogma Aerii,
the proper opinion of Aerius. And by Epiphanius it is called Dogma suriosum and
stolidum, a mad and foolish opinion, but not an heresy neither by the one nor
the other. But let us suppose (as is commonly thought) that he was accounted an
Heretic for this opinion: yet notwithstanding, that this was but the private
opinion of Epiphanius, and borrowed out of him by Austin and an opinion not to
be allowed, appears:

First, because the same Authors condemn Aerius, as much for reprehending and
censuring the mentioning of the dead in the publ^que prayers, and the
performing of good works for the benefit of the dead. And also for the
reprehending stata jejunia, and the keeping of the week before Easter as a
solemn Fast, which if worthy of condemnation, would bring in most of the
reformed Churches into the censure of Heresy.

Secondly, because not only Saint Hierome, but Austin himself, Sedulius,
Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, O^cumenius, Theophilact* were of the same
opinion with Aerius (as Michael Medina observes in the Council of Trent, and
has written, Lib. 1. de sacr. hom. origin.) and yet none of these deserving
the name of Fools, much less to be branded for Heretics.

Thirdly, because no Council did ever condemn this for Heresy; but on the
contrary, Concilium Aquisgranens. sub Ludovico ^io Imp. 1. anno 816. has
approved it for true Divinity out of the Scriture, Whitaker. Respons. ad
Campian. rat. 10. has these words:
That Bishops and Presbyters are equal, bringing the same texts that Aerius
does, and which Epiphanius indeed undertakes to answer; but how slightly let
any indifferent Reader judge.

Rome has not been, Aerium Epiphanius and Augu^tinus in haereticis numerant,
and praeter cos antiqui panci. E^ si Presbyterum E^iscapo aequare sit
haereticum, nihil Catholicum esse pot^st. Cun. AErio Hicronymus de Pres^y^^ is
(...) sensit Illos enim jure divino Episcopis aequales esse statuit.
in swerving from the Discipline of Christ, as well as from the doctrine? For
so it seems by that text, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. And also, Revel. 18.7 and diverse
others. And if so, then it much concerns all those that desire the purity of
the Church, to consider, how near the Discipline of the Church of England
borders upon Antichrist; lest, while they endeavor to keep out Antichrist from
entering by the door of doctrine, they should suffer him secretly to creep in by
the door of Discipline, especially considering, what is here said in this
Book, That by their own confession the Discipline of the Church of England is
the same with the Church of Rome.

Whether Episcopacie be not made a place of Dignity, rather then Sozomen. hist.
lib. 6. cap. 10.
whereas now Bishops cut off the ears of those that speak against their
Bishoprics?

How it comes to pass, that in England there is such increase of Rome, to
uphold their greatness, and their Courts and Canons, wherein they symbolize
with Rome? And whether it be not to be feared, that they will rather consent to
the bringing in of Popery, for the upholding of their dignities, then part with
their dignities for the upholding of Religion?

Why should England that is one of the chiefest Kingdoms Europe, that
separates from Antichrist, maintain and defend a Discipline different from all
other Reformed Churches, which stand in the like Separation? And whether the
continuance in this Discipline will not at last bring us to communion with
Rome, from which we are separated, and to separation from the other Reformed
Churches, unto which we are united?

Whether it be fit that the name Bishop, which in Scripture is

First, we find by woeful experience, that the great Equivocatithat lies in
the name Bishop, has been, and is at this day a great prop and pillar to
uphold Lordly Prelacy; for this is the great Goliath, the masterpiece, and
indeed the only argument with which they think to silence all opposers; to
wit, the Antiquity of Episcopacie, that it has continued in the Church of
Christ for 1500 years, etc. which argument is cited by this Remonstrant ad
nauseam usque and usque. Now it is evident tha^ this ^r^ument is a Paralogism,
depending upon the Equivocation of the (...) ^^shop. For Bishops in the
Apostles time were the some with Pre^byters in name and office, and so for a
good wh^le after. An^ when afterward they came to be disting^^shed, the
^i^hops of the ^rimitive times differed as much from o^^s now, as Rome anci^nt
from Rome at this day, as has been su^fi^ie^^ly decl^^ed in this Book. And the
best way to confute this ^rgumen^ i^ ^y h^nging in a Community of the name
Bishop to a Presby^er a^ w^ll (...) a ^^shop.

Secondly, becau^^ we ^in^e (...) late Innovators which have so much disturbed
(...) p^r^ty of our Church, did first begin w^^h the al^^ratio^ (...); and by
changing the word Table into the word Altar, and the word Minister into the
word Priest, and the wo^d Sacr^ment into the word ^acrifice, have endeavored
to bring in the Popish Mass. And the Apost^e exhorts us, 2 Timothy 1.13. T^ hold
fast the form of sound words: and 1 Timothy 6.20. To avoid the profane novelties
of words. Upon which text we will only mention what the Rhemists have
commented, which we conceive to be worthy consideration. (Nam instruunt nos non
solum docentes, s^d eti^m errantes.) The Church of God has always been as
diligent to resist novelties of words, as her adversaries are busy to invent
them, for which cause she will not have us communicate with them* no^ follow
their fashions and phrase newl^ invented, though in the nature of the words
^ometimes there be no harm. Le^ us keep our forefathers words, and we shall
easily keep our old and true says, that we had of the first Christians; let
them say, Amendment, A^sti^ence, the Lords Supper, the Communion Table, Elders,
Ministers, ^uper-inten^^nt, Congregation, So be it, Praise ye the Lord, Morning
Prayer, Evening Prayer, and the rest as they will; Let us avoid those novelties
of words, according to the Apostles prescript, and keep the old terms, ^enance,
^ast, Priests, Church, ^ishop, Mas^, Ma^^in, ^ven-Song, the B. Sacrament,
Altar, Oblation, Host, Sacifice. Hal^elujah, Amen; Lent, Palm-^unday,
Christmas, and the words will br^ng us to the faith of our first ^postles, and
condemn th^^^ new Apostates, new faith and phrase.

Whether having proved that God never set such a Government in hi^ Church as
our Episcopal Government is, Qu^st^ 6.
we may law^ul^^ any l^^ger be subject unto it, be present at their Courts,
obe^ their Inju^ctio^s, and especia^ly be instruments in publishing, and
ex^c^ting their Excommunications and Abs^ustions?

and ^hus we have given (as we hope) a sufficient answ^r, an^ brief as the
matter world permit, to the Remon^^rant. With (...) though we agree not in
opinion touching Episcopacie and Liturgy; yet we fully consent with him, to
pray unto Almighty God, Who is great in power, and infinite in wisdom, to pour
down upon the whole Honorable Assembly, the spirit of wisdom, and
understanding, the spirit of Counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of
the fear of the Lord: That you may be able to discern betwixt things that
differ, separate between the precious and the vile, purely purge away our
dross, and take away all our tin, root out every plant that is not of our
heavenly Fathers planting: That so you may raise up the foundations of many
generations, and be called the Repairers of breaches, and Restorers of paths to
dwell in. Even so, Amen.

A POSCRIPT.
THough we might have added much light and beauty to our Discourse, by
inserting variety of Histories upon several occasions given us in the
Remonstrance, the answer whereof we have undertaken; especially where it speaks
of the bounty and gracious Munificence of Religious Princes toward the Bishops,
yet unwilling to break the thread of our discourse, and its connection with the
Remonstrance by so large a digression, as the whole series of History
producible to our purpose, would extend unto: We have chosen rather to subjoyn
by way of Appendix, an historical Narration of those bitter fruits, Pride,
Rebellion, Treason, Unthankfulness, etc. which have issued from Episcopacy,
while it has stood under the continued influences of Sovereigne goodness.
Which Narration would fill a Volume, but we will bound our selves unto the
Stories of this Kingdom, and that revolution of time which has passed over us
since the erection of the Sea of Canterbury. And because in most things the
beginning is observed to be a presage of that which follows, let their Founder
Austin the Monk come first to be considered. Whom we may justly account to have
been such to the English, as the Arrian Bishops were of old to the Goths, and
the Jesuits now among the Indians, Beda. Holins^. Speed.
who of Pagans have made but Arrians and Papists. His ignorance in the Gospel
which he preached is seen in his idle and Judaical consultations with the Pope,
about things clean and unclean; his proud demeanor toward the British Clergy,
appears in his Council called about no solid point of faith, but celebration of
Easter, where having troubled and threatened the Churches of Wales, and
afterward of Scotland, about Romish Ceremonies, he is said in fine to have
been the stirrer up of Ethelbers, by means of the Northumbrian King, to the
slaughter of twelve hundred of those poor laborious Monks of Bangor. His
Successors busied in nothing but urging and instituting Ceremonies, and
maintaining Precedence we pass over.

Helinsh. out of Capgrave-Osborn, Hig^en.
Till Dunst^n, the Sa^nted Prelate, who of a frantic Necromaacer, and suspected
fornicatour, was shorn a Monk, and afterward made a Bishop. His worthy deeds
are noted by Speed, to have been the cheating King Eldred of the treasure
committed to his keeping; the prohibiting of marriage, to the increasing of all
filthiness in the Clergy o^ those times; as the long Oration of King Edgar in
Stow well testifies.

Edw Cons.
In Edward the Confessors days, Robert the Norman no sooner Archbishop of
Canterbury, but setting the King and Earl Godwine at variance for private
revenge, broach't a Civil War, till the Archbishop was banished. Holsh. 191.


Will. Conq.
Now William the Conqueror had set up Lankefrank Bishop of Canterbury, who to
requite him, spent his faithful service to the Pope Gregory, in persuading the
King to subject himself and his State to the Papacy, Speed p. 442.
as himself writes to the Pope, Suasi, sed non persuasi.

Will. Ruf.
The treason of Anselm to Rufus was notorious, who not content to withstand the
King, obstinately in money-matters, made suit to fetch his Pall or Investiture
of Archiepiscopacy from Rome, which the King denying as flat against his Regal
Sovereignty, he went without his leave, and for his Romish good service
received great honor from the Pope, by being seated at his right foot in a
Synod, with these words, Includamus hunc in orb nostro tanquam alterius orbis
Papam. Whence perhaps it is that the Sea of Canterbury has affected a
Patriarchy in our days. This Anselm also condemned the married Clergy.

Hen. 1.
Henry the First reigning, the same Anselm deprived those Prelates that had
been Invested by the King, and all the Kingdom is vexed with one Prelate, who
the second time betakes himself to his old fortress at Rome, till the King was
fain to yield. Which done, and the Archbishop returned, spends the rest of his
days in a long contention and unchristian jangling with York about Primacie.
Holshim. 37.
Which ended not so, but grew hot between York and London, as Dean to
Canterbury, striving for the upper seat at Dinner, till the King seeing their
odious pride, put them both out of doors.

Holinsh. 38.
To speak of Ralph and Thurstan, the next Archbishops, pursuing the same
quarrel, were tedious, as it was no small molestation to the King and Kingdom,
Thurstan refusing to stand to the Kings doom, and wins the day, or else the
King must be accursed by the Pope; Holinsh. 42, 43.
which further animates him to try the mastery with William next Archbishop of
Canterbury, and no man can end it but their Father the Pope, for which they
travel to Rome. In the mean while, marriage is sharply decreed against, Speed
448. and the Legate Cremonensis, the Declamour against Matrimony taken with a
Strumpet the same night.

In King Stephens Reign, K. Stephen.
the haughty Bishops of Canterbury and Winchester bandy about Precedence; and
to Rome to end the Duel. Theobald goes to Rome against the Kings will;
interdicts the Realm, and the King forced to suffer it; Holinsh. 57, 58, 59.
till refusing to Crown Eustace, the Kings Son, because the Pope had so
commanded, he flies again.

Becket's pride and out-ragious treasons are too manifest; Henry 3.
resigning the Kings gift of his Archbishopric to receive it of the Pope;
requiring the Custody of Rochester-castle, and the Tower of London, as
belonging to his Seignorie. Protects murdering Priests from Temporal Sword;
standing stiffly for the Liberties and Dignities of Clerks, but little to
chastise their vices, Speed 462. out of Nubrigens.
which besides other erying sins, were above a hundred murders since Henry
the Seconds crowning, till that time: to maintain which, Yet this man's life is
lately Printed in English, as a thing to be imitated.
most of the Bishops conspire, till the terror of the King made them shrink;
but Becket obdures, denies that the King of Englands Courts have authority to
judge him* And thus was this noble King disquieted by an insolent Traitor, in
habit of a Bishop, a great part of his Reign; the Land in uproar; Holinsh. 70.
many Excommunicate, and accursed; France and England set to War, Speed 469.
and the King himself curbed, and controlled; and lastly, disciplined by the
Bishops and Monks: first, with a barefoot penance, that drevv blood from his
feet, and lastly, with fourscore lashes on his anointed body with Rods.

In the same Kings time it was that the Archbishop of York striving to sit
above Canterbury, squats him down on his lap, whence with many a cuff he was
thrown down.

Next the pride of W. Longchamp, Bishop of Elie, Holinsh 98. Richard 1. Page
129, 130, 132.
was notorious, who would ride with a thousand horse; and of a Governor in
the Kings absence, became a Tyrant; for which flying in Woman's apparel he was
taken.

To this succeeds contention betvveen Canterbury and York, about carriage of
their Crosses, and Rome appealed to: the Bishop of Durham buys an Earldom.

No sooner another King, 144. King John.
but Hubert another Archbishop to vex him, and lest that were not enough, made
Chancellor of England. And besides him, Ieffery of York, who refusing to pay a
Subsidy within his Precincts, and therefore all his temporalities seaz'd;
excommunicates the Sheriff, beats the Kings Officers, and interdicts his whole
Province. Speed 503.
Hubert outbraves the King in Christmas hous-keeping: hinders King John by his
Legantine power from recovering Normandy After him Stephen Langton, set up by
the Pope in spite of the King, who opposing such an affront, falls under an
interdict, with his whole Land; and at the suit of his Archbishop to the Pope,
Speed 509.
is deposed by Papal Sentence; his Kingdom given to Philip the French King,
Langtons friend; and lastly, resignes and enfeuds his Crown to the Pope.

After this tragical Stephen, the fray which Boniface the next Archbishop but
one had with the Canons of Saint Bartholmews, Hen. 3. Stow 188.
is as pleasant; the tearing of Hoods and Cowles, the miring of Copes, the
flying about of Wax Candles, and Censors in the scuffle, cannot be imagined
without mirth; as his oathswere loud in this bickering, so his curses were as
vehement in the contention with the Bishop of Winchester for a slight occasion.
Hol. 247.
But now the Bishops had turned their contesting into base and servile
flatteries, to advance themselves on the ruin of the subjects. For Peter de
Rupibus Bishop of Winchester persuading the King to displace English Officers,
and substitute Poictivines, and telling the Lords to their faces, that there
were no Peers in England, Speed 529.530.
as in France, but that the King might do what he would, and by whom he would,
became a firebrand to the civil wars that followed.

Edward 1.
In this time Peckam Archbishop of Can. in a Synod was tampering with the Kings
liberties, Holsh 280.
but being threatened desisted. But his successor Winchelsey on occasion of
Subsidies demanded of the Clergy, Holsh. 301,
made answer, That having two Lords, one Spiritual, the other Temporal, he
ought rather to obey the Spiritual governor the Pope, Holsh. 315,
but that he would send to the Pope to know his pleasure, and so persisted
even to beggerie. The Bishop of Durham also cited by the King flies to Rome.

In the deposing of this King who more forvvard, then the Bishop of Hereford?
Edward 2.
witness his Sermon at Oxford, My head, my head aketh, Speed 574.
concluding that an aching and sick head of a King was to be taken off without
further Physic.

Edward 3.
John the Archbishop of Canterbury, suspected to hinder the Kings glorious
victories in Flanders, Speed 586.
and France, by stopping the conveyance of moneys committed to his charge,
conspiring therein with vvish ^he Pope. But not long after was constituted
that fatal praemunire, which was the first nipping of their courage, Holsh.
409
to seek aid at Rome. And next to that, the wide wounds that Wickleffe made in
their sides. From which time they have been falling, and thenceforth all the
smoke that they could vomit, was turned against the rising light of pure
doctrine.

Yet could not their Pride miss occasion to set other mischief on foot.
Richardpunc;
For the Citizens of London rising to apprehend a riotous fervant of the Bishop
of Salisbury then Lord Treasurer, who with his fellows stood on his guard in
the Bishops house, were by the Bishop who maintained the riot of his servant,
so complained of, Holsh, 478.
that the King therewith seized on their liberties, and set a Governor over
the City. And who knows not, that Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury
was a chief instrument and agent in deposing King Richard, as his actions and
Sermon well declares. Page 506.


The like intended the Abbot of Westminster to Henry the fourth, Henry 4.
who for no other reason, but because he suspected that the King did not favor
the wealth of the Church, drew into a most horrible conspiracy the Earls of
Kent, Rutland, and Salisbury, to kill the King in a turnament at Oxford, who
yet notwithstanding was a man that professed to leave the Church in better
state then he found it. For all this, Page 514.
Speed 631.
soon after is Richard Scroop Archbishop of York in the field against him,
Holsh. 529.
the chief attractor of the rebellious party.

In these times Thomas Arundell a great persecutor of the Gospel preached* by
Wikclefs followers, Henry 5.
dies a fearful death, his tongue so swelling within his mouth, that he must
of necessity starve. His successor Chickeley nothing milder diverts the King,
that was looking too nearly into the superfluous revenues of the Church, to a
bloody war. Speed 638.


All the famous conquests which Henry the fifth had made in France, were lost
by a civil dissension in England, Henry 6.
which sprung first from the haughty pride of Beaufort Bishop and Cardinal of
Winchester, and the Archbishop of York against the Protector, Holsh. 596.
Speed 674. Page 620.
In the civil wars the Archbishop sides with the Earl of Warwick, and March
in Kent, Speed 682.

Edward the Fourth, Mountacute Archbishop of York, Edward 4.
one of the chief conspirators with Warwick against Edward the fourth, Speed
^99.
and afterward his Jailer, being by Warwicks treason committed to this Bishop.

In Edward the Fifths time, the Archbishop of York was, Edward 5.
though perhaps unwittingly (yet by a certain fate of Prelacie) the unhappy
instrument of pulling the young Duke of York out of Sanctuary, into his cruel
Uncles hands.

Things being settled in such a peace, as after the bloody brawls was to the
afflicted Realm howsoever acceptable, Richard 3.
though not such as might be wished: Morton Bishop of Ely, enticing the Duke of
Buckingham to take the Crown, which ruined him, opened the veins of the poor
subjects to bleed afresh.

The intolerable pride, extortion, bribery, luxury of Wolsey Archbishop of York
who can be ignorant of? Henry 8.
selling Dispensatitions by his power Legantine for all offenses, Hol. 845.462.
insulting over the Dukes and Peers, of whom some he brought to destruction by
bloody policy, playing with State Affairs according to his humor, or benefit:
causing Tournay, got with the blood of many a good Soldier, to be rendered at
the French Kings secret request to him, not without bribes; with whom one while
siding, another while with the Emperor, he sold the honor and peace of
England, at what rates he pleased; and other crimes to be seen in the Articles
against him, Holinshed. 912. and against all the Bishops in general, 911, which
when the Parliament sought to remedy, being most exc^ssive extortion in the
Ecclesiastical Courts, the Bishops cry out; Sacrilege, the Church goes to
ruin, as it did in Bohemia, with the Schism of the Hussites, Ibid. After
this, though the Bishops ceased to be Papists; Speed 784.
for they preached against the Popes Supremacy, to please the King, yet they
ceased not to oppugn the Gospel, causing Tindals Translation to be burnt, yea,
they agreed to the suppressing of Monasteries, leaving their revenues to the
King, to make way for the six bloody Articles, Hol. 992,
which proceedings with all cruelty of inquisition are set down, Holinsh. page
946. till they were repealed the second of Edward the Sixth, stopping in the
mean while the cause of Reformation well begun by the Lord Cromwell. And this
mischief was wrought by Steven Gardener, Speed 792. Speed.
Bishop of Winchester. The six Articles are set down in Speed, page 792.

Statut. Hen. 8. Anno 35. cap. 5.
The Archbishop of Saint Andrews, his hindering of England, and Scotlands Union,
for fear of Reformation, Speed 794.

As for the days of King Edward the Sixth, we cannot but acknowledge to the
glory of the rich mercy of God, Edward 6.
that there was a great Reformation of Religion made even to admiration. And
yet notwithstanding we do much dislike the humor of those, that cry up those
days as a complete pattern of Reformation, and that endeavor to reduce our
Religion to the first times of King Edward, which we conceive were
comparatively very imperfect, there being four impediments which did much
hinder that blessed work.

The three Rebellions. One in Henry the Eighths time, by the Lincoln and
Yorkshire, for that Reformation which Cromwell had made. The other two in King
Edwards days. One in Cornwall, the other in York^shire.

The strife that arose suddenly amongst the Peers, emulating one Speed, page
837.

The violent opposition of the Popish Bishops, which made Martin Bucer write to
King Edward in his Book de Regno Christi, lib. 2 cap. 1. and say, Your Majesty
does see, that this restoring again the Kingdom of Christ, which we require,
yea, which the salvation of us all requires, may in no wise be expected to
come from the Bishops, seeing there be so few among them which do understand
the power and proper Offices of this Kingdom; and very many of them by all
means (which possibly they can and dare) either oppose themselves against it,
or defer and hinder.

The deficiency of zeal and courage even in those Bishops who Ridley against
Hooper for the ceremonies. And the importunate suit of Cranmer and Ridley for
toleration of the Mass for the Kings sister, which was rejected by the Kings
not only reasons, but tears; whereby the young King showed more zeal then his
best Bishops, 839.

The inhumane butcheries, blood-sheddings, and cruelties of Gardener, Bonner,
and the rest of the Bishops in Queen Mary's days, are so fresh in every man's
memory, as that we conceive it a thing altogether unnecessary to make mention
of them. Only we fear lest the guilt of the blood then shed, should yet remain
to be required at the hands of this Nation, because it has not publicly
endeavored to appease the wrath of God by a general and solemn humiliation for
it.

What the pract^ces of the Prelates have been ever since, from the begininning
of Queen Elizabeth to this present day, would fill a volume (like Ezekiels
Roll) with lamentation, mourning, and woe to record. For it has been their
great design to hinder all further Reformation; to bring in doctrines of
Popery, Arminianisme, and Libertinisme, to maintain, propagate and much
increase the burden of h^mane ceremonies: to keep out, and beat down the
Preaching of the Word, to silence the faithful Preachers of it, to oppose and
persecute the most zealous professors, and to turn all Relig^on into a pompous
outside; and to tread down the power of godliness. Insomuch as it is come to
an ordinary Proverb, tha^ when any thing is spoiled, we use to say, The
Bishop's foot has been in it. And in this (and much more which might be said)
fulfilling Bishop (...) Prophecy, who when he saw that in King Edwards
reformation, there was a reservation of Ceremonies and Hierarchy, is credibly
reported to have used these words: Since they have begun to taste of our
Broth, it will not be long ere they will eat of our Beef.

FINIS.

