MEROZ CURSE FOR NOT HELPING THE LORD Against the Mighty.

BEING The Substance of a SERMON, Preached on a day of Humiliation, at St.
Sepulchers, LONDON, December. 2. 1641.

By that Powerful and Godly Divine, Mr. STEPHEN MARSHALL.

Published in one sheet of Paper, (not by the Author) but by a Lover of the
Truth, for their good especially, that are not able to buy bigger Books. Being
a very seasonable Subject, wherein all that either out of policy or sloth,
refuse to help the LORD, may see their danger; and they that are willing are
called, and directions given to them, both what manner of persons they ought to
be, and what they ought to do to help the Lord. Wherein also every true
Christian may see, that though they be never so weak or poor, yet they may,
and ought to help the Lord, and by what means.

Ezekiel 13. 5. Ye have not risen up in the gaps, neither made up the hedge
for the house of Israel, to stand in the battle in the day of the Lord.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1641.

MEROZ Curse.
Judge. 5. 23. Curse ye Meroz, said the Angel of the Lord, Curse the
inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help the Lord, to help the Lord
against the mighty.
THis Verse contains a Curse against a whole City, and all in it, wherein we
may consider these particulars:

1. A duty that should have been performed, and that was, a coming out to
the help of the Lord 1.
against the mighty, the omission whereof was the cause of the Curse.

2. The persons cursed and they were the inhabitants of Meroz. 2.


3. The commander of the Curse, The Angel of the Lord, to wit, Christ Jesus
himself, who is the Angel of the Covenant, and Captain of the Lords Host.

In the duty that should have been performed, we may consider, first, the
parties they should have helped, the Lord: secondly, against whom they should
have helped the Lord, and that is, against the mighty.

In the persons cursed, we may consider, first, what the curse was; and that I
do confess I cannot tell, whether it was fire or pestilence, but this is most
certain, Gods curse is the ruin of those people on whom it lights: secondly,
we may consider what this city Meroz was, and for that, I shall tell you, I
cannot find in the whole Book of God this city mentioned once again, and
therefore cannot certainly tell you where it was situated, only this we may
certainly conclude, that it was near unto the place where the Lords people were
in danger of their enemies.

I have begun this Text in another Congregation, I will therefore give you the
brief heads of what I have elsewhere more largely delivered, and so come to
that which remains.

First, from the consideration of the parties against whom they should have
helped, the Lord, it is said they were mighty; whence we have observed this
point.

That the mighty ones of the earth do many times oppose the Lord.

Secondly, from thence we have also observed: Doctr.


That Gods people should not be afraid to oppose the mighty, when the cause is
the Lords. Doctr.


Secondly, from the consideration of the parties whom they should 2.
have helped, they were the people of God, and yet the Lord calls it his own
people, whence I observe:

That to help Gods people, is to help the Lord. Doctr.


Thirdly, from the consideration of this neerenesse to the people of 3.
God in regard of habitation I observed:

That the nearer a people are to Gods people in distress, the more is Doctr.
their help required, and the greater is their sin, if they do not help
them: this I applied to our selves, in regard of that case of Ireland.

Fourthly, from the Consideration that the curse extends to all the inhabitants
of the city, I observed: 4.


That there is neither man nor woman, but they may afford some Doctr.
help to Gods people in distress, if they have grace in their hearts; thus
far have I gone already and now the maine point that I intend to insist upon
at this time, is this.

That they are all cursed that help not the Lord, that is, that help not the
Lords people in the time of their distress; for the proof of this Doctr.
point, observe but that reprehension of Moses, Numb. 32. 6. to the children of
Gad and the children of Ruben, Shall your brethren, says he, go to war, and
ye tarry here? no by no means. And so our Savior, in Mat. 25. 41. will say,
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels;
for I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink. But I will stand no longer on the proof of the point, but come unto
the use of it, which I do principally intend to stand upon.

And first of all, is it so, that they are all cursed that help not the Lord
against the mighty? then surely they are cursed with a heavy curse, that Use.
help the mighty against the Lord: but I hope there be few or none such in this
Congregation, and I desire not to speak much to them that be absent; yet if
any of you that hear me have any friends that are guilty of it, I pray you
tell them what a fearful condition they are in, that set themselves against
the Lord.

But there are others, who are not so bad as to help the mighty against the
Lord and yet not so good as to help the Lord against the mighty, but stand as
neuters at such times when it is hard to say, whether the Lord or the mighty
will prevail; and of these there are two sorts.

The first sort do it out of policy, as now at this time, the Church of God in
England, by reason of the mighty, has been long under tyrannical ^.
government, and the Lord, we hope is now at wars with them, why there are
some politicians that stand looking on to see which side will prevail. And if
the Lord should now reform this government, and so prevail, why then they
would be on the Lords side, but if the mighty should prevail, which the Lord
forbid, then they would be on the mighties side. But as Gideon said to the men
of Succoth, when they refused to give morsels of bread to his people that
followed after Zebab and Zalmunna, Kings of Midian, when the Lord has
delivered them into Judge. 8. 7.
mine hand. I will tear your flesh with thorns of the wilderness, and with
briars, so say I to such, if the Lord prevail against the enemies of his
Church the Lord will make them smart, be sure of it, for that you will now
afford him no help against them.

The second sort are such as refuse to help the Lord, not so much out of
policy as out of sloth and negligence, like unto the men of Iabesh Gilead, 2.
that went not to war with their brethren against the Benjamites: but let
such consider, what the Israelites did unto them, by reason of this their sloth
and negligence, as you may read, Judge. 21. 8. etc. to wit, how they fell upon
them and destroyed them, because they came not up to Mizpeth to the Lord.

The next use shall be for exhortation to you all, is it so, that they are Use.
cursed that help not the Lord against the mighty? why then brethren, as you
desire to be freed from this curse, and to obtain a blessing at the Lords
hands, be exhorted to put forth your hands now to the help of the Lord, I pray
you look on me as on one that comes amongst you this day to beat a drum in
your ears, to see who will come out to follow the Lamb. Now then beloved, so
many of you as are willing, come, and I will give you direction what to do,
that you may all of you afford some help to the Lord at this time.

And first let me tell you, that the Lord does not require your help so much
for any need he has of it, as for to honor you thereby; for beloved, you are
to know, that it is an honor to help the Lord, the Lord, as I may say, scorns
to have help from every one, no, you must be fitly qualified before you be meet
to help the Lord, and that with these three things.

First you must be godly, or else you are unfit to be helpers of the Lord; 1.
the Lambs followers must be such as are chosen and called, and faithful they
must be holy men, and holy women; therefore, you that are ungodly persons,
believe it, you are not called to this help of the Lord.

Secondly, you must be selfe-denying persons, you must deny your 2.
own profit your own ease, your own friends, yea and all that you call your
own; the Apostle Paul writing to the Philippians, says, he has no man like
minded to Timotheus, and in the next verse he gives the reason, saying, for
all seek their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ Phil. 2. 20. 21. Ruth
1. 16
Therefore I say, you can never be fit to help the Lord, until you put off all
that is your own, and say to Christ, as Ruth said unto Naomi; Whither thou
go I will go, and where thou dwell I will dwell, thy people shall be my
people, and thy God my God.

Thirdly, you must be such persons as have a love to the Church; for 3.
beloved, you shall meet with so many rubs in the way, so many discouragements
to flesh and blood, that if you have not a great love to the cause of Christ,
you will be subject to turn back from the Lords cause when there is most need
of your help, therefore, alluding to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. I say
unto you, the most excellent way is love, it is that which constitutes a man to
be a meet follower of Christ; you know it is said of Jacob, Genesis 29. 20. that
the seven years he served for Rachel, seemed unto him but a few days, because
he loved her; even so brethren, if you get a love to Christ and his Church,
you will willingly help the Lord, though you meet with some difficulties,
therefore never rest, until thou have so much love, as to say, as I remember a
godly Minister said, I praise God, I am not troubled at any cross, but at the
afflictions of Gods Church, nor I care for no welfare so much, as for the
welfare of Christ Church.

But it may be some will say, O Sir, but how should I do to get such (...) the
Church of Christ? Quest.


(...) ^^nsider how dearly Christ has loved it, that he has given (...) it.
Answ.


(...) consider that he has left his Church here amongst us, and (...)
distress, to try our love to it. 2.


(...) ^^nsider, that if thou be a member of it, then all the rest 3.
(...) thee, even thy brethren and sisters.

But (...) be willing to help the Church to my power, what direction (...)
Quest.
(...) give me that I may put forth that power which I have?

First (...) godly Nehemiah, Daniel, and old Eli did, that is, enquire Answ.
diligently what the state of the Church is, and let me tell you, brethren, I
am persuaded that it is a great fault of many of us here in England, that we
do not perform this duty as we ought, wherefore be exhorted to labor at
this time to find out the state of Gods Church, both in England and in (...).

Secondly, when thou have sound out the state of the Church, and so
consequently what it wants, then in the next place, consider what 2.
thou have in thine hands to supply the want thereof: thou must observe this
rule, that whatsoever good God has put into thine hands, thou art but a
Steward of it, and thou art to employ it for the good of Gods Church; all Gods
people have an interest in that talent that God has committed to thy
employment.

Now, there is one talent which I am sure every child of God that is
effectually called has, though they be never so poor, and that is the talent
of prayer; for indeed, it is the surest evidence to witness unto them, that
the spirit of Christ is in them, when they can cry Abba Father: according to
the laws of our Kingdom, a child cannot be proved to be borne alive, except
there be witness that it was heard to cry; even so we say in Divinity, that
every one that has the new birth can cry to God his Father in prayer; so that
I say, every child of God has this talent of prayer.

And this talent the Lord requires they should use and employ for the good of
his Church and people, according to that Scripture, Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, and that in Isay 62. Ye that are the Lords remembrancers, give him
no rest, till he set up Jerusalem, the praise of the world; and beloved, let me
tell you, the exercise of this talent of prayer, is charged upon all ranks and
conditions of men, for that the exercise of no other talent can do any good
without this, neither the governing of the Magistrate, nor preaching of the
Minister, nor fighting of the soldier, nor the contribution of the rich man,
will do any good without prayer, it is prayer that brings a blessing down
upon all; yea, the exercise of this talent of prayer many times does more good
than all the rest. A praying Christian (let me speak it with holy reverence)
can do all that God can do, and therefore, in 1 King. 8. Solomon reckons up
all the hard conditions that the Church of God can fall into, and always
concludes, then hear thou in heaven, etc. and then God answers, I have heard
thy prayers and supplications that thou have made before me; with this talent
of prayer the servants of God have overcome God, and held his hands, in so much
that the Lord, if I may so speak, has been glad to entreat them and command
them to hold their tongues, and let him alone. Beloved, as God only can remove
the Churches troubles, so prayer only can prevail with God to do it; it is
prayer that brings all Gods promises into performances; there is not any part
of the world, but a Christian can reach it by prayer; there is not a blessing
in heaven, but prayer can fetch it down; prayer can knock down enemies; when
Moses held up his hands, Israel prevailed; David by prayer choked Achitophel;
Hester Exodus 17. 11
and her people by prayer hanged Haman. So that I may say of prayer, as the
Author to the Hebrews says of the faith of those worthyes there mentioned,
the time would be too short, to reckon up all that a Christian can do by
prayer.

And yet alas, I fear me, there are some Christians who have grace in their
hearts, that have not employed this their talent for the good of Gods Church,
whose conscience will witness unto them that they have not spent an hour in
their closets, in exercising this talent for the good of Gods Church: O, be
humbled this day, for this your self-love, and want of love to Gods Church.
And I am persuaded, that the want of this has been the cause that the enemies
prevail so in Ireland at this time, and that things go on so heavily at
Parliament here at home.

Wherefore you that fear God, I beseech you be humbled for your omission of
this duty; and be exhorted to set upon the practice of it, O pray, pray for the
Parliament, O pray, pray for Ireland, and call upon others to pray; there is no
man so mean in his estate, or weak in his body, but if he be a Christian, he
may contribute something toward this great work, though he be not able to
lend a penny, yet he may give a subsidy of prayers. Beloved, if all Christians
would exercise this talent aright, their prayers would be as a thundering Army
against the enemies of Gods Church.

But how shall I do to exercise this talent aright? Quest.


Answ.
First be sure that prayer be prayer, let it not only be in speech, but power
out thy desires before God; and to this end, get a heart truly affected with
the thing thou prayest for.

Labor to get an humble and selfe-denying spirit, remember Abraham, when he
came before the Lord in prayer, confessed he was but dust 2. Genesis 18. 17.
and ashes, and Icob; when he came before the Lord in prayer confessed himself
unworthy of the least of all Gods mercies; and David cries out, Hear me O
Lord, for I am peore. Genesis 32. 10.


Always when thou go to prayer, be sure to carry thy Mediator along with
thee, by faith in the promises, and beg earnestly for the 3.
Lords sake, as Daniel did, that so thy prayers may be fervent; O beloved
Christians, if you would pray, and pray thus, you would be the Dan. 9. 17.
most useful people in all the world, yea, you would be the very props to
these united Kingdoms; mark it then you men of the world, you sons of
Belial, that have been wont to scoff at praying Christians, and to wish them
all packed hence, and at new England, alas, you know not what an evil you wish
unto your selves therein, if they were gone, woe be to you.

And thus much shall suffice to have been spoken of the talent of prayer; in
the next place what outward abilities soever thou have, thou must also employ
for the good of Gods Church; for he that is a rich man, if he pray and hold
his purse, he cannot expect that his prayers should be availeable.

Wherefore, if God have given thee both grace and money, I do in the name of
God beseech thee, to employ both for the good of Gods Church and people, else
it is to be feared, it may be as truly said to thee, as the poor man said to
the Bishop, who asking him a penny for Christ his sake, the Bishop answered, I
will not give thee a penny, but I will give thee my blessing; the poor man
answered, ah Master, if you loved your blessing as well as your penny, you
would not give me that neither. Wherefore then to conclude, whatsoever God
has given thee that may do the Church good, be willing to part with it for the
Churches good.

FINIS.

