A PLEA FOR DEFENSIVE ARMS: OR, A Copy of a Letter written by Mr STEPHEN
MARSHALL To a friend of his in the City, for the necessary vindication of
himself and his Ministry, against that altogether groundless, most unjust,
and ungodly aspersion cast upon him by certain Malignants in the City, and
lately printed at Oxford, in their Mendacium Aulicum, otherwise called,
Mercurius Aulicus, and sent abroad into other Nations to his perpetual infamy.

In which Letter the accusation is fully answered.

And together with that, the lawfulness of the Parliaments taking up Defensive
Arms is briefly and learnedly asserted and demonstrated, Texts of Scripture
cleared, all Objections to the contrary answered, to the full satisfaction of
all those that desire to have their consciences informed in this great
Controversy.

HOSEA 4. 1, 2, 3. 1. Hear the word of the Lord, ye Children of Israel, for the
Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the Land, because there is no
truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land.

2. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring, they break
out, and blood touches blood.

3. Therefore shall the Land mourn, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard. 1643.

SIR,
YOur Letters brought not the first tidings of the continuance and increase of
those strange reports concerning me, they filled the City even while I was
there, and I perceive, pursue me into the Country: it is a lying spirit which
God has permitted to haunt me for my trial, as it has done others of his
servants before me. You know what a book Bolsec wrote of the life and death of
M. Calvin: Beza lived to write a confutation of a book written of his
renouncing his Religion, and turning Papist. And concerning Luther, the Priests
had long reported, that he had his call from the Devil; and to confirm it,
filled Italy with a rumor of his death, and that at his death he was carried
away by the Devil soul and body: which they (good souls) divulged not to
discredit the man, but in gloriam Jesus Christi, to the glory of Christ, and
comfort of the godly. The like usage my self have lately met with in some
degree: for being afflicted with a deep cold and distillation from my head upon
my lungs, and some feverish distempers, my learned, loving, and careful
Physician, finding that the too importune visits of my many loving friends,
occasioned too much speech, and thereby too much expense of spirits, advised me
to remove to the house of my Noble Lord of Warwick, where I should have more
air, and less company: hereupon a report was immediately spread about the
City, that I was distracted, and in my rage constantly cried out, I was damned
for appearing in, and adhering to the Parliament and Kingdom in this defensive
War: which when I first heard, I looked upon as a calumny invented by some
simple adversary (though malicious enough to my person and ministry) who
finding it the readiest way to reproach me, betook himself to this. But
afterward observing how studiously it was maintained, how laboriously
propagated, how banded from Court to City, from City to Country, from England
to foreign parts, Mercurius Aulicus printed it, and a great Officer of State
having sent it into other Kingdoms with his Letters, assuring the truth of it,
and that not nine days, no not a month did allay it, I then perceived the plot
was not so much to disgrace me, (for alas who am I, that they should trouble
themselves so much about me) but through me to wound the Cause, in which my
poor labors have been engaged. This rumor it seems yet lives, and (as your
letter confirms) increases; from my going down into the Country they have
taken occasion not only to report me distracted, but dead; yea that I died
crying out of my appearing in this Cause; and this is so confidently reported
by some, that it is almost as confidently believed by others; even thousands,
you say, which makes you earnestly to press me to write unto you, whether I
have not (at least) changed my former judgment about our defensive arms, and
this not (as you professed) to satisfy your self, but that you might have
something under my own hand to show for the satisfaction of others. Sir, your
ancient love to me, and present desires to vindicate me from these aspersions,
but especially your care that the public Cause might not suffer, do all
command me to be your servant in this thing.

I know it will satisfy you, that I solemnly protest unto you, that in all
these fourteen weeks keeping in, I never had an hours sickness, nor lost a
nights sleep, nor had any distemper in my head, nor saw any cause of sorrow for
my adhering to the Parliaments cause, but esteem it a great honor and mercy
from God, that he should move his Excellency my Lord, to require my service in
this great expedition; and that I have even therefore exactly followed the
Doctors prescriptions, out of an earnest desire to be fitted for my work, that
I might return to my most honored Lord, being fully resolved, if God say Amen
to it, never to give it over, until either there be an end of that work, or an
end of my days. This I think will satisfy you, and it is possibly as much as
you desire for the satisfaction of others, to have this under my hand. Take
this concerning the cause, and concerning the report spread of me, what Luther
said (of those above mentioned) concerning himself; fateor and testor hac mea
manu, etc. I profess and testify under my hand, that I entertained this
fiction of my distraction and death, laetaque mente and hilari vultu, very
cheerfully.

But since your love has compelled me to put pen to paper, I shall compel you
to read the largest letter that ever I wrote, being resolved to give you a full
account both of my ground and warrant of entering upon my office, and how far I
am from changing my judgment upon the present view of things.

When his Excellency vouchsafed to require my service (for, God knows, I
offered not my self in this great work) there were but two questions (besides
my care to walk aright in my Ministry) for my conscience to be resolved in.
First, whether upon supposall of the truth of the Parliament votes, viz. That
his Majesty seduced by wicked Council, did levy war against the
Parliament; the Scripture did warrant them to take up defensive Arms. Secondly,
Whether the Parliament was not misinformed about such his Majesty's purpose,
and practice. The first is a mere question in Divinity. viz. Whether a people,
especially the representative body of a State, may (after all humble
Remonstrances) defend themselves against the unlawful violence of the Supreme
Magistrate, or his Instruments, Endeavoring (and that in matters of great
moment) to deprive them of their lawful Liberties.

The second is a question merely of matter of fact.

For the first, Before the beginning of these unhappy differences, I had both
learned, and taught to this purpose. First, That it is agreeable to Gods will,
that in all Countries (especially when and where the people are numerous)
Magistracy be set up, with a sufficiency of power and authority to rule for
the public good; and that, even among them who are under the scepter of
Christ, against the Anabaptists. Secondly, That among the diverse kinds of
lawful governments, Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, no one of them is so
appointed of God, as to exclude the other from being a lawful government.
Thirdly, That the bounds and limits of the Magistrates lawful power of
commanding, and the subjects necessary obeying, must be found, and taken out of
the several Laws, Customs, and Constitutions of those several States, and
Commonwealths: There are scarce two forms (especially of Regal government, in
the world) but they differ one from the other, and that in matters of moment.
Now I say, what the power of Magistrates in one Country differs from the power
of Magistrates in another Country, and how the duty of Subjects differs in
each, must be found only in the Laws of the respective places: that no man's
right must be detained from him, that Caesar should have rendered to him the
things that are Caesar's, and all people the things that are their own, the
Scripture, and Laws of all nations do determine. But whether (for instance in
England) Ship Money be the Kings right, and so to be yielded, or denied;
whether this house or inheritance be this or the other pretenders to it, must
not be determined by any Law, but by the Law of England; go therefore to the
Laws, and learned Lawyers, and from them alone you shall learn what is the
Prerogative of the Prince, and both the Duty, and Liberty of the Subject. But
then fourthly comes in Religion, or the command of God, and binds the
consciences of Magistrates to rule, and of Subjects to obey, according to those
Laws. And fifthly (in particular) of Subjects it requires these four things.
First, to render to their Governors, next under God, the greatest fear, and
honor, as being Gods vicegerents, as having the greatest beams of his
authority put upon them, and therefore called Gods, and all of them the
children of the most High. Secondly, Loyalty to their persons, and office,
that is, obedience according to Law, and patient subjection, when we cannot
actively obey, willingly for conscience sake to submit to the penalty of the
Laws, when for conscience sake we cannot observe the Laws themselves. Thirdly,
maintenance with payment of all lawful Customs, Tributes, and impositions.
Fourthly, all manner of supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of
thanks, their usefulness being great, their temptations many, their fall (like
that of great Cedars) the crushing of many, and the shaking of the earth round
about them; and all this we owe, nor only to the King as Supreme, but in
proportion to all inferior Governors, who are sent by God also for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, they being
all the ministers of God for our good; and this is the first Commandment with
promise. But sixthly, if our Governors (whether supreme, or inferior) leave
to rule according to Law; and set up their own will contrary to Law, there is
no word of God acquitting them from sin in Gods sight, but severely threatening
them for abusing his name, which they bear; nor any word binding the
consciences of their subjects therein to yield them any active obedience. Thus
far we have all sides agreeing in all the particulars, except only a few
Court flatterers, who (and that especially of late) have endeavored to cry up
Monarchy, as the only ordinance of God, for the Government of States; as if the
other forms of Aristocracy, and Democracy were not approved by him: Yea, and
have cried up the power and authority of princes to be such, as that they are
absolved from all laws; and that whatsoever the Subjects enjoy under them, is
only by the princes favor, which if they please to recall, how justly or
unjustly soever, the subjects are bound to yield all unto them, and have no
plea against their Prince, only in the Court of heaven; no law, no judge, no
Court here below, having any authority to say unto him, What do thou: This
Divinity has of late been preached; and, as sweet enchanting music, often
chanted in the ears of our Princes: and no doubt was one great occasion of
these heavy yokes we have of late groaned under. But these absurdities need no
refutation. Egyptian Pharaoh claimed not the wealth of his people, till he had
bought it. And Ahab himself, who durst not lay claim to Naboths vineyard,
without purchase, or color of confiscation, proclaims their ignorance
sufficiently to the world. And among our selves, the constant proceedings of
our princes, even in their most heavy illegal exactions, borrowing always a
color of law, and the known laws of the land, enabling the meanest subject to
maintain his Propriety, even in a two-penny matter, against his Sovereign; And
the innumerable verdicts, in all Courts, passing for the Subject, against the
King; assure me, that unless God for our sins should give up our Parliament
and State to the vassallage which this Popish Army would bring it to, we shall
hear no more of this Divinity.

The only Question now is about passive obedience; they who cry down our
defensive Arms, confess that the Magistrate cannot require any thing but by
law, and that the subject need not yield up his right but by Law, no tie lies
upon the conscience of Naboth to let Ahab have his vineyard: but if a Saul will
by force take away our sons to care his ground, and our daughters to be his
Confectioners, Cooks, and Bakers; if he will by force take our fields, even
the best of them, and give them their servants, we have no help in that day,
but preces and lachryma, to cry unto our God: but no liberty to defend our
selves by Arms against such tyranny; if we do (say they) we resist the
ordinance of God, and must receive to our selves damnation.

But if this opinion be weighed in the balance of Reason, how much lighter
than vanity will it be found?; how absurd a thing is it, that these men will
allow me, if the king pretend Law in any thing I may try it out with him, and
not when he or his Instruments come with open violence: If the king will sue
me, and by pretense of Law seek to take away my coat, my house, my land, I may
defend these from him with all the strength of Law I can; but if he come with
armed violence to take away my liberty, life, religion, I must yield up these
without making any resistance: I may secure that, which I have nothing but
lexterrae to plead my propriety in, viz. my money, which I may give away, and
in the mean time my liberty, life, religion, which are mine by the laws of God
and man, I may not secure with a good conscience. True it is, if in case it do
(upon circumstances duly weighed) appear that our receding from our right, and
not resisting wrong, will tend to the promoving of a greater and a more
general good, or the preventing of a greater and a more general evil, it is
agreeable to right reason, and our Saviors rule, Mat. 5. 39. that we should
both remit of our right, and submit to wrong, whether sued or ensued, whether
to superiors or inferiors, or equals. But that men should give a liberty of
defense in Law, and yet absolutely condemn defense against unlawful violence,
is such an (...), such an absurdity, as you shall seldom meet with.

But give me leave to weigh it a little further; if the Subjects defending
themselves by Arms against the violence of oppressing Governors and their
instruments, be unlawful, either it must be because their Prince has by
conquest spoiled them of that liberty, which God and nature gave them at the
first. Or secondly, because they or their Ancestors having submitted by
Covenant and Consent to him to be their supreme Ruler according to Law, they
must therefore be interpreted to have yielded up all their Liberty so far as to
be now unable with a good Conscience to defend themselves against his violence,
though contrary to Law. Or thirdly, because God has lifted up Princes so far
above all mortal men, that all hands are by him bound from daring to resist
them.

The first I find not many pleading, that peoples being conquered, makes it
unlawful for them to defend themselves against the unjust violences of their
Conquerours or his Successors: Most of them grant, that the peoples right is
to design the person of their Prince. And indeed it is the most absurd
reasoning in the world, that because a strong robber has over-powerd me in my
house, in conscience I am tied to be his servant or slave for ever. Because
Eglon has mightily oppressed Israel for eighteen years, it is unlawful for
them to shake of^ his yoke when they are able to resist him: Certainly,
whatever of mine another takes by violence from me, let him keep it never so
long, it is but Continuata injuria, a continued wrong, till I consent to his
holding it; And all reason allows me to recover it again as soon as I can. And
I fear not to say, that had William, surnamed the conqueror, taken and held
this Crown only by his sword, and ruled over the Nation only by force, and all
his successors to this day had no other claim to it, all the reason in the
world would allow us to redeem our selves from that yoke, if we were able.

But though the sword begin the Conquest, yet many times the Consent of the
people comes in, and makes their Conqueror their lawful King; and then so far
as by Covenant or Laws, they agree to be under him for the public safety and
good, they are bound up from any resistance. But that their parting with some
of their liberty for the public good should (upon the usurpation of him whom
they have trusted) deprive them of that liberty which they never parted with,
is most abhorring to reason. Suppose a free man indents with another to be his
servant in some ingenious employment, as, suppose to attend upon his person;
and expressly indents that his master shall not have power to command him to rub
his horse heels, or fill his dung cart, or the like; If now this master shall
usurp, and command him to such sordid employment, and by force seek to compel
him to them, some show of reason (at least) there would be for the servant to
plead that his master had forfeited all his power over him, and that he was
free from his service, and might go seek another master; but no color of
reason that the servant has now forfeited that immunitie from sordid and
drudgery works that he first covenanted, and must thenceforth lie at his
masters feet, as wholly prostitute to all his Imperious humors.

Secondly, can it be imagined, by reason that a people submitting to a lawful
government, should thereby be necessitated to that which may overthrow the end
of all government, that is, inability to provide for their common safety. That
whereas when they were free and under no government at all, they might by the
law of nature defend themselves against injury: now having submitted, though
upon good conditions, they are utterly disabled to defend themselves, if he
that should be their Protector, would prove their Murderer: If he who both in
himself and instruments should be only for the punishment of evil, and the
praise of them that do well, will go, or send, or suffer a company of thieves
or murderers to go in his name, and spoil and destroy them that do well: can
their being subjects (in reason) deprive them of their defense allowed them by
the law of nature? yea, were they not guilty of self-murder in suffering such
a thing? For instance, some of our Historians relate of King John, that he was
transported with so deep a hatred against his Nobles and Commons, that he sent
an Ambassador to Miramumalin, entitled the great King of Africa, Morocco, and
Spain, wherein he offered to render unto him his Kingdom, and to hold the same
from him by tribute as his Sovereign Lord, to forgo the Christian faith
(which he held vain) and receive that of Mahomet; like enough some Court
Chaplain (may be the Clerk that went on the errand) might warrantize the Kings
conscience, and tell him, that it was the more shame for them who professed the
Christian Religion, to compel him to it. But whether the King did lawfully or
not, is not our question; but whether the subjects might lawfully have resisted
that attempt of his, and have stood for their Religion, Lives, and Liberty.

Thirdly, is it not quite contrary to reason, that whereas Kings and Rulers,
nothing differing by nature from their meanest subjects, were at first
constituted, and are still continued for the protection, welfare, benefit, yea
and service of the people; and who therefore should value their prerogatives,
scepters, and lives, no further then they may advance the public good; yet if
they degenerate, and will be destroyers, the people should suffer all to be
spoiled, as if Kingdoms and people had been created by God for the will,
pleasure, profit, yea and lusts of Princes. As if a Pilot purposely appointed
for the safe wafting over of passengers, who in stead thereof will dash the
ship against the rocks: Or a General purposely chosen (and to whom the
Soldiers have therefore sworn) for the safety of the whole Army, should yet
turn the Cannon mouth upon his own Soldiers, or deliver them all up into the
hands of the enemy: the passengers and soldiers, yea, the officers in the
ship, and council of war in the Army, should be morally disabled from doing
any thing to prevent their own apparent destruction. By this reason the Bishop
of Burgen in the Council of Basil proved the Council to be above the Pope, and
a kingdom above the King, and said they were but flatterers who taught
otherwise.

And fourthly, does not right reason as much abhor this, that whereas Princes
are the public fathers, and the people owe them the duty of children, that
these children should be prohibited from keeping their public fathers from the
greatest evils: If our natural father through ignorance or distemper should go
into a pesthouse, his children might by force fetch him out; or if in a raging
passion go about to kill himself, wife, children, or any others, their children
may disarm them, yea we are tied not to suffer friend or foe to incur the
guilt of rapine or blood, if it lie in our power to hinder it; and (speak to my
reason) what evil have Princes deserved, that if they go about to murder
themselves, subjects and children, not any of their people, no not the whole
body politic should have power to restrain them.

And if reason will allow this liberty of resistance to private persons (as
even Barclay and Grotius the two great propugners of the sacred and inviolable
power of Kings, grant) how much more clear, honorable, and safe must such a
defense needs be, when done by the representative body of a state, who are Gods
ordinance as well as kings, the ministers of God sent by him to be a terror to
evil, and a praise to them that do well. And in England are the highest Court
of Judicature, and in whom his Majesty confesses there is legally placed
sufficient power to prevent Tyranny.

Upon such reasons as these, not only Heathens have resisted their Princes,
when bent to subvert their laws and liberties; but even most of the States of
Christendom, Papists and Protestants when they have been put to it, have borne
defensive Arms against the unlawful violences of their misled Princes.

But now if notwithstanding all this fair show of reason Gods word has
determined the contrary, we must lay our hands upon our mouths, and shall no
longer deserve to be accounted the servants and subjects of Christ, then while
we turn our reason (how specious soever) out of doors, when once it offers to
oppose the least Iota of his revealed will. But where is this Scripture to be
found? Certainly the good Subjects in the Old Testament knew it not. Saul's
Subjects who swore that Saul should not kill Jonathan, nor pluck an hair from
his head, though Saul had sworn by God he should die, knew no such Scripture:
and I believe, that if the same men had bin about him when he protested the
Priests of the Lord should die, they would not only have withheld their own,
but Doegs hands from doing execution. David knew no such Scripture; nor the 600
men with him, that would have fortified Keilah against Saul. Nor those many
choice men of the several Tribes of Israel, among whom were some of Saul's
brethren and kindred and chief officers, that fell to David (though Saul had
proclaimed him Traitor) from day to day to help him, till it was a great host
like the host of God: And all this while David was (though an innocent, yet)
but a private man. And I think if Elias had took himself bound in conscience to
render himself prisoner to the Captains which Ahaziah sent for him, he would
not have killed them with fire from heaven: Neither would Elisha have taken
such a rough course with the messengers sent to take his head. Nor would the
eighty valiant Priests have thrust Uzziah by force out of the Temple, who was a
King still, though a Leper. Neither can these examples be eluded with saying
these were extraordinary persons; for first they were not all so, not the
people that resisted Saul, nor the people that fell to David, nor the eighty
Priests, unless in the extraordinarinesse and valiancy of their spirits: And
for the extraordinary persons themselves, I know nothing why their examples may
not be pleaded, for our Defensive Arms, as well as David's eating the shewbread
was pleaded by our Savior for his Disciples rubbing the ears of corn, unless
they can first show, that their practice was against a known law, I mean,
unless there were some known law that Innocents might not defend themselves,
and one another against the unjust violence of their princes. Indeed we often
read in the Old Testament of fearing the King, honoring the King, obeying the
King, which their practice shows they understood to bind them to yield Honor,
Loyalty, Obedience, and Subjection to their Magistrates according to law; but
not that they were bound to let them do what mischief they pleased

Neither is there any more in the new Testament; there indeed are full and
frequent exhortations to submit our selves to Magistrates, to be subject to the
higher Powers which are ordained of God, and not to resist the Ordinance of
God; but not one word that we may not resist the Tyranny of men, no color for
it, unless any will say that Tyranny is Gods Ordinance, that Tyrants bear the
sword for the punishment of evil doers, are the Ministers of God, etc. full
proof there is that we must be under the authority of Rulers, that is, under
their Legal Commands; not one word of being at the dispose of their illegal
wills: The word used there is (...), derived ab (...) licet, to show, as one
observes, that the Text binds subjects to obey Superiors not ad libitum, but
ad licitum, not to obey their lawless lusts and wills, but their lawful
authority, without resisting. And surely it were strange, that if God had laid
this yoke of subjection to the illegal will of Rulers, that neither the Jews
under their Kings, nor under Antiochus, nor the Churches of Christ, nor the
primitive Churches after once their Religion and Liberties were established by
Laws, nor any of the Reformed Churches have took themselves concluded under it:
which of all the Reformed Churches have not by their practice manifested, that
Religion binds them not to give their throats to be cut, or their liberties
and states to be spoiled at the mere will of their Princes and their
Instruments, contrary to their own Laws and Edicts? Were not the Lutheran
Churches put to it, and defended themselves against the Emperor Charles the
fifth, when the Smalchaldian confederacy was entering? Did not both the Divines
and Lawyers being consulted with, agree, that the inferior Magistrates might
at some time resist the Superior? Have not the States and Churches of the
Netherlands done the like constantly against the King of Spain? the Protestants
in France against their Kings? How often, and how lately have our Brethren in
Scotland done the same? And although since the Reformation, England was never
put to it, until these unhappie differences, yet how constantly have our most
learned Divines, Bishops as well as others, defended by their Pens, and our
Princes and States by their aides of men and money, their distressed and
oppressed Brethren and Neighbors in the like case? and now in our own sight
both the King and States have acquitted the Scots, as having done nothing in
their late defense, but what became good subjects. And what the judgment of
this Nation was in the time of popery is plain enough by their practice, in
their usual taking of Arms, and not leaving till they had compelled their
Princes to ratify their Privileges and Charters, which through ill
Counselors they had infringed. And observeable it is, that because the Bishops
and Clergy of those times saw the Princes go about to take down their pride,
they were ever the most forward to justify the proceeding of the State; and I
suspect, in case the Tables were turned, and we had a King endeavoring to take
down the Bishops, to take away Pluralites, Non-residents, etc. And a Parliament
seeking to maintain them, the world would hear another Divinity from many of
them, who now cry out, that all our defense is damnable.

But lest I might be thought not to have weighed the Scripture and reasons of
both sides equally, I will give you a further account what my thoughts were,
and are concerning the Scriptures usually pleaded against this resistance, and
the reasons deduced from them. The strongest hold they pretend to, is built
upon Romans 13. 1. etc. 1. Peter 2. 13, 14. where we are enjoined subjection
to the Higher Powers, especially to the King as Supreme, and all know that Nero
the then supreme Governor, was no better then a Tyrant. Answ. First, it is
observable that this objection, and almost all the rest taken out of the
Scripture, make the case of all Subjects in all Kingdoms to be alike; that
although (as I touched before) there are hardly two Kingdoms in the world, but
do differ in Laws, Customs, and Constitutions, bounding the Kings authority,
and the Subjects obedience, yet if any of these would change the bounds of his
authority (for instance, If the King of Denmark, or Sweden, or Polonia,
would invade the liberty of his Subjects, and make himself as absolute, (not
only as the King of England, but) as the King of France, or Spain, or the
great Turk) this argument ties all their Subjects from resisting; let any man
show an out-gate for the Subjects of the one, which will not let out others,
and for my part I will yield the cause: If they say these Kings took their
Crowns upon those terms, and the Subjects indented to have liberty of
resistance in such cases, then they grant that where the Laws of the Kingdom
allow a liberty of resistance, resistance may be used notvvithstanding these
texts, which is as much as we plead for: If any people have covenanted in no
case to resist, let them seek another answer, in the mean time these Texts tie
not those from resisting (by their own answer) who have not tied themselves.

Secondly, I appeal to their own judgments, whether these Texts forbid all
forcible resistance; Suppose a Prince in his rage should go about to kill
himself, or run some innocent man through with his sword, might no man take the
sword out of his hand? and if it be lawful for a private man to dis-arme him
of the weapons wherewith he would kill one, may not the State take such weapons
out of his or the hands of his Instruments, wherewith they go about to destroy
all. Thirdly, both Texts lay the same charge for subjection to inferior
Magistrates, who likewise have their authority from God, though under the
Superior: As our Savior said to Pilate, who was buta Deputy, thou could
have no (...), no power at all against me, if it were not given thee from
above. And may no resistance be made against the unjust violence of inferior
Officers; if there may, it is sufficient; sure I am, the Texts have not one
word to allow the one, and prohibit the other. Fourthly, what one syllable in
either of these Texts so much as looks toward the forbidding of a people to
resist Tyranny, but only that we resist not the Magistrates in the rightful
exercise of their authority given them by God: the Texts speak not of their
persons, but of their power; not of their dictates, but of their legal
commands; no more of Kings than of an higher power in an Aristocracie, or
Democracie, binding all persons to subject themselves to that Power and
Authority which in the several places where they live is the highest or
supreme power.

Object. But Nero was a Tyrant.

Answ. Not in his five first years; nor secondly, was he a Tyrant in all
things; he had authority to rule according to Law, that was not his Tyranny;
his Tyranny was, what he usurped contrary to the Law: nor thirdly, were all
his underofficers Tyrants, many of them could say with Festus, Acts 25. It is
not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die, before that he which
is accused, have the accusers face to face, and have leave to answer for
himself; and would accordingly dismiss them, if they had done nothing worthy
of death, or of bonds.

Object. 2. But does not the thirteenth Chapter of the Romans plainly bind up
men's hands from resisting the supreme Power?

Answ. By the Supreme power must be meant, that power, which by the original
and fundamental Constitution of any people and Nation, has authority to make
Laws which shall bind the whole Nation, to dispose of the estates and lives of
any person or persons for the good of the Nation, to judge every person and
persons in the Nation determinatively and conclusively, so as from that
judgment there is no appealing, that power it self being subject to the
judgment and authority of none but God: and Aristotle makes three distinct
Branches of this power.

1. The power of making and repealing Laws, a Legislative power.

2. The power of making War and Peace, of imposing Customs and Tributes.

3. The power of judging Causes and Crimes ultimately and decisively: where
these three meet, and make their residence, whether in one person, as in
absolute Monarchs; or in many, as in mixed Monarchies or Aristocracies; or in
the body of the people, as in the ancient Roman government, there is the
highest power which every soul is forbidden to resist: But now what ever be the
higher power in England, most certain it is, that the Kings absolute or
illegal will, is not the highest power, that has neither power to make Laws,
nor repeal Laws; that has not power to acquit or condemn; nor may men appeal
from the Kings lawful judgment Seat to the Kings absolute will; but his
legal will in the highest Court, or the King and Parliament may make Laws or
repeal Laws, may engage the whole Nation in a War, and command both the Bodies
and Purses of men unto the service, is the highest Court of Judicature, to
which all my appeal, and from which none may appeal, and consequently against
which there is no resistance. So that if men would read this Text of the
thirteenth to the Romans, in plain English it amounts directly to thus much,
Let every soul in England be subject to King and Parliament, for they are the
higher powers ordained unto you of God, whosoever therefore resists King and
Parliament, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive
to themselves damnation. I would desire no other Text but this to confound the
great Chaplains and Champions of the Antiparliamentary cause, or to strike
terror into their Loins, if their long conversing with God-dammee's, has not
drawn such a Kawl over their hearts, that to them damnation is ridiculous.

Object. 3. But does not Saint Peter say expressly, the King is Supreme, 1 Pet.
2. 12.

Answ. 1. It may as well be translated Superior, as Supreme, the same word in
the 13 of the Romans is translated Superior, higher, not highest. 2. It is
plain, the Apostle is not there constituting Governments, but giving direction
to people to obey the Government they lived under; and the Text has as much
strength to enforce subjection to Aristocracy, as to Monarchy: If the people of
Pontus, Asia, Cappadocia, Bithynia, were under an absolute Monarchy, as
sometimes they were, being petty Kingdoms crumbled out of the great Monarchy of
Alexander; and it may be did retain yet the same form of Government, if not of
their own, yet as lately received from the Romans; all that can be enforced
from thence is, That the Apostle names the Kings of those particular Countries
to be such as they were, and commands subjection to them, but no ways ties
other kingdoms to be like unto them.

Object. 4. But we in England by our oaths, do acknowledge the King to be
Supreme.

Answ. 1. We willingly grant Him to be Supreme, to judge all persons in all
causes according to His Laws, and the established Orders of the Kingdom, but
not at, or by His absolute will or pleasure. 2. Whoever considers the title,
scope, and words, both of the Oath and the Act of Parliament that enjoynes it,
will easily see that both the Act and Oath were intended in opposition to that
Supremacy which the Pope sometimes challenged and usurped in this Kingdom of
England, and no more: And this to be the true intent and meaning of it, appears
more fully by that explication or limitation of the Oath, made the next
Parliament, 5. Eliz. Wherein it is declared, That that Oath made, 1. Eliz.
shall be taken and expounded in such form, as it is set forth in an admonition
added to the Queens Injunctions published, Anno 1. of Her Reign, viz. To
confess or acknowledge in Her, Her Heirs and Successors, no other Authority
then that which was challenged and lately used by King Henry the eighth, and
Edward the sixth. And by this time you may see how little offensive these two
(so much boasted) Texts are to our defensive Arms.

Object. Other places of Scriptures the adversaries seem not much to confide
in, therefore I will pass them over the more briefly; yet let us a little
consider of them, Matthew. 26. 52. They that take the sword shall perish with the
sword. Where Christ seems to rebuke Peter for using defensive arms against the
officers that came with a pretext of authority to apprehend Christ.

Answ. 1. This is not a reproof of the sword taken for just defense, but of the
sword taken for unjust oppression, and a comfort to those that are oppressed by
it; for Origin, Theophylact, Titus, Euthimius, interpret the meaning to be,
That Christ does not rebuke Peter for using defensive Arms, but to let Peter
know that he need not snatch Gods Work out of his hand; for God would in due
time punish those with the sword, that came thus with the sword against him;
and that these words are a Prophecy of the punishment which the Roman sword
should enact of the bloody Jewish Nation; according with the like expression,
Revel. 13. 10. He that kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword,
here is the patience, and faith of the Saints, that is, This may comfort the
Saints in their persecutions, that God will take vengeance for them. But
secondly, Suppose it was a reproof of Peter's using the sword; then the plain
meaning is to condemn Peter's rashness, who drew his sword, and never staid to
know his Masters mind, whether he should strike or not; and so reproves those
who rashly, unlawfully, or doubtingly use the sword: Add this, That now was
the hour come of Christ's suffering, and not of his Apostles fighting, wherein
Christ would not be rescued, no, not by twelve Legions of Angels, much less
then by the sword of man; Therefore he says to Peter, Put up thy sword, etc.
But intended not that it should always be unlawful for his people to use the
sword in their just defense, against unjust violence; for then he would never
have commanded them, but a little before, that he that has two Coats, let him
sell one and buy a sword.

Object. Eccles. 8. 2. etc. I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, etc.
He does whatever he pleases, etc. Where the word of a King is, there is power,
and who may say to him, What do thou?

Answ. 1. No man can understand it literally in all things, as if every
commandment of the King must be kept, as if no actions of the King might be
scanned, nor reproved by any man, as the Canonists say of the Pope, That if he
lead thousands to hell, none may say, Why do thou so? Surely, if Saul command
to murder the Lords Priests, that commandment need not be kept? If David lie
with his neighbors wife, Nathan may say, Why do thou so? If Ahab murder
Naboth, and swallow his inheritance, worship Baal, persecute and kill the
Prophets of the Lord, Elijah may reprove him, notwithstanding this Text, Who
can say unto him what do thou? Secondly, The Text plainly enough interprets
it self, Keep the Kings commandment, according to the oath of God, stand not in
an evil thing against him, he has power to do whatever he will. Si scelus
patraveris, effugere non poteris, If you commit evil, you cannot escape
punishment: where the word of a King is, there is power, viz. to punish them
that do evil, and none to call him to account for doing it, and who can say
unto him, What do thou?

Object. Another text is, Proverb. 8. 15. By me Kings reign, etc. Whence they
plead, that because Kings and Princes receive their authority only from God,
and the people at the utmost only design the Person, but give him none of his
power; therefore they may in no case take away his power from him.

Answ. 1. It says no more of Kings, then of Nobles, Senators, and all other
Judges of the earth: for it follows, By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all
the Judges of the Earth. Secondly, Although no such thing is in the Text, that
the people give no power to the Magistrate, yet we will suppose it to be true,
what then will follow more then this? That although they may not take from the
Magistrate that power which God has given him; yet they may defend themselves
against such unjust violences, as God never gave the Magistrate power to
commit. A woman has power to design the person of her husband to her self,
but the authority of a husband is from God; now though the wife may not take
away the husbands just authority, she may defend her self against oppression
and injury.

Object. Some allege Gods judgment upon the two hundred and fifty Princes,
Numb. 16.

Answ. They were Rebels against their lawful Governors, ruling exactly,
according to the express will of God. And may all those perish with them who
will plead for such as they are.

Object. Others allege, 1 Samuel 8. 11. where the people are let to understand
how they shall be oppressed by their Kings; yet for all that, have no just cause
of resistance; for they shall have no other remedy left them, but preces and
lachrimae, crying to the Lord, Verse. 8.

Answ. But says the Text so? Let us read the words a little, and you shall cry
out in that day, Because of the King, which you have chosen, and the Lord shall
not hear in that day. Is this to say, they have no just cause of resistance,
nor no remedy left, but complaining? Indeed if the Holy Ghost had said, You
shall not resist, nor fight for your liberties, etc. there had been some show of
reason for such a deduction, as some would extort from them; but yet, even
then, Why might not the words have been a prediction of the curse of God upon
the people, giving them up to such a base degenerate ignoble spirit, that they
shall have no heart to stand up in the defense of their liberties and lives,
rather then a prohibition of such resistance? The Lord foretells the people,
Ezekiel. 24. 21. of calamitous times, in which he tells them, Verse. 24. That they
should not mourn or weep; Will any man interpret this, as if God made it
unlawful for them to mourn, or to weep, or was it not rather a prediction of
their stupidity of spirit, when they should pine away under these calamities?
so Jere. 27. God said they should put their necks under the yoke of the Kings
of Babylon; Will any man thence gather, That other People are bound to put
their necks under the yoke of a foreign enemy invading them? In one word, the
plain meaning is, That this People should dearly rue it for casting off the
form of Government which God had chosen for them; and when they should mourn
under their own choice, God would not take the yoke from off their necks; and
so it is a threatening of a judgment, not an imposition of a duty.

Object. But David durst not lift up his hand against the Lords Anointed,
though he did tyrannically persecute him; yea, though it were sometimes in his
power to have killed him.

Answ. No man pleads that any David should kill the Lords Anointed; yet he may
defend himself against his unjust violence, as David here did.

Object. But if they may not kill him, who can be secured? That in a battle
(as at Keynton field) his bullet may not hit the Lords Anointed.

Answ. Is this their fault, who have so often petitioned his Majesty to
withdraw himself from such dangerous vvayes, as both the Parliament and his
Excellency has done; if their petitions would have been received? or rather
theirs, who (the worse Subjects they, and the more accursed they) have led Him
into these unnatural Wars, and do in a manner enforce His presence in them?
Did they bear that affection to His Majesty as they pretend, They would with
David's men, Swear, Thou shall no more go out with us to battle, lest thou
quench the light of Israel, 2. Sam. 21. 17. We have heard much of the Cavaliers
swearing, but I never yet heard that one of them had the honesty to swear
this; Nay they are vvronged in reports, if some of them have not sworn the
contrary.

Object. But David would not fight against him.

Answ. Indeed he never did fight against him, because his numbers never were
considerable till toward the last, but he would have fortified the City of
Keilah against him; And it had been a strange madness to have had 600. men
with him, if his conscience would have suffered him to have done nothing but
flee: sure one might more easily be hid then 600. But there is a plain text
assuring us that David and his men vvoud have done more then run up and down,
if occasion had served, 1 Chronicles. 12. 16. and so forvvard. When diverse of the
children of Judah and Benjamin came to join with him, David went out to meet
them, and said, If ye be come to help me, etc. But if ye come to betray me to
my enemies, I being innocent, the God of our fathers look upon it, and rebuke
it. Now mark their answer, the spirit came upon Amasa the chief Captain, and he
said, Thine are we David, and of thy side, peace be to thee, and peace to thy
helpers: then David received them, and made them Captains of the band: Can any
man imagine their meaning was to run up and down the Countries with him, if
they were able to cope with any number that Saul should bring, or send
against them especially adding this to it, That they fell to him from the
several Tribes day by day, till his host was like an host of God. Now by these
men's argument, if David's host had been forty thousand, and Saul come against
him but with five or six hundred, they must all have fled from him, and not
have put it to a battle. Credat Judaeus Appella, non ego.

Object. But the Fathers of the Primitive times knew no defense but preces and
lachrymae in all their unjust sufferings.

Answ. 1. It follows not, because they knew it not, therefore we cannot know
it: there might be special reasons of Gods dispensations toward them. 2.
Their Liberties and Religion were not established by Law; and this was the
cause, says Abbot Bishop of Salisbury, why the Christians in the Primitive
times, before their Religion was established by Law, caedebantur non caedebant,
would rather be killed then kill: But after the times of Constantine, when
Religion was established, they shook off the yoke of persecution from the
Church, and caedebant non caedebantur, they did kill rather then be killed. 3.
Where did any of the Fathers ever oppose this opinion, and condemn this
practice, that is, declaring it unlawful, especially for a representative body
to defend themselves against the unjust violence of their misled Princes? I
believe if any such testimonies were to be found, the Parliament should have
heard of them before this time. 4. We want not examples of such defense in the
Primitive times, when once Religion was established by Edict of the Roman
Empire, and Licinius the Emperor of the East (legum violator maximus, contrary
to Law and his Covenant) would persecute the Christians, they defended
themselves by Arms, and Constantine the great joined with them; And as Eusebius
says, held it his duty, infinitum hominum genus, paucis nefariis hominibus,
tanquam quibusdam corruptelis, e medio sublatis, incolumes servare: To deliver
an infinite multitude of men, by cutting off a fevv wicked ones, as the pests
and plagues of the time. The Christians living under the Persian King, and
vvronged by him, sought for help from the Roman Emperor Theodosius, and were
assisted by him; and when the King of Persia complained that Theodosius should
meddle in affairs of his Kingdom, Theodosius ansvvered, that he did not only
protect them because they were suppliants, but was ready to defend them, and no
way to see them suffer for Religion, it being the same with their own. It seems
they thought it as lawful to help an innocent people against the oppressions
of their own Prince, as for one neighbor to succor another against thieves
and robbers. The Macedonians obtained of the Emperor Constantius, four
thousand armed men to help them drive out the Novatians from Paphlagonia, the
Orthodox assisted the Novatians against the unjust violence, and were armed
falcibus clavis, and securibus, with sithes, clubs and hatchets, and cut off
almost all the Soldiers, and many of the Paphlagonians. At Constantinople the
Orthodox defended Paulus his Election against Macedonius and his abettors,
though assisted with the Military Forces, and the Historian blames them only
for killing the Commander Hermogenes. Justina Valentinianus mother, infected
with Arianisme, commanded to banish Ambrose, but the people resisted, and for a
while defeated the plot of them who would have sent Ambrose into banishment.
The inhabitants of Armenia the greater, professing the Christian Faith, were
abused by the Persians (among whom they lived) especially for their Religion,
they entered into a league with the Romans for their safety. You see here are
some examples where the ancient Christians used defensive Arms, and I doubt not
but such as are well read in the stories of those times might produce many more.

Ob. But there is one Doctor who goes about to prove by reason, that oppressed
Subjects should not defend themselves against their Princes, though bent to
subvert Religion, Laws, and Liberties, because (forsooth) such resistance tends
to the dissolution of Order and Government, that is, to disable Princes from
subverting Religion, Law, and Liberty (which is the very dissolution of all
Order and Government) tends to the dissolution of all Order and Government; as
if hindering a man from pulling down his house, were the pulling down the house:
As if the hindering the Pilot from dashing the Ship against the rock, tended to
dash the Ship against the rock; If any man else see any color of reason in
this reason, I desire them to make it appear, for, for my part I can see none.

And indeed the case is so clear, that most of them who cry down defensive
Arms, though they use such Scriptures and Arguments to work upon the
consciences of people, yet when they come to dispute it, will hardly endure to
have the Question rightly stated, (as being unwilling to dash against the rock
of most learned Divines, whether Protestants or Papists, and, I think, of
almost all Politicians) but fall to discuss matters of fact, charging the
Parliament with invading the Kings just Prerogative, usurping an exorbitant
power and authority, etc. yea, His Majesty in all his Declarations insists
only upon this, never suggesting that in Conscience they are prohibited to
defend themselves, in case he should violently invade their Liberties, yea,
expressly grants, that there is power sufficient legally placed in the
Parliament to prevent Tyranny.

And therefore now I leave the case of Divinity, and shall more briefly give
you an account what satisfied me in the second, I mean matter of fact, that His
Majesty being seduced by wicked counsel did levy war against the Parliament:
My great evidence was, the Parliament judged so; the judgment of a Parliament
of England was never questioned till now by a people of England: all Patents,
Charters, Commissions, Grants, Proclamations, and Writs of the Kings of
England, receive their judgment, and are often repealed and made null by a
Parliament: all controversies betwixt the King and Subject receive their final
determination in the Parliament; the judgments of all other Courts are
ratified or nullified by a Parliament. I have heard some wise men say, That a
Parliament in England (like Paul's spiritual man) judges all, and it self is
judged of none; and therefore if I should give you no other account of my
entering upon my Office in the Army (which was not to fight, nor meddle in the
Council of War, but only to teach them how to behave themselves according to
the Word, that God might be with them) should I (I say) give no other account
but the determination of that wise assembly, I should be acquitted by
indifferent men. But although I had learned, that no dishonorable thing should
be imagined of that Honorable Assembly, yet I held it my duty not to yield
blind obedience, or go by an implicit Faith, but search whether the things
were so; and the rather, because both sides have appealed to heaven, to that
God, who no doubt in due time will clear the righteous cause: And upon my
search these things were quickly apparent.

It was very clear, that the persons too much prevailing with his Majesty, had
long before this Parliament, a design for over-throwing our Laws, enslaving
our Liberties, and altering our Religion; and it had so far prevailed, that we
were tantum non swallowed up; and when through the good providence of God, this
Parliament was called, and many hopes conceived, that now his Majesty seeing
the mischief of adhering to such ill counselors, would for the time to come
be wholly guided by the great Council of his Kingdom: alas it soon appeared
that the same kind of Counselors were still most prevailing, insomuch that
(soon after the pacification with Scotland) the Northern Army should have been
brought up to London, as appears by the very oaths of some who should have
acted it, a thing thou thought so pernicious, that not only the chief Actors
fled beyond the Seas, but many real Courtiers earnestly solicited their
friends in both Houses, that this their inexcusable error might be passed
over, and now to begin upon a new score. But that which made me the more
suspect their prevailing with his Majesty was, that, the horrid Rebellion
broken out in Ireland, the Rebels pretending his Majesty's and the Queens
Commission for their warrant, it was at least three months after, before they
were proclaimed Traitors, and when it was done, no Copies of the Proclamations
to be got for love or money; whereas when the Scots were proclaimed Rebels and
Traitors, it must speedily be published in all the Churches of England. I must
acknowledge, this made me to think, that the Parliament had just cause to be
jealous of great danger. But when His Majesty returned from Scotland,
discharged the guard which the Parliament had set for their own safety, and an
other denied, except under the charge of the Queens Chamberlain, and His
Majesty himself entertained diverse Captains as a super-numerary guard at
Whitehall, went to the House of Commons after that manner, to demand the five
members to be delivered unto Him; The Earl of Newcastle (now General of the
Army of Papists in the North) sent to Hull, attempting to seize it and the
Magazine there, his Majesty, according to the Lord Digbies letters, retiring
from the Parliament, to a place of strength; and the Queen going beyond Sea to
raise a party there; I must have shut my eyes, if I had not seen danger, and
thousands of thousands would have thought the Parliament altogether senseless,
if they had not importuned his Majesty (as they did) to settle the Militia, all
former settlings of it by Commissions of Lievtenancy being confessedly void:
His Majesty refusing this in that manner as they thought necessary for
security, they voted the putting of it into the hands of persons whom they
thought the State might confide in (though alas many of them since have
discovered to us how vain is our hope in man) And secured the Town of Hull,
and the Magazine there: soon after this his Majesty in the north seized
New Castle, and under the name of a guard begun to raise an army; all this was
done before the Parliament voted that his Majesty seduced by wicked council,
etc. And when his Majesty's Army was more increased, he then declared that he
was resolved by strength to recover Hull and the Magazine, and to suppress the
Militia: After this indeed the Parliament began to make vigorous preparations
by their propositions for Plate, Money, Horse, etc.

This being the true progress and state of the business, I saw clearly all
along, the Kingdom and Parliament were in danger, that it was therefore
necessary to have the Militia and Navy in safe hands, which His Majesty also
acknowledged; That he refused to settle it for a time in the way they conceived
necessary, and that by the judgment of both Houses when they were full, they
had power by the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom to settle it, especially for
a time, upon His Majesty's refusal; That His Majesty raised force, and
declared it was to suppress the Militia, and recover Hull and the Magazine, is
as clear, and made pregnant preparations both at home and beyond the Seas: And
the civil Lawyers say, that pregnant preparations are the beginning of a War.
The only Question remaining was, whether the Parliament did justly in ordering
the Militia, and securing the Magazine and Navy, in a confessed time of danger
upon such his Majesty's refusal.

What the Kings power and perogative, and what the Parliaments power was for
securing the Militia in time of danger according to the Laws of England, was
out of my profession, and in great part above my skill; But certainly unless I
was bound rather to believe the Votes of the Papists, and other Delinquents
about his Majesty, who hitherto had prevailed to bring upon us all the
miseries that we have lain under, then the Votes and Judgments of the
highest Court of Judicature in England, (which so far as I have heard, was
never by Common Law or Statute Law presumed to be guilty of, or charged with
the overthrow of the Kings prerogative, or the Laws and Liberties of the
Subjects until now, and who have given us so much evidence of their wisdom,
watchfulness and faithfulness) I was bound to be concluded under their
Testimony, and so consequently that His Majesty was seduced, etc. And surely,
if men who serve upon Justice betvveen Prince and People, party and party, in
matters of Life or State, may rest in the resolution of the learned Judges,
that this, or that is law, when themselves know it not; well might I rest in
the judgment and resolution of that Court, which is the Judge of all the
Judicatures in the Land. And in case I were unsatisfied, to whom should I
appeal, in whose judgment I might more safely rest, especially when I savv
their Vote agreeable to that which is the supreme Law of all Nations; namely,
that public safety is the highest and deepest Law, and that it is requisite
that every State have a power in time of danger to preserve it self from
ruin? and no Law of England more known, then that the Parliament is the
highest Court, from whence there is no appeal. This satisfaction I had then,
and since by the Declarations and Remonstrances of the Parliament, concerning
these Military matters, and by other Books lately published, it is most
apparent that they have not usurped upon His Majesty's prerogative, but what
they have done is agreeable to the practice of former Parliaments, In putting
the Militia, Forts, and Navy into safe hands in these times of danger: And that
it was therefore lavvfull for them, yea, necessary to take up these Defensive
Arms, and consequently to call in for supply from all such who should share
with them in the benefit of preservation, and to disable such from hurting
them, who were contrary minded. I spend no time to answer the Objections that
some make, that His Majesty could not tarry at London with safety of His
Person, that the Lords and Commons that are with Him, were driven away by
popular Tumults, and could not enjoy freedom of their Votes, etc. Because I
think these things are now believed by none, but such as would believe no good
of the Parliament, though one should rise from the dead again.

Thus Sir, you have a just account of the grounds that first induced me to own
this Cause; you desire to know whether I see not yet reason to repent of what I
have done: I confess I never undertook any thing but I saw cause to repent of
my miscarriage through the corruption which cleaves to me, and great cause I
have to bewail my many failings in this great Work: but for the Work it
self, I as solemnly profess, I never saw cause to repent of my appearing in
it; the Cause is a right cause, the Cause of God; my call to it, a clear call,
and though the Work prove harder and longer then at first it was thought, yet
the Cause is far clearer then at the first.

The work indeed is harder then I expected, for whoever could have believed he
should have seen in England so many Lords and Commons even after their solemn
Protestation, to defend the Privilege of Parliament, and their own Vote; that
His Majesty seduced by wicked council, intended War against the Parliament, so
shamefully to betray the trust committed to them? so many of the Protestant
Profession joining with an army of Papists (under pretense of maintaining the
Protestant Religion against a Protestant Parliament) to fight themselves into
Popery? so many unworthy Gentlemen fight to destroy a Parliament, and thereby
fight themselves and posterity into slavery? so many Papists in Arms contrary
to so many known Laws, and armed with Commission, to disarme Protestants
contrary to their known Liberties, and the Protestants who exceed their number
an hundred fold not to rise as one man to subdue them? And who would have
believed that he should have seen after all this an Army raised by the
Parliament in such an extremity, for such an end, (having hazzarded their
lives, undergone all these hardships, performed all these services, and whose
untimely disbanding may prove our irrecoverable ruin) straightened for want of
pay while England is worth a groate. Behold, regard, and wonder marvellously, I
relate a thing which many will not believe though it be told unto them. Hab. 1.
5.

But though the Work be harder, the case is still clearer, both in regard of
the intentions of the Parliament, and also of their adversaries. For the
Parliament, multitudes would not believe, but that they had further aims then
their own and the public safety, that they intended if not to depose His
Majesty, yet by force of Arms to compel him to that which is not fit for a
King to yield to; But now by their frequent petitioning of his Majesty,
especially by the reasonableness of their late Propositions and Instructions,
wherein they desire a present disbanding of all Arms, even before any other
bills were past, and were willing to have the Ports, Forts, and Ships, etc. of
the Kingdom resigned up into his Majesty's hands, provided only that in these
times of dangers they might, pro hac vice, be put into the hands of such as the
State might confide in; The sincerity of their intentions are now so plain,
that I think Malignity it self cannot but be convinced of them.

And the intentions of the contrary councels are as plain, their mask now
falling off, and their design more then ever discovered to be the overthrow of
Parliament, Liberty, Laws and Religion. For at first we had Declarations to
preserve all the just privileges of Parliament, but now we see men proclaimed
Traitors for executing the Commands of the two Houses, and the two Houses
themselves, if not in direct, yet in equivalent terms proclaimed Traitors,
yea, denied to be a Parliament, because his Majesty withdraws himself, and
after multitudes of Petitions refuses to return, and because many of their
Members have deserted them, and are protected by his Majesty from the Houses
who have sent for them. Yea, they are required to recall their Votes as
illegal, and that such as they have fined and imprisoned may bring their
Habeas Corpus to be tried in an inferior Court. Yea, people provoked to scorn
them, and thereupon multitudes not fearing to trample upon, and cast as vile
scorn and contempt unjustly upon that thrice-honorable Court, as ever was cast
justly upon the Commissaries Courts.

We have heretefore been assured that the known Laws of the Land should be
the only rule of government: but (to name no other instances) now we see the
Commission of Array to be justified to be Law, which the Parliament has not
only declared, but demonstrated, and the Countries (where ever it has
prevailed) found to be the utter destruction of all the Laws made for the
Subjects liberty.

Heretofore Proclamations were put out that no Papists should be entertained
into his Majesty's Army, because the resolution was to maintain the Protestant
Religion; But now we see them armed, and armed with Commission, and Protestant
Doctors in their writings justifying it; and being armed dare profess their
Religion publicly, set up their mass in the second City of the Kingdom,
cutting in pieces, and burning Bibles, and as multitudes of reports come from
beyond the Seas, (and the supplies that come from thence confirm it) all the
Papists in Christendom contributing to this War as to the Catholic cause.
Heretofore the Liberty of the Subject seemed to be stood for, yea defended
against the Parliament, (as if it were possible the representative body should
enslave it self) and in the mean time while these things are promised,
hundreds, yea thousands of his Majesty's Subjects plundered, with His Majesty's
Proclamations against plundering, in the hands of diverse of the plunderers,
And their persons led away in Ropes and Chains like Turkish Gally-slaves, and
many cast into Prisons and Dungeons, only for defending themselves against
robbers and murderers abusing His Majesty's Name: where their Jaylours use them
worse then the Turks do their Christian slaves, or one that has any thing of
man in him could use a dog.

And when all these things are now done, the Parliament not only sitting, but
having so much strength in the Field, what can we expect when these men have
prevailed, when at the putting on of their harness their usual language is
nothing but blasphemy against God, (not to be mentioned) and against His
people, calling all that adhere to his and the Kingdoms Cause, Parliament
dogs, and Parliament rogues? what language will you expect to hear if once
they come triumphantly to put it off? If while the event is uncertain they cut
us out such kind of Laws, Liberties, and Parliament privileges as these
are, if GOD for our sins sell us into their hands, think if you can, what
Laws Liberties, and Parliament-priviledges our posterity shall find
recorded in our blood: for our selves, alas, who shall live when God does this?
Nay, who would desire to live? I would rather with holy Austin make it my
humble suite to that GOD whose are the issues of life and death, that He
would rather take me from the Earth, then let me live to see His dear
Church, and my native Country, delivered into the (...) of such blasphemous
and barbarous men.

So that in stead of repenting and withdrawing from the work, I could wish that
my voice were able to reach into every corner of the kingdom, and that I could
awaken all people to see the danger and misery that is flowing in upon them.
That every soul might be quickened up to make his own, and help to make
Englands, bleeding, dying Englands peace with God, and every one who has any
interest in Heaven to cry mightily unto that God in whose hand the hearts of
Kings are, and who rules in the Kingdoms of men, that the power of our God
might be great toward us, in turning away these imminent calamities, and
turning the heart of our King toward His great and faithful Council, and
rescuing Him out of the hands of this Generation of men who delight in bllood.
Our God has not yet said, Pray not for this people: but if the Lord say he
has no delight in us, Righteous art thou O Lord, and just are all thy
judgments: only let us not be accessory to our own destruction, and the
destruction of so flourishing a Kingdom; let us not through our covetousness
or cowardice, self-love or sloth, betray our Laws, Liberties, Lives, Religion
into the hands of men, from whose hands we befoole our selves if we expect more
mercy, or less misery, then the poor Christians of Constantinople found with
the Turks, when thanks to their own niggardliness (O let it never be so
with England) they fell into their hands. Oh let us labor to prevent their
Swords thrusting into our bodies, and their Swords into our Souls, let our God
do with us what he will, let us do what we should, and while we have any
money in our purses, any blood in our veins, or any spirits in us, devote all
to the maintenance of this rightful cause: and if we perish, we perish.

Nor do I fear to be for this condemned by any right discerning man as an
incendiary to a Civil War, I know the miseries of a Civil War: War is the
severest of all Gods judgments, and Civil War the cruellest of all Wars:
where is the greatest hatred, the deepest treachery, the most unnatural
butcheries, where the father murders the son, the son the Father, the
brother embrues his hands in his brothers blood, and whoever gains, all are
loosers: (...) Cives, quae tanta licentia belli? Oh the (...) of our age and
Country? If England have such a lust to War, (...) we find no foreign
Enemies, but we must War against our selves, and at this time too, Cumque
superba for^t Babylon Spolianda (...). When the proud Turrets of the whore of
Babylon are to be levelled with the Earth: when Germany, when Ireland are to be
rescued out of her bloody paws? Can we find no fitter Object for the fury of
the Cannon, then our Towns, Houses, Bodies? But alas! The Generation with
whom we have to deal, had rather a thousand times see the glory of England in
the dust, then the pride of Rome: And though a evil War be miserable, yet no
such misery as the peace which they would beteeme us; a Sicilian vespers, or
a Parisian massacre, from which good Lord deliver us: Save, Lord, let the King
hear us when we call.

Thus Sir, you have my thoughts at large, you may either lay this Letter by
you, or communicate it for the satisfaction of others at your own pleasure: I
bless God I am gathering strength, and hope ere long by my return to my Lord
and the Army (if God please not to smile upon us with a safe Accommodation in
the mean time) to give a real proof that my judgment is the same that
formerly it has been, and I hope you believe my affection is the same still to
you, and therefore without further trouble, I subscribe my self.

Your loving friend, Stephen Marshall


