THE POWER OF THE CIVIL MAGISTRATE In matters of RELIGION, VINDICATED.

The Extent of his Power determined.

In a SERMON preached before the First PARLIAMENT on a Monthly Fast day.

BY The late faithful and laborious servant of Christ, Mr. STEPHEN MARSHALL,
B. D. and Minister of the Gospel for many years in Finchenfield, but the two
last years of his life in Ipswich.

Published by G. FIRMIN Minister in Shalford, With Notes upon the Sermon.

Isa. 49.23. And Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their Queens thy
nursing mothers, etc:

Isa: 60:12: For the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish,
etc.

London, Printed for Nathaniel Webb, and William Grantham, at the sign of the
Black Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North door. 1657.

To the Worshipful JOHN MEADE Esquire, dwelling in Finchingfield in Essex.
SIR,
THe exceeding love you bare to this Author [your dear friend and faithful
Pastour] together with that respect which your love unto me has Commanded from
me, have caused the Dedication of what was his, and what is mine unto you. The
Subject [though it may be not so profitable to you] is of great concernment in
our days, wherein the old Serpent to the end he might have free passage for
the Doctrines of Devils, has by the mouths and pens of men Cried down the
Civil Magistrates power in matters of Religion; which Stratagem of his may it
prevail [and I wish it had not prevailed too much] then as Mr. Cotton says,
Rejoice ye Heretics, Idolaters, Seducers, Answ. to bloody Tenet c. 33.
go on and make havoc of the Sheep of Christ like ravenous wolves; you may now
do it [impune] without fear or danger.

It had been well if this Author could have been prevailed with, to have
published his many spiritual and practical Sermons upon Prove. 4.23. in which
work and Preaching of Christ he took most content. I know boah your self and
others urged him to it, and could he have wrought with his hand (by writing) as
he could with his head and lungs, we had enjoyed them. A labourer he might well
be called, few such Laborers has he left behind him: we say men cannot work
that do not eat, but he could work when for many weeks (yea months) he
could not eat, his work was meat to him. a Christian was his profession, and
Christianity was his practice; Books, he told me never taught him to preach
Christ, but yet how well acquainted was he with Christ, his sermons declared,
and that excellent sentence of his when we were discoursing with him about his
death at your house. I cannot say as he, I have not so lived that I should now
be afraid to dye: but this I can say, I have so Learned Christ that I am not
afraid to dye. Faith he preached, by Faith he lived, by Faith he died; he
answered the Apostles exhortation to Timothy, 1 epist. Cap^ 4.12. Be thou an
example of the Believers in Faith, etc. amongst all his other graces, this
Gemme did shine most gloriously: what you have lost by the removal of such a
friend you know best: I know he was an Instrument by whom the Lord conveyed
much Comfort unto you in your pilgrimage: yet this is some comfort, that while
you had him, the Lord gave you a heart to improve him, and so improved him,
that I doubt not what is said of Abel in another case, He being dead yet
speaks; Heb. 11.4.
it may be said of Mr. Marshal, though he be dead, he yet speaks to you. It
will not be long, but the people of God shall be freed also from this evil
[which our honored friend was wont to say, was one of the greatest outward
evils] the loss of friends: you are hastening, and in a good way [I doubt not]
to that place, where you shall meet with your dear and christian friend again,
and with many others gone before you; the Lord has kept you hitherto steady,
sound, unshaken, in these times, holding fast to the old truths, [which I
esteem an honor in these daies] hold there still [good Sir] for they must
stand in stead when we come to dye. I shall add no more, but crave your
acceptance of what I have presented,

Subscribing my self Your Servant, GILES FIRMIN.

To the Reader.
I Have heard it reported since this reverend Author died, that upon his
deathbed he charged his Executors that none of his Notes should be printed: If
any then should say to me, Why do you publish these? I answer: First, These
Notes I had from himself, and I know as perfect as any he has left behind
him. Secondly, I told him while he was Living, if he would not publish his
Sermon, I would publish what Notes I had: The reason why he would not publish
his Sermon, was this, because in some things [especially in his 4th Argument to
prove the Magistrates power] he differed from some other Divines, which might
Occasion some to write against him, and for him to Reply [writing being to him
a most tedious work in his health, much more in his sickness] he would not do
it* but that reason being now taken away, I have taken this liberty to publish
his Notes. Though they are but short, yet they contain the Substance of the
Doctrinal part of his Sermon, which was preached in the Parliament House on one
of the last Monthly Fast days, and gave great Content to the soundest part,
professing they never heard so much before. For the application of his
Doctrine, I did not desire it, the Doctrinal part [upon such a Subject as this]
being the maine.

For the other Notes which I have added, I hope the Reader will not judge them
either impertinent or useless, considering our times: I took Counsel of such,
whom I know to be godly, judicious, and learned, before I would publish them,
and they wishing me to it, I have presented them to your View, and Committed
them to the Lord for his blessing.

THE CIVIL MAGISTRATES POWER IN MATTERS OF RELIGION PROVED.
1 Timothy 2.2. That we may Lead a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and
Honesty.


The Observation is this.

WHen Civil Magistrates themselves are brought to the knowledge of the truth,
Observation.
they will make it their great Care, that the people of God under them may live
a peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty.

It is the end why the Apostle exhorts the Saints to pray for them, and it is
to be believed that God would not direct his people to beg for that in order to
their office, which does not belong unto their office.

Objection. True, If any will be Godly, the Magistrate must provide that they
may live peaceably and quietly, Objection.
as if men be married, Learned, etc. the Magistrate must provide, that such may
live quietly: this is the meaning and no more.

Answer. Will any say the same of the Second, viz. Honesty, that if men will be
honest, Answer.
the Magistrate must provide they may live peaceably? Is it not true [who dare
deny it] that the Magistrate is bound to provide that men live honestly in
matters of the second table? to make laws about it and see to the execution of
them: why then must he not provide for Godliness, under the first table; the
Holy Ghost has joined them both together in the Text.

Caution. I mean not when Magistrates are Godly then they must begin to do
this as if it were not their duty, or they had not power before [ Dommum non
sundatur in gratia] but he is not qualified to Cause this before.

The married man converted, is bound to endeavor the Conversion of his wife
and children, he will now seek it; being converted he is qualified for it, but
it was his duty to seek the spiritual good of his wife and children before. So
here

In the Doctrine, are three parts of the Magistrates duty.

First, Public peace, 2. That the people live in honesty. 3. Godly. The two
first there are none have doubted of, but the third is the question of our
times. To make way to it, I shall lay down this Conclusion as the Foundation of
what shall follow.

That, Civil Magistracy is a Divine Institution: therefore, First, God has
appointed some to rule, and some to obey. Secondly, He has given them rules
about their Laws, that they be conformable to his mind.

Thirdly, In the Execution of them the Magistrate is Gods Vicegerent.

Fourthly, He is accountable to God for his Office.

This Foundation being laid, Two Questions will here arise.

1. Q. Whither the Lord has Committed to these Magistrates the Care of
Religion? 2. Q. If so, what he has committed to them in this behalf?
To the first I answer affirmatively, and thus I prove it.

First out of my Text: he must take Care that is people live in all Godliness.
To whom the End is committed, to him the Media are Committed; none can deny
this: If godliness the End, then all the means to this end he must take care
for.

Secondly, From all the examples in the Old Testament; Why Magistrates under
the Old Testament should be types more of Christ in matters of Religion
[belonging to the first Table] then in matters of justice [belonging to the
second Table] I know not. [ Non distinguendum est ubi Scriptura non distinguit]
What ever color they turn for the Kings of Israel, David, etc. who in some
things were types of Christ; yet this cannot be said of the Heathen Kings,
Cyrus, Artaxerxes, for whose care in this matter the Church blessed God, Ezra
7.27.

Though we infer not that Magistrates under the New Testament, are bound to do
in every particular as they did; yet as they did set up the worship of God, and
all means tending to godliness under the Old Testament, so must ours now set up
the worship of God and the means tending to godliness under the New Testament.

Thirdly, I prove it from Gospel-promises under the Old Testament of
Magistrates what they should be under the New Testament, Isa. 49.23. And Kings
shall be thy nursing fathers, etc. so Isa. 60.10. And their Kings shall
minister unto thee. Now if God promise that Magistrates shall be such nursing
fathers, then they ought to endeavor to be such.

To which may be added the exhortation to Kings, Psalm 2. and Psalm 24. As
Kings, they must open the gates to Christ.

Also the threats against such as will not serve the Church, Isaiah 60.12. For
the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish; yea those
Nations shall be utterly wasted.

Fourthly, Because Jesus Christ as Mediator, has the Kingdom and the power; He
is head and ruler over all for the Churches good, Ephesians. 1.22. Therefore all
being under him, must be subservient to him and his ends, Prove. 8.15, 16. (...)
By me Kings reign, etc. which is meant of Christ, v. 23. I was set up from
everlasting. The Hebrew word is the same with Psalm 2.6. I have set [anointed]
my King. Vnctus, regno inauguratus sum, Princeps constitutus sum.

Thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, etc. nor the stranger. Every one that
has others under him must see that they keep the Sabbath. And therefore the
Magistrate (as did Nehemiah) if the time for the worship belongs to the
Magistrate to take care of, then likewise he must take care for the worship it
self.

Sixthly, If the flourishing of Religion be the safety of the ^ Chro. 15.3, 4,
5, 6,
If all other professions, Physicians, Lawyers, etc. must come under the
Magistrates power and care, because of the interest of the Commonwealth, then
much more matters of Religion; because miscarriages in those, reach but some
particulars; but miscarriages in matters of Religion reach all, and are of a
more dangerous consequence.

Seventhly, If Magistrates must not meddle in matters of July, 12. 1653. is a
vain and empty thing [to say no worse of it] the words are these, Page 6, That
in all we may be fitted and used as instruments in the hand of God, for more
full and clear revealing of the Lord Jesus, and for the right promulgation of
his blessed Gospel, and for the true interest of his Kingdom and advance
thereof in the hearts of men, by real true goodness, righteousness, peace and
joy in the holy Ghost. Now if you were right you would do as Theodosius, you
would Hoc agere.

The second Question: What Care has God Committed to the Magistrate in the
matters of Religion?

This is a harder question: two extremes we commonly find. First, Some give too
much, all must be ad nutum Magistratus. Secondly, Some give too little; as if
no Care at all did belong to the Magistrate, but he must give Liberty to all.
Woeful experience teaches when Magistrates do meddle with Religion, they
either meddle with what they should not, or neglect what is enjoined them by
God. But I will bring my discourse to two heads; showing, First, what the
Magistrate must not do. Secondly, what he must do.

What the Magistrate must not do.

First, Magistrates must not do what is good in their own Deuteronomy. 17.18. when
the King sits upon the throne of his Kingdom, he shall write him a Copy of
this Law in a book, etc. Nor may Magistrates prefer reasons of State [as they
are called] before reasons of Religion held forth in Gods word.

Your wisdom and reason in matters of the Commonwealth is regula regulans, but
in matters of religion, regula regulata: every pin of the Tabernacle was
appointed.

Secondly, Nor are they to give themselves up to follow the Dictates of other
men whatsoever, till the Word show it to be Deuteronomy. 17.18. [This head was
improved against the Popish Clergy, who bind the Civil Power to execute what
they determine.]

Thirdly, Nor do I find a warrant for Magistrates to compel any to the
profession of truth, Psalm. 110. His people a willing To Order what men shall
believe, is to exercise Dominion over men's Consciences: It is One thing to
cause the people to attend the means, and another to make them believe the
truth, the first they must do, but not the second: Faith is Gods gift. It is
one thing to hinder Idolatry, and blasphemy spreading, another thing to make
people renounce an opinion, and embrace the truth.

Sed nec religionis est cogere religionem, quae sponte suscipi debeat, non vi.
Tertul. ad Scap.

Nova and inaudita est ista praedicatio, quae verberibus exigit fidem, Greg.

Fourthly, neither may Magistrates deprive the Lords people of any one of the
privileges he has bought with his blood: in civils, when reason require, they
may; but not in religion. What he has left indifferent, they must leave
indifferent; as if the Lord should appoint his servants such cloths, colors,
days, etc. and the steward hinders, the steward is now a Lord, not a fellow
servant.

Fifthly, Nor must the Magistrate deny that Indulgence, Toleration, to all the
Lords people, in their weaknesses, whither of Judgment or Conversation; which
Christ would have his Saints exercise one toward another.

Now I come to the second question, Positively, what must they Do?

General rules.
Answ. I will lay down two general rules; then I will come to some particular
rules. The general rules are these,

First, As all men in their Callings must order their business so, as the way
to heaven may be most promoted in themselves and those which relate unto them:
So the Magistrates in ordering and regulating the peace, trade, and all
interests of the Commonwealth, are to do it so, that all be subservient to
Christ's great Interest, that his people may be promoted in their way to eternal
life. This is like to Christ: Ephesians. 1.22. who is head over All things to the
Church.

Secondly, To take Care that all the Lords Institutions be Observed; what he
has appointed to be done, they must see it done. The Heathen King hit it
right, Ezra 7.23. Whatsoever is Commanded by the God of Heaven Let it be
diligently done.

They are to look to the preservation and restoration of Religion: as the
Physician either aims at the preservation, or restoration of health. And in
subserviency to these, to come to particular rules. Particular Ruler.


First, they are to do as Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17. and Hezekiah 2 Chronicles. 29.
That sent forth according to Gods Order, approved, faithful Ministers; by whom
truth of religion, purity of worship, ways of holiness, may be published,
inculcated, and whatsoever is contrary to sound and wholesome doctrine, and
Godliness, may be discovered, confuted, reproved: and with the same Hezekiah 2 Chronicles. 30. they are to speak comfortably to those who teach the good knowledge
of the Lord.

Secondly, In order to this, they are to erect, maintain, Schools, and
Universities, and to allow unto the Ministers, honorable maintenance it being
Gods express Ordinance, 1 Cor. 9.^4* that they which preach the Gospel should
live of the G^spel. They are Nursing fathers, then they must provide bread.

Q. Whence or how shall this maintenance rise, and be provided shall they who
may not compel men to the faith, compel them to maintain Ministers to preach
the faith?

Answ. The public provisions by Glebes, Tithes, Here he took hold of
something which Mr. Williams [though an enemy to the Ministry] had granted in
one of his books.
and such public stipendia already settled by law, whereof the magistrates are
the public Feoffees, and which are not the peoples [and for which going and
issuing out of their lands and labors, consideration is had, and abatement
made in all purchases and letting of lands, as for a Rent charge, or rates for
the poor, and therefore no more to be counted burdensome or oppressing, nor
contention to be made about them, then any the forementioned charges.] These if
good order were taken to see them paid, would go very far to help, and what is
lacking the Magistrates cannot want means to maintain the Ministers of the
Gospel, more then the Ministers of State, if there be a will to it: we see you
can do it to whom you please.

Thirdly, They may Command and Order the people to come and attend upon the
Ministry of the Word, as the means instituted by Christ for their instruction
to salvation. It is one thing to order them what they shall believe, another
thing to order them to wait upon the means. All grant the civil Magistrates may
call public Assemblies, to hear their Proclamations, and Statutes, etc. read:
if they may call a whole Town to hear a Law, then much more may they call them
and order them to hear Gods Laws.

Fourthly, When people have declared themselves to be a willing people, and
profess to embrace the Lord and his ways, then may the Magistrates engage
them by Covenants, stirring them up in a Moral way: thus did the godly Kings of
Judah, though they Compelled none to become proselytes, yet when they were
become such, they engaged them as well as other Israelites, by Oaths,
Covenants, Curse, to walk worthy of the Lord: And this you do now (in effect)
in Commanding Fasts to be kept, wherein the Covenant is renewed* etc.

Fifthly, It belongs to the Magistrates, to reject corrupt and unworthy
Ministers; for it cannot stand with the faithfulness of Nursing-fathers to
Commit their Nurse-children to such as will starve, or poison them, Ezekiel. 34.
By corrupt Ministers, I do not mean such as labor under any infirmities, for
who is sufficient then? But I mean ignorant, erroneous, scandalous, unsavory
Salt; thus Samuel visited from Bethel to Gilgal, etc.

Sixthly, They ought to prevent, and pull down Idolatry, Superstition, being
spiritual adultery, and esteemed by God as the defiling of the marriage bed:
this was so charged upon Magistrates, and so practiced in the old Testament,
that the uprightness of their hearts was judged by it: And in the New
Testament it is foretold, that as the ten Kings come into the Lord Christ, they
shall hate the Whore, make her desolate, eat her flesh, burn her with fire,
Revel. 17.

Seventhly, On the same account, they ought to do the like by blasphemies and
other damnable doctrines: the spreaders whereof are termed Dogs, evil workers,
Wolves, and are not to be tolerated by faithful shepherds, i. e. Magistrates;
the Office of a Nursing father ties him as well to prevent his childrens
poison, Phil. 3.2. Acts 20.29.
as to provide them bread. These First, are works of the flesh, Gal. 5. and
can challenge no other Toleration then such works amongst which they are ranked.

Secondly, These are called a Leprosy, a Gangrene.

Thirdly, These cause the way of truth to be blasphemed, make religion a vain
thing. There is a heavy charge against the Church of Thyatira for tolerating of
Jezabel, Rev. 2. and it will not be a light one against the Magistrates, if
they shall tolerate, etc.

Which way to punish these is not so easy a question: [as to simple Heresy]
But if men will spread them, then the question is not so hard. As if a
Physician should hold such druggs are fit for men's bodies, which yet are
poysonful, the Magistrate would not punish him for this; but if this Physician
will administer and use those druggs in his practice, then the Magistrate may
non-licentiate him. So here

If Magistrates would conscienciously and really discountenance such men, it
would go far, both for preventing, and suppressing them: for commonly they take
up such Opinions, to serve their own bellies, ambition, to serve men and
factions; and if they were made infamous, they would as fast lay down.

Objection. But will not this expose Gods people to persecution, there are so
few Magistrates good, and if their Consciences be misinformed, what then?

Answer. First, This objection was full as strong in the old Testament, yet
then it was their duty, none question.

Secondly, It holds as much against the Authority of Parents in educating of
their children, or Masters their servants, because many may be supposed, and
are wicked, yet it is still a duty incumbent on them, and praiseworthy in
them, the Godly.

Thirdly, The Inconvenience under Jeroboam, etc. was foreseen by the Lord
before he made his Laws, yet it did not hinder him from giving them, nor the
godly Kings of Judah from walking by them.

Fourthly, The Magistrates Conscience is not the rule for him to go by, but let
the Magistrate look to have his Conscience rightly informed from the word of
God, which is his rule; then his ^aw to c^^se men to wal^ Orderly, cannot be
called Persecution.

Thus far Mr. Marshal^; for the Application of his point, he gave it not to me,
nor did I desire it: These Heads of his Sermon being but short [yet clear
enough to an Intelligent head] I shall desire to add some Notes upon these
Heads, tending to clear them, and I trust not unprofitable to the Reader.
WHither the Civil Magistrates Power reaches to matters of Religion, is not a
question first started in these troublesome times. Vtenbogardus [and his
followers] from Deuteronomy. 17.18. and other Scriptures which he thinks make to his
purpose, together with the examples of Moses, Joshua, etc. thinks the Civil
Magistrate is so much concerned in matters of Religion, that he affirms the
Care of Religion is chi^fly and in the highest degree, committed to him
immediately from God, but not to the Ministers immediately, but in the name and
under the Magistrate; so that the Magistrate does teach the people by the
Ministers of the Church, and the Ministers do their acts a and sub Magistra^y.

It was supposed that the putting in of those words into the Title of our
Kings, next and immediately under Christ supreme Head and Governor, did lean
this way, and gave offense to the Orthodox abroad. Calvin Calls them
inconsiderate men who did it, and s^ith they were blasphemous when they Called
him the supreme Head of the Church under Christ; hoc semper me graviter
vulneravit, says he: But Dr. Reynolds and Nowell took off that offense
afterward. Vide in 7 Amo. 13.


The Papists on the other side that they may hold up the Authority of their
Pope, and keep the Magistracy from meddling with their Clergy, together with
some Heretics who would have liberty to hold and vent their wicked
Conceptions, these have shut the Magistrates quite out, they must have nothing
to do in the matters of religion: only the Papists will give them so much
honor as to be the Executioners of the decrees of their Church.

The Orthodox look on both these as unsound, proving and that with strength
enough, that the Ministers of the Church receive their power immediately from
Christ, not from the Magistrate: yet withal they strongly prove both against
Papists and Heretics, that he is not excluded from having power about matters
of Religion.

Our Author has given seven Reasons to prove the latter, and I doubt not but
they will appear to be reasons to rational men: Some scruple there may be
about the fourth, which was the cause why he would not Print his Sermon as I
have hinted in my Epistle to the Reader. But yet to clear our Author, this I
will say for him; he did not intend to side with Mr. Coleman and Mr. Hussy, in
their judgment about the Civil Magistrate, v^z. that, Jesus Christ as Mediator
has substituted and given Commission to the Christian Magistrate to govern the
Church in subordination to him: or that he is a Governor in the Church Vice
Christi. Aaro. rod. p. 209.
These Mr. Gallespy oppose. I never heard him publicly, nor privately own any
such thing, that text in Ephesians. 1.22. which he quotes, lead him [with other
texts] to what he has said. That text he handled largely in the Country upon
the Lecture days, and while I viewed over some Notes I took from him, I saw
enough to Convince me he was far from their judgment. I will give the Reader a
taste. For his Analisis. There is a double Dominion Christ has by sitting at
the right hand of his Father, ver. 20. 1. A Dominion over all Creatures. 2.
Over his Church: The first is laid down in three expressions. 1. He has lifted
him up above all, etc. 2. Put all under his feet. 3. Gave him to be Head over
all. The second is laid down in two expressions.

First, That he has a headship over this as his body: a political Head he is
to all, but they are not his body as his Church, to which he is, q. d. a
natural Head. Secondly, It is his fullness.

Again, These two Dominions are laid down under a double Consideration.

First, What they are simply in themselves.

Secondly, What they are in relation one to another, What is it to the Church
that Christ is head of the world? and What to the World that he is head over
the Church, what are they better or worse? He has given him to be head over
all things To the Church. The same relation then that there is between Medium
and Finis: the Church has not only more of his heart and love, but All
subservient to his Church; were it not for his Church, he would not foul his
fingers with the world. Then drew up a general Doctrine.

Doctrine. Christ having fini^hed the work of our Redemption, has now
committed to him the Dominion and Lordship over all Creatures.

One distinction I must premise. A double title Christ has to this Lordship.
First, Natural, as the second person of the Trinity, this is his essential
right, and not meant here. Secondly, Delegated, as Mediator, given as a reward
of his sufferings: this is a power immediately to execute, the sovereign
Authority over the Creature. This power because some question, I will prove:
Romans 14.9. Mat. 28.18. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. verses, Psalm. 8.4. compared
with Heb, 2.6, 7, 8. besides Prophetical predictions, etc.

Then he opened, wherein this Dominion stood: his third head was this. There
are Constituted by Christ, powers, gifts, Authorities; omnes species
Magistratus: and all Governments, what power soever they have, is from him. His
Church Officers do not belong to this.



Thus much he. Whence, if the Magistrate and the Church Officer come under
different Dominions of Christ as Mediator, then though he does maintain the
Magistrate to be under Christ as Mediator, receive his power from him, etc. yet
it will not follow that he governs the Church Vice Christi, for the
Church Officer comes under another Dominion.

When Greg. Naz. would assuage the anger of the President, Orat. 18.
and told him, that he did not rule with Christ, govern the Commonwealth with
Christ, that he received his sword from Christ, etc. I know not but he meant
Christ as Emanuel our Mediator, but yet Greg. did not think the President ruled
the Church under Christ. Yet hence will follow what our Author does infer, That
since the Magistrate is thus under Christ, that it is his duty to take care of
Christ his Church, and do what in him lie that his Master Christ be set up in
his dominions, for the Church is that he minds more then Commonwealths, and
these for the sake of that.

Give me leave to enlarge upon that which our Author in the sixth reason has
only named: The Heathens care about religion. It is great shame to those who
have the light of Scriptures, to deny that to be the Magistrates duty which
those who had but the light of nature could see to be their duty: who knows any
thing of the Persian, Grecian, and Roman Magistrates, and knows not the care
they took about their Religion: shall the Turk take more care for his Mahomet,
then a Christian Magistrate for his Christ?

When Aristotle would reckon up the requisites for a Commonwealth without which
it could not be, he numbers six. P^l. l. 2. c. 8. (...)
Food, Arts, Arms, money, and (that says the Philosopher which I should have
named first) Care of Divine things [which they call the Priesthood] Justice:
and so sums them up in the end of the chapter, Husband men, Artificers,
Military men, Rich men, Priests, Judges. When God would unravel the
Commonwealth of Israel, Isa. 3.1, 2, 3. how many of these which Aristotle has
mentioned he does threaten to remove.

These persons had need go to School to Plato, Aristotle, and Tully, to know
their duty.

Objection. Christians are not to learn their duty from the light of nature,
but the light of Scripture.

Answer. In the matters of faith, things which we know only by Divine
Revelation, As about man's Redemption, The Trinity, etc. there indeed we cleave
only to the Scripture, natures light can show us nothing here. But if we come
to other moral duties, certainly they do not understand what Natures light is
that make so little of it: [though Scripture light does not cross natures
light in this, for the Scriptures also are clear to prove the Magistrates Care,
etc.] Romans 2.14. the Gentiles that had not the Law did by nature the things
contained in the Law. There was a law of nature that did teach them many things
of the Law of God written. The law of nature, is but that Divine law implanted
by the Author of nature in the nature of all men. Take the moral law strictly,
and lay by the fourth Commandment, what does it differ from the law of nature?

I will not meddle with that great question whither any thing be justuin and
bonum anteced^nter ad Divin^m Vol^ntatem. Patres and scholastici^ d^ceat, Deum
non velle res quia bonae sunt, sedeas esse bona^ quia a Deo sunt volit^.

Yet say our Divines nulla est Lex justitiae in actionibus Divinis priusquam
voluntas acceptaverit: nihil est justum nisi quia volitum, quamvis non sit
justum qua volitum, sed potiu^ quatenus a sapientia divina dictatum.

Twis. vind. gra. p. 228. Rhaet. Apol. 345. Bradward. 231.233 594.


A moral law say some of our Divines, is such a law which is therefore Commanded
because it is g^od, and is not therefore good m^erly because it is commanded
[as the Ceremonial law.]

The goodness in a moral law for which it is therefore commanded is, that
Comely su^able^^ss and meetness in the thing Commanded unto humane nature as
rational, or unto man as rational. By rational, understanding, right reason
neither blinded nor corrupted, (...). Clem. Alex. l. 1. c 13. pae l.

According to this rule exam^ne our question, and see if the Magistrate be not
bound, etc.

The Christian Magistrate knows God to be the true God, and Jesus Christ the
Redeemer; he believes in this God and Christ, and knows he rules under this
God, must give account to him of his actions as a Magistrate; does it now suit
or not with right reason that this Magistrate takes care that this God and
Christ whom he knows and believes in, be also made known and as much as in him
lies be believed in? does right reason judge that this Mastistrate has
performed his duty to God and Christ, and may give a comforable account to him
though he neglects this?

This Magistrate having the highest power [under Christ] over the people whom
he rules, a power of life and death [regularly] and so by his power may do
very much for the setting up of the honor of God and Christ amongst his
people, [commonly following the example of their chief rulers] does right
reason say this Magistrate should not take Care for the things of God and
Christ?

Again this Magistrate knows that in the knowing and believing in this God and
Christ consists his own good, and the good of all men; does then right reason
say that this Magistrate, who is a Minister of God for the Good of his people,
Romans 13.4. does take care for the Good of his people, who takes not care that
all the people under him do come to know and believe in this God and Christ,
that they also may be happy with him? Let any man who has right reason left in
him then see, whither that Magistrate be not a great sinner against the moral
law of God, who does not the utmost that in him lies to promote the Interest
of God and Christ, amongst those over whom he rules, there being the same
ground for this duty that is for any other.

Some lawyers reckon Religion amongst those things which pertain to the Law of
N^tions, because by Natures guidance we learn there is a God, and that this God
ought to be worshipped: Shall then Christians who have both the light of nature
and of Scripture and both agreeing in the Magistrates duty about Religion, deny
it?

Shall I draw another reason to prove the Magistrates Duty, etc. The best way
for the Magistrate to procure Honesty amongst his people, yea and a good way to
estalish his own power, is to endeavor, that his people may live in Godliness.
For Honesty it is clear, for who show more Honesty in their conversations, then
those who have most Godliness in their hearts. If men be right in the first
table, they will be in the second: the Magistrates are not much troubled with
these.

For the second thing, experience has proved it, that the Magistrate has had
need of the Ministers pen to maintain his power in the Consciences of people,
as well as the Ministers have had need of his Sword to defend them against
unconscionable people. How many pages have the Ministers pen filled in defense
of the Magistracy against the Anabaptists? whence it was truly said by one of
our ablest Lawyers in his charge at the Alizes, See Calvin's Epistle to K.
Edward the 6. (before his Commentary upon the Catholic Epistles) toward the
latter c^d.
were it but for our own selves [i. e. the upholding of the Magistracy] we had
need uphold the Ministry.

For that Deuteronomy. 17* 18. a text commonly brought to prove that the Magistrate is
keeper of both Tables* and Vtenbogardus [whom I named before] draws it to
uphold his Opinion, others wave it, thinking it related only to the Kings own
person.

See him also in his Epistle to the same King, before his commentary on Isaiah;
out of which prophecy he gathers diverse things and applies them to the King.
But the Kings actions and the Verdict of the Scripture concerning those
actions, best interpret it: we see they did meddle and that much in matters of
religion, and they are commended for so doing: 2 Kin. 18.6. the text had spoken
before of Hezekiahs Carriage toward God, v. 5. and the matters of Religion in
v. 4. and this text says, he kept the Commandments which the Lord Commanded
Moses. Then it seems Hezekiah took himself to be Commanded to do what he did.

For those who would yield it to these because they were Types, etc. our Author
has answered before: I add only, Right reason says there is as much need of
such acts of the Magistrate now as then; for men's hearts are as vile now as
then, as apt to corrupt the worship of God now as then, and the text says
plainly, there will be damnable Heresies, and shall not a Christian Magistrate
regard damnable Heresies? 2 Pet. 2.1.
besides, Christ's Kingly power reaches Honesty I hope as well as Godliness, if
therefore they being Types or Christ his Kingly Office, ours must now cease
meddling with Religion, by the same reason also with Honesty, and Commit all to
the King Christ. This were excellent Divinity!

I have heard of some who have been numbered amongst our Grandees that would
yield, that the Magistrate was bound to pull down Antichrist, but not to set up
Christ. This is a new and I conceive a Vain distinction. Pull down Antichrist?
What then? Let Mahutanisme, Heathenisme, Judaisme, spread and over run the
Nation, Christ must shift for himself it seems! but do they think the
Magistrate is bound, then surely by a Command: If so, does the Command bind
only to the Negative, and not the Affirmative part? this is strang^: Asa did
not think so, 2 Chronicles. 13. ver. 3. he answers the negative part, verse 4. the
affirmative.

But I doubt this distinction was taken up to serve some other designs.
Antichrist they must pull down* how else pull down all the Hierarchy, and all
the Ministers Ordained by them; how shall we get such and such things into our
fingers that are of great worth, but set Antichrist upon the head of these men
and things, the^ down go all these Black-coats, and the profits are ours.

But leaving these, our state has declared that the Magistrate is concerned in
matters of Religion; for we find laws made in reference to every Command of the
first table. Indeed we could wi^h there were more, and that there were not some
things granted, which do under-mine those which are made. Yea the supreme power
have called the people of this Nation together, to humble themselves in solemn
days of Fasting and Prayer, and amongst other Causes, because of Heresies, men
growing weary of preaching of the Gospel, and of the Ordinances of Christ, this
shows that the Magistrate is Concerned: these things I conceive to be true.

First, Though every sin in its own nature deserve humbling, yet to have a
Nation called together solemnly thus, it has not been for sins of a small
size, they are sins commonly in Folio; as for those infirmities of judgment or
practice which Christians are bound to bear with each other in, surely these
are not the Causes of such solemn days, must I bear with that, which I must
keep a solemn day of Fasting and Prayer to seek God against? I conceive not.

Secondly, If the Magistrate finds such evils as to Call the Nation thus, then
surely he has some power, and is bound to put forth that power to help to
remedy those evils so far as he can: if they be evils from God upon us, Plague,
Famine, War, etc. yet if it lie in his Compass to do any thing for the good
of the Nation, he will and must do it: then as well if they be evils of sin
from a people against God, he is to do what he can, or else such Fasts are not
rightly kept nor can the Magistrae have peace. I never heard of a Magistrate
that did otherwise, if right. True Ezra was a Priest, he Fasted, but I find not
that he Commanded or Called the whole Nation in such a solemn manner; but as he
Fasts and Prays because of a sin, so he put forth power to remedy that in,
chap. 10.4, etc. Why then does it not as well belong to the Civil Magistrate?
etc.

Our Author having proved that God has Committed to the Magistrate the Care of
Religion, now ^hews us what it is God has Committed, and for clearness sake
shows first what he has not Committed. For his first and fourth, had the
supreme power of England heretofore observed those rules, English ground had
not sucked in so much blood as not it has. For his second, as he has laid it
down, there is no doubt of it; something I might move here, but I will bring it
in afterward.

For his Third; all men speak not as our Author: I will not inquire what the
Papists say to this, I heard enough of their Inquisition when I was in Spain,
to know the Romish judgment: I find our own Divines affirming that the
Magistrate may Compel men to embrace the true Faith, and Religion. Altingus,
Perkins, Bucanus, etc. they are many that are of this judgment, and quote Luke
14.23. Compel, etc. but this sure will never prove it. Jansenius a Popish
Author, opening the text, comes at last to the Magistrate, with prisons, death,
etc. to compel, but yet acknowledges that since the parable speaks of those
who were without the Church, therefore, Church Excommunications, and
Magistrates compulsion is not here [chiefly, no nor at all] meant. Stella,
another of those Authors, opens the text without mentioning any thing of the
Magistrate; he shows two ways how God Compels men, and that is excellent
compulsion indeed. 1. Ostendendo voluntari nostrae tantum bonum, Deum posse
objectum libertati ita proponere non negamus sed actum voluntatis tunc esse
liberum negamus. Rhaet. Apol. p. 10.11.
ut non possit non appetere illud. 2. Removendo and abscondendo omne m^lum, and
cum objectum voluntatis sit bonum, tantum bonum potest voluntati repraesentare,
ut non possit non amare illud quod videt bonum, etc. who would not be thus
compelled?

But for our Divines, I see when they come to answer the arguments that are
brought against this position, they say no more in effect then our Author has
said. Means must be used* i. e. compel them to come to ur Assemblies, to hear
the Word, and to learn the grounds of our Religion So Mr. Perkins, Vol. 2. p.
412.
Dominari fidei, est praescribere quid sit credendum: cogere autem non est
adigere mentem ad fidem ejusque assensum, sed cogere loco motivam, ut audiat
veram doctrinam, caveat blasphemias, and scandula. Sic Alting. To the same
purpose speaks Buchanus, Loc. Com. 10.2.166.
Non potest cogere mentem sed loco motivam, ut audiat veram doctrinam, and
media quibus excitatur fides, etc. This is no more then our Author affirms.
Loc. C^m. p. 865.


Objection. The Magistrate may compel in matters of Honesty, why not as well in
matters of Faith and Religion.

Answer. First, He may and ought to compel to the means whereby faith is bred.

Secondly, The Duties of the second table being the sinews of Commonwealths,
are more manifest to natures light then those of the first; to be sure much
more then those things which we believe and know only by Divine revelation.

Thirdly, The Magistrate punishes the breaches of the second Table, and
forces men that they shall not do so or so; men shall not steal, commit
Adultery, etc. now those virtues and vices being immediately contrary, he who
is not, or does not the vice, he appears to have the virtue. Thus far the
Magistrate as our Author, and so our Divines grant, compels men they shall not
blaspheme, they shall not vent nor spread their heresies; but to force them to
believe a Truth is another thing.

His fifth head has more difficulty in it, the Indulgence and Toleration which
the Magistrate must give. When he says Christ will have his Saints exercise
the same one toward another, I suppose he means Christ would have his Saints
to love each other, and not have Unity broken, but Communion afforded, [as he
has expressed his mind in his Sermon for the Unity of the saints, etc.] though
there be weaknesses in judgment and conversation; and if saints must do so,
then the Magistrate must indulge and tolerate such also.

First, It is certain there are and may be such weaknesses both in judgment
and practice in people, to whom love and communion ought to be continued,
unless we will have none to be saints, but those who have the infallible
spirit, and perfection of grace, according to the Quakers dreams. Those who are
strong have that duty laid upon them to bear the infirmities of the weak: but
gladly would I read that book where it were cleared how far I must go in
affording Communion to men weak in judgment and conversation: to say these
weaknesses I must tolerate, Christ will have me exercise indulgence thus far,
and no further. Some errors in practice we must bear, why not then some errors
in judgment? the Head is imperfect as well as the Heart. Yet we find it a
harder matter to keep unity when men differ in judgment. Whither,

First, Because we are sensible of weaknesses in our own conversations, we are
passionate, etc. Well then may I bear with others who are so; but for our
judgments we conceive we are right.

Secondly, Men do not use to defend themselves in such weaknesses, but do
more pray against them, and they are their burden if saints; but they will
defend their errors.

Thirdly, For errors in practice. Saints do value the grace which is contrary
to their corruption, and those men who have attained beyond them, they Commend.
But in errors of judgment, men set high prices on their errors, and Condemn
all those who are contrary to their judgments. More causes I could give, but
we find it hard to bear.

Secondly, As the Saints must bear, so no doubt there are such weaknesses which
the Magistrate ought to Tolerate. But whither the Magistrate must or will
tolerate, what ever a Church must, I question very much. I know our Author had
large principles this way, and I doubt not but he took them up from the love he
bare to Christ's Image, which might be where yet were too many errors. If the
error were not in the Fundamental points [alas that some body would once tell
us what those are, for I took those to be Fundamental, which our times now
deny] I know he would bear much. But suppose then Churches be overspread with
this error, that Christians must not swear though lawfully called, and matters
of great moment depend upon an Oath? Suppose men deny War [upon never so just
grounds] to be lawful: Suppose, deny All Magistracy, [as we know the old
Anabaptists did all these, and how many amongst us now] with diverse more such
things, which will not I suppose come under the Fundamentals: I say these
errors spread abundantly, what will or what must the Magistrate do, indulge
all these? What shall become of the Nation, and Courts of Judgment? Somethings
we may gather from our Author which the Magistrate must not Tolerate.

First, Not Idolatry, superstition, etc.

Secondly, Not Heresy, this can claim no more Toleration then other works of
the flesh, Gal. 5. But if the brains of Christians had been as much troubled
when the Apostles writ to them about heresies as ours are now, they had need
have writ again to the Apostles to explain what they meant by heresies, for
they could not tell.

Thirdly, Not the contemners of the Ordinances of Christ. For he has laid it
down as one of the things that God has committed to the Magistrate, to take
care that all the Lords Institutions be executed: also that he must command and
order the people to come and attend the Ministry of the Word. But if the
Magistrate Tolerate those who cast off the Institutions of Christ, to what
purpose does he take care to see them executed? How can it be his duty to do
this, and yet his duty to Tolerate those who throw them off? More I could
gather: Ep. to the Court in ^. E.
but let me speak a few words about Toleration. It is true what Learned Mr.
Norton says, to Tolerate all things, and tolerate nothing, are both
intolerable. Acts of Toleration are but Mercurial Medicines to recover a sick
state, but if the preparations of such Medicines be not exquisite, Mercurius
vitae [as the Chemists call it] proves often Mercurius mortis. States had need
look about them what they do when they make Acts for Toleration in matters of
religion, unless they think they must give no account for such Acts.

First, Toleration, is, Malorum of things that are evil, they are so reputed in
the judgment of those who do tolerate: we do not tolerate good, but evil
things. True, Toleration does not infer approbation [though most will think so]
yet being they are evil, he that is Minister of Good, must needs desire to
tolerate as few of them as may be: there will be evils, errors, in the Churches
do he and the Churches what they can, but when there is an Act of Toleration
for them, who takes care to heal them?

Secondly, When States will make Acts for Toleration in matters of Religion,
they had need have another Act go first, i. e. to declare what they will NOT
Tolerate: they had need make good fences about the Vitals of Religion, or else
we shall have errors arise that will threaten them also: have we not experince
of it now?

Thirdly, Rules for Toleration must not be taken from Persons that appear to be
godly; that is, because such persons are looked upon as godly, therefore what
Opinions they hold shall be tolerated. Because David a godly man falls into
adultery, therefore tolerate that sin? May not a man that is godly [at least
seems to be so,] fall into such an error of judgment, as neither Church nor
State must tolerate? I know no such warrant to secure us, but when professors
grow wanton God may leave them to such errors in judgment, as he has left to
errors in practice. Also may not godly men be true and blamable causes of great
Schism? but yet because godly, they must not be indulged.

Fourthly, If because Arguments can be brought to prove an Opinion, therefore
such an Opinion must be tolerated, then what Heresy must not be tolerated? If
a man will listen to his own Atheistical heart and carnal reason, there are
those who could bring arguments very strong against the Scriptures, Christ's
Divinity, his satisfaction, such things as we call Fundamentals, (if there be
any); I doubt not but there may be stronger arguments brought against these,
then there are for some things wherein men cry for Indulgence, though they
break the peace of the Churches, and have brought us into this Confusion. But
if therefore those Heresies should be tolerated, then let Churches and Religion
go whither they will.

Fifthly, Such Doctrines and practices as the Churches of Christ since the
Apostles days have constantly condemned; Churches, where soundness of
doctrine, and holiness in conversation have met together, having also liberty
to search the mind of God, and to reform: what these have constantly condemned,
I humbly conceive, that a State had need be cautious in making Acts to Tolerate
such doctrines and practices: and I am sure there are too many such now
Tolerated.

Sixthly, It had been much better for the Churches, to have yielded each to
other so far as they might, and studied an Accommodation, rather then put the
Civil power to make an Act for Toleration, which wanton spirits look at but as
an Invitation, to vent their own frothy and erroneous conceptions, being they
have a law to back them. I am not to this day satisfied, what sufficient
reasons can be given, why the Congregational and Classical brethren might not
have joined together, and strengthened each other, but that through their
division the Nation should be as it is at this day. If the letting of a godly
Minister enjoy his own people, without taking them from him, would have healed
the breach, what an easy Medicine had this been for so great a wound?

The text which our Author has pitched upon says, in All Godliness. A good
Magistrate will look that this people may live in All Honesty: One part will not
serve the turn, and if he could cause them to live in All godliness also, it
would be well for that people.

Seventhly, To displease Thousands of godly and sound Christians, for the sake
of pleasing a few Christians in doctrines and practices corrupt, I conceive is
no safe policy: whose spirits have shown themselves more Turbulent, then those
for whom Toleration has been pleaded?

We have now had experience what it is to live under Episcopal Persecutions,
and an Armies Toleration, which of these two have proved the most destructive
to the power of godliness I need not say. This only I would say, [and that
not without some sense of grief on my spirit] it is sad that those who lay
claim to New England principles, should so Act their part that men should not
say, and our posterity hereafter believe it, That Independency ruined the
Church of England.

Then our Author, comes to his Positive rules; and his second general rule is,
that the Magistrate takes care that all the Lords Institutions be observed.

The word in the Original which we translate godliness, signifies firstly, the
worship of God. A godly man (...), (...) probus Dei cultus. (...). veneror,
colo.
a good worshipper, qui probe c^lit and veneratur Deum: Godly Kings did show
their godliness in this point very much, putting down false worship, and
setting up the true worship of God: while the Ordinances of God are maintained
as they ought to be, God is known in the world: and much godliness is shown in
a due worshipping of God.

If we look back to the beginnings of our troubles, and recall what it was the
Professors of England would have had, let them speak: when you were fain to get
into houses privately to keep Fasts together, afraid that any should see you,
lest the Bishops should know it, why did you Fast, why did you utter such sad
Complaints to God, why did your tears drop so, what was your burden? Oh this
Hierarchy, did so Tyrannize over Gods faithful Ministers, suspending,
imprisoning, etc. they did so mix their humane Inventions with Gods
Institutions, that we could not have the worship of God according to the
pattern, but must wound our consciences if partake of the Ordinances; what do
you desire of God? why, that he would root up these persecuting Bishops, and
all the rabble that belongs to them, that we may have none but Christ's own
Officers, and Ordinances pure without this mixture, no Railes, Surplice,
Cross, etc. this was the business why men thus prayed, and fasted; and for
these things the old solid Puritan prayed many years since, though died before
these times; well, what those deceased Christians prayed for, and these living,
God has given this generation, Surely now those Ordinances and Officers shall
be highly prized, etc. But what are more despised? the Officers are but
Antichristian Blackcoats; any gifted brother is as good as these Priests; and
for the Ordinances, Church Discipline, singing of Psalms, Infant Baptism,
these are none of Christ's Institutions; and for elder persons water-baptisme,
is a needless thing if have the inward; so the Supper, if have the thing
signified, etc. that thus all are thrown off: would any man have believed such
horrid Apostasy should ever have been heard of, principally from those things,
where their Prayers, Fasts, and tears, together with the old Christians went so
strongly? What, in these points Apostatize? what do these things presage?

All Christ's Institutions says our Author, the Magistrate must take care for.
So indeed said the Persian Emperor, Ezra 7.23. whatsoever is Commanded by the
God of Heaven, let it be diligently done, etc. But it seems the Lord has No
Institutions now, they are all disputed out. Church Discipline, has gone
unquestionably for an Institution of Christ grounded on good Scripture, till
Erastus had a mind to quarrel with it, but it seems God did befool the man,
that whilst he falls out with the Ordinance, his pen must write down seven
sorts of persons, which ought not to be esteemed as members of the Church, and
if there be any such, they ought to be cast out. And Mr. Prynne after his great
stir, yet acknowledges, that 1 Cor. 5. ult. proves Excommunication, Mr.
Prynne, i^ his Vindication of four serious Questions, page 57. [to which book,
and his Suspension suspended, he often referrs his Reader in his late book,
called a Legal Resolution of two important Quaeries, etc. tending to the
casting out of many hundreds of godly Presbyterians, as well as others; but he
never referrs his Reader to Mr. Gillespies Aarens rod, etc. nor ever undertook
an answer to him, that I can learn] disswades from that strong desire many
Ministers have expressed to have Church Discipline erected, and defended by the
Magistrate, upon this ground, because the practical power of godliness is
generally more evidently visible in our English Congregations, where there has
been powerful preaching without the practice of excommunication or suspension
from the Sacrament, then in the Reformed Churches of France, Germany, Denmark,
or Scotland. Therefore the best way to reform us, is, for Ministers not to dr^w
out the sword of excommunication which will do little good: but the sword of
the spirit, the powerful preaching of Gods word, and the sword of the Civil
Magistrate, which are only able to effect this work.

But First, The question is, whither Church Discipline be an Institution of
Christ or not; if it be, as Mr. Prynne himself cannot deny, then the Ministers
may well seek for it: and whence had Learned Mr. Prynne that Divinity to say an
Institution of Christ will do little good.

Secondly, It is true, powerful preaching the Lord has blessed in England, but
yet I know those powerful and converting preachers did suspend scandalous
persons from the Lords Supper. I believe they had fewer unworthy persons at
that Ordinance, then any of the Churches he mentions; neither did they depend
upon Mr. Prynnes Chair to know what make men scandalous, however he is pleased
to call the Ministers, ^^eevish, ignorant, wilful, etc.

Thirdly, If Church Discipline be joined with powerful preaching, I hope one
Ordinance will not hinder another.

Fourthly, I grant that Maladministration, and the ignorance of people how to
carry themselves toward excommunicated persons, may hinder the efficacy of the
Ordinance; but let these be avoided, and the Ordinance is fitted to do good.
There have been such who have been excommunicated, who have blessed God that
ever they knew the Ordinance; and more experiences I could tell concerning this
Ordinance, what effects it has wrought in the hearts of people.

Fifthly, No more can be expected from this Ordinance then from others; God
does not bless other Ordinances to the good of All those who come under them.

Sixthly, Why does Mr. Prynne add which are Only able to effect this work? if
these two Swords be Only able to do the work; then the Sacraments are not
Converting Ordinances, nor will the giving the Lords Supper to All advance our
Reformation for which he so much contends.

If God speaks, Nature will teach, it is now the Creatures duty to hear: Nature
also teaches it is my duty to pray to my Creator. But that water in one
Ordinance, Bread and Wine in another Ordinance should signify, seal, be
Instruments to convey such things as they do, Nature is silent here; whence I
must say with the Assembly of Divines, The Believer is the subject of these
last; and it will not hold true that an excommunicated person must be debarred
from All Ordinances, as says Mr Prynne. Hearing of the Word preached, and
Prayer, belong to Natural worship, but the Sacraments to Instituted worship.


yea and more texts besides that.

That which was once a Church-ordinance, remained ever so, unless God himself
removed it; but where men will prove the Translation of this Ordinance from the
Church to the Civil Bench in case the Magistrate prove Christian, I cannot
tell, One of our Magistrates did attempt to prove such a thing once to me by
way of argument; because there is no thing which falls under the Churches
Cognizance as being an object for Church Discipline, but falls under the
Magistrates also.

But I thought Christian Magistrates would first have brought a word of
Scripture from Christ's mouth to have proved the removing of an Institution,
Calvin in 7 Amo. 13. complains, that the Princes in Germany, and so in the
Countries about him were grown so spiritual, that they would be chief Judges in
matter of doctrine, and null Church Discipline. He calls it Sacrilege.
but I heard none: Then surely there is no great fear of the loss of the
Ordinance, if it must be lost by Scripture.

2. To the argument I answer, by denying the consequence, that though the same
things do fall under the Magistrates cognizance that do under the Churches, yet
it does not prove that Church Discipline is removed, etc.

1. I doubt not but in the Primitive Churches there might fall out such sins
that the Heathens Courts might take hold of, [for there was government then
among the Heathen in matters of Honesty, wherein yet some Church Members might
be tardy] but that did not take off the Churches discipline.

2ly. But the end is very different: The Church in her discipline makes
Repentance her end; if the Delinquent be brought to that, the Church desires no
more, nor can require no more. But does the Magistrate require no more? is
Repentance his end he directly and firstly aims at? I think not; but he aims
at the satisfaction of a Law made against such offenders, to be a terror to
others.

3ly. If persons come not to Repentance, the Church does not proceed by Mul^^s,
Death, Prisons, Bridewels, etc. which the Magistrate does, yea though the
person repents. If Repentance would save from death, abundance should not dye
by the Magistrate. The Church labors to bring to repentance [which the
Magistrate qua sic does not, as not being his businesse] and if not, proceeds
to Excommunication, the person cast out of the visible Kingdom of Christ, and
now reckoned in Satan's Kingdom: This the Magistrate does not, nor can do.
Obstinacy in a sin and offense, is that the Church looks at, as much and [most
what] more then the sin it self; but so does not the Magistrate; for it is the
act, the Law broken, not obstinacy, [which is but an Adjunct to the Act] which
the Law punishes.

4ly. The Magistrate deals not with the offender, by applying the Law of God to
him immediately, but such a Law made in such or such a Kings time, or such an
Act of Parliament, etc. but the Church meddles with no such things, but applies
the word and law of God only to the offender.

5ly. The Church have a rule to proceed by degrees; if offenses be private, to
take one or two, go and deal, etc. if can attain the end, Repentance, go not
to the Church: But this does not belong to Magistrates Courts.

6ly. The Church upon repentance receives a man into fellowship, 2 Cor. 2. the
members confirm their love, etc. Does the Magistrate thus?

3. Again I answer, by denying the Antecedent, namely, that nothing falls under
the Churches Cognizance, but comes under the Magistrates also. There is nothing
comes under the Magistrates Cognizance, but that the State has made a law
against: but I have not known of any laws made against lying, filthy speeches,
Total neglect of religious worship in families, wicked carriages of children
to parents, with many more which might be mentioned, as Covetousness, when
evident notes of that sin reigning have appeared [which because Mr. Prynne
scoffs at the Churches for, I could name to him a person that was cast out of a
Church; and that was one of the chief causes, his covetousness, as the members
told me.] Now the Magistrate meddles, not with these, but I think no Church
that is as it ought to be, but will call persons guilty of these, to account;
and proceed, upon obstinacy.

This Ordinance then stands as an Institution of Christ, and surely the
Magistrate is to look tha^ this be observed; and if a christian Magistrate
would do service to Christ his Church at such a time as this is, next to the
bridling of the rage o^ furious, irrational, erroneous, blasphemous men, this
would be a worthy work, to stablish this Ordinance and that great Ordinance of
Cathechizing, for want of which we see the woeful Condition our Churches are
fallen into.

Obj. The Magistrate gives you leave to do these, why do not the Churches do
them? what need of him? The Churches have done these when the Magistrate was a
Heathen.

Answ. In those times when Christian, Jew, and Heathen, divided the whole
world, then the Churches could do more then now we can: the Churches then would
admit none to baptism [if adult] but first they were well Catechized: we have
such, as [set by the name Christian,] are as ignorant as Heathens, and take
themselves to be Church members, but scorn to be Catechized.

2. There is difference to be put between times, when the Ordinances and
Worship of Christ were had in high esteem, and feared, according to their
worth: and these times when wanton corrupt men and Apostates, have learned to
despise the Ordinances of Christ, and grown fearless; our Apostates will jeer
at that which then the Churches feared: Cast them out of a Church, they can fin
a knot of corrupt Sectaries to receive them, and hold Communion with them, and
what care they for Excommunication? [we see they can despise all ordinances]
But it was not thus in the Primitive Churches.

3. Surely a bare permission is not sufficient to discharge the Magistrate,
that he suffers the Ordinances to be set up; our Author says he must take
care, etc. which is more then a permission. The Persian Emperor did more then
permit.

Fourthly, It is true the Churches did observe these Ordinances, when the
Magistrate was a Heathen, but then he did not his duty: shall the Church and
Ordinances have no advantage by a Magistrate being Christian?

Obj. But what shall the Magistrate do, when there are such disputes about
Church Government? one says it is Episcopal, another Presbyterial; another
Congregational; and the Magistrate cannot be satisfied himself which it is; how
then shall he take care that this or that be set up?

Answ. Is the Magistrate indeed unsatisfied that he knows not which it is? I
doubt it.

For the Episcopal government, I suppose there needs no words about that, the
Magistracy has sufficiently declared against that.

The Bishops before allowed the Ministers power to suspend from the Lords
Supper, which is Excommunicatio minor in the esteem of many. That the Bishop
would Monopolize the power of Excommunication, as if Presbyters might not do
such an Act, is more then any Bishop dare undertake to prove. Hierom could tell
us in his time, Epist. ad Euag^
when Corruptions had overgrown the Church, Excepting Ordination what does a
Bishop that a Presbyter does not? It seems then Presbyters did excommunicate. I
thought to have added something more; but reading of Anselm the Archbishop of
Canterbury upon the first Chap. of Titus, he gives such strong grounds to
convince me that such Bishops were never of Divine Institution, that I trouble
my self no further.

For the other two, if any suppose the Congregationall Government not to be
Presbyterial, they mistake. It should be so I am sure, or else there must be no
government at all: to find government, where there are not Governors and
governed, will be very hard: but who are governed, if the people be Governors?
Let learned Mr. Norton, one of the strongest Congregational Divines be heard;
he speaks to the purpose: I appeal to any competently judicious and
sober-minded man, if the denial of Rule in the Presbytery, of a decisive voice
in the Synod, and of the power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion, Epist.
to the Genesis Court* in N. E.
does not in this point translate the Papal power unto the Brotherhood of every
Congregation? thou that abhorrest Episcopacy, do thou commit Popery? Alas,
alas, is there no medium between Boniface and Morellius, between Papacy and
Anarchy? if there be a mystery of iniquity in the one, is there not an
university of iniquity in the other? The Historians indignation that the East
was overcome by a drunken Commander with a drunken Army, is now become a matter
of astonishment, when so drunken a Tenet, in an Age of such learning, piety,
action, suffering, and success, should threaten the hopes of so glorious a
reformation, come unto the very birth. By this you may see the judgment of
this solid Divine and his fears; and what sober man does not fear the like?

The business then is not whether the government be Presbyterial, we all agree
in that: but whether Classical, etc. That which troubles us here, is, that the
Churches mentioned in the Scripture were in Cities and populous places, where
there were many Elders, and so there is no question about them: but how they
carried on their government in small Villages [we read not of any in such
places to my remembrance] such as ours are, we have no example.

Yet let us see how much we differ as now we stand: the Congregational Divines,
though they deny a Pastor to have Authoritative power over any Church but his
own, yet in matters of weight, and so in Excommunication they judge that a
Council of Elders ought to be called, which they look upon as an Ordinance of
God: thus in N. E. one Church going about to excommunicate a person, a
neighbour-Minister sent word, he conceived the Church ought not to do it; some
of the Church came to him to know his reasons; he bad them call a Council, and
in the Council he would give his reasons, but not else; the Church would not
hearken to him, but cast the person out. This bred division. Thus most of the
miscarriages have come from this, when people have been headstrong, and would
not call Councils. But now there the most learned, wise, and solid Divines do
call for Councils in all weighty acts. I see here amongst us, our
Congregational Brethren do the like. The case is judged and determined by the
Council, but it is executed by the Officer of the Congregation. Let us keep
close to this, and many miscarriages will be prevented.

Come to the Classical government, though these Divines suppose they have
Authoritative power over other Churches; yet this I suppose, look where the
fact is committed, there the case is to be heard. This was the old practice:
when the Classis have determined what ought to be done [as suppose a person is
to be excommunicated] yet if the Classis allow that the officer or officers of
the Church where the fact is committed shall execute the sentence with the
consent of the Church; Cypr. Ep. 55.
then though there be difference in our judgments, yet none appears in our
practices.

If we ask further concerning the power of Synods, what they may do to
Heretical Congregations? The Congregational men say, A Synod is a solemn
Ordinance of Christ; that the Synod does admonish men or Churches in the name
of Christ authoritatively, as there shall be cause; the Synod declares men or
Churches to be subverters of the faith, or otherwise according to the nature of
the offense to shame them before all the Churches; Burro. Iren. c. 7.
in the name of Christ refuse communion with them; also declare in the name of
Christ that these erring people or Churches, are not to be received into
fellowship with any the Churches of Christ, nor to have communion one with
another in the Ordinances of Christ: And thus they practice, keeping such from
Communion: what is this but excommunication in effect? The Classical add one
step more, a formal, and juridical delivering such to Satan; but that produces
no more effects. Look into the Congregational Churches, you see the same and as
many effects, as in the Classical, upon their formal delivering, etc. Here is
but a poor difference, no man can see any difference; whence I wonder that
there is such complaints against the Ministers for differing about Forms.

For other power of Synods, see Mr. Cotton, Keys, etc. p. 25, 53, 54 Our
Divines in their Preface to his Book, say, they have a Ministerial power and
Authority, to determine, declare, and enjoin such things, as may tend to reduce
such Congregations to right order and peace.

The sum is this, the Congregational men go so far, that men who have any
conscience will fear to oppose and cross them; and for those who have no
conscience, they will little regard the Synods formal delivering to Satan; but
then we hope the Magistrate will not tolerate such as have no conscience, nor
suffer such heretical persons to vent their Heresies when the Synod has
proceeded to Excommunion, or Non-communion, [our Author says he must not do
so] Then he helps both, the Classical and Congregational Churches.

Yet a few more words to see if I can make things plain.

1. Every Pastor of a Church has the power of government, he is a Ruler in
the Church, (...), etc.
he depends on no man for this, he has it from Christ immediately annexed to
his office inseparably. As soon deny a Magistrate to have power of ruling in a
Commonwealth, as a pastor in the Church: The title implies as much, with diverse
others in Scripture. They are Ministers; true, so is the Magistrate, Romans 13.4.
Minister of God. And these are called Ministers of God, 2 Cor. 6.4. and of
Christ, chap. 11.23. Their being Ministers, deny not their ruling power.

2ly. All persons who profess themselves to be Christians, and Church Members,
are to be subject to these in the Lord. This is necessarily inferred from the
former; even as truly as the members of a Commonwealth are subject to the civil
Ruler. I do not say that the Pastors rule, as do the civil Magistrate, if you
respect the modus, but rule they do.

3ly. Though every Pastor has the power, yet some Pastors question whether
they alone may put forth this power [especially in the highest acts] with the
consent of the Church Members, but rather think it must be as they are united
with more Pastors in a Classis. Others conceive they can with the consent of
the members without any such conjunction; yet that they might act more safely
from error, when they do apply the power, and that the Church might be kept
from division, when the Church shall hear the counsel and judgment of many
other Pastors, going along with their own Pastor, and to make the Ordinance
more solemn, these call in a Council of Elders.

4ly. According to the judgment of these Pastors, so are the members of the
Churches persuaded, over whom they watch and have the care in the Lord.

Now let us see what should hinder the Magistrate from assisting the Church in
executing of this Ordinance of Christ.

1. Not his qustioning of the subject of this power, for that is clear enough;
if I be a Pastor, this power I receive from Christ, as before: we do not ask
the Magistrate to put power into our hands, as if we had none, but only to
assist in the putting forth of that which is ours before by a Divine
Institution; as when the Ministry Preach and Print in defense of the power of
the Civil Magistrate, the Ministry does not give him a power which was not his
before, but what God has given him, the Ministry assist the Magistrates, by
stablishing that power in the consciences of people: so the Ministers desire
the Magistrate would assist them, that they may apply, and in applying their
power to the corrupt practices of their people.

If he object, Many of these Ministers are weak, not fit for it. We could say
the same of many Magistrates, they are weak enough. But then suppose this, the
Classical Minister has his Classis which helps him, the Congregational his
Council which helps him.

If he says the Ministers are naught, many, etc. Then let him do his part to
remove such: To which end, if Church Government were settled there would be a
means serving better then now there is.

Secondly, Neither need he be troubled at the difference between these two; for
the difference is so small we see, that there are no different effects appear:
he who is cast out of one Church is cast out of all, at least till the case be
heard there is no Communion: so it was in the old time though a person were
Excommunicated wrongfully. Council Sard. can. 17.
Besides he assists the Ministers where the power lies without question, [with
the consent of the people] he does not consider them as Classical or
Congregational, but as Pastors.

Thirdly, Neither need he fear the compelling of the peoples consciences, for
that the people ought to be subject in the Lord, there is no man's conscience
[unless it be a wretched one] does question it, if he ownes a Pastor: and as
for the Classical or Congregational subjection, the people are persuaded
before, [upon what grounds I leave] so that if compulsion be, it is but to make
people walk according to what in their consciences they think to be right.

But what shall he do with the Episcopal man's Conscience for he is against both
these, shall he compel him? no, no body shall compel him, let him keep his
conscience: suppose I have two or three Episcopal men in my parish, these
making every parsh to be a Church, must needs acknowledge themselves to be
members of that Church; if I be Minister to that Church I suppose they will
acknowledge me to be their Minister; if they come to require the Sacraments of
me, then be sure they do acknowledge me, according to their own principles.

If they own me, I will not ask them whither I have power or no over them;
they know it, and I know it; let these walk regularly, there is no body
troubles them they enjoy their judgment as to Episcopacy, but if they prove
Heretical, or scandalous, and will not be reclaimed, I will not trouble my self
about their judgments, but be ^ Classical or Congregational, will cast them
out of the Church; and let them keep their judgments as to Episcopacy when
Excommunicated. The same I would do with an Erastian.

I have enlarged upon this Institution, because there is such want of it, and
is so much called for.

For singing of Psalms, I have spoken to that in another book, but I think that
will ere long be owned again for an Ordinance of God, the Quakers proving such
Songsters.

For Infant Baptism, the Congregational differ not from the Classical in this,
that the children of such parents as visibly appear to be penitent believers,
ought to be baptized: they agree in the rule, but in the application of this
rule to persons, there is some difference. Some apply it larger, some more
straightly. Because they agree not in this, what is required to a Visible
believer: it is likely that if Church Government were erected, that they may
come nearer, when the Classical brethren shall have that power they desire to
have to reform their Churches. Yet since we agree in the subject of the
Ordinance, and the rule, differing only in the latitude of the application of
the rule, one would think here might be a forbearance; I suppose the Classical
brethren will lay down the same rules for admission to the Lords Supper, yet
when they come to apply those rules to particular subjects, some will go
larger, some narrow^r; but what then? will they not bear each with other? so in
Church Discipline.

But there comes in another Company and tells us, that Infant Baptism [let the
parents be never so godly] is no Institution of Christ's.

My intention is not to meddle with the Controversy, diverse of our Divines
have done it most strongly: This I can say.

First, I am sure it was once a Divine Institution, that Abraham^ seed should
be reckoned Members of the Church with Abraham himself.

Secondly, I am sure it was also a Divine Institution, that his seed should
have that Ordinance which was a sign and seal of the righteousness of faith.

Thirdly, I am as sure that All the Anabaptists who have yet put pen to paper,
have not brought one text that proves the repealing of the Institutions.

When God makes a law to debarr his people from eating swines flesh, etc.
Levit. 11.7. if that law must be repealed, what care God takes once and twice,
Acts 10. the sheet let down, etc. Romans 14.10. Is God so careful in repealing a
law about a Hog, and will he now have all the posterity of Abraham cast out of
the Church, and reckoned amongst the unclean, without giving us a word as clear
for repealing the Institution as he has done for that law against a Hog? for
my part I will never believe it.

I wonder that such an Opinion that has been constantly condemned by all the
Churches, where truth and holiness have flourished since the Apostles times;
and an Opinion which has been accompanied with other Heresies, Arianisme,
Pelagianisme, Socinianisme, etc. should now be swallowed down so readily
amongst some whom otherwise we would esteem to be godly. It being an Opinion
that has been searched into, studied, when Churches have had their liberty; I
remember in N. England an officer of a Church was arguing with one of his
members who was snared in this error, and asked the man what comfort he could
have of his babe, if God should take it away in the Infancy, more then George
Sagamore [an Indian] could have of his? the man [being an honest plain man]
answered, yes, he had more then the Indian; the Covenant of God with him and
his seed. It seems Abraham's children are solicitous about their seed, and
though some do in their practice rank them among the Indians, yet they would
fain have something to lay hold upon, as this poor man, and so confuted his
practice, for if the seed be in Covenant, then give it the sign and seal.

Though I do not pass that censure upon all these Anabaptists which I hear Mr.
Sidrach Simpson did, yet surely it is an error of more consequence then men
do esteem of, and grounded upon such principles, that will necessarily infer
more errors then this. Certainly such had need give strong testimony by their
whole conversation that they are very conscientious men [if they do plead
conscience in this] and if they can find so much Toleration as to have
Communion with Churches [being indeed conscientious men] to live peaceably in a
Nation, upon this condition that they divulge not their errors, it is as much
as can fairly be yielded by Churches or State, unless all the Scripture
grounds which are brought to prove the Interest of Abraham's seed in the Church,
with the constant practice of all Churches Orthodox and holy since the Apostles
times, are of no more worth then to be thrown at men's heels.

So much for our Authors general rule:

For his particular rules. If the first be true [as I am sure it is] then who
shall answer for all those ignorant, First Rule.
erroneous, Scripture-abusing [I will not say preachers but] praters that have
gone forth into Wales, the Northern and other parts of England, sowing such
seeds of errors, as will not be plucked up in have, occasioning so many to turn
Papists, making the pretended reformation to be so much despised, and the
English Ministry to become a scorn. These are far from those qualifications
which our Author has set down, and from the example of Jehoshaphat, he did not
take up Tailors, Shoomakers, and such kind of fellows, and send them to preach,
but Priests and Levits, orderly called to the work, brought up to it: If you
say, he sent Princes also; This is well answered by Mr. Rutherford: Due right
Presb. p. 282.
but if it were so as some understand, such were in more likelihood fit for the
work and more honor to the work, then Jeroboams practice was. Do these answer
the Apostles description in his Epistles to Titus and Timothy? now it is, who
is Not sufficient for these things?

Besides our Author faith, it must be according to Gods Order. But is this the
Order of Christ, to send out Ministers without Ordination? these fellows had no
election from the people, nor no Ordination: What is all Order thown down?
Ordination has been looked at as an Institution of Christ, till the Socinians
and some others objected: but the Orthodox have constantly maintained it, both
Episcopal, Classical, and Congregational; and if Scripture authority be worth
any thing, no doubt but we can bring good warrant still to prove it. There is
more ground to bring in Bishops to Ordain, then to leave out Ordination.

2. For his second rule: Second Rule.
If Schools and Universities be needful, then our Author must needs condemn
those against whom I spoke before. Julian knew what he did, when he forbad the
children of Christians the use of Schools: the Christians also knew what he
did, with very sad hearts; and I know they do but act what Julian intended,
who ever looks at Schools and Universities as useless, and so are hindrances
to them. I have heard it reported [though I can scarce believe it] that one of
the Masters of our Colleges, should in his Sermon declare that he thought
Universities were good to train up youth to Civilitie, but not to Divinity. If
this should be a true report, I wish he would read over Zanchy his Oration
concerning the necessity of Schools in the Church: To. 7. p. 415.
and tell us how a man can open the Scriptures, without the knowledge of the
Original Tongues, the three general Arts, and History. Besides other special
arts, and as for the other Oriental Tongues what helps they are to
understanding of Scripture, those who are a little versed in them know already.
But the man might have another end in this, to satisfy country Ministers why
they have stood sweating so many years in the Commencement house, but could
never hear him either Opponent or Respondent. Those who must be so able to
Convince others, had need be trained up in the way to it. What Cause have the
Church to bless God for those brave lights which have shined in our
Universities?

3. Our Authors reason is strong to prove the Magistrate may cause his people
to attend upon the Ministry of the Word, Third Rule.
only provided the Ministers be such as in his first he described. If this
course had been taken it would have prevented much of that evil that is now
come by separation from the public Ministry. As for the objection they make,
they cannot believe these Ministers be true Ministers: neither does the
Magistrate compel them to believe so, he compels them to attend upon those
which he looks at as true, being sound, qualified, orderly sent forth, but he
troubles not the people with this, that they must believe the standing [as they
call it] of the Ministers to be right, let them attend to the Doctrine.

Obj. But they are unsound.

Answ. 1. So will the Heretic say of the soundest Minister that is. 2. It
lies upon the Magistrate to look to that. 3 If you can prove their doctrine to
be unsound, you have liberty to reject their doctrine: what the evil is for
want of the Magistrates performing this part of his duty, England knows at
this day.

Why by the same rule the Magistrate may not compel the people to be Catechized
I know not: to be sure Catechizing was an Ordinance great in use in the
primitive times, and woeful experience has taught us, how people may set under
good preaching forty years, and yet for want of Catechizing, be more ignorant
then many children are. The Churches of England cry aloud to the Magistrate,
that if he will do any thing for them* then strengthen the hands of the
Ministers who would set up Catechizing, and Discipline.

Fourth Rule.
4 If the Magistrate may engage the people by Oaths, and Covenants, Loc. Com. de
mag. p^l. p. 618.
as says our Author, [to whom also Gerhard inclines.] Then there would arise a
question, whither the Magistrate have not more power over these in case they
Apostatize from what they have Covenanted then over others who have not so
Covenanted?

I shall desire to add but two things more to what our Author has set down,
which I conceive also the Magistrate is concerned in.

First, The calling of Synods. In the primitive times they used to have Synods
twice in a year. Can. Apos. 38. Council. Antio. Can. 20.
That the Christian Magistrate did use to call them also [when the Church came
to have such Magistrates] is well known; the story of Constantinus surnamed
Pogonatus Why so called, see Forbes. inst. Hist. theol. p. 223.
when the Monothelytes troubled the Church, is worth the reading: the
Centurists in their preface to the seventh Century have set it down: how he
called the Synod, and carried himself in the Synod; a pattern indeed for all
Christian Magistrates. The reading of the story put me in mind of our
Magistrates in N. England, when the first Synod there was Called, who carried
themselves according to that Prince.

1. Synods are a solemn Ordinance of Christ for the helping the Church against
errors, schisms, scandals, says Mr. Buroughs Iren. p. 43.44. Mr. Cotton Keys,
cap. 6.
has spoken sufficiently for them. The Synod of N. E. an. 1649. call Synods
assembled and proceeding according to the pattern, Plat. chu. ^ c. 16.
Act. 15. an Ordinance of Christ. And in the third section of the same chap.
say, the Magistrate has power to call a Synod; the Classical Divines be sure
differ not: now if it be an Ordinance so much concerning the well-being of the
Church, then the Magistrate must look to such an Ordinance.

2. Synods are necessary in regard of the Magistrate himself: for as our Author
says, the Magistrates Conscience is not the rule, but he must look to have
his Conscience rightly informed from the word, then what more likely way for
the Magistrate to have his conscience informed in things concerning the Church
which he must look to, then to have a company of holy and learned men gathered
together in the name of Christ, debating of matters which concern the Church;
the Magistrate being present as to keep civil order, so also to propound what
may trouble him, that so he may be informed.

Q. But what shall the Magistrate do? give himself up to the Synod? our Author
says he must not give himself up to the Dictates of men.

Answ. First, No more he does, for while he hears the debates, the reasons
given on both sides, propounds his own scruples, he does not give himself up to
the dictates of men.

Secondly, Mr. Cotton says, and that truly, that the Synod binds not only
materially, but also formally, Key. c. 6. p. 25
from the Authority of the Synod; which being an Ordinance of Christ binds
the more for the Synods sake. If there be no respect due to Synods to what
purpose are they called?

If a Synod may pronounce a Church to be Heretical, renounce Communion with a
Church, and declare such a Church ought not to have Communion with any Church
[which is in effect excommunication] as our Congregational men say: then
certainly Synods have Authority from Christ, and a Magistrate that is godly
will not lightly esteem their Determinations.

2ly, The Second thing which I conceive the Magistrate is to look to, is, to
prevent Schism what may be, and to heal it where it is. Schism never rises
but from bad causes, and the effect as bad. Were it but in respect to civil
Policy, the Magistrate had need take care of this, for where Schism is, there
Unity is broken, and that people will not live peaceably, which our Authors
text mentions. Rents in the Church will cause rents in the State, if
opportunity be given, experience has proved it: But if we look to the Church,
there the Magistrate if he takes himself to be a Minister for the good of it,
shall find cause enough why he should step in here.

Our Author in his Sermon about Unity, etc. tending to heal our rents; 22.1
edit.
says truly, that the sin of schism according to the sense of the Scripture
is a most heinous sin, though many make no account of it, whether they be
charged justly or unjustly with it. He opens the evil of it both in the nature
and effects of it. Now however our Author does show he has larger principles
then many other men have, yet let the professors of England be tried by his
rules, and then see who be the Schismatics. I never yet heard that any godly
classical Divine has so much as debarred an Anabaptist [who was otherwise
godly, and desired forbearance] from any Communion in the Lords Supper, or
other Ordinances, but to be sure the Anabaptists, the Separatists, etc. have
denied Communion with them and cast them off with highest scorn: where errors
are not in the fundamentals and persons be otherwise unblameable there we ought
to hold Communion. Be it so, let us yield it for the present: is Ordination by
Bishops an error in the foundation, is the owning of Abraham's seed as members
of the Church and baptizing them being yet Infants, an error in the
foundation? so I may number more. Let all the Separatists and Anabaptists with
other Sectaries whatever in England charge the Classical Churches with an error
in the foundation. If they cannot, why do they cast off Communion with them?

It is commonly said to us, though we differ in judgment let us not differ in
affection. Well, be it so, but this generation differ not only in judgment,
but affection, which they manifest openly in throwing off Communion with all
but their own sect, and yet they call to us we must not differ in affection,
though they do; for Schism is properly against Christian love; but to be sure
they are the Schismatics by our Authors rules. The meaning is this, though we
differ in judgment from you, and break our Union with you manifesting it
openly by casting off Communion with you, yet you must be united to us. Though
we call you Priests, Black-coats, Antichristians, and so your Churches, yet you
must not differ in affection. Though Churches can tolerate some errors in
persons when they carry themselves otherwise humbly and conscienciously, and
not divulge them nor labor to draw away others, yet this schismatical spirit
in such a high way also, is intolerable.

As for that question, What way simple error or heresy should be punished?
This our Author [and that truly] calls a hard question: yet the difficulty
lies not so much in this, whether the Magistrate may inflict any punishment
but capital punishment?

As for the Papists, we need not ask their judgments: their Books, their
practices, Smithfield and many other places in England, where our glorious
Martyrs have suffered, declare sufficiently what their judgment is. For the
Calvinists, Gerhard a learned Lutheran gives them a nip as if they varied their
judgments, Loc. Com. de* mag. pol. p. 775*
according to the variety of conditions they were under. Calvinianos quod
attinet, ille pro rerum ac fortunae diversitate, diversas proferunt sententias.
If things go ill on their side, if they be under the popish power, then they
use these rules; No man must be compelled to believe: It is Antichristian
tyranny to rule over men's consciences, etc. But if things go well on their
side, that they have the civil power with them, erumpunt in sanguinariam illam
vocem, Haereticos esse occidendos. Yet Gerhard was not of that mind, that the
Magistrate should let Heretics alone, he was far from this opinion.

He distinguishes between Seducers and the Seduced, p. 744.
[so do we] between errors fundamental, and not fundamental; I wish he had set
these down that we might know them.

But though he has not done it here, I find amongst other Lutherans where he
is quoted, that he takes some doctrines for fundamental errors, which others
will not believe to be errors at all; thus Calovius in his answer to that
question Number Lutherani cum Reformatis and Socinianis in unam coire possint
ecclesiam? Socinis, proffig. p. 942.
he excludes not only the Anabaptists and other Sectaries, but even the
Calvinists, giving his reasons, though he does us wrong in some of those
doctrines he names, especially as he lays them down.

He distinguishes between the times of the Old Testament and the N. T. Under
the old T. the Magistrate might put Heretics to death, not under the N. T.
says he: but I believe he will get nothing by this distinction.

He distingisheth between simple Heretics, and Heretics that are Seditious
and Vomit out plain blasphemies against God. These he denies not but the
Magistrate must put to death. With whom agrees Dr. Ames, De Consc. l. 4. c. 4.
S. 15.
grounding his sentence upon Levit. 24.15, 16. Also Mr. Cotton Ans. to Bloody
tenet p. 95.
: If the Idolater or Heretic grow obstinate, wax worse and worse, deceiving
himself and others to the destroying, corrupting, and disturbing of others, now
the Magistrate makes use not of stocks and whips [for these do not remove,
but exasperate the malady] but of Death or Banishment, etc.

That speech of the Heathen King Artaxerxes Ezra 7.26. seems to look this way,
And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King [which
law, I conceive, was this law of his concerning the House and worship of God]
Let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whither it be unto Death, or to
Banishment, or to Confiscation of goods ^or to imprisonment. Also
Nebuchadnezzars Decree Dan. 3.29. Though the Athenians erred in the
misapplication of that principle, when they Condemned Socrates, yet that Act
shows, that Magistrates are taught even by the light of Nature, to take care
of Religion, and of their God, so far as to punish severely, blasphemers of God
and corrupters of Religion.

But to let that knotty question alone, Herein I am sure our Author with all
other sober men [both Lutherans, and Calvinists, Classical and Congregational
Divines] agree, Viz. First, That Magistrates ought not to Countenance, but
Discountenance, and repress Heretics.

Gerhard who is so stiff against the punishing of simple Heresy with Death, p.
599.
yet makes this the Magistrates Duty, to enquire after these Seducing
Heretics: that they may catch these Foxes, who first convey their poison more
secretly before they come to appear openly.

Iren. p. 23.24.
Blessed Buroughs, a man moderate enough, yet says, we were in a most
miserable Condition, if we had no external Civil power to restrain from any
kinds of blasphemies and seducements: the Condition of the Jews, o how happy
was it in comparison of ours: When those who are mad with damnable Heresies run
from place to place, seeking to draw all they can from the truth, if we have no
means of help but arguments, it is all with us.

Dr. Ames [in his answer to that question, whither Heretics should be punished
by the Civil Magistrate?] lays down an undeniable Truth. That Heretics ought
to be repressed of all godly men according to that calling and power which they
have received from God, is clear enough ex natura rei: because all godly men
are called to the Christian warfare, that every one in his station should
oppose himself to the Kingdom of darkness. Now to what Kingdom do Errors and
Heresies belong? I am sure not to the Kingdom of Light. The Ministers in their
station oppose these by Scripture, arguments, reproofs, exhortations,
admonitions, excommunications: private Christians oppose them in their station
either privately by arguing, etc. or more publicly as they consent to their
Officers in Church Censures. Now how does a Christian Magistrate in his station
oppose these, [as a Magistrate] if he puts not forth his Coercive power also,
to repress them. How shall he answer this Text, that his people under him may
live in All godlin^ss? if he lets his people run into Heresies, and Gallio-like
regards not these things; How is he a Minister for good, Romans 13.4. To tie up
this good to the second table, is to streighten where the word does not; I hope
godliness is good, and he is to be a Minister for that, according to our
Authors Text; and that belongs to the first Table. But Heresy and Error are no
parts of godliness.

What our Author says concerning corrupt Opinions and practices, that men take
them up to serve factions and times, to please men, to serve their own bellies;
this is true of many if not most of the Sectaries in our Times. As a man may
discern here, as also by what I have learaed by good Intelligence out of
Ireland: and it is as true what our Author says, had these been
conscienciously and really discountenanced by the Magistrate, many had not
taken these up, and many had laid these down.

Secondly, This I find is agreed upon by our Divines, who question the putting
to Death of Heretics; that Seducing Heretics, obstinate, that will not be
reclaimed, they should be Banished or some other way restrained by the
Magistrate, Synops. disp. 50. S. 56.
to the end they may not infect others with their poison. Thus the Leyden
Professors: De magis. pol. p. 600.
aut deponendos, aut relegandos, aut alt^ modo constringendos, etc. So Gerhard:
expellendi sunt, etc.

As for the plea of Conscience; it is true, Conscience is a tender thing, and
those who carry themselves as conscientious men indeed, ought to be dealt very
tenderly with: but for these we find them to be very rare amongst those who
have drunk in the errors of our Times: And as Mr. Buroughs says well, the
Devil must not be let alone though he be got into men's Consciences, Iren.
God has appointed no City of refuge for him: If he flies to men's Consciences
as Joab to the horns of the Altar he must be fetched from thence, or fallen
upon there.

As for the clamor of Persecution, when the Magistrate puts forth his power to
repress Heresies, our Author has given a full answer to it: He may as well be
charged with Persecution for punishing and laboring to repress Drunkenness,
uncleanness, etc. which are works of the flesh, and so is Heresy, Gal. 5.20.

Postscript.
IT pleased the Lord in whose hands are our times, whilst this Book was in the
Press to call home to himself this godly Gentleman Mr. Meade, to whom this
book is dedicated: the man was a sincere lover of Christ, a great lover and
companion of all those who loved Christ, a diligent waiter upon all his
Ordinonces, a high esteemer of and great friend to all his faithful Ministers,
a man who loved not to eat his morsels alone [nor did.] Such a succession of
strangers [especially of Ministers] there was to his house that none need fear
an unaired bed that lay there; considering his estate, we need not say, he was
the second liberal Gentleman in Essex: he was deeply affected with the
apprehensions of the dark and miserable days coming upon England; but as he
lived not to read over this book, so the Lord would not let him live to see
those days, he is gone to his fathers in peace.

FINIS.

