A Peace Offering to God. A SERMON Preached to the Honorable House of Commons
assembled in PARLIAMENT, At their public Thanksgiving, September 7. 1641. For
the PEACE concluded between ENGLAND and SCOTLAND. By STEPHEN MARSHALL,
Batchelour in Divinity, Minister of Finchingfield in ESSEX.

Psalm. 147. Praise the Lord O Jerusalem, praise thy God O Sion: for he has
strengthened the Bars of thy Gates, and blessed thy children within thee, He
makes Peace* in thy Borders. Published by Order of the said House.

LONDON: Printed by T. P. and M. S. for SAMUEL MAN, dwelling in St. Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Swan. 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE House of Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THe mercies which God has showed to these two Nations of England and
Scotland, giving us such great cause and matter of Thanksgiving, causing our
sheafe to arise and stand upright, making us with Saul higher by the shoulders
then all our brethren; these mercies (I say) deserve so to be recorded, that
posterity should be compelled to read and admire them: but who is sufficient
for this thing? It was said of Claudian, that he wanted matter suitable to the
excellency of his wit: but where is the head or heart suitable to this matter?
Psalm. 106. 2.
Who can utter these mighty works of the Lord, who can show forth all his
praise? For my own part had I put my self upon this work to utter these mean
conceptions upon this great subject before so great and honorable Audience, I
might justly have been condemned for abusing both the one and the other. But
you were pleased to command my service in preaching on the day of your public
and solemn Thanksgiving, it may be because I was then near at hand, and after
your Reverent attention had testified that you received them as the counsel of
God, you were further pleased expressly to desire me forthwith to print and
publish what in my weakness I then delivered, I suppose for the better
memorial of these great deliverances; I could have pleaded much, why these
poor notes should not be exposed to public view; Treatises to be read by all,
should be long meditated, often reviewed: Excellent pictures should be engraven
in brass, and not cast in clay: the setting forth these mercies, and quickening
up answerable Thankfulness are above the Abilities of any man, much more
beyond the capacity of my self, the weakest and unworthiest of many thousands;
But your Order left me not at liberty to do what I desired, you have thus made
them your own, the more facile I shall hope to find you, and all Ingenuous
Readers toward my weaknesses, which not presumption but my obedience has made
thus public. This further encouragement I have, little things have been
accepted with God and man in testimonial of Thankfulness; a female, a Turtle,
a handful of wheat-floure by God himself; a handful of water, a bunch of
grapes, etc. by great Kings and Emperors. And even under this Notion also I
humbly present you with this ensuing discourse.

I have no more to say for my self, but much I have to beg of God, that you
(Noble Senators) and the Right Honorable Lords, who joined with you in this
peace offering, may wholly consecrate your selves to advance his glory who has
done these great things for us all, that your faithful endeavors to do what
is behind, joining with your Thankfulness for what is past, the event may be
answerable to your desires, even the glory of God, and the good and safety both
of Church, and Commonwealth, which is the daily prayer of

Your devoted servant STEPHEN MARSHALL.

A SERMON PREACHED before the Honorable House of Commons at their public
Thanksgiving.
The Preface to the SERMON
RIght Honorable and beloved, It was a privilege and mercy which the Lord
promised by the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 66. 10
That they should rejoice with Jerusalem who had mourned with her. This mercy
the Lord has in great degree vouchsafed to my self this day: the same good
hand that cast it to be my lot (though most unfit and unworthie) to help this
Honorable Assembly in the day of their humiliation, Psalm. 84. 6.
to dig pits in the valley of Bachah, has now designed me to sing with them in
the valley of Berochah. 2 Chronicles. 20. 26.
That after I had helped to carry out their precious seed with tears, I should
come with joy and help to gather in their sheaves, that after our Lamentations
we should together sing Canticles and Halleluiahs unto our God. Thus the Lord
in mercy mingles rain and sunshine. Oh that we had hearts suitable to all his
administrations!

The duty of this day, Preface.
is to rejoice, and to give praises unto God, a service easier to the flesh,
then that of fasting and mourning, but harder to the spiritual part. In a day
of humiliation even wicked men have affections stirring in them, consciousnesse
of evil, guiltiness of mind, sense of wrath, astonishing and oppressing
fears arising from the apprehension of near and unavoidable danger, are
natural means to make even Pharaohs, Ahabs, and Ninevites mourn and humble
themselves before God: But in keeping a day of spiritual rejoicing unto God,
little or no help is to be expected from the flesh, and that is one reason, why
commonly days of thanksgiving are translated with much less affection, life,
and savor then days of humiliation. You should therefore have chosen Asaphs,
Ieduthuns, and Hemans who might skilfully have helped you to lift up the
praises of God: but its now no time to complain of your choice, neither will
it be needful, if the Lord please to be present, Isa. 35. 6.
who can make the tongue of the dumb to sing, and can ordain his praise out of
the mouths of babes and sucklings: Psalm. 8. 2.
trusting therefore his assistance, I beseech you attend to his holy Word, as
you shall find it written.

PSALM 124. verse 6, 7, 8. Introduction.
Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth. Our soul
is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler, the snare is broken, and
we are escaped. Our help is in the Name of the Lord: who made heaven and earth.
I Studied to have found out a Text which might every way have been suitable
with the mercies which this day we are to celebrate, Introduction to the Text.
but I confess I could not do it, and I do greatly question, Showing the
fitness of it, and opening generally.
whether GOD ever did such a thing for matter and manner, as he has now done
for these two unworthy Nations. This Text which I have chosen comes very near
in the matter and way of our deliverance, very home to the duty which this day
we are to perform.

The Psalm is styled a Song of degrees, The Title.
a title peculiar to fifteen short Psalms set down together, whether they be
so called because they were to be sung with an exalted voice, or because they
were to be sung upon the stairs of the Temple where the Singers were to stand,
or whether for the supereminencie of the matter contained in them, (they being
so full of short, grave, and pithy sentences, all tending to exalt the praises
of God) I know not: In this all Interpreters agree, that for this third and
last reason they all deserve to be called Songs of degrees: and therefore any
sentence of them will deserve and call for the highest degree of our reverend
attention to the unfolding of it. This Psalm (and three or four other of
these Songs of degrees) was unquestionably penned by King David, Author.
who therefore counted himself the man raised up on high, because he was the
anointed of the Lord, 2 Samuel 23. 1.
and the sweet singer of Israel, esteeming it a greater mercy that the Spirit
of God spoke by him, then that the Nations were subdued under him: But upon
what occasion he penned it, whether historically, speaking of what was already
done, or prophetically, foretelling deliverances to come, (either that out of
Babylon, or that from Antiochus Epiphanes) Interpreters agree not, but we need
not trouble our selves about it, because (when ever the particular story fell
out) without question the Spirit of God intended it to suite the like condition
of the Church in all ages: so that even we enjoying the same mercy, and called
to perform the same duty, may say for our sakes no doubt this Psalm was
written.

The matter whereof, Scope.
is that, which David usually calls a new song, Psalm. 40.
even praise to our God, yea the most pleasant and comely praise, recording his
dealing to his peculiar people, to his own inheritance in such mercies which he
dispences not to other Nations; and may all be reduced to these two heads.

First, And parts of this Psalm.
an Antecedent or a doctrine. Secondly, a Consequent or the use of that
doctrine. The Antecedent or doctrinall part is laid down and explained in the
five first verses, the sum whereof is, that God, and God alone is on his
peoples side to deliver them in all their most deadly and desperate dangers.
The Consequent or use of this doctrine is laid down in these three verses which
I have read. Blessed be the Lord, etc. More particularly opening the text.
And it contains 2. branches. 1. Therefore his people praise him, because he is
on his peoples side, ver. 6. 7. 2. Therefore his people will trust in this
mighty God, who is always their help in the time of trouble, verse. 8.

The first branch or the use of thanksgiving, In 3. branches.
I have chosen to speak of this day, wherein (for the more quickening of their
souls to praise God) the Prophet first repeates and illustrates the danger they
were in before deliverance came; and secondly, the author, time, manner, and
way of their deliverance: and then thirdly, celebrates this mercy in his
return of praises, Blessed be the Lord, etc. The danger they were in, is in
this verse, and elsewhere in the Psalm set out by 3. sorts of comparisons, all
expressing the strength, malice, and rage of their enemies, and their own
nearness to be ruined and destroyed by them. First, they are compared to men,
strong men, proud men, wrathful men, whose rage was kindled, cunning men,
subtle men, unweariable men, like men that go about to set nets and snares to
catch birds, entangling them before they are aware. Secondly, they are compared
to wild beasts, that go roving and roaring about to catch their prey, whom
there is no pacifying, they had almost swallowed us up quick, A prey to their
teeth. Thirdly, they are compared to the most masterfull and merciless
creatures of fire and water; their wrath was kindled against us, the proud
waters had almost swallowed us. So that look what potent, cruel, cunning men
can do; look what ravenous wild beasts, Lions, Tigers, Bears, Dragons, etc.
are able to do; look what fire and water, raging fire, and proud water, look
what all these are able to do, and then you may judge what the Churches Danger
was before Deliverance came.

Secondly, The deliverance, the author, time, and manner of it, we have
expressed in these words, God has not given us a prey to their teeth, our soul
is escaped as a bird out of the snare; the snare is broken, and we are
delivered. The lastly follows the return of their praises for Gods needful
help in the time of trouble.

The 2. first branches, their danger and deliverance I shall but briefly touch,
taking them in, only as a foundation or groundsill, whereupon the building of
thanksgiving (which we are this day to rear up) may the more firmly and
conspicuously stand.

Their danger from these enemies thus described, First Branch. Description of
the Churches enemies.
teaches us among what neighbors Gods people live in this world, and what they
are to expect from them. What ever the Lions paw or Foxes skin, open force and
secret cunning is able to bring to pass, they must continually look to be put
in practice against them, thus it ever has been, thus it ever shall be till
Christ have subdued all their enemies under their feet.

The Jews when they dwelt in their own land of Canaan were thus compassed; on
the East they had the Moabites, Ammonites, Assyrians, and Caldeans, on the West
the Philistines, on the North the Syrians, on the South the Arabians and
Egyptians, and these were all alike maliciously bent against them, and when
ever God let any of them loose, they presently executed all that their wrath,
Description of the Churches enemies.
strength, and policy could bring to pass against them. And just so has it
been with the Church of Christ ever since, they dwell among men that are set on
fire, Psalm. 57. 4.
even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a
sharp sword. They are hated and persecuted of all men, Act. 20. 23
so that what Paul said of his own case, Mat. 5. 11, 12.
the whole Church may say of hers, I know not the things that shall betide me,
Ioh. 16. 33.
save that the holy Ghost witnesses in every City that bonds and afflictions
abide me. 2 Timothy 3. 12.


And would you know the cause of it, The causes why they are so.
It comes partly from the condition and quality of Gods people in this world,
their lives and conversations are contrary to other men, 1 Pet 44.
they dare not run with them to the same excess of sin, this their
neighbors think strange of, and this their holy life gives check to others,
and arms their consciences against them, and therefore they hate them. This
you shall see in Revel. 11. 10. to be the cause why all the inhabitants of the
earth were so mad against the two witnesses, (that is) the small number of them
that bore witness to Christ's truth, in the time of Antichrists apostasy,
because these two witnesses tormented them that dwelt upon the earth, and
partly the outward condition of Gods people is most what mean and
contemptible; they have indeed glorious things, but these are hidden from the
eyes of the world, their outside appears as their Saviors did when he
conversed here upon earth without form or comeliness, Esaias 53. 2.
there was no beauty why they should desire him. They have little countenance
from men, 1 Cor. ^. 26
few of them are wise, noble, or mighty, but they are the foolish, weak, and
base ones of the world. Now low styles are easily trodden down, every hawke dare
fly at pigeon, any wild beast run at a silly lamb.

2. And partly it comes from that inveterate hatred and enmity which God has
put betwixt the seed of the serpent and the seed of the woman, from which
enmity it comes to pass, that the wicked can no more cease to persecute the
righteous, then the troubled Sea can cease from casting up mire and dirt.

3. And partly from the devil, who as he reigns in all the children of
disobedience, so where ever he is, he makes it his great work to make war
with the woman and her seed, Rev. 12. 17.
which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.
Persecuting men often die, often have been reconciled: persecuting Kings and
Princes have become nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers, but Satan never turns
Christian. Non semper saeviunt Nerones, sed nunquam cessat diabolus. The devil
ever goes about like a roaring Lion seeking to devour them.

4. Yea God himself has ordered it to be so for his own glory, because he
delights to rule amongst his enemies, and to make the wrath of man to turn to
his praise, that he may show his wisdom, power, and love in preserving his
Lilly among the thorns, and to keep his bush (though burning) from consuming.

Many are the uses which this lesson might teach us, Application.
I shall only name these two as most agreeable to our present business. 1.
Instruction.
First, to admire, adore, and praise the wisdom, To admire Gods preservation
of her against such and so many enemies.
goodness, power, and care of God in the protection and preservation of his
Church and people in the midst of so many and mighty malicious and impetuous
adversaries. We are prone to wonder why Gods people walking so innocently and
inoffensively should meet with so much hard usage, but alas could we read what
is in the heart and purpose of all our ill neighbors, we should rather wonder
that there is one godly man left in the world: 1 Pet. ^. 12.
In stead of thinking it strange concerning their fiery trials, (as though some
strange thing happened unto them) we should with thankful hearts daily sing
this Psalm, were not the Lord himself on our side, we should instantly be
swallowed up quick, the waters would overwhelme us, the proud waters would go
even over our soul.

Secondly, 1 Exhortation against security never expect better from them
this may teach us all never to be secure, if we have escaped one danger, if we
be come out of six troubles, and the seventh has not been able to hurt us, if
whole armies of our enemies be overthrown, let us not hang up our armor upon
the wall, grow not careless because the rod of him that smote us is broken,
Isa, 14* ^^.
for out of the Serpents root will come forth a Cockatrice, and the fruit will
be a fiery flying Serpent. God has lately done great things for these two
unworthy Nations, great enemies are quelld, great yokes are broken, blessed be
his Name for it: but our enemies are not all dead, our adversary the devil who
rules in all the children of disobedience, compasses the earth, and goes about
like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: Ephesians. 6. 11. etc.
Be sober therefore and watchful, and keep on the whole armor of God, that we
may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all to stand.

But though there be cause of watchfulness, Branch of the text Author, manner,
and way of their deliverance.
yet you will see there is no cause of distrustful fear by that time I have
briefly opened the next branch which is the author, manner, and way of their
deliverance. God has not not given us a prey to their teeth, The Churches
deliverance.
etc. (Where among many considerable things) I shall only commend to you these
2. observations.

First, That they were not made a prey, because God would not give them as a
prey to their teeth.

Secondly, In it.
when they were as birds caught in the net and snared, God chose that for his
time to break their snares asunder.

The first affords us this comfortable lesson. 1. Doct. No spoil of the
Church, till God give her to be a spoil.
That how potent soever, how cunning or malicious soever, the enemies of Gods
Church are, how great, imminent, or unavoidable the dangers of Gods people are,
yet they never can be made a prey, unless God will give them for a prey. All
things seem to meet that might make them a prey, yet because God would not
give them to be a prey, therefore they were not made a prey.

This is abundantly proved out of the Scripture, when ever God told his people
they should be spoiled, Proved by Scripture.
it was added, he would deliver them up: When at any time they were spoiled,
God is said to spoil them. God sold his people into the hand of Jabin King of
Canaan. Judge. 4. 2.
The Lord delivered them into the hand of Midian. Judge. 6. 1.
God sold his people for naught, Psalm. 44. 8.
he made them a reproach, a scorn, and derision, he made them turn their backs
from their enemy. So likewise when they desired deliverance from their
enemies, they used to beg in these terms, that God would not deliver the soul
of his turtle unto the multitude of their enemies, Psalm. 74. 19.
accounting all to depend upon Gods act, if God refused to deliver up his
turtle, they feared none others catching or shooting his turtle.

Most remarkable is that place in Deuteronomy. 32. 30. The Lord did there in that song
tell the people what would betide them for their rebellion afterward, they
should be scattered into corners, and be made a spoil to all their enemies
round about them, insomuch that two or three of their enemies should chase a
thousand of them, and a handful of their enemies should put ten thousand of
them to flight. Now whereas they might object and say, Is this according to thy
promise, that thou made in the 26. Levit. 26. 7, 8.
Levit. That thy people should chase their enemies, that five of them should
chase an hundred, and an hundred of them should put ten thousand to flight, how
comes it then, that one should chase a thousand of thy people? Mark what answer
God makes them in that 30. verse. This could never have been, unless their
Rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up. If God say to one, Spoil
them, shut them up, it is done presently. If God will not do it, all the world
cannot do it.

And the ground of it is plain, And Reason.
because God not only is a wall of fire about them, 1 Their interest in God.
keeps a watchful eye upon them, carries them under his wings, and in his
bosom, but even all creatures, all things which might hurt them, 2. Their
enemies dependence upon God, being only his instruments.
all their enemies who would hurt them, have such a dependence upon God, that
(not only in him they live, and move, and have their being, but) all their
motions and operations are but as Tools in Gods hands. That although they seem
to work from principles of their own, yet the truth is, they are but merely as
the ax and the saw in the hand of God who uses them. This the Scripture
speaks an hundred times. Isa. 10. 5.
The great King of Assyria was but the rod of Gods anger, though his heart
thought not so. And when he thought to do more against Gods people then God
intended, Verse. 1^.
God told him the Ax did but boast it self against him that hewed with it,
Churches deliverance.
and the saw magnified it self against him that shaked it, and the staff
lifted up it self as if it forgot it self to be a piece of wood.

And it must needs be so, else God were not only and wholly to be trusted in,
nor only and wholly to be sought and prayed to, and consequently not only and
wholly to be acknowledged as God: Could any hurt his servants against his will,
Thom. in 1. p. Sum q. 22. A^t. 2. contra Gent. li. 3. Estius in lib. 1. Sent,
Did. 39. Se^. 5. 6. 7 Pro. 16. 9. 33.
his servants must fear some others besides him, find out any creature
reasonable or unreasonable, Angels or devils, good or bad, who do or can do any
thing otherwise then as second causes which are wholly carried by the first
cause, and for my part I should acknowledge a Deity in it, the creature should
pass for a God, and Gods absolute soveraigntie would be denied. Pro. 31. 1. 1
Cor. 12. 6.
Whereas the Scripture teaches us that not only the hearts and ways of
ordinary men, but even the hearts of Kings which are most sovereign and
independent, Application.
and lots which are most casual, 1 Instruction, in all evils look only at Gods
hand.
are all disposed of by God, who works all in all. I note this for these two
ends. First, to teach all that are in covenant with God in all the evils that
betide them, to look further then the rod that smites them. Some cunning enemy
undermines thy peace; some foul mouth reproaches thy good name, some powerful
and malicious enemies spoil thy cattle, Job 1. ^4. etc.
some fire burns up thy sheep and servants, some wind from the wilderness
smites the four corners of thy house, Job 2.
and makes it fall upon thy children, some devil afflicts thy body with sore
boyles, and thy soul with invenomed arrows. What should thou now do? contend
with the instrument? bite the stone (like a dog) that struck thee? Oh no!
Remember Shimei could never curse David till God bade him. As^ur could never
smite Israel till God used him as a staff in his own hand. Satan could touch
nothing that Job had, till God delivered it into his hand: No, not enter into
an herd of swine till Christ sent him. Look not therefore to the creature, but
with Job acknowledge it is Gods hand only: The necessity of this duty.
The not having learned this lesson, is the cause of most of that sinfulness
that is found in our ill-bearing of crosses, and makes us exceedingly wrong the
creature, our selves, and our God most of all.

1. We wrong the creature, which is but Gods instrument, in over-fearing it, or
over-grieving it, as if our weal or woe did come from it; and so make an Idol
of it, attributing somewhat to the creature which is peculiar to God.

Secondly, we wrong our selves, for (beside a great deal of lost care, and
grief, and pains which increases our sin, and sorrow in fretting at the
Instrument, and gnawing the chain which ties us, in knocking at a wrong door,
seeking help where it cannot be had) we lose the good which God intends; God
never sends a cross, but it is upon some arrand for our good; Mica. 6. 9.
Gods rod always has a voice; Hear the Rod and who has appointed it. Now
would we hear God speaking by his rod, lie down at his foot, and say with Job,
Job 10. 2.
Show me why thou contendest with me, we should then find, that Gods
correction would seal our instruction, Job 33. 16
to try us, to withdraw us from some sinful way, and to keep back our soul
from the pit, which, by not looking at Gods hand, we deprive our selves of.

Thirdly, we wrong God most of all, when with our sinful communicating to the
creature a great part of that grief, care, fear, desire, etc. which should be
only bestowed upon him, we do also hereby deny his providence, as if there
could be any evil in the City, Amos 3. 6
which the Lord has not done.

Secondly, 2* Exhortation. Keep in with God and all is safe.
since we never can be a prey till God will give us to be a prey, Keep in with
God, and you are safe enough; none shall arrest you, till Gods hand be to the
warrant. We observe, since the beginning of the Parliament, many walk
confidently abroad in the very face of Creditours, Bayliffes, and Sergeants,
when they have got a lawful Parliament-Protection, who before durst not show
their heads; they know they cannot be arrested till their master puts them out
of his protection. O how much more boldly may they walk who abide under the
protection of the Almighty, who being called to great services for God, and
endeavoring to walk faithfully in their work, may conclude that no Writ can
be served on them on earth, till their masters hand have signed it in heaven.
See how our blessed Savior encouraged himself and his disciples by this
argument in the 11. Joh. ver. 7. Christ told his disciples they must go again
into Judea, why Master, say his disciples, the Jews of late sought to stone
thee there, and go thou thither again? Now mark Christ's answer, v. 9. Are
there not twelve hours in the day, if a man walk in the day he stumbles not,
because he sees the light of this world. The meaning is this; That as they who
travel by day, travel in safety, so they that walk in the light of Gods call
in any business, walk safe from danger: go about a business without a call,
and we walk as at midnight. Men that have letters of public faith, letters of
safe conduct, dare go any where through troops of enemies, from one end of an
enemies country to another: Go on therefore boldly, (ye Worthies of the Lord)
do his work faithfully, there shall no evil befall you, nor any plague come
nigh your dwelling, a thousand shall fall at your side, and ten thousand at
your right hand, but till God put your Name in, till God say to plague, or pox,
or fever, or Traitors, or death, ceize upon such a Nobleman, take such a
Parliamentman, they never can touch you. And I should expect Gods delivering
you in displeasure to any evil any where sooner, then when your hearts and
hands are employed in his service.

The second observation is from the manner and time of their deliverance, 2
Doct. Gods help comes in, in extremity.
God let them alone, until they were almost in the teeth of the wild beast,
until the bird was even caught in the Fowlers snare, and then he comes and
snatches them as a prey from their teeth, then he breaks the Fowlers snare, and
the bird escapes; And that affords us this lesson.

When Gods people are come to the greatest extremity of danger, that is the
time which God chooses for their deliverance.

There are 2. branches in this lesson. Herein 2, Branches, 1. God* lets evils
come to extremity, though not always.
First, God uses to let evils go on against the Church, till they come to
extremities. Secondly, when the extremity is come, then Gods help comes in.
First, God lets evils run on till they come to extremity. I do not say God lets
them always come to extremity, for then the Church should ever be in
extremity, her enemies are always devising mischief against her: sometimes
God crushes their intentions while they are in the shell: Thus Jeroboams hand
withered, when he said against the Prophet, 1 King. 13. 4.
Lay hold of him. Thus the Emperor Valens could not write when he should
confirm Basils banishment. Sometimes God meets them in the midst of their
enterprise, and thus he put his bridle in the jaws, 1 Kin. 19.
and his hook in the nostrils of Senacherib, when he was coming against
Hezekiah.

But oftentimes he lets his people come into great extremity, Joseph's feet are
hurt in the stocks, the iron enters into his soul. The Israelites tale of brick
shall be doubled. David shall be hunted like a Patridge in the mountains. The
3. Children shall be thrown into the fiery furnace. Daniel cast into the Lions
den. The Decree for rooting out of the Jews established by the Law of the Medes
and Persians, before any hope of deliverance comes.

But then when extremity is come, 2 Branch. In extremity God always helps his
people.
the Lord never fails to be a help in the needful time of trouble. All the
former examples prove it; Abundance of promises assure us of it. Our own
experience can abundantly testify it: Yea, I think, were all the examples in
the world lost of Gods helping his people at a pinch, they might be all revived
in the experience of Gods dealing with this unworthy Nation, especially in
these two Instances which I shall give you.

The first is, that of the Powder treason, when the neck of the whole State,
the glory both of the Church and the flourishing Commonwealth lay upon the
block, and the Instruments of death lifted up, and a few hours had done that
which all the world could not have repaired: and our case so much the more
helpless, because all was done in the dark, we could suspect no danger. In
that extremity our God sends his Angel, and delivers us from all the
expectation of his enemies.

2. The other which is as remarkable, is this great mercy which we have now
received, and this day come to celebrate: I speak to wise men, and therefore my
words may be few, you all know our estates, our Liberties, our Religion, and
what ever we may call ours, were in a manner irrecoverably lost through the
malice and practice of wicked Instruments, and a dreadful cloud has these two
or three years been gathering, and hanging over our heads, continually ready
to dissolve into showers of blood, the two Nations ready to imbrue their hands
in each others blood, the most observing people in the Kingdom expecting
nothing but certain ruin, and our neighbors round about us did conclude that
we should soon be made the most desolate people in the world, help we could see
none, our Prophets were grown fools, and our spiritual men mad; The Judges
and Rulers who should have been our help, had many of them their hands in the
means of our destruction: We were tantum non: swallowed up in confusion: And
when the foundations were thus dissolved, what could the righteous do, 2 Chronicles.
20.
only with Iehoshaphat mourn before God, and acknowledge, Lord we have no
help, we know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee: and now lo, our
God has brought all about, and wrought a great deliverance as we see this day.

And would you know the grounds why it should be so, Reason why God is a help
to his people in time of trouble.
I could give you reasons enough, why God should help his people, they are his
people, in covenant with him, he has redeemed them by the blood of his Son,
he has promised to help them, their cause is his own, they betake themselves
only and wholly to his help. The Churches deliverance.
But why he should put off his help till a time of extremity, why he should
suffer his people to come to so low an ebb, this is a thing which many wonder
at.

To satisfy you in this, And why he so often defers his help till extremity.
I can never give a better reason then our Lord himself gives in the 11. Joh.
There you shall find when Lazarus was very sick, sick almost unto death, his
two sisters sent a messenger to Christ to tell him, Ver. 34.
Lord he whom thou love is sick, they thought he whom thou love is sick was
argument enough to fetch Christ presently, but though Christ loved Lazarus, he
tarried two or three days, and sent this answer, This sickness is not unto
death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified
thereby, as if he should say, The true cause of this great sickness, and my
delaying to come presently, is not because Lazarus should be tormented or
killed, but because Christ should be glorified. Not to grieve his people, or
please his enemies.
So the very cause of Gods putting off and delaying to help, and letting things
come to an extremity, is not because he would have his people afflicted, and
his enemies to triumph and be exalted, but it is to gain the more honor and
glory to his own Name, to manifest his wisdom, power, love and goodness in
creating deliverances for them. Such mercies as come in an ordinary way are
commonly interpreted to come from an ordinary love, but mercies and
deliverances coming in an unexpected time, But for their great good, and for
his own glory
in an extraordinary way and manner, in them Gods love and goodness is most
apparently seen and acknowledged. God loved Hezekiah as well at other times, as
when he sent an Angel to kill nine score thousand of his enemies at one time,
in one night, and when at another time, he made the Sun go back ten degrees
in the dial of Ahaz, making one day as long as two, in token of his
deliverance. God loved the three Children as well at other times, as when he
preserved them in the fiery furnace, so as the smell of fire should not be upon
them. And Daniel was as dear to God at other times, as when he shut up the
Lions mouths, that they could not hurt him. But his power over them, his
mercy and goodness to them, his justice against their enemies, never was so
exalted, as in deferring so long, and so unexpectedly helping them in their
greatest extremity. Themselves not only find it, but their enemies are then
constrained to acknowledge it. All Moses Sermons and threatenings could not make
the Egyptians so much acknowledge Gods being on his peoples side, as when they
having promised themselves to overtake them to divide the spoil of them, to
have their lust satisfied upon them, to have their hands destroy them, when
they were entangled in the land, when the Wilderness and the Sea had shut them
in, God then came in and made the Sea a path for his people, and the waters a
wall to them, but took off the Egyptians Chariot wheels, and turned the waters
upon them: Then they are constrained to cry out, Let us flee from the face of
Israel, for the Lord fights for them against the Egyptians. Application.


Thus you see this truth cleared, 1. Instruction.
that God never fails his people in a time of need, let us briefly make these
two or three Uses of it. Therefore all plots against the Church must prove
successelesse.


First, for our Instruction we hence learn, that all plots against the Church
and people of God must prove successelesse in the event, how wise, how cunning,
how strong soever they are, who manage an ill cause against the Lord, Churches
deliverance.
and against his Church, though for a time with that little horn in the 7. of
Daniel, they may be very stout, and speak very great things, and make war
with the Saints, and prosper: though they may carry the ball long at their
foot, they can never win the goal, God will come in an adversary against
them, Psalm. 78. 65.
he will awake as one out of sleep, like a mighty man that shouts by reason of
wine, and put them to a perpetual reproach. Search all the Scriptures, and you
shall find, Isa. 54. 17.
that this is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, that no weapon that is
formed against them shall prosper; either their plot fails, or the thing which
they intended is turned another way: Their plot failed not in the 6. of Daniel,
they aimed to get Daniel into the Lions den, and in they got him, but they
little thought that the event should be Daniels preservation and exaltation,
and their own destruction. So the devil and his Instruments failed not in
their plot in getting Christ upon the Cross, but they little thought that this
bruising of our Saviors heel should prove the breaking of the Serpents head,
The redemption of the Church, and the leading of all the power of darkness
captivity captive. Mark this all ye wisemen and great Politicians of the world,
that dare drive designs against the cause of God and his Church, write it
down, and say your unworthy Minister taught you this day from God, Isa. 8. 10.
Though ye take counsel together it shall come to naught, though ye speak the
word it shall not stand, for God is with us. Hamans wife long ago could tell her
husband, if Mordecai was of the seed of the Jews, he should never prevail
against him, but should surely fall before him. Weigh therefore all your
designs in the balance of the Sanctuary, lay aside all carnal and sinful
projects, put your selves and all your reason under Christ's footstool, take
Gamaliels counsel, refrain from opposing those men, Act. 5. 3 8.
who advance Gods work, you cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found even to
fight against God.

Secondly, 2. Consolation, encouraging to expect help in deepest trials.
this may be a mighty and wonderful refreshing to all the servants of God in
their deepest and heaviest pressures and afflictions, though one deep call to
another, though thou seem to be cast beyond the Antarctick pole, though all
humane hope and help fail, though thy heart fail, and thy flesh fail, thy God
will never fail; though thou art at thy wits end, thou have no cause to be at
thy faiths end; take Gods book in thy hand, find out the promises, how God
has engaged himself to help at a pinch, and when thou have got a promise of
deliverance, then believe that heaven and earth shall be jumbled together,
rather then one jot or title of Gods promise shall not come to pass in due
time: Nay though he seem to break his promise believe it not; for so he seemed
to do to Mary and Martha, And to stay our selves upon God and his Word.
he sent them word Lazarus sickness was not to death, and he seemed to fail,
for Lazarus died, but they should have believed any thing, rather then that
that sickness should have been unto death.

Object. But what if I can find no promise that God will deliver me out of
this strait. I answer, either thou art in covenant with God, or not, if thou be
not in covenant, if thou be an unbeleever, an impenitent person, I assure thee
there is no promise in all this book of God that speaks one word of comfort to
thee: All Gods promises are yea, and Amen to them who are in Christ Jesus: I
should wrong God, and his truth, and thy soul, in speaking one word of comfort
to thee. But if in truth thou reliest upon Christ, the bent of thy heart be
turned to God, and so thou be brought under the line of his covenant, then I
say to thee, if there be no promise for thy strait, thy strait is not greatly
to be regarded. God has made promises to deliver thee from every evil work,
from what ever might hurt thee, and thou needst not fear that which cannot
hurt thee.

Thirdly and lastly, 3. Exhortation to all Gods servants especially when
employed in great services.
Right Honorable and beloved, how should this steel your spirits, and raise up
your hearts, and make you with Jehoshaphat lifted up in the ways of God: you
have great works to do, the planting of a new heaven and a new earth amongst
us, and great works have great enemies, they are attended with great dangers,
and oftentimes great fears ceize upon the spirits of Moses himself, To fear
nothing.
when he looks upon the work which he knows too great for him. But could you
remember that you walk not only under Gods protection, but under a promise
that he will come in when ever you need him, how boldly might you place your
help in the Name of this God who has made heaven and earth: Set you your
hearts to Gods work, God has set his heart upon you to deliver you, and he can
do it. Darius set his heart on Daniel to deliver him, and labored it, but
could not do it: But it is but for your God to command deliverance and it
comes. I may say the less, because of all the experience you have had of Gods
fulfilling this since your meeting together: how often have you been at your
wits end? how often have you ebbed and flowed, and yet in all your extremities
God has come in beyond your expectation. Trust still in this God, seek him in
his own way, and say thus with your selves, He is our rock, our fortress, he
will deliver us, his truth shall be our shield and buckler.

Yet remember that I do not teach you, that ye can never be left to suffer in a
good cause, that were to preach contrary to the Gospel, all Christ's disciples
must take up their cross and follow him: you shall read in the 11. of Daniel,
ver. 33. That they that understand among the people, and instruct many, shall
fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by spoil many days, and
when they fall, they shall be helped with little or no help, but yet mark what
follows, their fall shall only be as the silver falls into the furnace: Ver. 35.
There are three ends why the Refiner of silver puts it into the fire. First,
to try it, whether it be pure or reprobate silver. Secondly, to better it, to
purge out the dross: Thirdly, to burnish it, to make it more beautiful. So
these shall fall to try them, and to purge and make them white, neither shall
it be so long as their enemies please, but even to the time of the end, to the
time appointed by God. Resolve therefore upon it, that if ye do suffer, if
evil do betide you in a good way, and for a good cause, your sufferings will
be better for you, then freedom from sufferings, they shall be only to try
you, to purge you, and to make you white, and at the appointed time deliverance
will come, which if it be a while deferred, you shall be liberally paid for
your forbearance. Thus I have done with the second part of my Text, and now

I proceed to the third Branch of my text, which I most aimed at, the use which
the Church makes of this goodness of God, Blessed be the Lord, etc.

The Hebrew word, Churches thankfulness.
Barach, when it is applied from the creature to God, signifies, Benedicere,
laudare, offerre munus, To Bless, to speak well of, to offer a gift, (...)
to praise. This is our work this day, and so without any more Preface, 3
Branch. The Churches duty. To praise God for deliverance.
I come to handle that lesson which is our maine duty, viz.

That the praising of God is the service which Gods people are to perform,
when ever God delivers them. This is a Doctrine which needs much explication
and application, This duty 1 Commanded.
but little proof. No one lesson more inculcated in the whole Scriptures,
frequently commanded, Call upon me in the time of trouble, Psalm. 50. 15.
and I will hear thee, Psalm. 22. 22.
and thou shall praise me. All that seek the Lord shall praise him. Oh that men
would praise the Lord for for his goodness, Psalm. 107.
four times repeated in one Psalm. At least an hundred times in one
expression or other it is enjoined in this book of the Psalms.

Oh praise the Lord, praise ye the Lord, pressed and repeated almost in every
verse of diverse Psalms; as if the Prophet knew not what other duty to call
for.

2. This duty was likewise typified in the old Law; 2 Typified.
They had two sorts of sacrifices, shadowing out moral duties, some
petitionary, whereby they sought God for the mercies which they needed: Others
were Eucharisticall, peace offerings, wherein their praises were rendered unto
God, and these was to be as constant as their Supplicatory or Expiatory
sacrifices.

3. The duty has always been practiced by all Gods servants: 3 Practiced
the time would fail me to tell of Noah, Abraham, Jacob, Moses, all the good
Judges, Kings, Priests, and Prophets, whose Hallelujahs were as constant as
their Hosannaes. When ever they had sought God and found him, The Churches
thankfulness.
their next work was to magnify and praise him. And for the rule and practice
of the Christian Church, I shall pass by many exhortations and examples, Both
in the old and new Testament
and satisfy you abundantly with one place which is the fourth of the
Revelation. That Chapter is a description of Christ's presence in the Christian
Church, and of all their service and carriage toward him; there ye have the
Lamb sitting upon the throne in the midst of his people, there ye have also,
all the multitude of his Saints in all the four quarters of the world, Mead.
comment. in Apoc. p. 4.
shadowed out by the four beasts, there ye have the multitude of Christ's
Ministers, shadowed out by the four and twenty Elders, sitting upon their
seats: Now mark what all the service is which these four beasts, and four and
twenty Elders perform to him that sits upon the throne, it is expressed, verse.
9. to be nothing else, but to give glory, honor, and thanks to him that lives
for ever and ever: So that all Christian worship, public, and solitary,
whatever the corpse of it be, the soul of it is nothing but honor, and glory,
and praise to our God through Jesus Christ. Reasons of this duty.
Many reasons might be given, why praise and thanksgiving should be rendered
unto God: All excellency and honor is his original due: All good things are
received from his hand freely: Now common honesty requires, that undeserved
favors should be received with thankfulness. A benefit received, and a Return
of praise are inseparable among all Civil Nations. The main reason. It is most
dear to God being all which he requires
But I shall insist only upon this one.

This service of praise is the only Quit-rent or Homage which God has
reserved to himself for all the mercies which he bestows upon his Church.
Understand it, I beseech you, I say what ever the Lord does for his Church and
people, he has reserved not a shoelatchet, save only his praise and glory.
Which to understand, know that there are three things meet in every mercy.
First, the thing it self which is given, suppose food, raiment, health, life,
peace, wife, children, or what ever we enjoy. Secondly, there is the sweetness
of it, the comfort which may be drawn out in the use of it. Thirdly, there is
the glory of it, or the commendation that may arise from it, the honor or
praise which exults out of it. The two first God freely gives away, he has
made nothing but he freely bestows, he gives heaven to the Saints and Angels,
he gives the earth to the sons of men, he gives all creatures living upon
earth for their use; And allows them to take all the sweetness and comfort,
which can possibly be drawn out of his free gifts, lets them drink and be
filled with the juice and marrow of every mercy: only his glory he will never
part with, his glory and praise he will give to none. They say Quit rents and
Royalties are so prized by Lords of Manors, that they will not sell them under
thirty or forty years purchase: But the Lords Royalty and Homage of praise
and thanksgiving is more precious unto him then heaven and earth: In so much
that it is all one in his account, Romans 1. 21.
not to be acknowledged God, and not to be praised. His greatest end of all his
works.
Yea so dear is his praise and glory, that it was the utmost and highest end
he propounded to himself in creating, upholding and governing this goodly frame
of heaven and earth, even that his glory and excellency might shine forth, Pro
16. 4.
that as of him, and by him, Romans 11. 36.
so all things might be for him. And as all things were made for his praise, so
the creature man was in special manner made to be a fit bayliffe or gatherer
in of Gods Quit-rent of praises from all the rest of the creatures, and to pay
it unto himself. And this David acknowledges in the 8. Psalm, Man being in
special manner created for it.
and magnifies as an infinite advancement of man above all the rest of the
creatures, that Gods glory which is above the heavens should be ordained to
proceed out of the mouth of such a poor worm as man is.

Nay if we look yet further into it, And the Church redeemed for this very and
and work.
we shall find that when all mankind had sinned, and sell short of the glory
of God, would not praise him, and could not praise him, the Lord therefore
bought a peculiar family to himself by the blood of his Son, that he might
have a people of his own to praise him; who might while they are here upon
earth, collect, gather in, and offer up the praises due unto his Name. And
therefore he calls his redeemed ones his sons and daughters, Isa. 43. 7.
which he has created for his glory. This is plainly taught in the 22. Psalm,
in the latter end whereof, ye have a description of the Church or kingdom of
Christ, which (as there is said) shall be gathered out of all Nations, and all
sorts of people, some that are fat and mighty upon earth, some of the poor
that lie in the dust, who want bread to keep themselves alive, all these shall
be counted to the Lord for a generation, a seed who shall serve him; and what
shall this service be? even to declare and set forth his righteous works from
generation to generation, here is all this holy seed has to do; first to seek
him, Ver. 26.
then to praise him, to enjoy him, and to glorify him. So that what Solomon
said of fearing God, and keeping his Commandments, Eccles. 12. 13.
this is the whole duty of man. The same I may say of thanksgiving, praise God
and glorify him, for this is the whole duty of the Church in this world; And
not only in this momentany pilgrimage, but even to all eternity: if you would
know what the triumphant Church does, how the glorious Saints and Angels are
employed, this one word Hallelujah expresses it fully, praise ye the Lord.

And by this time, I hope you see good reason why our praises should succeed
our prayers, and accompany our deliverances.

But will some say, Many mistaken in the nature of this duty.
all this labor might have been spared, is there any man who will not praise
God? Does the man live who is not willing and ready to give God the praises due
unto his Name? I answer. Indeed if to praise God were no more then most people
think, it were the most universal, common, easy, cheap, and constant duty in
the world, such who never kept a holy fast in all their life time, such who
neither pray to God in their family, nor in their chamber, do yet (if their
carnal minds may be the judge) praise God an hundred times. Every day, their
ordinary phrase is, I thank God, I praise God. Ask but of their welfare, well I
thank God, they say: Enquire of their families, all well, I praise God: Every
mouth is filled with the praises of God, blessing proceeds out of the same
mouth which is full of cursing: young men and maids, old men and children can
all praise God. But alas, most men are infinitely mistaken in this duty, a
thankful man who can find? there is not in all the world a duty more rare to
be found, a duty more spiritual, more difficult, more costly, then the duty of
praise.

Let me therefore (that we may not mistake when we come to application) give
you briefly the Institution of a thankful man according to the word, and I
will bring it all to these two heads.

First, The Institution of a thankful man.
the qualification of the person of a thankful man, who and what he is:
Secondly, the Ingredients into the duty, or what makes it up: Who the man is,
And what his work is.

First, None but a godly man can do it.
who is the man that may praise God? Answ. Only the godly man; True it is, all
men even the worst are bound to do it, it lies upon them as a duty, but it
belongs not to them as a privilege: it is the privilege only of the
righteous, Psalm. 33. 1
they may do it. Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, Psalm. 149.
it becomes well the just to be thankful. Let the high praises of God be in
their mouths. Their praises please the Lord better then a bullock that has
horns and hoofs. Though all are bound to it.
Not so the wicked, they have a woolfe by the ears in this work; if they do it
not* God will have his glory out of them. Pharaoh, Senacherib, Herod, such as
proudly seek to rob him of his glory, shall yield him his glory in their
righteous destruction; they would not do it with singing, they shall do it with
howling. On the other-side, Mal. 2. 3.
if they bring their peace offerings, God spreads the dung of their sacrifices
upon their faces: Es 1. 12.
They are an abomination to him. Prove. 15. 8
See this notably expressed in the 50* Psalm, verse. 7. and so forward, the
Lord showed how little pleasure he took in the sacrifice of beasts, in
comparison of the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. Offer unto God
thanksgiving, Ver. 14.
and pay thy vows to the most high. Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I
will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. This God takes pleasure in. Mark
now what follows, But unto the wicked, says God, what have thou to do to take
my covenant into thy mouth? who required these things at thy hands? so that you
see whether wicked men praise God, or praise him not, they are abhorred by him.
Just as some great Lord of a Manor, who having an enemy holding lands of him,
will compel him to do suit and service, and yet abhorres him in his suit and
service. But Israel may rejoice in God, let them praise him in the dance, Psalm.
149. 3. 4.
let them sing praises to him with timbrell and harp, for the Lord takes
pleasure in his people.

The second quare, The duty is made up.
what makes up the duty. Now you have found the man, wherein stands his work*
Answ. When God appointed the sacrifice of peace offerings, Levit. 3. 1.
he made it an indifferent thing whether it were a male or female, so it were
the best they had, the best it must be: Mal. 1. 14.
Cursed be that deceiver who has a male, and sacrifices a corrupt thing unto
God. Were a female the best, it was accepted, provided it were a whole one:
Ver. 13.
To bring a limb of a torn beast, should I accept this at your hands, says
the Lord? He will have all, Of 3. things. 1. Heart 2. Tongue 3. Life.
or none: A whole one then it must be: Now this whole peace offering is made up
of these 3. things. The first is the soul which is the fat and inwards of it.
Secondly, the tongue which is the glory of it. Thirdly the life which indeed is
the life of thankfulness.

1. First the soul, the heart, and spirit, this must chiefly be looked to,
having to do with the Father of spirits, Psalm. 138. 1
with God the searcher of the heart: I will praise God (says David) with my
whole heart. Psa. 133. 1.
My soul praise the Lord, Psalm. 108.
and all that is within me praise his holy Name. My heart is fixed, O God, my
heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise* Now to this soul-praising of God
are required principally these three things. The heart to which required
First, A A mind observing the ways and mercies of God, a spirit inquisitive
into Gods ways, not out of Athenian curiosity, 1. A mind observing Gods
dealing.
but (as Bees fly from flower to flower to gather honey) to digest them into
matter of praise and thanksgiving. God makes it an argument of an unthankful
heart, not to consider his ways, nor the operations of his hands. Psalm. 28. 5.
And on the other side, it is an argument of a thankful heart, Psalm. 111. 2.
to take pleasure in searching out the works of God. See how David sets this
down in the 68. Psalm ver. 14. They have seen thy goings, O God, the goings of
my God my King in the sanctuary: then follows, The singers went before: the
players on Instruments followed after: Bless ye God in the Congregation. First
they observe Gods footsteps, then bless him in the Congregation. And in the
107. Psalm. after the Prophet had set down the variety of Gods administrations
for which he should be praised, he thus concludes the Psalm, Ver. 43.
Who so is wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord. And ye may further observe, that the thankful
men recorded in the Scriptures have not let slip from their observation the
very circumstances of Gods dealings toward them, Thus did Hezekiah concerning
his recovery.
not only the substance of the mercy, Ezekiel. 38. 9. etc.
in a gross sum, but all circumstances which have accompanied it, as time,
place, Thus David for all his deliverances.
manner, means.

Secondly, this soul thankfulness must have affections suitable to the mercies
bestowed, when our heart is affected according to Gods dealing, 2 Samuel 22. 2.
this is thankfulness. Suitable affections.
And these affections are chiefly love and joy. Psa 116. 1.
I love the Lord because he has heard the voice of my prayer. Psalm. 33. 1.
And then they must rejoice in his mercy. Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous,
Psalm. 92. 4.
it becomes the just to be thankful. Thou Lord have made me glad through thy
work, therefore will I triumph in the works of thy hands. Mercies are not
mercies, deliverances are not deliverances to men who are not glad of them. God
gave David a great deliverance from his rebellious son Absolon, he upon the
news weeps and cries out, O Absolon, my son, my son. Was this
thankfulness? God has wrought a great deliverance for us, can those men whose
fingers itcht for blood; and are grieved at our peace, be thankful for this
deliverance?

Thirdly, 3. Registring the^ in our memory.
the last thing which makes up this soul-thankfulnesse, is the laying up and
registring these mercies of God in our memory, to lay them up in our
treasury, not as some do their bundles of old writings in their
counting house, never looking on them in seven years: but in a memory which may
suggest to them upon every occasion what great things God has done for them. A
memory which will lay Gods mercies before them, as the Chronicles which
Ahasuerus read when he could not sleep in the night. God requires it should be
so. The righteous Lord has so done his mavelous works that they ought to be
had in thankful remembrance. This thankful memory feeds the heart with
continual matter of praise, fills the thoughts with admiration of Gods dealing
toward them, shows them how Gods mercies pass their understandings in the
manner of them, in the measure of them, making the soul stand amazed: thankful
hearts have found so much good in remembering of Gods mercies, that they have
been careful to keep Registers, and set up Monuments to help their memory,
endited Psalms to bring to Remembrance, gave Names to places where mercies
were received, new Names to times when they were received, write the Names of
their deliverances upon their children, Genesis 22. 14.
that the sight of them might quicken their memories and thoughts. 2. Chron. 20
20.
Yea God himself used to take new Names to himself as he gave new mercies,
Esther 9.
sometimes calling himself, 1. Sam. 1. 20.
The God that brought Abraham from Vr of the Caldees, then the Lord that
brought them out of the land of Egypt, then the Lord that gathered his people
out of the North country, and now since the greatest deliverance of all, The
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And all to help their memories.

2. This is the Inside of a thankful man, but if praise be in the heart it
will not be kept in, Ier. 20. 2. The tongue.
but it will be like oil in the right hand, like the word in Ieremies heart,
like a burning fire in his bones which he could not contain within. The tongue
will be set on work, and bears a great part in this Music of thankfulness,
Psalm. 66, 16.
confessing to God, publishing to others, I will tell you what God has done
for my soul. My tongue shall ever be talking of thy wondrous works, and of thy
praise all the day long. Psalm. 108.
Our tongue is therefore called our glory, because with it we glorify God. As
praise is Gods glory, so our tongue in exalting him is our glory. Now this
tongue-praise is not confined to saying of a grace, singing of a Psalm,
uttering a Benedictus, or Te Deum laudamus, but in all speech which tends to
exalt God, and sets forth his excellency. Miserecordias Domini narrabo.
Iunius told the mercies of God, when he wrote his own life. And David's tongue
was ever talking of Gods praise, because his speech one way or other rended to
exalt God.

Thirdly, true thankfulness is expressed in the life, as one truly says, the
life of thankfulness consists in the life of the thankful. The praising of
God, and ordering our conversation aright, are not only inseparable, but
exegeticall interpretations one of another. Psalm. 50. ult.


Now this life Thankfulness stands in these two things.

First, 3. The life in 2 things.
in using Gods mercies to the right end, this is to praise him indeed, without
this all other thankfulness is but complement, formalitie, 1. In using mercies
to the right end.
and hypocrisy: Set this down for an everlasting truth, that its impossible
God should be praised with an abused mercy. Did Israel and Judah praise God
for their fair jemels of gold and silver which God had given them, when they
made to themselves Images of men, and committed whoredom with them? Did they
praise him for their broidered garments, their fine flower, oil, and honey,
wherewith God clothed and fed them? Did they praise him for their sons and
daughters when they sacrificed them unto devils? Read the sixteenth of Ezekiel,
and you will find the contrary. I shall give you one example which will clear
it beyond all contradiction, and that is of Hezekiah. Isa. 38.
God gave him a most miraculous recovery, he was sick to death, and it is
thought he was sick of the plague, God not only healed him, but made the Sun
go back for six hours at least, and by this miracle told all the world, that
the God who loved Hezekiah, had recovered him from death to life; Now mark
Hezekiahs thankfulness, as soon as he got up, he makes a Psalm, wherein he
confesses his unworthiness, his bitter affliction, Gods gracious restoring of
him, goes to the Temple and sings it, resolves to sing it all the days of his
life, who would not think but this man had been thankful? But Hezekiah abused
this mercy, his heart grew proud, he began to think himself the most
remarkable man in the world, discovers this vanity of his heart to the
Ambassadors of the king of Babylon: See now what God judged of his
thankfulness: 2 Chronicles. 32.
Hezekiah was sick to death, and God spoke to him and gave him a sign, but
Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him, for his
heart was lifted up. Never does a man render according to the mercy, who
abuses the mercy.

The second thing in life thanksgiving is the rendering back again to God, 2
Rendering back again to God.
what God requires by way of homage or Lords-rent. Quid retribuam? What shall I
render to the Lord, is every thankful man's Psalm. Now although no man can
give unto God any thing worthy of him, yet there are four things which God
requires and accepts from all his thankful people by way of homage.

First, 1. A contrite heart.
an humble broken contrite heart, a self-renouncing, a self-abhorring spirit,
for our vileness against so gracious a God is infinitely pleasing to him. Oh
says David (when God had pardoned his great sin, and healed his broken bones)
I would give thee sacrifice and burnt offerings if thou delightedst in them:
Psalm. 51. 16. 17.
But these God cared not for; but David lights upon that which he cared for:
The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, O
God, thou will not despise.

Secondly, 2. Our bodies and souls to his service.
the giving up of our selves, bodies, and souls, to have and to hold, and to
use them at the will of the Lord, to consecrate them unto him, to do him
faithful service. This is notably expressed by David in the 40. Psalm, when
he studied what to render to God, and found that sacrifice and offerings God
did not desire, but this pleased him, My ear thou have bored: What is that
boring his ear? why he alludes to the practice in Israel, that when a servant
did choose to dwell with his master for ever, his master should bore his ear
through with an awle. Exodus 21. 5. 6.
So says David, I will be thy servant for ever, I delight to do thy will, O
God, thy law is written in my heart. This is a little otherwise expressed,
Hebr. 10. 5. In stead of reading it my ear thou have opened. The Apostle
following the Septuagint reads it a body have thou prepared me, but full to the
same sense, as if he should have said, Lord thou have fitted me, molded my
body and soul to be thy servant. This same thing the Apostle calls for, I
beseech you brethren, Romans 12. 1
by all the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service: this is a second
peace offering.

Thirdly, 3. A reverent attending upon his ordinances
when God had put an end to all Leviticall sacrifices, both Propitiatory and
Eucharisticall, in stead of them he has instituted the attending upon his holy
ordinances, praying, preaching, hearing, Sacraments, to be in the Christian
Church acknowledgements of our homage, spiritual sacrifices acceptable unto
him through Jesus Christ. This the Apostle expresses in the 13. to the
Hebrews, verse. 15. Having before showed that all other sacrifices were
abolisht, he tells them, that the calves of our lips, the sacrifice of praise
were now to be offered up to God continually.

Fourthly and lastly, 4. Doing works of mercy.
the works of mercy the poor, visiting the sick, feeding the hungry, clothing
the naked, ministering to the necessities of the Saints, are an adour of a sweet
smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing unto God. To do good and to
communicate (says Paul) forget not, Phil. 4. 18.
for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Provided that because they are
sacrifices they must not be offered to the Idol of our own credit, Heb. 13 16.
or esteem, or private ends, but unto God alone, even in obedience unto him,
and for his glory.

Thus have I as briefly as I could possibly given you the true Institution of a
thankful man, his person must be holy, his sacrifice must be whole, made up of
heart and tongue and life, an observing mind, suitable and enlarged
affections, a ready memory, a tongue to tell Gods praises, a life using Gods
mercies aright, abusing none of them, abhorring himself before God, devoting
himself unto God, humbly waiting upon his ordinances, and according to his
ability, endeavoring to be an Instrument of help and comfort to him that
needs.

Now give me leave (Right Honorable and beloved) to endeavor to set all this
home to your hearts in a double use. First for Humiliation. Secondly, for
Exhortation.

First for humiliation. Application.
It may be some will think it unseasonable in a day of rejoicing to put you
upon sorrow and mourning, 1. For humiliation.
but certainly could I but help you to be rightly humbled for, and to slay this
beast of Ingratitude, it would be the best peace offering which ever God
received from many of your hands, neither will you ever be able to give him the
sacrifice of an humble contrite heart, till your spirits be laid low in the
sense of this great sin. Let me speak plain and in earnest, I remember I speak
to a great assembly, to an assembly of Gods, but I speak in the name of a great
God, before whom you are but as so many gras-hoppers, his potsheards, his poor
sinful creatures: Pardon me (ye great Lords and Gentlemen) if I pass over all
your eminency, and discharge my duty; Are we not a most unthankful people?
Do we render to God according to his infinite mercies vouchsafed to us? I could
easily set before you great lists and Catalogues of mercies, In general our
unthankfulness for all Gods mercies.
which you have received; Many in common with the rest of the world, Many in
common with this Nation, to which God has been merciful above all Nations
upon earth: Many in common with the places where you live: Many peculiar to
your own persons, to your own souls and bodies, to your estates, families,
relations, privative mercies, positive mercies, ye eat mercies, drink mercies,
wear mercies, compassed about and covered with mercies, as much as ever the
earth was with water in the time of Noah's flood. But beloved, where is your
thankfulness for all these mercies to be found? I can tell you where the
houses are that are full of mercies, but who can tell me where true
thankfulness may be found? May not God say of you, that for all his goodness
and mercies which he has multiplied and bestowed upon you, the return is
nothing but abominable Ingratitude: let me help you in a few things.

1. Are there not abundance to be found, who take no notice of Gods gracious
dealing to them? either through the pride of their heart, esteeming nothing
worthy of their observation, or having their souls so crooked to the earth,
that they cannot look up to heaven: or through the peevishness of their spirit
burying ten thousand mercies under one clod of discontent: and so can find
nothing for which they should either rejoice in God, or love him, or admire his
goodness to them?

2. Are there not abundance whose tongues (in stead of being their glory, to
exalt God and his goodness) are as it were set on fire of hell, depressing his
majesty, reproaching and blaspheming his Name, and works, his ordinances, and
servants, seldom naming him for his praise, Luke 18. 11
unless (when with the Pharisee) pretending to thank God, they intend to
commend themselves?

3. Are there not abundance (even great ones, Lords, Ladies, Gentlemen) whom
God has singularly and eminently laden with his mercies, who with all th^se
do nothing but bear arms to fight against God (as David against Goliath) with
his own sword. Waters of a full cup are wrang out into them, they prosper in
the world, Psalm. 73.
increase in riches, they have all their hearts can desire, therefore pride
compasses them about as a chain, therefore they are corrupt and wicked;
therefore they may swear and drink, dice and drab. Oh beloved, God has a
tallie of all the mercies which you enjoy, a Catalogue of all the favors which
he has bestowed upon you, and if you be found to be the people, who thus
requite him, who are thus advanced and work all these abominations, God will
ere long say of you, as David said of Nabal, Surely in vain have I kept all
that this fellow has, 1. Sam. 25. 21.
and he has requited me evil for good, I will not leave any thing that
pertains to him, in vain have I done all which I have done for these men, they
have requited me evil for good, I will strip them naked, I will deprive them
of all my abused mercies, I will spend my arrows, and heap mischiefs (in stead
of mercies) upon them?

4. Are there not abundance to whom (this thankful rendering of a contrite
heart, of bodies and souls consecrated to Gods service, reverent waiting upon
him in his ordinances, and doing good to others, thereby to praise God) to whom
(I say) these things are the darkest riddles in the world: who think God never
does enough for them, and think any thing too much for them to do to God?

But to leave this general complaint, In special our unthankfulness for
these late deliverances.
I beseech you (Right Honorable and beloved) to see what great cause we have to
be abased concerning our great Ingratitude, for the admirable mercies which God
has bestowed us this very last year; This one year, this wonderful year,
wherein God has done more for us in some kinds, then in fourscore years
before, breaking so many yokes, giving such hopes and beginnings of a very
Jubilee and Resurrection both of Church and State: This year wherein we looked
to have been a wonder to all the world in our desolations, and God has made us
a wonder to the world in our preservation: giving us in one year a Return of
the prayers of forty and forty years. Now look abroad into the kingdom,
enquire (as Ahasuerus did of Mordecai) what honor and dignity is done to the
Lord for all this; my heart would bleed, were it rightly affected in the
expressing of it: We scarce make any show of thankfulness, but manifest the
very power of Ingratitude.

Alas, For which some are grieved.
there are many whose hearts are grieved at the great things which God has
done for us, turning a Jubilee into Lamentations: I know not better how to
express the spirit of these men, then by that in the 8. of Ezekiel. Verse. 14.
Among all the abominations which the Lord showed the Prophet, Churches
thankfulness.
whereby he was provoked to go far off from his sanctuary, one was a company of
women sat weeping for Tammuz, they wept because they they had lost their
Idol: so these grieve because they fear to loose their toys and fooleries,
which provoke God against us.

Others bring up an ill report of Gods goodness and his worthy Instruments,
Others slight.
who can see no wood for trees, ever enquiring in discontent, what is done all
this year, the Parliament has sat long, abundance of money given, but what
have they done for us? Indeed, less is done, then might have been, had we been
truly thankful, but much more is done, then ever thou or I had cause to hope
our eyes should see: when it is Gods mercy we are not all as Sodom, art not
thou a wretched man, to say what is done by way of sleighting what thy eyes see
this day?

Others deny not but God has done great things this last year, Most abuse.
and all their inquiry is, What is to be done next, who (as swine under the
pear tree devour all that falls, and whine for more, never looking to the hand
that shakes down to them) in the mean time return nothing to God, abate not an
ace of any of their former courses, whereby God was offended, as proud, vain,
wanton, worldly, profane, this year as the last, yea a greater torrent of sin
(for ought I can hear) rusheth in, and fearfully prevails and domineers in most
places. God is free in his goodness, and will be merciful to whom he will be
merciful, and the wickedness of a Nation can set no bounds or limits to his
goodness, else we should certainly conclude, that this dry wind from the
wilderness, this ingratitude of ours, would even sweep and drive away all Gods
mercies from us.

Yea, may I not, must I not (Right Honorable and Noble Senators) humble you,
even you, before the Lord this day, even in this day of your rejoicing, to make
you begin this your Passover with eating some bitter herbs: Even the
honorable Parliament ought to be humbled for this sin.
have you rendered to God according to the mercies of this year? I think you may
say of Gods dealing toward you, as never Parliament could say, God has
carried you in his bosom, prevented and discovered great designs against you,
queld great adversaries before you, restored great privileges unto you,
appeared as your Counselor in all your darknesses, opened a door, an
out-gate in all your straits: all rubs and stumbling blocks before you, God
has made them but as vantage ground to raise you higher: What should I say?
you have found your gracious Sovereign granting (I think) all your suits
hitherto; your Rights and Liberties are established, and your houses built, if
it were possible you should surpass the very Angels in thanksgiving. Now let
your servant be bold with you, what glory and honor do you return to God? How
have you observed the goings of your God and King amongst you? With what
admiring thoughts are your hearts filled? what Reformation appears in your
hearts and lives? what cost are you at for this God? how strongly have you
engaged and consecrated your selves and all which you have for his service and
glory? Lay your hand upon your heart, and think in this your day of rejoicing,
whether your continuance in your old sinful ways, your unbelief, your ebbing
and flowing in your spirits, according as humane hopes and helps have come and
gone; your not zealously laying to heart the cause of Christ, his worship and
servants, may not make the Lord say of you (as of Hezekiah) the Lords and
Commons of England prayed unto God, and the Lord heard them, and gave them a
sign, but they rendered not again according to the benefits done unto them: If
it be so, the good Lord humble you under it, and turn away the guilt of this
great sin from you and from us all for Christ Jesus sake, and so much for the
use of Humiliation.

Secondly, 2. Exhortation to thankfulness.
one more for exhortation and I have done. Oh that I were able to speak
something to raise up your hearts to the practice of this excellent service, I
shall confine my self to these two heads First, a few Motives to quicken you to
the duty. Secondly, a few Directions to guide you in it.

First, Motives to this duty.
the man lives not who owes not this homage or quit-rent unto God, 1. The
equity of it, all owe it unto God.
yea even for every thing which he has, find out the man who lies under one
evil so great as he has deserved, or enjoyes one mercy which he has not
freely received, and that man shall go scot-free from the duty of thankfulness:
Now even common honesty will call for the discharge of this ingenuous, equal,
and easy rent of Thanksgiving to men who are but Instruments of mercy, how
much more to God the welspring and fountain of them all.

Secondly, 2. The excellency of it.
consider the excellency of the duty, what a high and honorable service it is,
so high that though God be most worthy to be praised, yet no creature is found
worthy to praise him. In our praises we are said to bless, honor, exalt,
magnify, and glorify God; can any creature be thought worthy or able to do
this? to lift up God, to make him a great God; to put glory upon God, yet God
so interprets it, he that praises me honors me. Yea so excellent is this
duty, that it is the only employment of all the glorious host of heaven. Psalm.
50. ult.
It is said in the Psalm, that man did eat Angels food; Psalm. 78. 25.
sure I am, this is to do Angels work, heavens work, to bring heaven down to
earth, and to raise up poor dust to heaven, to be enabled to praise the Lord;
what should I say more? this praising of God is by Interpretation, the doing of
all that God requires. Tully said that Gratitude to man is Maxima and matter
omnium reliquarum virtutum. But what ever Gratitude to man be, the Scriptures
teach us, that gratitude to God is the comprehension of all our obedience.

3. Thirdly, The fruit of it.
it is the comfortablest duty that ever we can perform, partly, because it is
the sweetest evidence of our sincere love and faithful dependence upon God: we
may pray for base self-love, when we love not God, but his gifts, but a
cordial praising of him, is a real expression of our love to him; and partly,
because God graciously accepts what ever comes under the notion of praise, a
female, or turtle, a handful of wheat flower, a pepper corn, a cup of cold
water, a sigh or tear, is most kindly accepted when presented as a
peace offering: I will praise God with a song, Psa. 69. 30
this shall please the Lord better then an ox or a bullock that has horns and
hoofs. Who that loves God, would stick at any thing in this duty so acceptable
unto him: It is pitiful to observe what pains and cost many poor seduced
Papists are at out of a false conceit of meriting for themselves and theirs,
should not love and Gratitude to God and our Lord Jesus, (who has merited all
for us) be more prevalent with us, then self-love and blind superstition in
them.

4 Fourthly, I have one Motive more especially to press upon you according to
the duty of the day, The mercies of this year in special manner call for it.
the consideration of the wonders, (I had almost said the miracles) of this
last year: Could I lively draw them before your eyes, that you might see what
this year God has done for you, and wrought by you, such whose affections are
lame among you would leap as an Heart, and the tongue of the dumb would sing.
This year we have seen the three Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland in a
posture of war without blood. shed, Oh wonderful! This year we have seen our
neighbor Nation come into England in a hostile show with peaceable hearts, oh
wonderful! This year we have seen the same Nation (after all mistakes cleared)
received into the bosom of their Sovereigns favor, their loyalty and
faithfulness acknowledged, and with a friendly aid honorably and peaceably
sent to their own homes, and the two Nations faster cemented together in a
league of love then ever heretofore: oh wonderful! Nay yet more, this year
have we seen broken the yokes which lay upon our estates, Liberties, Religion,
and Conscience; the intolerable yokes of Star Chamber, and terrible
High Commission and their Appendances; unsufferable pressures to many
thousands, all eased, removed, broken and swept away. This year have we seen
the two houses of Parliament (and many ten thousands in the kingdom following
their example) enter into a Protestation promise and vow for defense of Gods
true Religion against all Popery and Popish Innovations and superstition. This
year the Complaints of the Imprisoned, outcast, persecuted, and afflicted we
have seen and heard, tenderly received into the high and honorable Court of
Parliament, and the faces of many proud enemies covered with shame. This year
for preventing future grievances, the Lord has put it into the heart of our
gracious Sovereign, the Lords and Commons all to agree upon a Trienniall
Parliament, and this present Parliament to continue till all things be rightly
established both in Church and Commonwealth, that the foundations of the Land
may be no more out of joint, that Liberty and Religion henceforth receive no
damage, unless the State (like the foolish woman in the proverb) plucks it
down with their own hands. Quadragesimus primus mirabilis annus. Oh wonderful
year! and so much the more wonderful that all these things are done for us,
when our neighbor Nations round about us see no such days, when Germany
remains a field of blood, when their Cities and Towns are desolate, their wives
ravished, their children killed, when many of them eat their dead carcasses,
and die for want of food, yea when Gods sword rides in circuit round about us,
these great things are done for us, and hopes of greater: And which is most
wonderful, all this done for the most unworthy and unthankful Nation in all
the world, our God has thus broke in over all the walls of separation which
our sins have built up against us, and called for vengeance upon us.

Me thinks (Right Honorable and beloved) every one of your hearts should say
to God, as the Prophet to the (...), thou have been careful for us with all
this care, what is to be done for thee? Lord what would thou have us do to
testify that we are sensible of thy goodness? Oh praise the Lord.

5. And the rather, because else God knows whether all these mercies may not be
removed, and destruction and misery yet break in upon us. When Tamar was to be
delivered, and twins in her womb, Zarah first put forth his hand, and they
tied a scarlet thread about it, and said this came out first, but his hand was
plucked in again, and his brother broke out before him. So mercy and
judgment, deliverance and ruin, have seemed to be long struggling in the womb
which should first break out upon us: Deliverance has now put forth the hand,
and we have tied our scarlet thread about it, and say this came out first: Oh
that Ingratitude cause not this hand to be plucked back again, and destruction
yet to break in upon us. Ingratitude that, Obex Infernalis, as Divines call it,
that hellish stop may interrupt the course of all Gods mercies. According to
what God has threatened: Jer. 18. 9, 10.
that though he speak concerning a Nation to build and plant it, if that Nation
do evil in his sight, he will repent of the good wherewith he said he would
benefit them. Directions for the practice of it.


Quest. What then is to be done? or wherewith shall we be thankful? Answ*
Chrysostom once desired that he had a voice to speak to all the world. 1. To
the honorable house of Parliament.
I could wish that my voice could speak to all the kingdom, that I might tell
them what God expects from all their hands. To show thankfulness worthy of
their condition and office.
But though that cannot be, I am called this day to speak to you, (Right
Honorable and beloved) who are the Representative Body of the kingdom, and
whose thankfulness will be interpreted by God and man to be the thankfulness
of the whole kingdom; you must think of some such way of praising God, as
becomes your high places and callings, and the whole kingdom which you
represent: if single persons praise God upon a ten stringed Instrument, you
must do it upon a ten thousand stringed Instrument: some thing worthy of a
Parliament of England, such a Parliament, for whom God has done such great
things. When King Solomon offers a peace offering he brings two and twenty
thousand fat beeves, and an hundred and twenty thousand fat sheep, there is
thankfulness fit for a King to show. 1 Chronicles. 22. 14.
And when David would show his Gratitude to God in preparing to build him an
house, he offered a thousand thousand talents of silver, and an hundred
thousand talents of gold, which comes to above three and thirty thousand
cart-load of silver, allowing two thousand weight or six thousand pound
sterling to every load; and of gold seventy millions of French crowns, besides
brass and iron without weight: Cap. 29. 12.
And when he and his people had added much more unto it, he admired Gods
goodness to give them a heart to offer so willingly, and excuses the smalnesse
of his own gift as being prepared in a time of trouble. Let not therefore your
Thankfulness be in trifles, lowprizd, serve not God with that which costs you
nothing. And if indeed you would do something heroical, worthy of your selves,
take him for your pattern, who for his thankfulness was called the man after
Gods own heart, and that is David, Following the example of David.
who (when God had delivered him from all his enemies, and established him in
his kingdom) expresses in the hundred and first Psalm, wherein his
thankfulness should appear, weigh the Psalm seriously, it comprehends the
sum of what I have to say to you. I will sing (says he) of mercy and
judgment, that is, I will celebrate thankfully all Gods merciful
administrations unto my soul: how would he do this? Answ. In binding himself in
his rule of walking toward three sorts of persons with whom he had to do.
First, himself. Secondly, his family. And thirdly, his kingdom. For his own
person he would be holy, Verse. 2.
he would walk uprightly in the midst of his house. For his family he would
have no wicked person about him, no slanderers, liars, proud, or deceitful
persons, he would root them out as pests to his family; And he would search
throughout the whole kingdom to have his family stored with good servants.
Thirdly, for his kingdom, he would root out wicked men without exception of
persons, and that early, that so his whole kingdom might be a City of the
Lord, a people with whom God might delight to dwell. Here is an example fit for
a King and Parliament to follow, oh that God would incline your hearts this day
to resolve to begin first with your own persons, In reforming.
else you will never be sincere for the rest: 1. Their own persons.
Now God has called you and separated you for his work, be not the vassals of
Satan, factors or pensioners for his enemy, who has thus far be trusted you.
Secondly, look to your families, do as Jacob did at Bethel, when he paid his
vow of thanksgiving unto God, he made all his family bury their Idols under an
oak; that so when hereafter any of you shall be mentioned, Genesis 35.
it may truly be said, such a Nobleman, 1. Their families.
such a Parliament man, and the Church in his house, that your families may be
little Congregations of Saints, with whom God may delight to dwell: Not like
Taverns and Alehouses, houses of lewd and debaucht persons, where Zim, and Jim
dwells, doleful creatures, fit only to be agents for Satan, as it is much
feared many of them are until this day.

Thirdly, 3. The Church and kingdom.
then look to sweep the Church and kingdom; blessed be God you have begun
well, you have been happy Instruments to ease many pressures; But beloved,
there is yet much work to be done, yet the root of our evils is not taken away,
yet the Ministry is not purged, yet the great Cities and Towns, and many
thousand other places in the kingdom want bread for their souls, Nehem. 12. 10.
and the portions of the Levites, honorable maintenance for them who should do
the work of the Lord in many places are not yet provided: yet there remains
much rubbish to be carried away, as yet the honor of the Lords day is not
fully vindicated, as yet the Lords Temple is not builded, nor the Scepter of
Christ thoroughly set up. These are services fit for a thankful Parliament, if
you neglect these, and cause a cessation in building the Temple, and let it lie
unfinished, as it was in Cyrus his days, if there be a P^rez-Vzizah, a breach
in bringing in the Ark of God unto us: Now you have built your own house, and
procured Civil Liberties, should you let Gods house lie waste, should you be
(as many fear you are) less zealous in Gods cause, then in your own, I
solemnly profess unto you, the God of heaven will require it at your hands,
and the hands of your posterity: he will curse all your blessings, and
overturn what you think you have established. But the people of God in whose
hearts and prayers you daily are, expect and hope for these great things from
you: This do in the fear of the Lord, and ye shall prosper.

2. This (Right Honorable) is that I had to say to you from the Lord, if now
you (that are the residue of this great Assembly) enquire what you shall do,
and how you shall testify your thankfulness. To all others to express their
thankfulness.
I answer, if you will go and ring Bells, make Bonfires, feast one another, and
send portions to the poor for whom nothing is provided, I have nothing to say
against it, I think you shall do well. In rejoicing.
But this I beseech you do, go home and pray God to incline the hearts of the
Parliament to practice what this day they have heard, In praying for the
Parliament.
write down a Catalogue of all the great things which God has this year done
for us, and let your children know them, (and the Lord put it into the heart of
some wise observer of the times, so to write them, In remembering Gods
deliverances.
that the present and future generation may be blessed with a true Narration of
these wonderful mercies) give every one of you up, your selves to the Lord to
be his servants, abuse not your peace and Liberty with Idleness, riot, and
excess, or in being choked with enlarging your selves with worldly businesses,
but make that use of our peace which the Church did in the ninth of the Acts,
And walking worthy of them.
and the 31. verse. Then had the Churches rest and peace; and what use made they
of their peace? They were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in
the comforts of the holy Ghost were multiplied: which the Lord grant unto us
for Christ Jesus sake. Amen.

FINIS.
In the Preface, for Berocah r. Beracah. for translated r. transacted.


