A LETTER of QUERIES To the Popish Brethren of the ASSOCIATION.
Muten^us Clypeos Danaumque insignia nobis
Aptemus. Dolus an Virtus Quis in Host requirat?
Virgil.
YOU cannot imagine [ Honorable Associators, for so I must call you, since
some body has been pleased to write you, Knight and Burgesses, etc. in the Head
of his Paper, though to bring in the business, he might as well have called you
Traitors and Rebels:] You cannot imagine how heartily the Pope laughed at the
first perusual of your Association, when it arrived at Rome, and how mightily
it tickled the Cockles of the Old Man's heart, to see it drawn so exactly to
his mind. He was never in so merry and blithe a humor in all his Life; and it
was very remarkable, that the Ancient Gentleman read every syllable and Iota
on it over and over again, without putting on his Spectacles, when he has not
done the like these many good years. So strangely do some things delight (and
even tickle) some People, that the very conceit of 'em can make the Blood
circulate much more fast and briskly, than it used to do; can make a Decrepid
Bald Man as froliksom and airy as the best Youngster of them all, and can
Illuminate the Eyes as well the Mind of Old Age. Well, the Holy Father was
resolved to weep, and weep he did, for joy; and after some few Mawdlin Tears,
it was his good pleasure to drop two or three words to the Red-hatted Sparks
about him: These are the men for my turn; These will most Infallibly do the
business: You may Plot again and again; but when all is done, there is no way
like to this, to bring down the stubborn Necks of that Heretical People under
my Toes.

Now, I being informed of this the other day by a Letter I casually lighted on,
that came from one of your Correspondents at Rome, did wonder very much at the
News; and could hardly believe it, till I looked a little more narrowly into
the Draught of your Association; and then I began to be pretty well convinced,
that it was a Damnable and Jesuitical Thing written by some Members of the
Society toward the advancement of Popery, let their Declaration in outward
view be never so severe against it. However, I have determined with my self to
suspend my belief to the afore-mentioned story, till some of you will take the
pains to give me better Intelligence, or return me your Resolutions to the
following Quaeres, which I here present you withal. And, I. Whether the Pope
gave you a Dispensation and Absolution from your Oath of Allegiance, before you
were to enter into this Association? II. Whether it is not a mere Cheat and
Blind put upon the world, when you pretend so much to Defend the Protestant
Religion; seeing one of its chiefest Doctrines is, Obedience to the Civil
Magistrate; and the very entrance into this Combination, without and against
Authority, is repugnant and contradictory to That Principle; And they who act
against it, and espouse the Contrary, (which is one of the most discrimanating
Doctrines of the Church of Rome) may be presumed easily, not to stick at the
Less, but to be Virtually, and in effect Rank Papists? III. Whether in that
place where you say, Lest this Just and Pious Work would by any means be
obstructed or hindered, for want of Discipline and Conduct, etc. you do mean,
there may be Impediments in the carrying on; and that it must be a Work of
Time, since Rome was not built in a day? IV. Whether by the Meritorious Works
you aim at, in Delivering His Majesty from His Councils, and in Disbanding His
Guards; you expect as high and mighty thanks from Heaven, as they did from the
King's Father, who said in the days of Yore; We deserve and expect Approbation,
Sc. Protest. 1^ December. 1638.
and Thanks from His Majesty in His own due time, for keeping His Evil
Councillors and bad Patriots, from putting their hand in His Subjects? V.
Whether Stephen College did not excellently well (and with Suceess) follow
that Popish Aphorism of Machivel, to put on the Masque of Religion; when at
his Trial he said, All the Protestants of England were concerned in it; least
he should come into the same cause with Garnet, who in one of his private
Letters showed his Fear, least he should not be Enrol'd in the Albe of the
Martyrs; for that, there were not objected against him any matters of Religion?
VI. Whether this Association has not in it is form a near Consanguinity with the
Bloody League of France, and be not patched up out of i's Holy Relics? VII.
Whether you are not like to the Politicians of the Court of Rome, Huomini senza
pro senza Anima, Men without Fear of God, or Regard of their own Souls, who,
while they strive to advance their Religion; have lost all Religion themselves.
VIII. Whether Mercenary Forces do not signify the Guards by an Equivocation,
and the Exclusion of the Duke, the Destruction of Monarchy, and Pulling down a
Power Arbitrary in Imagination, the setting up another Real one? IX. Whether
your most Execrable Complot in Swearing to Casheer all Arbitrary Sway, and to
Propugne the Protestant Religion, and to Destroy the Duke, may not very patly
be Paralleled by a wicked Passage in a Book called, The Defense of the English
Catholics, Chap. 5 ' The Danger is so evident and inevitable, that God has
not sufficiently provided for our Salvation, and the Preservation of the Church
and H. Laws, if there were no way to Restrain such wicked Princes, etc. And
then it follows, -- ' The Bond and Obligation we have entered into, for the
Service of Christ and his Church, far exceeds all other duties, which we owe to
any Humane Creature, etc. X. Whether by this Union intended to Disunite
Protestants, you do not take the best way to bring in Papism?


Lastly, Whether, by Consequence the Now-Abhorrers of the Association, do not
likewise in that, Abhor and Detest Popery?

And now, Gentlemen, If any Member of you will answer these Interrogatories, by
way of clearing your selves from the Scandal of a Pack of Popishly-Affected
Persons, I shall look upon my self so far obliged to you, as either to Answer
your Answers, or to propose some New Doubts to You, or to that same Ignatius
Loyola, who may be as good at Expounding, as making of Riddles; and whom some
Mad People follow with such a Precipitate and Blind Obedience, as only befits
them, whom the Devil drives. But better things are now hoped from you, since
you could not but see very lately the Fact of all Rebels in the Resemblance of
the Old Covenant and New Association, consumed by the Flames. The descent to
Hell is very easy, and Ignatius, though he may Limp and Halt never so much, may
get thither timely enough to come to the Roast-meat.

Some of your own Popish Authors say of him, Satis constat eum in Pueritia,
Profanos admodum haufisse Spiritus, certain it is, that in his Childhood he
drew in very Profane Spirits; and that, in Adolescentia, Militia ac Vanitati
sese dedit, in his Youthful years, he betook himself to Wars and Vanity, being
of a Defultorius's Disposition, and ready to serve any Party, that could pay
best. But at Pomperopolis, being Strenuously engaged in Battle; his Leg was
sorely wounded, and it turned to a very good Account, for accepto hoc Luculento
vulnere ad Deum conversus est, having received this huge wound, he was
Converted to God, letting out of it all his sinful Blood: And using ever since
a Tap-stilt to support his Body, he has walked so Firmly with God, as he is
become the Founder and General of a most Sacred Society; though still some
think this Walking is only an Halting between God and Baal and running Crooked
courses, as Israel did in the days of Elias. However let him go how or whither
he will, The Popes blessing ever-more go along with him.

T. M.

LONDON: Printed for A. Banks, MDCLXXXII.


