Die Mercurii 30. December. 1646.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That Sir William Massam do
from this House give thanks to Mr. Marshall and Mr. Newcomen for the great
pains they took in their Sermons they preached this day before the Commons at
St. Margaret Westminster (being a day of their public Humiliation) and desire
them to Print their Sermons.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Stephen Bowtell to print my Sermon.

Stephen Marshall.

THE RIGHT UNDERSTANDING OF THE TIMES: OPENED In a Sermon preached to the
Honorable House of Commons, December 30. 1646. at Margaret Westminster, Being
the day of their solemn Monthly Fast. By Stephen Marshall, B. D. Minister of
Gods Word at Finchingfield in Essex.

Jer. 8. Verse. 7, 8. The Storke in the heavens knows her appointed times, and
the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming,
but my people know not the judgment of the Lord: How do ye say, we are wise?
If thou had known, even thou at least in this thy day, the things which
belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. Luke 19.42. So
teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom,
Psalm. 90.12. LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Stephen Bowtell, and are to
be sold at the sign of the Bible in Pope's Head Alley, 1647.

TO THE HONORABLE The House of COMMONS Now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
IT has been much lamented by learned men, that the times wherein things have
been done in the world, are no more truly computed, and that thereby all
Histories of times are very imperfect, Apud quos ratio temporis non cohaeret,
apud illos neque veritatis neque fidei historicae ratio ulla constare potest;
How much more is it to be lamented, that so few have any understanding of the
times in reference to the things which concern their everlasting peace?
because no less mischief then ruin of souls, of Nations and Churches
unavoidably break in upon them, who know not the time of their visitation; If
this plain Sermon may help this way to mend the times, and promote the right
and best study of them, especially if God vouchsafe to bless it to be in any
degree useful to you in your great work, for whose Meridian it was
calculated, for whose use it was composed, to whom it was preached, and by
whose order it is now made public, it will be a great comfort to the spirit,
and a blessed answer from heaven to the Prayers of

Your unworthy and most devoted Servant, STEPHEN MARSHALL.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House of Commons, at their Monthly
Fast, December. 30. 1646.
1 Chronicles. 12.32. And of the Children of Issachar, which were men that had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do; the heads of them
were two hundred, and all their brethren were at their command.
THis whole Chapter (Beloved) does contain a List or Catalogue of all the men
of war which did cleave to David, their names, their qualities, Introduction
showing the scope of the Chapter.
their Number; and there is a double Catalogue of them: First, a Catalogue of
them that did cleave to him, before Saul was dead, while he was in a defensive
war for his own safety; for although David for a great while, had not above
six or seven hundred with him, yet in the end they fell to him, especially out
of the Tribes of Judah, Benjamin, Gad, and Manasseh, so many that his Army grew
to be like an Army of God. And lest any man should think that it were no
better then rebellion in him and them to bear defensive Arms against his
Prince, Verse 22.
it is said in the 18 Verse, That the Spirit came upon one of the chief
Commanders, and told him they were his, and would live and die with him, and
that God was with him, they knew him innocent; they saw he was unjustly
persecuted, they came to rescue him as a Partridge out of a Falcons Talons, and
in so doing they did no more, then the whole host did at another time, when
they saved Jonathan out of the hands of his father Saul, who would unjustly
have put him to death. 1 Samuel 14.45.
The other part of the Chapter beginning at Verse 23. contains the Catalogue
of the Commanders and Soldiers that fell in to him to make him King, after the
death of Saul, and there you shall find that the excellent qualities of all
the Leaders, and of many of the Soldiers are described; some of them were
excellent Archers, some were exact Slingers who could throw and hit at a hairs
breadth, some of them were as courageous as Lions, some of them were as swift
as the Roes upon the Mountains, but none of them all came near the Tribe of
Issachar, in that which makes a people strong and happy both in the time of
war and peace; They were men of understanding, who knew the times what Israel
had to do; and of this excellent commendation of this Tribe of Issachar, as of
a Theme that very much concerns us, I have chosen to treat this day before
this great Assembly by the assistance of Almighty God; The Text opened and
divided.
wherein there are three things to be handled. First,

The persons spoken of, the Tribe of Issachar, and their

Their singular commendations, they had understanding to; the whole Tribe, but
especially their Leaders, who were about two hundred, knew the times in
reference to their duty. Thirdly,

Here is the interest which these Leaders had in the hearts all their Brethren
were at their command, or as the word signifies, depended on their mouth. I
begin briefly to speak of the first.

The persons, they were the men of Issachar; Issachar you know was one of the
twelve Tribes, 1 Part, what the Tribe of Issachar was.
one of Jacobs sons by Leah, and their lot in the land of Canaan fell betwixt
the half Tribe of Manasseh and Zebulun, and their province was bounded by the
mountains of Gilboa on the one side, and mount Hermon on the other; all that
goodly part of the Country, that was called the fat valley of Jezreel, was the
inheritance of this Tribe of Issachar, a rich inland Country, and formerly
their Spirits and Genius was like to that of Country Farmers. What their temper
and spirit in time past.

Genesis 49.14, 15 opened and explained.


They minded nothing but their back and their belly, and so Jacob himself did
foretell of them, in the 49. of Genesis, when he said, that Issachar was like a
strong Ass that couched down between two burdens, and saw that rest was
good, and gave himself willingly to bear Tribute: The meaning was, that this
Tribe would be like unto that dull, simple, slothful creature the Ass, that
minded nothing but his belley, give him but meat enough for his belly and lay
what you will upon his back; so this Tribe, if they might not be outed or
plundered in their rich Country, but might follow their business, and gather
wealth, lay any thing upon them they would bear it: this of old was the Genius
of this Tribe, but now another manner of Spirit possessed them; none of all the
Maritine towns nor Cities where the people are most active, and fit for
Negotiation, went beyond, What at the present.
or came near to the Tribe of Issachar, now (I say) they had learned that that
makes a people happy, they had wisdom and unity, they had understanding to
know the times and their duty, they had many thousands of eyes to see into the
true state of affairs, and then they had as many thousand hands ready to
execute; they could presently fall upon that which belonged to them; they had
understanding of the times, and knew not only what themselves, but what all
the Country, what all Israel had to do; this was the people, and this strange
alteration that God had made in the Spirit of this Tribe of Issachar, does
afford us this excellent lesson.

That the Lord can at his pleasure enable and raise up the spirits of persons,
Doct. 1.
God often raises up the spirits of people to do worthily from whom men would
little expect it.
and people to do worthily, from whom no body would expect any thing. Moses
had foretold that Issachar would be but a dull Ass, but you see how the Lord
had altered, and raised him up to do excellently; he went beyond all the
other Tribes; and God has often done so, he takes Moses a Shepherd, a man
slow of speech, sends him and makes him a fit man to deliver a whole nation out
of bondage and captivity; at another time, he raises Gideon, a private
Gentleman, it may be but a Yeomans son, Gen 4. Judges 6. 1 Samuel 9. 1 Samuel 16.
from his Flayle when he was threshing of Wheat, and makes him a Captain to
route the whole Army of the Midianites and to judge his people; at another time
takes Saul, a Private Gentleman's son, who was seeking for his fathers Asses,
and makes him fit to govern a kingdom; takes David a young youth from
following his Ewes great with Lamb, and presently enables him to cope with the
Giant Goliath, and to destroy him, and afterward to be the ruler over Gods
people; Amos 7.14.
he takes Amos from being a Neatheard, and a gatherer of Summer fruit, to be
a Prophet, and to preach in the Kings Chapel; takes Fishermen who were never
bred in Universities, and sends them into all the world with the power of the
Gospel to subdue the Nations to Jesus Christ. Thus the Lord has raised up
instruments, and he can easily do it, for there is a spirit in man, Reasons
of it. He has abundance of the Spirit.
but the inspiration which gives understanding and gifts comes only from the
Almighty; the Lord has abundance of the Spirit, and powers it out where, and
how, and in what manner he pleases. Application.


This may be a great encouragement to us in all our extremities and exigents,
let us do our duty, and let us never fear Gods wanting of instruments for
his work; when we are low, we presently cry out, Lord by whom shall Jacob
arise, by whom? by stones raised up to be children, and by children enabled to
do the work of men: We should never be at our faiths end, though sometimes
we are at our wits end, let us do our duty, and leave it to God, who can
easily raise up instruments to do his work, from whom we would never expect
it; we our selves have had a great deal of blessed experience of it. In the
beginning of our public troubles, our question was, by whom shall England
arise now it is thus low? We demanded, where shall we find Captains and
Commanders for a war in a Nation where all men have been bred in ease and
peace? God has found them, and took Gentlemen from following their Hawks and
Dogs, and Tradesmen from their shops, and Husbandmen from their Ploughes, to
be able to cope with the most expert Commanders in the world: and now we are
at another loss, now we are demanding, where shall we find Ministers for
eight or ten thousand Congregations, to instruct them in the way of life? Fear
not, if God for our sins deny us not this mercy, Psalm. 68.11.
he can fulfill that in the 68. Psalm; The Lord will give the Word, and great
shall be the multitude of them that shall publish it, the Lord can raise them
up unexpectedly; and so in all other our difficulties.

The second and chief thing in the Text.

Their singular commendation.


But this I purposely only point at, that I might not be straightned in the
second, which is the singular commendations of this Tribe, They were men of
understanding to know the times, and what Israel had to do.

That it is a great and high commendation of any people, especially of their
Heads and Leaders, Doct. 2.
to know the times in reference to their duty: It is a singular commendation
to know the times in reference to men's duties. This Doctrine, first, explained.
These men of Issachar had understanding of the times, to know what Israel had
to do; this God sets down as their high commendation; in the handling of it I
shall endeavor these three things. First,

I shall interpret the meaning of it, make you see what it is to know the times
in reference to duties. Secondly,

2ly, proved.
I shall endeavor to prove it out of the Scripture, and illustrate the truth of
it, that you may see, that it is a high commendation, and a matter of extreme
consequence; and thirdly, and principally,

3ly, applied.
I shall endeavor to make Application of it for our own good. For the first,

First explained, there is a fivefold knowledge of the times.
What it is to know the times in reference to duty; you may please to observe
that in the Scripture, and in the practice of men, there is found a fivefold
knowledge of the times.

1 Astrologicall.
There is an Astrologicall knowledge of the times, such a knowledge as the
Starre-gazers do boast of; a knowledge whereby a company of vain men do
undertake out of the books of the Stars to tell you whatsoever God has
decreed concerning Men or States: this knowledge is so condemned in other places
of Scripture that none of you will imagine, that this was the commendation of
this Tribe. Secondly,

2 Diabolical.
There is another knowledge of the times, which I may call a Diabolical
knowledge of the times, whereby wicked and ungodly men do study to improve all
advantages of time to further their own lusts and wickednesses; the study and
knowledge of time-servers, who endeavor to make the times further them in
their cursed designs; men who like Willowes or Bulrushes in the water will bow
which way soever the stream runs, and dance after the present Fiddle of the
times for their own ends. I am certain none of you think that this was the
commendation of this Tribe; such Temporizers and Time-servers, however they may
for a while applaud their own wisdoms, will one day know, they have served
but an ill Master; this was far from the Tribe of Issachar. Thirdly,

You shall read of a Prophetical knowledge of the times, 3 Prophetical.
that is, such a knowledge as wherein the Lord by revelation does in able some
of his servants, I mean the Prophets, to know what shall afterward come to
pass; and this kind of knowledge, though every man has an itch after it, and
many do as Nebuchadnezzar did, Dan. 2*29.
when his thoughts troubled him in the night, that he might know what should
come to pass afterward; yet our Lord has told us, That it is not for us thus
to know the times and seasons, which the Father has kept in his own hand;
Act. 1.7.
there is fourthly,

Another knowledge of the Times, and study of it, 4 Historical and
Astronomicall
which is, an Historical knowledge of the times, or an Astronomicall knowledge
of the times; a knowledge which is extremely and deservedly cried up by learned
men; a knowledge wherein many men of choycest wits, both among Heathens and
Christians, have took very great pains, wherein they have much advanced
wisdom and learning, especially in our latter age. Many rare men of choycest
abilities have set down in a continued Series, a Chronology of all the years,
that have been since the Creation, and of the most memorable things and persons
that have fallen out, or lived in the several ages, and years; and this they
have done to their own everlasting honor, rectifying the account of time, and
extremely advantaged even the study of the Scriptures; now this knowledge,
though it be excellent, yet my Text has nothing to do with it, and truly
though it be an excellent thing, men may have it, and yet die fools, and be
miserable for want of that knowledge which I am this day to speak of. The
Nation of the Jews were admirable in that kind of account of times: Scaliger
says of them, they were exact even to admiration; and Sethus Calvisius one of
the most learned writers of that kind, though he go another way to work, yet
confesses that in the Jews account, they did not lose above the account of one
hour in the space of 1500. years; yet because they had no better knowledge of
the times then that, the Lord in the eighth of Jeremiah says, Ier. 8.
they were fools, and had not so much wisdom, as the Crane and the Storke,
and the Swallow, those irrational Animals, who had so much sagacitie, as to
know the times of their coming into a Country, and leaving a Country; but
this people knew nothing of the times in reference to Gods judgments, and
their own duties: the Lord counted them fools for all their other learning;
And therefore there is, fifthly,

5 Theological, a gracious and practical knowledge, which is here meant.
Another knowledge of the times, which I may call a Theological knowledge, or
rather a gracious and a practical knowledge of the times, which is, so to know
the times, as to understand the moment and exigence of all affairs which fall
within the times in reference to their own duty, that they may improve all
occurrences which fall out to the right end. This is the knowledge that I am to
speak of, and this knowledge infinitely goes beyond that other; I confess I
find a great many learned Volumes writ for the help of the other, to further
the Chronologicall, or Historical wisdom of the times, abundance of
Astronomicall Tables have been compiled, and other helps set forth; but for
this latter, I hardly know one little Pamphlet extant about it, and yet this
infinitely goes beyond the other; for though a man should die ignorant of the
other, and never know the Julian Account, or wherein the new and old style
differ one from another, if he have but learned to number his days, so as to
apply his heart to wisdom, he will honor God here, and be happy for ever;
but without this, what learning soever he had in the other, his life will be
wicked, and in the end he will die a fool: And this was the knowledge of this
Tribe, this Practical knowledge, so that when the other Tribes some of them
stood for the house of Saul, to continue the government there, others of them
inclined to David to make him King, and others probably were unsatisfied in
their thoughts concerning either of them, possibly thinking it would be best
to continue their old Aristocraticall government, in their several Tribes, and
to wait that God should raise them up extraordinary Judges in difficult times,
and so they stood in a kind of indifferency and neutralitie; these men of
Issachar, especially their Leaders, had so studied the times, that they did not
only know what was lawful and expedient in this huge turn of theirs, What
this practical knowledge of the times is.
in this great business that was before them, but they knew what was their
duty, yea what all the kingdom, all the Commonwealth ought to do with them,
they knew the times, and what Israel had to do.

Now this knowledge that I have brought you to, is not a mental or speculative
understanding of humane affairs, or things belonging either to Church or
Commonwealth, but it is a Practical knowledge, which is a wise ability to
manage all the understanding that they have in reference to their duty; in one
word, it is to observe all Gods administrations, wherewith the present time is
filled, his providence, his mercies, his judgments, his words, his works, to
observe them (I say) so as thereby to be enabled seasonably and timely to
perform their own duties, and to regulate their conversations according to
the exigence and juncture of times, for the glory of God, the good of their
brethren, and the salvation of their own souls, and this is the Theme
wherein I now proceed.

2. This Doctrine proved.
To give you some evidence out of the Scripture, to make it apparent to you,
that it is the highest commendations that can be given of any people, to have
this understanding of the times, in reference to their duty: and for the
proof of it, I shall endeavor these two things. First,





^. The Scripture calls this wisdom.
To prove that it is such a high and deserved commendations, take but these
three proofs. First, every where in the Scripture this is counted true
wisdom, and in the account of God, they go for wise men, who understand the
times in reference to their duties; look first into the fifth of the Ephesians,
at the eight verse, and so forward, Ephesians. 5.15, 16. opened and explained.
the Apostle lays down this great Doctrine, That now God had sent the light
of the Gospel amongst them, they must not for time to come walk as other
Gentiles did walk in the vanity of their minds, but they must lead a life
worthy of the Gospel; and this he proves by many Arguments, which when he
has proved, then in the 15. and 16. verses, he sets down what this life is,
see then, that you walk (...), exactly, not as Fools but as Wise men; wherein
lies that? redeeming the time, because the days are evil; there is all
required, there is the manifestation and demonstration, that you do not walk
like Fools, but as Wise men, if you have but once learned to redeem the time
in these evil days; the days are naught, the times are evil, full of snares
to be avoided, many duties to be done; now herein will appear
Gospell-wisedome, to walk so as that in these evil days, you may redeem the
time: and Solomon has an excellent discourse of the same subject, in the
eighth of Ecclesiastes, in the beginning of the Chapter, Ecles. 8.1. to 6.
opened*
he gives a high Encomium of a wise man; Who is (says he) as the wise man?
that is, no ^an can be compared to a wise man, what is he? (...) that knows
the interpretation of a thing, he that knows what every business does truly
signify and call for, that is the wise man; then he tells you, this man's
wisdom will gain him courage and credit, he will be honored and esteemed;
then brings it down, to manifest the excellency of this wisdom in one
particular case, which is the most tickle business in the world for men to be
employed in, and that is in attending upon the affairs of supreme Governors in
doing that which the higher powers command them, for they will quickly be
angry and take offense, therefore do their business carefully and speedily as
you should, and if they be angry, go not away in a pet, etc. But now lest
some body should say, Do you mean that a man should do all that Kings, and
supreme Magistrates do command, without further enquiry or delay? No, says
Solomon in the fifth Verse, the wise man knows both time and judgment; the
wise man that has the interpretation of a thing, knows what is to be done,
what is to be refused, and when things are to be done most fitly or
opportunely; therefore none like the wise man. So likewise Moses in the 32. of
Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 32.19.
about the 19. Verse, O that this people were wise, that they did but
understand their last end; that they but rightly knew their time: and in the
90. Psalm, which is another prayer of Moses, Lord teach us so to number our
days, Psalm. 90.12.
to make such a compute of our times, that we might apply our hearts to
wisdom. I might give you many other Scriptures which show that the Lord
counts this to be true wisdom; nay, I Will add this further, the very light of
nature has taught the Heathens to judge this to be true wisdom: the seven
Counselors of that great Emperor of Persia, in the first of Ester are said to
be men that knew the times, the meaning is, that they were wise Counselors;
Ester 1.13.
and among the Romans it is a Proverbiall Adage, homo omnium horarum, that is,
he is a wise man that is a man for all hours, knows the business of every
time, of every place, whatsoever he is called to, he understands his
affairs; and in truth this may well be called wisdom, for it is wisdom;
it is not only a part of wisdom, but it is the very Systeme and
comprehension of all wisdom: I know there is a particular wisdom that men
may have in some affairs, as a Husbandman that knows but how to plough his
ground seasonably, Esaias 28.16.
etc. that is called his wisdom; and the women that did but know how to spin
finely, etc. Men may have a kind of wisdom in this or that particular trade,
Exodus 36.
and yet all the world may know him to be a fool in everything else; but that
that is the true and real wisdom which properly sets a man out to go for a
wise man, What wisdom is*
properly stands in the true understanding of the times, in reference to men's
duties.

For both Philosophers and Divines do agree, that wisdom is made up of these
two things; the one is, Intelligence, which is nothing but the understanding of
things in their nature, as they are good or evil; the other is Sapience, which
is the same understanding applied to particular businesses, as they stand
vested with all their circumstances: and that man that has the understanding
of affairs, as they are circumstantianted with all things that go with them,
and knows how he may dexterously and opportunely apply himself to them, he
is the wise man, that is the first proof, that the Spirit of God every where
calls this wisdom. Secondly,

The same Spirit of God does ^sually call the want of Jeremiah, the Lord
speaks in the 6, 7, 8, 9. Verses, after this manner, Jer. 8.6, 7, 8.
How do you say you are wise? why do you pretend to wisdom, (and he
speaks not to the vulgar people, but to the Scribes, their learned men, that
could handle their tongues and their pens best) there was no wisdom in them,
they were fools; Why? because (says God) the Storke, and the Crane, and the
Swallow know their seasons, but this people knows not the time of my
judgments; and therefore the Lord would not have them pretend to any wisdom,
but be contented to be counted fools, because they were ignorant of this:
and our blessed Savior in the 16. of Matthew, Matthew. 16.1, 2, 3, 4.
when the Scribes and Pharisees, and the learned Doctors of the Law came and
desired to have some further evidence from him, by some sign from heaven, that
he was the Messiah; Christ told them they were Hypocrites, they were a sinful
and an adulterous Generation, merely because they did not understand the
signs of the times, A wicked and an adulterous generation would have more
light: you can tell by the Clouds when it will be fair weather next morning,
and you can guess by the morning whether it will be rain; but ye hypocrites,
ye fools (says he) you cannot discern the signs of the times, what the
times signifies, and calls for at your hands, you have no understanding of
this, and therefore you may go for a company of fools, and hypocrites, and so
left them and departed. Nay, thirdly, which makes it yet more clear,

The want of this knowledge of the times in reference that they knew not the
times of their visitation. Luke 19.41.44.
This you will find in the 19. of Luke, and the latter end of it, when Christ
about the 41. Verse, came to take his farefull of Jerusalem and to die there;
from the top of the Mountain he looked over the City and fell a weeping, O
(says he) that thou had but known in this thy day the things that belong to
thy peace, but they are hid from thy eyes; then he goes on and tells them what
shall become of them, the enemies shall cast a bank and not leave one stone
upon another, level them to the ground and their Children in them; for what I
pray? because thou knew'st not the time of thy visitation: destruction came in
only at that breach, they knew not the time of their visitation; Matthew. 24.
Luke 17.
and elsewhere our Lord says, in the latter end of the world, when ruin shall
come, it will be then, as it was in the days of Noah, and as it was in the
days of Lot, men shall be eating and drinking, and marrying wives, but know
nothing they should do for their salvation till utter ruin come upon them. I
hope now the truth of this Lesson is clear out of the Scripture.

But if you please to go a little further yet, and consider the excellency and
difficulty of this wisdom to know the times, how much depends upon it, and
how much is required to it, you will be fully satisfied, that a greater
commendation can never be given of any man, or any people, then this, that
they know the times in reference to their duties: and that I may open what
belongs to the making up of this work, The right understanding of the times
opened out of the Scripture in 6. Conclusions.
I beseech you give me leave to open these six Conclusions out of the
Scripture, which all much concern this wisdom of knowing the times in
reference to duty. First,

That time is one of the most precious treasures that ever God bestows upon
any man, or any people; Conclus. 1.
1. because time is the only measure out of which God powers out all his
administrations. 2. Time it is the only space in which men are to do all
their work. Exodus 21.19.
3. It Is so precious that God would have men value it one to another: if any
man had hurt another, he must not only pay for his healing, but he must pay
for the loss of his time. Yea, 4. God calls upon his people to redeem it at
any rate; Redeem the time, Ephesians. 5.16. Col. 4.5.
redeem the time, as if there were no commodity, that the God of heaven would
so commend unto men (next to his truth) that we should buy so eagerly, as we
should purchase time. Yea, 5. it is so precious, that He who is at that great
cost to make and contrive it, as to cause the Sun every day to run about the
world, and all those excellent creatures in the firmament to make it their
work, for the continuation of time will call men to account for every moment,
for every minute of it: That is my first Conclusion, that time is a precious
Jewel in Gods account, and ought to be so in all people's. Secondly,

God has joined time and duty inseparably one to another; so that there is no
duty, Conclus. 2.
Eccles. 3.1, 2, etc.
but it has an appointed time for it, and there is no time, but it, has an
appointed duty for it; it is disputable whether there be a vacuum in nature or
no, it is most certain there is no vacuum in time: No man ever lives to see
that minute of time, nor that ragge or cranny of time, of which he may truly
say at this time, I have nothing at all to do; but the Lord has measured out
to all times some duty or other: this our Savior says expressly, Matthew. 6*
Matthew. 6.34. when he would dissuade men from troubling themselves to day with
the duties that belong to to morrow, he uses this argument among others,
Trouble not your selves for to morrow, for to morrow day has trouble enough of
its own, sufficient for every day is the trouble of it; the care, the work,
the duty of every day that passes over our heads is enough to fill the day,
that is the second, that God has joined time and duty together. Thirdly,

Conclus. 3.
There are some great duties that are to be concurrent in the practice of all
men, with every moment of their lives: My meaning plainly is this, the great
business of glorifying God, of saving our immortal souls, of keeping a good
conscience, of working out our salvation, these great things are not set off by
God to any set time, but they are to be concurrent with every moment of a man's
time; Trust in the Lord at all times; Esaias 26. Psalm. 106.3. Psalm. 62.81.119.20.
have respect to Gods Commandments at all times; Blessed are they that do
justice and judgment at all times; be ye always ready for your masters
coming: And of those excellent men Josiah and others, it is recorded that they
looked to Gods Commandments all their days; so that the great matters of
glorifying God, saving our souls, looking for our Masters coming, etc. these
duties are to be concurrent with all our time. Fourthly,

Several times, I mean the several compositions of times, Conclus. 4.
or Scenes, or Junctures of times, have their several and peculiar duties laid
out for every man by God himself: my meaning is this, there is a time of
youth, a time of age, a time of prosperity, a time of adversity, a time of
comfort, a time of trouble* a time of war, a time of peace, and a hundred
other several frames, and compositions, and junctures of time. Now so often as
God does make a new Scene of the time, every man has some new duty or other to
act; his part requires that he should act some new thing; the Scripture is
full of such expressions as these, in the times of prosperity do thus, in the
time of adversity do thus, in the time of the Gospel do thus, etc. Now to
know the time, and the several duties belonging to every time, is one of the
hardest things that belong to the task of man, this wisdom lies in the
deep; it is a difficult thing to find out what the duties are that belong to
the several times. But then fifthly,

That the Book of God, and only the Book of God, Conclus. 5.
is able to inform them who faithfully study it, in all the duties that do
belong to every new posture or face of time. First I say, only Gods Book can
do it, there are Books of excellent wisdom written by other men, but take
them all together, let a man be never so versed in them, they will never
discover to him every duty that belongs to every time, but the Book of God can
do it if men have their senses exercised in the study of it; there is no time
so intricate, no duty so arduous, but the book of God will teach all men,
from the Minister to the Hearer, from the Prince to the Subject, to make every
one of them perfect in all the works which belong to them. Psalm 19.7. it is
said, Psalm. 19.7, 8.
the Word gives understanding to the simple; and in the third of the Proverbs,
Verse. 21, 22, 23 In all thy ways acknowledge her, and thou shall walk in thy
way safely, Prove. 3.21, 22, 23.
and thy foot shall not stumble; when thou lie down thou shall not be
afraid, etc. Do but get wisdom into thy heart, get acquaintance with Gods
Word, it will direct thee in all thy w^^es, whether to the right hand or to the
left, at every turning place it will say, here is thy way, Esaias 30.21.
and these must be thy steps. Sixthly, and principally,

As there are several times, Conclus. 6.
and several duties annexed to these times, so in every time for any duty,
there is some particle of that time, which is the opportunity of the duty,
the season of the duty there is the space of time, and there is the season of
time; the space of time is nothing but the continuation and succession of so
many minutes and moments one of another; but the season of time, or
opportunity of it, is time apted and fitted, to do a business. Now these two
do very much differ one from another, the one of them the length, the duration
of time, the Greeks calls (...), but the season, the opportunity is called
(...), which is the tempus commodum, the tempestivitie of time, the ripeness
of time: and this indeed is properly time in reference to duty. And concerning
these seasons of time or times fitted for business, be pleased to consider
these five things, I shall need only to name them, because I speak to an
understanding people.

That any work to be done is done easily if the opportunity be taken; take
opportunity by the forelock, and any business whatsoever is to be done, will
be done with ease; not only because opportunity is the ripeness of time,
but because in opportunities God offers to work with us, and for us: Now you
know any business that must be done by the help of another, is then easily
done, when both parties join in it. Two Men that are to lift up a burden, if
they both lift together, and take the Hae, now, it goes up easily. A vessel
that is to be driven, if the Watermen ply the Oars, the wind and tide go with
them, the vessel is carried easily; Now (I say) the Lord offers himself to
come in to a people when there is a fit opportunity* ^hen he holds up his
hand, and says, Now lift, and I Will lift with you, now row, and my Word shall
blow with you; such Scripture as these are frequent, In an accepted time I have
heard thee; 2 Cor. 6.2.
and I will hear thee in an acceptable time; In a day of salvation I will
succor thee, in an opportune time: God offers to come in and help, if
opportunity be taken; This made the heathens esteem opportunity a goddess.

As things are easy when men take opportunities, so they are then beautiful;
the beauty and grace of every duty, both with God and man, is, when it is
done in its fit season; the righteous man in the first Psalm, is compared to
the Tree that brings forth his fruit in his season, suum in suo, his own
fruit, and in his proper season; Psalm 1.3.
God (says Solomon) has made every thing beautiful in its season; Eccles.
3.11.
all Gods works are beautiful in their season, and so are all men's works too:
A word spoke in season, Prove. 25.11. Prove. 15.23.
is like Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver; and a good word in season, O how
comfortable it is. Thirdly,

But know, that these Opportunities are wondrous hard to find out; very
difficult it is for men to know the true season Solomon sets down most
excellently in the eighth of Ecclesiastes, Eccles. 8.6. opened.
Verse 6. Because to every purpose there is required time and judgment,
therefore the misery of man is great upon him; mark that expression, most men
are miserable, because a business cannot be done, without a fit season and
judgment to know it: as if Solomon had said thus, The truth is, opportunities
are so rare, oft-times so sudden, so violent, so short, the wind seldom
blowing long in an opportune point, and men so ignorant, so blinded with
prejudice, with vain hopes or fears, that most men are miserable in that they
cannot find out the true season of a business, and thereby intimates that in
every business the most difficult part of the work is the right timing of it.
I add fourthly,

That when opportunities are past, if they be let slip, they are oftentimes
altogether irrecoverable; and the business is either wholly lost, or never
better then half done; it may cost more to patch up a business out of season,
then required to have done it beautifully if the season had been taken; As the
story goes of the Sibylls books, they were feign to give the full price for
one, which would have bought all three, when two of them were burnt. Post est
occasio calva. Unless God make another opportunity, man can never call
opportunity back again. Opportunities are Gods fitting of time to business,
Heb. 12.17.
and none but God can thus fit it; therefore you shall find Esau would have
repented and got the blessing, Matthew. 25.
he wept and cried for it, yet missed it, he might have had it once without
weeping and crying, but he lost the season, and the season being gone, he
could never recover it with all his weeping: So the foolish Virgins came with
their Lamps, pretending to have got some oil, and cried, Lord open to us, but
the season was past, and there was no entrance; the truth is, seasons are to
businesses as money is to wares, he that would buy a commodity upon a market
day, when possibly the commodity is very cheap, may then have it for laying
out his money, lose but that market, possibly ten market days will not help
him again with it, and either never buy it or give a greater rate for that
which is not so good as the other would have been; if opportunities be once
past over, without the Lord create them again, men are utterly lost in their

As these opportunities are excellent, and hard to find, and irrecoverable if
they be lost: So in the last place, know, that no wisdom, no learning,
nothing but a gracious heart guided by the Spirit of God, does know how to take
opportunities in time, for the great businesses that concern God and his
glory, no wisdom but the wisdom of grace, and Gods Spirit guiding the
heart, does ever know to do businesses in their right seasons. In other things
(as I said before) they may be taken, natural men may plow and sow in season,
etc. Yea, men may sensibly understand the times, so as to mourn for the
afflictions of them, so as to rejoice in the good of them; and wicked men by a
devilish wisdom can take the seeming opportunities, to promote their own
wicked designs; the harlot can take the opportunity of her husbands absence,
the thief the opportunity of the twilight, and so every man the seeming
opportunity of things that are of the Devil, for Satan helps them; but to
know the opportunities of the things that concern God and our souls, nothing
but a gracious heart enables a man to do it: the Scripture is very plain for
this, Solomon expresses it notably in the tenth of Ecclesiastes, Verse. 2. A
wise man's heart is at his right hand, but a fools heart is at his left;
Eccles. 10.2. opened.
the meaning is this, when a business is to be done, and the right season for
it, the wise man, a gracious man has his hand ready, and his heart to join
with his hand, he is always dexterous at it, but a fools ( i. e. a wicked
man's) heart, when his business is to be done, his heart is at his left hand,
every finger is a Thumb, he cannot manage it: but more clearly Solomon
expresses this, Prove. 17.16. opened.
Prove. 17. Verse. 16. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to buy
wisdom, seeing he has no heart to it? Let a wicked man have opportunities,
give him wealth, give him honor, give him means of grace, give him any thing
that may help to wisdom, he has no heart to it: So also says Daniel, Dan.
12.10. speaking of understanding the times, Dan. 12.10.
none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall, the godly shall.

Thus I have done with the Doctrinall part of it, and by this time I hope you
all grant, that it is a matter of wonderful concernement, of admirable
wisdom and commendation, to have understanding of the times and seasons, so
as rightly to discharge their own duties: I now come to the Application of it,
Application in two Uses.
wherein I shall only insist upon two Uses, the one is,

For Humiliation, in reference to time past, to seasons and opportunities which
are past and lost. The other shall be,

For Exhortation, in reference to the time to come, that we may learn this
excellent wisdom to know the times and seasons so as to lose no more of them.
For the first,

Use 1. Humiliation.
Is it such a singular commendation, so excellent a wisdom, a matter of so
great moment and consequence, to know the times in reference to duty? O what
cause of lamentations is there: First,

1 In general to all.
In general to us all? a man might in this case fill such a book as Ezekiels
roll was, wi^h weeping, and lamentation and mourning: Here is a great Assembly
gathered together to mourn upon a day of mourning, and if ever any Doctrine
that ever I have preached might call for mourning at all your hands, I am
persuaded this doctrine calls for it from every one of us; God be merciful to
us, we have all been fools, we have not known the times of our visitation,
we have known the times to talk of them, sometimes to inveigh against them,
crying out, they are the worst times that ever were; but for this knowledge of
my Text (wherein true wisdom should appear) to know the times in reference
to our duties, I fear I may say as Paul said of the Corinthians, hardly one
wise man to be found amongst us. One said, (I know not how truly) of the
Helvet^ans, that he traveled through their Country, and found that there are
toti pagi repleti fatuis, whole Villages inhabited by none but fools; Truly
(beloved) not only our Country Villages, but our market towns, and our
Cities, and I pray God it prove not that our Parliament and Assemblies are all
filled with fools in this great point, few or none of us know the times in
reference to our duties. Let me speak freely to you, God has cast the lot of
all of us in such times as have been filled with such administrations, as the
like could not have been in the space of these 1000 years; and confident I am,
that he that loses these times wherein we have lived, would never have
redeemed any time; and yet notwithstanding, have not we, O have not we all
usually put off to the future, the duties that belong to the present time, and
done in the present time, the things that should never have been done at all?
Have not most of us lived all our days, as if God had made us for the World,
as Leviathan for the Sea, only to take our pleasure in it? others of us to
fill our shops with commodities, our purses with money, our houses with stuff
and provision, as if there had been no better things to have been regarded?
when in the mean time for the admirable opportunities we have had for the
glorifying of God, and the saving of our souls, as if these had been nothing
worth; woe unto us, we have done any thing rather then make improvement of
them: and as rich people will give any poor people leave to go into their
Pease-fields to gather lapfulls of their Pease, as being things of little
worth, so have we allowed any thing to take up our time, sporting, and eating,
and prating, and sleeping, and such things that are of little concernment. O
how much of our precious time have they devoured and we regard it not? what
cause have we to tremble at the thought of it? I beseech you tell me, if God
should come now, and say to any Nobleman, Gentleman, Minister, Citizen, or
other that is here, I have given thee 20. years, 40. years, threescore years of
time, I have filled thy time with glorious opportunities, as excellent as ever
I gave to any, the least of them worth a world, give in your Bill of account
what you have done with these? what improvement you have made of them? how have
you walked I beseech you? what account could you make? would it not appear
that you have spent many hours and days in riot and wantonness, sporting and
playing, in swearing and cursing, in contriving and acting that which is evil
and mischievous, and very few minutes for your God, and for your soul, for
obtaining eternal life, happiness, or doing good to your brethren: God be
merciful to us, we could not answer him one word for a thousand, we have all
cause to lie in the dust, and acknowledge we have been fools, and not known
the things that belonged to our peace, not regarded the time of our visitation.

2. More particularly to the Parliament.
But (Honorable and beloved) give me leave to bring this lesson nearer to you,
who have called me this day to preach, and let me make a more through inquiry
after your wisdom in this particular, because you are looked upon as the wise
men of the Land that know the times better then others; I am confident you do
not desire to be flattered any day, but this day I hope that will be most
acceptable which in a way of God could most effectually humble and abase you,
and you have put a necessity upon me, to deal freely and faithfully with
your souls. Have not you, honored and worthy Patriots and Senators, infinite
cause to bemoane this, that you have not known the times in reference to your
duties?

First, be pleased to view the times you lived while you were private
Gentlemen, before you were called to these public services, when you lived in
your several Countries; where I know by reason of your wealth, and parts, and
interests, and states, you had abundance of opportunities more then other
people had, to have done much service, to have made the times and places better
for you. Did you then thus know the times? did you then walk as wise men,
redeeming the times? did you know what God expected from you in your places,
and have you done it? O blessed ye, if you have: But (I beseech you) will it
not rather appear upon a true search, that many of you in those days walked
in the ways of riot, in uncleanness, in drunkenness, possibly in swearing,
in profaning Gods holy time, in opposing and scorning Religion, was it not
thus? it behooves you to search; did you not make your own Families, the Towns
and Lordships where you lived the worse for you, as so many Jeroboams causing
Israel to sin? did not you thereby help to pull down those judgments that
have been like to devour and destroy this whole Land? and if so, have you
been humbled under these things? have you since repented of them? or do they
still stand upon your score before that God that keeps an exact account of all
the Talents that ever he has put into your hands? I beseech you enquire into
it; but let me go further, and enquire whether since the time that God has
separated you from your brethren, and by a notable providence called you out to
be the heads of all our Tribes, have you since that time known the times in
reference to your duties? It is now above six years since many of you have
been called to this work, one of the greatest works that mortal men have
been employed in these many hundreds of years, a work wherein you have been
assisted not only with the prayers and tears of those that fear God,
throughout the Christian world, but with the states and blood of many, and God
himself has carried you in his bosom, and made you the most remarkable
handful of men, that I think this day breath upon the earth, in regard of the
mercies that he has showed you, and in this time (certain I am) has put
into your hands as many golden opportunities, not only required as many
duties, but put as many golden opportunities into your hands to establish our
wretched kingdom, and to rescue a decayed, lukewarm, Apostatized Church, as
ever were put into the hands of a Parliament. Now (beloved) have you known your
times, and taken your opportunities? I know it well, that you have wrestled
with huge difficulties, infinite oppositions, and I know that oft-times the
perverseness of a Patient poisoning his own disease or wounds may frustrate
the care of the best Physicians; and God forbid, that that which is only your
misery, should ever be imputed to you as your sin; but suppose upon a
diligent search, any of you that are called to be our wise men, to know the
times for us, that at your door it should lie in great part, that our miseries
are not yet healed, how sad would that be? To this end I most humbly pray you
inquire, if upon a diligent search there should be found among you any who at
this day live in the same sinful, riotous, ungodly, wicked conversation that
they led, before God called them to this public service: that after your
solemn oath, with your hand lifted up to the most high God for the reformation
of your ways, that you should be found still with Zimri and Cozbi, to live in
those sins for which God is judging this Nation; Were this to know the times,
and what Israel has to do? Suppose further, there should be found amongst
you any such as should ordinarily neglect the public service, and turn your
backs upon it, to attend your own private affairs, after that the Kingdom
has put into your hands whatsoever under God is precious and dear unto them;
were this to know the times and what Israel has to do? Suppose there should
be found amongst you any that should seek advantage to themselves out of
public calamities, or should sinfully help to undo those for whom they are
called to be Saviors; were this to know the times? Suppose that any of you
should be found unjust in judgment, and favor an unrighteous man in his
cause, either for corrupt gains or out of opposition to them you like not, and
so prostrate the untainted honor of the Parliament to the reproach of the
adversaries, the scandal of the Nation, the tears and grief of them who love
you; were this to know the times, and what Israel has to do? Suppose it
should be found that there should be any that in matters of Religion should
side with a party for corrupt and sinful ends, and make Religion but an
Engine to carry on some other sinful design; were this to know the times and
what Israel had to do? Suppose yet further, that upon a diligent search there
should be found among you any that do retard matters of the greatest moment;
that the settling of Religion should be obstructed by you, that many people
abroad are remiss in it, because they judge you have no heart to it; were this
to know the time, and what Israel has to do? Suppose that the cries and
tears of the oppressed* I mean not the fatherless and widows, (whom I am
confident the Houses of Parliament would help this very day, if it lay in
their power) but the cries of some oppressed by Committees or others in the
Country, should come up to you and seek for succor, and it should be found
that some of you should patronize the wrong-doers, and keep them off from
coming to a hearing, and thereby from redress; were this to know the times,
and what Israel had to do? Honorable, and Worthy, do not mistake me, I am
far from saying it is so, I only suggest these things to your own search,
and if in naming the particulars I mistake any of them, God knows it is with
the same singleness of heart, wherewith Job sanctified his Children,
sacrificed for them, saying, Peradventure my sons have sinned, and cursed God
in their hearts; sure I am it concerns you all to search and try; for if it
should be so, we are all like to smart for it, for as he said of the Roman
Senate, Ita nati est is ut bona malaque vestra ad rempub. pertineant, Your
condition is such, that your good and your evil, is the good and evil of the
Commonwealth; it belongs to us all: and should the great God find any of you
walking thus unworthy of the great trust he has committed to you, when he
has put (as it were) the fates of his Church and Kingdom in your hands, under
him to dispose of them, h^s wrath would be kindled against you, these things
would lie very heavy upon your score, and we and you should dearly rue it.
Sure I am, there is not a man of us, but for some or other of these things,
has just cause to lay his hand upon his heart with sorrow, and to put his
mouth in the dust, and this day to be very deeply humbled and abased before
God. And this is the first Use, a Use of Humiliation, that we have not in time
past, so known the times as we should in reference to our duties. There is
one more, and that is,

Use 2.
A Use of Exhortation; Is this so excellent and necessary a duty, to know the
times in reference to our duties? O that I knew how to speak somewhat in the
name of the Lord, Exhortation. 1. In general to all, to endeavor after this
wisdom.
that might promote this wisdom in you for time to come, that in this our day
we might know the things that concern our peace, that they may not be for
ever hid from our eyes; O that I could say to you, as Paul said to the
Thessalonians: ^ These. 5.1.
Concerning the times and seasons, it is superfluous for me to write to you,
for you your selves know perfectly. To this end I beseech you take briefly
these four Meditations to provoke you to study this wisdom in time to come.
Motives thereto.
First,

Often consider how much time, and how many golden opportunities

Consider how much does depend upon that moment Our life is but a moment* but
Ex hoc momento pendet aeternitas, Eternity depends upon this moment; no less
then the glory of God, and the saving of thy immortal soul, and it may be of
thy family, it may be of the Church and Kingdom, depends upon thy knowing
the times. Thirdly,

Consider thou can not tell, whether ever thou shall Time shall be no more.
And then Fourthly,

Consider when Time ceases to be any more, thou Rejoice O young man (says
Solomon in the 11 of Ecclesiastes) in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee
in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the
sight of thine eyes; take thy pleasures, waste thy seasons, but know that for
all these things thou must come to judgment. Such Meditations as these would
provoke your hearts to be very careful to lose no more time* but rather to
enquire what you should do for time to come, and how you might learn this
Wisdom: And truly, it would fill a Volume, to tell what every one should do,
from what we should redeem our time, and to what we should redeem it, and
by what means we should do it. I dare not enter upon that discourse: 2 In
particular to the Honorable Members of this House.
But there is one thing wherein I desire freedom, that I might be as helpful
as I can to the Honorable Senate that has called me to the service of this
day: Honorable and Beloved, God has cast your lot so, that if you be rightly
instructed in this one Lesson, you may make our times differ as much from
former times, Daniel 2*
as Nebuchadnezzars Golden head did from the feet of iron and clay; Golden
times indeed might be brought about, if God vouchsafed but to teach you this
one Lesson. Your duties are many, for whatsoever lies upon any other, lies
eminently upon you; You are to do all those things in every time, that others
are to do; and you are to do many things that others cannot do, and may not
do: That you may therefore know your duty, give me leave to represent before
you the true face of our Times wherein we live, The face of our present times
represented.
and show what in these Times you have to do, and herein I will not presume to
put any Prudentialls upon you, (we ought all to think that Prudentialls are
better understood by you, then by us) but what shall I say, shall (God willing)
appear to be matter of Conscience, matters of necessity, and things that may
not be left to liberty; Know then our present times.

First, in general, full of changes. Joel 1.2.
First in general, are such Times, as I think never were before us in the
World; I may say of our times, as the Prophet Joel says in the 1 of Joel,
Hear O ye old men, was it ever thus in your days, or in the days of your
forefathers? I mean, our times are so full of various administrations, such a
concurrence of all kind of Providence and Administrations, as seldom were
ever known in so few years; We have been sometimes full of hopes of
recovery, sometimes at the brinke of despair, sometimes dawnings of light, by
and by all clouded over again with utter darkness; sometimes we see a people
drawing nigh to God that hides his face from them, by and by God drawing nigh
to a people that run away from him; such alterations, such vicissitudes of all
kinds of administrations, that truly I may compare our times to the wind
mentioned in the first of Ecclesiastes, It whirles about continually, now in
the North, and then in the South, Eccles. 1.6.
and never abides in one Point: So has it been with us for these four or five
last years: this day of ours has been like that day in the 14 of Zachariah,
neither night nor day, nor light nor darkness, but a strange kind of mixture
of all these, Zach. 14.6, 7.
and in such various and uncertain Times as these are, what have the heads of
our Tribes to do? I answer plainly, all others with you, and you with others,
Psalm 107.43.
are in such days to stand and behold the Works of God, viewing and admiring,
and adoring these Mosaic works, these Checquer works of God, but it concerns
you above all others, to stand constantly upon your watch, and employ all your
Parts and Wisdom, and Faithfulness, lest a change of time take you upon a
sudden. As when a Ship is at Sea, if it sail to the Westward, and once get
beyond the Canaries, where the Sea sets constantly one way, and state-winds
blowing for so many Months together in one Point, a moderate skill and care of
him that guides the Helm, will carry them on with ease; but in various winds,
and tumultuous Seas, when they sail sometimes among Rocks, and sometimes among
Quicksands, sometimes in Gulfes, sometimes in the Ocean, sometimes almost at
the Shore, if the Pilot be not extreme skillful and careful, himself, his
Barque, and all that are with him are quickly cast away: So I am assured is it
now with us in these various administrations; you that are our Pilots, that sit
at the Stern, must show more then ordinary skill and diligence, or we may
quickly perish. But

2 More particularly our times are opened in 7 Particulars.
More particularly, there are seven several Scenes of the Time (if I may so
call them) or sorts of things, that every day are acted upon our Stage, and in
every one of them I shall show you, what you that are the Heads of our Tribes
have to do. First,

1. Our times are times of prodigious wickedness in men's conversations.
Our times are times of most prodigious wickedness, horrible abominations in
men's manners; I am confident, never such abominable drunkenness, and general
looseness in that kind; never more universal liberty of whoring* Incestuous
marriages, oppressions, cruelty, injustice, malice, revenge, and every thing
that might fill a Land with ungodliness. Since we or our Forefathers were
borne, never was there a greater deluge of wickedness, then in these our
times; Ezekiel 9.
and what have the Heads of Israel to do at such a time? Certainly you, and
all others at such times are called to mourn for all the abominations of the
Times; Ephesians. 5.15.
and you, and all others are called to walk more exactly, in that time, to
redeem the time when the days are evil: But You above all others are called
out by God, in such times, to be his instruments, to oppose these things, Romans
12.4
the Ministers of God, to execute vengeance upon those that do evil: For these
things, I think you shall not need to trouble your selves to make new Laws, as
excellent Laws are already made against them all, as I think any
Commonwealth in the world has, but it concerns you to see that these be put
in execution; It concerns you in times of oppression to deliver the poor and
the oppressed, out of the Talons and Paws of them, who tear them and crush
them in pieces; It concerns you to see that the Justices and other officers in
the Country, set not up these houses of Sin, Alehouses and Tavernes, nor
that when some well-affected put them down, Great men set them up again; and
so in other abominations it concerns you to see that incestuous Marriages and
such ungodlinesses, go not unbranded and unpunished; the Lord kindle zeal in
your hearts, that you may do it: that is one, Our Times are times of
abominable wickedness. Secondly,

Our times are times of Errors, horrible Errors, I mean not such Errors as are
to be found among Gods people, 2. Our times are times of errors, heresies, and
blasphemies.
to whom he never has given an equal light, and notwithstanding which Errors
himself bears with them, and would have his people bear one with another; but
I mean our times are times of such Errors as are heretical and blasphemous,
such as concern our Christian faith, and holy conversation, in a very high
degree; it would weary you, but to tell you, the things that are generally
known to spread as a Gangrene, a new generation of men are risen up, and
spread all the points of Arminianisme, universal Redemption, Apostasy from
grace, Man's free will; multitudes of others cry down the Law, as not having
any thing to do with Gods people; others denying that the Saints of God should
ever any more confess sin to God in prayer; others questioning whether there
be any Church or Ministry this day upon the face of the earth, and whether
there shall be any till new Apostles arise: Nay, beyond all these, many
denying the Lord Jesus, that bought us with his blood, to be God; or the Holy
Ghost to be God; others denying the three Persons in the Trinity; and
consequently affirming that we, and all the Christian world with us, do
worship Idols in stead of God, for if these men be right, they are Idols whom
we worship. These, and abundance of such horrid things as these are, do
spread and scatter like wildefire every where in all corners of the Land, to
the great provocation of Gods wrath, and our reproach through the Christian
world. And what have our Heads to do at such a time? Certainly you, and al
others ought to mourn for these things, and tear your clothes, and your
hairs, and your hearts, that God should be so dishonored, but for your duties
who are in high Places, for what is peculiar to you, I Will not dispute any
controversy at this time, but set down Two things which I know you must yield
to. One is,



What then is to be done? I answer, you must not take Blasphemies, Errors, and
Heresies to be such upon the reports of other men, but as the Lord ordered
them in the 13 of Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 13. Deuteronomy. 17.
so likewise must you do, Search diligently whether indeed such and such
things are done; and when they appear to be done, out of the zeal of God,
do that against them which the Lord would have you do; let not your Religion
be thus contaminated, suffer not your children, to whom you ought to be
nursing Fathers, to be thus poisoned by such corrupt Doctrines, nor devoured
by such wolves: This I know you will all subscribe unto; This I desire above
all may stick with you, that if the Lord has given you power, he has not
given you liberty to forbear such men; God in mercy make you zealous for him,
that has been zealous for you in all your troubles. Thirdly,

Our times are times of wrath, a great deal of wrath from the Lord is gone
forth; 3. Our times are times of wrath*
you know what dreadful Vialls of wrath, have been poured out in blood;
terrible quivers of destroying arrows have been shot out in Pestilence, all
which tell you God is angry: And what then have our Heads and Leaders to do?
certainly all people should tremble when God is angry; The Lion roares, Amos 18.
what beast does not tremble? and every one must labor to pacify him when he
is angry; but you whom the Lord has placed under him in such high place and
authority, must with Moses at such a time, call to Aaron to run with his
Censer, 2 S^m. 21.1.
you must labor to enquire out the Causes of it, and execute the judgment and
vengeance that God would have executed upon them who have procured it; You must
with Josiah, 2 Kings 22.13. Jonah 3.
2 Kings 22.13. inquire what will appease him, and with the King of Nineveh,
call upon every one to turn from the evil of his doings, and your selves be
examples to the rest. Fourthly,

Our times are times of War, terrible wars, unnatural wars, bloody
wars, as ever England knew, 4. Our times are times of war.
and as yet the Armies are in the Field, and though there be no open Enemy,
the Sword is not put up; and in Ireland, poor wretched Ireland, the war is
more terrible, where if we labor not to end it by sending our brethren timely
succors, the bloody enemy is like to come to make a new war upon us ere it be
long; And in the times of war, What have the heads of our Tribes to do?
Certainly all people in a time of war, should make it a time of mourning;
Ezekiel says, Ezekiel. 21.10.
The Sword is furbished* and drawn, and made bright for slaughter, should we
then make mirth? Should this be a time of jollitie? and all should labor to
find out the Causes of the war, what the Sword-procuring sins are, and every
one to repent and turn from them. But you that are our Heads, are to look to
these 2 Things principally. First,

When the Host goes forth to the battle, Deuteronomy. 23.9.
keep thee from every evil thing. And Secondly,

In the times of War, you should always labor after Pax una triumphis, One
peace is worth 100 Victories; and therefore you must principally address your
selves to God, who alone can give us Peace: Kings and States may begin a war,
but God only must end it; we may daube up a peace, and get counterfeits of
peace, but all will be arena sine calce, Sand without lime, a mortar which
will not hold, but as a swelling in a high wall, whose breach comes suddenly:
Therefore remember again and again, your work lies with the God of Peace,
pacify him, and he will create peace for you. Fifthly,

Our Times are times of Divisions; such Divisions, as (I think) were hardly
ever known in the Christian World; 5. Our times are times of divisions.
Divisions every where, divisions in Parliament, divisions in the Assembly,
divisions in the City, divisions in State affairs; but woe and alas, most
of all, and worst of all, divisions among Gods people, the Servants of God who
heretofore prayed together, fasted together, could have been banished together,
now, as if the curse of Simeon and Levi were fallen upon them, they are divided
in Jacob, and scattered in Israel; Manasseh is aagainst Ephraim, and Ephraim
against Manasseh, and every one eats the flesh of his own arm, and through
the wrath of the Lord, the Land is darkened and infatuated, by the miserable
divisions of Gods own people; and these divisions are fomented, encouraged,
and backed by a Third il-affected party, who desires that these Two, like wild
beasts, may tear one another, and weaken one another, that they may devour
them both; and all this goes on thorough our sin: And truly we are in my
poor thoughts, as if God had left us to be as Moab, 2 Chronicles. 20.
and Ammon, and Mount Seir, where two stood up against one to destroy it, and
then the other two to destroy one another; as the foolish Woman, we are
pulling down our house with our own hands. And now (Honorable and Beloved) in
such sad and uncomfortable times as these are, what have the Heads of our
Israel to do? what does the Lord look for at your hands? Certainly you with
others, and you above all others, should labor to be our Physicians, our
Aesculapiusses, to join our dissever'd limbs, and if it be possible, to make
us one again: Noble Senators, is there no way that your Wisdom can contrive
to make Pacification, Accommodation, and Reconciliation, but must we go on
thus to ruin one another? Any ordinary head may serve to embroyle things, but
here would be the Masterpiece of your Wisdom, if you could find out a way
how the envy of Ephraim, and the ill will of Manasseh might cease, and that
Gods people might yet be reconciled and united, of one mind as far as is
possible, and made of one heart in those lower things, wherein they cannot be
of one mind: Would God put this in your hearts, that you might speedily and
earnestly set about it, that if there should be found any Animosities amongst
your selves, you would lay them down first, and all agree to study the Public
good, and then see what you can do to reconcile others in the Ministry, in
the City, in the Country; o that you could do as Constantine did, who burnt
all the Libells that were presented to him from one Bishop against another, and
never left till he had made peace among them. O that God would both enable
you, and provoke you to set speedily upon this work, God, and his people have
their eyes upon you, and expect you should employ all your Wisdom, Piety,
Parts, and Authority to extinguish those flames which threaten speedy ruin to
us all.

6. Our times are times of Reformation.
Our times are times of Reformation; As they are times of sin and error, and
wrath, and war, and divisions, which all five are very sad, so the other two
are excellent, our times are times of Reformation; I mean, they are times not
only of much Gospel light, but they are times of growing, and increasing
light, wherein the light of the Gospel spreads more, and the Lord as in other
parts of the world, so especially amongst us, seems to be laying out the
platform of his Temple, and to set out a new edition of his Church, fairer and
more beautiful then ever; and what have the Heads of our Tribes to do at such
a time? without all question, very much of it will lie upon your hands under
God, you have contended stiffly and courageously for our liberties, and
properties* and to recover us from bondage and slavery, and God has been with
you in it; and although the kingdom does not yet feel it, and so it may be
does not greatly thank you, because in desperate diseases, the cure is commonly
more costly and more tedious then the disease is, but I doubt when God
vouchsafes a settling they will find the fruit of what you have done for them,
and bless God for you that are their healers. But know (I beseech you) that
our Religion is our most Orient Pearl, and that whereupon our heart is most
set* and if there should be any miscariage in it all will perish with it, we
should call every thing else Ichabod, if Religion miscarry, all is gone; and
therefore to provoke you to help us in this thing, let me leave these two
Conclusions in your bosoms. First,

A Reformation begun, and not carried on* always brings more wrath from God;
you have begun the Reformation, you are engaged in it by oath and Covenant, and
some happy proceeding and progress you have made in it, God grant you slack
not in it: For you^l find in the Scriptures, a reformation begun and laid
aside is a peoples undoing; In Elijahs days there was a Reformation begun, it
fell down and the Kingdom perished with it. In Josiah's time a Reformation
was begun, and quickly laid aside with the death of that good King, and the
Kingdom was ruined presently after it. In Haggai his days, the Reformation
was begun, then laid aside; God presently smote them with Blasting and Mildew,
and would have undone them, if they had not taken it up again: God looks you
should carry this work on. And I add,

Without settling Religion, you shall never settle the Commonwealth; He that
writes a Book of the corrupt and troubled state of the Church, will hardly
ever write a Book of the quiet and settled State of the Commonwealth; Christ is
King of Nations and Commonwealths as well as King of Saints: Now the glory of
Christ is so much concerned in the matter of Religion, that they shall never
find him propitious to them, for their good in humane affairs, who neglect
him in that that is dearest to him. But what have our Heads and Rulers to do
in that? I fear not to say confidently, that they are mistaken who say, you
have nothing to do with it; All the good Kings that ever I read of in the
book of God, thought not only they had to do with it, but it was their first
work a Jove principium, they all began with it, they ever accounted the
Reformation, and preservation, and propogation of Religion to be their Crown:
but what have you to do? I answer, you must with David, set your whole hearts
to the house of your God, 1 Chronicles. 29.
really and seriously; with Solomon set as many on work as you can possibly,
to prepare materials for Gods house; 1 Kings 5. 2 Chronicles. 17.7. Nehemiah 8. 2 Chronicles 31.
with Jehosaphat send abroad as many faithful Preachers as you can, to go
about and instruct the people from Town to Town, and City to City, till you
can get Ministers to be settled. With Nehemiah labor to build the walls of
Jerusalem, though in a troublesome time, with a Sword in one hand and a Trowell
in the other, set up discipline to be a hedge and fence to the Churches. With
Hezekiah labor to provide honorable maintenance for Gods house and his
Ministers, that young men may not be discouraged in their studies. For when
young Students can see, Galen and Justinian, the study of the Law or Physic
can give them wealth and honor, and the Ministry nothing but beggary, it will
be a great snare to them, though the work of the Ministry be honorable, and
has an abundant reward with God, yet for want of maintenance the house of God
will be forsaken; Nehemiah 13.11.
Sint Maecenates, non deerunt marones: Men of parts must have encouragement,
and in your provision for them forget not the Schools of the Prophets,
remember the Universities: Endeavor to carry on the work, that the beauty
and power of Religion may be promoted, and the Lord direct you to it.
Seventhly, and lastly,

7. Our times are times of deliverances.
Our times are times of Deliverances, the greatest deliverances that I think
the Lord has wrought, since he brought Israel out of Egypt; such deliverances
as we our selves are like men in a dream, such deliverances that there has
been but few footsteps of ordinary Providence in them; deliverances that have
been the fruit of Prayer, the fruit of Covenanting, the fruit of Fasting, and
in all these the fruit of free grace, wherein the Lord has exceeded not only
our Faith, but our Prayers, and has measured out to us all that he has done
by the shekel of the Sanctuary, his own shekel that is double of ours; I know,
you forget not the wonderful things the Lord has done, and what have our
Heads to do at such a Time? Truly, all others with you, but you more then all,
at such a time must be careful of these four things;

First, God expects when he works deliverances, that his people should
consider his works, and stand amazed When the Lord turned the captivity of
Zion, Psalm. 126.1, 2.
we were like men in a dream, our mouth was filled with laughter, and our
tongue with joy; The Lord (say they) has done great things for us; Thus let us
admire his works.

In times of deliverance, you must be very careful to Psalm 50.14. Psalm.
66.13, 14 Eccles. 5.4.
the vows that you made in the time of your low condition; the vows you made,
when your Selves, and Liberties, and Religion, and the Kingdom were all like to
be buried quick together; God expects in times of deliverance to have those
vows remembered and paid; consider what they were. Thirdly,

When the Lord works such deliverances, he expects, and it will very well
become the Heads of our Tribes, to David himself in the day of his prosperity
kept not always that humble spirit which he had in his low estate, nor Asa,
nor Uzziah, nor Hezekiah; and we know the story of that famous Queen, whose
motto in the time of her afflictions was Tanquam ovis, as a sheep for the
slaughter, yet afterward it was thought needful to entreat that it might not
be tanquam indomita juvenca, as an untamed Heifer. Men are infinitely prone to
be lifted up, when God enlarges them, but God infinitely detesteth it, and
will not put it up at the hands of any. Therefore I most humbly beseech you,
(Right Honorable, and Honorable and beloved) let David and Solomon his son,
and Uzziah, and Hezekiah be warnings to you, and do you labor to maintain
the same lowly spirit, that you had when you could keep days of mourning for
the sins of the Kingdom, for your personal sins and Parliament sins,
such a spirit would infinitely please God. And lastly,

In the time of deliverance, God expects of those that impares oneri, never
able to go through your work. What gracious man who understands this, would
ever pray to God in his Chamber without remembering you, and your work? and for
you your selves* O what need is there that you should call in the Payers and
supplications of all Gods people to help you; and that every one of you, lay
aside any business of your own, all self-interest, and count it to be but
catching of Flies, in comparison of the work you are called to; and that you
lay aside all carnal confidence of any power or wisdom of your own, or
relying on any Arm of flesh, that is never able to carry you thorough all your
work: But in stead hereof, to rely wholly upon the wisdom, promise, and
power of God, submit your selves to him, and trust to him alone, who only is
able to carry you thorough all. Thus of the second part of my Text, the
excellent commendation of this Tribe of Issachar, They had understanding to
know the times, and what Israel had to do. Spare me liberty for a few words
of the Third, and I have done; which is,

The interest that they had in their Brethrens hearts, Third part of the Text,
The interest these ^ Leaders had in their brethren.
all their Brethren were at their command, or at their mouth, hung upon their
mouth: certainly it is not meant of any compulsion, but a power they had got in
their brethrens hearts by their Wisdom and faithful carriage; they saw that
they were wise and faithful men, and that set them up high in their esteem,
and by this inward respect, the lifting up of their hands, was as good as the
displaying of a Banner, to make all their brethren come out and spend their
lives, and whatsoever they had in their Countries service; which affords us
this Lesson,

That when the Heads and Leaders of a people are wise, Doct. 3.
to do their duties, it gives them that interest in their Brethrens hearts,
that they will be at their disposing.

Of this I could give you abundance of evidence; Deuteronomy. 13.^.
Moses reigned as King in Jeshurun, his wisdom and grace was the things which
set him so high. Joshua that had been but Moses servant, had the same power
with them, because they saw the wisdom of God in him: This was it got Job that
authority, that the young men feared him, Job 29*^.
and the aged, reverenced him, and every eye which saw him, blessed him;
because he put on righteousness, and wisdom; and judgment was to him as a
robe and diadem. David a man of a mean family, from a Shepherd, was feared
by Saul, 1 Samuel 18.16. 1 Kings 3.28.
loved by the people* even while he was but a Captain, because they saw he
behaved himself wisely. Solomon a child, and being but a child, very subject
to be contemned, swayed all Israel, they honored him and feared him, When they
saw the wisdom that God had given him to do Justice and Judgment; 2 Samuel
23.3, 4.
abundance of other instances there are of it, and David expresses it notably
in the 2 of Samuel 23. He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the
fear of God; if he be such an one, he shall be like the light of the
morning, like a clear bright morning without clouds, as the tender grass that
grows by the sweet showers of rain; such a one shall be amiable, Eccles.
4.13.
desirable, beautiful, comfortable, he is every thing you can wish, if he
be a good Man ruling in the fear of God; and Solomon proves it notably by the
contrary, in the 4 of Ecclesiastes, Better is a poor and wise Child, then an
old and foolish King, who will no more be admonished, etc. A child, a poor
child that has wisdom, will have more love and honor, then a King, though
an old man, and a great Prince, if he be doting and foolish, and will not
receive Counsel, nor learn wisdom to discharge his duty; It Is wisdom will
win hearts, and one dram of this wisdom and grace will do more then a whole
pound of greatness: And the reason is plain,

Because this Wisdom that I have spoken of, is the Image of God, which cannot
be contemned, but will be feared by them that are bad, and honored and
embraced by them that are good; and therefore it is said of most of them I
instanced in, that the people would say, God was with them, when they saw their
wise behavior. I wind up all with a brief Application.

To you our Heads and Leaders, Use. Of Exhortation.
give me leave to instruct you, how you may keep England to be yours; how you
may have your Brethren at your Command, not out of Rules of State Policy, but
as a Minister of Christ, out of the Word of God, know the times and your
duties, and walk as Men fearing God, taking the counsel of his Word as your
only guide; This will make the worst of men fear you, and the best honor and
love you, your Brethrens hearts will hereby be at your command, and your
interest in their hearts will rule them better then Armies or Garrisons: Many
great Politicians go another way to work, they think the affections of people
are not to be valued, they say, Populus humiliter servit, superbe dominatur,
that the People (like fire and water) are good Servants, but evil Masters; and
therefore the best way is to subdue them and keep them under, but I am assured
that you detest these Rules; you know well enough, that the Peoples love is the
best Exchequer; and this Lesson teaches you the surest way how to hold that
firm, and close to you, even your wise walking and working in your great
Trust; Herein lies the difference between Wisdom and Policy, VVisdome makes a
man constantly keep the high road-way of Justice and Judgment, doing every
thing upon Scripture grounds and rules: Policy directs men, when need is, to
turn into odd bypath, sometime taking in the help of the Foxes skin,
sometime of the Lions paw; But (Beloved) you shall certainly find the way of
VVisdome to be the safest and most successful; Politicians may deceive
others for a while, but themselves for ever: You your selves have had much
experience of it, you know what it is to command in the hearts of your
Brethren, had you had all the Port Towns in England, in the beginning of your
Troubles, and Garrisons wheresoever you could have desired, it would never have
done you the service (...) the hearts of your brethren have done; you were in
their hearts, and they have been at your command, and wha^ gave you this
interest? Why, they saw you were set upon Judgment and Justice, breaking
their yoakes, removing their grievances, they saw your hearts were set to it;
and while you go on in the same wisdom, piety, singleness and integrity;
You will preserve your interest in God and his people, and while you have Gods
favor, and your brethrens hearts, all confederacies against you will be
broken, Esaias 54.17.
all conspiraeies come to naught, No weapon that is formed against you shall
prosper, and every tongue that rises up against you shall be condemned. But
should they ever find, (which God forbid) that you turn out of the right way
of VVisdome and Piety, of Judgment and righteousness, that you grow
injurious, that oppression and injustice should be found among you, that you
should favor evil men in evil causes, grow to be self-seekers, or not
cordially endeavoring to settle Peace and Religion, you would then certainly
engage God against you, and lose the hearts of your brethren, and you will be
undone, and we shall be undone with you. But I am persuaded better things of
you, and such things as become a Parliament of England; yea, a Parliament thus
blessed and magnified by God. But consider what I have said, and the Lord give
you understanding in all things.

FINIS.

