Two SORTS OF Latter Days, PROVED FROM SCRIPTURE: FIRST, THE Latter Days of
Perilous Times, THE WHICH Are to be Ended before the Great and Glorious LATTER
DAYS have their Beginning.

Proved when the Elder People or Nation is to serve the Younger.

AND By That SERVITUDE made BLESSED. The Old and New Testament made to Agree.
AND TRUTH Vindicated against all HERESIES.

By M. MARSIN.

London, Printed and Sold by J. Bradford in Little Britain, the Corner House,
over against the Pump. Mrs. Michael at the Crown and Cushion in
Westminster Hall. And at Mercers Chapel in Cheapside. At John Gwillum's, over
against the Great James in Bishopsgate-street. 1699.

The Dedication.
IT is humbly offered his Majesty, and the great Council of the Nation, that if
there is any other place of Scripture which is not answered in this nor my
other Book, if it stand in any opposition to the Scriptures agreement, as to
hinder the Witness of the Apostles from agreeing with the Testimony of the
Prophets (which is the sure word of Prophecy. 2 Pet. 1.19. Unto which the
Christians were always to take heed, so as to believe nothing in contradiction
thereunto) by God's assistance it will be made plain. And I hope that neither
his Majesty, nor the Nobles, nor the Clergy will be offended that God should
bring these great Truths to Light by so weak an Instrument; for God often makes
use of such to declare great things by, that so his Power thereby might be the
more eminently seen. For had God by the Wise and Learned Doctors of the time
removed all the mistaken Notions; and made his Word to agree, which Man had
made so much to disagree: And likewise explained the Vision so plain from the
word, it would have been thought it had proceeded from their great Parts and
Learning: Therefore God chooses the weak things of this World, that all the
Praise may be rendered to his Name: And it being every ones concern to
understand the great Truths of God' s word: Therefore it is desired that into
whose hands soever this Book shall come, that they will Read it: But especially
it is more humbly requested of all to whom it is presented, that they will read
it themselves, because it is of very great import; and I hope they will reap
Satisfaction by it. God bless the King and Great Council, and remember the Jews
in Mercy according to his Promises made to their Fathers.

TO THE READER.
Friendly Reader,
TO know the Scriptures aright, is the great concern of Christians, the which
by the Apostasy from the Truth, the right Sentiments of the Word have been
lost, which mistaken places have since lain as dark Mountains, on which the
Christians have stumbled. And every one has made an interpretation of them
according to their own fancy: Whereby they have set the Scriptures at an
unreconcilable difference, the which has occasioned some to turn Atheists, some
Papists, some Hypocrites, and some Profane. So as thereby now there are but
three sorts of People that can believe: The first are those that have always
walked in a Holy Conversation, whereby they have had experiences of God. The
second, are those that fall under a Terror of Conscience: The third are those,
who through the ignorance in the Scriptures, each believes what their.
Teachers tell them; whether they be Papists, Protestants, or any other Sect.
But for any rational Man to read the Scriptures, and the strange interpretation
put upon them: by which they have made the Oaths, and Words, and Promises of
God void, that Man must deny the reason that God has given him, if he can
believe the Strange Tenets, that are held concerning them, and whilst we deny
so many plain Truths in God's Word, it is very improbable that the Jews or
Papists, should ever be convinced by what we say. For as by the Romish
Apostasy, they have imposed upon the People their false Worship, and others
having imposed upon the People their mistaken Notions, that they have taken up
with, the which is as a Bridle put into the Jaws of the People, causing them to
err, Isa. 30.28. For the Protestants are as much afraid to look into the Truth,
and to consider it for fear of being led into Error, as the Papists are to eat
Flesh in Lent. And this fear like a Bridle, keeps them in Error. But when God
according to his promise at the time of the end, brings the Knowledge of the
true meaning of his word to light, whereby the Scriptures are made to agree in
a Holy Harmony; the Teachers that will not take the Bridle out of the Jaws of
the People, must expect to fall under the same Punishment, as those that put it
in; And therefore that our Teachers may not be found guilty of the great
Transgression, the which is wilful disobedience, to oppose or smother the
Truth, when God in his own way, and at his own time brings again the great
Truths in his Word to Light, that knowledge thereby might be increased, and Man
prepared; I therefore will here set down some of those Texts of Scripture that
relate to the Shepherds and Ambassadors of Peace in our time; because what is
spoken is about, and at the time of Israel's Restoration: and therefore must
have its chief reference to our Teachers in this Day, and it is our Ministers
that are reamed Shepherds and Ambassadors of Peace: For Isreal's Priests were
never sent of any such Embassage. And therefore, that I may clear my self from
the Blood of all Men in what God has employed me in, I shall here cite the
Places that relate to them that will oppose, or smother the Truth. For these
following Scriptures belong to the Christians, Isa. 33.7. Isa. 29.10. Isa.
56.9, 10, 11. Ezekiel. 34. the whole Chap. Isa. 24.16, 17, 18. Fear, and the Pit
and the Snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant of the Earth.

I have with fervent and earnest Prayer, wrestled with the most High God that
he would send Peace, that the great Truths of God might be considered, and if
they are not, he will require it.

And it is God's usual way and method, to choose the weak things of this World
to confound the Wise and Mighty. For it was the Rulers, and Seers, when they
came to have no Love to the Truth, that first laid the Christian World in
Darkness; So as the Vision of ill becamed Sealed: Therefore God declared that
the Rulers and Seers he has covered, Isa. 29.10, 11. whereby is showed, that
the Vision of all, is not to come forth that way. And therefore so many Good,
Wise, and Learned Men, have come no nearer the mark of the Truth, in this
matter. For as when Christ first came, Israel's Priests did not rightly
understand the manner of his coming; neither was it at first declared to, or by
them; though without doubt there were several good ones amongst them.

And if Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, could have made the Scriptures agree, the
Scholars of all parties would not have so much disagreed about them: but since
the Apostasy from the Truth, the Wifest and Best of Men could not do it. But
God can give the Simple, Wisdom when he pleases. And with him, there is
neither Bond nor Free, Male nor Female, Gal. 3.28. But the sincere Heart, that
truly loves and fears him, is best accepted of him. And God having employed me
in his Service, I am willing to venture all, even Life and all for him, that
the Truth of God's Word may be known. And to be sure it is rightly understood,
when the Scriptures are made to agree, and thereby they become plain to a
rational Man's understanding: which is the Light that God has set up in the
Soul of Man. That thereby he might know how to choose the Good, and refuse the
Evil. And the Scriptures now being made to agree, and God by his Word according
to his Promise proved true, as well to the Jews, as to the Gentiles. This may
be convincing to any rational Man's understanding that believes the Scriptures,
it they will but contemplate the matter.

Some say let the Prophet take care of his Prophecy. But such little think that
their destruction is included in it, if they do not take heed of the Prophet's
warning. But there is no way to bring the People to a right understanding of
the Truth, but by unravelling to them their mistakes to the bottom. For our
Authors having lost the right Apprehension of the World, or Time to come; then
they were put to their shifts, like the Wits of the Times, to weather out a
Cause, when they had neither Truth nor Tackle to assist their invention. By
which mistakes, The Sheep of the Lord, eat that which others have trodden, and
drink that which others have fouled with their feet, Ezekiel. 34.18, 19. So as
thereby all are in mistakes at this Day, for this is spoken concerning the time
the Lord will Judge between the Rams and the He-Goats, after which time the
Lord will for evermore feed his Sheep himself, ver. 22, 23, 24, 25.

But now some by Studying the Scriptures, with the strange interpretations
which our great Authors (as some call them) have put upon them, have lost their
Senses. And others fearing they are not elected; and if not, they then think
they were reprobated from all Eternity, or from the Foundation of the World.
The which have drove many into despair, and caused some to make themselves
away. But the knowledge of the Truth of God's word sets all free from such ill
consequences: And likewise puts them that know the Truth, into a good capacity
for eternal Salvation: For to a true Faith, there is required sound Doctrine,
as well as good Practice, and to believe what God has said, and sworn to,
before what any Man says in contradiction thereunto.

The weight of this great affair, I hope will be considered, which is the
desire, and earnest Prayer of your Friend and Servant in Christ, M. M.

All that are willing to know the Truth, it is desired of them to consider
these Twelve things.
1st. THat we are not the Elect, but that the Elect was the Remnant chosen from
among Israel, which is the Church in the Wilderness, and the first Gentile
Churches, unto whom the Holy Ghost was given to be in them, that they might be
a light to the World, that the World through them might know that God sent
Christ. For the Elect are always chosen for a purpose, which is, to carry on
the Counsel of the Will of God. 2dly. I affirm and prove, that as there is a
peculiar calling, so there is likewise a common calling of the Gospel, by which
Salvation is attainable. 3dly. I affirm and prove, that if we are Saved, we
must be Saved by Christ's Righteousness according to his Word; which is in the
way of our Obedience. And by our believing that Christ is the Son of God, we
must Obey him as such; for those whose Wills are not brought into Subjection to
Christ, are none of his; for all are his Servants to whom they Obey, and
otherwise to believe in Christ will stand them in no stead. 4thly. I affirm and
prove, that the promised new everlasting Covenant is not established, and that
it will not be till the Lord again comes, and the first Churches, by receiving
the Holy Ghost to be in them, had an earnest of the inheritance for time to
come. 5thly. I affirm and prove, that there are two Judgments. The first, when
Christ comes to Judge the Nations in the Valley of Jehoshaphat, At which time
the Dead Bodies of the Saints will rise, and Isreal's Dead Men live. And the
last and final Judgment, is when the Sea, and Hell, and Death, deliver up their
Dead. 6thly. I affirm and prove, that God by his Word, speaks but to them that
are under it: And when Christ comes, they are that World and those Nations that
will be condemned by it, which have not lived in Obedience to it. And it is the
Sheep, and the Goats that partake of one Pasture, that then will be Judged, and
the one made Blessed, and the other sent to the Fire of Hell. For the greater
light they Sin against, the greater condemnation they fall under. 7thly. I
affirm and prove, that the Elect that will be gathered from the four Winds,
when the Lord again comes, shall be Israel. 8thly. I affirm and prove, that the
World to come, is not Heaven, but a People with whom the Lord will establish
his now promised new everlasting Covenant, which Crowns Life to the Soul, and
those will be the World to come, which will be put into Subjection unto Christ,
and the World without end. 9thly. I affirm and prove, that Christ has cleared
all from original Sin, and that all shall be Judged according to their deeds.
And that there is a redemption in the World to come, and that all innocent
Children will then be cleared, and all the virtuous Heathens who have lived up
to the Light which God had given them, so as their Consciences excuse them when
Judged, they will then find Mercy. 10thly. I affirm and prove, that it is not
the material Heaven and all the Earth that will be burnt up, when the Lord
comes; but it is a great state of People, which in Scripture is likewise termed
the Heavens and Earth, and it is the Earth on which they dwell which will be
burnt up, and all the works therein, so as never to be restored again. 11thly.
I affirm and prove, that the Earth will be renewed, and Canaan made like the
Garden of Eden. 12thly. I affirm and prove, that the Glorious Tabernacle will
then be pitched over all the Assemblies of Israel, so as the knowledge of the
Glory of the Lord shall then cover the Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea.
These things are of the greatest moment in the World to be considered of, but
whilst the Christians trust to their Authors, and the Jews to their Talmud, it
is impossible either should come to a right understanding of the Scriptures.

CHAP I. A full discovery that we are in the Gloomy and Dark day, which St.
Paul terms the Night, where he says,
ROMANS 13.12, 13, 14. The night is far spent, the Day is at hand: let us
therefore cast off the Works of Darkness, and let us put on the Armor of
Light. Let us walk honestly as in the Day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not
in Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envy. But put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make no Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lust thereof.
Now the Night which was far spent then, is nigh spent now. For the Times being
divided into three parts; Christ's first coming was at the beginning of the
last part. And therefore the last part must needs now be near expiration, and
the Day in which Christ will Judge the World; in which time will be the
Restitution of all things: The which Day is now nigh at hand, when there will
not be disorderly walking. But now is the Cloudy and Dark day, until the Lord
again comes to feed his Sheep himself. And then will he gather them out of all
Countries, and feed them upon the Mountains of Israel. And then will the Lord
Judge between the Rams and the He-Goats, Ezekiel. 34.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17.

Now when the Lord first came, it is said he came when the fullness of time was
come, Gal. 4.4. The which was at the full time that God had appointed for his
coming. It is also said, Heb. 1.2. God has in these last Days spoken to us by
his Son, whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the
Worlds. Now in that the Apostle here says, these last days, is because there
is other last, or latter Days spoken of in Scripture, in which latter Days it
is, Israel will receive the promised great and Glorious blessings. And he
therefore distinguishes these last Days in which the Gospel was established,
from those that are yet to come, Isa. 2.2. And it shall come to pass in the
last days, that the Mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the
top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the Hills; and all Nations
shall flow unto it. Mic. 4.1. But in the last days it shall come to pass, that
the Mountain of the House of the Lord shall be established in the top of the
Mountains, and it shall be exalted above the Hills, and People shall flow unto
it, Hos. 3.5. Afterward shall the Children of Israel return, and seek the Lord
their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord, and his goodness in
the latter Days. And St. Peter speaking of the Lord's second coming, therefore
termed these days the last days of the Gospel institution and of the Power of
the Principalities of this World; (and the end of our time of coming in heirs
with Israel): All this will end upon the beginning of the time of Israel's
great and glorious latter Days before quoted, but in the latter days of this
time Moses Prophesied of their falling away, Deuteronomy. 31.29. According to which we
see they have done, but after the latter Days of this time, in the time to
come, which is in the latter Days also, and beyond the latter Days of this
time, the Lord will then be merciful to his Land, and to his People. And the
Nations are then to rejoice with them, Deuteronomy. 32.43. At which time, God will
render vengeance to his Adversaries, and restore his People, and circumcise
their Heart and the Heart of their Seed, to love the Lord their God, Deuteronomy.
30.6. For when the Lord comes to Zion, he will turn away ungodliness from
Jacob, Romans 11.26. Deuteronomy. 30.3.6.8. And that there will be Days and Nights after
Christ's second coming is evident. For after Christ's second coming, Satan is
to be bound up for a Thousand Years: and after that he is cast into Hell to be
tormented Day and Night for ever and for ever, Rev. 20.3, 10. And according to
this it is faid, Isa. 34.4, 8. That when all the Idumean Heaven and their Host
shall be dissolved, and rolled together a as Scrole: the which will be the day
of the Lord's vengeance, and the Year of Recompenses, for the Controversy of
Sion, ver. 8. Then part of the Land on which the Curse will fall, as in the 9
and 10 Verses, The Streams thereof shall be turned into Pitch, and the Dust
thereof into Brimstone: and it shall not be quenched Night nor Day, the Smoke
thereof shall go up for ever: from Generation to Generation it shall lie wast,
none shall pass through it for ever and ever. But the Cormorant, and the
Bittern, and such like shall inhabit it, ver. 11. And these Heavens and their
Host, are the Heavens and Elements, unto which St. Peter had his reference,
when he said, The Day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in which
the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements melt with
fervent heat, and the Earth and all the works that are therein shall be burnt
up, 2 Pet. 3.10. For we are to take notice that St. Peter does not say all the
Earth; but it is the Earth before spoken of by the Prophet, and all the things
which are therein, which the Anger of the Lord is pronounced against, Isa. 34.
the which will stand as a remark of God's fore displeasure against sin, all the
time of the world to come, as Sodom has done in this time. And therefore St.
Peter says at the beginning of the Chapter, That he wrote to them, to stir up
their minds by way of Remembrance, that they might be mindful of the Words
which were spoken before by the holy Prophets, and of the Commands of us the
Apostles, verse. 1, 2, 3. For they required and commanded that they should be
mindful of the words of the Prophets.

And a great State of People God generally in Scripture calls Heaven and Earth;
and almost every Prophecy of Scripture has at least a twofold signication, 2
Pet. 1.20. The which we not understanding, we have thereby been much in the
dark: And every Name is a proper Name to that which God gives it. And if God
will call two things by one Name, it as properly belongs to one as to the
other. And that it is not the Material Heavens and all the Earth that is to be
destroyed, is evident to all, from the words of the Text: Because, when these
Heavens, and their Host, and the Earth here spoken of are destroyed, then
Israel will be restored, and day and night continued; and succeeding
Generations, Isa. 34.4, 5, 8, 9, 10. From whence we see the continuance of Day
and Night proved, both from the Old and New Testament.

And that it is not the Material Heavens, and all the Earth, that is to be
burnt up at the Day of Judgment, is further evident; for the Lord says, At the
end of this World he will send his Angels, and gather out of his Kingdom all
things that offend, and them that work Iniquity, and cast them into a Furnace
of Fire, Matthew. 13.40, 41, 42. (and those are the Heavens and Element that will
melt as the fat of Lambs, Psalm. 3.20.) But the Elements of Earth, Air, Fire and
Water cannot melt, therefore this his Kingdom must be on Earth, and the Throne
of his Father David, according as was foretold by the Angel, Luke 2.31, 32, 33.
For there is nothing that offends nor works Iniquity in Heaven: but the
Wicked are to be rooted out of the Earth, Psalm. 37.1, 9, 10, 11, 13.20, 22, 28,
29, 34, 38. And this is to be after the seventh Angel sounds, Then the
Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ,
and he shall reign forever, and ever, Rev. 11.7. Dan. 7. Psalm. 45.7. For though
the Disciples and Martyrs of Jesus, and them that overcome, have in Heaven an
Inheritance reserved for them, ready to be revealed in the last time, 1 Pet. 4,
5. For this is the Mansion or Tabernacle which the Lord goes to prepare for
them; John 14.3. Which when he comes with his Saints, he will then bring with
him, Rev. 3.12. For then the New Jerusalem will come down out of Heaven, which
is not only the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, but the glorious Tabernacle, Rev. 21.3.
Which will be placed in the Elementary Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. And so Israel's
covert over all her Assemblies, Isa. 4.5, 6. And then it is the Knowledge of the
Glory of the Lord will cover the Earth as the Waters cover the Sea, Habba. 2.14.

But it is the Meek and the Righteous is promised the Earth, Matthew. 5.5. Psalm.
37.8, 10, 11, 29. And Israel at the end of this World, Isa. 62.11, 12. Jer.
31.13. Ezekiel 87.11, 12, 13.

And whereas St. Paul says, Heb. 1.2. God has appointed Christ heir of all
things: Thereby he shows, that what was appointed Christ, was not then in his
possession: And though Christ said after he arose from the Dead, Mat. 28 19. All
power is given unto me in Heaven and Earth; Yet the thing given was not then
possessed by him: for he was to sit at his Fathers right hand until his Enemies
be made his Footstool. Psalm. 110.1. The which time of the Lord's second coming.
St. Peter calls the time of the Restitution of all things, Acts 3.21. The which
is the Day St. Paul had his reference to; and relates to the time spoken of,
Ezekiel. 34.17. When the Lord will Judge between the Rams, and He-Goats. And then
as in Ephesians. 1.10. That in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might
gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and
which are on the Earth. Here it is said, the Lord will come in the fullness of
times: Thereby showing the time will be completed, both of the Old, and this
World. That is thus, the time that was before the Law, under the Law, and under
the Gospel, for the Lord has given three Laws to Man as a rule for him to
Steer by. First, The law of Nature, 2dly. The moral Law. 3dly. The Gospel
institution. The Law of nature is to continue in the time or World to come. And
so likewise the moral Law: for then God will Circumcise the Hearts of his
People, Deuteronomy. 30.6, 8. So as they shall keep all the commands of the Lord. And
thou shall return, and obey the voice of the Lord, and do all his Commandments
which I have commanded thee this Day. In the Covenant which Moses rehearsed to
them, Deu. 29.14. Chap. 30.8. For then the Lord will magnify the Law, and make
it Honorable, Isa. 42.21. For by establishing the promised New everlasting
Covenant, there will be given an inherent perfect Righteousness, by which their
Hearts will be Circumcised, as they shall thereby be made perfectly able to
keep the Old Covenant. As for the Gospel institution, the Christians were but
to hold that fast till Christ came, Rev. 3.10.11. Cor. 11.26. But the Gospel
Spirit will be forever and ever required, as to have their Wills brought in
Subjection unto Christ, without which none can be his, neither here nor
hereafter. And at Christ's first coming, Luke. 1.78. Zacharias faith the Day
spring from on high had visited them. And a Visit all know is of a short
continuance; but he is to return again and Build the Tabernacle of David, which
is fallen, and he will set up, Acts. 15.15.16.

And whereas St. John says to the Saints unto whom he wrote, The Darkness is
past, and the true Light now Shines, 1 John 2.8. He had here his reference
only to them that walked in obedience to God, as in the 4th and 5th Verses: and
love to his Brother, ver. 9. For all the rest were in Darkness; but this
Obedience, and Love was a Ray of the true Light of that Day which is still to
come. And likewise then they had the Holy Ghost shed on them abundantly, Tit.
3.6. Which was as an earnest of their inheritance in time to come, Ephesians. 1.14.
And these were those of whom St. Peter spoke, 1 Pet. 2.9. That did then partake
of that mavelous Light: The which in that Day that is yet to come, they will
partake and Drink abundantly, Cant. 5.1. Isa. 60.19, 20, 21. For then their Sun
will no more go down, for the Lord will be their everlasting Light; and then
the days of their Mourning will be ended, for then Israel will for evermore
Drink of the River of his pleasures, Psalm. 36.8. And know as they are known.
For then God's People will partake of those exceeding great and precious
Promises, by which they will be made partakers of the divine Nature: having
escaped the corruption that is in the World, 2 Pet. 1.4. For it is in the time
to come, the Eternal Life will be given: and therefore we are exhorted by good
Works, to lay up in store a good Foundation against the time to come, 1 Timothy
6.18, 19. For there is a time to come before Eternity, in which the Saints, and
Israel, and the true Believer will be Blessed; for these are those that will
have their part in the first Resurrection, Rev. 20.4, 5. The which will be when
the Lord comes to Judge the Nations in the Valley of Jehoshaphat, Joel, 3.2.
And restore his People, ver. 16, 17, 18.20, 21. And then Israel will be the
Lord's Elect, which he will gather together when the great Trumpet is blown,
Isa. 27.13. Which will be long before, the Sea, and Hell and Death deliver up
their Dead. The which which be the last Judgment, tho in both Judgments some
are Condemned to Eternal Punishment, and it is the Sinners under the Gospel,
that at the first fall under the Eternal Punishment, being Condemned thereunto
when the Lord comes; but at the last Judgment the Nations are not to be
Judged. For in time to come Israel will be all righteous: they shall inherit
the Land for ever, and then a little one shall become a Thousand, and a small
one a strong Nation: I the Lord will hasten it in his time, Isa. 60.21, 22. And
this is the World to come that will be put in Subjection unto Christ, Heb. 2.5.
The which will be, when the Old Heavens and Earth shall Perish, which have now
the ruling power: And the new Heavens and Earth take place. And then the
Children of God's Servants shall continue, and their seed shall be established
before him, Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27, 28. And this is the World to come, of which
the Apostle says, we speak, Heb. 2.5, 8. For that which is called a Nation, or
Generation in the Old Testament where it is said, a Seed shall serve him, and
it shall be accounted to the Lord for a Generation, Psalm. 22.30, 31. Psalm.
24.6, 7. The same in the New Testament, is termed the World to come, and the
World without end, And the Christians since the Apostasy from the truth of
God's Word, have never rightly understood this World to come, nor the
Foundation thereof: Whereby great part of the Fundamental Doctrine of the
Gospel has been overturned. And in the New Testament the last Day is spoken of
because they that are under the Gospel will then be Judged; and the Gospel
institution will then cease, and the ruling Power taken out of the Hand of the
People of this World: and therefore it is termed their last Day. But in the Old
Testament we never read of a last Day, because when Israel is again restored,
then the Land is given them for an Everlasting inheritance, Genesis 17.7, 8. And
then as the New Heavens, and the New Earth shall remain, so shall their Seed
and their Name remain, Isa. 66.22. and then it is that Mount Sion shall be made
an Eternal. Excellency. But more of this hereafter.

Now whereas St. Paul says, These. 5.4, 5. But ye Brethren are not in darkness,
that that day should overtake you as a thief: ye are all the Children of the
Light, and the Children of the Day; ye are not of the Night, nor of darkness.
This he speaks of them that were of the first Churches, which had received the
Holy Ghost, and thereby he knew they were chosen in a more peculiar manner for
that Day which is still to come, as his foregoing words make clearly appear; in
that he says, That Day should not overtake them as a Thief. And if we now in
this gloomy and dark day, walk as Children of the Light, in a holy and upright
Conversation, and with love to the Truth, we shall belong to that Day also. But
when the Apostle wrote this Epistle, and the first of the Corinthians, he did
expect the coming of the Lord in their day; but afterward he did declare to
the contrary, for in 2 These. 2.2. he lets them understand, that the Day of
Christ was not then at hand, but that there would be a falling away first, but
nothing of a New Election afterward to be called in under the Gospel, that
being a new received notion, and Scriptureless.

And concerning this Day which is to come, the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10.
That they knew but in part, and they prophesied but in part. But when that
which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. Now
then what gross Darkness must we lie under, that came out of Popery, by which
was altogether lost the right apprehension of that Day; for by the Pope it was
condemned for a Heresy. But St. Peter said to the Church to whom he wrote, Ye
do well that ye take heed as unto a Light that shines in a dark place, 2 Pet.
1.19. But we having lost the right knowledge of that day, are thereby stumbling
on the dark Mountains; Every Sect sticking to that Opinion they first took up
with, when they came out of that darkness: All thinking themselves so right,
that they need not make any further enquiry or search into the knowledge of the
truth of the Scriptures. But now is the time the Lord is beginning to fulfill
his Promise, in Dan. 12.4. By revealing the true meaning of his Word, that
thereby knowledge might be increased; so as preparation may be made for the
Coming of the Lord. And also it is said, That at Evening time it shall he
light, Zech. 14.7. And that the Vision shall speak, and not lie, Hab. 2.3. By
which it does clearly appear, that the Word of the Lord will be better
understood than hitherto it has been for these many hundred years.

But our mistakes concerning Election, in that we have thought our selves the
Elect, and so they say, can never fall from Grace. And others wholly believing
in the Righteousness of Christ for Salvation, not considering the Conditions on
which it is tendered. All these think they stand so secure, that it is no
concern of theirs, to know whether Christ is coming or not: They not
apprehending there are a certain Remnant of the Jeros given to Christ by his
Father, to be his standing witness through the World. And that likewise the
first Churches were elected, and received the Holy Ghost to be in them; that
the World through them might know that God had sent Christ; as thereby they
might have ground to believe. And upon the publication of the common Salvation,
was given a day of Grace by the Call of the Word, with the assistance of the
good motions of the Spirit of God, the which Israel had, till they resisted, in
their not obeying the Commands of the Lord, Act. 7.51. For they did then strain
at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel, Mat. 23.24. And so the Gentiles, till they came
to have no love to the Truth, 2 These. 2.10. Now the Mistakes in these things,
if we do not well awaken, will prove of most dangerous consequence, 1 These.
5.3. For when they say peace and Safety, then sudden Destruction comes upon
them, as Travail upon a Woman with Child. And then it is that such Christians
will be found in Darkness, who have not prepared for the coming of the Lord.

God's Love to the World.
JOHN 3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life. That
is, every individual Person that believes in Christ, has a promise of
everlasting Life: from which words we are to take notice, that of this World or
People there are some that will believe, and some that will not; but that the
love of Christ was such as to dye for all; for St. Paul says, H^b. 2.9. That
Christ did taste Death for every Man. And St. John says, Christ is the
Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John, 2.2. From which
Scriptures we may plainly see, that by Christ all will be cleared from original
Sin, so as when all come to be Judged, they will be Judged according to their
Works, Rev. 20.12. 1 Pet. 1.17. Cor. 5.10. John 5.28, 29. Romans 2.12, 13, 14.
And therefore in the Time or World to come there will be a Redemption for
Children, and such as are not wilfully Guilty. And God loving his Creatures
first, it is that thereby it might beget in them a love to him that: dyed for
them, For Christ says, he that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not
worthy of me, Mat. 10.37, 38. For it is a Faith that works by love, that is
required of us, whereby our Wills and Affections must be brought into
Subjection unto Christ. The which is the Faith unto which the promise of
Eternal Life is annexed.

For that which Christ would have us believe, is, That Salvation is to be had
by him according to his Word, that is, by taking his Yoke upon them, and to
render obedience to him; And to remain faithful to the Death, and Christ will
give them a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. Whosoever thus believes in Christ, shall
be saved with an everlasting Salvation; for these are the Words of Christ, and
we are to expect his coming; and his Kingdom according as it is declared in his
Word: But whosoever believes not what God and Christ has declared, cannot be
said to believe in them.

And by our believing that Christ is the Son of God, thereby is required, we
should obey him as such: But whosoever will oppose the Truth, and believe what
Man says, rather than God, because it more suits to their carnal inclinations,
such cannot be said to obey God, or believe in him; but rather in cunningly
devised Fables.

But the Sinner upon his resignation of himself to Christ, is thereby saved
from his Sins which are past, Romans 3.25. And by his continuance in well doing,
he shall be saved with an everlasting Salvation: and for Sins of ignorance, and
Sins of surprisal, Christ remains an Advocate. But let all take care of wilful
and presumptuous Sins, for they cause God to withdraw himself; For which cause
God left Israel to Blindness; and the Gentile Christians to delusions, when
they came to have no love to the Truth, but took pleasure in Unrighteousness, 2
These. 2.10. And now the Christians had best take care they are not found to
have no love to the Truth, lest thereby they work their overthrow. But the
Christians by their mistaken notions are for the most part upon a wrong
Foundation, whereby they are in the Snare, according to the Word of the Lord,
in Isaiah Chap. 24.17.

Esau and Jacob made the Figures or Representatives of two Nations, or two
several Sorts of People.
GENESIS 25.22, 23. Rebeckah enquired of the Lord concerning the Struggling of the
Children in her Womb. ver. 23. And the Lord said to her, two Nations are in thy
Womb, and two manner of People shall be separated from thy Bowels, and the one
People shall be Stronger than the other People, and the Elder shall serve the
Younger. We are here to take notice, that God does not here say that he hated
Esau; neither that the Elder Brother should serve the Younger; but it is said
of the Elder People, that they should serve the Younger, and it is the Younger
People that shall be Stronger than the Elder. For God made these two Brethren
the Figures of two Nations, or the two Worlds of People, Esau of this World,
and Jacob of that which is to come. And this God determined before the Children
had done Good or Evil: That the Elder People or Nation, should serve the
Younger. But God had not here determined hatred to either, nor servitude to the
Elder Brother, unto whom God first gave the Pre-eminence, Genesis 4.7. And Jacob,
though he got from Esau the Birthright and Blessing as to his Seed, yet he went
not about to take it from Esau's Person, for Jacob termed him his Lord Esau,
Genesis 32.18. Genesis 33.8.13, 14.

And whereas it is said, Genesis 25.26. That Jacob's Hand took hold of Esan's
Heel: Thereby showing, that the full Power of the Younger World will come in
upon the going off of the Power of the Elder World of People: and that which is
called a Nation, People or Generation, in the Old Testament, Psalm. 22.28, 29,
30, 31. Psalm. 102.26, 27, 28. is called the World to come in the New, Heb. 1.8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Heb. 2* 5. And these Younger People must needs be the
Stronger People, For they will be all Righteous, Isa. 60.21. They shall teach
no more every Man his Neighbor and his Brother, for they shall be all taught
of God, Jer. 31.34. And then it is they will walk in the Statutes of the Lord,
and keep his Commandments, and do them, Ezekiel. 36.24, 25, 26, 27. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
Jer. 32.39, 40, 41. And they will drink of the River of his Pleasures, Psalm.
36.8. And that abundantly, Cant. 5.1. And they will live to the Age of a Tree,
Isa. 65.22. And the Beast of the Field, and the Fowls of Heaven, and all other
Creatures will be subject to them. Hos. 2.18. Eze. 34.25. And the Lord will
make with them the Promised new everlasting Covenant, Jer. 32.41, 42. which is
the Covenant of Peace, Ezekiel. 34.35. And rest in his love, and rejoice over
them, Zeph. 3.17. And then they shall not say I am Sick, Isa. 33.24. And sorrow
and sighing shall flee away, Isa. 35.10. And the Lord will be Prince amongst
them, Ezekiel. 34.24, 25. And then the weak will be as the House of David, and the
House of David will be as God, Zechariah, Chap. 12.8. And then their seed shall
be known amongst the Gentiles, and their off spring among the People, Isa.
61.9, 10, 11. And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all Kings thy
Glory: Thou shall also be a Crown of Glory in the hand of the Lord, and a Royal
Diadem in the hand of thy God, Isa. 62.2, 3. Here is sufficient proof that
these Younger People will be abundantly stronger than the Elder People: and
then this Younger People, which are the Ages to come, become thus Blessed: then
God will show forth the exceeding Riches of his Grace to the Apostles, and
Saints, and Martyrs of Jesus, Ephesians. 2.7. Who then will have their place in the
Glorious Tabernacle which the Lord will pitch, and not Man, Heb. 8.2. which
Tabernacle will be Israel's covert, Isa. 4.6. From whence the Lord with his
raised Saints, will ascend and descend to the real Mount Sion: as the Lord
formlery did from the Cloudy Pillar to the Tabernacle, as I have elsewhere at
large proved.

And in time to come, the Nations are given to be Servants to Israel: For the
Lord says, Isa. 60.12. The Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall
perish: yea, those Nations shall be utterly wasted. And then it is that the
Elder People, World, or Nation are to serve the Younger, according as God by
his Word has declared.

But thus far Esau and Jacob did represent the two Nations, or two Worlds of
People in this time, in their own Persons. For as Esan was hairy all over, Genesis
25.25. which signifies roughness or an unsmoothness; And Esau was therein like
the constitution of this World of People, as to their mind and practice; And
Esau got his food by Hunting; so this World Hunts and Labors for their food.
But Jacob was a smooth Man, representing the Time or World to come, in which
time there will be Smoothness and calmness, with all serenity; and Provision in
abundance without Hunting for.

Concerning the Servitude.
BUt as for the Servitude the Lord had determined for the Elder World, before
the Children had done good or evil: In that Servitude they will be more Blessed
than ever they would have been without it. For God promised Abraham, that in
him all the Families of the Earth should be Blessed, Genesis 12.3. Genesis 18.18.
Genesis 22.17, 18. Genesis 26.4. Which is by Christ, and partly made good at Christ's
first coming by the publication of the Gospel, by which many of the Nations
embraced the Faith, by laying hold of the common Salvation which is therein
tendered, Jude 2. For Christ tasted Death for every Man, Heb. 2.9. Heb. 5.9.
John 3.16. 1 John 2.2. In which common Salvation, I neither mean the elect
remnant that was chosen from among Israel, unto whom Christ promised to be with
to the end of the World: Nor the People that God at the first visiting the
Gentiles, did take out from among them for his Name, Acts 15.14. The which
People then received the Holy Ghost to be in them, that they might be a light
to the World: And that the World through them might believe or know that God
had sent Christ, John 17.23. That thereby the Nations might take hold of the
offered Mercy, which accordingly they did, Colos. 1.6. and so became the Seed
of Abraham* And whilst they walked in the stops of the Faith of Abraham, Romans
4.12. They were heirs to Isreal's promises: and that by Christ, who was of the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah; And set forth as a propitiation through Faith in
his Blood for the remission of Sins that are past, Romans 3.25. to all them that
then believed according to the tender of his Grace. Therefore they then
concluded upon the publication of the Gospel, or of a Sinners resigning himself
to Christ to serve him, that a Man was justified by Faith, without the deeds of
the Law, Chap. 3.26, 27, 28. But in the Faith that they were to believe, were
included the deeds of the Law: For it is required they should walk according to
it, for they are to be Judged by it, Romans 2.13. For the Lord will render to
every Man according to his deeds, when Judged. Chap. 2.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. And
Christ is become the Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, Heb
5.9. And walk before God with a perfect Heart, as Abraham did, Genesis 26.5. Genesis
17.1. And like him, expect the promised Reward in the way of their obedience.
And whilst the Gentiles that had embraced the Faith walked in his steps, they
were Heirs to the promises: and it is such will be partakers of the Glory
promised in time to come. The which time, will be the time of Christ's Kingdom;
And then all the Families of the Earth will be Blessed in Abraham and his Seed.
For after the Lord has avenged himself of his Enemies; which Enemies are those
who regard not the Counsel of the Lord, and will have none of his Reproof;
against these he will spend his Arrows. And then God calls to the Nations to
rejoice with his People, Deuteronomy. 32.42, 43. For then all the Nations that are
given to be Israel's Servants, will have cause to rejoice, in that they will
then be made blessed thereby, when all those of Mount-Seir and Idumea, who
through unbelief of the Promise made to Israel, boast themselves, and deny the
Time or World to come, in which the Lord will make his Promises good. And
through Covetousness of this present evil world, they, like Esau, sell their
Birthright for this world's Morsel: And it is these Edomites shall be made
desolate, when the whole Earth rejoices, Ezekiel. 35.12, 13, 14, 15.

Now Esau was but termed Edom, upon the desiring the Pottage; for which Pottage
be sold his Birthright, Genesis 25.31, 32, 33. As not believing the Promises
which God made to Abraham, as relating to this time, nor that which is to come;
unto which the promised Blessedness belongs. For if he had believed the
Promises, he would not have said, If I dye for Hunger, what profit shall this
Birthright do me? And it was through Unbelief of a future slate, made him
unwilling to encounter with Difficulties; and therefore sold his Birthright,
to which the Blessing was annexed: For which, afterward when he would have
inherited the Blessing, he was rejected, Heb. 12.17. And had not Jacob known
the advantage that was to be had by the Birthright, he would not have desired
it from him.

For had not the Blessing gone with the Birthright, Jacob had been in a far
better condition without it, for then he had purchased the Servitude with the
Birthright: But Isaac, Rebecca, and Jacob, well knew that it was the Elder
People, Nation, or World, that was to serve the Younger. And as Esau through
unbelief disinherited himself; so the Seed of Jacob by their disobedience and
unbelief, have in this time disinherited themselves. Yet in the time to come,
the Seed of Jacob will have the promised Blessing, with whom the true Believer
will come in Heir with.

And in this time, the Covenant which God made with the Seed of Jacob was such,
that others might take hold of it; Strangers as well as Israel, Deuteronomy. 29.14,
15. So that the natural seed of Esau were not excluded from it; as many as
would come in, according to the condition of the Covenant, might be Heirs with
Israel in time to come. And Esau's Seed knowing the Covenant of the Lord, and
they not joining with Israel in the true Worship, they were more inexcusable
than the rest of the Nations. For the true God, was the God of their Fathers.
But in the time to come, the unborn Posterity of Esau, then cannot come in
Heirs with Israel. Neither any of this World can partake of Israel's Promises
in time to come, but those that come in Heirs with Israel in this time.

Jacob's Blessing.
THe Blessing wherewith Isaac blessed Jacob, as relating to him and his Seed,
the which had not only Reference to this Time, or World, but much more to that
which is to come. For unto him he pronounced the Words of God to Abraham, Genesis
12.3. I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee. For
in the Blessing, Isaac said to Jacob, Genesis 28.29. God give thee of the Dew of
Heaven, and the Fatness of the Earth, and plenty of Corn and Wine. Let People
serve thee, and Nations bow down to thee; be Lord over thy Brethren, and let
thy Mother's Sons bow down to thee; cursed be every one that curses thee, and
blessed be he that blesses thee. This Blessing, as I said before, must needs
have its chief reference to the Generations of Israel's Children in time to
come, Psalm. 102.18, 19. Psalm. 22.30, 31. Psalm. 24.6. Deuteronomy. 30.5, 6, 7. Deuteronomy.
32.43. Jer. 32.39, 40, 41.

But as to the Blessing with which Isaac Blessed Esau and his Seed, in which he
had therein his reference to the time of this World, and not to the time of
that which is to come, Genesis 27.39, 40. For Isaac his Father said, behold thy
dwelling shall be the fatness of the Earth, and the dew of Heaven from above.
And by thy Sword shall thou live, and shall serve thy Brother: and it shall
come to pass when thou shall have the dominion, that thou shall break his Yoke
from off thy Neck. The which Yoke was to be broken off in this time, according
as we see it has been. But in time to come, it cannot be, For then the Nation
and Kingdom that will not serve Israel, shall perish: yea, those Nations shall
be utterly wasted, Isa. 60.12. For then no Weapon formed against Israel shall
prosper, Isa. 54.17. And God says to them, verse. 7.8. For a small moment have
I forsaken thee, but with great Mercies will I gather thee: In a little wrath I
hid my face from thee, for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. For as God has sworn that the
Waters of Noah should no more go over the Earth; so has he sworn that he would
not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee, verse. 9. The which is when again
reconciled.

But Esau weeping so bitterly for the loss of the Blessing; that Isaac said
nothing to him concerning the time to come, but rather chose to comfort him
concerning this time, in which he should break his Brother's Yoke from off him.

But all in this time, that come in Heirs with Israel by Abraham's Faith,
become the Seed of Abraham. And so the unbelievers through their unbelief,
become the Seed of Esau or Edom: For now all being reckoned as Esau or Edom
that know the Will of God, and will not live in obedience to it, through
unbelief of the promises: and so such part with the Glory promised for this
Worlds morsel, like Esau, for which he was termed profane, Heb. 12.16, 17. But
the belief of the promised reward, carried the worthies of Old through all
difficulties, Heb. 11.12. So as they hoped against hope, as Abraham did for his
promised Son, Romans 4.18. So the Christians should have continued hoping for the
return of the Lord according to the promises in the Old and New Testament; both
being given as Ground to Build our Faith upon. But when the Gentile Christians
thought the Lord delayed his coming, then they began to grow weary of waiting
for the return of the Lord, and the performance of the promises, that will be
made good by him in time to come. The which when they believed not, they
resolved to make as much advantage of the present time as they could. And so
all such part with the promised reward for this Worlds morsel; And therefore
are termed, Edom, Mount Seir, and all Idumea, Ezekiel. 35.12, 13, 14, 15.

And the Roman and Turkish Esau or Edom, has been more cruel and inveterate to
the Saints and People of God, and especially the evil Servant, that beat his
Fellow Servants, than ever the Esau that came of the Loins of Jacob was, or
could be. And it was against this Esau, which the Lord declares his hatred to
in Malachy: That being a Prophecy that related to the time to come. And
therefore the Lord speaking of things that are to come, as though they were
already done, says, Chap. 1.3. And I hated Esau, and laid his Mountains, and
his Heritage wast, for the Dragons of the Wilderness. This is the same Edom
Prophesied of, Ezekiel. 35.15. And Isa. 34.4, 5, 6. And it is the same People
spoke of, Joel 3.13, 14, 15, 16. And in several other places, which will be
then Judged; and these People of Esau, will be destroyed when the Lord comes
again: and then their Mountains will be laid wast for the Dragons of the
Wilderness. And some part of it will remain as burning Lakes, as a remark of
God's sore displeasure against Sin. For which they are termed the People of
God's curse, Isa. 34.5.10. Isa. 24.5, 6.

But again, concerning this Edom spoken of, Mal. 1.4. Whereas Edom says, we
are impoverished, but we will return and build the desolate Places: Thus says
the Lord of Hosts, they shall build, but I will throw down: and they shall call
them the border of Wickedness, and the People against whom the Lord has
indignation for ever. This is a Prophecy spoken of the ever of the time to
come: And then as in the 5 verse. Israel's Eyes shall see, and they shall say,
the Lord will be magnified from the Borders of Israel.

But some may say, how can the Edomites after they are destroyed, and their
Mountains laid wast, say they will return and Build their desolate places if
this in the 4th verse. be spoken for the time to come?

This is spoken of the Children of this Esau or Edom, which when the Lord comes
will be spared, when their Parents for their unbelief and disobedience will be
cut off, for the Lord says, Jer. 49.10. There speaking of Esau, and of the
Lord's making of him bare, says in the 11 verse. Leave thy Fatherless Children,
I will preserve them alive, and let thy Widows trust in me. These Widows do
plainly appear to be those that are deceived by false Teachers, but not
otherwise wilfully Wicked: For when the Rams and He-Goats are Judged, that have
one Pasture to partake of; It Is the He-Goats for treading down the good
Pastures and fouling of the deep Waters will then be Condemned, Ezekiel. 34.10,
17, 18. And therefore then their Widows are spared. And these Children which
the Lord says he will preserve alive. God declares how he will dispose of
them, Joel 3.8. Which is, that they shall be sold to the Sabeans: from whence
when they are again multiplied, they may return to Build their disolate Places.
But God having declared, they should lie wast: therefore they disobey in their
returning to Build them, and they proving disobedient as well as their
Predecessors, are called the Border of Wickedness.

And as God loved Israel for Abraham's sake, because he obeyed the voice of
God, and kept his charge, his Commandments, his Statutes, and his Laws, Genesis
26.4, 5. Therefore God made to Abraham and his Seed, those great and Blessed
promises for the time to come: And for the wickedness of this Esau-Generation,
God has more disregard to their Offspring in time to come, than to all the
rest of the Nations. For Christ in this time having broken down the
partion-wall between Jew and Gentile, Ephesians. 2.14. So as these might have come
in to the everlasting inheritance in time to come, until they came to have no
love to the Truth, 2 These. 10, 11. And the first Christians embraced the true
Faith, but some Hundred Years after, they fell from the Truth, and trausgressed
the Laws, changed the Ordinances, and broke the everlasting Covenant. Therefore
where this Offense is found, the Curse devoureth the Earth, and they that dwell
therein are desolate, Isa. 24.5, 6. And for these things it is, that God's sore
displeasure will be against them. For the moral Law is an everlasting Covenant
between God and Man: And by establishing the promised New everlasting Covenant,
there will be given an inherent perfect Righteousness, by which they shall be
enabled perfectly to keep the Old, Deuteronomy. 30.6, 8. Isa. 42.21. But in this time
it is required that we should walk blamelesly in them, as Zachary and Elizabeth
did, Luke 1.6. And to have kept the Ordinances as they were delivered, as the
first Churches did, 1 Cor. 11.2. And several Generations; Till such time they
began to think the Lord delayed his coming, so grew weary to wait on the Lord
in his way, and for his time, for the performance of his Promises: And when
they came to have no Love to the Truth, then they changed the Laws, and brake
the Everlasting Covenant. The which is, to love the Lord God with all their
Heart, and with all their Soul; and do Equity to their Neighbor, and to have
served God according to his own Institution. But the forementioned doing
otherwise, therefore are Condemned, for Man in this time is left to his own
free will. For when the Beast thought or desired to change times or laws, it
was given into his Hands, Dan. 7.25. And the common tender of God's grace, is
to all that are athirst, Rev. 22.17. And it is those that are Condemned at
Judgment, that hate knowledge, and will not choose the counsel of the Lord, Pro.
1 29, 30. And though none by their willing or running, can make themselves
Elected or fore-chosen: Nor when the Master of the House is risen up to
Judgment, then none by their willing or running can find admittance into the
Wedding Supper, but those of the Christians that are before prepared: And those
Christians that are not, they do not then only exclude themselves, but their
unborn Posterity. For then the Mercy, or blessing will according to the
promise, which is to Israel, when the Lord comes again to Sion, Romans 11 26, 27.
And God knowing the great disadvantage it would be to the Christians, and their
offspring, for that Day to overtake them at unawares; Therefore has declared
that at the time of the end, knowledge should be increased, Dan. 12.4. And that
at Evening time it should be Light, Zach. 14 7. And that at the end of the
time, the Vision shall speak, and not lie: tho it tarry, wait for it, because
it will surely come, Hab. 2.3. For great is the advantage both to Jew, and to
Gentile, to understand aright the time that is to come. For though the great
promised Mercy then belongs to Israel, yet the Wicked amongst them must expect
to fall before the everlasting Covenant is established: as they did formerly on
the other side of the River Jordan. Therefore in this time to both the Jew and
Gentile, there is a race set, that those that will, may run for the Prize. And
now especially, the Glory being so near, let every thinking Soul, So run, as
they may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.23. 24, 25, 26, 27. But those that persist in
unbelief, and still say, Where is the promise of his Coming, 2 Pet. 3.4. To
restore all things as you say, Acts 3.20, 21. Such must expect to fall under
the severe Condemnation.

Wherefore God hated Esau or Edom.
And God speaking concerning this time to come, Mal. 1.3. That he loved Jacob,
and hated Esau; is because the Younger Generation that then comes in of Israel,
though their Predecessors that were under the Law, were formerly Wicked, yet the
Lord for his Oaths sake will make his promise good to Israel in time to come.
And then in the day of the Lord's power, he will make his People a willing
People, Psalm. 110.3. As he did upon the establishing of the Gopel, when he then
took out from among the Gentiles a People for his Name, Acts 14.15. For a
Prophecy of Scripture has more than a private tendency, 2 Pet. 1.20. And this
in the forecited Psalm, has it is chief reference to the time to come: When
Israel shall be all Righteous and inherit the Land for ever, Isa. 60.21. And
then it is the Lord will ordain Peace for them: And work all their works in
them, Isa. 26.12. And then it is, the Lord will not be wroth with them, nor
rebuke them any more, Isa. 54.9. Then it is they will be of one Heart and one
Way, Jer. 32.39. And then they shall dwell in Peaceable habitations, and in
sure dwellings, and in quiet resting Places, Isa. 32.18. And then it is, that
his Elect shall long enjoy the work of their Hands, Isa. 65.22. And then it is,
The Lord will plant them, that they may dwell in a Place of their own, and move
no more Neither shall the Children of Wickedness afflict them any were, 2 Samuel
7.10. And then it is, That God shall cause them that come of Jacob to take
Root, Isa. 27.6. And then it is, God will rest in his love, Zeph. 3.17. For
then the Lord will secure them to himself for evermore, by establishing the now
promised New everlasting Covenant, with Abraham and his Seed together, Genesis
17.7, 8, 9. And this will be all done of Grace and Mercy, for the promise sake
God made to their Fathers, who obeyed the voice of the Lord, and kept his
Charge, his Commandments, his Statutes, and his Laws, Genesis 26.5.

At which time the Young Offspring of Edom, their Mountains are then laid wast
for the Sins of their Parents; And they sold to be Servants to them that are
Servants to Israel. And they as the rest of the Nations, are left to their own
free will, which for the Thousand Years that Satan is bound, they may probably
keep the Station in which God had placed them: But when Satan is again loosed,
he readily deceives them; they not being willing to submit to the portion that
God has allotted them. By which God's indignation will be showed against them,
because they were of the Borders of Wickedness. And Satan will then ensnare
some other of the Nations with them, as many as he can draw to Covet and evil
Covetousness; And then God leaves them to the Devil's delusion, to go up to
plunder Israel, for which they will be destroyed, Ezekiel. 28.12, 22. Whilst the
other Nations that are likewise then left to their own free will; yet they not
being willing to disobey God, could not be drawn to the coveting of Israel's
wealth; as to Plunder and Rebel against them, unto whom God had given the
Sovereignty. Thus God will be justified by them who then remain undeceived;
that the others might have stood, if they would have resisted the Devils
Temptations. And after Satan is cast into the Fire of Hell for ever and ever,
those People and Nations that will obey the Lord, may; and those that will not,
for want of Rain, will dwindle away, Zech. 14.17. And the others being not
Fruitful, the Nations will decrease, and Israel according to the Word of the
Lord will Blossom and Bud, and fill the face of the World with Fruit, Isa.
27.6. And then it is a little one shall become a Thousand, and a small one a
strong Nation: The Lord will hasten it in his time, Isa. 60.22. And these are
the World to come, and the World that will never be Judged: Because Israel is
then betrothed to the Lord for ever, in loving kindness and in Mercy, Hosea
2.19. And therefore fore at the last Judgment, when the Sea, and Hell, and
Death deliver up their Dead, there is none of the Nations Judged, Rev. 20.13.
For this World to come, is World without end. For the Lord says, Isa. 66.22.
As the new Heavens, and the new Earth which I will make, shall remain before
me, says the Lord, so shall your Seed and your Name remain.

The which New Heavens and Earth which God will make, is to be comprehended
under a two or threefold Head, for the Lord with the raised Saints, will be a
Heaven; for in Scripture a ruling power is a Heaven, as I have already proved;
and when the Lord comes with his Saints to take to himself his own great Power
and Reign, Rev. 11.15, 17. Rev. 19.6, 7, 15. Then there is a new Heaven,
wherein dwells Righteousness, and Israel when they are made Plants
Righteousness, at which time they will be all Righteous, Isa. 60.21. Then they
will be the Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, and these will be the new
Heavens and Earth that will take place upon the passing away of the Old, Rev.
21.1. 2dly, the Glorious Mansion, which the Lord is gone to prepare for his
Saints, he will then bring with him, Rev. 12.3. The which will then be a new
Heaven and a Taber^^cle of Covert, over all the Assemblies of Israel, Es. 4.5,
6. And then their Land will be like the Garden of Eden, Ezekiel. 36.35. And then
it will be a new Earth, and so a new Heavens and new Earth, and the other part
of the Earth will be renewed and made Fruitful, and the Darks and Clouds
dispersed, thereby will appear a new Face put upon all things, is Rev. What is
here hinted as to the Heavens and Earth, is at large proved in my Book, of the
Figurative Speeches.

Concerning the Kingdom of Saul, and the Kingdom of David.
THe House of Saul, and the House of David were the Figures or Representatives
of the two Kingdoms. The House of Saul the Figure of the Kingdom of this World,
who have a day of Grace put into their Hands: But for his disobedience, the
Kingdom was taken from him.

And David was the lively Representative of the Kingdom that is to come: The
which Kingdom, the Lord commanded us Daily to pray for. Which Typical Kingdom,
David long waited for after he had the promise of it, and he stood in all his
Trials, till he received the Crown. For which God made with him an everlasting
Covenant, and sure in that he would never take his loving Kindness from him nor
his Son, as he did from Saul. And therefore it was termed the sure Mercies of
David: After which David Sinned, as to the matter of Vriah, for which God
hurled him off from his Throne: and as he says, broke all his Bones; for those
that are in this time without Chastisement, are Bastards and not Sons, Heb.
12.8. But God would not take the Kingdom from him, because of the Oath that he
had made him, with the promise to his Seed.

But the common tender of his Grace is now to every one that is a thirst, that
they may freely come and Eat that which is Good, but their Souls must delight
in fatness, and this God will be Judge of, for we must be brought to Judgment,
before we shall be thought meet to be inheritors with the Saints in Light, as
to partake of the sure Mercies of David, Isa. 55.4, 5.

And as the Historical part of the Bible gives us an account that in David's
time, the House of Saul grew Weaker and Weaker, and the House of David
Stronger, and Stronger; So the Prophetical part declares that in time to come,
the House of Saul will gorw Weaker and Weaker, and the House of David grow
Stronger and Stronger. As in Isa. 27.6. God then shall cause them of Jacob to
take Root, Israel shall Blossom and Bud, and fill the Face of the World with
Fruit; and in Isa. 60.22. A little one shall become a Thousand, and a small one
a strong Nation: I the Lord will hasten it in his time. For this is not to be
until the time to come: At which time, the Younger Peoples Strength, will thus
wonderfully surpass the elder; And then his People also shall be all righteous,
they shall inherit the Land for ever, the Branch of my Planting, the work of my
Hands that I may be Glorified. Isa. 60.21.

The Faith of Abraham is comprehended under a Fourfold Head: The which belief
was accounted to him for Righteousness.
FIrst, that God called him to forsake his Country, and Kindred, and his
Fathers House. And God said, I will give thee the Land, Genesis 12.1. Genesis 26.4.5.
And upon this condition, we have Eternal Life given us, if we will forsake the
Vanities of this present evil World, and take up their Cross, and follow after
Christ, Mat. 10.37, 38, 39. Mat. 11.29. Rev. 3.10, 11, 12. And like Abraham
walk with God with a perfect Heart, the which God required or him, Genesis 17.1.
The which is to be sincere and upright.

2dly. Abraham believed the promise that God made to him in the gift of a Son
by Sarah his Wife: And he was in continual expectation of the gift of this Son,
even till Old Age; and then hoped against hope, Judging him Faithful that had
promised, Romans 4.18, 21. So the Christians should have waited for the coming of
the Lord to Judge and Reign, and Restore all things, according as it is
declared by St. Peter, Acts 3.21. And as he says also, by all the Holy
Prophets since the World began.

3dly. Abraham believed the Judge of all the World would do right, And not slay
the Righteous with the Wicked, Genesis 18.25. For his belief was that every one be
should Judged, as their deeds require according to the World of the Lord. 'That
the Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him, and the Wickedness of the
Wicked shall be upon him, Ezekiel. 18.20. And not that God had reprobated any
before they had offended, as some ignorantly imagine.

4thly. Abraham's Faith was such, that he was willing to part with the desire
of his Heart, and the delight of his Eyes, when God required it. And therefore
he so freely offered up his Son Isaac for a Sacrifice; still Believing that God
could by him make his Promise good, for which thing God was so well pleased
with him that God made to him those great promises, Genesis 22.16, 17, 18.

But how have the Christians retained this Faith when they are so far out as to
these Heads? All as to some of these Heads, and some to all of them: yet think
like them of Laodicea, That they stand in need of nothing, not knowing that
they are Poor, Blind and Naked, Rev. 3.17. And if they do not with an humble
Heart, ask of the Lord Eye Salve, that they may see the great Truth in his
Word, which he has now discovered, and made plain according to his promise,
and at his own time, Dan. 12.4. The shame of their Nakedness will quickly
appear. And then all the imaginary Faith of Man's forging will be like so many
Fig leaves; And all their imagined Elections will then stand them in no Stead:
And others, that trust to their Baptismal Covenant, though they perform not the
Conditions of it, yet think they shall be saved by it. Whereby they do but
highten their Condemnation; and by which means the Nations are involved in
false Oaths, both the party Baptized and their Sureties, they promising that
which they do not, neither can perform.

And the Papist believe in their Priest's Pardons: so that most have lost the
Grounds of a true Faith, by false imaginary fictions. And so the Gentile
Christians are most of them in a deplorable condition. I desire none to be
offended, because I speak thus plain; it is by reason their Souls lie at Stake;
for when the Lord comes, we cannot stand upon a Sandy Foundation, but it is he
that has done the will of God shall be Rewarded. Matt. 7.21. Rev. 22.12.

St. Paul's Reference to Sarah and Rebeckah.
NOw St. Paul in Romans 9. He having there in his Allusion to Sarah and Rebeckah,
has therein his reference to Christ's first and second coming, and to the
several Elections that were and are to be called in at those times according to
the Promise: For he says in verse. 6. They are not all Israel which are Israel,
and in verse. 7. Neither because they are the Seed of Abraham are they all
Children, but in Isaac shall thy Seed be called, and Isaac came of the Loins of
his Father Abraham according to the Flesh, yet his Son according to promise:
And whereas the Apostle says, verse. 8 They which are the Children of the Flesh
are not the Children of God; but the Children of the promise are accounted for
the Seed; And all that live not according to the will of the Flesh, but
according to the Spirit, are Heirs according to promise, Psalm. 15. For it is
such shall live in his Holy Hill, and unto such as obey Christ, he will be the
Author of Eternal Salvation to them, Heb. 5.9. But St. Paul has here his
peculiar reference to them that were and are to be called in according to
promise, at the set time appointed. And therefore he first alludeth to Sarah,
in verse. 9. In which he has a reference to Christ' first coming, which was
according to promise, at which set time there was some called in both of Jew
and Gentile by a peculiar calling, and that according to promise, Joel 2.28.
Isa. 32.15. Acts 15.14. And that not for any works of Righteousness which they
had then done: but according to his Mercy he saved them. For they were brought
out of Idolatry and Heathenism, and therefore could not be saved for the works
of Righteousness that they had then done. But whom God did foreknow, he also
did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, Romans 8.29. For they
were not only to believe, but to suffer for his Sake; And to be examples to all
that would lay hold of the offered Mercy, and by Faith and Patience in
continuance in well doing, they might inherit the Promises. But the Apostle
foreseeing that the Gentiles that came in upon the common Salvation, would not
long retain this Faith, as so to tread in the steps of Abraham, as thereby to
remain the Children of Abraham. And therefore he goes on, and says in the 10
verse. Not only this, but when Rebeckah had conceived by one, even our Father
Isaac: For the Children being not then Born, neither having done good or evil,
that the purpose of God according to Election might stand, not of works, but of
him that calls, it was said unto her, the Elder shall serve the Younger. Here
the Apostle has his whole reference to the time or World to come, unto which
God has determined the Glory, that the Elder. People should serve the Younger,
that the purpose according to the Election might stand. That according to
promise at the appointed time when the Lord again comes to Sion, he will turn
away ungodliness from Jacob, Rom: 11.25, 26, 27, 28. Joel 3.21. Acts 15.16. And
it is then the Elder People, Nation, or World shall serve the Younger. The
which the foresaid two Brothers were made the Representatives of. But St. Paul
makes no exposition on the Servitude, because it has it is reference to the
Heathen in time to come; and it is in the time to come that Israel will inherit
the promises: though not the Seed according to the Flesh, although they come of
the Loins of their Fathers. For then the Lord will circumcise their Hearts, and
the Heart of their Seed, Deuteronomy. 30.6, 8. So as then they will love and obey the
Lord: which in this time through the Corruption of the Flesh, and Sinful
inclinations of the mind, they did not obey him. But in this time to come, then
it is their Righteousness is of the Lord, when they are made thus perfectly
Righteous, Isa. 54.13, 14, 17. And whereas the Apostle says, Rom, 9.22. As it
is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. Now the Apostle here
having his allusion to the Seed of Jacob in time to come, has likewise here his
reference to the Seed of Esau in time to come. And whereas he says, as it is
written, therein he includes the Esau or Edom, whose Mountains and Heritage
will then be laid wast in time to come, for the Sins of their Parents: for
whose disobedience God will have less regard to them, than to any other. For
though the Children in time to come are alike Guiltless, yet the Lord then will
make great difference among them, according as he has declared in his Word,
Isa. 60.12. Joel 3.8. And it is the Mountains of this latter Esau that will
then be laid wast for the Dragons of the Wilderness: And then it is that God
shows more dislike or hatred to their Seed, than to any other. For then it is
God gives their Young offspring to be Servants to them, that are Servants to
Israel, Joel 3.8. And in time to come because they were the Offspring of the
Wicked, and for their returning to Build their desolate Places, they are callet
the Borders of Wickedness: And the People against whom the Lord has
indignaiton for ever, Mal. 1.4. Which ever, is the ever of the time to come.
This time being reckoned one ever, and the time to come another ever, And God
has declared that the Wicked shall be cut off from the Earth, and that their
offspring shall not remain in it, 37 Psalm. 9.22.28. The which will be made good
in the ever of the time to come.

And whereas St. Paul says, Romans 9.14. What shall we say then, is there
Unrighteousness with God? God forbid. Whereas he says then, thereby he shows
he has his reference to the time to come. For as Balaam said according to this
time, it shall be said of Jacob and Israel, what has God wrought, Number. 23.23.
And so St. Paul shows the deliverance of Israel the second time, will be like
that of the first. And whereas he said in the 15. verse. God said to Moses, I
will have Mercy, on whom I will have Mercy: and I will have compassion on whom
I will have compassion. Whereas the Apostle says, verse. 16. So then it is not
of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows Mercy. By
this then, the Apostle has his reference to the then time of Isreal's
deliverance And therefore he says in the 17 verse. The Scripture says unto
Pharaoh, even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my
power in thee, and that my name might be declared through all the Earth. Now in
the Hebrew it is no otherwise writ, then that God made him stand: For they
being Israel's oppressors, God therefore then made him stand, till he came in
the Clouds to drown them in the Sea. For though God did not harden him in
Wickedness or Cruelty, yet he did in unbelief of his Power, that he and his
Host might follow after Israel and be drowned in the Sea. So again when the
Lord comes in the Clouds, the wicked Edomites will then be destroyed, when
their Children will be spared; for them that harden themselves in Wickedness
and Cruelty, God chooses such to harden in unbelief of his coming, that he may
thereby overtake them at unawares. And when the Master of the House rises up
to Judgment, then he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy; and then his
Mercy will be showed according to his Promise, and his Punishments according to
his Threatenings. For therein they shall not resist his will, for then it is not
any ones willing and running, can bring them in Heirs with Israel to the
Promises: For then God according to his Word will show forth his Power, and
make some Vessels to Honor, and some to Dishonor. At which time, verse. 23.24.
He will make known the Riches of his Glory on the Vessels of Mercy which he had
before prepared unto Glory; even us whom he has called, not of the Jews only,
but also of the Gentiles. This the Apostle speaks of them that were then in a
peculiar manner called in, whom he had before well instructed in these matters
about which he wrote unto them for he says he had declared the whole counsel
of God, by which he says he was clear from the Blood of all Men, Acts 20.26,
27. But these things were hard for us to understand: who since t^^^^ of the
Pope know nothing of this matter, he having condemned it for a Heresy.

Now St. Paul had several meanings, according to the several occasions he had
to express himself. As when the first Gentile Churches were brought out of
Idolatry, he said unto them, it was not for any works of Righteousness which
they had done, but according to his Mercy he saved them, Titus 3.5. Romans 3.25.
And to all that embraced the Faith, He said, they must run for the Prize, 1
Cor. 9.24. And that such should reap if they faint not, Gal 6.9. And whereas he
says, ye are saved by Grace, and not by Works; Is thereby to show, That none
can be saved by Works standing alone, without the Grace and Mercy of God
through Christ; But the tender of God's Grace being on conditions, we must in
this Life perform the conditions, if we will in time to come inherit the
Promises. But when the Master of the House is risen up to Judgment, then it is
not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
Mercy: For then God will show Mercy to Israel according to his promise, and
punish the Disobedient under the Gospel according to his Threatenings. But we
not knowing these distinctions, it has occasioned endless Controversy among
us: And had not St. Paul's Words had their several tendencies, he had writ a
parcel of contradictions: and if so, he had thereby made all that he had said
as an insignificant thing.

Not all Sleep.
AND whereas St. Paul said, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. We shall not all Sleep, but we
shall all be changed in a moment, at the last Trumpet. Now the question is,
what We the Apostle here speaks of? Whether it be both good and bad, or only
the saved that will be thus suddenly changed. To which I answer, it is not the
bad that will be thus suddenly changed, neither the generality of them that are
saved that will be the We, the Apostle here means. For Israel is to return
into their own Land, when the great Trumpet is blown, Isa. 27.13 And then it is
the New everlasting Covenant will be Established, and then it is God will rest
in his Love to his People. Therefore the Apostle says, verse. 52. As it is
written, Death is swallowed up in Victory, Isa. 25.8. For then it is the rebuke
of his People Israel God will take away from off all the Earth. But this will
not be done in the twinkling of an Eye, therefore can have no reference to the
We, that are to be so suddenly changed. And so by this We, the Apostle appears
only to have his reference to them in that time, rather than to the Elect
remnant, which was to remain to the end of the World undeceived. For in that he
said we shall not all Sleep, as expecting the returning of the Lord in their
Day, as by his writing it does further appear in his first Epistle to the
Thessalonians, Chap. 4. verse. 17. And therefore he says, Then we which are
alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet
the Lord in the Air. For he knew that they were fore-chosen for the Glorious
Tabernacle, as well as those that Sleep, when raised. And therefore St. Paul
says, Ephesians. 1.12. That we should be to the Praise of his Glory, who first
trusted in Christ. Whereby it is evident to all by his saying We, he had but
herein his reference to them in that time that did first trust in Christ, and
were fore-chosen, that God in them might show forth the exceeding Riches of his
Grace in the Ages to come, Ephesians. 2.7. For they being fore-chosen for the
Glorious Tabernacle, he knew there was no getting up there, but by being taken
up in the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, where this Glorious Mansion is to
be placed over all Israel's assemblies, and for their Covert, Isa. 4.5, 6. And
that he did expect the coming of the Lord in their Day is farther evident, till
such time he wrote the Second Epistle to the Thessalonians, wherein he then
wrote to them not to think that the Day of the Lord was at Hand, Chap. 2.2. The
which had he not before thought otherwise, he would not have had occasion to
have wrote to have brought them out of that mistake.

Now some Men had rather continue in their Mistakes, and let God's Glory and
Man's Salvation lie at stake: And so the People dash themselves in pieces,
about their several Opinions like so many Potsherds, rather than themselves be
found in a mistake, or venture to encounter with a difficulty: The which they
know they must do, without they have orders from Authority, and an agreement
among themselves. For although most of all the Teachers are in some one thing,
more right than the other, yet the height of Man's mind is so great, that they
will not in the least yield one to the other. For though the greatest part of the
Church of England, are righter than the Dissenting party in some things, yet in
some other things the Dissenting party is righter than they. In that they
engage none in Oaths at Baptism: And also that they do not now allow any
Lord-like dignities in the Church. And as for either Pope or Devil, as far as
they own the Truth; all that have the true fear of God before their Eyes, are
bound to acknowledge it. But the Protestants, are not willing to own there is a
Redemption in the World to come, because the Papists, and Jews own there is a
returning for some from the place of Punishment, but the place of Separation,
will not be found the Popes Purgatory, for the Priests to pray them out for a
piece of Money. For as the Tree falls there it lies, till the Judge's time is
to remove it. And to prove that there is a Redemption for some in the Worl^ to
come, I shall only here cite two or three Quotations of Scripture out of many,
for brevity sake^

First, that Israel, whom God has concluded in unbelief when the Lord again
comes will be delivered out of the Pit wherein there is no Water, Zech. 9* 11.
The which are now Prisoners of hope, verse. 12. Romans 11.26, 32. And the Children
that were Slain by Herod, will then return from the Land of the Enemy to their
own Border, Jer. 31.15, 16, 17. Mat. 2.18* Isa. 49.9. Isa. 24.22. 1 Timothy 1.20.
Chap. 2.5, 6. Chap. 4.9, 10. The word All in Scripture does not include the
whole, but it does the major part. I desire the Teachers of all parties not to
be offended, for I am to speak the Truth of all sides.

Some say that I do not write in a Scholastic method, and that I heap
Scriptures one upon the Back of another. As for writing in a Scholastic
method, I never desire to do it, for by that method any one may turn the
Scriptures as a Nose of Wax which way they please, and as for my heaping
Scriptures together, it i^ the only way to make the true meaning of the Wor^
appear what it is, when I have a Cloud of Witnesse^ to prove what I affirm, and
likewise mak^ plain to the understanding what did first see^ by slight
examination to appear to be another thing than what it really is; for the Bible
hang^ one upon another from Genesis to the Revelations, an^ by making plainly
appear that all the Prophesie^ and Christ, and the Apstoles do agree in one and
the same thing it is the most Convincing way to confir^ the Truth of the
Scriptures, and to bring the People into a right understanding of the same, the
whi^ by the Scholastic way the Learned Scholars take (...) with, it is
impossible for them to do, should the live to the Age of Methusalem. I hope the
wise Heart will consider these things.

FINIS.

