AN ANSWER TO A BOOK ENTITVLED, AN HVMBLE REMONSTRANCE.

In which, The Original of LITURGY, EPISCOPACY is discussed. And Quaeres
propounded concerning both.

The PARITY of Bishops and Presbyters in Scripture Demonstrated. The occasion
of their IMPARITY in Antiquity discovered. The DISPARITY of the Ancient and our
Modern Bishops manifested. The ANTIQUITY of Ruling Elders in the Church
vindicated. The PRELATICALL Church Bownded.

JEREMY 6.16. Thus says the Lord, stand in the ways, and Behold, and ask for
the Old Way, which is the Way, and walk therein.

Tertul. de praescr. adv. haeres. Id Dominicum and verum, quod prius traditum:
id autem extraaeum and falsum quod sit posterius.

Written by SMECTYMNVVS.

LONDON, Printed for I. Rothwell, and are to be sold by T. N. at the Bible in
Popes-Head-Alley. 1641.

MOST HONORABLE LORDS, AND YE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, AND BVRGESSES, of the
Honorable House of COMMONS.
ALthough we doubt not, but that book which was lately directed to your
Honors, bearing the name of an Humble Remonstrance, has had access unto your
presence: and is in the first approaches of it, discovered by your discerning
spirits, to be neither Humble, nor a Remonstrance; but a heap of confident,
and ungrounded assertions; so that to your Honors a Reply may seem
superfluous: Yet lest the Author should glory in our silence, as a granting of
the cause; we humbly crave your Honors leave, to present, not so much to your
selves, as to the world by your hands, a review of this Remonstrance; in which
the Author after too large a Preface, undertakes the support of two things,
which seem to him to be threatened with danger of a present precipice, the
Liturgy, and the Hierarchy.

It was a constitution of those admired sons of Justice the Areopagi; (...).
that such as pleaded before them should plead without prefacing and without
Passion: had your Honors made such a constitution, this Remonstance must have
been banished from the face of your Assembly: for the Preface fills almost a
fourth part of the Book, and the rest swells with so many passionate
Rhetorications, as it is harder for us in the multitude of his words to find
what his argument is, that we have to answer, then to answer it when it is
found.

We would not trace him in his words, but close immediately with his argments;
did we not find in him a sad exemplification of that Divine Axiom, in
Multitudine verborum non deest peccatum, in the multitude of words there wants
no sin: Page 23.
for though the Author is bold to call upon your Honors to hear the words of
truth and confidence, yet how little truth there is in this great confidence,
the ensuing discourse shall discover.

His very first word^ are confident enough, and yet as false as confident;
wherein he Impropriates all honesty unto these his Papers, and brands all
others with the name of Libellers, and yet himself sins deeply against the
rule of honesty, and lies naked to the scourge of his own censure.

all writings that have lately issued from the press, Page 1.
as if they had all forgotten to speak any other language then Libellous: it
seems himself had forgotten, that some things had issued by Authority of the
King and Parliament.

none of the peaceable and well-affected Sons of the Church of England.

Page 2.
for a Tumultuary under-band way.

Episcopal Cause, Page 3.
as none of his Majesty's good Subjects, engrossing that praise only to his
own party, saying, The eyes of us the good Subjects of this whole Realm^ are
fixed upon your Success, etc.

Impropriating to the same party the praise of Orthodox, Page 6.
page 6. as if to speak a word, or think a thought against Episcopacy, were no
less Heresy, then it was in forme^ time to speak against the Popes
supremacy, or the monks fat Belly; whereas whether the Episcopal part be the
Orthodox, peaceable, well affected part, and his Majesty's only good Subjects,
we leave to your Honors to Judge, upon the numerous Informations that flow in
unto you from the several parts of this Kingdom.

Nor can they decline your Judgment, Page 2.
seeing now you are (through Gods blessing) happily met in a much longed for
Parliament: but whether so much longed for by him and his accomplices; as by
those against whom he wh^^s his Style, the Prayers that have obtained this
happy meeting, and the praises that do attend it, will decide in that great
day.

The Helena, whose Champion this Remonstrant chiefly is: is that Government
which he calls Sacred, viz. that Government by Archbishops, Bishops,
Deanes, Archdeacons, etc. which, says he, through the sides of some misliked
persons some have endeavored to wound. Misliked Persons? and why not offending
persons? why not guilty persons? when this Honorable house has ^ound just
cause to charge some of them, with crimes of the highest nature. Our zeal for
your Honors make us fear, lest your assembly should suffer in this word; as if
your proceedings against such persons should be grounded upon compliance with
such as do mislike them, rather then upon their own demerits, or the Justice
of this Court.

But what ever those Persons be, Page 7.
the Government it self is Sacred; which by the ^oynt confession of all
reformed Divines, derives it self from the times of the ^lessed Apostles,
Untruths.
without any interruption, without contradiction of any one congregation in the
world unto this present age. This is but an Episcopal Bravado, therefore we
let it pass, till we come to close and contend with him in the point; where we
shall demonstrate, that in the compass of three lines he has packt up as
many untruths, as could be smoothly couched in so few words, as any man of
common understanding, that looks upon the face of the Government of almost
all reformed Churches in the Christian world, may at first view discover.

But before we come to this, there are yet two things in this Preface which we
count not unworthy observation. The First is, the comparison which he makes
between the two Governments, the Civil which with us is Monarchy: and the
sacred which with him is Episcopacy. Of the first he says, R^mo^^ page 8.
if Antiquity may be the Rule; (as he pleades it for Episcopacy) or i^
Scripture (as he interprets Scripture) it is VARIABLE, and ARBITRARY: but the
other DIVINE and UNALTERABLE, so that had men petitioned for the altering of
Monarchical Government, they had (in his Judgment) been less culpable, ^oth
by Scripture and Antiquity, then in petitioning the alteration of the
Hierarchicall: Had he found but any such passage in any of his Lewd Libellers
(as his modesty is always pleased to term them) certainly if we may borrow
his own phrase, the ears of the three Interessed Kingdoms, yea, all the
neighbor Churches, and if we may say, the whole Christian world, and no small
part beyond it, had rung with the loud cries of no less then Treason, Treason.

Truth is, in his Antiquity we find that this his uninterrupted sacred
Government, has so far invaded the Civil, and so yoked Monarchy, even in this
Kingdom, as Malmesbury reports: That William Rufus oppressed by Bishops,
persuaded the Jews to confute them; Malmesbury lib. 4.
promising thereupon to turn England to their Religion, that he might be free
of Bishops. And this is so natural an effect of unalterable Episcopacy, that
Pius ^he fourth to the Spanish Ambassador, importuning him to permit Bishops
to be declared by the Council of Trent, Hist. Council. Trid.
to be Iure Divino, gave this answer: That his King knew not what he did
desire, for if Bishops should be so declared, they would be all exempted from
his Power, and as indepedent as the Pope himself.

The second thing observable is the comparison he makes between the late
Alterations attempted in our Neighbor Church by his Episcopal faction, and
that Alteration that is now justly desired by the humble petitioners to this
Honorable House. The one being attempted by strangers, endeavoring violently
to obtrude Innovations upon a settled Church and State, The other humbly
petitioned to the Heads and Princes of our State by Multitudes therein almost
ruined by an Innovating Faction: yet does not this Remonstrant blush to say; if
these be branded, (so he calls the just censures of this Honorable House) For
Incendiaries, Page 9.
how shall these Boutefeux escape, etc. thus cunningly endeavoring either to
justify the former by the practice of the latter, or to render the latter more
odious then the former.

The attempts of these men whom he would thus render odious, he craves leave
to present to your Honors in two things, which are the subjects of this
quarrel: The Liturgy and Episcopacy, and we humbly crave your Honors leave
in both to answer.

SECT. II.
FIrst, the Liturgy of the Church of England (says he) has bin hitherto
esteemed sacred, Liturgy.
reverently used by holy Martyrs, Page 10.
daily frequented by devout Protestants, as that which more then once has been
confirmed by the Edicts of religious Princes, and your own Parliamentary Acts,
etc. And has it so? whence then proceed these many Additions and Alterations?
that have so changed the face and fabric of the Liturgy, that as Dr. Hall
spoke once of the pride of England: if our forefathers should revive and see
their daughters walking in Cheapside with their fannes and farthingales, etc.
they would wonder what kind of creatures they were, and say Nature had forgot
her self and brought forth a monster: so if these holy Martyrs that once so
reverently used the Liturgy should revive and look for their Letany stamped by
Authority of Parliament, they would be amassed, and wondering say; England had
forgotten her self and brought forth, etc. Martyrs? what do we speak of
Martyrs when we know Sir, that one of your own Ad hoc malarum dev^lutae est
Ecclesia Dei and spon^a Christi ut haereticorum exempla Sectentu^ and ad
celebranda Sacramenta coelestia, disciplinam. Lux mu^uetur de teneb^^^ and ^d
faciant christiani quod Antichristi faciunt. Cypr. Ep. 74.
Bishops said it in the hearing of many not so long since, but you may well
remember it. That the service of the Church of England was now so dressed, that
if the Pope should come and see it, he would claim it as his own, but that it
is in English.

It is little then to the advantage of your cause, that you tell us, it is
translated into other languages, and as little service have they done to the
Church of England, who have taught our Prayers to speak Latin again: For if
it be their Language chiefly that overthrowes the Popes claim, take away that,
and what hinders then, but the Pope may say, these are mine.

As for other Translations and the great applause it has obtained from
Foreign Divines, which are the fumes this Remonstrant venditates; what late
days have produced we know not, but the great lights of Former ages have been
far from this applauding: we are sure judicious Calvine says, that in the
Liturgy there are sundry Tolerabiles Ineptiae, which we think is no very great
applause.

To vindicate this Liturgy from scorn (as he calls it) at home, or by your
Honors aid to reinforce it upon the Nation, is the work of his Remonstrance;
for the effecting whereof he falls into an unparalleled discourse about the
Antiquity of Liturgies; Page 13.
we call it unparalleld, because no man that we have seen ever drew the line
of Liturgy so high as he has done.

Concerning which, if by Liturgy this Remonstrant understand an Order observed
in Church assemblies of Praying, reading, and expounding the Scriptures,
Administering Sacraments, etc. Such a Liturgy we know and do acknowledge both
Jews and Christians have used. But if by Liturgy he understand prescribed and
stinted forms of Administration Composed by some particular men in the Church,
and imposed upon all the rest (as this he must understand, or else all he
says is nothing) we desire and expect that those forms, which he says are
yet extant, and ready to be produced, might once appear.

Just. Mar. Apost. 2.
Liturgy of this former sort we find in Iustine Martyr and Tertullian. Tert.
Ap. ad Genesis c. 39.
But that there were not such stinted Liturgies as this Remonstrant disputes
for, appears by Tertullian, in his Apol. Cap. 30. where he says the
Christians of those times did in their public assemblies pray sine monitore
qui^ de pectore, without any Prompter but their own hearts. And that so it
should be the same Father proves in his Treatise, de Oratione: S^^nt quae
petantur, etc. There are some things to be asked according to the occasions of
every man: the lawful and ordinary prayer (tha^ is the Lords Prayer) being
laid as a foundation; It is lawful to build upon that foundation other prayers
according to every ones occasions. And to the same purpose S. Austin in his
121. Ep. Liberum est, etc. it is free to ask the same things that are desired
in the Lords Prayer, Just. Mar. Apost. 2. (...).
aliis atque aliis verbis, sometimes one way and sometimes another: And before
this in that famous place of Just. Mar. Apo. 2. He, who instructed the people,
prayed according to his ability, Nor was this liberty in prayer taken away, and
set and imposed forms introduced, until the time that the Arian and Pelagian
Heresies did invade the Church, and then because those Heretics did convey and
spread their poison in their forms of Prayer and Hymns, the Church thought
it convenient to restrain the liberty of making and using public forms: And
first it ordained that pro Arbitrio, sed semper eaedem preces, that none should
use liberty to vary in prayer; but use always the same form, Council. La. Can.
18.
Conc. Laod. Can. 18. yet this was a form of his own composing, as appears
by another Canon, wherein it was ordered thus: None should use any form,
unless he had first conferred Cum fratribus instructioribus: with the more
learned of his brethren. Conc. Carth. 3. Can. 23. and lastly that none should
use set prayers, Conc. Carth. 3. Can. 23. Anno 397.
but such as were approved of in a Synod, which was not determined till the
year 416. Conc. Milev. 2. Can. 12. And had there been any Liturgies of Times
of the first and most venerable antiquity producible, Conc. Milev. 2.
the great admirers of them, and inquirers after them would have presented them
to the world ere this. Can. 12. An. 416.
we know that Bishop Andrews in his zeal for Liturgies pursued the inquiry
after the Jewish Liturgy so far, that he thought he had found it; and one
there was which he sent to Cambridge to be translated: but there it was soon
discovered, to have been made long after the Jews ceased to be the Church of
God; and so himself suppressed it, that it never saw the light under a
translation.

We wonder therefore, what this Remonstrant meant to affirm so confidently,
Page 10.
that part of the form of prayer which was composed by our blessed Savior,
was borrowed from the forms of prayer formerly used by Gods people. An opinion
we never met before; indeed, we have read that the Rabbines since the days of
our Savior have borrowed some expressions from that Prayer, and from other
Evangelicall passages: But we never read till now, that the Lord Christ the
wisdom of the Father borrowed from the wisdom of the Rabbines expressions to
use in Prayer.

Page 12.
And as much we wonder by what Revelation or Tradition (Scripture being silent
in the thing) he knew, that Peter and John, when they went up to the Temple to
pray, their Prayer was not of a sudden and extemporary conception, but of a
Regular prescription. Sure we are some as well read in Jewish antiquity, as
this Remonstrant shows himself to be; have told us that the hour of Prayer
was the time when the Priest burnt Incense; and the people were at their
private prayers without, as appears, Luke 1.9. where we read, that while
Zachary the Priest went in to offer Incense, all the people stood with out
praying in the time of the Oblation. Which Prayers were so far from being
Prescript Forms or Liturgies that they were not vocal but mental Prayers, as
Master Meade tells us in his exposition upon the eighth of the Revelations.

And what ever Peter and John did, this we know, that when the Publican and the
Pharisee went up to the Temple to pray (as the Apostles did at the hour of
prayer) their prayer was not of Regular prescription, Page 18.
but of a present Conception.

But if this Remonstrant be in the right, concerning the Jewish Liturgies, then
the Evangelicall Church might better have improved her peace and happiness,
Page 11.
then in composing Models of Invocation and Thanksgiving, when there is one
extant and ready to be produced, that was constantly used by Gods people ever
since Moses days, and put over to the times of the Gospel and confirmed by
Apostolical practice: or else great is our loss, who are so unhappily
deprived of the best improvement, the Church made of her peace and happiness
in the first 300. years: for rejecting those Liturgies that are confessed by the
Learned to be Spurious; Eusebius. de vit. Con. li 4. cap. 18.
We challenge this Remonstrant to produce any one Liturgy that was the issue
of those times. And blessed Constantine was herein as unhappy as we, who needed
not have composed forms of prayer for his Guard to use upon the Lords day, but
might and would have taken them out of former Liturgies, if there had been any;
And can ye with patience think that any ingenuous Christian should be so
transported, Page 11.
as upon such weak and unproved premises to build such a Confident conclusion,
as this Remonstrant does? and in that Conclusion forget the state of the
controversy sliding from the question of a prescribed and imposed Liturgy to
an arbitrary book of prayer.

In his Rhetorical Encomium of conceived prayer we shall more willingly bear
a part with him, then they whose cause he pleads; for had that been in their
hearts, which is in this book: Page 12.
to hate, to be guilty of pouring water upon the Spirit, and gladly to add
oil rather: so many learned, able, Conscientious Preachers had not been
molested and suspended, for letting the constant flames of their fixed
conceptions mount up from the altar of their zealous heart unto the throne of
grace: nor had there been so many advantages watched from some stops and
seeming solecismes in some men's prayers, Page 12.
to blaspheme the spirit of prayer, which though now confessed to be so far from
being offensive, that they are as pleasing Music in the ears of the Almighty:
yet time has been, when they have ^ounded as mere Battologies; nay no better
then mere Blasphemies in the ^ares of some Bishops.

Page 13.
And if this conceived prayer be not to be opposed in another, by any man that
has found the true operation of this grace in himself: with that spirit then
are those possessed, that have not only thus raged with their tongues against
this way of prayer: but by sealing up the mouths of Ministers for praying thus
in public, and imposing penances upon private Christians for praying thus in
their Families: and compelling them to abjure this practice, have endeavored
with raging violence to banish this divine ordinance from our Churches and
dwellings, D. Corbet. M. Novel.
and professed in open Court: it was fitter for Amsterdam than for our Churches.

But howsoever this applause of conceived prayer may seem to be Cordial, yet
he makes it but a vantage ground to lift up public forms of sacred Church
Liturgy (as he calls it) the higher, that they may have the greater honor,
that by the power of your authority they be reinforced, which work there would
have been no need to call your Honors to, Page 13.
had not Episcopal zeal broke forth into such flames of indignation against
conceived prayers, that we have more just cause to implore the propitious aid
of the same Authority to reestablish the Liberty of this, then they to
reinforce the necessity of that.

Yet there are two specious Arguments which this Remonstrant brings to persuade
this desired re-inforcement, the Original and Confirmation of our Liturgy.

For the first, he tells your Honors, it was selected out of ancient Models not
ROMAN but CHRISTIAN, Page 13.
contrived by the holy Martyrs and Confessors of the blessed reformation of
Religion; where we beseech your Honors to consider how we may trust these men,
who sometimes speaking and writing of the ROMAN Church, proclaim it a true
Church of CHRIST, and yet here ROMAN and CHRISTIAN stand in opposition:
sometimes they tell men, their Liturgy is wholly taken out of the Roman
Missall, only with some little alteration: and here they would persuade your
Honors there is nothing Roman in it. But it is wholly selected out of pure
Ancient Models, as the Quintessence of them all. Whereas alas the original of
it, is published to the world, in that Proclamation of Edward the sixth.

And though here they please to style the Composers of it, holy Martyrs, and
contrivers of the blessed Reformation: yet there are of the Tribe for whom he
pleads, not a few that have called them Traitors rather then Martyrs, and
D^formers rather then Reformers of our Religion.

His other Argument for the Liturgy is taken from that supply of strength, it
has received from the recommendation of four most Religious Princes, and your
own Parliamentary establishments: Page 13, 14.
and more especially from the Proclamation of King James of famous memory: the
validity of which plea, your Honors are best able to judge, and therefore we
leave it at your Bar; yet these two things we know: first, that this form was
never established to be so punctually observed, so rigorously pressed, to the
casting out of all that scruple it, or any thing in it (as many of his
Majesty's Subjects now do) to the ( almost) justling out of the preaching of
the Word, and Conceived Prayer altogether.

And secondly, as sure we are, that your Honors think neither your own Laws,
nor the Proclamation of that most famous and ever admired Prince, to be as
unalterable as the Laws of the Medes and Persians.

And now having briefly showed, that Liturgies are not of that antiquity that
this Remonstrant pretends, but that conceived prayer was in use in the Church
of God before Liturgies, and is justified from their own mouths, and not to be
found fault with by any but a graceless man: and having likewise showed that
our Liturgy was taken out of Models, not only Christian but Roman, and has
since the first compiling of it suffered alteration to the worse; and though
established by Law, and confirmed by Proclamation, was never intended to the
justling ou^, either of preaching or conceived prayer; these things declared,
we humbly crave your Honors leave to propound these two Queries.

QUERE I.
Whether it be not fit to consider of the alteration of the present Liturgy.





Letany.

England, and is now made the upholder of a non-preaching Ministry, and is
cried up to that height, as that some are not ashamed to say, that the wit of
men and Angels cannot mend it: Abbot against Church ^o^sakers.
and that it is a sufficient discharge of the Ministers duty to read this
Book.



There is such a vaste difference between it, and the Liturgies of all other
reformed Churches, as that it keeps them at a distance from us, and us from
full Communion with them.

QUERE II.
Whether the first reformers of Religion did ever intend the use of a Liturgy
further, then to be an help, in the want, or to the weakness of a Minister.

All other reformed Churches, though they use Liturgies,

A Rubric in King Edwards book left it unto the discretion

The Homilies which are appointed to be read, are left

The ground of the first binding of it upon all to use,

That which makes many refuse to be present at our

If it be objected, Ob.
that this will breed divisions and disturbances in Churches, unless there be
a uniformity, and that there are many unable.

It has not bred any disturbance in other reformed Churches. Answ.




Wrens days, who forbad all use of conceived prayer in the Church.

SECT. III.
WE come now with your Honors favor, to the second point disputed in this
Remonstrance; Episcopacy it self: against which, whatsoever has been either
spoken or written by any, either learned Divines, or well reformed Churches (as
his conscience knows, Page 17.
there are of both that have writ against it) is Taxed by him as no other then
the unjust Clamors either of weak or factious persons. Sure the man thinks he
has obtained a Monopoly of learning, Page 17.
and all Knowledge is locked up in his bosom; and not only Knowledge but piety
and peaceableness too; for all that are not of his opinion, must suffer either
as weak or factious, if he may be their Judge. We know not what this Arrogance
might attempt to fasten upon your Honors, should the bowels of your compassion
be enlarged, to weigh in the Balance of your wisdoms, the multitude of
Humble petitions, presented to you from several parts of this Kingdom, that
has long groaned under the Iron and Insupportable yoke of this Episcopal
Government, which yet we doubt not, but your Honors will please to take into
your prudent and pious consideration: Especially knowing it is their continual
practice to load with the odious names of Faction all that justly complain of
their unjust oppression.

In his address to his defense of Episcopacy, Page 17.
he makes an unhappy confession that he is confounded in himself. Your Honors
may in this believe him, for he that selfe-confounded man: which though we
doubt not but your Honors have descryed; yet because they are hid from an
errant, and unobserving eye, under the Embroyderies of a silken Language, we
Humbly crave your Honors leave to put them one by one upon the file, that the
world may see what credit is to be given to the bold assertions of this
confident Remonstrant.

First, in his second page, he dubs his Book Page 2.
the faithful messenger of all One of these Sons of the Church of England
whose messenger this Remonstrance is, was he who swore by the Eternal God, he
would be the death of those that did appear to move against the grievances of
Episcopacy, and if the rest of these Millions mentioned page 2. whose thousands
are so punctually calculated p. 41 be of his spirit: they are an army of very
peaceable and right-affected men.
the peaceable and right affected sons of the Church of England: which words
(besides that unchristian Theta, which as we already observed, they set upon
all that are not of his party,) carry in the bowels of them a notorious falsity
and contradiction to the phrase of the book; for how could this book be the
messenger of all his own party in England, when it is not to be imagined, that
all could know of the coming forth of this book before it was published: and
how can that book crave admittance in all their names, that speaks in the
singular number, and as in the person of one man almost the whole book through.

But it may besome will say this is but a small slip; well be it so: but in
the seventh page he lays it on in four lines, asserting these four things:
First, that Episcopal Government, Page 7.
(that very same Episcopal Government, which some he says seeks to wound,
that is Government by Diocesan Bishops) derives it self from the Apostles
times, which though we shall (...) more fully confute anon, yet we cannot here
but rank it among his notorious --: for how could there be such Government of
a Diocese by a Bishop derived from the Apostles times: when in the Apostles
times there were no Bishops distinct from P^esbyters, as we shall show, and if
there had been Bishops, yet they were no Diocesans, for it was a hundred
years after Christ, or as most agree 260. before Parishes were distinguished,
Evaristus. 100.
and there must be a distinction of Parishes before there could be an union of
them into Diocesses. Dionysius. 260.


Secondly, it is by the joint confession of all reformed Divines granted, Some
say 267. as Pol. Virg.
that this sacred Government is derived from the Apostles: What all reformed
Divines? was Calvin, Beza, Iunius, etc. of that mind? Are the reformed France,
Scotland, Netherlands, of that Judgment? we shall show anon that there is no
more Truth in this Assertion then if he had said with Anaxagoras, snow is
black, or with Copernicus, the Earth moves, and the heavens stand still.

Government has continued without any interruption: What does he mean, at
Rome? for we read in some places of the world this Government was never known
for many years together: as in Scotland^ we read that in Ancient times the
Scots were instructed in the Christian faith by Priests and Monks, Ioh. Mayor
l. 2. Hist. de gest. Scot. Cap. 2.
and were without Bishops 290. years: yea to come to England, we would desire
to know of this Remonstrant whether God had a Church in England in Q. Mari^s
days or no? and if so, who were then the Bishops of this Church, for some
there must be, if it be true that this man says, this Government has
continued without any interruption unto this day; and Bishops then we know not
where to find but in the ^ine of Popish succession.

Fourthly, he says it has thus continued without the contradiction of any one
Congregation in the Christian world. It seems he has forgotten, what their
own darling Heylin has written of the people of Biscay in Spain, that they
admit of no Bishops to come among them, for when Ferdinand the Catholic came
in progress accompanied among others with the Bishop of Pampelone, Heylins
Geog. p. 55.
the people rose up in Arms, drove back the Bishop, and gathering up all the
dust which they thought he had trod on, flung it into the Sea.

Which story had it been recorded only by him, Gener. Hist. of Spain l. 22
would have been of lighter Credit. But we read the same in the Spanish
Chronicle, who says more then the Doctor, for he tells us that the People threw
that dust that the Bishop or his Mule had trod on, into the Sea with Curses
and Imprecations: which certainly says he was not done without some Mystery,
those people not being void of Religion, but superstitiously devout as the
rest of the Spaniards are: so that they is one Congregation in the Christian
world in which this Government has met with contradiction.

And are not the French, Scottish, and Belgicke Churches worthy to be counted
Christian Congregations, and who knows not that amongst these this Government
has met not only with verbal, but real contradiction?

Yet he cannot leave his --: But within two pages is at Page 9.
and tells us of an unquestionable clearness wherein it has been from the
Apostles derived to us, how unquestionable? when the many volumes written about
it, witness to the world, and to his conscience, it has been as much
questioned as any point (almost) in our Religion.

And that assertion of his that tells us that the people of had a form of
prayer as ancient as Moses, which was constantly practiced to the Apostles
days, and by the Apostles, etc. though we have showed how bold and false this
assertion is, yet we mention it here as deserving to be put into the Catalogue.

And that he may not seem Contra Mentem ire: but Page 18.
p. 18. he says Episcopal Government has continued in this Island ever since
the first plantation of the Gospel without contradiction. Had he taken a less
space of time, and said but since the resuscitation of the Gospel: we can prove
it to him and shall, that since the reformation, Episcopacy has been more
contradicted, then ever the Papacy was before the extirpation of it.

page 21. he says; Certainly except all Histories, all Authors fail us,
nothing can be more certain then this truth: O^ Durum! Nothing more certain:
what is it not more certain that there is a God? is it not more certain that
Christ is God and man? is it not more certain that Christ is the only Savior
of the world? Nothing more certain: must this then be an Article of our
Creed, the corner stone of our Religion: must this be of necessity to
Salvation? Nothing more certain. O that men should not only forget
themselves, but God also: And in their zeal for their own Honor utter words
bordering upon Blasphemy.

Indignation will not suffer us to prosecute these falsities of his any
further; we will leave this displeasing service, only retorting the words of
this Remonstrant upon himself; Surely could he look with our eyes (or any
eyes that were not partial) he would see cause to be thoroughly ashamed of
these his gross injurious miscarriages, Page 18.
and should be forced to confess, that never good cause (if cause be good) had
more reason to complain of a sinful prosecution.

SECT. IV.
WE will now come with your Honors patience to weigh, whether there be any
more strength in his arguments, then there is truth in his assertion^.

His Plea for Episcopacy consists of two parts. In the first he brings
arguments for the supporting of it. In the second he undertakes to answer the
objections that may be made against it.

His first argument for it, is couched in these words; Were this Ordinance
merely humane or Ecclesiastical, Page 18.
if there could no more be said for it, but that it is exceeding Ancient, of
more then 15 hundred years, etc. The strength of which argument lies in this,
that they have been in peaceable possession of this government fifteen
hundred years and upwards; and in this Island ever since the Gospel, without
contradiction.

In which words he speaks two things, which deserve just censure. First, that
the Hierarchicall Government has continued for fifteen hundred years,
therefore should not now be altered, which may well be called, as Hierome in
another Case; Argumentu^ Galeatum, an argument calculated for the Meridian of
Episcopacy, and may indifferently serve for all Religions in the world: For
thus the Jews might have pleaded against Christ the Antiquity of more then so
many hundred years; and thus the Heathens did plead against the Christian
Religion, which Justin Martyr in his Apology answers. And by this Argument the
Pope sits as fast rivetted in his chair at Rome, as ours in theirs: whose plea
for Antiquity runs parallel with theirs. It is a good observation of Cyprian,
that Christ said, Ego sum via, veritas and vita, not Ego sum consuetudo; and
Frustra consuetudine^ nobis opponunt, quasi consuetudo major sit v^ri^tate, aut
non id sit in spiritualibus s^quendu^, quod in melius ^uerit a Spiritu Sancto
R^velatum, Cypr Ep. 73.
that Consuetudo sine veritate est vetustas erroris, Christ is Truth, and not
Custom, and Custom without Truth, is a moldy error: and as Sir Francis
Bacon says, Antiquity without Truth, is a Cipher without a Figure.

Yet had this It is well observed by Gerha^d, that a Bishop ^hrasi Apostolica,
that is, a Bishop that is the same with a Presbyter, is of fifteen hundred
years standing; but a Bishop, ^hrosi Pon^ si^ia, that is, a distinct order
superior to a Presbyter invested with sole power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction, is but a Novell Invention^
Remonstrant been as well versed in Antiquity, as he would bear the world in
hand he has, he might have found Learned Ancients affirming, there was a Time
when the Church was not governed by Bishops, but by Presbyters. And when by
Bishops, he might further have seen more affinity between our Bishops and the
Pope of Rome, then between the Primitive Bishops and them. And that as King
James, of famous memory, said of the Religion of England, that it differed no
more from Rome, than Rome did from what it was at first; may as truly be said
of Bishops, that we differ no more from them, then they do from what Bishops
were, when first they were raised unto this eminency: which difference we shall
show in our ensuing Discourse, to be so great, that as he said of Rome, he did
Romam in Roma quaerere, he sought Rome in Rome; so we Episcopatum in
Episcopatu, may go seek for a Bishop among all our Bishops.

And whereas in his application of this Argument to the Bishops of this Nation,
Page 19.
he says, It has continued in this Island ever since the first plantation of
the Gospel, without contradiction; which is his Second in this Argument: How
false this is we have declared already, and we all know, and himself cannot
but know, that there is no one thing since the reformation, that has met with
so much Contradiction as Episcopacy has done; witness the several Books,
written in the Reigns of our several Princes, and the many Petitions
exhibited to our several Parliaments, and the many speeches made therein
against Episcopal Government: many of which are yet extant.

As for that supply of Accessory strength, which he begs to this Argument, Page
19.
from the light of nature, and the rules of just policy, which (says he)
teaches us not easily to give way to the change of those things, which long
use and many What the establishment of Episcopacy by the Laws i^, and upon
what grounded, the learned Sir Edward Cook informs us, who reports, That in
an Act of Parliament holden at Carlisle in the 25. year of Edw. 1. it is
de^lared that the holy Church of England was founded in the state of Prelacy
within the Realm of England, by the King and h^s Progenitors, etc. for them
to info^me the people in the Law of God, and to keep ^ospitality, and give
alme^, and do other works of charity. And the said Kings in times past were
wont to have their advise and counsel for the safeguard of the Realm, when
they had need of such Prelates and Clerks so advanced. Cook de jure Regis
Ecclesiast^co. But whether Bishops have observed the Orders of their first
foundation, etc.
Laws have firmly established, as Necessary and Beneficial; it is evident,
that those things which to former Ages have seemed Necessary and Beneficial,
may to succeeding Generations, prove not Necessary but Noxious, not Beneficial
but Burdensome. And then the same light of nature, and the same just policy,
that did at the first command the establishment of them, may and will persuade
their abolishment; if not, either our Parliaments must never Repeal any of
their former Acts (which yet they have justly and wisely done) or else in so
doing must run Counter to the light of nature, and the Rules of just policy;
which to think were an impiety to be punished by the Judge.

SECT. V.
THe Second Argument for the defense of Episcopal government, Page 19, 20.
is from the Pedigree of this holy Calling, which he derives from no less than
an Apostolical, and in that, right divine institution; and assayes to prove it
from the practice of the Apostles; and as he says, the clear practice of
their Successors, continued in Christ's Church to this very day: and to this
Argument he so much confides, that he concludes it with this Triumphant
Epiphonema, What scruple can remain in any ingenuous heart? Page 21.
And determines, if any continue yet unsatisfied, it is in despite of reason,
and all evidence of History, and because he wilfully shuts his eyes, with a
purpose not to see the light. Bona verba.

By your favor Sir, we will tell you notwithstanding the supposed strength of
your argumentation, there is one scruple yet remaining, and if you would know
upon what ground, it is this, because we find in Scripture (which by your own
Confession is Original Authority) that Bishops and Presbyters were Originally
the same, Page 8.
though afterward they came to be distinguished: and in process of time,
Episcopacy did swallow up all the honor and power of the Presbytery; as
Pharaohs lean Kine did the fat.

Their Identity is discernable; first, from the same names given unto both;
secondly from the same office, designed unto both in Scripture. As for the
names, are not the same names given unto both in sacred Writ? Let the fifth,
sixth, and seventh verses of the first Chapter to Titus testify: in the fifth
verse, the Apostle shows that he left Titus in Creet to ordain Elders in every
City: in the sixth verse, he gives a delineation of the persons that are
capable of such Ordination: and in the seventh, the Reason, why the person to
be ordained, must be so qualified; for a Bishop, etc. Now if the Bishop and
Elder be not here the same, but names of distinct office and order, the
Apostles reason rendered in the seventh verse of his direction in the fifth and
sixth verses, is (with reverence be it spoken) inconsequentiall, and his demand
unjust. If a Chancellor in one of the Universities should give Order to his
Vice Chancellor to admit none to the decree of Batchelour in Arts, but such as
were able to preach, or keep a Divinity Act; For Batchelours in Divinity must
be so; what reason or equity were in this? So if Paul leaving Titus as his
Locum teneus, as it were in Creet for a season, should give order to him not to
admit any to be an Elder but one thus and thus qualified, because a Bishop must
be so: Had a Bishop been an Order or Calling distinct from, or superior to a
Presbyter, and not the same, this had been no more rational or equal then the
former; therefore under the name of Bishop in the seventh verse the Apostle
intends the Elder, mentioned in the fifth verse. Consonant to this is the
Language of the same blessed Apostle, Acts 20. verse 17.18. where such as in 17
verse he calls (...), Elders in the 28. he calls (...), in ordinary English,
Bishops, though our Translation there, (we know not for what reason) reads it
Overseers; not so rendering the word in any other Text.

And though this Remonstrant undertakes to show a clear and received
distinction, of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, Page 24.
as three distinct subordinate Callings in Gods Church, with an evident
specification of the duty and charge belonging to each of them; or else let this
claimed Hierarchy be for ever hooted out of the Church: Yet let us tell him,
that Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, mentioned together: but only Bishops and
Deacons, as Phil. 1. and 1 Timothy Nor do we find in Scripture Ordination to the
office of a Bishop, differing from the Ordination of an Elder: Nor do we find
in Scripture, the specification of any Duty charged upon a Bishop, that Elders
are secluded from: Nor any qualification required in a Bishop, that is not
requisite in every Presbyter; some of which, if not all, would be found, were
they not the same.

But if this Remonstrant think to help himself by taking Sanctuary in
Antiquity (though we would gladly ^est in Scripture, the Sanctuary of the Lord)
yet we will follow him thither, and there show him that Hierome from the
Scriptures proves more then once, Presbyters and Bishops to be the same.
Hierony. Ep. ad Euag. and ad Ocea.
And Chrysostom in Philip. 1. Homil. 2. with his admirer Theophilact in
Philip. 1. affirms that while the Apostles lived, the Names of Bishops and
Presbyters were not distinguished: and not only while the Apostles lived, Iren.
adver. haer. l. 4. cap. 43.44.
but in after ages. Does not Irenaeus use the name of Bishops and Presbyters
(...), in a promiscuous sense. Are not Anicetus, Pius, Hyginus, Telesphorus,
Sixtus, whom the Papists call Bishops, and the popes predecessors, Hist. Lib.
5. Cap. 23.
termed by Eusebius presbyters? Nor was it strange in the primitive times to
hear Bishops called presbyters, when Presbyters writing to their Bishops have
called him Frater. So Cyprian ( Epist. 26. in the beginning) is styled by his
Presbyters, Deacons and confessors, nor was that holy Martyr offended with that
title, nor they condemned of insolency that used it.

But what should we burden your patience with more testimonies? when the
evidence of this truth has shined with so strong a beam, Bellarm. de Cleric.
Lib. 1. cap. 15.
that even our Adversaries have stooped to it, and confessed that their Names
were the same in the Apostles time. But yet say they, the Offices were distinct.

Now here we would gladly know, what these men make the distinct Office of a
Bishop.

Is it to edify the Church by word and Sacrament? is it to ordain others to
that work? is it to rule, to govern, by admonition and other censures? if any
of these, if all these make up the proper work of a Bishop; we can prove from
Scripture that all these belong unto the Presbytery, which is no more then was
granted by a Council Presbyte (...) secut Ep^s^^pis (...) D^icommissa est:
Presunt eum Ecclesiae Christi: in Consecrat^one Domi^ici (...) cons^r^es (...)
E^i^copis: and (...) in Doctrina Populorum and in (...) propt^r autorit^tem,
summo Sacerdott Clericorum Ordina^io reserv^^a ^st: Co^^^. 1 (...). pri^. m,
Can. 8.

E^^ngeli^m ^^but his qui prae^unt Ecclesie Ma^^atum docendi Evang^lii,
rem^tt^^di pec^^^^, adm^^^stra^di Sa^ramenta: prae^erea jurisdictionem;
videlicet Ma^datum Excomm^n^andi cos q^^rum (...) sunt crimina, and Resipiscen
es rursum absolvendi: Ac Oma^^ (...), etiam advers^rioru^ (...), hinc
potesta^em Jare Divino comm^^ (...) qui presant Ecclesiae, sive Pastores
vo^^atur, sive Presbyteri, Sive E^is^opi. S^rip^^^ Philip. Melanch. in Conventu
Smalcald. Anno. 1540. a precipuis illar^m Ecclesiarum Dictoribus commani
Consensu comprobatum de potestate and jurisdictione Episc^porum.


.

their proper work (for some have been cite^ into the High Commission for
saying, it belongs to them) yet Sir we are sure, Scripture makes it a part, a
chief of the Episcopal office; (...).
for so in the 1 Pet 5.2. they are said to do the work of a Bishop, when they
do feed the flock of God. And this is such a work as we hope their
Lordships will give the poor Presbyters leave to share with them in: or if
not, we will tell them that the Apostle Peter in that forecited place, and the
Apostle Paul, Acts. 20. binds this work upon our hands, and Woe unto us if we
preach not the Gospel.

But this branch of Episcopal and Presbyteriall office we pass with brevity,
because in this there lies not so much controversy as in the next; which they
do more wholly Impropriate to themselves: the power of Ordination.

Which power, that it was in former times in the hands of Presbyters appears 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not the gift which was given thee by Prophecy, and by the
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. The gift here spoken of is the
Ministerial gift, the exercise whereof, the Apostle exhorts Timothy not to
neglect, which says he, he had received, not by the laying on of the hands of
one single man, whether Apostle, or Bishop, or Presbyter; But (...) the
Presbytery, that is, the whole company of Presbyters, for in that sense only
we ^inde (...) taken in Scripture, as in Luke 22. verse. 66. Act. 22. verse. 5.
which the Christian Church called the Ecclesiastical Senate, as Ierom in Isay
3. Nos habemus in Ecclesia Senatum nostrum, Ierom. Isa. 3.
Coetum Presbyterorum, and an Apostolical Senate: (...) Ignatius Epis. ad
Magnes: Igna. Epis. ad Magnes.
and some times (...), Council. Ancyr. Can. 18.

And though the Apostle in his second Epistle to Tim. 1.6. makes mention of the
laying on of his hands; Conc. Ancyr. Can. 18.
yet to maintain the Harmony of Scripture, it must not be denied, but there
was imposition of hands by the Presbytery, as well as by himself, and so it
was a joint act; So that in this there is no more difference then in the former.

And if there be no difference between Presbyters in feeding or ordaining, let
us see if there be any in the third part of their office of Ruling, which
though our Bishops assume wholly to themselves, yet we shall discover, that it
has been committed to and exercised by Presbyteriall hands.

For who are they of whom the Scripture speaks, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that
have the Rule over you, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give
an account, etc.

Here all such as watch over the souls of Gods people, are entitled to rule
over them. So that unless Bishops will say, that they only watch over the
souls of Gods people, and are only to give an account for them: they cannot
challenge to themselves the sole rule over them. And if the Bishops can give us
good security, that they will acquit us from giving up our account to God for
the souls of his people, we will quit our plea, and resign to them the sole
rule over them.

So again in the 1 Thessa. 5.12. Know them which labor amongst you, and are
over you in the Lord, and admonish you.

In which words are contained these truths; First that in one Church (for the
Thessalonians were but one Church, 1 Ca.) there was not (...)^ but (...); not
one chief Bishop or President, but the Presidency was in many.

presidency was of such as labored in the word and Doctrine.

Communi. Them that admonish you.

Parity, for the Apostles bids know them in an Indifferency, not discriminating
one from another: yea such was the rule that Elders had, that S. Peter thought
it needful to make an exhortation to them to use their power with Moderation,
not Lording it over Gods Heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3.

By this time we have sufficiently proved from Scripture, that Bishops and
Presbyters are the same in name, in Office, in Edifying the Church, in power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction; we sum up all that has been spoken in one
argument.

They which have the same Name, the same Ordination to their Office, the same
qualification for their Office, the same work to feed the flock of God, to
ordain pastors and Elders, to Rule, and Govern; they are one and the same
Office: but such are Bishops and presbyters, Ergo.

SECT. VI.
BUt the dint of all this Scripture, the Remonstrant would elude, by obtruding
upon his reader a commentary Page 20.
(as he calls it) of the Apostles own practice (which he would force to
contradict their own rules) to which he superadds the unquestio^able gloss of
the clear practice of their immediate successors in this administration. For
the Apostles practice, we have already discovered it, from the Apostles own
writings; and for his Gloss he superadds, if it corrupts not the Text we shall
admit it; but if it do, we must answer with Tertullian, Tertull.
Id verum quodcunque primum: id adulterum quod posterius, whatsoever is first
is true; but that which is latter is adulterous.

In the examination of this Gloss, to avoid needless Controversy. First, we
take for granted by both sides, that the first and best Antiquity, used the
names of Bishops and Presbyters promiscuously. Secondly, that in process of
time, some one was honored with the name of Bishop and the rest were called
Presbyters or Cleri. Thirdly, that this was not Nomen inane, but there was some
kind of Imparitie between him and the rest of the Presbyters.

Yet in this we differ; that they say, this Impropriation of name, and Imparity
of place, is of Divine Right and Apostolical Institution: we affirm both to
be occasional, and of humane Invention; and undertake to show out of
Antiquity, both the occasion upon which, and the Persons by whom this Imparity
was brought into the Church.

On our parts stands Jerome and Ambrose, and others, whom we doubt not but our
Remonstrant will grant a place among his Glossators: Saint Jerome tells us in 1
Tit.

Idem est ergo Presbyter qui Episcopus: and antequam Diaboli instinctu, studia
in Religione ^ierent, and diceretur in populis, ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego
Cephae, Communi Presbyterorum Consilio ecclesiae gubernabantur. Postquam vero
unusquisque eos quos baptizaverat suos putabat esse, non Christi; in toto Orb
decretum est, ut unus de Presbyteris electus superponeretur caeteris, ad quem
omnis Ecclesiae Cura pertineret, and schismatum semina ^olicrentur. Putat
aliquts non Scripturarum, sed nostram esse sent^ntiam, Episcopum and
Presbyterum unum esse, and aliud aetatis, aliud esse nomen officii, rel^gat
Apostoli ad Philippenses verba, dicentis, Paulus and Timotheus servi Iesis
Christi qui sunt Philippis, cum Episcopis and Diaconis, etc. Philippi una est
urbs Macedoniae, and certe in una Civitate non poterant plures esse (ut
nuncupantur) Episcopi, etc. sicut ergo Presbyteri sciant se ex Ecclesiae
consuetudine ei qui sibi praepositus fuerit esse subjectos; Ita Episcopi
noverint se magis consuetudine, quam dispositionis Dominicae veritate
Presbyteris esse majores, and in Communi debere Ecclesiam regere.

A Presbyter and a Bishop is the same: and before there were through the Devils
instinct, divisions in Religion, and the people began to say, I am of Paul, and
I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, The Churches were governed by the Common Counsel
of the Presbyters: But after that each man began to account those whom he had
baptized his own, and not Christ's; it was decreed through the whole world, that
one of the Presbyters should be set over the rest; to whom the Care of all the
Church should belong, that the seeds of schism might be taken away. Thinks
any, that this is my opinion, and not the opinion of the Scripture, that a
Bishop and an Elder is the same, let him read the words of the Apostle to the
Philippians, saying, Paul and Timothy, the servants of Jesus Christ, to them
that are at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons. Philippi is one City of
Macedonia, and certainly in one City there could not be many Bishops (as they
are now called, etc.) and after the allegations of many other Scriptures, he
concludes thus; as the Elders therefore may know, that they are to be subject
to him that is set over them by the Custom of the Church; so let the Bishops
know, that it is more from custom, then from any true dispensation from the
Lord, that they are above the Presbyters, and that they ought to rule the
Church in common.

In which words of Jerome, these five things present themselves to the Readers
view;

Bishops and Presbyters are originally the same; Idem ergo est Presbyter qui
Episcopus.

Episcopi noverint, etc.

Putat aliquis, etc.

started, the Church was governed Communi Presbyterorum Consilio, by the
Counsel of the presbyters in common, and that even after this imparity, it
ought to be so governed; Sciant Episcopi se Ecclesiam debere in communi regere.

Fifthly, that the occasion of this Imparity and Superiority Post quam vero
Diaboli instinctu.

Saravia would take advantage of this place, to deduce this Imparity as high as
from the Apostles times, because even then they began to say, I am of Paul, and
I of Apollos: but sure S. Jerome was not so weak as this man would make him,
to speak Inconsistencies; and when he propounds it to himself, to prove that
Bishops and Presbyters are in Scripture the same, to let fall words that should
confute his own proposition: whereas therefore S. Jerome says, that after men
began to say, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, etc. it was decreed that one of
the Presbyters should be set over the rest, etc. This is spoken indeed in the
Apostles phrase, but not of the Apostles times, else to what purpose is that
coacervation of texts that follows?

But suppose it should be granted to be of Apostolical antiquity (which yet we
grant not, having proved the contrary) yet it appears: it was not of
Apostolical intention, but of Diabolical occasion: And though the Devil by
kindling Divisions in the Church, did minister Occasion to the invention of the
primacy or prelacy or one for the suppressing of Schism; yet there is just
cause to think, that the Spirit of God in his Apostles was never the author of
this Invention.

First, because we read in the Apostles days there Rom 16.7. and Schisms, 1
Cor. 3.3. and 11.18. yet the Apostle was not directed by the holy Ghost to
ord^ine Bishops for the taking away of those Divisions; Neither in the rules
he prescribes for the healing of those breaches, does he mention Bishops for
that end: Nor in the Directions given to Timothy and Titus for the Ordination
of Bishops or Elders, does he mention this as one end of their Ordination, or
one peculiar duty of their office. And though the Apostle says, O portet
haereses inter vos esse, ut qui probati sunt manifesti fiant inter vos; yet the
apostle no where says, Oportet Episcopos esse, ut tollantur haereses, quae
mainifestae fiunt.

Whitaker says, the remedy devised has proved worse then the disease, which
does never happen to that remedy whereof the holy Ghost is the author.

Bishop over many presbyters for preventing schisms, there is as great a
necessity of setting up one Archbishop over many Bishops, and one patriarch
over many Archbishops, and one pope over all, unless men will imagine, that
there is a danger of schism only among presbyters, and not among Bishops and
Archbishops, which is contrary to reason, truth, History, and our own
Experience.

And lest our adversaries should appeal from Hierome as an incompetent Judge
in this case, because a Presbyter, and so a party, we will therefore subjoyne
the judgments of other ancient Fathers who were themselves bishops.

The Commentaries that go under the name of Saint Ambrose upon Ephesians. 4.
mention another occasion of this Discrimination or priority; and that was At
ubi omnia ^oca Circumplexa est Ecclesia, ^Conventicula con^itula sunt: and
caeperunt R^ctores: and Caetera Ossi^^a in Ecclesia sunt ordinata. Caepit aliot
ordine and Providentia g^bernari Ecclesia. Ideo non per omnia convenient
Sc^ipta Apostoli ordinationi quae nunc in Ecclesia est, quia haec inter i^sa
primordia scripta sunt. Na^ and Timothe^m a se Presbyterum Creatum Episcopam
v^ca^, etc. Sed quia cae^erunt sequentes Presbyteri indigns inventri ad
pruratus t^nendos, immu^ata est (...), etc.
the increase and dilatation of the Church, upon occasion whereof they did
ordain rectors or Governors, and other officers in the Church; yet this he
grants, that this did differ from the former orders of the Church, and from
apostolical Writ.

And this Rectorship or Priority was devolved at first from one Elder to
another by Succession, when he who was in the place was removed, the next in
order among the Elders Succeeded. But this was afterward changed, and that
unworthy men might not be preferred, it was made a matter of election, and not
a matter of Succession. Thus much we find concerning the occasion of this
imparity, enough to show, it is not of Divine Authority.

For the second thing, the persons who brought in this Imparity, the same
Authors tells us: the Presbyters themselves brought it in; witness Hierome ad
Evag. Alexandriae Presbyteri unum ex se electum in Excelsiori gradu collocatum,
Hierom ad Evag.
Episcopum nominabant, quomodo si exercitus Imperatorem faceret, aut Diaconi de
se Archidiaconum. The Presbyters of Alexandria did call him their Bishop, whom
they had chosen from among themselves, and placed in a higher degree, as if an
army should make an Emperor, or the Deacons an Archdeacon.

Ambrose upon the fourth of the Ephesians tells us, Ambros. ubi prius.
it was done by a Council, and although he neither name the Time nor place of
the Council, yet ascribing it to a Council he grants it not to be
Apostolical: this gave occasion to others to fix it upon Custom as Hieronym.
in Tit. and August. Epist. 19. secundum honorum vocabula quae Ecclesiae usus
obtinuit Episcopatus Presbyterio major est. And had that (...) or Prelacie had
the Seal and confirmation of Divine or Apostolical Authority, Gregory
Nazianzene would never in such a Patheticke manner have wished the Abolition of
it, Grego. Naz. Orat. 28.
as he does in his 28. Oration.

And now where is that acknowledgement, Page 21.22.
and conveyance of Imparitie and Jurisdiction which says this Remonstrant was
derived from the Apostles hands, and deduced in an uninterrupted line, unto
this day: where is it? we find no such Imparity delivered from Apostolical
hands, nor acknowledged in Apostolical writings; yet had there been such an
acknowledgement and conveyance of imparity: how this should have been deduced
to us in an uninterrupted Line, we know not, unless our Bishops will draw the
Line of their Pedigree through the loins of Antichrist, and join issue, and
mingle blood with Rome: Greg. Nazi. vbi prius.
which it seems they will rather do then lose this plea for their (...):
their tyrannical prerogative, as Nazianzen calls it.

Suffer us therefore humbly to appeal to your Honors, whether this
Remonstrant has not given sentence against himself, who is so confident of
the Evidence of his cause, that he does not fear to say, if there can be
better Evidence under Heaven for any matter of fact then there is for his
Episcopacy: Page 22.
Let EPISCOPACY BEFORE EVER ABANDONED OVT OF THE CHVRCH OF GOD.

SECT. VII.
YEt it seems himself in the height of his confidence was not without
Jelousies, of some thing might be spoken against his Cause, therefore he seems
to hear, what is spoken against it.

Page 23.
That the Apostles Bishops and ours are two: there was no other then a
Parochial Pastor, a Preaching Presbyter without inequality, without any Rule
over his brethren. Ours claim an eminent Superiority, and a power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction unknown to the Primitive times.

That this which he supposes he hears us say is Scripture Truth we have
showed already, etc. that there was a parity between Presbyters and Bishops:
and that eminent superiority and power of Ordination and Jurisdiction which
our Bishops claim, was unknown to Scripture, and are now prepared by Gods
assistance to prove, it was unknown to primitive times.

But how does this Remonstrant meet with this Reply: Page 23.
ALAS ALAS HOW GOOD PEOPLE may be abused by misinformation! It seems the man
Judged this Reply so poor as in his thoughts it was more worthy of his pity,
then of his pains to answer, or rather knew there was more in this Reply, then
he knew how to answer, and therefore waves it with his Rethoricke.

And this we rather think, because he knows but little in Antiquity, that
knows not, that there is so vast a difference between our Bishops, and those
that were not only in the Apostles days (whom we have proved to be
undistinguished from Presbyters) But those Bishops that were in the Church 400
years after, when there began to be some discrimination, that Episcopacy may
well be likened to the Ship Argo, that was so often repaired, as there was
nothing left of the First Materials; yet still it challenged the first Name.

Which difference we spread before your Honors in three particulars: first in
point of Election to their office; secondly, in point of Execution of their
office; thirdly, in point of state-Imployment.

First (having discovered already upon what occasion this priority began to
have existence in the Church, and from whom it first received its being, not
from God but from Consent and Custom of the Churches, according to Ambrose,
Ierom, Augustine, etc.) We come now to Declare what was the manner of Election
unto this Prioritie in these times, and to show first, how therein these
Bishops did differ from ours: for all their Elections were ordered by the
privity, consent, and approbation of the people, where the Bishops was to
serve. Were there no other Authors to make this good, Cyprian alone would do
it, among other places let his 68. Epistle witness, where he says Plebs ipsa
Maxim habet potestatem vel Eligendi. Dignos Sacerdotes, vel indignos
recusandi, quod and ipsum Videmus de Divina Authoritate descendere: ut sacerdos
plebe praesente sub omnium oculis deligatur, and dignus atque Idoneus publico
Iudicio ac testimonio comprobetur. By Priests the Author here understands
Bishopps, as the whole Series of the Epistle shows.
plebs Maxim habet potestatem, etc. The people specially have power either of
choosing worthy Priests, or rejecting the unworthy: for this is derived from
Divine Authority, that the Priests should be chosen in the presence of the
people, before all their eyes and approved as fit and worthy by their public
vote and Testimony. This he proves by the Testimony of Sacred writ both Old
and New. Where we observe first, Plebs maxim Thirdly, that this power did
descend upon the People De Divina Authoritate.

Nor was this the Judgment of one Sole man, but of an Affrican Synod consulted
by the Spanish Churches in point of Election, as the inscription of the Epistle
shows.

(...). Athanas. Epist. ad Othodoxos.
The Obtrusion of a Bishop upon the Church of Alexandria without the Presence,
desire and vote of the Clergy or People is Condemned by Athanasius not only
as a breach of Canon, but as a Transgression of Apostolical prescript, and
that it did compel or necessitate the heathen to blaspheme.

Nor did only Christian Bishops, but Christian Princes acknowledge the Right
and power of Election of Bishops to be in the People; so that admired
Constantine the great Promover and Patron of the peace of the Christian Church
writing to the Church of Nicomedia against Eusebius and Theognius, tells them
the ready way to lay asleep the Tumults that did then disturb the Church
about the Election of a Bishop was, si modo Episcopum fidelem and integrum
nacti fuerint, quod quidem in praesentia in vestra situm est potestate, quodque
etiam dudum penes vestrum Iudicium fuerat, nisi Eusebius de quo dixi pravo
eorum, qui cum juverunt Consilio hac praeceps ruisset and rectum Eligendi
Ordinem impudenter conturbasset. Gelas in Act. Council. Nicen. part. 3. if they
would get a faithful and upright Bishop which says he, is in your power
presently to do; and was long ago, if Eusebius with the aid of his faction,
had not rushed in upon you, and impudently disturbed the right Order of
Election.

That which this sacred Emperor calls the right order of Election; what is it
but the Election by the people? in whose power, he says, it then was and long
had been to choose a Bishop: and by whose power the next Bishop was chosen.
Idem ubi supra.
So the same Author tells us, that after Eusebius and Theognius were cast out
of their several seats for Arianisme, by the Council of Nice, others were
appointed in their rooms by the Clergy and people of each Diocese.

To this Election in Nicomedia, Cyprian, Cornelius, Athanasius, and others.
we could (if it were needful in so clear a Truth) add many the like
Presidents of popular Elections; which for brevities sake, we pass over. Not
questioning, but that which has been spoken, is sufficient to inform the
intelligent Reader, that our Bishops and the Bishops of former times, are Two
in point of Election.

SECT. VIII.
A Second thing wherein we have undertaken to show, that our Bishops and the
Bishops of former times, are Two, is in the Execution of their Office: and
here there are three things, wherein he that will not wilfully shut his eyes
against all light, may see a Latitude of difference between ours and former
Bishops. First, in that Sole Jurisdiction which our Bishops assume to
themselves. Secondly, in the Delegation they make of the power of exercising
this Jurisdiction unto others. Thirdly, in the way of the exercise of that
power.

For the first of these, Their sole Jurisdiction; That our Bishops assume this
to themselves, it is known and felt, and that this Sole Jurisdiction was a
stranger, a Monster to former times, we shall now prove, and make clear, that
the power of Ordination, Admonition, Excommunication, Absolution, was not in
the hands of any sole man.

Cypr. Epist. 33.
First, for Ordination, Cyprian in his exile writing to his Charge, certifies
them, that Aurelius was ordained by him and his Colleagues, who were present
with him; who were these Colleagues, but his Presbyters? as he himself
expounds it, writing to Lucius in his own name, and the name of his Clergy
and people, Epist. 58.
Ego and Collegae and fraternitas omnis, etc. I and my Colleagues, and my whole
people send these Letters to you, etc. So that it is clear in Cyprians time,
Presbyters had a hand in Ordination, and Bishops did not Ordain alone.
Firmilianus says of them that rule in the Church, apud Cypr. Epist. 75.
Quod baptizandi, MANVM IMPONENDI ET ORDINANDI, possident potestatem. And who
those be, he expresses a little before, SENIORES and Praepositi: by whom the
Presbyters as well as the Bishops are understood.

And as these places prove, that Bishops in the Primitive time, could not
ordain alone without the Presbyters; so there are that give us light to
understand, that the Presbyters might ordain without the Bishop. Cumjure
divino non sint diversi gradus Episcopi et Pastores: Manifestum est
ordinationem in sua Ecclesia factam IVRE DIVINO RATAM esse. Itaque cum Episcopi
ordinarii fiant hosts Ecclesiae aut nolunt ordinatione^ impert^re, Ecclesia
retinet jus suum. Melanch. ubi supra, page Council. Antioc. Can. 10. and Aneyr.
Can. 13.
The Author of the Comment upon the Ephesians, that goes under the name of
Ambrose, says, Apud Aegyptum Presbyteri consignant, si praesens non sit
Episcopus, In Egypt the Presbyters ordain, if the Bishop be not present, so
says Augustine in the same words; and the Chorepiscopus, who was but a
Presbyter, had power to impose hands, and to ordain within his precincts, with
the Bishops License. Now Licenses confer not a power to him that has it not,
but only a faculty to exercise that power he has.

The Iniquity of our times has been such, that a Minister may not Preach to
his own flock, without a License: does this License make a man a Minister,
and give him power to preach, or only a faculty and liberty to exercise that
power? Should a Bishop give a Laike a License to preach, or to ordain, does
that License make him a Minister, or a Bishop? Sure all will say, no: why?
because in the Laike there is not Actus primus, the root and principle of that
power, which License only opens a way to the exercise of; and therefore that
must be concluded to be in those Chorepiscopi, or Presbyters, by virtue of
their place and calling, and not by virtue of a License. So that the power of
Ordination was so far from residing in the Bishop alone, as that the
Presbyters and Chorepiscopi had power to ordain as well as he.

Neither was this only a matter of Ecclesiastical Custom, but of
Ecclesiastical Constitution, which binds the Bishop;

First, Council 4. Carthag.
in all his Ordinations to consult with his Clergy; Vt Episcopus sine Consilio
Clericorum suorum Clericos non ordinet; That the Bishop shall not ordain a
Clergy man without the counsel of the Clergy; Can. 2^.
this was Cyprians practice, Epist. 33.

Secondly, in his Ordinations to take the concurrent assistance Ibid. C^n 3.
Cum ordinatur Presbyter, Episcopo cum benedicent^, and manum super caput ejus
tenente, etiam omnes Presbyteri qui praesentes sunt, manu^ suas juxta manum
Episcopi super caput illius teneant; When a Presbyter is ordained, the Bishop
blessing him, and holding his hand upon his head, all the Presbyters that are
present, shall likewise lay their hands upon his head, with the hands of the
Bishop. In which Canon, we have the unanimous vote of two hundred and fourteen
Bishops, declaring that the power of Ordination is in the hands of Presbyters
as well as Bishops.

And whereas it may be objected, that Hiorome and Chrysostom, Hicronym. in
Epist. ad Evag. Chrysostom. Hom. 1^. in 1 ad Tim
affirming Bishops to differ from Presbyters in the power of Ordination; seem
to imply, that that power is soly theirs: Here we desire it may be observed;

First, that these Fathers put all the difference that lies between Bishops
and Presbyters, to be in point of Ordination. Quid facit Episcopus, quod non
facit Presbyter excepta Ordinatione. And therefore Chrysostom himself
confesses, that in his days there was little or no difference between a
Bishop and a Presbyter. Chrysostom. upon the 1 Timothy
Inter Episcopu^ et Presbyteru^ interest ferme nihil, etc.

Secondly, That this difference is not so to be understood, as if these Fathers
did hold it to be by divine right (as Bellarmine and our Episcopal men would
make us believe) but by a humane constitution. And therefore they do not speak
De jure, but de facto, Quid facit, etc. not quid debet facere. And this Hierom
confesses. Libro d^ settem Ordinabus.
So Leo prim. ep. 88. upon complaints of unlawful Ordinations, writing to the
Germane and French Bishops, reckons up what things are reserved to the Bishops,
Among which he set down Presbyterorum and Diaconorum consecratio, Council.
Aquisgra. 1. Can 8. Solum propter author^tatem Clericorum ordinatio et
consecratio reservata est summo Sacerdoti.
and then adds, Quae omnia solis deberi summis Pontificibus Authoritate Canonam
praecipitur: So that for this power of Ordination, they are more beholden to
the Canon of the Church, then to the Canon of Gods Word.

Thirdly, we answer that this very humane difference was not in the Primitive
Antiquity. It was not so in Cyprians time, as we even now showed. And when it
did prevail, it was but a particular custom (and sometimes usurpation) of
some Churches. For it was otherwise appointed in the Council of Carthage, and
in Egypt, and other places, as is declared in the former part of this Section;
And even in Chrysostomes time, it was so little approved of, that it was one
great accusation against Chrysostom himself, That he made Ordinations
without the Presbytery, and without the consent of his Clergy. This is quoted
by Bishop Downam, lib. 1. cap. 8. page 176.

SECT. IX.
NOr had the Bishop of former times more right to the power of sole
Jurisdiction, Bilson. Spalat. Franc. a Sancta Clara.
then of sole Ordination: And here we have Confitentem reum, our very
Adversaries confess the Votes of Antiquity are with us. Cyp. Epist. 6. and 28.


Cyprian professes, that he would do nothing without the Council. 4. Carthag.
Can. 23. Vid Russ Hist. lib. 10. cap 9. Soz^. li. 2. c 23. Possidon. de vita^
Aug. c. 4. Orig. Hom. 11. in Exo. page 97.
nay, he could do nothing without them; nay, he durst not take upon him alone
to determine that which of right did belong to all: and had he or any other
done so, the fourth Council of Carthage condemns the Sentence of the Bishop,
as Irrita nisi Clericorum sententia confirmetur.

Would ye know the particulars, wherein the Bishops had no power of Judicature
without their Presbyters.

First, in judging and censuring Presbyters themselves, and Gratian is full and
clear: Decret. part. 2. Can. 15 quae. 7. Per totum and part ^ Dis. 93. cap.
5.6.
Episcopus non potest Iudicare Presbyterum vel Diaconum sine Synodo and
Senioribus: Thus Basil counseled and practiced, epist. 75. So Ambr. lib. 10.
epist. 80 Cyrill in epist. ad Iohannem Antiochen. Thus Gregory ad Johan.
Panormitan. lib. 11. epist, 49.

Clem. Alex. Stroma^. lib. ^.
Penes Presbyteros est Disciplina quae facit hom ines meliores; That Discipline
that works emendaion in men, is in the power of the Elders. Tertull. Apol.
advers. Gent.
And therefore when any was questioned in point of conversation, he was
brought, says Tertullian, into the Congregation where were Exhortations,
Castigations, and Divine censures: And who had the chief stroke in these
Censures, he tells us after: Praesident probati quique seniores; All the
approved Elders sit as Presidents.

And those censures that passed by the whole Presbytery were more approved by
the Church in Ancient times, then such as were passed by one man; for we find
that when Syagrius and Ambrose passed Sentence in the same case, the Church was
unsatisfied in the Sentence of Syagrius, because he past it sine alicujus
fratris consilio, without the counsel or consent of any of his Brethren. But
were pacified with the sentence of Saint Ambrose: Ambros. Epist. ad Syagrium.
because, says he, Hoc Iudicium Nostrum cum fratribus and consacerdotibus
participatum processerit.

Nor was there any kind of censures that the Bishops did administer alone:
Admonitions were given by the Elders; Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 19.
Augustine tells us the Elders did admonish such as were offenders; to the same
purpose speaks Origin contra Celsum. Lib. 3.

Constat, Iurisdictionem illam excommunicandi reos manifestorum criminum
pertinere ad omnes Pastores, hanc ad se solos tyrannice transtulerunt, and ad
quaestum contulerunt Episcopi, Melanc. ubi sup.
So excommunication, though that being the dreadfullest thunder of the Church,
and as Tertullian calls it, summum praejudicium futuri Iudicij, the great
forerunner of the Judgment of God, was never vibrated but by the hand of
those that labored in the Word and Doctrine: yet was no one man in the Church
invested with this power more then another.

Therefore says Hieron. Epist. ad Heliodor.
Hierom; Presbytero si peccavero licet me tradere satanae in interitum carnis.
If I sin, a Presbyter (not a Bishop only) may deliver me to Satan, to the
destruction, etc. where the Reader may please to take notice that Saint Hierom
speaks not of one particular Presbyter, but of the Order of Presbyters.

The same S. Hierom says again, Sunt quos Ecclesia reprehendit, quos interdum
abijcit, Ep. ad Demet.
in quos nonnunquam Episcoporum and Clericorum censura desaevit. There be some
whom the Church reprooves, and some which she casts out; against whom the
censures of Bishops and Presbyters sharply proceed; where we see, the Censures
whereby wicked men were cast out of the Church, were not the sole hands of the
Bishops, but likewise in the hands of Presbyters.

Syricius Bishop of Rome signifies to the Church of M^llaine, that Iovinianus,
Auxentius, etc. were cast out of the Church for ever, and he sets down how
they did it, Omnium Nostrum tam Presbyterorum quam Diaconorum, quam totius
etiam clerisciscitata fuit sententia. There was a concurrence of all
Presbyters, Ambros. lib 10 Epist. 80.
Deacons, and the whole Clergy in that sentence of Excommunication.

The truth herein may be further evidenc^d by this, because the whole Clergy
as well as the Bishops imposed hands upon such, as rep^nting were a^solved: Nec
ad communicationem (says Cypr^an) venire quis possit, Cypr. Epist. 12. Ana
this was the custom says Cyprian in minoribus delictis.
nisi prius ab Episcopo and Clero Manus illi fuerit imposita: No man that has
been excommunicated might return to Church Communion, before hands had been
laid upon him by the Bishop and Clergy.

Also writing to his Clergy concerning lapsed Christians, he tells them,
Exomologe si facta and manu eis a vobis in poenitentiam imposita, etc. that
after confession and the laying on their hands, they might be commended unto
God: so when certain returning from their heresy were to be received into the
Church at Rome in the time of Cornelius, Cypr. Epist 46 vide etiam Cypr Epist.
6.
they came before the Presbytery, and therefore confessed their sins, and so
were admitted.

But though the sentence of Excommunication was managed one^y by the hand of
those that labored in the Word and Doctrine, yet we will not conceal from
you, that neither Excommunication nor absolution did pass without the
knowledge and approbation of the body of the Church, to which the Deliquent did
belong.

Tertul. Apol. adver Gent. cap. 39.
So we have learned out of Tertullian, that their censures were ordered in their
public assemblies; and good reason, because the people were to forbear
communion with such. 2 These. 3.6, 14, 15. and public Censures of the Church
were inflicted not only for the Emendation of delinquents, but for the
admonition of others, and therefore ought to be administered in public that
others might fear. 1 Timothy 5.20. Origin speaking of the Duty and Power of the
Church in cutting off a scandalous Person though a Presbyter: Origin. Hom. 7.
in J^sh.
making the case his own he says thus: In uno consensu Eccl^sia universa
conspirans excidat me dextram suam and projiciat a se, He would have the
consent of the whole Church in that Act.

And when the lapsed Christians were received again into the Church, the
Peoples consent was required therein; else why should Cyprian say, Cypr. Epist
55.
Vix plebi persuadeo imo extorqueo ut tales patiantur admitti: I can scarce
persuade the people to suffer such to be admitted: and in another Epistle
written to his people in his Banishment, he promises to examine all things,
they being present and judging. Cypr. Epist. 11. ad plebem.
Examinabuntur singula praesentibus and judicantibus vobis.

But of this power of the People we shall have a further occasion to speak
afterward, when we come to discourse of Governing Elders.

Only may it please your Honors from hence to take notice, how unjustly our
Bishops have invaded this right and power of Presbyters and people in Church
censures, and devesting both of it, have girt it wholly upon themselves, and
how herein they and the Bishops of former times are TWO.

SECT. X.
ANd as our Bishops, and the Bishops of former times are TWO in point of Sole
Jurisdiction, so also in the Delegation of this power of Jurisdiction unto
others: Indecarum est Laicum vicarium esse Episcopi, and seculares in Eccl^sia
judicare: in uno ^^nim eod^mque o^er^ non decet d^sp^r prosessio quod etiam in
lege Divina prohibetur dicen^^ Mose, Non ^rabis in love and asino simul,
Council. Hispal. 2.
to their Chancellours, Commissaries, Officers, etc. Was ever such a thing as
this heard of in the best primitive Times? that men that never received
Imposition of hands, should not only be received into assistance, but be
wholly entrusted with the power of Spiritual Jurisdiction: Even then when it
is to be exercised over such persons as have had hands laid upon them.

We may observe in Cyprian, whilst persecution separated him from his Church,
when questions did arise among his people, he does not send them to his
Chancellor or Commissarie; No, he was so far from su^stituting any man (much
less a lay man) to determine or give Judgment in such cases, that he would
not assume that power wholly to himself, but suspends his Judgment, till the
hand of God should restore him to his Church again, that with the advice and
Counsel of the Presbyters, he might give sentence: as may appear to any that
shall peruse his Epistles.

Sure if God had ever led his Church to such a way of deputation, it would have
been in such a case of Necessity as this was: or had any footsteps of such a
course as this been visible by this holy Martyr in the goings of former ages,
he needed not have deferred the determination of the question about the
receiving of some penitent lapsed ones into the bosom of the Church again,
till his return and the return of his Clergy, as he does.

Cyp. Epist. 28.
We will instance in his 28 Epistle, wherein giving direction for the
excommunicating of such as would rashly communicate with lapsed Christians, he
gives this charge not to his Chancellor or Commissarie, or any other man upon
whom he had devolved his power, and set him as his Deputy or Vicar general in
his absence, but ad clerum, to the whole Presbytery.

Downam in the defense of his Sermon. lib. 1. cap. 8.
This Truth is so clear, that Bishop Downam the great Ad^ocate of Episcopacie
confesses, that in Ambrose his time, and a good while after (which was about
400 years) til the Presbyters were in a manner wholly neglected, the Bishops
had no Ordinaries, Vicars, Chancellors, or Commissaries, that were not
Clergymen: but this is but a blind, wherewith the Bishop would Dorre his
Reader, for we challenge any man to produce the names of any Clergie-man that
was Vicar to Ambrose, or Chancellor to Augustine, or any other of the Bishops
of these times; so that herein our Bishops and theirs are TWO.

SECT. XI.
A Third branch wherein the difference between our Bishops, and the Bishops of
former times, inpoint of Exercising their Jurisdiction, is visible, is the way
or manner of exercising that power.

For brevities sake we will only instance in their proceedings in Causes
Criminal; where let them tell us, whether any good Antiquity can yield them
one President for THEIR OATH EX OFFICIO, which has been to their COURTS, as
Purgatory fire to the Popes Kitchen: they have forgotten that old Maxim in the
Civil Law, Nemo tenetur prodere seipsum, which as it is grounded upon natural
equity, so it is confirmed by a Law enacted by Dioclesian and Maximilian, Nimis
grave est quod petitis, etc. Cod. li. 4. Tit. 20. L. 7.
It is too grievous that the adverse part should be required to the exhibition
of such things as should create trouble to themselves. Understand therefore
that you ought to bring proofs of your intentions, and not to extort them from
your adversaries against themselves.

Shall the Lamp of Nature in the night of Ethnicisme enable Heathen Princes,
(yea Persecutors) to see and enact thus much, and shall not the glorious Sun
of the Gospel convince these of their iniquities in transgressing this Law,
that call themselves the Fathers of the Church?

If neither the light of Nature, nor Gospel light can, yet the Custom of the
Church, to which they so often appeal, may both convince them of this iniquity,
and discover to all the world the contrariety of their proceedings, to the
proceedings of former times, in this particular.

For of Old, both the Plaintiff and Defendant were brought face to face,
before the parties, in whose power it was to judge: which way of proceeding,
Athanasius affirms to be according to Scripture, the Law of God. And because
those that condemned Macarius, Athan. Aso. 2.
did not thus proceed, he condemns their Sentence as malicious and unjust.

Of old, no Sentence passed against any man, but upon the Testimony of other
witnesses besides the Accusers: after Complaint exhibited, the first thing they
applied themselves to, was to consider the person and qualit^e of the Accuser,
Apud Zonaram.
Concil^ prim Constant. Can. 6 Then they heard the Witnesses, who were two at
least, Can. Apost. Can. 75. And these witnesses must be such, as might not be
imagined to be partial, nor to bear enmity nor malice against the party
accused. Ambros. Epist. 64. so Gratian, Cause. 3. quae 5. cap. Quod suspecti.

Of old, None might be party, witness, and Judge, which Gratian proves at
large, Cause. 4. qu 4. cap. Nullus unquam praesumat accusator simul esse, and
Iudex and testis.

We grant indeed the Canon Law permits in some cases Trial without witnesses:
Greg. Decret. lib. 3. Tit. 2. cap. 8 q^^ vos.
Si crimen ita publicum est, ut merito debeat appellari notorium; If the crime
be so public, that it may deservedly be called Notorious. Which Law further
determines what is notorious, saying, Offensam illam nos intelligimus
manifestam, Decret. Greg. ^ib. 5. Tit. 4. cap. 24.
quae vel per confessionem vel probationem legitime nota fuerit, aut evidentia
Rei, quae nulla possit tergiversatione celari; We count that offense manifest,
which either by confession, or by lawful proof comes to be known, or by
evidence of fact, so as it can be hid by no tergiversations.

So that all was done in former times with mature deliberation, upon
examination and evidence produced, and proved by such witnesses, as against
whom the d^fendant could lay in no just exception. And not as now an accusation
whispered against a man, he knows not by whom, to which he must take his Oath
to answer, before he knows what his accusation is. Which Oath, if he takes,
without further witness, he is censured upon the witnes^e of his own Oath. If
he takes it not, he is sent presently to prison, there to lie without Bail or
Mainprize, till the insupportable miseries of his long durance, compel him to
take an Oath against Nature, Scripture, Conscience, and the just Defense of his
own innocence.

That our Bishops therefore and former Bishops are Two, in the point of
executing their Judicatory power, we need spend no more time to prove. But come
to the third thing, in which the difference between ours and former Bishops is
to be evidenced.

SECT. XII.
ANd that is State Employment, or attendance upon Civil and Secular affairs,
etc. which both Christ and Saint Paul prohibits, which prohibition reaches
every Bishop (to speak in Chrysostomes words) as well as Timothy, to whom it
is directed; Chrysostom. Hom. 40^ in 2 in Ti.
Nullus ergo Episcopatu praeditus haec audire detrectet, sed agere ea omnia
detrectet; Let no man that is a Bishop, refuse to hear what the Apostle says,
but to do what the Apostle forbids.

We deny not but that Bishops were in the Primitive times often encumbered with
secular business; but these were put upon them, sometimes by Emperors, who
sought the ruin of the Church, as Julian, of whom Niceph. lib. 10. cap. 13.
does report, Recording this among those things that he did Dolo malo ducere.
that in Clerum coaptatos Senatorum munere and ministerio perverse fungi jussit
Sometimes the gracious disposition of Princes toward Christian Religion, made
them thus to honor Bishops, thinking thereby to advance Religion; as
Constantine the Great enacted, (...). Sozom. 1.9.
that such as were to be tried before Civil Magis^rates, might have leave to
appeal ad Iudicium Episcoporum, atque eorum sententiani ratam esse tanquam ab
ipso Imperatore prolatam: And this the Historian reckons as one argument of
his reverend respect to Religion. Sometimes the excellency of their singular
parts cast Civil dignities upon them. Niceph. 18.5.
Tiberius granted a Questors dignity unto a Bishop for his eloquence.
Chrysostom for his notable stoutnesse and freedom of speech, was sent as the
fittest man to Gainas, with the Emperors command. Sometimes the people
observing the Bishops to be much honored by the Emperor, would solicit them
to present their grievances to the Emperor. And sometimes the aspiring humor
of the Bishops raised them to such places, as appears by Cyrill, who was the
first Bishop in Alexandria, Socra. 7.7.
who had civil dignities conferred upon him, as Socrates relates it, from whom
Civil authority did descend upon succeeding Bishops. (...): of whom Nicephorus
therefore recorded, Episcopatum majoricum fastu, prophanorum Magistratuum more,
quam praedecessores ejus Episcopi, ingressus est, unde adeo initium sumptum est
in Ecclesia Alexandrina ut Episcopietiam profana negotia curarent; Lib. 14. c.
14.
He entered upon his Episcopacie with more pomp then his predecessors, with a
pomp conformable to the Heathen Magistrates.

Both these Historians relate the sad consequence that followed upon this, that
Orestes the Roman Governor seeing his power much weakened by the Bishops
interposing in secular affairs, Soc. Li. 7. c. 19.
hated the Bishop; and this (as the Historian calls it) his usurped power.
Niceph. ^. 14. cap. 14.


This president of the Alexandrian Bishop, the Bishop of Rome did soon follow;
Et Romanus Episcopatus non aliter quam Alexandrinus, quasi EXTRA SACERDOTII
FINES egressus ad secularem principatum erat jam delapsus; The Bishop of Rome
as well as the Bishop of Alexandria breaking the limits of the Priestly
function, did degenerate into a secular Principality: which purchased no less
envy to him then that to the other.

And though these two Bishops went at first abreast in this point, yet in a
short time the Roman had outstripped the Alexandrian in that power, till the
Church degenerating more and more, that Roman Priest advanced his power not
only above all the Bishops, but all the Monarchs in the Christian Orb.

Yet notwithstanding, he that shall look into the Ancients, shall find; first,
that the best of them held, that they were not to be molested with the handling
of worldly affairs, Cyprian Epist. 66.1. Singuli divino Sacerdotio honorati
non nisi altari and sacrificiis deservire and precibus atque orationibus vacare
debent, Molestiis secularibus non sunt obligandi, qui divinis rebus and
spiritualibus occupantur.

Secondly, Possidon. in vita August.
that they complained of them as of heavy burdens, Aug. calls it Angaria, yea
Austin himself in his 81. Epistle Complains, that worldly business hindered
his praying, and so pressed him, that vix respirare potuit: and Gregory the
great, non sine dolor in secularibus versabatur, praefat. in Dial.

Thirdly, Cyprian construed it as one great cause of persecutions raised
against the Church, de lapsis, Sect. 4.

Fourthly, it was much cried down as unlawful by the holy Fathers, many
Canons forbidding it, and that under pain of being removed from their places.
Can. Apost. Can. 6. Can. 81. he that did presume to administer (...), a Roman
command or Administration of Military affairs or civil place (as Zonaras
there) he should be deposed, Can. Apo. Can. 83. hiring of ground, meddling with
worldly affairs is to be laid asid by them: Otherwise they are threatened to be
liable to Ecclesiastical censures, Conc. Call. Cano. 3. Conc. Carth. Can. 16.

We will ad this for a conclusion in this point, it is observed by Athanasius,
Sulpitius, Severus, and other Ecclesiastical Historians, that the Arians were
very expedite in worldly affairs, which experience they gained by their
constant following and attendance upon the Emperors Court; and what troubles
they occasioned to the Church thereby, is notoriously known to any that have
seen the Histories of their times. And in this our Bishops have approved
themselves more like to the Arian Bishops then the purer Bishops of purer
times: but how ever clear it is, that our Bishops and the Bishops of former
times are Two: Two in election to their office; Two in the discharge of their
office; Two in their Ordination, Jurisdiction, processes, Censures,
Administrations, and the difference between our Bishops and those of former
times, is greater then between the great Bishop of Rome and them.

SECT. XIII.
BUt it seems our Remonstrant soared above those times even as high as the
Apostles days, for so he says, If our Bishops challenge any other spiritual
power, then was by Apostolic Authority delegated to, and required of Timothy
and Titus, and the Angels of the seven Asian Churches, let them be DISCLAIMED
as VSVRPERS. And the truth is, so they deserve to be, if they do but challenge
the same power that the Apostle did delegate to Timothy and Titus; for Timothy
and Titus were Evangelists, and so moved in a Sphere above Bishops or
Presbyters. For Timothy, it is clear from the letter of the Text, 2 Timothy 4.5.
(...): Do the work of an Evangelist: if Timothy had been but a Presbyter or
Bishop, Paul had here put him upon employment, Vltra Sphara Activitatis.

And to any man, that will but understand and consider what the Office of an
Let the Reader plea^e to consult Eusebius. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 33 according to
some, after others. cap. 37. and view the description, he there makes of an
Evangelist, and then judge of what we speak.
Evangelist was, and wherein it differed from the Office of a Presbyter or
Bishop, it will be manifest that Timothy and Titus were Evangelists, and no
Bishops: for the title of Evangelist is taken but two ways; either for such as
wrote the Gospel, and so we do not affirm Timothy and Titus to be
Evangelists: or else for such as taught the Gospel; and those were of two
sorts, either such as had ordinary places and ordinary gifts, or such whose
places and gifts were extraordinary; and such Evangelists were Timothy and
Titus, and not Bishops, as will appear if we consider, what was the
Difference between the Evangelists and Bishops^ Bishops or Presbyters were
tied to the particular care and tui^ion of that flock over which God had made
them Overseers, Acts 20.28. But Evangelists were not tied to reside in one
particular place, but did attend upon the Apostles by whose appointment they
were sent from place to place, as the necessity of the Churches did require. As
appears first in Timothy^ whom S. Paul besought to abide at Ephesus. 1 Timothy
1.3 which had been a needless importunity, if Timothy had had the Episcopal
(that is the Pastoral) charge of Ephesus committed to him by the Apostles, for
then he might have laid as dreadful a Charge upon him to abide at Ephesus, as
he does to Preach the Gospel. But so far was Paul from settling Timothy in
Cathedra in Ephesus, that he rather continually sends him up and down upon all
Church services, for we ^inde Acts. 17.14. That when Paul fled from the tumults
of Berea to Athens, he left Silas and Timothy behind him, Anno. Era Christi
receptae, 47.
who afterward coming to Paul to Athens, Paul sends Timothy from Athens to
Thessalonica, to confirm the Thessalonians in the faith, as appears 1 These.
3.1.2. from whence returning to Paul to Athens again, the Apostle Paul before
he left Athens and went to Corinth, sent him and Silas into Macedonia, who
returned to him again to Corinth, Anno 48.
Act. 18.5. afterward they traveled to Ephesus, from whence we read Paul sent
Timothy and Erastus into Macedonia, Anno 51.
Act. 19 22. whither Paul went after them, and from whence they and diverse
other Brethren journied into Asia, Anno. 53.
Acts 20.4. All which Brethren Paul calls, as it is probable, (...), the
messengers of the Churches, 2 Cor. 8.23. And being thus accompanied with
Timothy, and the rest of the Brethren he comes to Miletum, Anno 53.
and calls the Elders of the Church of Ephesus thither to him, of which Church
had Timothy been Bishop, the Apostle in stead of giving the Elders a charge to
feed the flock of Christ, would have given that charge to Timothy, and not to
them.

And secondly, the Apostle would not so have forgotten himself, as to call the
Elders (...), before their Bishops face.

Thirdly, It is to be conceived, the Apostles would have given them some
directions, how to carry themselves toward their Bishop, but not a word of
this, though Timothy were then in Paul's presence, and in the presence of the
Elders. The clear evidence of which text demonstrates, that Paul did not leave
Timothy at this time as Bishop of Ephesus. But it is rather evident that he
took him along with him in his journey to Hi^rusalem, and so to Rome; for we
find that those Epistles Paul wrote while he was a prisoner, bear either in
their inscription or some other passage of them, the name of Timothy, as Paul's
companion, viz. The Epistle to the Philippians, Colossians, Hebre^es, Philemon,
which Epistles he wrote in bonds as the contexture, which those two learned
professors, the one at Heydelberge, Paraeus.
the other at Saulmur, make of Saint Paul's Epistles, Capellus.
does declare.

Heb. 13.23. We find not only that Timothy was with Paul at Rome, but a
Prisoner with him there.
So that it appears that Timothy was no Bishop, but a Minister, an Evangelist,
a fellow labourer of the Apostles, 1 Thessalonians. 3.1. an Apostle, a Messenger of the
Church, 2. Cor. 8.3. a Minister of God, 1 Thessalonians. 3.2. these titles the Holy
Ghost gives him, but never the title of a Bishop.

The like we find in Scripture concerning Titus, whom Paul as it is conceived
by learned men, did first assume into the fellowship of his Labors in the
place of John, and made him his companion in his journey through Anno 43.
Antioch to Herusalem, Anno. 45.
so we find Gal. 2.1, from thence returning to Antioch again; from thence he
passed through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the Churches, and from Cilicia, he
passed to Creet, where having Preached the Gospel, and planted Churches, he
left Titus Anno 46.
there for a while, to set in order things that remain.

Yet it was but for a while he left him there, for in his Epistle which he
wrote to him not many years after, he injoynes him to come to him to
Nicopolis Anno 51.
where he did intend to winter, but changing that purpose sends for him to
Ephesus, where it seems his Hyemall station was, and from thence sends him
before him to Corinth, to enquire the state of the Corinthians Anno 51.
. His return from thence Paul expects at Troas Anno 52.
, and because coming thither he found not his expectation there, he was so
grieved in his spirit, 2 Cor. 2.12. that he passed presently from then^e into
Macedonia, where Titus met him; and in the midst of his afflictions joyed his
spirits with the glad tidings of the powerful and gracious effects, his first
Epistle had among the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7, 5, 6, 7. Paul having there
collected the Liberalities of the Saints, sends Titus again to the Anno 53.
Corinthians, to prepare them for the same service of Ministering to the
necessities of the Saints, 2 Cor. 8.6. And makes him with some others the
Conveyers of that second Epistle to the Corinthians.

All these journeyes to and fro did Titus make at the designement of the
Apostle, even after he was left in Creet. Nor do we find, Anno 64.
that after his first removal from Creet, he did ever return thither. We
read indeed, 2 Timothy 4.10. he was with Paul at Rome; and from thence returned
not to Creet, but into Dalmatia. All which does more then probably show, it
never was the Intendment of the Apostle to six Titus in Creet as a Bishop, but
only to leave him there for a season for the good of that Church, and to call
him from thence, and send him abroad to other Churches for their good, as their
necessities might require. Now who that will acknowledge a Distinction between
the Offices of Bishops and Evangelists, and knows wherein that Distinction
lies, will not upon these premises conclude that, Timothy and Titus were
Evangelists and NOT Bishops.

I but some of the Fathers have called Timothy and Titus Bishops. We grant it
true; and it is as true, that some of the Fathers have called them Archbishops,
and Patriarks; yet it does not follow, they were so. We add, secondly, that
when the Fathers did call them so, it was not in a proper but in an improper
sense; which we express in the words of our Learned Orthodox Raynolds;

You may learn by the Fathers themselves, Raynolds contra Heart. Ca. 6.
says he, that when they termed any Apostle a Bishop of thi^ or that City
(as namely Saint Peter of Antioch or Rome) they meant it in a general sort and
signification, because they did attend that Church for a time, and supply that
room in preaching the Gospel, which Bishops did after; but as the name of
Bishop is commonly taken for the Overseer of a particular Church, and Pastor of
a several flock; so Peter was not Bishop of any one place; therefore not of
Rome. And this is true by Analogy of all extraordinary Bishops, and the same
may be said of Timothy and Titus, that he says of Peter.

But were it true that Timothy and Titus were Bishops; will this remonstrant
undertake, that all his party shall stand to his Conditions? If our Bishops
challenge any other power then was by Apostolic Authority delegated to, and
required of Timothy and Titus, and the Angels of the seven Asian Churches,
Page 23.
let them be disclaimed as usurpers. Will our Bishops indeed stand to this?
then actum est. Did ever Apostolic authority delegate power to Timothy or
Titus, to ordain alone? to govern alone? and do not our Bishops challenge
that power? Did ever Apostolic authority delegate power to Timothy and Titus,
to rebuke an Elder? no; but to entreat him as a Father: and do not our
Bishops challenge to themselves^ and permit to their Chancellours,
Commissaries, and Officialls power not only to rebuke an Elder, but to rail
upon an Elder? to reproach him with the most opprobrious terms of fool,
knave, jack-sauce, etc. which our paper blushes to present to your Honors
view. Did ever Apostolic authority delegate to Timothy and Titus power to
receave an accusation against an Elder, but before two or three witnesses? and
do not our Bishops challenge power to proceed Ex officio, and make Elders
their own Accusers? Did ever Apostolic authority delegate power to Timothy
or Titus, to reject any after twice admonition, but an Heretic? and do not
our Bishops challenge power to reject and eject the most sound and orthodox of
our Ministers, for refusing the use of a Ceremony; as if Nonconformity were
Heresy. So that either our Bishops must disclaim this remonstrance, or else
themselves must be disclaimed as usurpers.

But if Timothy and Titus were no Bishops, or had not this power, it may be
the Angels of the seven Asian Churches had; and our Remonstrant is so subtle
as to twist these two together, that if one fail, the other may hold.

Collectively, not Individually; as appears by the Epistle to Thyatira, cap.
2. verse. 24. where we read (...), etc. But I say unto you (in the plural
number, not unto thee in the singular) and unto the rest in Thyatira, etc. Here
is a plain distinction between the members of that Church. By you, is
signified those to whom he spoke under the name of the Angel. By the rest,
the residue of the people. The people governned, and the governors in the
plural number. What can be more evident to prove, that by Angel is meant not
one singular person, but the whole company of Presbyters that were in Thyatira.

This also further appears, because it is usual with the holy Ghost, not only
in other books of the Scripture, but also in this very book of the Revelation,
to express a company under one singular person. Thus the Civil state of Rome,
as opposite to Christ, is called, A beast with ten horns: and the
Ecclesiastical state Antichristian is called the whore of Babylon, and, the
false Prophet: and the devil and all his family is called An old red Dragon.
Thus also the seven Angels that blew the seven trumpets, Revel. 8.2. And the
seven Angels that poured out the seven Vialls, are not literally to be taken,
but Synecdo^hically, as all know. And why not then the seven Angels in those
Epistles? Master Meed^ in his Commentaries upon the Revelation, page 265, has
these words; Denique (ut jam semel iterumque monuimus) quoniam Deus adhibet
angelos providentiae sitae in reru^ humanarum motibus and conversionibus
ciendis, gubernandisque administros: idcirco, quae multorum manibus peraguntur,
Angelo tamen tanquam rei gerendae praesidi and Duci pro communi loquendi modo
tribuuntur.

Add, thirdly, that the very name Angel is sufficient to prove, that it is
not meant of one person alone, because the word Angel does not import any
peculiar jurisdiction or pre-eminence, but is a common name to all Ministers,
and is so used in Scripture. For all Ministers are Gods Messengers and
Ambassadors, sent for the good of the Elect. And therefore the name being
common to all Ministers, why should we think that there should be any thing
spoken to one Minister, that does not belong to all? The like argument we draw
from the word Stars, used Revel. 1.20. The seven Stars are the Angels of
the seven Churches. Now it is evident, that all faithful Ministers are called
Stars in Scripture, whose duty is to shine as lights unto the Churches, in
all purity of doctrine and holiness of conversation. And in this sense, the
word is used, when it is said, that the third part of the stars were
darkened, Revel. 8.12. and that the Dragons tail drew the third part of the
stars of Heaven, and cast them to the Earth, Revel. 12.4. Which is meant not
only of Bishops, but of other Ministers, unless the Bishops will appropriate
all corruption and Apostasy unto themselves.

Add, fourthly, out of the Text it self, It is very observable, that our
Savior in opening the mystery of the Vision, Revel. 1.20. says; The seven
Candlestickes which thou saw, are the seven Churches, but he does not say.
The seven stars are the seven Angels of the same Churches, But the Angels of
the seven Churches; wherein not without some mystery the number of the Angels
in omitted, least we should understand by Angel, one Minister alone, and not a
company. And yet the septenary number of Churches is twice set down.

Lastly, though but one Angel be mentioned in the forefront, yet it is
evident, that the Epistles themselves are dedicated to all the Angels and
Ministers in every Church, and to the Churches themselves. And if to the whole
Church, much more to the Presbyters of that Church. This is proved Revel. 1.11.
What thou see write in a Book and send it to the seven Churches which are in
Asia. And also by the Epiphonema of every Epistle; He that has an ear to
hear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches. Upon which words,
Ambrosius Ausbertus in his second book upon the Revelation, says thus; Vna
ead^mque locutione and Angelos and Ecclesias ^num esse designat. Nam cum in
principio locutionu^ quae ad sep^em fiunt Angelos dicat, and Angelo illius
Ecclesiae scribe; in ^ine tamen carundem non dicit, qui habet aurem audiat quod
spiritus dicat Angelo, sed quid Ecclesiae dicat. By one and the same phrase of
speech he shows, the Angels and the Churches to be one and the same. For
whereas in the beginning of his speech, which he makes to the seven Churches,
he says; And write to the Angel of the Churches; yet in the close of the
same, he does not say, He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit
says to the Angel, but what he says to the Church. And this is further proved
by the whole argument of those Epistles, wherein the admonition^, threatenings,
commendations, and reproves, are directed to all the Ministers of all the
Churches. Revel. 2.10. The devil shall cast some of you into prison, etc. Rev.
2.16. I will fight against them with the sword of my mouth, Rev. 2.24. I will
put upon you no other burden, etc. I say unto you and the rest of Thyatira, as
many as have not this doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan,
etc. And when it is said in the singular Number (as it is often) I know thy
works and thy labor, etc. verse. 2. and verse. 4. Repent and do thy first
works; and verse 13. Thou have not denied my Faith, etc. and cap. 3.26. Because
thou art neither hot nor cold, etc. All these and the like places, are not to
be understood as meant of one individual person, but of the whole company of
Ministers, and also of the whole Church, because that the punishment threatened,
is to the whole Church; Revel. 2.5. Repent and do thy first works, or else I
will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out of his place; Rev.
2.16. Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against
them with the sword of my mouth; Revel. 2.24. I will not put upon you any other
burden. Now we have no warrant in the Word to think that Christ would remove
his Gospel from a Church for the sin of one Bishop, when all the other
Ministers and the Churches themselves are free from those sins. And if God
should take this course, in what woeful and miserable condition should the
Church of England be, which groaneth under so many corrupt Prelates? By all
this it appears, that the word angel, is not to be taken, (...), but (...),
not properly, but figuratively. And this is the judgment of Master Perkins
upon the second Chapter of the Revelation; and of Master Brightman; and of
Doctor Fulke, who in answer to the Rhemists in Apoc. 1.20. has these words; S.
John by the angels of the Churches means not all, that should wear on their
heads myters, and hold crosier staves in their hands, like dead Idols, but
them that are the faithful messengers of Gods Word, and utter and declare the
same. Again, they are called the angels of the Churches, because they be Gods
messengers.

Master Fox likewise in his Meditation upon the Revelation ( page 7.9.17^.) is
of this opinion, and has gathered to our hands the opinions of all
Interpreters he could meet, and says that they all consent in this, that
under the person of an Angel, the Pastors and Ministers of the Churches were
understood. Saint Austin in his 132. Epistle, says thus; Sic enim in
Apocalypsi legitur Angelus, etc. Quod si de angelo superioru^ coelorum, and non
de Praepositis ecclesiarum vellet intelligi, non consequenter diceret, habeo
adversum te, etc. And so in his second Homily upon the Revelation (if that
book be his) Quod autem dicit angelo Thyatirae^ habeo adversum te pauca, dicit
Praepositis Ecclesiarum, etc. This also Gregory the Great, lib. 34. Moral^ in
Job cap. 4. Saepe sacrum scripturam pr^dicatores Ecclesiae, pro eo quod patris
gloriam annunciant, angelorum nomine solere de signare: and hinc esse, quod
Johannes in Apocalypsi septem Ecclesiis scribens, angelis Ecclesia^um loquitur,
id ^st, Praedicatoribus populorum. Master Fox cites Primasius, Haymo, Beda,
Richard, Thomas, and others, to whom we refer you.

If it be here demanded (as it is much by the Hierarchicall side) that if by
angel be meant the whole company o^ Presbyters, why Christ did not say, to
the angels in the plural number, but to the angel in the singular?

We answer, that though this question may savor of a little too much
curiosity, yet we will make bold to subjoyn three conjecturall reasons of this
phrase of speech.

First, It is so used in this place, because it is the common language of other
Scriptures in types and visions to set down a certain number for an
uncertain, and the singular number for the purall. Thus the Ram, Dan. 8.3.
is interpreted verse. 20. to be the Kings of Media and Persia And the enemies of
Gods Church are set out by four ho^nes. And the deliverers by four
Carpenters, Zach. 1.18 20. And the wise and foolish Virgins are said to be five
wise and five foolish. And many such like. And therefore as we answer the
Papists, when they demand why Christ if he meant figuratively when he says,
this is my body, did not speak in plain language, this is the sign of my
body? We say, that this phrase of speech is proper to all Sacraments: So we
also answer here, this phrase of speech, Angel for Angels, is common to all
types and visions.

Secondly, angel is put, though more be meant, that so it may hold proportion
with the Vision which John saw^ Chap, 1.12.20. He saw seven golden
Candlestickes, and seven Stars. And therefore to hold proportion, the
Epistles are directed to seven angels, and to seven Churches. And this is
called a mystery, Revel. 1.20, The mystery of the seven Stars, etc. Now a
mystery is a secret, which comprehends more then is expressed; and therefore
though but one angel be expressed, yet the mystery implies all the angels of
that Church.

Thirdly, to signify their unity in the Ministerial function, and joint
commission to attend upon the feeding and governing of one Church, with one
common care, as it were with one hand and heart. And this is more fitly
declared by the name of one angel, then of many. We often find the name of
(one) Prophet or Priest to be put for the general body of the Ministry, or
whole multitude of Prophets or Priests, in the Church of Israel or Judah, when
the Spirit of God intends to reprove, threaten, or admonish them. Thus it is
Iere. 6.13.18.18. Isa. 3.2. Hos. 9.8. Ezekiel. 7.26. Hos. 4.6. Mal. 2.7. Neither
should it seem strange, that a multitude or company of Ministers should be
understood under the name of one angel, seeing a multitude of Heavenly angels
(employed in one service for the good of Gods Saints) is sometimes in the
Scripture shut up under one angel in the singular number, as may be gathered
from Genesis ^4.7. 2 Kings 19.35. Psalm. 34.7. compared with Psalm 91.11. Genesis
32.1.2. Kings 6.16, 17. And also a multitude of devils or evil angels, jointly
laboring in any one work, is set forth under the name of one evil or
unclean spirit, 1 Kings 22.21, 22. Mark. 1 23, 24. Mark^ 5.2.9. Luke 4.33, 34.
Luke 8.27.30. 1 Pet. 5.8. Heb. 2.14. Ephesians. 6.11.12.

But now let us suppose (which yet notwithstanding we will not grant) that the
word Angel is taken individually for one particular person, as Doctor Reynolds
seems to interpret it, together with Master Beza, yet nevertheless, there
will nothing follow out of this acception, that will any ways make for the
upholding of a Diocesan Bishop, with sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction,
as a distinct superior to Presbyters. And this appears.

First, because it never was yet proved nor ever will (as we conceive) that
these angels were Diocesan Bishops, considering that Parishes were not divided
into Diocesses in S. John's days. And the seven stars are said to be fixed
in their seven Candlestickes or Churches, not one star over diverse
Candlestickes. Neither can those Churches be thought to be Diocesan, when not
only Tindall and the old translation, calls them seven Congregations, but we
read also Acts 20. that at Ephesus which was one of those Candlesticks, there
was but one flock.

And secondly, we further find that in Ephesus one of those seven Churches,
there were many Presbyters, which are all called Bishops, Acts 20.28. and we
find no color of any superintendency or superiority of one Bishop over
another. To them in general the Church is committed to be fed by them without
any respect had to Timothy, who stood at his elbow and had been with him in
Macedonia, and was now waiting upon him to Jerusalem. This is also confirmed by
Epiphanius, who writing of the Heresies of the Meletians, says, that in
ancient times this was peculiar to Alexandria, that it had but one bishop,
whereas other Cities had two. And he being bishop of Cypres, might well be
acquainted with the condition of the Churches of Asia, which were so nigh unto
him.

Thirdly, there is nothing said in the seven Epistles that implies any
superiority or majority of rule or power that these angels had over the other
angels that were joined with them in their Churches. It is written indeed, in
commendation of the angel of the Church of Ephesus, that he could not bear
them that were evil, and that he had tried them which say they were Apostles
and are not, and had found them liars. And it is spoken in dispraise of the
angel of Pergamus, that he suffered them which held the doctrine of Balaam,
etc. But these things are common duties, requirable at the hands of all
Ministers, who have the Charge of Souls.

But suppose that there were some superiority and preheminency insinuated by
this individual angel, yet who knows not that there are diverse kinds of
superiority; to wit, of Order, of dignity, of gifts and parts, or in degree of
Ministry, or in charge of power and jurisdiction. And how will it be proved
that this angel if he had a superiority, had any more then a superiority of
order, or of gifts and parts? Where is it said, that this angel was a superior
degree or order of Ministry above Presbyters? In which Epistle it is said that
this angel had sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction? and therefore as our
learned Protestants prove against the Papists, that when Christ directed his
speech to Peter in particular and said, I will give unto thee the keys of the
kingdom of Heaven, etc. That this particularization of Peter did not import any
singular pre-eminence or majority of power to Peter more then to the other
apostles. But that though the promise was made to Peter, yet it was made to him
in the name of all the rest, and given to all as well as one. And that
therefore it was spoken to one person, and not to all, that so Christ might
fore signify the unity of his Church, as Hoc erant utique and cateri Apostoli
quod fuerat Pe^rus, part consort^o pr^di^i and honoris and potestatis, sed
exordium ab (...) pro^icistitur, ut Ecclesia una menstretur.
Cyprian, Austin, Hierome, Optatus, and others say. So when Christ directs a^
Epistle to one angel, it does not imply a superior power over his fellow
angels, but at most only a presidency for order sake. And that which is
written to him, is written to the rest as well as to him. And therefore written
to one, not to exclude the rest, but to denote the unity that ought to be
between the Ministers of the same Church in their common care and diligence to
their flock. And this is all that Doctor Reynolds says, as you may read in
his conference with Heart, cap. 4. divis. 3. ad finem. For it is evident that
Doctor Reynolds was an utter enemy to the I^^ Divinum of the Episcopal
preheminency over Presbyters by his Letter to Sir Francis Krolls. And learned
Master Beza also says something to the same purpose in his annotations upon
Revel. 2.1. Angelo. i. (...) quem nimirum oportuit imprimis de his rebus
admoneri, ac per eum caeteros collegas, totamque adeo Ecclesiam. Sed hinc
statui Episcopalis ille gradus postea humanitus in Ecclesiam Dei invectus certe
nec potest nec debet, imo ne perpetuum quidem istud (...) munus esse necessario
oportuisse, sicut exorta inde Tyrannis oligarchica (cujus apex est
Antichristana bestia) certissima cum totius non Ecclesia modo, sed etiam orbis
pernicie, nunc tandem declarat.

If therefore our Remonstrant can produce no better evidence for his Hierarchy
then Timothy, and Titus, and the Angels of the Asian Churches, Let not this
Remonstrant and his party, cry out of wrong, if this claimed Hierarchy be for
ever hooted o^t of the Church, seeing it is his own Option. And yet we cannot
co^ceale one refuge more out of Scripture, to which the Hierarchy betake
themselves for shelter. And that is the two Postscripts in the end of Paul's
second Epistle to Timothy, and of that to Titus; where in the one, Timothy is
said to be the first bishop of Ephesus, and in the other, Titus is said to be
the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians: to both which places we answer.

That these two Postscripts (and so all the rest) are no part of Canonical
Scripture. And therefore our former and ancienter English translations, though
they have these Postscripts, yet they are put in a small character different
from that of the text, that all men might take notice they were no parts of the
text. Although our Episcopal men of late in newer impressions have enlarged
their Phylacteries, in putting those Postscripts in the same full character
with that of the text, that the simple might believe they are Canonical
Scripture. The Papists themselves ( Baronius, Serrarius, and the Rhemists)
confess that there is much falsity in them. The first Epistle to Timothy, is
thus subscribed: the first to Timothy was written from Laodicea, which is the
chiefest City of Phrygia Pacatiana. Here we demand, whether Paul when he writ
the first Epistle to Timothy, was assured he should live to write a second,
which was written long after? And if not; How comes it to be subscribed, the
first to Timothy, which has relation to a second? Besides, the Epistle is said
to be writ from Loadicea, whereas Beza in his Annotations proves apparently,
that it was written from Macedonia; to which opinion Baronius and Serrarius
subscribe. It is added, Which is the chiefest City of Phrygia Pacatiana. But
this Epithete is no where read in the Writers of those ages, says Beza, Sed
apud recentiores illos, qui Romani imperii jam inclinantis provincias
descripserunt. So that by this place it is evident, that the subscription was
added a long while after the writing of the Epistles by some men, for the most
part vel indoctis, says Beza, vel certe non satis attentis, Either by a
learned, or negligent man.

The second Epistle is thus subscribed; the second Epistle unto Timothy
ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the Ephesia^s, was written from
Rome, when Paul was brought before Nero the second time. Now these words
Ordained the first Bishop, is wanting, says Beza, in quibusdam vetustis
codicibus, in veteri vulgat^ editione, and apud Syrum interpretem. If Saint
Paul had written this Postscript, he would not have said, to Timothy the first
Bishop, etc. whereas it was not yet certain whether ever there should be a
second. Neither would it be said when Paul was brought, etc. But when I was
the second time brought before Nero. The Syriack Interpreter reads it, Here
ends the second epistle to Timothy written from Rome.

The Epistle to Titus is thus subscribed: Written to Titus, ordained first
Bishop of the Church of the Cretians, from Nicopolis of Macedonia. Here it is
said that this Epistle was written from Nicopolis, whereas it is clear that
Paul was not at Nicopolis when he wrote it, Tit, 3.12. Be diligent to come to
me to Nicopolis, for I have determined there to winter. He does not say, Here
to winter, but there; Where note, for the present he was not there. And
besides, it is said, that Titus was ordained the first Bishop, etc. And who was
the second? or was there ever a second? And also He is said to be Bishop, not
only of a Diocese, but of all Creet. Was there ever such a second Bishop?
Add, lastly, that it is said, Bishop of the Church of the Cretians; Whereas it
would be said of the Churches of the Cretians. For the Christian Churches of
any Nation are called Churches by Luke and Paul, not Church. Therefore Codex
Claremontanus subscribes; Here ends the Epistle to Titus, and no more. So the
Syriack; Finitur Epistola ad Titum quae scripta fuit e Nicopoli. The old Vulgar
Edition has nothing of the Episcopacy of Titus. By all this it appears, that
if the Bishops had no more authority to urge us to subscribe to their
Ceremonies, then they have authority for their Episcopal dignity by these
Subscriptions, there would be no more Subscription to Ceremonies in the
Churches of England.

But some will say, that there is one objection out of Scripture yet
unanswered, and that is from the inequality that was between the twelve
Apostles, and the seventy Disciples.

To which we answer;

First, that it cannot be proved that the twelve Apostles had any superiority
over the seventy, either of Ordination, or Jurisdiction. Or that there was any
subordination of the seventy unto the twelve. But suppose it were yet we answer.

Secondly, that a superiority and inferiority between Officers of different
kinds, will not prove that there should be a superiority and inferiority
between Officers of the same kind. No man will deny but that in Christ's time,
there were Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, and teachers, and that the
apostles were superior to Evangelists and Pastors. But it cannot be proved,
that one apostle had any superiority over another apostle, or one Evangelist
over another. And why then should one Presbyter be over another? Hence it
follows, that though we should grant a superiority between the twelve and
the seventy, yet this will not prove the question in hand. Because the question
is concerning Officers of the same kind, and the instance is of Officers of
different kinds, amongst whom no man will deny but there may be a superiority
and inferiority, as there is amongst us between Presbyters and Deacons.

And now let your Honors judge (considering the premises) how far this
Episcopal government is from any Divine right, or Apostolical institution.
And how true that speech of Hierome is, that a bishop as it is a superior Order
to a Presbyter, is an Humane praesumption, not a divine Ordinance.

But though Scripture fails them, yet the indulgence and Munificence of
Religious Princes may support them, and to this the Remonstrant makes his next
recourse, yet so as he acknowledges here, Engagements to Princes only for
their accessory dignities, titles, and Maintenance; not at all for their
stations and functions, (wherein yet the author plainly acknowledges a
difference between our Bishops and the Bishops of old by such accessions.)

For our parts, we are so far from envying the gracious Munificence of pious
Princes, in collating honorable maintenance upon the Ministers of Christ, that
we believe, that even by Gods own Ordinance, double Honor is due unto them.

And that by how much the Ministry of the Gospel is more honorable then that
of the Law; by so much the more ought all that embrace the Gospel, to be
careful to provide, that the Ministers of the Gospel might not only live,
but maintain Hospitality, according to the Rule of the Gospel. And that
worthy Gentleman spoke as an Oracle, that said; That scandalous Maintenance is
a great cause of a scandalous Ministry.

Yet we are not ignorant, that when the Ministry came to have Agros, domos,
locationes, vehicula, equos, latifundia, as Chrysostom. Hom. 86. in Matthew. That
then Religio peperit divitias, and filia devoravit Matrem, religion brought
forth riches, and the Daughter devoured the Mother; and then there was a voice
of Angels heard from Heaven; Hodie venenum in Ecclesiam Christi cecidit, this
Day is poison shed into the Church of Christ.

And then it was that Jerome complained, Christi Ecclesia postquam ad
Christianos principes venit, potentia quidem and divitiis major, sed virtutibus
minor facta est. Then also was that Conjunction found true; That when they had
wooden Chalices, they had golden Priests; but when their Chalices were golden,
their Priests were wooden.

And though we do not think, there is any such incompossibility, but that
large Revenues may be happily managed with an humble sociablenesse, yet it is
very rare to find. History tells us, that the superfluous revenues of the
Bishops not only made them neglect their Ministry, but further ushered in
their stately and pompous attendance; which did so elevate their Spirits, that
they insulted over their brethren, both Clergy and People, and gave occasion to
others to hate and abhor the Christian Faith, Which Eusebius sets forth fully
in the pride of Paulus Samosatenus, who notwithstanding the meannesse and
obscurity of his birth, afterward grew to that height of Insol^nc^ and pride
in all his carriage; especially in that numerous train that attended him in
the streets, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 29.
and in his stately throne raised after the manner of Kings and Princes, that
Fides nostra invi^^ia, and odi^, propter fostum and superbi^m cordis illius,
facta fuerit obnexia; the Christian faith was exposed to envy and hatred
through his pride.

And as their ambition (fed with the largeness of their revenewes) discovered
it self in great attendance, stately dwellings, and all Lordly pomp, so
Hierom complains of their pride in their stately seats, qui velut in aliqua
sublimi specula constituti, vix dignantur vid^re mortales and alloqui conservos
suos: who sitting aloft as it were in a watch tower, will scarce deigne to
look upon poor mortalis, or speak to their fellow servants.

Here we might be large, in multiplying several testimonies against the pride
of Ecclesiastical persons, that the largeness of their revenues raised them
to: but we will conclude with that grave complaint of Sulpitius Severus.

Ille qui ante pedibus aut asello ire consueverat, spumante equo superbus
invebitur: parva prius ac vili cellula contentus habitare, erigit celsa
Laquearia, construit multa conclaviu, sculpit posts, pingit armaria, vestem
respuit gressiorem, indumentum molle desiderat, etc. Which because the practice
of our times has already turned into English, we spare the labor to
translate.

Only suffer us (being now to give a Vale to our remonstrants arguments) to
recollect some few things.

First, whereas this remonst^ant says; If we do not show out of the true and
genuine writings of those holy men, that lived in the Apostles days a clear
and received distinction of Bishops^ Page 24.
Presbyters, and Deacons, as three distinct subordinate callings, with an
evident specification of the duty belonging to each of them: Let this claimed
Hierarchy be for ever rooted out of the Church: We beseech you let it be
rememred how we have proved, out of the genuine and undeniable writings of the
Apostles themselves: that these are not three distinct callings: Bishops are
Presbyters, being with them all one, Name and Office, and that the distinction
of Bishops and Presbyters was not of Divine Institution, but Humane: and that
these Bishops, in their first Institution did not differ so much from
Presbyters, as our present Bishops differ from them.

Page 23.
Secondly, Whereas this remonstant says, If our Bishops challenge any other
power then was by Apostolic authority delegated to, and required of Timothy
and Titus, and the Angels of the Asian Churches: Let them be disclaimed as
usurpers. We desire it may be remembered, how we have proved first; that
Timothy and Titus and the Angels were no Diocesan bishops; and secondly, that
our bishops challenge (if not in their Polemicks, yet in their Practicks) a
power that Timothy and Titus, and those angels never did.

Page 22.
Thirdly, Whereas this remonstrant says, If there can be better evidence under
Heaven for any matter of fact, let Episcopacy be for ever abandoned out of Gods
Church: We beseech you remember how weak we have discovered his Evidence to
be; and then the Inference upon all these we humbly leave to your Honors
Wisdom and Justice.

SECT. XIIII.
HAving thus considered the validity of those arguments, whereby this
remonstrant would suffult Episcopacy, we descend now to inquire what
satisfaction he gives to those objections, which himself, frames as the maine,
if not the sole arguments, that Episcopacy is asfaultable by, and they are two.

First, that pleading the Divine right of Episcopacy, is to the prejudice of
Sovereignty: Secondly, that it casts a dangerous imputation upon all those
reformed Churches that want this Government.

To the first, the prejudice of Sovereignty; he answers there is a
compatiblenesse in this case of Gods Act, and the Kings: it is God that makes
the Bishop, the King that gives the Bishopric.

But we have proved already, that God never made a Bishop, as he stands in his
Superiority over all other Presbyters, he never had Gods Fiat: and if they
disclaim the influence of sovereignty unto their creation to a priority, and
assert, that the King does not make them Bishops, they must have no being at
all. Sure we are, the Laws of the Land proclaim, 37. Hen. 8. cap. 17.
that not only Bishoprics, but Bishops and all the Jurisdiction they have is
from the King: whereas the Remonstrant acknowledges no more, but the bare The
Remonstrant here acknowledges the same of the King, that Friar Simon, a
Florentine, did of the Pope, who affirmed the degree of a Bishop was de jure
divino, but every particular Bishop de jure Pontificio. Hist. con. Trid.
place and exercise to be from Regal donation, which cannot be affirmed
without apparent prejudice of that Soveraigntie which the Laws of the Land
have invested our Princes with.

And for his unworthy comparison of Kings in order to Bishops and Patrons in
order to their Clerks, when he shall prove that the patron gives ministerial
power to his Clerk, as the K^n^ according to our Laws gives Episcopal power
to the Bishop^ it may be of some conducement to his cause, but till then, we
leave the unfitness of this comparison, and the unthankfulness of those men
to the indulgence of their Sovereign, to their deserved recompense.

His learned answer to such men as borrowing Saint Ieroms phrase, Page 28, 29.
speak Saint Paul's truth, is in sum this: That he kn^w^s not how to
prescribe to men's thoughts, but for all his Rhetoric, they will think what
they list; but if they will grant him the question, they shall soon be at an
end of the quarrel: which one answer if Satisfactory, would silence all
controversies to as good purpose as he did Bellarmine, who said, Bellarmine
says it is thus, and I say it is not, and where is Bellarmine now?

To the second objection, that Episcopacie thus asserted casts an imputation
upon all the reformed Churches, Page 29.
that want that Government, he says; that the objection is intended to raise
envy against them; who (if they may be believed) love and honor those sister
Churches, and bless God for them.

But do they not pluck all this envy upon themselves, who in their
Conferences, Writings, Pulpits, Universities, Disputes, High Commission,
Declamations, have disclaimed them us no Churches, that have disclaimed the
Prelates? and have honored the most glorious Lights of those Reformed Churches,
Calvin, Beza, and others with no better titles than of Rascals, Blasphemers,
etc.

But the pith of his answer after a few good words is this: that no such
consequent can be drawn from their opinion, for their Ius divinum pleads only
for a Iustifiablenesse of this holy calling: Not for an absolute necessity of
it, warranting it where it is, and requiring it where it may be had; but not
fixing upon the Church that wants it, the defect of any thing of the Essence of
a Church, but only of the glory and perfection of it; neither is it their sin,
but their misery.

And is it so, does not this Ius divinum argue a Necessity, but only a
Iustifiablenesse of this calling; nor is the want of it a want of any thing of
Essence, but only of perfection? we had thought, that page the twentieth,
where this Remonstrant strives to fetch the pedigree of Episcopacie from no
less than Apostolical, and in that right Divine institution he had reckoned
it among those things, which the Apostles ordained for the succeeding
administration of the Church in essential matters: but here it seems he is
willing to retract what there fell from him: there it was to his advantage to
say, this government was a thing essential to the Church, and here it is no
less advantage to say, it is not essential.

But if it be not Essential, then what is the reason that when a Priest who
has received orders at Rome turns to us, they urge not him to receive
ordination among us again: but when some of our brethren, who flying in Queen
(...) days, had received Imposition of hands in the Reformed Churches beyond
the Seas returned again in the days of Queen Elizabeth, they were urged to
receive Imposition of hands again from our Bishops, and some did receive it.
If those Churches that want Bishops want nothing essential to a Church; then
what Essential want was there in the ordination of those Ministers that
received Imposition of hands in those Churches, that might deserve a
Reordination, more than if they had first received their ordination at Rome?

And what is the reason that Bishop Mountague so confidently affirms, Originum
Ecclesi^st. car^m (...) prioris pars posterior 463, 464
that Ordination by Episcopal hands is so necessary, as that the Church is no
true Church without it, and the Ministry no true Ministry, and ordinarily no
salvation to be obtained without it? And if this Remonstrant should leave
Bishop Mountague to answer for himself, yet notwithstanding he stands bound to
give us satisfaction to these two questions, which arise from his own Book.

First, whether that Office, which by divine right has the sole power of
Ordaining, and Ruling all other Officers in the Church, (as he says Episcopacy
has) belong not to the being, but only to the glory and perfection of a
Church. Secondly, there being (in this man's thoughts) the same Ius divinum for
Bishops, that there is for Pastors and Elders, Page 32.
whether if those Reformed Churches wanted Pastors and Elders too, they should
want nothing of the Essence of a Church, but of the perfection and glory of it?

But this Remonstrant seems to know so much of the mind of those Churches,
that if they might have their option, they would most gladly embrace Episcopal
Government, as little differing from their own Moderatorship, save only in
the perpetuity of it, and the new Invention (as he odiously calls it) of Lay
Elders. But no question those learned Worthies that were entrusted by the
Churches to compile their confessions, did comprise their Judgments better
than the Composer of this Remonstrance. And to his presumption, we oppose
their Confession. We will begin with the French Church, who in their
Confession speak thus.

Credimus veram Ecclesiam gubernari debere ea politia, quam Dominus noster
Jesus Christus sancivit, ita videlicet, ut sint in ea Pastores, Presbyteri,
sive Seniores, and Diaconi, ut doctrinae puritas retineatur, etc. Ar. 29.
Credimus omnes Pastores ubicunque collocati sunt, cadem and aequali potestate
inter se esse praeditos sub uno illo capite summoque and solo universali
Episcopo Jesus Christo. Art. 30. Gallicae confessionis. Credimus veram hanc
Ecclesiam debere regi, ac gubernari, spirituali illa politia quam nos Deus ipse
in verbo suo edocuit; it a ut sint in ea Pastores ac ministri qui pure and
concionentur, and Sacramenta administrent; sint quoque Seniores, and Diaconi
qui Ecclesiae senatum constituant, ut his veluti mediis vera R^ligio
conservari, Hominesque vitiis dediti spiritualiter corripi and emendari
possint. Tunc enim rite and ordinate omnia siunt in Ecclesia, cum viri fid^les,
and pii ad ejus gubernationem deligu^tur juxta Divi Pauli praescriptum, 1 Timothy
3. Confess. Belgic. Art. 30. Caeterum ubicunque locorum sunt verbi Dei Ministri
eandem atque aequalem Omnes habent tum Potestatem tum AUTHORITATEM, ut qui sunt
aeque Omnes Christi unici illius universalis Episcopi and capitis Ecclesiae
Ministri.

We believe that the true Church ought to be governed by that policy which
Christ Jesus our Lord established, viz. that there be Pastors, Presbyters, or
Elders and Deacons. And again, We believe that all true Pastors where ever
they be, are endued with equal and the same power, under one chief Head and
bishop Christ Jesus. Consonant to this the Dutch Churches. We believe (say
they) the true Church ought to be ruled with that spiritual policy which God
has taught us in his Word, to wit, that there be in it Pastors to preach the
Word purely; Elders and Deacons to constitute the Ecclesiastical Senate, that
by these means Religion may be preserved, and manners corrected. And so again,
We believe where ever the Ministers of God are placed, they All have the same
equal power and authority, as being All equally the Ministers of Christ.

In which harmony of these Confessions, see how both Churches agree in these
five points:

of Government set down, Deus in verbo suo edocuit.

Secondly, That this form of Government Christ established in his Church;
Jesus Christus in Ecclesia sancivit.

Thirdly, That this form of Government is by Pastors,

Fourthly, That the true Church of Christ ought to be Veram Ecclesiam debere
regi.

Fifthly, That all true Ministers of the Gospel are of

For the reason he assigns, why those Churches should make this Option, we
cannot enough admire that such a passage should fall from his pen, as to say,
there is Little difference between their (...), and our Episcopacie, save
only in perpetuity and lay Elders, for who knows not that between these two,
there is as vast a difference as between the Duke of Venice and an absolute
Monarch. For, 1. the Moderator in Geneva is not of a superior order to his
Brethren; nor 2. has an ordination differing from them; nor 3. assumes power
of sole Ordination or Jurisdiction; nor has he 4. maintenance for that office
above his Brethren; nor 5. a Negative voice in what is agreed by the rest; nor
6. any further power then any of his Brethren. So that the difference between
our Bishops and their Moderators is more then Little: But if it be so little as
this Remonstrant here pretends; then the Alteration and Abrogation of
Episcopacie will be with the less difficulty, and occasion the less
disturbance.

SECT. XV.
BUt there is another thing, wherein our Episcopacie differs from the Geneva
Moderatorship, besides the perpetuity; and that is the exclusion of the Lay
Presbytery, (which if we may believe this Remonstrant) never till this age had
footing in the Christian Church.

In which assertion, this Remonstrant concludes so fully with Bishop Halls
Irrefragable Propositions, and his other book of Episcopacie by divine right;
as if he had conspired to swear to what the Bishop had said.

Now, though we will not enter the Lists with a man of that learning and fame
that Bishop Hall is, yet we dare tell this Remonstrant, that this his assertion
has no more truth in it, then the rest that we have already noted. We will
(to avoid prolixity) not urge those 1 (...). ^.17 1 Cor. 12.28. Romans 12.8.
three known Texts of Scripture, produced by some for the establishing of
Governing Elders in the Church, not yet vindicated by the adversaries.

Nor will we urge that famous Text of Vnde and Syn^goga, and postea Ecclesia
seniores habuit, quorum sine Con^il^o n^hil agebatur in ^^c. ^lisi^i. Quod qua
negligent^i obso verit nescio, nisi forte Doctorum desid a, aut magis superbia,
dumsoli volunt aliq^id videri.
Ambrose in 1 Timothy 5. But if there were no Lay Elders in the Church till this
present age, we would be glad to learn, who they were of whom Origin speaks,
when he tells us, it was the Custom of Christian Teachers, first to examine
such as desired to hear them, of whom there were two orders; the first were
Catechumeni, or beginners; the other was of such as were more perfect: among
whom (...), etc^ Nonnulli praepositi sunt qui in vitam and mores eorum qui
admittuntur inquirant, ut qui turpia committant iis communi Caetu Interdicant,
qui vero ab istis abhorrent, ex anima complexi, meliores quotidie reddant:
There are some ordained to enquire into the life and manners of such as are
admitted into the Church, Origin. Lib. 3. contra Ceisum.
that they may banish such from the public Assembly, that perpetrate
scandalous Acts; which place tells us plainly:

First, that there were some in the higher form of hears (not Teachers) who
were Censores morum over the rest. Secondly, that they were designed or
constituted to this work, (...). Thirdly, that they had such Authority
instrusted into their hands, as that they might interdict such as were
scandalous from the public Assemblies. We would gladly know, whether these
were not, as it were, Lay Elders.

That there were such in the Church (distinguished from others that were called
to teach) appears. Ep. 137.
Augustine writing to his Charge directs his Epistle, Dilectissimis fratribus,
clero, senioribus and universae Plebi Ecclesiae Hipponensis: where first there
is the general compellation. Fratribus, Brethren, then there is a distribution
of these Brethren into the Clergy, the Elders, and the whole People; so that
there were in that Church Elders distinguished both from the Clergy, and the
rest of the People.

So again, Contra Cresconium Grammaticum: Omnes vos Episcopi, Lib. 3. cap.
Presbyteri, Diaconi, and Seniores scitis; All you Bishops, Elders, Deacons,
and Elders, do know. What were those two sorts of Elders there mentioned in
one comma, and ibidem cap. 56. Peregrinus Presbyter and seniores Ecclesiae
Musticanae Regiones tale desiderium prosequuntur; where again we read of
Elder and Elders, Presbyter, and Seniors in one Church.

Both those passages are upon record in the public acts, which are more fully
set down by Baronius, ao. 303. Number. 15.16, 17. As also by Albaspineus, in his
Edition of Optatus: in which Acts the Seniors are often mentioned. In that
famous relation of the purging of Cecilianus and Felix, there is a copy of a
Letter; Fratribus and filiis: Clero and Senioribus, Fortis in Domino aeternam
salutem: Another Letter is mentioned a little before Clericis and Senioribus
Cirthensium in Domino aeternum Salutem. These Seniors were interessed in
affairs concerning the Church as being the men, by whose advise they were
managed.

The Letter of Purpurius to Silvanus says, adhibete concl^ricos, and seniores
plebis, Ecclesiasticos Viros, and inquirant quae sunt ista Dissensiones: ut ea
quae sunt secundum fidei Praecepta fiant, Where we see the joint power of
these Seniors, with the Clergy in ordering Ecclesiastical affairs; that by
their wisdom and care peace might be settled in the Church; for which cause,
these Seniors are called Ecclesiastical men; and yet they are distinguished
from Clergy men.

They are mentioned again afterward by Maximus, saying; Loquor Nomine
SENIORVM Populi Christiani. Greg. Mag. distinguishes them also from the
Clergy: Tabellarium cum consensu SENIORVM and Cleri memineris Ordinandum.

These Seniors had power to reprove offenders, otherwise why should Augustine
say, Cum ob errorem aliquem a Senioribus arguuntur and imputatur alicui cur
ebrius fuerit, August. Ser. 19. de Verb. Dom.
cur res alienas pervaserit, etc. when they were by the Elders reproved for
their errors, and drunkenness is laid to a man's charge etc. So that it was
proper to the Seniors to have the cognizance of delinquents, and to reprove
them.

August. in Psalm. 38. Conc. 2.
The same Augustine in Psalm 36. Necesse nos fuerat Primianicausam, quem, etc.
Senioru^ literis ejusdem Ecclesiae postulantibus audire. Being requested by
letters from the Seniors of that Church, it was needful for me to hear the
the cause of Primian, etc.

So again, Optatus, who mentioning a persecution that did for a while scatter
the Church, says, Erant Ecclesiae ex auro and argento quam plurima Ornamenta,
quae nec defodere terrae, nec secum portare poterat, quare fidelibus senioribus
commendavit. Albaspin^us, that learned Antiquarie, on that place acknowledges,
that Besides the Clergy, there were certain of the Elders of the people, men
of approved life, that did tend the affairs of the Church, of whom this place
is to be understood.

By all these testimonies it is apparent; first, that in the ancient Church
there were some called Seniors. Secondly, that these Seniors were not Clergy
men. Thirdly, that they had a stroke in governing the Church, and managing the
affairs thereof. Fourthly, that Seniors were distinguished from the rest of
the people.

Page 32.
Neither wou^d we desire to choose any other Judges in this whole controversy;
then whom himself constituted; Foreign Divines, taking the general Suffrage
and practice of the Churches, and not of particular men.

As for the learned Spanhemius whom he produces, though we give him the
deserved honor of a worthy man: yet we think it too much to speak of him, as
if the judgment of the whole Church of Geneva were incorporated into him, as
this Remonstrant does. And for Spanhemius himself, we may truly say, in the
place cited, he delivered a complement, rather then his judgment, which in
Dedicatorie Epistles is not unusual. We know that reverend Calvin and learned
Beza have said as much upon occasion in their Epistles, and yet the Christian
world knows their Judgment was to the contrary.

Little reason therefore has this Remonstrant, Page 33.
to declaime against all such as speak against this Government as unlawful,
Page 33.
with the terms of Ignorant and spiteful Sectaries, because they call the
Government unlawful: had they proceeded further to call it Antichristian,
(which he charges upon them) they had said no more, then what our ears have
heard some of their principal Agents, their Legati a Latere speak publicly
in their visitations: That how ever the Church of England be as sound, and
Orthodox in her Doctrine as any Church in the world, D. Ducke.
yet in our Discipline and Government, we are the same with the Church of
Rome, which amounts to as much as to say, the Government is Antichristi^n,
unless they will say the Government of Rome is not so, nor the Pope
Antichrist.

SECT. XVI.
NOw our Remonstrant begins to leave his dispute for the Office, and flows
into the large pra^ses of the Persons, and what is wanting in his Arguments for
the Place, thinks to make up in his Encomiasticks of the Persons, that have
possessed that place in the Church of God and tells us, that the Religious Bishops
of all times are and have been they, that have strongly upheld the truth of God
against Satan and his Antichrist. It is well he sets this crown only upon the
heads of Religious Bishops, as knowing that there are and have been some
Irreligious ones, Page 34.
that have as strongly upheld Satan and his Antichrist against the truth of
God. But the Religious Bishops are they that have all times upheld the truth.
What? they, and only they? did never any uphold the truth, but a Religious
Bishop? did never any Religious Minister or Professor preach, or write, or die,
to uphold the truth, but a Religious Bishop? if so then there is some
persuasive strength in that he says; and a credulous man might be induced ^o
think, If Bishops go down, truth will go down too: But if we can produce
for one Bishop many others that gave been valiant for the truth, this
Rhethoricall insinuation will contribute no great help to their establishment.
Nor indeed any at all; unles he were able to make this good of our times, as
well as of all others, Page 35.
which he assaies; for says he, even amongst our own how many of the reverend
and learned Fathers of the Church now living, We may ^ather think that they
would have done ^o^e. Remembering what Marti^us was wont to say to his friend
Su^^itius, N^quaqaum sib^m Epis^op^tu c^m ^^tulum Gra^i^m suppe^^sse, quam p^^^
se (...). Sulpitius Severus Dial 2
have spent their spirits, and worn out their lives in the powerful
opposition of that man of sin; how many? I sir; we would feign know how
many: that there are some that have stood up to bear witness against that Man
of sin, we acknowledge with all due respect, to the Learning and worth of their
Persons. But that their Episcopal dignity has added either any flame to their
zeal, or any Nerves to their ability: we cannot believe, nor can we think they
would have done less in that cause, though they had been no Bishops.

But what if this be true of some Bishops in the Kingdom, Is it true of all?
are there not some that have spent their spirits in the opposition of Christ,
as others have in the opposition of Antichrist? and are there none but Zealous,
Religious Prelates in the Kingdom? are there none upon whom the guilt of that
may meritoriously be charged, Page 35.
which others have convincingly and meritoriously opposed? And are there not
some Bishops in the Kingdom, that are so far from opposing the Man of sin,
that even this Remonstrant is in danger of suffering under the name of P^ritan
for daring to call him by that name, we doubt not but this R^monstrant knows
there are.

Page 35.
But if he will against the light of his own Conscience, bear up a known error
out of private repects, (we will not say these papers) but his own conscience,
shall own day be an evidence against him before the dreadful Tribunal of the
Almighty.

But there is yet a second thing that should endeare Episcopacie, Page 36.
and that is the careful, peaceable, painful, conscionable mannaging of
their Charges; to the great glory of God, and the comfort of his faithful
people. Which (in not seeming to urge) he urges to the full and beyond. This
care, conscience, pains of our Bishops, is exercised and evidenced, either in
their Preaching or in their Ruling; for their preaching, it is true, some few
there are that Labor in the Word and Doctrine; whose persons in that respect
we honor: but the most are so far from Preaching, that they rather
discountenance, discourage, oppose, blaspheme Preaching.

It was a Non-preaching Bishop, that said of a preaching Bishop, He was a
preaching Coxcomb. As for the discharge of their office of ruling, their
entrusting their Chancellors, and other Officers, with their visitations, and
Courts (as ordinarily they do, whiles themselves attend the Court) does
abundantly witness their care in it. The many and loud cries of the
intolerable oppressions and tyrannies of their Court-proceedings witness their
peaceablenesse, their unjust sees, exactions, commutations; witness their
conscionablenesse in mannaging their Charges, to the great glory of God, and
the comfort of his faithful people.

And hence it is that so many at this day here ill; Page 36.
(how deservedly, says this Remonstrant, God knows) and do not your Honors
know, and does not this Remonstrant know? and does not all the nation (that
will know any thing) know how deservedly Some, nay, Most, nay, All the Bishops
of this nation hear ill, were it but only for the late Canons and Oath? Page
36.
But why should the faults of some, diffuse the blame to all? Why? by your own
argument, that would extend the deserts of some; to the patronage of All; and
if it be a fault in the impetuous and undistinguishing Vulgar, so to involve
all, as to make Innocence it self a sin; what is it in a Man able to
distinguish, by the same implication, to shroud sin under Innocence, the
sin of many, under the Innocence of a few.

Page 37.
But have our Bishops indeed been so careful, painful, conscionable, in
managing their Charges? how is it then that there are such manifold scandalls
of the inferior Clergy presented to your Honors view, which he cannot mention
without a bleeding heart; and yet could find in his heart (if he knew how) to
excuse them, and though he confess them to be the shame and misery of our
Church, yet is he not ashamed to plead their cause at your Honors BAR,
Onuphrius-like, that was the Advocate of every bad cause; and to excite you by
Constantines example (in a different Cause alleged) if not to suffer those
Crimes, which himself calls hateful, to pass unpunished, yet not to bring
them to that open and public punishment they have deserved.

But what, if pious Constantine (in his tender care to prevent the Divisions
that the emulation of the Bishops of that age, enraged with a spirit of envy
and faction, were kindling in the Church, lest by that means the Christian
faith should be derided among the Heathens) did suppress their mutual
accusations, many of which might be but upon surmises; and that not in a Court
of Justice, but in an Ecclesiastical Synod; shall this be urged before the
highest Court of Justice upon earth, to the patronizing of Notorious scandalls,
and hateful enormities, that are already proved by evidence of clear witness.

Page 37.
But oh forbid it to tell it in Gath, etc. What? the sin; alas, that is done
already; Do we not know, the drunkenness, profaneness, superstition,
Popishnesse of the English Clergy rings at Rome already? yes undoubtedly; and
there is no way to vindicate the Honor of our Nation, Ministry, Parliaments,
Sovereign, Religion, God; but by causing the punishment to ring as far as
the sin has done; that our adversaries that have triumphed in their sin,
may be confounded at their punishments. Do not your Honors know, that the
plaistring or palliating of these rotten members, will be a greater dishonor
to the Nation and Church, then their cutting off; and that the personal acts
of these sons of Beliall, being connived at, become National sins?

But for this one fact of Constantine, we humbly crave your Honors leave to
present to your wisdom three Texts of Scripture, Ezekiel. 44.12, 13. Because
they ministered unto them before their Idols, and caused the house of Israel to
fall into iniquity, therefore have I lift up my hand unto them, says the Lord,
and they shall bear their iniquity. And they shall not come near unto me, to
do the office of a Priest unto me, nor to come near unto any of mine holy
things in the most holy place, etc.

The second is Ierem. 48.10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
negligently: and the third is, Judges 6.31. He that will plead for Baal, let
him be put to death while it is yet morning. We have no more to say in this;
whether it be best to walk after the President of Man, or the Prescript of God,
your Honors can easily judge.

SECT. XVII.
BUt stay says this Remonstrant; Page 39.
and indeed he might well have stayed and spared the labor of his ensuing
discourse, about the Church of England, the Prelaticall and the Antiprelaticall
Church: but these Episcopal Men deal as the Papists that dazzle the eyes, and
astonish the senses of poor people, with the glorious Name of the Church, the
Church; The holy Mother the Church. This is the Gorgons head, as In his Preface
to his Book called The way to the True Church.
Doctor White says, that has enchanted them, and held them in bondage to
their Errors: All their speech is of the Church, the Church; no mention of the
Scriptures, of God the Father; but all of the Mother the Church. Much like as
they write of certain Aethiopians, that by reason they use no marriage,
Solinus.
but promiscuously company together, the children only follow the Mother; the
Father and his name is in no request, but the Mother has all the reputation.
So is it with the Author of this R^monstrance, he styles himself, a Dutiful
son of the Church. And it has been a Custom of late times, to cry up the
holy Mother the Church of England, to call for absolute obedience to holy
Church; full conformity to the orders of holy Church; Neglecting in the mean
time, God the Father, and the holy Scripture.

Page 39.
But if we should now demand of them, what they mean by the Church of England,
this Author seems to be thunder-stricken at this Question; and calls the very
Question, a new Divinity; where he deals like such as holding great revenues
by unjust Titles, will not suffer their Titles to be called in Question.

For it is apparent, Ac si solaribus radiis descriptum esset (to use
Tertullians phrase) that the word Church is an Equivocall word, and has as
many several acceptions as letters; and that Dolus latet in universalibus. And
that by the Church of England; first by some of these men is meant only the
Bishops; or rather the two Archbishops; or more properly the Archbishop of
Canterbury: Just as the Iesuited Papists resolve the Church and all the
glorious Titles of it into the Pope; so do these into the Archbishop, or at
fullest, they understand it of the Bishops and their party met in Convocation;
as the more ingenuous of the Papists, make the Pope and his Cardinals to be
their Church: thus excluding all the Christian people and Presbyters of the
Kingdom; as not worthy to be reckoned in the number of the Church.

And which is more strange, this Author in his Simplicity (as he truly says)
never heard, nor thought of any more Churches of England then one; and what
then shall become of his Diocesan Churches, and Diocesan Bishops? And what shall
we think of England, when it was an Heptarchy? had it not then seven Churches
when seven Kings? Or if the Bounds of a Kingdom must constitute the Limits and
Bounds of a Church, why are not England, Scotland, and Ireland, all one Church?
when they are happily united under one gracious Monarch, into one Kingdom. We
read in Scripture, of the Churches of Judea, and the Churches of Galatia; and
why not the Churches of England? not that we deny the Consociation, or
Combination of Churches into a Provincial or National Synod for the right
ordering of them. But that there should be no Church in England, but a
National Church: this is that which this Author in his simplicity affirms, of
which the very rehearsal is a refutation.

SECT. XVIII.
THere are yet two things with which this Remonstrance shuts up it self, which
must not be past without our Obeliskes.

First, he scoffs at the Antiprelaticall Church, and the Antiprelaticall
Divisions^ for our parts we acknowledge no Antiprelaticall Church. But there
are a company of men in the Kingdom, of no mean rank or quality, for Piety,
Nobility, Learning, that stand up to bear witness against the Hierarchy (as
it now stands:) their usurpations over Gods Church and Ministers, their cruel
using of Gods people by their tyrannical Government: this we acknowledge; and
if he call these the Antiprelaticall Church, we doubt not but your Honors will
consider, that there are many Thousands in this Kingdom, and those pious and
worthy persons, that thus do, and upon most just cause.

It was a speech of Erasinus, of Luther, Vt quisque vir est optimus, ita illius
Scriptis minime offendi, The better any man was, the less offense he took at
Luthers writings: but we may say the contrary of the Prelates, Vt quisque vir
est optimus, ita illorum factis magis offendi, The better any man is, the more
he is offended at their dealings. And all that can be objected against this
party, will be like that in Tertullian, Tertull. adverb. Gent.
Bonus vir Cajus Sejus, sed malus tantum quia Antiprelaticus.

But he upbraides us with our Divisions and Subdivisions, and so do the
Papists upbraid the Protestants with their Lutheranisme, Calvinisme, and
Zuinglianisme. And this is that the Heathens objected to the Christians, their
Fractures were so many, they knew not which Religion to choose if they should
turn Christians: And can it be expected that the Church in any age should be
free from divisions, when the times of the Apostles were not free? and the
Apostle tells us, it must needs be that there be divisions: in Greg. Naz. days
there were 600 Errors in the Church; do these any ways derogate from the
truth and worth of Christian Religion?

But as for the Divisions of the Antiprelaticall party, so odiously exaggerated
by this Remonstrant: Let us assure your Honors, they have been much fomented
by the Prelates, whose pract^se has been according to that rule of
Machiavill: Divide and Impera, and they have made these divisions, and
afterward complained of that which their Tyranny and Policy has made. It is
no wonder considering the paths our Prelates have trod, that there are
Divisions in the Nation. The wonder is our Divisions are no more, no greater;
and we doubt not but if they were of that gracious spirit, and so entirely
affected to the peace of the Church as Greg. Naz. was, they would say as he did
in the tumults of the people, Mitte nos in mare, and non erit tempestas; rather
then they would hinder that sweet Con^ordance, and conspiration of mind unto a
Government that shall be every way agreeable to the rule of Gods word, and
pro^itable for the edification and flourishing of the Church.

A second thing, we cannot but take notice of, is the pains this Author takes
to advance his Prelaticall Church: Page 2.
and forgetting what he had said in the beginning: that their party was so
numerous, it could not be summed; tells us now, Page 41.
these several thousands are punctually calculated. But we doubt not but your
Honors will consider that there may be mul^i homines and pauci viri. And that
there are more against them then for them.

And whereas they pretend, that they differ from us only in a Ceremony or an
Organ pipe, (which however is no contemptible difference) yet it will appear
that our differences are in point of a superior Alloy. Though this Remonstrant
braves it in his multiplied Quere's. What are the bounds of this Church? Page
^1.
what the distinction of the professors and Religion? what grounds of faith?
what new Creed do they hold different from their Neighbors? what Scriptures?
what Baptism? what means of Salvation other then the rest? yet if he pleased
he might have silenced his own Queres: but if he will needs put us to the
answer, we will resolve them one by one.

First, if he ask what are the bounds of this Church, we answer him out of the
sixth of their late founded Canons: where we find the limits of this Prelaticall
Church extend as far as from the high and lofty Promontory of Archbishops, to
the Terra incognita of an, etc.

If what Distinction of professors and Religion; we answer their worshipping
toward the East, and bowing toward the Altar, prostrating themselves in their
approaches into Churches, placing all Religion in outward formalities, are
visible differences of these professors and their Religion.

If what new Creed they have, or what grounds of Faith differing from their
Neighbors, we answer; Episcopacy by divine right is the first Article of their
Creed Absolute and blind obedience to all the commandments of the Church
(that is the Bishop and his Emissaries) election upon faith foreseen, the
influence of works into Justification, falling from grace, etc.

If what Scripture, we answer; the Apocrypha and unwritten Traditions.

If what Baptism? a Baptism of absolute Necessity unto salvation; and yet
insufficient unto salvation: as not sealing grace to the taking away of sin
after Baptism.

If what Eucharist? an Eucharist that must be administered upon an Altar or a
Table set Altar-wise, rayled in an Eucharist in which there is such a presence
of Christ, (though Modum nesciunt) as makes the place of its Administration the
throne of God, the place of the Residence of the Almighty; and impresseth such
a holiness upon it as makes it not only capable, but worthy of Adoration.

If what Christ? a Christ who has given the same power of absolution to a
Priest that himself has.

If what Heaven? a heaven that has a broad way leading thither, and is
receptive of Drunkards, Swearers, Adulterers, etc. such a heaven as we may say
of it, as the the Indians said of the heaven of the Spaniards: Unto that heaven
which some of the Prelaticall Church living and dying in their scandalous
sins, and hateful enormities go to, let our souls never enter.

If what means of salvation? we answer, confession of sins to a Priest as
the most absolute, undoubted, necessary, infallible means of Salvation.

Page 41.
Far be it from us to say with this Remonstrant, we do fully agree in all
these and all other Doctrinall, and practical points of Religion, and preach
one and the same saving truths. Nay, we must rather say as that holy Martyr
did, We thank God we are none of you.

Nor do we because of this dissension fear the censure of uncharitableness
from any but uncharitable men. Page 42.
But it is no unusual thing with the Prelates and their party, to charge such
as protest against their corrupt opinions and ways, with uncharitableness and
Schism, as the Papists do the Protestants: and as the Protestants do justly
recriminate, and charge that Schism upon the Papists, which they object to us;
So may we upon the Prelates: And if Austin may be Judge, the Prelates are more
Schismatics then we. Quicunque (says he) invident bonis, ut quaerant
occasiones excludendieos, aut degradandi, vel crimina sua sic defond^re parati
sunt (si objecta vel prodita fuerint) ut etiam conventiculorum congregationes
vel Ecclesiae perturbationes cogitent excitare, jam schismatici sunt. Whosoever
envy those that are good, and seek occasions to exclude and degrade them, and
are so ready to defend their faults, that rather then they will leave them,
they will devise how to raise up troubles in the Church, and drive men into
Conventicles and corners, they are the Schismatics.

And that all the world may take notice what just cause we have to complain
of Episcopacie, as it now stands, we humbly crave leave to propound these
Quaeries.

Quaeries about Episcopacie.
Whether it be tolerable in a Christian Church, Iure Divino; And yet the Lords
day by the same men to be but Iure Humano. And that the same persons should cry
up Altars in stead of Communion Tables, and Priests in stead of Ministers, and
yet not Iudaize, when they will not suffer the Lords day to be called the
Sabbath day, for fear of Iudaizing. Whereas the word Sabbath is a general
word, signifying a day of rest, which is common as well to the Christian
Sabbath, as to the Jewish Sabbath, and was also used by the Ancients, Russinus
in Psalm. 47. Origin Hom. 23. in Number. Gregory Nazian.

Whether that assertion, No Bishop, No King, and no

Whether seeing it has been proved that Bishops

Whether the advancing of Episcopacie into Ius Divinum, Colos. 2.20. 21, 22.
Math. 15.9. But now since Episcopacy comes to be challenged as a Divine
Ordinance, how shall we be responsable to those Texts. And is it not, as it is
now asserted, become an Idol, and like the Brazen Serpent to be ground to
powder?

Ius Divinum and Ius Apostolicum. Because we find some claiming their standing
by Ius Divinum; others by Ius Apostolicum. But we conceive that Ius
Apostolicum properly taken, is all one with Ius Divinum. For Ius Apostolicum is
such a Ius, which is founded upon the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles,
written by them so as to be a perpetual Rule for the succeeding Administration
of the Church, as this Author says page 20. And this Ius is Ius Divinum, as
well as Apostolicum. But if by Ius Apostolicum, they mean improperly (as some
do) such things which are not recorded in the writings of the Apostles, but
introduced, the Apostles being living, they cannot be rightly said to be jure
Apostolico, nor such things which the Apostles did intend the Churches should
be bound unto. Neither is Episcopacie as it imports a superiority of power
over a Presbyter, no not in this sense jure Apostolico, as has been already
proved, and might further be manifested by diverse Testimonies, if need did
require. We will only instance in Cassander, a man famous for his immoderate
moderation in controverted Points of Religion, who in his Consultat. Articul.
14. has this saying; An Episcopatus inter ordines Ecclesiasticos ponendus sit,
inter Theologos and Canonistas non convenit. Convenit autem inter omnes, in
Apostolorum aetate Presbyterum and Episcopum nullum discrimen fuisse, etc.

Beza, between Episcopus Divinus, Humanus, and Diabolicus, be not worthy your
Honors consideration. By the Divine Bishop, he means the Bishop as he is
taken in Scripture, which is one and the same with a Presbyter; By the humane
Bishop he means the Bishop chosen by the Presbyters to be President over them,
and to rule with them by fixed Laws and Canons. By the Diabolical Bishop he
means a Bishop with sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, Lording it over
Gods heritage, and governing by his own will and authority. Which puts us in
mind of the Painter that Limmed two pictures to the same proportion and
figure; The one he reserved in secret, the other he exposed to common view.
And as the fancy of beholders led them to censure any line or proportion, as
not done to the life, he mends it after direction. If any fault be found with
the eye, hand, foot, etc. he corrects it, till at last the addition of every
man's fancy had defaced the first figure, and made that which was the Picture
of a man, swell into a monster: Then bringing forth this and his other Picture
which he had reserved, he presented both to the people. and they abhorring the
former, and applauding the latter, he cried, Hunc populus fecit: This the
deformed one the People made: This lovely one I made. As the Painter of his
Painting, so (in Bezaes sense) it may be said of Bishops, God at first
instituted Bishops such as are all one with presbyters; and such are amiable,
honorable in all the Churches of God. But when men would be adding to Gods
institution, what power, Hunc populus fecit.
pre-eminence, Jurisdiction; Lordlynes their fancy suggested unto them, this
divine Bishop lost his Originali beauty, and became to be Humanus. And in
conclusion (by these and other additions swelling into a P^pe.) Diabolicus.

Whether the Ancient Fathers, when they call Peter and Titus Bishops, did not
speak according to the Language of the times wherein they lived, rather then
according to the true acception of the word Bishop; and whether it be not true
which is here said in this Book, that they are called Bishops of Alexandria,
Ephesus, Jerusalem, etc. in a very improper sense, because they abode at those
places a longer time then at other places? For sure it is, if Christ made Peter
and James Apostles (which are Bishops over the whole world) and the Apostles
made Mark, Timothy and Titus Evangelists, etc. It seems to us that it wonld
have been a great sin in them to limit themselves to one particular
Diocese, and to leave that calling in which Christ had placed them.

Mat. 16.19. where the power of the Keys is promised to Peter, in the name of
the rest of the Apostles, and their successors; and given to all the Apostles,
and their successors, Mat. 18.19. John 20.23. And that Presbyters succeed the
Apostles, appears not only Mat. 28.20. but also Acts 20 28. where the Apostle
ready to leave the Church of Ephesus commends the care of ruling and feeding it
to the Elders of that Church. To this Irenaeus witnesses, lib. 4. cap. 43.44.
This Bishop Jewel against Harding, Artic. 4. sect. 5.6. says, that all
Pastors have equal power of binding and loosing with Peeter.

then other, 4. because the Pope was Anticstrist, before he did assume any
temporal power. 5. Because the Spiritual is more inward and less discerned:
and therefore it concerns all those that have Spiritual eyes, and desire to
worship God in spirit and truth to consider, and and endeavor to abrogate
their Spiritual usurpations as well as their Temporal.

Whether Acrius be justly branded by Epiphanius and Austin for a Heretic (as
some report) for affirming Bishops, and presbyters to be of an equal power?

We say, Epiphanius says he did Arrium ip^um dogmatum novitate superare.

Austin says in Ar^anorum haeresin lapsum.


as some report, for the truth is, he is charged with heresy merely and only
because he was an a Arian. As for his opinion of the parity of a presbyter with
a Bishop; this indeed is called by Austin, proprium dogma Aerii, the proper
opinion of Aerius. And by Epiphanius it is called Dogma furiosum and stolidum,
a mad and foolish opinion, but not an heresy neither by the one nor the other.
But let us suppose (as is commonly thought) that he was accounted an Heretic
for this opinion: yet notwithstanding, that this was but the private opinion of
Epiphanius, and borrowed out of him by Austin, and an opinion not to be allowed
appears;

First, Epiphall. accused him because he said that super^^^^m preces did not
opitulari eis q^i ex hac vita discesserint. And Austin accused Aerius because
he said, Non lic^t orare, vel offerre pro mortuis oblationem.
because the same Authors condemn Aerius, as much for reprehending and
censuring the mentioning of the dead in the public prayers, and the
performing of good works for the benefit of the dead. And also for the
reprehending statu jejunia, and the keeping of the week before Easter as a
solemn Fast; which if worthy of condemnation, would bring in most of the
reformed Churches into the censure of Heresy.

Secondly, because not only Saint Hierome, but Anstin himself, Sedulius,
Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophilact, were of the same
opinion with Aerius (as Michael Medina, observes in the Council of Trent, and
has written, Lib. 1. de sacr. hom. Origin) and yet none of these deserving
the name of Fools, much less to be branded for Heretics.

Thirdly, because no Counsel did ever condemn this for Heresy; Whitaker
respons. ad Campian rat. 10. has these words: A^^^um Esi (...) and Augustinus
in ^aere (...), and praeter eo an qui pa^^^ (...) E^iscopo aequa^e ^it ^ae
^ticum, nihil Catholicum essi potest. Cum Aerio Hieronymus de Presbyteris
omnino s^nsit. Illos enim jure divino Epis (...) aequales esse ^lat^^t.
but on the contrary, Concilium Aquisgranens. sub Ludovico Pio Imp. 1. anno
816. has approved it for true Divinity out of the Scripture: That Bishops and
Presbyters are equal, bringing the same texts that Aerius does, and which
Epiphanius indeed undertakes to answer; but how slightly let any indifferent
Reader judge.

Whether the great Apostacy of the Church of Rome has not been, in swarving
from the Discipline of Christ, as well as from the doctrine. For so it seems by
that text. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. And also Revel. 18.7. and diverse others. And if so,
then it much concerns all those that desire the purity of the Church to
consider, how near the discipline of the Church of England borders upon
Antichrist; least, while they endeavor to keep out Antichrist from entering by
the door of doctrine, they should suffer him secretly to creep in by the door
of discipline, especially considering, what is here said in this Book. That
by their own confession, the discipline of the Church of

Sozomen. hist. lib. 6. c^p. 10.
as much as the ancient Bishops did, who hid themselves that they might not be
made Bishops and cut off their ears rather then they would be made Bishops:
whereas now Bishops cut off the ears of those that speak against their
Bishoprics.

to the bringing in of Popery, for the upholding of their dignities, then part
with their dignities for the upholding of Religion.

Why should England that is one of the chiefest Kingdoms

Whether it be fit that the name Bishop, which in

First we find by woeful experience, that the great Equivocation that lies in
the name Bishop has been and is at this day a great prop and pillar to uphold
Lordly Prelacy, for this is the great Goliath, the masterpiece, and indeed the
only argument with which they think to silence all opposers. To wit, the
antiquity of Episcopacie, that it has continued in the Church of Christ for
1500 years, etc, which argument is cited by this Remonstrant ad nauseam usque
and usque. Now it is evident that this, argument is a Paralogisme, depending
upon the Equivocation of the name Bishop. For Bishops in the Apostles time were
the same with Presbyters in name and office and so for a good while after. And
when afterward they came to be distinguished. The Bishops of the primitive
times differed as much from ours now, as Rome ancient from Rome at this day, as
has been sufficiently declared in this Book. And the best way to confute
this argument is by bringing in a Community of the Name Bishop to a Presbyter
as well as to a Bishop.

Secondly, because we find that the late Innovators which have so much
disturbed the peace and purity of our Church, did first begin with the
alteration of words; and by changing the word Table into the word Altar; and
the word Minister, into the word Priest; and the word Sacrament into the word
Sacrifice, have endeavored to bring in the Popish Mass. And the Apostle
exhorts us, 2 Timothy 1.13. To hold fast the form of sound words: and 1 Timothy 6.20.
to avoid the profane novelties of words. Upon which text we will only mention
what the Rhemists have commented, which we conceive to be worthy
consideration. ( Nam instruunt nos non solum docentes, sed etiam errantes) The
Church of God has always been as diligent to resist novelties, of words, as
her adversaries are busy to invent them, for which cause she will not have us
communicate with them, nor follow their fashions and phrase newly invented,
though in the nature of the words sometimes there be no harm. Let us keep
our forefathers words, and we shall easily keep our old and true faith, that
we had of the first Christians; let them say Amendment, Abstinence, the Lords
Supper, the Communion Table, Elders, Ministers, Superintendent, Congregation,
so be it, praise ye the Lord, Morning Prayer, Evening Prayer and the rest, as
they will, Let us avoid those novelties of words, according to the Apostles
prescript and keep the ole terms, Penance, Fast, Priests, Church, Bishop,
Mass, Mat^in, Evensong, the B. Sacrament, Altar, Oblation. Host, Sacrifice,
Halleluja, Amen; Lent, Palme-Sunday, Christmasse, and the words will bring us
to the faith of our first Apostles, and condemn these new Apostates, new faith
and phrase.

Quest. 16.
Whether having proved that God never set such a government in his Church as our
Episcopal Government is we may lawfully any longer be subject unto it, be
present at their Courts, obey their injunctions and especially be instruments
in publishing, and executing their Excommunications and Absolutions.

And thus we have given (as we hope) a sufficient answer, and as brief as the
matter would permit, to The Remonstrant. With whom, though we agree not in
opinion touching Episcopacie and Liturgy; yet we fully consent with him, to
pray unto Almighty God, Who is great in power, and infinite in wisdom, to
power down upon the whole Honourabe Assembly, the Spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of Council and might, the spirit of knowledge and of
the fear of the Lord. That you may be able to discern betwixt things that
differ; separate between the precious and the vile, purely purge away our
dross, and take away all our tin; root out every plant that is not of our
heavenly Fathers planting. That so you may raise up the foundations of many
generations, and be called The Repairers of breaches, and Restorers of paths to
dwell in. Even so, Amen.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT.
THough we might have added much light and beauty to our Discourse, by
inserting variety of Histories upon several occasions given us in the
Remonstrance, the answer whereof we have undertaken; especially where it
speaks of the bounty and gracious Munificence of Religious Princes toward the
Bishops, yet unwilling to break the thread of our discourse, and its connection
with the Remonstrance, by so large a digression, as the whole series of History
producible to our purpose, would extend unto: We have chosen rather to
subjoyne by way of appendix, an historical Narration of those bitter fruits,
Pride, Rebellion, Treason, Unthankfulness, etc. which have issued from
Episcopacy, while it has stood under the continued influences of Sovereign
goodness. Which Narration would fill a volume, but we will bound our selves
unto the Stories of this Kingdom, and that revolution of time which has
passed over us since the erection of the Sea of Canterbury. And because in most
things the beginning is observed to be a presage of that which follows, let
their Founder Austin the Monk come first to be considered. Whom we may justly
account to have been such to the English, as the Arrian Bishops were of old to
the Goths, Bed. Holinsh. Speed.
and the Jesuits now among the Indians, who of Pagans have made but Arrians and
Papists. His ignorance in the Gospel which he preached is seen in his idle
and Judaicall Consultations with the Pope, about things clean and unclean;
his proud demeanor toward the British Clergy, appears in his counsel called
about no solid point of faith, but celebration of Easter, where having troubled
and threatened the Churches of Wales, and afterward of Scotland, about Romish
Ceremonies, he is said in fine to have been the stirrer up of Ethelbert, by
means of the Northumbrian King, to the slaughter of twelve hundred of those
poor laborious Monks of Bangor. His Successors busied in nothing but urging
and instituting Ceremonies, and maintaining precedence we pass over.

Holinsh. out of Capgrave. Osborn, Higden.
Till Dunstan, the Sainted Prelate, who of a frantic Necromancer, and suspected
fornicatour, was shorn a Monk, and afterward made a Bishop. His worthy deeds
are noted by Speed to have been the cheating King Edred of the treasure
committed to his keeping; the prohibiting of marriage, to the increasing of all
filthiness in the Clergy of those times; as the long Oration of King Edgar in
Stow well testifies.

Edw. Conf.
In Edward the Confessors days, Robert the Norman no sooner Archbishop of
Canterbury, but setting the King and Earl Godwine at variance for private
revenge broached a civil war, Holinsh. 191 Will. Conq.
till the Archbishop was banished.

Now William the Conqueror had set up Lanfrank Bishop of Canterbury, who to
requite him, spent his faithful service to the Pope Gregory, Speed. page 442.
in persuading the King to subject himself and his state to the Papacy as
himself writes to the Pope, Suasi, sed non persuasi.

Will. Ruf.
The treason of Anselm to Rufus was notorious, who not content to withstand the
King, obstinately in money matters made suit to fetch his Pall or investiture
of Archiepiscopacie from Rome, which the King denying as flat against his
regal Soveraigntie, he went without his leave^ and for his Romish good service
received great honor from the Pope, by being seated at his right foot in a
Synod, with these words, Includamus hunc in orb nostro tanquam alterius orbis
Papam. Whence perhaps it is that the Sea of Canterbury has affected a
Patriarchy in our days. This Anselm also condemned the married Clergy.

Henry the first reigning, Henry 1
the same Anselm deprived those Prelates that had been invested by the King,
and all the Kingdom is vexed with one Prelat, who the second time betakes
himself to his old fortress at Rome, till the King was feign to yield. Which
done, and the Archbishop returned, spends the rest of his days in a long
contention and unchristian jangling with York about Primacie. Holinsh. 3^
Which ended not so, but grew as hot between York and London, as Dean to
Canterbury, striving for the upper seat at dinner, till the King seeing their
odious pride put them both out of doors.

To speak of Ralf. and Thurstan, Holinsh. 3^
the next Archbishops, pursuing the same quarrel, were tedious as it was no
small molestation to the King and Kingdom, Thurstan refusing to stand to the
Kings doom, and wins the day, or else the king must be accurs't by the Pope;
Holinsh. 42.
which further animates him to try the mastry with William next Archbishop of
Canterbury, 43.
and no man can end it but their Father the Pope, for which they travel to
Rome. In the mean while, marriage is sharply decreed against, Speed 448. and
the Legate Cremonensis, the declamor against matrimony taken with a strumpet
the same night.

In King Stephens Reign, K. Stephen.
the haughty Bishops of Canterbury and Winchester bandy about precedencie; and
to Rome to end the duel. Holinsh. 57.
Theobald goes to Rome against the Kings will; 58.
interdicts the Realm, and the King forced to suffer it; till refusing to
Crown Eustace the Kings son, 59.
because the Pope had so commanded, he flies again.

Beckets pride and outrageous treasons are too manifest; Henry 2.
resigning the Kings gift of his Archbishopric to receive it of the Pope;
requiring the Custody of Rochester Castle, and the Tower of London, as
belonging to his Seignorie. Protects murdering Priests from the temporal
sword; Speed 467. out of Nubrigens.
standing stiffly for the liberties and dignities of Clerks, but little to
chastise their vices, which besides other crying sins, were above a hundred
murders since Henry the seconds crowning, till that time to maintain which,
Yet this man's life is lately printed in English as a thing to be imitate^^
most of the Bishops conspire, till terror of the King made them shrink; but
Becket obdures, denies that the King of Englands Courts have authority to judge
him. And thus was this noble King disquieted by an insolent traitor, Holinsh.
70.
in habit of a Bishop, a great part of his Reign; the land in uproar; many
excommunicate, and accursed. France and England set to war, Speed. 469.
and the King himself curbed, and controlled; and lastly, disciplined by the
Bishops and Monks, first with a bare foot penance, that drew blood from his
feet, and lastly, with fourscore lashes on his anointed body with rods.

In the same Kings time it was that the Archbishop of York, striving to sit
above Canterbury, squatts him down on his lap, Hol. page 98.
whence with many a cuffe he was thrown down.

Richard 1. Page 129.
Next the pride of W. Longchamp, Bishop of Elie was notorious, who would ride
with a thousand horse, and of a Governor in the Kings absence, became a
Tyrant; for which ^lying in woman's apparel he was taken. 130.


132.
To this succeeds contention between Canterbury and York, about carriage of
their crosses, and Rome appealed to: 144.
the Bishop of Durham buys an Earldome.

K. John.
No sooner another King, but Hubert another Archbishop to vex him, and lest that
were not enough, made Chancellor of England. And besides him, Geffry of York,
who refusing to pay a Subsidy within his Precincts, and therefore all his
temporalities seaz'd; excommunicates the Sheriff, beats the Kings Officers,
and interdicts his whole Province. Hubert outbraves the King in Christmasse
housekeeping: hinders King John by his Legantine power from recovering
Normandy. Speed. 503
After him Stephen-Langton, set up by the Pope in spite of the King, who
opposing such an affront, falls under an interdict, with his whole Land; and at
the suit of his Archbishop to the Pope, Speed. 509
is deposed by Papal Sentence; his Kingdom given to Philip the French King,
Langtons friend, and lastly resignes and ^nfe^ds his Crown to the Pope.

After this tragical Stephen, Hen. 3.
the fray which Boniface the next Archbishop but one had with the Canons of
Saint Bartholmews is as pleasant; Stow 188.
the tearing of Hoods and Cowles, the miring of Copes, the flying about of wax
Candles, and Censors in the scuffle, cannot be imagined without mirth; as his
oaths were loud in this bickering, Hol. 247.
so his curles were as vehement in the contention with the Bishop of Winchester
for a slight occasion. But now the Bishops had turned their contesting into
base and servile f^atteries, to advance themselves on the ruin of the
Subjects. For Peter de Rupibus Bishop of Winchester persuading the King to
displace English Officers and substitute Poictivines, Speed 529.530.
and telling the Lords to their ces, that there were no Peers in England, as
in France, but that the King might do what he would, and by whom he would,
became a firebrand to the civil wars that followed.

In this time Peckam Archbishop of Can. in a Synod was tempering with the Kings
liberties, Edward 1.
Hol. 280.
but being threatened desisted. But his successor Winchelsey on occasion of
Subsidies demanded of the Clergy, Hol. 301.
made answer, That having two Lords, one Spiritual, the other Temporal, he
ought rather to obey the Spiritual governor the Pope, Hol. 315.
but that he would send to the Pope, to know his pleasure, and so persisted
even to beggerie. The Bishop of Durham also cited by the King flies to Rome.

In the deposing of this King who more forward, Edward 2.
then the Bishop of Hereford? Speed 574.
witness his Sermon at Oxford, My head, my head aketh concluding that an
aching, and sick head of a King was to be taken off without further Physic.

John the Archbishop of Canterbury, Edward 3.
suspected to hinder the Kings glorious victories in Flanders, Speed 586.
and France, by stopping the con^eyance of moneys committed to his charge,
conspiring therein with the Pope. But not long after was constituted that
fatal praemunire, which was the first nipping of their courage, to seek aid
at Rome. And next to that, Hol. 409.
the wide wounds, that Wickleffe made in their sides. From which time they have
been falling, and thenceforth all the smoke, that they could vomit, was turned
against the rising light of pure doctrine.

Richard 2.
Yet could not their pride miss occasion to set other mischief on foot. For the
Citizens of London rising to apprehend a riotous servant of the Bishop of
Salisbury then Lord Treasurer, who with his fellows stood on his guard in the
Bishops house, Hol. 478.
were by the Bishop, who maintained the riot of his servant, so complained of,
that the King therewith seized on their liberties, and set a Governor over the
City. And who knows not, that Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury was a
chief instrument, and agent in deposing King Richard, Page 506.
as his actions and Sermon well declares.

Henry 4.
The like intended the Abbot of Westminster to Henry the fourth, who for no
other reason, but because he suspected, that the King did not favor the
wealth of the Church, drew into a most horrible conspiracy the Earls of Kent,
Page 514.
Rutland, and Salisbury, to kill the King in a turnament at Oxford, who yet
notwithstanding was a man that professed to leave the Church in better state
then he found it. Speed 631.
For all this, soon after is Richard Scroop Archbishop of York in the field
against him, the chief attractor of the rebellious party. Hol. 529.


Henry 5.
In these times Thomas Arundell a great persecutor of the Gospel preached by
Wifclefs followers, dies a fearful death, his tongue so swelling within his
mouth, that he must of necessity starve. His successor Chickeley nothing
milder diverts the King, that was looking too nearly into the superfluous
revenewes of the Church, Speed 638.
to a bloody war.

Henry 6.
All the famous conquests which Henry the fifth had made in France, were lost by
a civil dissension in England, which sprung first from the haughty pride of
Beaufort Bishop and Cardinal of Winchester, Hol. 596.
and the Archbishop of York against the Protector, Speed 674. In the civil
wars the Archbishop sides with the Earl of Warwick, Page 620.
and March in Kent, Speed 682.

Edward the fourth, Edward 4.
Mountacute Archbishop of York, Speed 699.
one of the chief conspirators with Warwick against Edward the fourth, and
afterward his Jailer, being by Warwickes treason committed to this Bishop.

In Edward the fifths time, Edward 5.
the Archbishop of York was, though perhaps unwittingly (yet by a certain fate
of of Prelacie) the unhappy instrument of pulling the young Duke of York out
of Sanctuary, into his cruel Unckles hands.

Things being settled in such a peace, Richard 3.
as after the bloody brawles was to the af^licted Realm howsoever acceptable,
though not such, as might be wished: Morton Bishop of Ely, enticing the Duke
of Buckingham to take the Crown, which ruined him, opened the veins of the
poor subjects to bleed afresh.

The intolerable pride, Henry 8.
extortion, bribery, luxury of Wolsey Archbishop of York who can be ignorant
of? Hol. 845.
462.
selling dispensations by his power Legantine for all offenses, insulting over
the Dukes and Peers, of whom some he brought to destruction by bloody
policy, playing with State aff^ires according to his humor, or benefit:
causing Turnay got with the blood of many a good Soldier, to be rendered at the
French Kings secret request to him, not without bribes; with whom one while
siding, another while with the Emperor, he sold the honor and peace of
England at what rates he pleased; and other crimes to be seen in the
Articles against him, Hol. 912. and against all the Bishops in generall^ 911.
which when the Parliament sought to remedy, being most excessive extortion in
the Ecclesiastical Courts, the Bishops cry out; sacrilege, the Church goes to
ruin, as it did in Bohem, Speed 784.
with the Schism of the Hussites, Ibid. After this, though the Bishops ceased
to be Papists; for they preached against the Popes Supremacy, to please the
King, yet they ceased not to oppugn the Gospel, causing Tindals translation to
be burnt, yet they agreed to the suppressing of Monasteries, leaving their
revenewes to the King, to make way for the six bloody Articles, which
proceedings with all cruelty of inquisition are set down Holinsh. page 946.
till they were repealed the second of Edward the sixth, Hol. 992.
stopping in the mean while the cause of reformation well begun by the Lord
Cromwell. And this mischief was wrought by Steven Gardener, Speed 792.
Bishop of Winchester. The six Articles are set down in Speed, Speed.
page 792. Statut. Hen. 8. Anno. 35. cap 5.


The Archbishop of Saint Andrews, his hindering of Englands and Scotlands
Union, for fear of reformation, Speed 794. Edward 6.


As for the days of King Edward the sixth, we cannot but acknowledge to the
glory of the rich mercy of God, that there was a great reformation of
Religion made even to admiration. And yet notwithstanding we do much dislike
the humor of those, that cry up those days as a complete pattern of
reformation, and that endeavor to reduce our Religion to the first times of
King Edward, which we conceive were comparatively very imperfect, there being
four impediments which did much hinder that blessed work.

Henry the eighths time, by the Priests of Lincoln and Yorkshire, for that
reformation which Cromwell had made. The other two in King Edwards days. One
in Cornwall, the other in Yorkshire.

Speed page 837.

Martin Bucer write to King Edward in his book de Regno Christi. Lib. 2. cap.
1. and say, your Majesty does see, that this restoring again the Kingdom of
Christ, which we require, yea, which the salvation of us all requires, may in
no wise be expected to come from the Bishops, seeing there be so few among
them which do understand the power and proper Offices of this Kingdom; and
very many of them by all means (which possibly they can and dare) either
oppose themselves against it, or defer and hinder it.

The deficiencie of zeal and courage even in those Bishops Ridley against
Hooper, for the ceremonies. And the importunate suit of Cranmer and Ridley for
tolleration of the Mass for the Kings sister, which was rejected by the Kings,
not only reasons, but tears; whereby the young King showed more zeal then his
best Bishops. 839.

The inhumane butcheries, blood-sheddings, and cruelties of Gardener, Bonner,
and the rest of the Bishops in Queen Mary's days, are so fresh in every man's
memory, as that we conceive it a thing altogether unnecessary to make mention
of them. Only we fear least the guilt of the blood then shed, should yet
remain to be required at the hands of this Nation, because it has not
publicly endeavored to appease the wrath of God by a general and solemn
humiliation for it.

What the practices of the Prelates have been ever since, from the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth to this present day, would fill a volume (like Ezekiels roll)
with lamentation, mourning, and woe to record. For it has been their great
design to hinder all further reformation; to bring in doctrines of Popery,
Arminianisme, and Libertinisme, to maintain, propagate and much increase the
burden of humane ceremonies: to keep out, and beat down the Preaching of the
Word, to silence the faithful Preachers of it, to oppose and persecute the
most zealous professors, and to turn all Religion into a pompous outside.
And to tread down the power of godliness. Insomuch as it is come to an
ordinary Proverb, that when any thing is spoiled we use to say, The Bishops
foot has been in it. And in all this (and much more which might be said)
fulfilling Bishop Bonners Prophecy, who when he saw that in King Edwards
reformation, there was a reservation of ceremonies and Hierarchy, is credibly
reported to have used these words; Since they have begun to taste of our Broth,
it will not be long ere they will eat of our Beef.

FINIS.

