Coll. HENRY MARTEN's Familiar LETTERS. TO HIS LADY OF DELIGHT.

ALSO Her kind Returns.

WITH His Rival R. Pettingalls Heroical EPISTLES.

Published by Edm: Gayton, according to the Original Papers under their own
hands: With an Answer to that Letter, entitled, A Copy of H. Marten's Letter
in justification of the Murder of the late King Charles.

OXFORD, Printed for RICHARD DAVIS, 1663.

TO THE Delicate and male-contented Lady, MARY WARD, alias MARTEN.
Madam,
THese following Letters, by their indorsements and subscriptions, being yours,
to none more properl^ ought they to be dedicated, then your own self, to whom
the originals were first sent. Sparrows are for Lesbia, and these Epistles,
most of them salacious, ought to flutter to the breasts of such a Lady, who
knew how to chirp to the Bird, or Martin that presented them. In what condition
you were, when these were surpised, I am not willing to relate, only I shall
tell you of a Verse which your Dearest may translate: Currendum est pede nudo
Ne nummi pereant, aut pyga, aut denique fama,
Deprendi miserum est Fabio vel judice vin^am.
Really, Madam, had you bin a wife, these Familiarities might very well become
you, but being ( quod dicere nolo) it does too much show, that lawful beds are
not so highly courted as these: the use whereof will cost a grand Repentance.
The Colonel can tell how expensive that sport has been; who from an estate of
3 or 4000 l. per ann. is brought to Twelve-pennie exigencies. I do abhor to
upbraid, or insult upon unfortunate misery; I would you were as tender of your
selves, as I shall be; and I could wish that you would send these Letters which
I send to you, to your two best Beloveds, Dick and Hall, with a Palinodia, or
Recantation, and say, Mary is not Mary now, but shall stand upon a Ward, or
Guard, which you will, of future Chastity. Which is the humble request of

Madam, Votre tres humble Serviture, De Speciosa Villa.

TO THE Ingenious and enamored Colonel, Colonel HENRY MARTEN.
SIR,
THese Letters of Yours to Yours, had not seen the world, if you your self had
not given just occasion for the incivilitie. There was a time (I would it had
never been) when you voted and principally caused the Sacred Letters of your
Sovereign, and his Queen (the Cabinet as it was styled) to be made public.
There was a time (would it had never bin) when at Longworth you tore in pieces,
with your own hands, the Kings Commission of Array. Pretty devices these
(Colonel;) but now you see the times of retaliation are come: I am very glad
they are come, that such rebellious and inhumane persons may be in their kind
requited. I know your genius of old, being of long acquaintance, ever since you
lived in Aldersgate Street, under the tuition of the then called Blew-nos'd
Romanist your Father, who was the best Civilian in our Horizon, and a
Sin-swinger, as they ^ermed him: yet you, Colonel, were not under his verge,
though you then deserved his censure as much as you do now: How could it be
otherwise expected, but that that vast estate (for he had but 40 l. per ann. of
his own) should be expended, dissipated (as Mr. Noy said in another case) in
such cases as you found out. This last, I could have wished Casus omissus, but
you thought otherwise, and returned the streams to the Sea, that is, your ebb
of expenses reflux'd to the Sins and Venerie from whence their Flood was. Pious
use's money was spent in impious, and the Commutation fee spent upon Community.
Let these Letters stand a charge for ever against you, higher then that for
your life, and testify what a Reformer you and your fellow-Governours of this
Nation were like to be; who, if they were all so well decyphered, I believe we
should find them as true as your self to the Smock, or your Page Dick,
Pettingall. Blessed Reformers! Noll and Hall, or Hall and Noll, Ingeniosi
nequam, Madam Lambert, and Mary Ward, and Old Nick take you, if you were not Ad
perdendam Rempublicam and Regem maxim idonei.

Well Sir, you are now in the Tower, keep there, and if you can recant, repent;
and now your nose is out of date, die however like a Roman. Forsake Mall and
Presb. and all the Witchcrafts of your life, and from a Martin-mar-King, and
mar-Prelate, turn a true S. Martin, that is, a Convert: which is the wish,

Sir, Of Yours, De Speciosa Villa,

To the high Inamoretto of the Lady MARY MARTEN.
Sicelides Musae Paulo majora Canamus.
THe Pen of a Balzaac, or a Cleaveland, will be scarce lofty enough to write of
thee, Dick Pettingall, who from a Page art exalted to be Secretary and Courtly
servant to thy own Mistress: Thou did do her more then eye-service, Dick,
where ere she pi^kt thee up. 'Twas to be feared the many How-doe-you's and
Good-morrows sent by thy love-smitten Master, would instruct thee sometime or
other to speak a word for thy self. To hold the door deserves now and then
admittance into the Conclave: what hinders, but that a pimp (in defectu) may be
a Coadju^or? Like Master like man, is a very good Proverb, and Moll is as good
in the dark as my Lady, and Dick as Hall. With what a battery of language do
thou storm that Castle, which surrendered at a parley of Harry Martens: Thy
great Guns played night and day, before the sweet Rendition. Cursed theif! what
Qualmes she put thee in, before thou had made use of Astolphos story, thy
self, poor Lad, were Orlando Furioso! but at last, what can hold out for ever?
Casta est quam nemo rogavit.
Importunity is as prevalent as Gold; but Dick, learn these verses against the
courting of your next Lady (if Madam Mary may not be totally yours now.)
Pulveris aurati pluvia sit sparsa papyris,
Rescribet Danae solicitata veni.
Sprinkle your amorous lines with golden dust,
And courted Danae says, my Dick, we must.
What store of this golden powder has been strewed upon her let the lost
Manours of that exhausted Colonel speak, whose Father did disinherit him in
leaving him so vast a Fortune, as the Poet sings, Exhaeredavit te Philomuse
Pater.
The Estate that is left an unthrist Son,
Is but a disinherison.
For there are more calamities to an estate, then there are storms and
tempests, as you may read in Plautus, where a Glycerium, a Philocomasium, a
girl in English are found Calamitas bonorum Hamaxagogae, for as Gerones, one
girl, Dick, is Waggoner, and Teams to draw a grand fortune into a small
center; such as Dick at present I leave thee in, till thy soul awake, and thou
see the danger of the pit thou have so long laid wallow in. Accept of this good
counsel, which is bestowed gratis, from

Sir, Yours, De Speciosa Villa.

Coll: Henry Martins FAMILIAR EPISTLES To his Lady of Pleasure; also his
Politic and Oeconomical Letters, etc.
LETTER I. A Gopy of H. Martins Letter in justification of the Murder of the
Late King CHARLES.
Sir
MY person being hitherto by Gods providence preserved from our old enraged and
new empowred enemies, yet knowing that Divine Vengeance is not so to be
escaped, if guilt lies in my bosom, I thought, that of that leisure I now
have, I might well employ some time in arraigning my self at the bar of my own
conscience, and find, if I could, how I came to deserve (from men I mean) the
rigours I undergo in the loss of that reputation and estate I left behind me,
bendes the manifest inconveniences and difficulties I carry with me for the
ietching out a pursued life in a strange land.

Upon serious consultation (it seems to me) the Royal party could contrive no
one sacrifice so proper to appease the ghost of their often foiled cause, both
in point of revenge and interest, as the persons who had the boldness to make
an example of their Ringleader.

The report of the crimes charged upon me overtakes me wheresoever I go, though
the reporters know not how nearly some of their auditors are concerned therein,
and it runs to this effect* extended or extenuated according to the several
affections of the relater.

1. That I with diverse others about 11 or 12 years past, did sit in judgment
upon the late King, and signed a Warrant for his Execution, accordingly he was
put to death, and I thereby became guilty of Treason and Murder.

2. That I with some others did fly for the same.

Thereupon calling a Court at home, and to the best of my understanding having
acted Pyramus and Thisbe, the Lion and the Moonshine (with less partiality
perhaps one way, then would have appeared the other in the Votes on your side
the water) I stood clearly acquitted upon the whole matter, yet could I not
satisfy my self with keeping this Verdict in my pocket, which (for ought I
knew) might be serviceable for my Country, if by your means, and according to
your discretion communicated; for though I doubt not but my fellow
Commissioners now in question with you, upon that account are as well read as
my self in the same truths I shall declare, yet considering they are to fence
for their lives with Masters in the Art, and their Masters too, it will
probably behoove them neither to confess, nor to exasperate.

1. My self far enough from both those cares, am content to acknowledge the
bare matter of fact, that is, I did with others, about such a time sit in
judgment upon such a person, and signed a Warrant for his execution, whereupon
I believe he was after executed.

2. Could I have foreseen how dearly public freedom must be bought, and how
hardly it can be kept, I would have used only my passive valor against all
the late Kings oppressions, rather then voted, as I did, any War at all, though
a defensive one: for you must understand that this act, whether its name be
Treason and Murder, or Reason and Justice, its Parent was a Civil War.

3. Had I suspected that the Axe which took off the late Kings head, should
have been made a stirrup for our first false General, I should sooner have
consented to my own death then his.

4. I am satisfied in my conscience that the said King thought in his
conscience he died unjustly; wherein (if it were not presumption too high for
me) I should blame the Parliament for having always forborne to declare unto
him his subjection to the Law, nay for having upon the matter so behaved
themselves toward him, as might encourage him to think himself unaccountable
to man for whatsoever he should do.

5. I believe it was irregularly done of the Parliament, both in the Earl of
Straffords case and in this, to order the trial of any particular person,
their proper business having been anciently Legis lature and aeris dature: at
that time the whole Parliaments work, and the Supreme Magistrates was devolved
into one house. Whereunto nevertheless no juridicative power ought to belong,
though there be here and there presidents of it in former times.

6. My opinion is, that the way of trial by Commissioners without a Jury was
yet more irregular, for he ought not to have been put into a worse condition
then the meanest Englishman, who may ^laime to be tried in a known Judicatory
before swo^n Judges, and by a Jury of twelve men, all agreeing* if it be for
his life, by two Inquests upon o^th one after another. Although in this case it
could not have ^ome to the petty Jury, because the King refused to plead.

In all this I take no Murder to my self, no^ Treason, as being sure I had no
murtherous nor treasonable intent about me in ^h^t I did.

Murder it is either so by st^ture, when I kill a man suddenly, without being
provoked by him I shall be supposed to bear malice in my heart toward mankind
in general: when I kill a m^n, though in an accidental fray, if with such a
kind of weapon as be^rayes a bloody mind: when I kill a legal Offi^er in the
execution of his office: when I kill him whom I intend but to wound or m^ime,
or when I kill one thinking to h^ve killed or hurt another; in like manner
advising, assisting, abetting and concealing murder, is the crime advised,
assisted, abetted, or concealed.

Murder at the Common Law I commit, when I kill or cause to be killed o^ hurt,
so as he die thereof within a year, any m^n, woman, or child, upon malice
prepensed, which I shall be understood to bear him, though I had no former
grudge to his person, if by hi^ death I projected any advantage to my self, or
to any other who employed me therein, or with whom I combined; therefore I
cannot apprehend how my case should f^ll into any one of these qualifications;
and yet I confess, did I appear to have killed a man, or caused to be killed,
and could say no mo^e in my own justification then the negatives of what I h^ve
now enumerated, it would hardly serve my turn; my plea therefore is, That I
judged the late King. Although Martins name be not to the Letter; yet he owned
it to a Member of the House of Commons to be of his own enditing and writing*
who being asked by the said Member to whom he did intend to have sent it, he
made this answer, that he intended it for the Press, as a Letter from himself
to a friend, believing that it might incline (at least) some of the people
(naming the Jury) that were to pass upon the lives of his fellows, to a
moderation toward them.


LETTER II. My last and only Love, though I were sure to live an hundred years
longer, and thou not half so many hours.
AS for news, it cannot be worth the gaping after (any more then the weather)
the worst will come soon enough; the best is like to be welcome whenever it
comes. I confess what I hear is not very good, but (just like weather again) it
may rain two or three days in a week, and that in summer, and it may hold up
a fortnight together, and that in the midst of winter. The Skill is, not in
being weather-wise, but weather-proof. In one thing, the storms I mean, are
contrary to those the clouds ^our upon us: for in that case it is best to keep
all our clothes about us, and houses over our heads; in my case, to throw off
all we can, and snugg like a ^naile within our own selves, that is, our minds,
which no body but we can touch. I could s^uff my whole sheet of paper with this
discourse, but that I have a bigger providing for thee. Besides, I hope to talk
it out with thee very shortly: and but for the we^ther, in earnest, I believe
my keeper would have fetched thee to me by this time. My Dear, it is indeed a
very great blessing that you have all your healths, as I have mine, I thank
God. Methinks, when I have that, and meet an enemy (of what kind soever) I am
able to keep him at swords point; when I want that, he is got within me, and it
requires a huge strength of heart to keep one's ground, when both sides are set
upon at once: I like the goo^ use thou make of your being little better then
prisoners; sure thou art a piece of a Philosopher. That lord should not deceive
me quite, yet no fastening upon any thing that may miscarry. Loder was
yesterday with me, and instead of satisfying what I pressed him to, told me,
that until he saw the end of the next Term he knew not w^ether he should be
undone or no by meddling with my estate; they bear him down at Court that all is
juggling betwixt him and me: and lest they should take the advantage of the
weekly allowance I receive from his Cousin Stanton, I must receive it
henceforth from my Sister Edmonds, to whom he will pay it. Do not let this
trouble my sweet Soul neither, for thou and I have leaned upon many a broken
reed ere now, and afterward sighted upon a founder staff. Hitherto was written
yesterday: This morning my son is gotten in to me, and I will press hard for
thee by hook or by crook: yet this news I must tell thee that he brought me
from my brother Stonhouse, that (contrary to what I had heard) nothing at all
has been done in the house against us since one single motion on monday was
sevennight, seconded by no body. Betty is not come yet, though provided for. I
thank thee for my Ale, it was very good. All happiness to my sweet soul this
fine day, and ever and ever.

Thine for such a time. H. M.

LETTER 3.
My Dearest,
THough I have nothing to enclose in my paper, but the same heart which was
thine before, yet I must be writing, because thou will have it so; and besides,
if ever thou had need of a man's heart, it is now. Dick was here to day I
thank him, but did not tell me the worst. I will try all the ways I can above
ground to help thee, if an officer come that thou think is one indeed, thou
must give him thy right name; thou may ^ell him thy other too, and bid him
set down both, for thou art known and called by both. The poor wench that
carries this I believe loves thee, which makes me almost troubled that I have
not a penny to give her. Monday is near, till then, and afterward, and for
ever, God keep thee, and my soul,

Thy H. Martin.

LETTER 4.
My sweet soul,
WHether I have any thing to send thee or no, I must be scribbling to thee.
perhaps I am as well pleased in the doing of it, as thou in the receiving.
First, I give thee an account of my self, and as to that I am very well (I
thank God) though my Doctor (whose name would foul this paper too) has been
with me (off and on) ever since midnight. Next, I am to have an account how my
Dear does, and my brats, though I can scarce believe a word thou say, when
thou tellest me they are all well; therefore the bearers eyes are sure to be
examined at ^his return. Lastly, it is not much amiss to let thee see, for thy
comfort, that one who has never a penny in his purse may be able to send his
Love something that may be reasonable good, and get a porter to carry it. The
roots come from Colchester, and the water with a little sugar tastes not ill
(methinks) God be with my poor heart, and all the little pieces thereof.

Thine everlastingly. Henry Martin.
Country Robin went away yesterday as ^ise as he came, but I wrote by him my
service to our Friend.



LETTER 5.
My poor sweet dear heart and soul,
HOw do thou do? I would have seen thee whipped before I had told thee the
other days news, if it had not been to prevent a worse inconvenience: neither
can I yet come to the speech of the Gentleman Porter, whereby I might
understand the bottom of that business. Well, in spite of 'um all, thou and I
will see one another if we can, and (if we cannot) love one another better then
any of them is able to love himself. I have set another friend of mine to work
about lodgings for thee, and I have provided this for Mr. Pettingale to lose
his labor with, if thou and he think sit, and have wherewithal. Here are a
few pennies and a bottle of good Claret I believe. Blessing upon all my pretty
brats, and upon their no^n mother, and see if it can miss her,

H. Marten.

LETTER 6.
My poor sweet Dear,
WOuld I could do thee half so much good as thou do me in letting me know
how thou do, though it be far otherwise then I would have thee. Tom Pe^ton
told me indeed that thou took'st a vomit last Sunday, but were pretty well upon
it. I am afraid I can guess too right at the greatest part of thy disease, or
at least, the ground of it, which is melancholy and thoughtfulness for things,
which I can apply no remedy to, so much as by discourse, otherwise then this
way, and that thou shall not fail of, so long as I can reach pen, and ink, and
paper. I confess I am glad when thou do furnish me with messengers, partly
to save the charge of a porter, and chiefly to understand how it is with thee
and my children. Last week I wrote a letter into Berkshire to a friend (as I
thought) for some matters, but got not so much as an answer again. I did the
same week set another instrument on work, but have yet no account of it. Major
Wildmans imprisonment was unlucky to me, and Mr. Loders restraint and my
daughters some way or other though we shall be assisted, because I have been
on bare board a thousand times in my life, and yet still found a twig or
something to hold me up. But I am resolved that the next 30. l. which comes
shall be the Lievten^nts; lesser sums may do the rest of thy body service;
But that must cure thy heart, which dwells here with

My Soul, thy true H. Marten.

LETTER 7.
My dear Love,
NOt so much to send thee thy Oranges and thy Pears that thou left'st behind
thee; nor any thing else to keep them company, nor to give thee an account how
pitifully Sarah cries now she is with her father, nor to know from thee how
thou did speed at Mr. Stantons with my note; do I dispatch this bearer to
thee, as to learn how my two brats do, that are now in thy arms, especially
the little one, who wants the others heart, and yet had as good a one of her
own, that thou gave her twice already: if she mend, I need not wish thee joy,
but in case she do not, I must put thee in mind, that every thing thou have,
except thy mind (that is thy self) is loose about thee, as well thy Smock, and
whatsoever is nearest thee, as thy uppermost Garments, and those that thou were
plundered off above seven years ago. I do not forget thy Cordial, as soon as I
have any opportunity of sending to the place. For this time I bid thee good
morrow with all my heart, that is, with all thy self, and rest (though but
outwardly, till I hear from thee.)

My Souls own, H. Marten.
Saturday, betwixt 8. or 9. of the forenoon.
LETTER 8.
My own Heart,
I Know not what have this Letter will make to thee: but I thought to have sent
up little Ierrie, whom riding has made so sore, that I cannot find in my heart
to make trot till tomorrow; then he must and will be with thee, I hope, by
Wednesday night. I was fain to lie at Abington Saturday nigh^; yet I s^ick to
^he note thou have by thee of going (...) tomorro^. The worst is I can send
thee no money, in regard Major Wildman is gone again into Sussex. Lemster I
presume will do it, if thou can make any shift in the mean time. I hope thou
have gotten little Peggies things from Brainford, though I was glad to write a
ticker to Mrs. Parish for the loan of 40 s. to fetch them off. M. Ingram has
given me very good satisfaction concerning his wives words, which I would
relate to thee at large, but that I believe thou know all already by a
Letter he sent me up on Thursday. Nan Stone, contrary to my expectation, did
come down with the Carrier appointed. Our Girls (especially Iinnie) are but
coursely used by their mother; yet being only words, they must endure it for
ought I know; the rather for that (if they list) they may neglect and despise
her as much as their Sister Nan does. Remember me to all my friends according
to their several capacities: but be very careful, my Dear, of her lame
brother, of my couple of biddies, and of my study-doore key. I am, and so am
like to be a great while,

My sweet Soul, Thy own, H. Martin.

LETTER 9.
My Dear soul,
IS it not long enough in all conscience since thou and I saw one another?
methinks it is a pretty while since thou had a letter from me. But Tom
Peyton's coming one day, and Job Wards the next, made a reasonable shift to
stay my stomach. The latter of 'um ( I thank him) drunk thee up a bottle of
good Sack; there is never a drop left neither. But thou do not grudge it him
at parting; and I hope now he is off hand. Prithee charge Tillie to tell me
truly how my poor brat do^s. Thou must send me to morrow thy 40 s. Ambassador
to be employed in another money business, perhaps he has a luckier hand then
Dick; and in the mean time one of them should go to the inner Temple
Cloister,, about the middle whereof is a door into a little Court, and also by
the door a Stationers shop; where I would have it enquired, how a body may
find Mr. Chute, a young Gentleman, whose father was a good Lawyer, and had
chambers in that Court: if they are not able to inform, it is likely one may
learn at my L. P-'s lodgings. The enclosed I send thee (not for thy opinion in
the answering, for I have answered it already, and told him I knew thy mind as
well as if I were in thy belly, but) to show thee that the honest fellow will
not forget us quite. The truth is, the weather and ways too are very tolerab^e
yet, and it is a huge while to maintain a family in Hockney lodgings till the
Spring. I have not sent Sir John any message yet by the Gentleman Potter
concerning thy quartering with me (as I intended) because his only child is
now sick again, and has been almost a week, so as, till that be over (as they
say he is upon recovery) there is no coming near him for any favor. Let me
know all thy mind by Tom, either in writing or word of mouth, (for sure writing
is too much toil for thee in this case) and thou shall hear again from

My sweet Love, Thy own, H.M.

LETTER 10.
My Dear,
FOr all I sent thee a double Letter yesterday by Job, and got never a one from
thee to day by thy man, yet thou shall have another now; together with a leg of
mutton, two loaves, a peck of flower (though not of 18 d. the bushel) and four
bottles of Will. Parkers Lemon Ale. He brought me a fine Nosegay, and
Strowings, and some Lettice that he was fain to borrow, and scarce worth taking
up; however I like his coming, to save the charges of a Porter, which I find
considerable, though he be a very honest fellow. Therefore let Stephen come
again on Thursday morning, and no farther then the Butchers, who can better
come to me then he. Buss Baconhog for me, the rest I must buss my self, when I
can catch them. My service to our true friend, and good morrow,

My sweet Soul, Thy own H. Marten.

LETTER 11.
My Heart,
IT was late this morning ere I received thy yesterdayes basket (and Letter,
the sweetest flower in the parcel) so as I should not have sent thee an answer
till to morrow in the company of some vitch, but that I longed to vent a little
of my news. I have gotten, not Dick Peter's himself, but a man of his, with
instructions to stay here so long as I will have him, and wait upon whom I bid
him. Dick does reserve that farm for thee, and would have come up, but that in
order to his journey he hastened his wife out of Derbishire, while she was too
green, into that place, where she has taken cold enough to make a new lying in
of it, that he knows not whether she will live or die. Therefore, though I
wish our true friend well again, for his own sake chiefly, yet I confess I
wished very much for thine. I believe the other matter is very near ripe too, I
mean, half of it, so far as I could drive it. More of that on Monday. At last
Mr Loder is come to town, and I think will let me see him to morrow. My Keeper
and I are contriving how I may see somebodie else; but I will not tell thee who
that is, because thou have a shrewd guess of thy own. I have sent thee two
Tower loaves of two sorts, and every penny of money I have. 'Twil mend, and so
will

Thy own Henry Marten.

LETTER 12.
My own Heart,
I Have spoken, and am fairly promised a Regiment, but of Foot. M -- will not
be in town till to morrow seven-night, or tuesday next at soonest. My Lady L --
made very much of me, and asked kindly for thee: she goes not away till the
next week toward the end of it. I told her when thou art to be Churched, and
that thou would visit her so soon as ever thou come abroad. But she means
to prevent thee; so as I must send thee some goodness to morrow for her. This
roguy money does not come according to promise; it will sure. In the mean while
I am though

Thy poor, thy true, H. Marten.

LETTER 13.
Sirrah,
It Is no wonder if I love thee dearly now, for I hear say thou gottest money
the other day. This day little Bacon-hog is one week elder then she was; and to
morrow night I intend to visit Moppet. Mean while (Hussie) do you make much of
my Peggy. For I hope by to morrow seven-night to fetch them up mother and all:
and then I warrant thee if I busse pretty Lucie Parker, thou will be yellow of

My Heart, Thy own, H. Marten.

LETTER 14.
My sweet soul,
BEsides seeing thee (which is good at any time) and being kept touch withal
according to promise (which honest people love dearly) I have a bushel of talk
for thee to entertain thee with, so as I doubt thou will not have time to eat a
bit with me, yet I shall look for thee about dinner time, and get some fish for
my self and those that come with thee. And me thinks it should be a fine day to
bring me as many of my Brats as are in a condition for health, and hang clothes.

Here is a note enclosed which will help thee to some money for the purpose we
designed it, from which I would not have thee divert it by any means, Good
morrow to my Heart till anon.

Thy H. M. now and anon too.
Prithee go over to 'um (at least) to let me know how they do, and leave this
little token for 'um.



LETTER 15.
My poor Dove,
THough I starved thee yesterday with cold, by forgetting to send thee wood, I
will make thee amends to day in telling thee I shall not run away from thee.
Scot and Robinson are gone on that errand. I am to meet with Greg anon. What
we shall do I know not; but I will make a holt or shaft of it now, and not
abate him a farthing of that I resolved, either in money or in time, like

My own heart, Thy H.M.

LETTER 16.
My Soul,
WHen shall I see thee? when shall I have thee within some compass of being
able to send to thee, or hear from thee once every day? The ugly Carriers
Porters wife cheated me, when she told me she would come again, and perhaps
cheated thee of thy shoulder of mutton. I have now sent thee a little of my
Longworth commodity, and a scrapp of the business, viz. 4 s. Buss my little
brats for,

My Heart, Their Daddy, H.M.

LETTER 17.
Good morrow Vallentine
FOr thou art first in my eye, or in my heart; but thou art not like to be
mocked first, no more then poor Baconhog is with her little toosses: thou
shall have cloth for all four bums so soon as ever I can spin: I have some hemp
upon the wheel. Mean while here is a dozen of eggs for thee, and a pound of
butter, just now bought of a country Hegler. According to our bargain I am to
have some grass from thee: let it not be much. B'w'y sweet Soul.

Thy own, Henry Marten.
The Captain has sent me one of his country Wastcoats, which I have upon my
back; by the same then thy maid may be glad she has not the washing of the old
one: for I believe it would take up more soap then I sent the other day.



LETTER 18.
My dearest Dear,
THou have I hope by this time digested one shrewd brunt, ^and art the better
prepared for another. To morrow morning we are all to appear at the House of
Commons, to show cause why the sentence given against us should not be
executed. I think we can show a very good one, whe^ein the Kings honor and the
Paliaments is concerned: if they think otherwise, who can help it? That can

My sweet Love, Thy own for ever and ever, H. Marten.

LETTER 19.
My sweet dear Love and Soul,
LEt me kno^ how thou do I, either by Letter of any body's writing, or by any
messenger. As for matters, I have now set ^o many wheels a going, that some
will fadge sure; I mean considerable, for I am pretty certain of being able to
send thee a scrap before monday night. Keep up thy poor heart, sweet Soul, a
little while, though thou have no reason for it, but for that I am ever and ever

Thy o^n, and no bodies else, nor any thing else, H. M.

LETTER 20.
My Heart,
THis Letter is not to thee, it is to honest * Dick, that will entitle me to
the doing him any good; for though I was very well before, yet methinks that
conceit makes me a great deal better.

I will not write to thy man, but I will go very near to do for him as thou
bidst me, shortly too: and I will promise me to forbear what thou forbiddest
me, that is, giving him money; it is not so flush; neither did I ever except
one six pence. Commend me to poor little Betty. Thou do according to my own
heart, and God will bless thee and thy little Bettyes, and

Thy old Dear, H.M.

LETTER 21.
My heart,
THou must not be a naughty Dear, because I look like one in not coming, nor
writing to thee since monday morning, and keeping Moppet from thee too. But the
* House and the Council do make such a Rogue of me, that I have much ado to
say my prayers; and yet I must pray all this day in the House; soon I hope to
be with thee, and mean while thou must accept this pretty token of my love, from

Sweet Soul Thy own, H.M*

LETTER 22.
My poorest sweetest dearest heart and soul,
BEar up a little longer, and arm thy self for the worst. If God will not let
thee keep all 3 thank him for two: if thou can not have a sight of thy own,
make much of a piece of paper from him; and if that get nothing in it, put the
top and the bottom together, and there is a little Cordial. There is some luck
too that this bearer can come at me: let us make the best use of what we have,
and let me know by the next whether you and Dick do approve of the other Essex
job. I cannot abide to keep any of thy few friends (especially all of them) so
long from thee: and therefore God be with thee, and with

Thy ever and ever, and ever, H. Marten.

LETTER 23.
My Dearest,
I Sent thee a barrel of Oysters yesterday, which I hope the brats have not
guttled away; for my meaning was they should be saved till thy Churching, and
then thou might eat some thy self. My Hartington chapman hangs an arse still,
but the Lemster man is come to town, and so is Loder. The deuce is in it if
some money does not come from some place. Mean while it is pretty good luck
that I can get credit for thy victuals and the families, and dine my self every
day almost upon free-cost. Poor Hall is feign to quarter with his Aunt, who is
now rid (as they tell me) of her she guest, and of her sickness, only lame
still, and keeps her bed. Good morrow to my sweet Love, says

Thy own, H. Marten.

LETTER 24.
My dear,
IF any butter would stick upon my bread, I should by this time have had
wherewith to warm thy fingers ends; but my poor soul must put on a bushel of
patience: For though it be but Wednesday morning, I am at the bottom of my
tubb, having given the bearer money to buy thee nine pound of soap, two pound
of candles, one of rush, the other of cotton of eights, and a sixpenny loaf. I
am glad to hear thou and my brats are well. So soon as any good news comes,
thou shall be sure to hear of it, and feel it. So good morrow to my sweet Love.

Thy own, H. Marten.

LETTER 25.
My sweet soul,
I Do confess it is hard to make bread without corn, though the baker be
never so good: therefore (and indeed for reasons enough besides) I do all I can
about the crop: as it comes in thou shall have notice; and however, that we may
think what is to be done next. I cannot send thee any thing now, because of
Iinnies being here; but if thou can send me some messenger to morrow morning,
I shall (...) for thee, and for my brats. I believe thy brother will be good
company for thee, I mean for thy security as long as thou hayest there: if thou
have reasons to the contrary, give me but a hint of it, and he shall be
persuaded to quarter elsewhere. My service to your honest Landlord. I rest, my
^eart,

Thy own H. Marten.

LETTER 26.
My sweet Love,
I Have spoken and prevailed with Mrs. Dawson, who desires Mr. Stephens would
come to her house any morning in St. Martins l^ne, just above the old Swan
stairs, and authorize her from my Lady P -- to deal for such commodities in
her Ladyships behalf, and keep them at her own home when she has bought them,
till my Lady has occasion to use them. 50 or 60 l. shall be ready: and I
believe, if need be, as much more, if the penniworths be answerable: and when
the goods be there, they are not at Bennets, nor any bodies that will put thee
to streights to redeem 'um, or make 'um eat out their heads. If thou can not
conveniently get Mr. Stephens to go so far, go thy self: She will be glad to
see thee; thou will find her a very good body, and discreet, and one that
loves him that thou do^t not hate. And if thou be^st yellow, what care I? My
service to that friend of thine, of whom I am not so yellow, is all the world
besides is, because I do know better then they, that I and no body else is,

My Dears own own H. Marten.

LETTER 27.
My sweet Love,
I Thank thee for thy two Tokens of yesterday, though thou did but send them
me, and had them safe home again I hope. I do partly expect thee here to day:
prithee come or send, if thou can, if for nothing else, that I may know how
thou do after thy Pills Ruff and thy poor belly. But I would fain have a
bushel of talk with thee too. Mean while I have sent thee by this bearer to be
laid out in Southwark market (since he did so well last time) 3 s. 6 d. for a
joint of meat at his discretion, 1 s. for a loaf of bread, and 2 s. for a quart
bottle of Canary, and 1 s. for himself. Morrow to my Heart, and I was going to
say I rest, but I believe I shall not, till thou be either seen or heard of
by, Soul,

Thy H. Marten.

LETTER 28.
My poor sweet soul,
THat I could send thee my two arms and hands at the ends of 'um enclosed in a
Letter: for indeed I begin now to be as much afraid of thee as of my little
baby, and of the two I know which would be most missed, to say nothing of the
simple thing called love. I may well call it simple, because it will not be gone,
if a body would never so fain; but (like a disease) the more pitiful the
party is wherein it lies, the stronger and lustier it grows. Prithee Dear,
think of some body to help thee in this luggage; if thou art not provided with
a fitter, I should commend the bearers big girl Sarah, for whom, though I
cannot say much in many other respects, yet I have observed her very good
natured toward an untowardly child as can be Bettie Co^ss, by the same, token
that the mother on it commonly will give her a penny a time to tend her for an
hour or two in her absence, then she is trusty and at hand to be sent of
errands, especially betwixt thee and me, and loose, and to be turned off again
at pleasure: let me know thy mind herein, but I shall not be right, till thou
get some body or other to take off part of thy drudgery.

Poppets Ague is turned into the sleeping disease I think, she will eat no
meat, nor pottage made of meat, nor egg, yet well enough, and merry with a few
humors, that I can make an ass of as I lift: she has not taken her powder,
but shall ere thou hear from us again.

Will. A -- was here yesterday, as you may perceive by the bottle, and the
Lorgworth Pigeons had a mind to take their leaves of her, before they flew
quite away.

This little token is for Peggie, who is to keep two of the sums for her
younger sisters, and make use of the third for her Fathers sake, who is,

My Loves Love, H.M.
If any little mad girl have lost a small parcel of golden earrings, I know a
cunning man will cast a figure for 'um, and use her reasonably.



LETTER 29.
HOw did my poor Dear sleep last night, after the alarm thy man gave thee from
hence? but thou have been used to such things. The worst was he had nothing to
carry thee from me except a couple of candles: but thou art used to that too. I
shall now give some comfort to thy little heart, having lately perused the
Kings Speech and the Chancelors, either I am very much mistaken in them, or
they signify no great danger to us, whose faults are almost as old as our
selves. Then I believe Mr. C -- will be with thee either to day or to morrow
morning with a small token of my love. But do thou wonder that I should know
thy mind as well as if I were in thy belly? why thou know mine, and if I
thought there were ever a corner in it dark toward thee, I would set it on a
light fire but thou should see it. Oh the pitiful butter that thy man bought
the other day! this I hope is better, but if it be not, I could not help it,
for it was past nine this morning ere my door was unlocked, and then the first
business was to borrow a little money of one of my fellow prisoners, so that
by that time I can send for any thing the best of the market is gone. Here is
somewhat else for thee too, as bread, and beer, and sparaguss, and 3 s. to buy
thee coals (for if your country be not hotter then this, you will hardly know
it to be midday by the weather) which is more by 2 s. 9 d. then I was worth
three hours ago. Because we will offend our Gentlemen no more then we needs
must, thou shall not send so much as Peggie or any body else to me, yet I will
make a shift either every day, or once in two days at least to conveigh a
piece of paper to thee; and I am not very angry with thee (what ever the matter
is) for thy scribbling so often to me. But hark you (houswife) I will not have
Dick thank you for nursing him up, but me for making you a nurse: For what a
simple one had thou been, if thou had not practiced two or three times upon

My Love, Thy own, H. Marten.

LETTER 30.
O my dear Love,
THe danger thou were in by thy coming to me, and the fright I was in by
telling me so: for the simple woman when she was denied coming into the Tower,
and delivered her basket and napkin at the gate, must needs tell them she had a
letter too for the Colonel: which, by good fortune, though the other broke it
open, no body read but the Gentleman Porter, and he told them there was nothing
in it, as indeed there was not, but about the little girl; yet that might have
bred trouble enough, as it was like to have been construed; and the Gentleman
Porter himself does not know how it may be taken if she should stay long; she is
shod but wants other things pitifully; as I can help her I will, and long, for
a thousand reasons, to see her backfile, I mean, to see her taken down with
thee into the Country. I did at a venture send for Dick by the last post, that
if he could possibly, he should come up himself, if not, send up the same man
with one or two horses and a pair of panniers. I may well call it an
adventure, considering how we are provided: But God may send somewhat in the
mean time, or if honest Dick be here in person, the labor will not be lost. It
is unlucky that your man is sick; but if the small Pox was to come, it could
not have lighted better amongst you. I am glad to hear that the little one will
save you fuel for dressing her meat, so she can have it raw: but I believe
that was only a fit of her teeth which made her glad of the cold she found in
the raw flesh. Since I wrote thus far, Master T -- advises me to rid away the
girl so soon as ever I can conveniently, for the strictness increases, though
no body knows any reason for it. I have sent thee such commodities as I have,
with order to buy some things by the way, and with a little token in the belly
of my letter. And so good morrow to my sweet Soul, and the Gentleman that is as
whole as a Fish, and to my least of brats, and to Clem, together with Betty's
commendations, that has been very earnest with me to send her a piece of
Lamprey: I am fain to tell her that Glem's Mistress must have the disposal of
all I send. Who am

Heart, Thy H. Marten.

LETTER 31.
Love and Dear,
I Do not thank thee for the hundred fine things thou sentst me last night by
the woman, nor care for any thing thou have done, or can do, but coming to
me; and that thou must do this day: it is already laid, thus; first thou art to
make a rogue of thy self, then to take what guard thou will to the waterside,
then a boat at what stairs thou will, that may bring thorow-bridge (the tide is
ordered for the nonce) to be at the by-ward about one of the clock, and then
come in with the crowd, but without thy brother or thy friend, or any body that
has been seen with thee: nobody will take notice of thee there, but one, that
stands there on purpose to bring thee off, if need be. In case thou have a
couple of Squires to conduct thee so far, thou may direct them to retire to
the Angel or the Rose, or some such good neighbouring-place, or perhaps to
Gardiners or mother Thorntons within the Tower, and yet keep distance enough
from thee; and we shall be able to send them their dinner in victuals, their
drink, thou know, is to be called for ^t their quarters, and that (being
moderate) will be cle^^ed too. Whether thou will take this opportunity of
bringing the poor girl along with thee, I leave to thy discretion. The care I
take is for my own poor girl, that I am sure needs not be disguised for me; it
is so long since I saw her, that I shall make her tell me some tokens before I
believe it is she, when I do see her. But why do I stand tittle tatling now,
when it is more then time my letter were gone? there will be Peggy, and there
will be Poppet, and there will be Bacon-hog to make Ladies of, and then their
maid to be made an ass of. Therefore (housewife) go about your business, and
let me hear no more on you till I see you. For how can thou tell or no
whether thou have got ever a

Heart and Dear of H. Marten.

LETTER 32.
My dear Love,
THough I might thank thee for my good cheer (which I am sure I should not have
had without thee) yet I will thank thee for nothing but my good company,
neither do reckon thy self all that, nor thy pair of po^pets: therefore prithee
do thou it for me to the fourth party.

The company I got in my Landladies chamber could not have been less welcome to
me at any other time, though they had brought fair water with them: but thou
and I must pick a quarrel from thence to meet so much the sooner again. I will
take upon me, without thy order, to keep alive that Staffordshire business,
because in this dogg-age a body must be content with a Cat that will but catch
a Mouse, though she run away from a Rat.

So soon as Loder has been with me, I will give thee an account how it is. Next
week I hope to tipple thy nose again in Rhenish; take the Sugar in the mean
time, for I dare not trust my self with it, neither can I send thee any thing
that I must go to fob for, but thy ordinary allowance of bread, and yet I don't
think but I am

My own Hearts Henry Marten.
Here Is Clems busk. Remember my bottles and lettice, but not much. Mr. T --
(when I can spare him) shall go into Holland to fetch thee some sweet
Strawberries.



LETTER 33.
My dear Heart,
I Thouhgt now within a day or 2 I should have obtained leave for thee to come
and see me; but it seems thou have a worse Keeper then I: which addition to thy
other troubles thou need not; neither would I put thee in mind of what is
heavy enough upon thee, if it were not to show thee that thou have a partner in
the weight, and therefore must reckon it lighter by one half then it is. This
may be good Philosophy, but real assistance I can give thee none. Be of good
cheer though (my Love) because things must be at the worst, before they will
mend. God send thee thy health again, and so soon as ever I know it, I will
make some shift or other that thou shall come to me.

Mean while, and ever, I am Sweet Soul, Thy true H. Marten.

LETTER 34.
My Heart,
ALl the comfort I have now for thee or my self, is, that to morrow is
Saturday. Mean while, and then too, and a pretty while after, that I am, and am
like to be,

My own Soul, Thy H. Marten.
Our Speaker takes Physic for ten days, and we have chosen Mr. S -- for
Speaker in his room during his absence.



LETTER 35.
My Heart,
I Care not a pudding where thou art, so thou be safe. Yesterday I heard
something true and something false concerning thy business from Stephen, and
wrote thee a Letter by him, which I know not when thou will have. I was glad
not only to see this bearer for his own sake and thine, but to see he could
pass the pikes without our friend T. -- I hope he may do so another time: and
if you were all scattered into forty families, my mind gives me, that I should
have a morsel for every one of you. If I could send thee above an Angel, I
would not at once, because I would make thee (as if I needed) send to me the
sooner again, as if I were, My sweet Love,

Thy own, H. M.

LETTER 36.
Soul,
I Thank thee for thy Christen token: if this be the worst, I never received
so much kindness from so ugly a disease, as to spare my own Dear quite and
clean, and to punish my bantlings so favorably. Because I do not love to see
thee, I must now put thee off two days longer, and that is till friday, I hope
for the better, in respect of thy strength too: in regard of the company I had
here to day it was good luck thou did not come. Mr. T -- and I have so
contrived it, that thou and I may then be the whole day together, and Rhenish
wine shall not be wanting to tipple thy nose in, nor a savoury bit for thy
chaps; and somewhat I shall have to send thee too on Thursday morning, and
something to say: therefore I will not spend all my talk in this piece of
paper, notwithstanding the convenience of your conveyance by such hands as
would prove, if there were no other evidence that my Dear is mine, and that I am

My Dears H. Marten.

LETTER 37.
My sweet soul,
YEa but I will see my own Dear to morrow, and all my little bantlings: for the
Gentleman Porter has picked out that time to grant me thy company when Sir I --
is sure to dine abroad, for he must not know it. I do not know whether
thoudarest venture thy baby upon the water or no; but the tide serves finely
betwixt 11 and 12. If thou come by Coach (which I think is the safest way)
thou must set out an hour sooner, or else I shall eat up all the vitch before
thou come; for all that, I would have thy hee-camerades try their fortunes
too. I will spend no more ink upon thee now, but bottle up all thy business for
thy ugly ears. Therefore good morrow Monkey-face.

Thy H. Marten.

LETTER 38.
My dearest Dear,
THou do not know how I have longed all night for this morning, that I might
send these to thee, inviting thee to dine with me to day; the way is made, and
the time to be about one of the clock, the manner as private as it was last
time, only the little brat were best to be left behind, unless thou dare
not trust it with its teeth out of thy company, then I hope it may do well
enough to bring her, so thou have some body to help thee carry her. I have here
sent thee just enough to pay thy waterman: whether thou will leave this girl
behind thee or no, I leave to thy self, but I should think it good. Here was
my Cousin J.Y -- yesterday most part of the day, with leave, and he believes
only banishment is intended at last: but thou and I will not talk of those
matters, nor think neither (Shall we Love? ah that thou could help it!) till
my Heart come to

Hers, H. Marten.

LETTER 39.
My own Heart,
TEll me how thou and thy luggage are like to fadge at thy new quarters. This
bearer has told me where it is, especially how my poor shin-and-bone brat does,
then what is done about thy goods, and withal in the suit against Bat, which
(as I remember) was to have been tried last Friday.

If our Dick be not gone with my Letter to T -- I think thou were best send Tom
to me, and I will send him with one: one baffle is enough for the other at one
place.

I long to have thee with me for good and all, and sometimes I fancy it not
altogether impossible. I am sure it goes a little against my stomach to dispose
of thee so far off at this time of the year: but if I must check that longing,
there is another that I will not check, but bring about by hook or crook, that
is, to have two or three hours talk with thee. My old friend W. is now come to
town, and his Lady (though not well) and the Gentleman in S. Martins lane gave
me a kind of a visit yesterday; but staid so little, as we could have no
discourse almost. My Lord L -- is not come up, nor Mr. L.

Here are a few pennies for thee: more will come one day. I find (besides the
dearness of these lodgings, in respect of the last, which I cannot find in my
heart to think much of) that winter is a more chargeable season then summer,
especially when two chimneys are to be warmed instead of one, and parlours call
for candles as well as chambers. Now I talk like a miserable cribbe, because I
would put thee in hopes that I may be a rich man yet before I die; and then I
warrant thou will love,

My Heart, Thy own, H. Marten,

LETTER 40.
Hussie,
THy last letter got two six pences in it, and so thou thought to find in
this too, did not? but thou art mump'd; for I am resolved I will not send
thee one farthing to day. Both my sisters brought their dinner with them, and
dined with me yesterday, and the elder of 'um this morning sent half a dozen
bottles of small beer, and some scraps of good cheer, whereof thou shall taste,
because it is in mammocks; so I gave the messenger just as much as I send thee.
But monday will come, you Chits-face you, therefore I will not be jeered for a
beggarly rogue, especially so long as I have leave to walk once a day into the
Gentleman Porters lodgings, and on the top of his leads. I am able to give thee
a bottle of rare Sack too, so thou can keep it cool, either in gravel, or in
water, with saltpeter in it; any other water will make it hotter; and to give
thee a piece of roasting Beef, and a shoulder of Mutton; Veale I would have
had, but the butcher dares not kill any for fear of the weather. If thou can
give the bearer 1 or 2 of thy butter-dishes, I will send thee some of that
commodity on Tuesday, though it be a very ticklish one. Commend my service to
him that is past the pox, and to him that is afraid of 'um: for other things I
am glad he has more hopes then fears, and so I am that thou art so quiet from
abroad; for I doubt not but thou have work enough at home; ever since thou
told'st me how well thou like my Strawberries, my chaps have watered for
more; but I will not tell thee what I meant to do with them, because I am none
of

Thy Dear not I nor H. Marten.

LETTER 41.
ANd thou shall have a Letter (my own sweet Love) though I robbed a Copy of
Verses of half a sheet to write it in: for my Nuncle, I thank him, has gutled
up all my brown paper and white too. The reason why I did not write the last
time I sent, was the have my messenger was in, being with me by stealth, viz.
the butchers man, for the honest porter is not suffered to come in: for truly I
do not grudge thee my pains half so much as I do thy own in scribbling, and yet
I cannot find in my heart to forbid thee, because I need not tell thee how
handsome a piece of paper looks that comes from a body's Dear. But now you talk
of handsomnesse, let Peggie have a care, for if she get any pits upon her lips,
I shall not endure to kiss her, unless her sister Sarah speak for her. I hope
my little brats mouth is well, I liked her eating raw meat better then that of
her mothers chewing hitherto: my Keepers mind holds for giving thee a visit to
morrow about one of the clock; but thou shall know the certainty in the
morning, and receive something to receive him withal: and when you be
together, I shall wish you both whipped if you do not contrive thy coming to me
the next day after to eat a little fish. On Monday last my Lord M. and my
daughter, and Jinny, brought 3 or 4 dishes of victuals and dined with me, but
he got away all my wine that I had provided for thee, because he liked it: I
know where that grew though, and in the mean time thou must be content with a
bottle of such which my cousin Ned C -- (who visited me the same day too)
brought me for a special drink. So for this time I bid thee good morrow, and
rest, my sweet Soul, thy own every day that goes over my head, every night too,
whether I talk to thee or no, whether I dream of thee or no.

H.M.

LETTER 42.
My sweet Love,
THough I burnt thy Letter so soon as I had read it, according to thy order by
the bearer, yet I have not forgotten the contents of it. Concerning the offer
thou have of a new Dear, there was a time I confess, when I was such a Hog, as
to think my throat cut by any body that would have a share in thee besides my
self: I am reformed, but not the ordinary way, by not caring who enjoyes that
which I have done taking pleasure in, but by binding up all my pleasure in
thine: and as it has been pretty common with me to think that good bit tasted
best which went into thy mouth; so still or more do I relish thy happiness
beyond my own; if it were not complementing, that is for fear of seeming to
complement, I would tell thee, that I would not live: I am sure I would not beg
to live, but because I find thou would have me live: therefore good Soul, if
ever thou have a design of satisfying me (which I believe thou art never
without) study how to satisfy thy own mind, and there lie I as quiet as a
Lamb. For all that, I cannot let thee go without an item. My poor Heart, take
heed of every body, especially of the fairest offers; thou have been bitten,
and bitten, and bitten by such as were no mere strangers to thee; by that time
thou art a little older thou will take every word thou hear for an errand
lie, the world is grown so false. What B -- says I have not leisure to tell
thee now. My brats will dine with me, and Harry C -- brings them. I would fain
have them near me, and thee too, if possible. I rest.

My Dearest Thy everlasting self, H. M.

LETTER 43.
My Life,
I Scorn to thank thee for thy good news, but I will give thee as good as thou
bring. I had last night at nine of the clock a friend with me, who came from
another friend with this message, or rather with this answer to a former. The
business you wot of should not stick for wan^ of money. Now get you gone and
be whipped a while, I know no body cares a pudding for you, nor for Job, nor for
Dick, nor for Brats, and yet these three old scraps are found this morning by a
Monkey-faces

Own, H. Marten.

LETTER 44.
My sweet Love,
MY little baby does not lie upon my lap, but she lies almost as heavy as if
she did, till I hear how she is. Keep up thy heart a little longer though, it
has a great many good days to see yet, the bad ones in reason being even all
out. For a beginning, Poppet thou know is quite well, and Peggy has but got
a disease to play withal, just like the weather, or the fortune of States and
Kingdoms, fair and foul by turns. For all this thou and I must see one
another; only let me know from thee, when thy nursery will give thee leave,
and I will procure it here above board, or by stealth. Do not trouble thy self
to write, this bearer will deliver all thy mind to me honestly and carefully.
And so good morrow to my dear Love,

Thy own, Henry Marten.
Thou may see (Heart) by my token that I have credit, though it be but
sucking credit.



LETTER 45.
Dear Heart,
I Sent thee the other day by Tom P -- a piece of cheese, with three Oranges,
and a couple of shillings; but I made more have in sending the messenger then I
understand he and his two Camerades made in going: yet if it did not vex thee
(who have no need of being vexed) I should find no fault; for I am persuaded
they would not have staid so long with any body else as they did with my
Keeper, and that upon my account, and to the end some of them at least might
have access to me from thee, and tell me still how thou do: for all that do
not believe I could stay now till some body comes: this bearer must bring me
word: withal he carries a few Grapes, such as our wilderness yields, and 3 or
4 bottles of my own Ale. Cheer up thy self, my Love, as if thou had received
a bushel of money from one that has not a peck in all the world, and yet for
thy sake thinks very well of living, because he is

His own Souls H. Marten.

LETTER 46.
MY Dearest, that is, not dearer then other Deares, (for so thou were forty
years ago) but dearer then thou were this morning, when I thought I could have
sent to thee, and found I could not, therefore thou art beholding to my Masters
for all that Dearness that thou might have spared. Let me know how thy best
friend does to day: don't think I put him above my self now, as some do that
know neither thee nor me. For I count not my self thy friend, no more then thou
art mine, yet I could never tell whether I were thou, or thou were I, one of
'um I am sure it is, if not both, so as I need not give thee an account why thou
had not what thou writt'st for on Saturday, nor persuade thee not to be
troubled at this new restraint. I have out lived a hundred of 'um already, and
am heart-whole still, if thou be well. This bearer will deliver thee two
two-penny loaves new, about half a pound of butter, two small bunches of
Sparraguss, and half a dozen round shillings of old Besses: if conveyance had
been free to day, I should have mended every letter, and done something toward
a better business; but it is pretty well that my Love has yet

Her own H. Marten.

LETTER 47.
Dear,
IF I could have gotten a messenger yesterday, I would not have slept twice
before I had known how my nursery does: if she go on in mending (as I hope) or
stand at a stay, prithee mind no worms nor any disease at all in her but
weakness, and therefore give her all that thou art able either to nourish or
to please her. Fain would I have her again, if it be possible, to dine with me,
and stay till Monday, thee and Peggy and all: betwixt one and two of the clock
cast to be at the Tower, and I will endeavor to get leave: and if I cannot
obtain it, I will send thee word time enough; not sending to thee again is a
sign thou may come. I send thee here enclosed a Letter I received yesterday,
from one who it seems has not received my last. Thy work I could not put out
till this morning, but am promised it shall be done by Tuesday: in case thou
can come to day, or so soon as to dine with me, let me know it, and withal
as much of all our other concerns as thou can put into paper.

Here is 20 s. for thy Coaches earnest, if that business takes, and 5 s. for
the Hack that brings thee hither to

My Soul, Thy Body, H. Marten.
Thou see I would not cousen thee of what is contained in the brown paper.



LETTER 48.
My sweet Love,
SInce God is contented to let thee keep thy poor brat a while longer, to raise
her some friends still upon my account or thy own, and to give thee some
success in thy business, thou may hope he has in store a little blessing for
thee more then could have been expected, after all the storms which thou and I
have seen and felt, and see and feel. This bearer promises me fair that I shall
have 8 of my bottles again; thereupon I will trust thee with one more; it is
but Maligo Sack, reasonable good though. I have sent Peg and Poppet some
sale-ware, yet f^r from bad, if I have any skill: if it be liked, the next
token shall be bigger. Thy own should have been less; but thou must even be
glad of pie-crust instead of bread: and if thou can pawn it for bread, J
would fain hope thou may one day redeem it. J did not borrow, but beg it; and
so J will again, and again, rather then my Heart shall fail of what may be done
by

Her H.M.
J have not told Tom what it is.



LETTER 49.
My sweet soul,
NOw I begin to like thy room better then thy company, because I grudge thee a
share in the weather we have got: yet I have my health still, and my old friend
that waits constantly at the backdoor. I wish thee such another now and then,
but too much of it would weaken thee. This night J hope to meet a letter of
thine at Lemster, sent down by last Saturdaies Post, and directed by F. H. if
thou did omit that time, mend it by the next, and make much of my Dear, or do
not pretend to

Thy H.M.

LETTER 50.
Mine own Heart,
I Hope thou be well (notwithstanding one roguerie still treading on the
heels of another) but thine own heart cannot be very well till he knows it;
though it be but by message, a letter were better, and coming (if possible, and
safe) best of all. But do not venture, before thou let me understand first
by the honest Doctor what condition thou art in, that J may advise thee
accordingly.

Good morrow sweet Soul, Thy H. Marten.

LETTER 51.
My poor sweet Dear,
IT was well done of thee to send this bearer to me, since T. P. could not get
in, and to bid her tell me that nothing troubles thee: and because thou would
have me believe it, J will: but prithee tell thy other self so sometimes, and
with often telling thou may perhaps believe it too. The Gent: Porter
continues very civil to me (as Clem can inform thee in one particular) and is
now Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir J R. being gone into the Country: therefore J
hope to get leave of him for thee and my brats to dine with me on Wednesday: if
it cannot be J will send thee word be^imes that morning. If thou hear
nothing to the contrary thou may venture to come.

Mrs. D -- was with me, and tells me that Mrs. W -- lies extreme weak still;
but her husband has a great deal of kindness for me. J am pretty apt to fancy
the same; but J was born to be killed by tediousness: yet if thou can^t keep
up thy hopes a little longer, J will see what is to be done by

My Souls own, H. Marten.

LETTER 52.
My Heart,
THis bearer must needs be welcome, for he saves me 18 d. in my purse that the
Porter would have had. My child's slow mending is better then if it should
gallop, that is, more likely to hold. The less thou tamperest in any Physic
then stones with either of 'um, the better J like it. And sure the journey into
the country will on, being so much according to the heart of Father and
Mother, and children: the little Item in thy Letter will get down the powder J
hope, otherwise I know who wears the breeches at our house: Yesterday though
was a fine day, and we went into the Gentleman Porters lodgings, and tickled
his Gooseberry-bushes.

The business of washing and clearing goodwife G. and coach and horses are
alarmes to the same tune; all my business is to provide relief where J can, and
when; J have several strings to my bow; one of 'um will take if luck serve. J
have not yet seen Mr. S -- nor heard from him. J shall adventure though to tell
Dick P -- that thou will be with him by that time the next month is a week old.

Thou may perceive by my token that J heard from Longworth, where all are
well but the old one. We shall know more next return of the carrier. Mean
while, and ever, blessing upon my sweet Dear, and her Lambs.

Thy own H. Marten.

LETTER 53.
My dear,
THe man thou left'st with me is very slow in the matter thou wott'st on,
neither dare J mention any thing of kindness J expect, till J have gotten in
all my own money out of his hand, whereof he tells me part had need to remain
for fees against the Lieutenant calls again, who claims 30 l. due still, and
the Gentleman Potter 2 l. and Cr -- never had any thing yet: but his cousin St
-- shall furnish me with one of his ten pounds to pay off Mr. C -- and Mr. M --
which comes to above 8 l. at the lowest rate; so J sent yesterday to his
cousin, and had my weekly allowance with much ado, whereof J owed 8 s. 6 d.
and for the 10 pounds he will bring it me himself one day of this week, but the
certain time he cannot appoint.

Having told thee the worst of it, the next news J send thee will be better I
hope: mean while here are four handsome puddings for thee, how good they are is
not known to me, being a token of last night from one of my fellow prisoners:
and the fellow will bring thee a neck of Mutton from S -- 's, with one pound of
watch candles, and two pound of cotton. My service to the Gentleman was here on
Sunday, and pray him to remember the Falcon he promised to send me. Buss all my
Brats for me, and as thou have convenience send me one or two of them in a
basket. God be with my poor own sweet soul, and with

Her H. Marten.

LETTER 54.
Huzzy,
GIve me my 8 s. back again, for J promised you but 12 s. to pay your Quarters:
don't you tell me it is all l^id out upon my own brats, for J must have it, and
therefore send thee 2 s. more, to make up the debt just 10 s. J have also sent
my three chits each of them a bird that came from Holingbury, and a parcel of
fruit that came a great deal further off, as this bearer can tell thee better
then J. Here dines with me to day of her own invitation, and upon Malls
victuals, my sister E --, who intended very lately to send my daughter J. to
have been provided for at Mrs. U-'s, but they have since bethought themselves
that J need no such helps, or what other consideration works upon them, J know
not, only yesterday it was counter-maunded, and her aunt R. is resolved to
take her down to Bray. My service to our Dick, and send Tom as often as thou
can unto Dear soul,

Thy H. Marten.

LETTER 55.
My sweet Love,
I Thank thee for thy yesterdays company, and so I should if I had it every day
of the week, and should be glad too, that I could give thee as good cheer every
day, to eat, and to drink, and to carry away. What thou did at our Malls,
thou will tell me in thine; J forget not what J promised thee to go in hand
with; but think a little farther of a print which may be useful, that is, if
possible, to get the knowledge of what is intended at Court toward us, or some
of us, and which; for without question, as White Hall pipes, Westminster will
dance: to that end, if thou could get some friend to step over to morrow,
and hear the Sermon preached before the King, something may be picked out of
it, and if another friend at the same time visited the Abbey, and took notice of
the Doctrine delivered there. God does use to acquaint his Ambassadors with
much of his mind. Because, if our several intelligences shall inform us, that
J am in the black book, then Mr. L. cannot afford to give the D. of York such a
consideration for his interest, as otherwise he may, nor to make such
allowances to my children. Therefore, they must be advised to take other and
meaner courses for their livelihood, without depending upon that staff which
will fail them. Besides, it is some comfort to know what a man must t^ust to.
My heart, after J had wrote what thou have read, Mr. T -- came to me, and told
me, that half a dozen Parliament men dining yesterday in Fish-street, and
understanding that the King had pardoned Vane and Lambert, vowed they ^ould
pardon all the rest: Since that, J have news from one of my fellow prisoners,
that Sir H. F. coming to the ^ing to excuse himself for not b^inging in the
bill^ yesterday according to order, was told by his Majesty himself, he should
be at no further trouble about that business, for he intended to pardon them
all: withal, that another Parliament man protested he would never give his
vote to the executing any, so long as those two Rogues were pardoned. For all
this, J will not be negligent in what thou and J agreed upon, only J have no
mind to clothes nor such trumpery. J am

My Dear, Thy H. Marten.

LETTER 56.
My Love,
THis bearer is better at bringing me news from thee, then in bringing home
bottles or baskets; neither cares he much whether his news be true or no, so it
be good for the purpose; he told me the other day that my little Anatomy was
fine and cheary, the swelling of her feet down, the dogs and cats turned into
milk and Sack, and all this, and more, would be justified by Tom P -- who was
to come to me the next day. Well, the next day came, but no Tom; so J believe
the rest accordingly. J have made a shift now (because he should not go
empty-handed, however he comes back again) to send thee some Longworth Pig,
and my two B^wnces some Plummes instead of Sixpences: J have not heard a word
from Dick P -- since Robin went, yet have written two or three times. Commend
my service to the other Dick Pe: the best that ever (not only thou, but) J
(that have lived a great while longer) was acquainted with.

Thy own, H. Marten.

LETTER 57.
My heart,
THy letter was very welcome to me, and that J need not tell thee; and how ill
thou can spare me and thy little brats, thou needst not tell me. Fain would J
have thee away out of all these inconveniences a great while ago, if J had
known how, and fain would yet, if J could, after the adjournment of this
Parliament: till then J know thy mind will hanker after my condition, which is
very hopeful according to the best intelligence J can get: it must needs be
chargeable and dangerous, and every way unpleasant, to abide long where thou
art, and to remove without a disguise, and to get a disguise without money is
as hard: but whether getting of money be not the hardest thing in the world J
leave to thee. What luck had J to find that 30 s. out of 40 s. and send
victuals to Kennington, and live at home, and help Job to 7 s. 6 d. and give
this knave a Crown, and make him the carrier of an Angel to thee? and yet J
hope God will send more next week. J have advised to go this night when thy
private goods are thought to be secured, and fetch them thence in bundles to my
daughter M -- 's house, in regard that untowardly girl B.S. knows where they
be, only my daughter must let as few of her household know it as is possible,
for ten to one there be slippery companions there too: but advise well of it,
Mall J am confident of, for her own part. Till thou go into the country,
thou must not trust to any one lodging too long, notwithstanding thy change of
habit: and prithee let me hear from thee as often as thou can with safety. J
have no reason for it, but that J am, My sweet Soul,

Thy own Dear, H. Marten.

LETTER 58.
My poor dear heart,
WHom J am fain not only to leave, but to starve. J will not excuse either
now, but do better then excuse my self to morrow morning: and mean while send
thee such things as thou want most, and rest,

My Soul, Thy own H. Marten.

LETTER 59.
Heart and Soul,
I Will believe thee (because thou would have me) that thou art very well,
and according to thy conjuring me, will send for thee on Saturday to meet thy
new Cousin, and Old Self,

H. Marten.

LETTER 60.
My Heart,
I Got two Letters at once from thee now, and shall send thee but one little
scrap of answer; but that as full as it can hold of gladness that you be all
well again. J was half and more afraid for thee. My three Longworth daughters
took the alarm of the bad news, and came cluttering to town the beginning of
the week, and are now here with their brother. J have nothing to send my poor
Love, but this quarter of Lamb: to morrow J look for wine. Mean time J rest in
thy bosom, like

Thy fourth brat, H. Marten.

LETTER 61.
My Dear,
I Must be begging of the good news: this bearer tells me of three sorts:
First, that thou art very well; the next, that Bacon-hog begins to mend; and
lastly, that thou art now in a fair way about thy White Hall business. I sent
to my two great brats to day what I could: but weeks ends are not so good as
their beginnings; and the beginning of the next week I hope to see my Love
here, that is, either monday or tuesday, which will best stand with thy
convenience, only I would fain keep my word with D. P. whom I promised by
tuesdayes Post what time he should expect at least some of our company.

I rest, my sweet Soul, Thy own for ever, H.M.
My service to our good Friend.



LETTER 62.
My sweet Love,
I Cannot think every day too often to send to thee, and hear from thee (at
least of thee.) All the token I have for thee is an Orange or two, a piece of
bread (half what it was last) and a piece of butter (half a pound) and just
such a weight of Sassages. To morrow I shall send again, and if I do not so on
friday too, it will not be because I did it 3 days together before: yet don't
thou toil thy self to death with ^ending my brats, and scribbling, to their
father too; and of the two I can best abate thee the last office. I thank thee
for my s^ew-pan, though his cap could not be found.

I rest, My Heart, Thy own still, and still, and still, H.M.

LETTER 63.
Ah my own Dear!
If thou were not a very hog, thou would give me some of thy drudgery or some
of thy Ague, that I know thou can spare. I shall have a time to trust thee
with my neck upon the leads before I am a week older, I hope. Prithee let me
know whether I did cosen thee in my last packet, telling thee I sent a bottle
of Sack. If I did not cosen thee, the old womam has done the same by me, for I
miss it: however I intended to send thee this, and a bottle of Rhenish, and
half a dozen Hartichokes, and a pound of butter, and a scrap of Sugar, and four
Oranges; and if I had not been out of hope of this opportunity, I had not
spoiled my Strawberries in a dish a quarter of an hour before the butchers man
came, and then thou had had them. I do not like P -- 's Ale so well as I
did; but the next time I send into town I will have some for thee; perhaps it
mends again. Methinks if thou must needs be ill, I am glad an Ague has excused
the small Pox, because I am not with thee to tend thee; not for thy beauty's
sake, for Clem has enough of that for thee and her self too, and for, My Heart,

Thy H. M

LETTER 64.
Love,
THou may see I have got more paper now, but the same hand still, and that
serves thy turn it seems. My Keeper holds his resolution yet, as I told thee
yesterday, to g^e hence about noon, and bestow four or five hours upon you,
going, coming, and staying there. I am content you should make much of him, but
not too much; prithee tell our good friend so, and that for 40 reasons. I have
sent thee the bottle of Sack now, which I made thee believe I sent thee
yesterday, but forgot, and so helped poor John to a chiding I doubt, as if he
had disposed of it by the way. Here be 8 pennies for thee too, I think the
roguy Besses come on purpose to go to thee, ever since I condemned them the
same way that Neds, and Philip, and Mary's were wont to go. Thou toldst me that
thy two bigger brats received my tokens, but that was, I suppose, my lesser
tokens, the 2 d. and the penny, but I sent Peggy two sixpences, and Sarah one
by little Betty. I would have thee find out, if thou can handsomely, and
without taking them away, whether the children had them or no; for I am
deceived if that girl does not love money dearly to spend, and am afraid, if
thou stayest long out of the Country, will require more of thy care to look
after her then thou can well afford from thy own: and since thou have taken
her under thy wing, I would be loath she should miscarry there.

Dear, I am very poor in bottles now, return me as many as thou have to spare,
and if one or two of 'um be full of small drink I shall not be much offended. A
leg of mutton and a piece of sugar, and I have ordered a dish of pease, for
which h^re is a parcel of butter, and two loaves of bread. And so God be with
my sweet Soul, and her sweet Soul-kins.

Thy true H. Marten.
It is not good to talk to him now of the old business, till thou and I have
laid our heads together once more at least.



LETTER 65.
NOt starved yet? nor drowned neither? then I see I must be at the charge of
half a chaldron of coals to try if I can burn thee to death: this fellow
promises to have a care about them, and to get a quarter of a hundred of
faggots thrown into the cart. He brings thee now half of my own butter, and a
six penny loaf from the market. To morrow the heglers come to town, and then I
will buy thee some other countrey-commodities: but sure we were better continue
in employment a knave whom we know, and who knows how to have intercourse and
access, then to be to seek of a stranger that will be to seek of conveniencie
how to do business between us; and yet I believe all thou tellest me
concerning him, and can tell thee somewhat more of my own knowledge. Both thou
and I must have a little more care of our loose things. And now in good sober
sadness good morrow to my own sweet Love and Heart, and Dear, and Soul,

Thy old H. Marten.

LETTER 66.
My sweet Love, that have thy belly full of sower Sauce,
I did not think any thing I could say to thee would have been worth sending
thee word of, yet resolved to send, that I might receive good news from thee.
But our Poppet mist her ague last night, and I will tell thee my Physic; the
milk which was fetched for thee and thy little one must make her a posset; when
I had m^de it, nothing would down with her but the curd, and that well
sugared, she eat up every bit, and went to bed upon it. Methinks I should get
money enough for my receipt.

Now, how does my poor Lamb do? and how does the mother of it, who has that to
tend, and the 150 divorce from her Dear to digest. I have sent thee only thy
Rabbets, which were loath to be kept till to morrow: other matters may be sent
thee then, except thy Hartshorn, and that need not be sent raw, so long as I
have fine water and thy directions. Good morrow to my Soul this good day, which
was designed for a better day, if luck had served, either the heart thou
carriedst with thee, or the heart thou left'st behind thee.

H. Marten.

LETTER 67.
Manners come up,
MUst I guttle your belly for you with fresh Salmon, Gurnets, and Rhenish wine,
and sugar, and J cannot tell what, for you to run away and never take your leave
of a body? the paper sent after you too like a (...): but J hope I shall not be
troubled with you again in have: therefore pray stay till you be sent for: Nay
it is e'n trim-tram too, like Mistress, like man: Stephen promised me to come
so early this morning with his butter-dishes, and now is come betwixt nine and
ten, but put me out of my fooling humor with the news of last night. My poor
sweet Dear, what I have been afraid of a great while, and thou have just escaped
so narrowly, is more likely then ever to fall upon thee, because the whole
tribe of Bailiffs and Catch-poles will be exasperated against thee, and have
thee by hook or by crook; and it is a huge disadvantage to have the Law of the
land for an enemy. L -- gave me a great many good words, but not a rag of
money, which is not to be looked for till matters are settled; only for my
comfort, he tells me that they are in a good forwardness, and by the end of the
next week he will be in town again. I rest,

My sweet Love, Thy own, H. Marten.

LETTER 68.
My dear Soul,
I ^erceive thou wentst too late yesterday morning to Mrs. D -- 's, for she was
with me in the afternoon, and told me she saw thee not, yet staid at home till
ten of the clock. I had not my full swinge of discourse with her, because first
a Gentleman, and afterward my two sisters came in upon us: but this she told
me, that in regard it was so long ere she heard again from you, she disposed of
60 l. which she had laid by on purpose, and has not now above 40 l. left, if
that; besides, she believes the goods are rated high enough (according to her
skill without seeing) especially the Diaper and the Damask. Worse then all
that, J. W. is newly gone into Berks, and will not be returned till the end of
next week. Mr. L -- came not yesterday. When I hear from thee what space is
allowed by the articles for thy refusal, I will have another bout with the
good woman; and as she says, if they be richly worth the money, it is
encouragement to borrow; if the pennyworths be hard, thy share will be the
better in money. Good morrow to my sweet Love, and my poor brats.

Thy own, Henry Marten.

LETTER 69.
My sweet Soul,
I am very yellow that thou art my naughty Dear, that is, too good a Dear to
me, and wilt not tell me how thou do: Remember how thou did make a rogue of
me in my three brats sickness, that were not to be known to their poor father
till they were almost quite well. But Love, if thou be in any prison, or
bailiffs house, or such ugly place, do not hide it from me, as thou would
(and as J would have thee) from Peggie and Sarah. J can bear it, and perhaps
advise thee to bear it, and perhaps what to do in it before the Judges of the
Kings Bench be gone out of town, and before thou have gotten that (with being
stifled up this hot weather) which thou will not claw off again in have.
Stephen tells me thy brother Job visits thee, and why J might not have been as
well of thy counsel as he (if it were not as J suspect) J do not understand,
especially when Dick was here, and needed no letter to trust with it. Besides,
if there be no remedy but thou must be kept from thy little ones, J will try
all the strength I have to get one or two of them hither to me, and the third
nearer to thee, that housekeeping may be struck off at Kennington, and the
bantlings find more comfort then now they can at such distance from both their
parents. Clear this one scruple, good Heart, in

Thy own, H. Marten.

LETTER 70.
My Heart and more,
For all last nights messenger frighted thee with his have, disappointed thee
of thy tokens, and brought thee a paper-full of ill-favored news, yet I
believe thou would not have been without it, and thou may believe I would
not have been without thine: I confess there was more reason for that, because,
besides that it was thine, the good news in it did quite drown the bad. Let God
Almighty do his part in giving health to my Dame P -- and her little biddies,
and I care not a ^igg for all the Kites and Jack-daws in breeches or long
coats. I think thou say Henryetta is full of teeth, which I like well, for
breeding of those commodities is one of the narrowest bridges brats-faces have
to pass. My mind gives me (Love) that thou should take thy mind off now from
buying of a Coach, in regard of the great sum it must cost at first, the
difficulty of getting horses to draw it, the feeding and casualty of those
horses by the way, the small time of using it in the country, betwixt this and
Winter, and the noise it will make there to be said to keep thy Coach. I am of
opinion thou were better give 12 or 15 l. for the hire of a Coach with 4 or 6
horses, wherein thou may put both thy he-camerades, and have the conversation
of ^um all the day long, without hiring a saddle-horse, or keeping this bearer
in to^n against his Masters will and his own: it is just the che^pest time in
all the year, and thou art like to have as good ways and weather as can be
wished, if thou can show the City thy backside by this day seven-night. I
shall have an account from W -- by to morrow night; I presume I shall obtain
leave for a sight of thee once at least before thou go; for I got it for
^obin yesterday, but that he was gone abroad early, and my cousin James Y --
and Mr. S -- dined with me on Saturday: it is honestly done of Mr. S -- to
forbear so long; but he considers how thou and I are played withal, as every
body shall be that is down. Thus far on Sunday, and though I be fresh again
this Monday morning, yet thou sufficiently tired with reading, and therefore
take thy eyes off from the scribble, and look upon my matters, that have been
so long a coming: there is a piece of Cake, and some Pergamot pears from
Holingbury, a piece of Sturgeon, and a bottle of liquor from James Y --, a
piece of Venison, and a Cheese from my sister E -- 's, and after cheese nothing
(thou know) or that which is next to nothing, two poor pieces of silver,
that have left thereabouts behind them. God be with my own Soul, and all hers,
and amongst them

Her H. Marten.

LETTER 71.
My Dear,
THe bearer is in great haste, I must be short. Here is a pint bottle of new
Canary a Hollingbury Hen, half a score Puddings, and four halfe-crownes in a
paper, the fourth part of my weekly allowance. If thou ^ouldst send Peg to me
she should carry thee all I can spare more, if not more. I am glad thou have
some comfort in thy long business: I would not discourage thee, but take heed
of shooting away too many arrows after what I doubt is gone already: thy
matter is not for Council to be advised in: if thou go to law once, good
night, especially when thou do not know where to get the first fee: going
abroad into the air does thee good, therefore I like that: the rest may do
well too for all the opinion of an old fool, and yet he is,

My sweet Love, Thy own, Henry Marten.

LETTER 72.
My sweet Love,
THy letter of the seventh (that is the only Letter of thine I have seen since
I saw thee) could not hinder it self from being welcome, notwithstanding the
news (I was about to call it, but it is too common for that name) of thy
extreme wants: they shall not be a whit the sooner supplied for thy mentioning
them, because I had set all the wits I had to work before about the same
business. That poor Job is likely to stand upon two legs again I am very
glad, and when thou make a meal of the brats, whereof Moppet it seems must
serve for the second course, prithee wish me a bit, that am,

My own Love, Thy own, H. Marten.

LETTER 73.
My Heart,
I Long to know how my poor little brat does after her grapes, that if they did
well with her I might present her with more: mean while I present her bumm with
a couple of Napkins, and claim thy promise of sending her Sister Sarah to me.
This bearer is to go from your quarters to Parsons Green with a message to the
people there, if they be come home, and from thence to Mrs. D -- with a letter.
I do not find the cause, nor (which is better) the continuance of that
strictness that was here when thou were with me: but if my Keeper could tell
how to be more orderly then he is, it would do him and me a great pleasure. My
service to our good f^iend, and thy brother, my love to Peggy, and so good
morrow to

My Dear, Thy H.M.

LETTER 74.
My Heart,
THou need'st not tell me it is a huge while since J sent to thee, J tell my
self so; and yet I have something to say for it: First, the Porter brought me
pretty good news last time he came from thee; secondly, he was otherwise
employed; thirdly, my nursery had her fit upon her all day long; and lastly, J
expected Mrs. D -- here, that J might be enabled to send thee a token for thy
nurse, but J doubt she is not well: for when she was with me last, she
complained of her having been ill: I would thy brat would give thee leave to
visit her. Thy message concerning Mr. S -- his coming hither to day, makes me
put on my gay clothes: if he do not come now J shall wish thee whipped, so J
have the whipping of thee, and thy little brat whipped too, so thou have the
whipping of her. J have sent thee the work thou deliveredst me that came
betimes yesterday morning according to promise; how well done, J know not; but
if thou have not all thy cloth, J shall be bold to send to her for the rest.
Mrs. C -- is removed it seems to narrower lodgings, and our Jane gone to her
aunt E -- 's house; though the Mistress on it be not at home, having a key left
with her of one of the chambers. Prithee let me set down in my Almanac the
certain day when the Coach-master is to be paid for his Coach. My girl is fine
and well now again, but that she will eat nothing, and undoes me in
play-things. J shall long to see thee again one of these days, but first to
get a letter from thee, not so much for the papers sake, as because that will
be a sign of some leisure. My letters have got a trick not to go quite
empty-handed, and Peggy has a father, as well as my Love has a

Dear of Henry Marten.

LETTER 75.
My Dear,
IT is a filthy long while since we either saw or heard from one another, yet
don't let us chide, for I think verily it is no wilful fault in either of us. I
begin to write this to night, because I will not be to seek to morrow morning,
when the butchers man comes; besides, J have had a fine deal of leisure to day,
my Keeper locking me up (as he was bid) about 8 in the morning, and now it is
almost 8 afternoon; but J had my victuals about me, and my books, and my pen,
and my pusses withal; I got a letter from George of S -- (whereof here is a
copy) a little basket of Strawberries (whereof J have not cousen'd thee of one)
that ^ost me nothing; and it is well J was asked no money for them, my
Gentleman being gone about that (with other business) and till his return I
would not wish thee to give me a far^hing for my estate; yet J bought butter at
market for thee while it was to be had, and hutchers meat J dare promise thee,
the rest depends upon the Monsieurs safe arrival. Love, Hall was with me on
Saturday, and told me he met P -- the ^pholster, and understands from him now
again that all is like to be dispatched betwixt thee, and him, and S -- which J
will believe so soon as ever J see it; that he told my son so J believe
already. Prithee let me know what use Job makes of his time; if he cannot get
an employment, methinks it were easy to agree with his adversaries, and get
that ugly Judgment off, since they see he is protected against them. But do
thou think J will not know how all my 3 pocky rogues do? and tell me true too.
If thy Roses be not all gone, and if thou have any stills, or limbecks, or such
things, J would fain have thee still a little Rose Water, the cakes will serve
to put among thy linen, when God sends it. And now in all have good morrow to
my sweet Soul. J am, sure J am,

Thy own, H.M.

LETTER 76.
My poor Soul,
IF I did but see how thou look thy self when thou give me a potion, and
forbiddest making of faces, I doubt thou would prove a man nowhere but in
thy tongue, and yet I knew my Heart will be a man now she finds she must be
so. Captain B -- and Lord P -- are all one; and if Mr. S -- and Mrs. D -- be so
too, who can help it? I got an empty Letter yesterday from my daughter M. and
with very much ado my next weeks allowance from S --, almost half spent before
it came. when W -- is tried, and fails, we will even sit down and rest. I am
not jealous of thy extraordinary kindness to our Lieutenant, but am content to
be as kind as thou art, if I had wherewithal. Honest Robin has reason to
grumble at his staying in town, with so little hopes of having what he came
for, and being kept from me too; for I cannot yet come at him. Thy Letter came
to me last night by Jinny, upon whom he stumbled in the street. These
commodities (except the pennies) are my sister E -- 's tokens to me. And so
good morrow to

My sweet Love, Thy own in spite of all weathers, H.M.
My service to our friend as rich as our selves, and my love to the three that
know how to help us, as much as we do them, for a while I mean



LETTER 77.
YEs indeed (Love) it is long enough in conscience since J sent to thee last;
for all J was told the same day both by Tom and by my own messenger how fine
and well my little brat came on: but such worms are set up with a rush, and
thrown down again with a straw: besides, J liked not one part of the vapor,
that she had gotten a fresh color in her cheeks. Well, as thou say, when we
have done our utmost then let God do his pleasure. They tell me, thou art about
to take a maid, and J must needs say, thou have need enough. Withal, though
thou have nothing left now to be robbed of, prithee take a care what cattle
thou harbourest under thy roof, to sleep with thee and thy three arm-loads of
treasure, only it cannot be long (thou know) she can stay with thee: for if
any luck ever serve, thou must go down without her, and take fresh in the
country. Yesterday morning my L.L. was here, thinking (it seems) to find L.
with me, or that he had been with me. Some bargain or other they have jumbled
up betwixt them, which J am sure J shall like better then they believe J will,
because J shall then know what to trust to, and not be drilled on much longer.
Thy Court-news J do not value of a half penny, nor would have thee mind it,
there is no sense in it. But J am very well contented that thou have made an
end with S -- and all those Masters, and so have thou great reason to be, and
to thank Providence that thou have made a shift to live upon them all this
while. Since J wrote thus fa^, the bearer hereof tells me he saw thee yesterday,
and would not let me know it before he slept, like a blockhead as he was. J
have given him his mornings draught though, in hopes of amendment, and J have
sent thee a piece of Longworth Cheese, and a parcel of nuts from the same
place: resting, My own svveet Dear,

Thy H. Marten.

LETTER 78.
My Dear,
IF J did not write to thee yesterday, it was not because J did not think of
thee, and if J write now, it is not because I would not see thee here to day:
for the truth is, in case thou can conveniently come, J would feign have thee
dine with me, and bring my sick baby at least with thee; for so short a time we
may obtain leave: yet lest thou should no^ be able to wag, J have sent thee
the enclosed which J received yesterday, and whereby thou may perceive the
man is in earnest, so as J can do my part. J have withal sent thee thy
Earrings, for fear J should make them march a wrong way, as J have heretofore
made many a good thing, and even since I came hither, Mr. C -- 's spoon shall
bear me witness: he is fetched home again though. Here is besides a small
token of my own (that is) poverty for thee, and another proportionable for
Peggy, from her Father, and

My Heart, Thy H. Marten.
Love, I must not have thee till Monday or Tuesday, the Gentleman Porter tells
me, because Sir J. is a little fusty to day; he thinks not fit to be spoken to.
Therefore send me word which of the two days thou likest best.



LETTER 79.
My Heart,
IT was hard with me for paper, and harder for matters, but both will mend, and
so do both my brats, J hope; whereof to be little more sure, is the chiefest
errand of this bearer. I am glad thou art fallen into the hands of so good
people; we will show our selves thankful when we can: but Sarah and J could
hardly forbear laughing at thee, for understanding me in earnest, when J told
thee how pitifully she cried to be left with her Father: some things she wants
though in earnest, especially a clean frock, and headclothes, and her comb. If
Mr. L -- has played me one of his old tricks, who can help it yet? shortly J
believe J shall by my shee-friend in a corner, who J doubt is not in town till
to morrow; and the next day (viz. Wednesday) J shall be glad to see thee here,
if thou be then to be spared. Mr. S -- shall be very welcome to me upon any
account; and as for the horses, if he will take my word for the present, he
shall have better security ere long; and for the worth of 'um, J have reason to
take thy word, for whose use J buy them: only be sure (if possible) they be
sound, and (which is easy to know) young. So with my service to your two young
men, and my busses to the two maids, J rest,

My own Dear, Thy still, still H. Marten.

LETTER 80.
My sweet Dear, brave gallant Soul,
NOw stand thy ground; I was told on Tuesday night, that the House of Commons
had given us all up on monday, and had appointed a Committee to bring in a bill
for that purpose, which cannot require much time, and if I wish any thing in
the world, it is, that thou had been with me, when the tidings came, and ever
since, to see if thou could find any alteration in me, sleeping or waking.
My paper is not quite ready for thee yet, but I am upon it every foot; and in
the mean time, will give thee such cordials as ordinary people give to one
another. Perhaps the bill will not pass when it comes in, perhaps the Lords
will not pass it, when it comes there; perhaps the King has given way to his
friends to set this on foot, on purpose to have the whole honor of pardoning
to himself; perhaps some names may be excepted in one House, or in the other;
and thy Dear may be one of them. He that has time, has life; a thousand things
happen betwixt the cup and the lip: and it is some comfort that we can still
send to each other. Visiting indeed grows pretty difficult; but after the
opening of my door in the morning, I have the freedom of the whole house till
we have dined. J was not so hasty to send thee this news yesterday; J believe I
had not now neither, but that I was afraid thou would hear it from another
hand, that would make it worse. Pluck up thy strength, my good Heart, conquer
this brun^, and thou art a man for ever. Look upon my little brats, and see if
thy Dear be not among them; has not one of 'um his face, another his brains,
another his mi^th? and look thou most upon that, for it is just the best thing
in this world, and a thing that could not be taken from me, when Lemster was,
when all the remainder of my Estate and thine was; nor when my liberty and the
assurance of my life was, nor when thy company was, which though I reckon last,
goes for something with

My dearest Dear, Thy own own, H. Marten.

LETTER 81.
My Sweet Soul,
I Have made a shift to send thee the other odd spanker, but I could have
wished 4000 for thy sake. It was well done to send me the bottles and baskets,
thou art like to fare the better for it, when I have gotten some body that is
able to carry things, but the poor wench must go against the tide, or else I
must keep her too long from thee and my brats, and that is against my
conscience.

I was told yesterday that all we (except two of us, who are in more favor)
must be banished; which if it be true, it is probable we shall have some time
given us to provide our selves, and that is all the kindness I did ever
expect, and more.

Major W. takes it unkindly that T.P. makes so many visits to him in my name,
and in Sir J. R -- 's name, and without my order, which indeed I could not
own; therefore I would have him from henceforth forbear it: if he be civil to
me, he will be sure to be wary for himself, and not to come within compass of
danger. God be with

My dearest Heart, Thy H. Marten.

LETTER 82.
INdeed (my Dear) I am scarce friends with my self yet for not writing to thee
on Saturday, for all the fellow was in such haste, and for all I made a shift
to send my Love half a score pennies, and for all I love thy letters as well as
thou can love mine for the heart of thee; but how can I tell but thou may
think I would not write to thee, because thou did not write to me? and then,
does he forbid me to come to him, and will not write to me neither? nay here was a
pudding too on Sunday for dinner, worth twenty of that thou had the Sunday
before, and I had saved a corner for thee; and hither came our Mall, and Jinny,
and aunt E -- yesterday, and guttled it almost all up: last night, though I was
pretty well pleased again with receiving the enclosed: thou see therein what
will be most wanting in that country: but it shall go hard if I do not
contrive a way for thee to dine with me next Sunday, and thy brats-faces too,
at least thy self, that thou and I may that about our businesses; we are not
like to be troubled with any women-kind again, for my present Keeper is a
single man, and the other has small hopes of returning: instead of that poor C
-- is in danger to ma^^h next, and all the old gang to be weeded out one after
another. John L. is not yet in town, neither does B. come at me. I had a
letter from poor Job, who is with the girls at Longworth, and in fear that his
sisters and brother-in-law will arrest him: I bade him secure himself as well
as he could against Doctors of Physic, and their Patients, and I would warrant
him thou should do him no harm. Now I care for nothing but knowing how my
three biddies do, and the barren hen that clocks 'um all about her. Thou were
best give them none of their daddies good things, and then see if I be

My Heart, Thy own, H.M.

LETTER 83.
My dear Love,
HOw our Ambassador has sped in Essex I know not, but am sure I cannot speed
elsewhere, and that thy time of redemption is out this day. All the advice I
have to give thee, is, that thou cast thy self upon Mr. S -- 's kindness; let
him join with thee in pretending to P -- as if thou had laid down money for
all the goods, and then at his own leisure give thee what profit he thinks fit:
in case he do for the present want a sum, he will make more of every thing
then thou shall: and if he can forbear, thou may be able hereafter to give
him as much as any body else, and yet have a good bargain in thy goods, besides
thy own conten^ment. If it may be some ease to thee (as I suppose) prithee let
me have Sarah again, and let me see thee too as soon as I can, though I
deserve no other name then

My Heart, Thy well-wisher, H. M.

LETTER 84.
My Heart,
I Thank thee for my tutties, and my window-stuff, and my book of double use,
but most of all for the good news of thy Agues marching from thee, which way
soever he is gone; and yet, for that he has left behind him, I am not
thoroughly resolved, whether I should invite thee, or forbid thee till to
morrow; but upon my blessing (huzzy) do not offer to come to day, unless thou
find'st all as it should be with thee, and then let me know as soon as thou
can, that thou may fare the better. When thou do come, bring any b^a^
that is fit to be brought, and Camerade too; for I have leave for thee; and yet
I would have thee habited very plain, as I observe they do all, (or as many as
I can see or hear of) that relate to my fellow prisoners. This morning I saw
two daughters of Sir Henry Vanes (whom I take to be none of the poorest among
us) whom I should have hardly suspected for Gentlewomen, if Mr. T -- had not
told me who they were; and yet (I will say that for 'um) they have as much need
of being set off by their clothes, as some of his neighbors daughters have.
But (Love) now I think better of it, it is too late in all conscience for thee
to come to day: besides that, I can have almost nothing that is good for thee*
but send me word whether thou will come to morrow, or give thy body one day
more of settling, and make it Tuesday. I hope the kindness they show me now,
will not be spent before it be used: besides, I have got some fine small beer,
that is hardly yet ripe to be broached. Just now I received the enclosed, which
I send thee to chew the cud upon, that thou may prepare thy self for a
discourse against thou and I meet. For this time J bid thee good morrow, and
company, and return to my old companion,

My Soul, Thy H. Marten.

LETTER 85.
My dearest Love,
FOr all J have not sent to thee since Saturday, nor needed have sent now, if
it would have served my turn to hear of thy health by Mr. S --, who was
yesterday here to look for his brother and enemy D. P --.

Mrs. D -- at last came to me, and tells me she will go to Mr. S -- 's on
Thursday, if they will suffer her to see the goods,; and she has now a chapman
for the hangings, if she like 'um, and will endeavor to procure as much money
as is necessary: but her stay with me was so very short, that J could not have
time to talk with her about the Coach-money: yet J remember this to be thy last
day; so J tried S --, and he or his wife intend to visit me anon, and J hope to
prevail there.

Prithee let me know by this bearer what is done with my Lord P --, that J may
proceed accordingly: for if he be not in town, J mean to dispatch a messenger
into Essex, unless J understand at his lodgings that he is not there neither.
It is only time that pinches us, and the have which winter makes in coming
upon us, and the intolerable charge of living here: for J perceive both by my
Lord L -- and Mr L -- (whom J spoke with severally since J saw thee, and whom J
am promised to see again before the week be out) that we shall have something
settled upon every one of us, or else a piece of money in gross (which is as
good, or better) if we can but rub out a little while to put clothes upon our
backs and ^itch in our bellies; and God send health to the little ones and
continue it to the old ones.

This is your sealing day (as J remember) with P -- and them; good Heart take
care what thou sett'st thy hand and seal to, besides what is already
considered, for one little half word makes a huge alteration in a Deed; and let
thy good friend have a care of his hand and seal, thou have reason to make his
concerns thy own, who makes thine his own.

My old landlady has gotten me to wear out this week with her, so J go not to
my new quarters till to morrow night.

Here are some remainders of Sarahs implements; if neither she nor her sisters
get any other tokens now, there is some reason for it. Yet J rest,

My sweet Soul, Thy ever own H. Marten.

LETTER 86.
My Love,
IF thou had been as good as thy word, thou would either have come thy
self, or sent a speaking token by this time, unless thou did understand me
wrong, as if J were first to let thee know the time. Now J think thou were best
stay (at least thy self) till Sunday: Mean while commend my very hearty
respects to our Dick, whose pudding miscarried yesterday: J made it on purpose;
but my daughter M -- and sister R -- coming in, made me and the old woman
jumble things so together, that we quite spoiled it betwixt us; therefore if
thou can get him in with thee when thou come next, J will have a good one
for him, and then J shall see him in the bargain. Mr. L -- has been with me,
and talks handsomely, both from my Lord L -- concerning the hopes of my being
banished, and from his own resolutions concerning my allowance, wherein thou
may be sure to have a pretty share, for I did not talk of thee singly: but I
see never a penny of his money yet: he complains heartily of the backwardness
of Rents in the country, and the falsehood of tenants. Somewhat may be true,
yet I think it fit to be very earnest with him next time he comes, that he may
enable me to pack thee away. I hope thou do not forget to put thy friend upon
a diligent pursuit of those White Hall commodities, so far as his health will
give him leave: every body tells me nothing is to be done there but with money,
and that almost as much as hthe thing is worth you would have done; therefore I
was jealous for S --, because I knew he had wherewithal, and to hook in his
old debt would be likely to stretch; but it seems he finds it too dear too.

My son S -- is sworn a Privy-chamber-man extraordinary, which is worth little
to him more then the protecting him from arrests; therein he was shrewdly
afraid of his dear friend B --. I have sent thee a Hen our Mall brought me
yesterday for her dinner, but she brought other things too, and some I had of
my own, that I made shift to save this for thee, and four Oranges to eat with
it, and a bottle of Claret to drink, but thou must burn it thy self, for I will
not keep the fellow so long from thee, only here is sugar to do it with, and
one or two Oysters. Now good morrow to

My Heart, Thy own, H. Marten.

LETTER 87.
My sweet Love,
FIrst, I am glad with all my heart (and that for 100000 reasons) that our good
friend is in a fine way of health again: Next, I think I have made a rogue of
thy pitiful pannier-plot, for I sent Robin out of town yesterday: I will have
you go all together if possible, both for comforts sake and for cheapnesse:
besides, I will not let any of you go till I am sure to send the rest after,
and that no flesh is without matters in fobb; so soon as ever they come (and I
look hard now every day for so much at least as will set the wheels a going) I
will write to Dick P -- by the Post, and he shall either come himself or send
up the same man with one horse or mo^e; and the mean time will serve thee to
pack up and send away such things as thou must have there, and to provide what
is to go along with thee, I mean, as well as we can. And my Keeper has promised
me afresh, that so soon as ever I am ripe for thee, I shall have one bout with
thee here.

Mr. L -- was with me on Saturday, and according to his old wont complains
(and I believe much of it to be too true) that things are still at a great
uncertainty, and that he is in danger of being turned out of all he has laid
out his money upon, if he cannot make exact proof of every thing that passed,
as well betwixt my old cre^itors (whose titles he has bought in) and me, as
betwixt us two: By the way, he says thou have a writing of some accounts under
his hand that he gave me at Lambeth-house, and may do him mischief if it be
known: I would have thee therefore give it him, that he may have no just
exception to deny thee reasonable courtesies; but first have it copied and
attested by persons thou can trus^, and keep that copy carefully by thee
against a wet day. J thank thee for my sweets and my herbs, and especially for
the trick of sending to me; J suppose the fellow makes a little money too at
market of strewings, etc. If so, or however, send him to morrow morning with a
letter, and intelligence how every body does: it is the cheapest messenger that
passes between us, and is pretty well acquainted with the soldiers. If thou
likest my beer, tell me so, and thou shall not want it, for J have enough: but
thou must send me the pottle-bottle that had Claret in it. My service to the
green Man, and my duty to the Ladies, and not a bit of love to thee, for thou
have got it all already, greedy-gut: it is no matter though, J have got somewhat
instead on it, that serves the turn of

My Souls own, H. Marten.

LETTER 88.
My heart,
I Did think by this time not only to have had better news ^o ^hee, but to
have told it thee my self; instead of that thou must make use of such good
counsel as thou have lying by thee, and is cheaper it seems then good news. My
son was not suffered to see me yesterday, nor Mr. L. this day he is promised he
shall; and this day J am promised my weeks m^intenance (which was never put off
before.) J believe there are people at Court that mean to set up a trade of
gran^ing leave to visit prisoners: my Lady Vane, Lamberts wife, and
Heveninghams wife, having used them to it. If Betty S -- be still in danger of
being found out by her mother, thou may let this bearer have her away to my
butchers, and thence the old woman is content to fetch her: but, as J said at
first, so still I leave it to thy own discretion. Not a word yet from my Lord P
--, whether this restraint be the reason of it, or what else J know not; but he
told Dick P -- his man he would send a Gentleman to me on Thursday last, or
before. The enclosed is a performance of my engagement to Poppet, her Portion
in Poetry being to be paid next after her elder sisters. J have sent thee a
piece of butter, such as is brought into the Tower, and as much bread as took
up every penny J had, and two bottles of Canarie, new and old: the first is
bound about the head, but J believe the other is best, yet neither bad: my beer
is almost all gone: let me know how thou likest the Ale that went last to
Kennington, it was P -- 's, but methoughts not so good as it was wont to be.

This Keeper of mine is a very civil person to me when he is with me, and
swears he will visit thee, and bring thee to me whatever it cost; but he is
just the worst Keeper in the Tower for keeping his times, when he is from me,
that he makes me so uncertain in sending to thee, whereas all other prisoners
are unlocked before 7 in the morning; he makes me stay till 8, 9, 10, and past;
it is almost 9 now, yet J am fast. My Love, J long to hear how honest Dick does
digest his venturousnesse in going forth the other day. J must close up my
letter, because I shall be feign to switch and spur by and by, and the Porter
we find very honest in whatsoever is delivered him. So good morrow to

My own sweet Dear, Thine yet, and yet, and yet, H. Marten.

LETTER 89.
WEll (Love) it was a happy turn that thou were not here yesterday, nor Peggie,
nor Poppet, nor Baconhog, nor Dick, for I should have killed half a dozen of
you at least, if you had come within my reach, J was so stark staring mad from
morning to night; and thou shall judge whether J had not reason to be ten times
worse then J was. First and foremost, did not Dick promise to send me (J marry
would he) from the Falcon that should be with me betimes next morning, that he
should? and what servest thou for, but to have put him in mind of it, if he had
forgot it? and what serves Peg for, but to put thee in mind of what thou
fogettest? and what serves Poppet for, but to cry, and the the other to scold and
scratch her mother when she has forgotten? J could have sent thee bread,
butter and candles, and something else without money; then J sent my Keeper for
that, and he did not bring it home till 4 or 5 of the clock in the afternoon;
then J had but half a stick of fire to hold my nose over for an hour together,
the roguie faggot-man staid so long; then within a quarter of an hour after it
had cost me 5 groats (2 d. more then ever man paid) for a dozen of faggots, in
comes goodie M -- 's man with a hundred, as if she had studied what to send,
that thou might be sure to have never a bit of. It Is no matter now ag^in;
this morning I ^eel my self friends with all the world; J account she is well
enough served by her mother-in-laws death, who left her husband but 20 l. to
buy him mourning, and 160 l. to be paid him 6 months hence, and ^ l. to her to
buy her a ring, only the Executors have sent her 20 l. more to buy her
mourning: and my malice is pretty well abated toward thee and thy Camerades,
because I hope you are all starved by this time either with cold or hunger; and
therefore to show I bore a little good will once, I have ordered some provision
for thy executors, viz. a pound of cotton candles, and another of rush, two
two-pennie loaves, two new rolls, a piece of butter to serve till to morrow, a
leg of mutton: the next time they shall have something else. Mean while I am

My Dears Ghosts Own, H. M.

LETTER 90.
Love,
I Took up my next weeks allowance (with some grumbling too of him that paid
it, and being told he was like enough to hear from me on Monday,
notwithstanding this) on purpose for thee, whereof though I sent thee but 3
quarters, yet all that is left to live upon till monday come seven-night is 16
d. and that this messenger will reduce when he returns to a single groat. But
this is not all the news J have to tell thee, if it were, he should not have
gone to thee though he would have given me a shilling to suffer him. George has
returned me an answer of my Februaries letter, dated the 20 of May last,
wherein he does earnestly invite me again, and tells me, that what J will have
him do to Mr. L -- he will do. The old woman at Longworth is recovered, whereof
not only her five children, but their Father is very glad: for if she should
have died ere the K -- 's title had been purchased, it would have raised the
market 2000 l. My Niece Fr. M -- is sick of the small Pox. Mr L -- was with me
last night, being but newly come to town, and tells me, my Lord makes him
believe that they are agreed, and that his Lordship has a grant from his
Majesty, yet fails meeting him according to promise, and makes him jealous he
plays a game by himself (I am sure J hear not a word from him.) But this day
L. will make it his business to drive matters to a head, either with my Lord,
or without him, and give me an a^count by to morrow morning. Staffordshire Dick
sends me word his man cannot be with me till Wednesday next, whereof J am not
sorry, for thou know thou can not wag before monday seven-night, if then.

Now J expect news from thee: First, how my two little brats do, of them I
would not have the bigger again till J am settled in my new quarters, which
will be (J hope) by to morrow night, though it prove the middle of this woman's
week: next, tell me what Mrs. D -- says, with whom J presume thou have had
some discourse concerning thy goods, both of White Hall and Chelsey. I cannot
have a sight of thee, if thou gettest off thy housholdstuffe from Roffry. L --
will be thy chapman for the heavy commodities there, as pewter, brass and
iron. Is it not time to bid good morrow to

My Dear, Thy own, H. Marten.

The End of Coll. Henry Martins Letters.
Mr Richard Pettingall his Heroical EPISTLES TO The same virtuous Lady.
LETTER I.
Madam,
I Was, in spite of my desire, by extraordinary business disappointed of
waiting on you yesterday, and having this day some signs of a growing
distemper, J am bold to beg your Ladyships advice for prevention. I know not
the cause, unless natures continuing kindness bringing the inconvenience of
rising these cold nights. I now long to know how your Ladyship does, which if
denied me by this bearer, J will not only fetch Physic, but an absolute Cure
for

Your Own, Dick Petti^gall.

LETTER 2.
Dearest Madam,
IT is I must beg your pardon so: this free expression of my passions inditing:
it being arrived now at that height, that J dare not give you bare thanks,
knowing too well J should fall short, being really sensible how highly you have
obliged me in not refusing a heart (alas) too mean a sacrifice for so sweet a
Saint: yet believe (dear Madam) that your virtue has the power to create in
that heart some buds of a generous spirit, whose blossoms may prove whole
actions, then may J laugh at, now only pity those Doctors that prescribe
absence as the only remedy for a person in love. J being confident that virtue
increases under the weights of misfortune. Let me then kiss in your letter
the only name that is dear to me; for though my affection is at such a height,
that it can never increase, yet my passion does and will, until J have the
happiness to kiss your hands, and that you receive again

Your Own Dick Pettingall.

LETTER 3.
My Dearest,
WEre the person as writes this as gallant as that ambitious heart, which dare
love you and tell you so, prompts him to be, he would then venture to beg a
welcome for this paper, which did, as it were, disdain to receive an impression
from a hand so mean as has done nothing yet in your service. But oh Heavens!
most divine Soul! how happy should I account my self, if J could change my
condition with that of this innocent paper, just when your lovely hand (perhaps
wanting other convenience) may guide it to your most delicate breasts, where is
seated a delight far beyond expression: let me then, instead of that
happiness, obtain the continuance of your most endearing esteem. Then must J
live; yet if otherwise, die

Your Own, Dick Pettingall.

LETTER 4.
I Should be unworthy both of health and life, if the preservation of either of
them could be any obstacle to that perfect happiness J enjoy when J see you;
pardon then Madam J beseech you, that absence which was caused by your own
commands; yet must J needs confess my own reputation required as much from
me, telling me, J ought not to appear before you without some testimonies of
that just revenge which yet J owe to your enemies, and therefore mine. Let me
then, J beseech you, see to morrow that dear person, who may expect a real
performance of all vows from

Her Own, Dick Pettingall.

LETTER 5.
Madam,
YOu will not think it strange, that the knowledge of mine own unworthiness
made me hitherto burst out in silent raptures, occasioned by the contemplation
of your happiness far above what the best of men's deserts could ever
accumulate. When I tell you it was the only reason which made me conceal an
affection no whit inferior to what might be termed most virtuous, in that
time when my heart filled with admiration of so much majesty, sent my eyes as
its Ambassadors to entreat pity, yet were often forced to return blushing at
their high presumption. But let me now take courage, and declare, it is your
Effigies, my only Dear, it is your Effigies would make me taste so high a
bliss; it is your Effigies would protect me in extremity, nay make me
immortal; to it in cruel absence I would breath forth my prayers, and prove,
nothing creates so true a sense of Divinity, as the adoration of so divine an
object: yes, you are divine (my Dearest) which makes me confident your pity
will let live one who lives no longer then allowed by you, to be

Your Own Dick Pettingall.

LETTER 6.
Madam,
YOu may very well wonder at my impudence in begging still the preservation of
your esteem, mine own conscience checking me for having done nothing that
might deserve the least share of it, did not your rare acknowledgement make
ordinary civilities appear high virtues by the incomparable returns you make
them. May not J then assure my self, that all men would admire my fortune, and
adore your worth, did they know, you not only gave me a chaste humor worthy
of commendation, but also honor it with the noble retaliation of owning me for
yours: you may be confident I had writ sooner, had the Sabbath made more have
to excuse us from travel, having not till then any possibility of sending;
oblige me then yet farther, by informing me of your health in your letter, my
mother having promised to enclose it in hers: could any one assure you of my
health but your self, I would not fail to do it. You may then be confident you
are the sole Protectress of his, who disdains to live any longer then he is

Your Dick Pettingall.

LETTER 7.
Most adored,
IF you with an impartial eye would review your own perfections, you would
find, that to them alone belongs so large a tribute of praise, to them alone is
due an acknowledgement beyond utterance. It Is you, my dear divine Soul, whom no
expression can define: of what one good then may I boast, unless that having a
clear and unspotted mind, not much unlike the Moon, receive and retain my light
from your most Sun-like virtue, to which no dark misfortune can cause a shade:
then let not a cloud interpose him, and your most obliging favor, who loves
you with admiration, and serves you with so real a fidelity, as may in length
of time in part, deserve the most glorious title of

Your Own, Dick Pettingall.

LETTER 8.
My Goddess,
I Do not likely, but upon a serious contemplation, judge this presumption is
unpardonable, did it not tend to the preservation of a life, though too mean a
sacrifice for one breath of your commands; yet is it such, as resolves not to
draw breath longer then warranted by your most indearing esteem; but
recollecting my memory, and finding no absolute command against this
conveniencie of discovering my fears, occasioned by a stinging jealousy of
mine own unworthiness. Let me therefore, my most sweet Saint, obtain one
cordial line to revive a heart so dampt, that is plunging into despair, being
confident that from your generous pity of my passionate soul proceeds so rare
an acceptance, not from my weak deserts. Then still have pity, my Dearest, have
pity upon one who dies till he sees you to be by you bid live, and hope, that
whilst virtuous, he may continue

Your own Dick Pettingall.

LETTER 9.
My Dearest,
WHat language or expression can you expect from a miserable wretch, just ready
to be drenched in a sea of despair? Must my other misfortune serve as an Index
to discover to you the poorness of my soul, in that I could not better dispute
my liberty? But O Jesus,! had I guessed at your ensuing hate, certainly I
should have left my body a prey to those Vultures, rather then thus endure your
torturing displeasure. To give you then that satisfaction which you desire,
being the only person who is most dear to me, I do swear by your most sweet
perfections; which oath I will never infringe, that unless you will be pleased
to pity my extremities, upon a true relation of my misery, I will, as I have
hitherto lived, so speedily die

Your Martyr, and Own, Dick Pettingall.

LETTER 10.
Madam,
I Have hopes that your Ladyships knowledge of me bids you be confident it was
rather a fear to displease you, then any neglect which forbade me by lines to
express the most innocent and most respectful affection in the world. I would
have begged this favor the last time I had the honor to see you, had not my
own thoughts told me it was many degrees beyond my merit, yet my brothers
coming offering me this convenience, makes me presume upon your acceptance: let
it then be lawful, dear Madam, for me to write, when cruel absence denies me
to speak, and tell you, that I love you far beyond what the readiest wit is
able to express. The widow has very much need of your visit; deny not her,
who counts her chains most glorious, and whose whole study is to preserve
your esteem, with that indearing title of

Your Own, Dick Pettingall.

LETTER 11.
My Dearest,
WEre I assured my face could so trecherouslie belie my heart, as to persuade
you it ever entertained a thought unworthy of me, and injurious to your most
serene virtue, you should not so soon desire revenge, as it should be performed
by my self, an impartial Judge, and most ready executioner of so vile a
miscreant. But if, mine only Dear, swearing by the Eternal God, you will not
believe me, how may I even persuade you, your perfections have so Divine a
light, that all others, when compared to them, appear dim, and as nothing:
Since then my looks cannot promise so well for me, as my heart by my tongue can
protest, may I not justly hate the former, whose ugliness promotes my ruin,
unless you in pity save me, who in dying your Martyr, proves

Your Own Dick Pettingall.

LETTER 12.
My Souls sole Deity,
It Is impossible to make a discovery of my sublime thoughts but by lines so
weak, that they cannot bear the least part of their luster. Certainly there is
a far more ready way to discern a passionate soul, the eyes at such a time
proving the hearts most faithful Ambassadors; read then in mine that high
affection, far above the reach of the more pithie expression. Had I more wit
then love, perhaps I might with elegant words and smooth sentences, better
please your high genius: but since it is not so, pardon then his weak language,
who is so much yours in realitie, as renders him ambitious to assume the title
of

Your Own Dick Pettingall.

Mary Martens Letter to R. Pettingall.
Most dear Sir,
YOu may admire your self in keeping an esteem so far short of your worth; if
your conscience checked you, it was for saying you had done nothing that
deserved my esteem; and that which you account so ordinary; miss my Dick, where
would you find it? would you make me believe I made you chaste? I found you
chaste, and the most that can be attributed to me is the continuance of it, nay,
not that for chastity would have accompanied all your other rare virtues. O
God! did you but kno^ your self, then would you pity me, for being deprived
of so rare a companion, yet I like well what you have done, knowing it is in
obedience to your dear Mother. Mr. Marten is going into Derbishire. O God! all
happiness wait on you both, though so much the less fall to the share of her
that wishes you have My dear Dick.

Mary Marten.

ANOTHER.
Dear Sir,
Is a pardon requisite, where there is no crime, and virtue so predominant, as
appears in you? then am I happy, to own Letters from so dear a hand, and do
accept them more welcome to me then any thing, except Mr. Marten, or Mr.
Marten's, I will ever acknowledge him to be more dear then all the world, and
next the company of my chaste and v^^tuous Dick, is most pleasing to me.

Mary Marten.

A Letter written by Marten's Lady, upon a distaste taken against the Lady B --,
suspecting Martens too much familiarity.
Madam,
It could never before enter into my thoughts, that you could make show of any
thing more then what was real, but plainly seeing you have, am bold to tell
you, I had rather have found that in any other, provided you had missed it; but
since it is so, I beg your pardon, and tell my self what a fool I was, to be
more knowing (in what was for your good) then your self; you let me see my
measure of confidence and weakness, yet this let me say, I aimed at your
greatest good, as I thought, what can tell you I did not? and if I did, and you
did apprehend it so, and will take to the contrary, O Cod! how you distract
me! I will trouble you no farther: but if you will know more, tell your self
the rest: And that I am,

Your servant and friend, Mary Mart.

An Answer to a Letter, called a Copy of Henry Marten's Letter, in vindication
of the Murder of the late KING CHARLES.
SIR
IF this Title be your o^n, as I do not think you such a fool as so to indors
it, there needs no farther dispute, the business is confessed, That you and
your fellow Rebels Murdered the King, for which you intend to repent as much
as you do for the breach of the seventh Commandment. Would any one imagine
that you should (as you pretend) sweep that Augaean Stable of thy conscience
clean of murder, and let Mall lie there, not so much as disturbed? Can an
unrepenting Whoremaster be a Pious Rebel? O base hypocrysie!

But forward. What rigours have thou found, but what you deserved? and more
dolorous you deserve then you have found; who by a bold Apology dare to entayle
Rebellion to the World, and furnish Fanatics with at least so much reason, as
thou pretendest to enjoy. I say of thy wit, (for wisdom it is not) as was said
of the Emperor Galba, Ingenium tuum male habitat: Never so much wit in so foul
and filthy a pericranium or situation.

It is not the varnisht speeches of yours and your Brother Hall, that was
lately executed, will ever make good that unparaleld Crime, for which he died,
and you may. Yet I pro^esse I do not wish your Corporal penance, nor
damnation, nor Cromwels, nor any of his most wicked adherents, though I have
been undone by all of you. May you live to sing a Palinedia, and let the neck
verse and Psalms of Mercy aloue, I could never endure writhed necks, nor any
thing strangled, though it were at Tyburn. But such a person as should say, the
King is not above his people conjunctim, but divisi^^, or in your own words,
major singulis, but not universis or Collectim is a most desperate villain, and
not fit to live in a Kingdom, which kind of Government, how much it exceeds a
state Democratical, I refer you to that most excellent piece of Mr Wrens, in
his answer to Harringtons Oceana. Did you never read Horace, Hall? Do you not
remember there? rub up your memory; for as to other things I believe you are
bewitched. Can you forget these verses (the practice of which you have?) Omne
sub Regno graviore regnum est
Regum timendorum in prop^ios greges.
Reges in ipsos imperium est Iovis.


And dare you, (pretending to Christianity and the reading only of
Scriptures, which gives Kings superiority over all, and commands subje^tion
even to Heathen Emperors) assert that Kings are answerable to their own bars,
which is a contradiction in Antithe^^, and against the very Municipal laws of
our own land.

You say you would never have signed the Warrant for the Kings death, if you
had thought it should have been a stirrup for Cromwell to have been made Stork
Regent. But Hall, you forget your Grammar too. Honest Lilly, who taught you
this sentence. Insipientis est dicere non putaram. And t^ke this in answer to
all the rest of your nonsense a^guments out of the same Grammarian, that Regis
est --
Parcere subjectis and debellare superbos.


You say it troubles you for that most admirable Statesman's murder, the Earl
of Strafford, but you speak not a word of relenting for that excellent Prelate,
Archbishop Laud, whose blood you are as guilty of as of that Heroic Earl, or
of the most pious Martyr K. Charles the first. I know what incen^'d you. The
Coercive powers of Ecclesiastical Courts against your vices. Purbeck and Mall
were his crimes, but farewell. Read such a Text as Prove. 20. v. 2. and one
Grammar example, Muli^ri ne credas, n^ mortuae quidem. That Mortu^, I mean, is
in sin (Hall.)

You say also, If you had thought of the filthy consequences, you would not
have voted, this devoted War, was the parent of all the mischiefs you brought
upon others (so long you were contented) And your self at last: there was the
Colloquintida, that kills Crows (Hall.)

Upon my Bedel-ship ( Hall) thou art in the right, that His Majesty thought he
died unjustlie, especially when the worst of men sat in judgment upon the
best of Princes, when Wolves, and Goats, and Foxes, usurped the chair of
Execution, and condemned (Alas! what could they do else?) the Lamb of the Land,
whose innocent blood, had it cried for justice (as thou gav'st it without
resenting) thou had not this day had leisure to repent,

But (Hall) you have a sting in the end of this Paragraph, that is, The
Parliament, or the Council of State, had forborne to acquaint the KING with his
subjection to the Law. By which filthy Sentence you would insinuate, at least,
that he was, and his Successor is, under the lash of it. God forbid, that Kings
should act any thing contrary to their Laws, that is, pardon Murderers,
Adulterers; yet if they should by their Perogative mercy do such a thing,
centainly those that had the benefit of their Grace, should not call in
question their power. It is one thing to be an (...), and Exactor operis,
another thing to be under the Law. The King (Hall) is to see every man do the
duty belonging to the offices under him, not to provide so carefully for his
subjects, that they should be Masters over him.

I will not trouble you with the 51. Psalm, nor the L^mentation, though the
first vindicates your objection, the second will well become the objector.
Lawgivers (not Law-contrivers, nor Money-granters) are above the Laws they
make: understand me rightly, not so above, as not to do Right ad libitum, but
so above, that if they do otherwise (which God forbid) no law of their own can
reach their persons. Did Nathan say any thing to David, but that he had sinned
against the Lord? and J presume his commission was higher then Hendersens.

Kings are Gods (that is, Loco Dei) by Lievtenancie, and they shall die like
men, but not by men, that is, by their subjects, by a Court of highest
Injustice, though otherwise called.

Nowsuppose you had no murtherous intention, that is still as much as to say,
You did think you did right in giving your bloody vote: It cannot be supposed,
no more then you can suppose that you intend no lust, nor Fornication, nor
Adultery, when you leap into the arms of another Lady, and renounce your own
^ive's. For as to that, also it may be replied, that you do it for the
conservation of your handsome Species, for the educing of such another, as God
never send; that is, Tui similis per omnia, which never a Chancelour in England
register, nor Apparritor will ever believe, or allow, nay, your o^ne Dad, were
he alive, would have made you commute for doing and saying so. Farewell,
without be ^a^g'd.

Yet for all our civil Vale, take heed how you depart, for Old Nick has an
absolute coercive authority, and never allowed any coordinate Powers, States,
nor Parliaments, within his infernal Dominions; for that were to make a
division in his Elaboratories, which he will never suffer, bu^ creates and
makes these schisms amongst us here, which he punishes severely there, though
he set you all on work.

Good Hall take heed of fire and brimstone, it is not so pleasant as Mall,
Myrtle, and Iessimine.

I shall conclude all with this short story of your self, which was transacted
in the Physick-garden at Oxford, where these lines were wrote. You came to
caress Mall with some bottles, and other incentives to the sport; when she,
upon some default in her shoo-latchet, stooped to amend it, but arising up, you
fell down, and snuffed up the air of the place she stood upon, thinking she
had dropped some Essences from her Cape bonae Speranzae, and as if you had been
borne when the sign was in Taurus, so extended your nose, as if you had been
Marten Bull.

POSTSCRIPT to Coll. MARTEN.
Sir,
DId I not honor some honorable and gentile Relations of yours, I could have
been larger, and every where made your Letters by some marginal notes more
sacetious. I have not, J protest, wronged a punctum in yours, nor a Parenthesis
in your Ladies Epistles. I am a Hi^^orian, not a Commentator* and they say that
those are most faithful of them, who tell Res gestas sine censuris vel
commentariis: wherefore it is said, that Livy was a better Historian then
Tacitus, and this the better Statesman.

Pray Sir, give me leave to take notice of your familiar compellation of your
money, sometimes you call it Malls and Philips, sometimes roguy Besses,
sometimes Iamies, sometimes Charlses, which is a sign that you like them better
in their stamps then in their offices and Royal functions. Hall, thy face would
have made as good a Numisma, or Medal, as Vespasian Claudius, or Galbas, with
this motto or inscription, Neminem am^ Gubernantem. This adviso, and I
conclude, though as to the sense and words of it, they are as you are, much
conversant, circa umbilicu^; read them: Eccles. 19. v. 2. That Impudent in the
Text is a Rebel in some Commentators: And Eccles. 26. v. 12.

FINIS

CORONAT OPUS.

I am for the Crown still.


