A LETTER FROM Mr. MARSHALL, and Mr. NIGH, appointed Assistants to the
Commissioners of SCOTLAND: To their Brethren in England, concerning the
success of their affairs there, partly concerning the Covenant.

Published by the Order of the House of Commons.

LONDON, Printed for John Bellamy and Ralph Smith. 1643.

A LETTER FROM Mr. Marshall, and Mr. Nigh, appointed Assistants to the
Commissioners of SCOTLAND.
Reverend Friends,
WE cannot but communicate unto you the good hand of God with us in the Work
we are employed in, our Commissioners have most indefatigably followed their
business night and day, having scarcely allowed themfelves time to eat or
sleep, and have had to do with the Convention of States, and Assembly of
Divines, (both which we found happily sitting at the time of coming) the
gravest and wisest that we have seen, and who we think are more sensible of
our condition than we are our selves, the leading men both of the Convention
and Assembly, and (as far as we can understand) even the whole body of the
Nation looking upon it as the cause of Christ, and that they cannot but be
ruined if we perish; we are fully and confidently persuaded they are generally
resolved to live and die with us in this quarrel against the Popish and
Episcopal Faction, and for the Reformation of Religion according to the word;
we know multitudes are prejudiced against them as if we might expect no help
from them but for their own ends, but if you dare give any credit to our
faithfulness and most diligent inquisition and observation; (having
opportunity of conversing with the holiest of our Brethren their Ministers that
are in the Kingdom) let us prevail with you to beat down all such unworthy
thoughts and jealousies of them, they are guided by God in this work, and we
are persuaded will bring glory to Christ and requital of all our former love
to them. Some select men have debated with us of the most ready way to stir
up their people to come in readily, and they suggested and made it apparent
that the joining in a Covenant to be subscribed would take them all, and a
form was agreed upon, which when you see, you will easily discern, has been
drawn up with that wariness as to express their desires as well as ours,
that there might be no bogling at it. And when our Commissioners and the
Commissioners of the Convention and Assembly had on Wednesday at night agreed
upon the form, it was the next day brought into the General Assembly, where
we were present, and eye witnesses of what was done, where as a good
introduction to it, the Letter from our Assembly was first read, and
entertained with great acceptance, (the Moderator solemnly professed that it
deserved often to be read amongst them) and then the businesses of the Covenant
was propounded, and the form read twice over. There were present between
twenty and thirty of their prime Nobility, we think near a hundred Noble men
and Divines spoke to the business before it was Voted, no man speaking against
it, except the Kings Commissioner, who was answered and dealt with, with that
wisdom, freedom, and resolution both by Nobles and Divines as your heart can
think, though he professed that as a private man he liked it, and said after
the Voting he heard a joyful sound. In fine it was Voted and agreed to be
entered into (for substance, for it was by the Moderator declared it was the
substance intended and not expressions or words) as soon as they heard their
Brethren in England agree upon it; we say their brethen, not limiting it to the
Parliament, which possibly may not be fitting. And when you have agreed it (as
we hope you will) we are persuaded the body of the Kingdom of Scotland will
live and die with you, and we doubt not but they will be preparing speedily
upon expectation of the Covenants passing amongst you. We scarce ever saw so
much of Christ for us as this day in the Assemblies carrying of this business,
such weeping, such rejoicing, such resolution, such patheticall expressions, as
we confess has much refreshed our hearts, before extremely sadded with ill
news from our dear Country; And has put us in good hope that this Nation
(who set about this business as becomes the work of God and the saving of
Kingdoms) shall be the means of lifting up of distressed England and Ireland.
We are persuaded that the most dejected and sad heart amongst you would have
the same thoughts we are now possessed with, if they were with us; we think
twenty thousand of them will come to your help rather then fail. And again
we say we hope you will quickly see a good Army with you; yea, something done
before, or as soon as these Letters come at you: continue with all
earnestness as you were wont in seeking God, and be not discouraged, or suffer
your spirits to languish; surely the arm of the Lord in this assistance
extends it self toward you, In the Mount the Lord will be seen. Some of
these reverend and godly Ministers are coming to our Assembly; we shall not
need to entreat you to give them the right hand of fellowship, nor will we
relate in what a hearty respectfull way we have been received by them both in
public and private. We forbear to write any more because this Bearer will
acquaint you with our affairs, (and distribute our respects amongst you) and
his have allows us no more time, but to commit you to the grace of God, and
subscribe our selves.

From Edinburgh, Aug. 18. 1643. Your most affectionate and dear Brethren,
Stephen Marshall. Philip Nigh.


THe Letters we brought with us from some Brethren, melted the Assembly beyond
measure, and have been of great use, blessed be God.


