A SERMON IN COMMEMORATION Of the truly Virtuous and Religious Gentlewoman,
Mris. ELIZABETH DERING, WIFE OF Mr. CHARLES DERING Youngest Son of Sir ANTHONY
DERING Knight.

She departed this life at Pluckley in Kent the 26. day of July, 1640.

By Robert Marriot, Vicar of Lenham in Kent.

PSALM 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for N. Bourne, at the South entrance of the Royal
Exchange, 1641.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL AND HIS MUCH Honored friend, Master CHARLES DERING.
SIR,
No trial does so illustrate the truth and power of that Religion we profess,
as does our patient and cheerful suffering of adversity. No adversity does so
sensibly affect us as does the parting with our intimatest and entirely beloved
friends. No friends are comparable to such as are united to our selves by the
bond of Conjugal affection; like Nathan's Ewe Lamb eating of our own bread, 2 Samuel 12.^.
drinking of our own Cup, and lying in our bosom. Now these Circumstances, as
they do the more aggravate your loss, so will they the more renown your
virtues, if you can so far master your passions as to bear them moderately:
which you may the better do by following S. Paul's counsel in this case to his
Thessalonians. 1 Thessalonians 4.13.
Be not ignorant concerning those that are asleep, that ye sorrow not as
others which have no hope. Where the Apostle does not say peremptorily, sorrow
not, for that was with the Stoics to deny you natural affection: but sorrow
not without hope, least with the Heretics you deny your self a Resurrection.
The spirit of God directs you to a mean in mourning which will best suit with
your sables, that is, to weep as if you wept not. 1 Cor. 7.30.
So you shall show your love by your tears, and your faith by your moderation.

And truly Sir, amongst the most I know, you have least cause to exceed in
sorrows for the death of your dear consort: if you please seriously to
consider, how that nothing deplorable or grievous has befallen her, more than
what has commonly happened to believers, while in the mean time, God
wonderfully manifested his goodness in sundry remarkable mercies toward her,
which he has ofttimes withheld from many of his choysest children. That she
dyed, that she dyed young, that she dyed a stranger in this Kingdom; that she
was troubled with some doubtings before; and that she has left you destitute
since her death, as it is all you can object to minister matter of grief unto
you, so let me assure you, that there is no particular of it, either new or
strange.

1. As for death, Debemur morti nos nostraque. It is as good a debt as any the
world knows, for the levying whereof there is an extent upon all mankind, and
a statute enacted primo Adami, Heb 9, 27.
and recorded by S. Paul, Statutum est omnibus semel mori, It is appointed for
all men once to dye. Hence homo (a common name to all men) is ex humo from the
ground, and Adam signifies but Red Earth, of which both the Prince and the
Peasant are alike Elemented. And though there be diversities amongst us while
we live, some like Nabuchadnezer have golden heads, and some like Chrysostom
have golden tongues, yet we all stand luteis pedibus, on seet of clay, for so
says the Prophet, Dan. 2.32.33.
What man is he that shall not see death?

2. And though long life be accounted a blessing, yet is not a short life to
be esteemed a curse, since God conferres length of days to some (says S.
Austin) to show that they are his gift, and denies them to other, some that we
may know how that he has better gifts than this: yet cannot he by this deny
all be said more to break promise with his people (when for a long life on
earth, he pays with an eternal life in heaven) then Herod with Herodias if
(promising but the half) he had given her the whole Kingdom. (...), whom God
loves he dy's young, said Menander: God (whom he makes most account of) those
he soonest takes, said Euripides; and Nazianzen tells us, hoc nobis adfert
longius vitae spatium, quod plura mala partim videmus, partim perpetramus,
partim sustinemus, This is all the benefit of long life, to see more evil,
suffer more sorrow, and commit more sin.

3. Nor was she the only stranger who departed this life remote from her
native Country. Adam her first Father by generation, Heb 11.9. 1 Pet 3.6.
and Abraham her faithful Father by regeneration, (whose daughter she was made
by doing well, says S. Peter) dyed both in a strange land. So that if you
begin with David to complain and say she was a stranger, Psalm. 39.12.
you must add moreover, as were all her Fathers, and then the strangeness will
be taken away, and with it your complaint also. Trees transplanted ofttimes
become more fruitful, and so did she: whom God perceiving to bear so well,
has removed into his Celestial Paradise, where being planted (as says the
Psalmist) in the house of the Lord, she shall for ever flourish in the Courts of
our God, Ps 92.13.
and grow green to eternity.

4. And as for her doubtings, they may the more confirm your assurance of her
happiness, for the Devil never makes war against those of his own
kingdom, who are as securely his own as temptation can make them: those whom
he tempts to doubts and despair are such whom himself doubts and despayres
of. Luke 11.21.
Our Savior tells you, while the strong man armed keeps the house, the things
which he possesses are in peace; but when Satan assaults the Fort without, it
is a certain sign he is not yet within, nor has any command of that Castle
which he holds not in quiet obedience.

5. Besides, you are not the first in this kind of loss: Genesis 23.2. Genesis 35.19.
thus Abraham was forced to forgo his Sarah, thus Jacob his Rachel: others
have had their share in the like sorrows, and company is some comfort though
it be in misery. Demonax the Philosopher seeing one immoderatly to bewayl the
death of a friend, he wished him in a great multitude, to look about if he
could find one man exempted from the like accident, which failing to do
community in the case returned him better composed.

And as these arguments are prevalent to mit igate your grief, so are there
others as equivalent to promote your comfort. How many have there been of Gods
dear children, who have gone out of the world (as Israel went out of Egypt) in
have, having their lives snatched from them by the hand of sudden death, while
God gave unto your beloved wife, time of repentance and preparation? How many
whose Sun of saving assurance has even set in a cloud of doubts, and distrust
full thoughts, (for ought that has been visible in our Horizon) while God
restored her to the joy of his salvation, to both your great rejoycings, making
her to say with the Prophet, Psalm. 94.19.
In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart, thy comforts have
refreshed my soul. How many through the malignity of their diseases, have
been dissolved on such distempered and distracted fits, that Charity herself
has been feign to look back, and take a view of their lives, before she
durst pass her verdit of their deaths. When her dissolution was so cheerful
and Christian-like, that whosoever had beheld it (though unacquainted with her
life) yet must needs have given her that testimony which the Centurion gave our
Savior: Math. 27.54.
Surely this was the child of God. How comfortably may you recount Gods
goodness toward her at the very point of her departure, both for the manner
and the time of it, not so much as faltering in her speech, nor failing in any
of her intellectualls, as many others have done, but continuing all in their
wonted vigor, while she continued her life. S. John, Revel. 1.10.
is said on the Lords day to be in the spirit, and she on the Lords day
resigned her spirit, and that in a most memorable instant: for no sooner were
you and your friends returned from commending your own selves to God in the
Church, but you were immediately called to recommend her soul to God, from the
Chamber, so where you ended your Sabbath of temporal rest there she began her
Sabbath of eternal rest. And I may truly say, Exodus 8.19.
digitus Dei hic est, the finger of God was in it, or to speak in the Prophets
phrase, this was the Lords doing, Ps. 118.23.
and it was marvailous in our eyes. Suffer me then to comfort you, as S.
Hierome did Heliodorus, Ne doleas quod talem amiseris, sed gaudeas quod talem
habueris, sorrow not so much that you have now lost, as give thanks to God,
that once you had so virtuous a companion who lived so piously, and dyed so
peaceably. And you may also comfort your self (in the absence of her, your
self united) in the words of David, for the death of his child himself
divided. You shall go to her, 2 Samuel 12.23.
she shall not return to you. And that you may assuredly follow her, to those
joys whither she is gone before and already entered: Be it your care, while you
traffic in this troublesome world, to imitate that wise Merchant in the
Gospel to pursue and purchase that one pearl of inestimable price, Matthew.
13.45.46. Math. 6.33.
namely the Kingdom of Christ and the righteousness thereof. That so having
fought the good fight, kept the faith, and finished your course, 1 Timothy 6.19. 2 Timothy 4.8.
you may lay hold on eternal life, and receive that Crown which the Lord, the
righteous Judge has conferred on her, and promised to you, and all that love
his appearing. Now that both you and yours, may constantly persevere in this
course, and be everlastingly blessed with this Crown; shall be the daily
prayer of

Your uncessant Orator, ROBERT MARRIOT.

A FUNERAL SERMON FOR Mris. ELIZABETH DERING.
PSALM 90.12. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts
unto Wisdom.


IF we peruse the passages of holy Writ, we shall there find, that Christian
Burial is not only commended, but also commanded, as a godly and charitable
work: the Fathers of the Old, and faithful of the New Testament being our
examples in the decent performance of this duty, and comely payment of this
debt, thinking no care, nor cost too much, which they bestowed on the bodies
(the vestments of the souls) of their deceased friends, while they safely
reposed them (as precious Relics) in the Wardrope of the Earth. Nor was this
care without good consideration, This one Act of Christianity, complying with
many others of especial note. as,

First, John. 11.25. Col. 1.18.
with an act of Faith in Christ, the Resurrection and the life, who is
primogenitus mortuorum, borne tanquam ex utero sepulchri, and rising the first
fruits of them that sleep, to sanctify and assure us who be the rest of the
harvest.

Secondly, with an act of Hope: Ever since the Angel sat on the Gravestone of
our Savior, saying, Resurrexit, Matthew. 28.6.
non est hic, He is risen, he is not here, we have been bold to write on the
Tombe-stones of our friends, Hic jacet -- spe resurgendi, Here lies such a one,
in hope of a glorious resurrection. Hence it is observed, that Christ from the
grave appeared to Mary, John 20.15.
in a Garden, to teach us that he will one day turn all our graves into
Garden-plots, and so husband our very dust, that by virtue of the dew of his
Resurrection, Esaias 26.19.
they shall spring out of the Earth like beauteous flowers, and be for ever
planted in the Paradise of God.

Thirdly, with an act of Charity and love; to prosecute those bodies being dead
with honor to their graves, whom we, nay whom God himself so much loved and
honored being alive, as to style them Members of Christ, and Temples of the
Holy Ghost.

Fourthly, with an act of Necessity, to separate the living from the contagion
of the dead. Abraham loved Sarah well, but being departed, he besought the
Hittits for a place to bury her out of his sight. As there is nothing whiter
then Snow of it self, Genesis 23.4.
yet being dissolved makes the fowlest water, so the purest complexion the
worst putrefaction; according to the old Axiom, corruption optimi est p^ssima.

Lastly, with an act of Mortification. The Ancients did use to take their
leaves of their friends, having brought them to their graves, in these words,
Vale, vale, nos te sequemur, Adue, adue, we will follow thee, and we retain
this course still among us; the dead corpse are carried before, while the
mourners follow after, leading us the way in which we must all walk, which
should teach us to read our own mortality in others Funerals, while we hear
the Bell to tole for another passing, to consider that if the Lord so please
it may take in us also before it ring out, when we walk over the graves of
others to remember that they are our houses also in reversion, and when we see
how suddenly the days of others are determined to learn so to number our
days as to apply our hearts unto Wisdom. So teach us etc.

It is the consent of the Fathers, and the opinion of the best expositors, that
this Psalm was penned by Moses upon this occasion, After the Israelits had
passed the Red Sea and were entered into the wilderness, Moses sent spies
before to discover the land of Canaan, who returned with these sad tidings to
the people, that the inhabitants were Giants the sons of Anak, in comparison
of whom, the Israelits were but as Grasse-hoppers, and that their Cities were
walled up to Heaven, and so impregnable. At which relation they (forgetting the
great wonders and mighty works which God had so lately showed amongst them)
murmured against the Lord and against his servant Moses. Whereupon the Lord
swear in his wrath that they should not enter into his promised rest. And from
that time forth all of the age of twenty years and upwards (except Caleb and
Iosuah) dyed in the wilderness by the way. During which mortality, Moses
composed this Psalm, wherein, having first laid down the shortness and
uncertainty of man's life, he makes this application of it, by way of prayer
unto God on the behalf of himself and the rest of Israel. That, though their
days were few, yet they might not be evil, since they could not live long,
yet that they might live well, which to do (being impossible of themselves)
they beseech God to instruct them, saying, so teach us to number our days
that, etc.

This text is a prayer for instruction, teach us.

First, in this particular, to number our days. Secondly, on this manner, so
to number our days. Thirdly, to this end, that we may apply our hearts, etc.
Now all sorts of prayers may be reduced to these 4. heads.

First, Petitory, for mercies and blessings. Secondly, Deprecatory, against
sins and evils. Thirdly, Intercessory, on the behalf of others. Fourthly,
Gratulatory in Thankfulness for past received favors.
This prayer is of the first kind, viz. a Petition, wherein are considerable 4.
things.

First, Efficiens, the teacher or instructor, God. O Lord teach us: so some
translators. Secondly, Materia, the matter taught: to number our days.
Thirdly, Forma, the manner how this numbering is to be done. So, Fourthly,
Finis, the End why they would be so taught to number, etc. viz. That they may
apply their bearts, etc.
Efficiens, the teacher God; to him Moses and Israel direct their prayers.

Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts 7.

The Secretaryes of Nature, the most experienced in human knowledge of any
nation then in the world, and the rest of Israel having lived so long amongst
them, could not but have learned so much Arithmeticke as to number a few days,
why then do they make it so great a suit unto God? To which it may well be
answered.

Humane knowledge of Arts and Sciences may go far in the information of the
understanding, Sol.
but they are all ignorant in teaching reformation of life, they may teach us
scientiam capitis, how to apply our heads to wisdom, but that which Moses
would learn here is scientiam Cordis, how to apply his heart to wisdom, which
none but God can teach. Acts 10.1.6.
The Centurion by his his own Art, had learned so well in Military discipline,
that he became a Captain over the Italian band, but he was so ignorant in
Gods war, that he knew not how to serve there, as a common soldier, till
Peter instructed him.

The Ethiopian Eunuch was so well versed in Courtship, Acts 8.27.
that he was chief favorite to Candace Queen of Ethiopia but could not become
Gods favorite till he sent Philip to baptize him. Paul that spoke so many
languages, yet was unskilled in the language of Canaan, the knowledge of
Christ, Acts 9.5.
till Christ himself converted him. Acts 18.26.
Apollos an Eloquent man, yet a Novice in Christianity, till Aquila and
Priscilla took him, and taught him the way of God more perfectly. Here is a
divine kind of Arithmeticke, that none but God can teach, for the numbering of
the people, we have David for an example: 2 Samuel 24.2.
for the numbering of our money, our sheep, our Cattle, we can do it our
selves, the Poet could say Mill mei teneris errant in montibus agni, and
again, pauperis est numerare pecus. Nay, man can number the latitude of the
Earth, the altitude of the stars, etc. but for the numbering of his days to
make up his account with God aright, to see what arrerages he has, and to
sum up exactly his time to serve him, None but he that is God can teach us
this.

It is not to vilify humane learning that I speak this, No, I know Wisdom
has enemies enough, though she be justified by her own children; But rather
to magnify God, teaching above others, and to show that it is his privilege
alone (who does all things, Wisd. 11. Psalm. 147.4. Math. 10.30.
by number, weight, and measure) who numbers the stars and calls them all by
their names, who numbers the hayres of our head, and suffers not one to fall to
the ground without his providence) to teach us so to number our days as to
apply our hearts to wisdom. Here let all Moralls be mute, and all sciences
be silent, let other teachers lay their hands on their mouths and learn
themselves. Or if they will speak, let them confess, that 1. He is the best
Grammarian, that lives with fewest incongruities in his faith, and manners,
that keeps the best Concordance in his life to the rules of the Word, that
walks aequis passibus in Gods ways, that with Zachary and Elizabeth
endeavors, Luke 1.6.
to walk in all the Commandments of God, blameless and without reproof^,
Luke 1. 2. He is the best Logician that knits his fist against sin and
impiety, that makes the strongest Syllogismes against the temptations of Satan,
allurements of the world, and lusts of the flesh, that backs himself with
arguments out of Gods Word, wherewith as with the shield of Faith, Helmet of
Salvation, and sword of the Spirit, he is able to repel all the fiery darts
of Satan, that can best divide the Word of truth, best define the mysteries of
Godliness, and best discourse unto edification. 3. He is the best Rethorician
that with Apollos is mighty and eloquent in the Scriptures, Acts 18. that with
Esaias rents his Rethoricke in sermons of Repentance, and with David shows his
Poesy in divine Hymns: that with Paul can persuade Agrippa not only almost,
Acts 26.28.
but altogether to become a Christian, and make Faelix tremble with his
discourse while he preaches of Temperance, Acts 24.25.
Righteousness and Judgment to come, that studyes to deliver himself not so
much in fine as fit and significant words, Acts 2.37.
that with Peter may prick the hearts of the auditory, and drive them to
confession of sins and amendment of life. 4. He is the best Geometrician,
whose Rule, is the Word, whose square is the will, and whose line and level
are the glory of God, that has learnt with all Saints to comprehend what is
the height and depth and breadth and length of the love of Christ, Ephesians. 3.18.
and can resolve with Saint Paul: that neither height nor depth, Rom 8.^9
nor any other creature, shall be able to separate him from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. 5. He is the best Astronomer that can pick
out of the hoasts of Heaven, viz. The Sun, Moon and Stars, matter to
admire Gods Wisdom and power, and that has learnt with David by the Heavens
to declare the glory of God, Psalm. 19.1.
and by the firmament to show his handy-worke, that can say by taking the
altitude of the Pole, Psalm. 103.11.12.
look how high the heaven is above the Earth, so great is Gods mercy to them
that fear him, and considering the diverse Clymats can say, look how far
the East is from the West, so far has he set our sins out of his sight. 6.
He is the best Musician who keeps a continual Harmony in his Conscience,
whose life is in tune to Gods Word, who speaks to the Lord in Psalms and
Hymns and spiritual songs, Colos. 3.16.
singing and making Melody in his heart, whose whole life from Gamut, to Ela,
viz. from his Cradle to his grave, is spent in Carroling forth his Makers
praise. 7. Lastly, he is the best Arithmetician who has learned Moses
Arithmeticke in the text, viz. so to number his days, as to apply his heart
unto wisdom.


viz. Materia the matter desired to be taught, and that is to number our days.
So teach us to number our days, etc.

Wherein I shall show you both what is meant by days, and how they are to be
numbered.

By days, in Scripture are signified two things.

First, the trade of a man's life, his whole employment about which he is
always conversant. So taken John 11.9. are there not twelve hours in the day
wherein a man may walk (1) work etc. Now all Men's employment consists, either
in Contemplation, as in thoughts and words; or in Action, as in deeds and
works: So that if we consider our days according to this acception, we must
be careful then to number,

First, our thoughts, by embracing the Prophets lesson, Ier. 4.14.
suffer not a vain thought to lodge in thee. Sin may, nay, will oftentimes
visit us as a stranger, or traveller 2 Samuel 12.4. but we must in no case
entertain him as a friend to dwell with us, no not so much as in the thought,
but we must labor to kill it in the Conception, to crush the Cocatrice while
it is in the shell, Ps. 137.9.
to dash the children of Babylon against the stones, while they are but
children; ibi maxim observandum, and extirpandum est peccatum, ubi nasci
solet, says a Father sin must be met withal, where it first enters, and
that is in the thought, we must take heed how we busy them in things either
impossible, or unprofitable, but be always meditating either on the vanity of
the world to contemn it, on death to prepare for it, on judgment to avoid it,
on Hell to escape it, and on heaven to enjoy it.

Secondly, our words which must have these three properties, few seasonable,
and weighty remembering that we must give an account for every idle word,
Matthew. 12.36.
and therefore to embrace the Apostles precept to have our speech always with
grace seasoned with salt, Col. 4 6.
Considering that while thy word is in thy breast it is thine own to correct,
but once uttered it is another to censure thee, and cannot be recalled.
Nescit vox missa reverti: says on, Nulli tacuisse nocet, nocet esse loquutum,
many have repented, and paid dear too, for their unreasonable, and
unseasonable speeches, few or none for their silence; therefore labor always
to keep a watch before the door of thy lips, and of thy heart; that nothing
enter in, or proceed out, but what may savor of grace to the hearers.

Thirdly, our Actions; In the Legal sacrifices amongst many other things, they
were enjoined to offer the Turtle, and amongst many other Ceremonies observed
this was on, that they wrung off the head of it backward. Now every believer is
a Turtle, Psalm. 74.19.
Deliver not the soul of thy Turtle said David, into the hands of the enemy,
and we are hereby taught, every night when we offer up our evening sacrifice,
to do it by looking back to our Actions of the day, and wherein we have done
well, bless God for it, and continue; wherein amiss, repent and sin no
more. The Philosopher taught his Scholars every night to ask themselves these
three questions. (...); The same make thou to thy self. How have I
transgressed? What ill have I done? What good have I left undone? Genesis
1.4.12.18.21, ^1.
Thus did God, every day he looked back upon what he had done, and saw that it
was good, do thou so every day, and though thou cannot say of all thou
beholdest that it is very good, yet assure thy self it will be far better by
this Circumspection.

Again by days are signified, Secondly, the Time of man's life, Job 14.14. all
the days of my appointed time will I wait, etc. Now to number these days is
not to tell 20. 30. 40. years etc. this every child can do upon his fingers,
but rightly to number them, is to employ them well to Gods glory and the good
of our souls, in the increase of virtue, that as we grow in years, we may
grow in grace, as in stature, so in wisdeme and favor with God and man, Luke
2. ult. Titus Vespasian would tell his friends (Amici, diem perdidi) he had
lost a day when he had done no memorable act in it. Apelles being asked how
he became so famous in his Art of Picture-drawing, answered, Nulla dies sine
linea, that be never mist a day, but he drew somewhat for the improvement of
his skill: If we will be perfect, we must daily practice the way to
perfection. The Heathens were so cautelous in the employment of this time, that
they derided the Jews, thinking that they lost every Sabbath day on which they
rested. And it is to be feared that many of us loose it indeed, or rather our
selves on it; when resting from our bodily labor, we rest not from sin and
wickedness even on the Lords day. Non quam diu, sed quam been; God does not so
much respect how long as how well we live: Nor does he account of any time
more, then what is spent in his service. Hence Philo calls an old sinner
Longaevus puer, and another calls him Elementarius senex, an old child, one
that was never other but a child, who when for his age, he is come even to the
brinke of the Jordan of death, and expects to pass into Canaan, is sent back
again to dye in the wilderness of Sin, because of his ignorance and
unbelief. One told his friend that he perceived him to decline so fast, that
he thought he could not live above a year, to whom he replied, that if he was
sure to live one year, he would make it two; and being demanded how, he
answered by doubling his care in Gods service, who numbers our days by our
diligence: and indeed this is the way, though we live but a while on earth,
yet to live long in Gods account: not only to number our days, but sic so to
number them as to apply our hearts, etc. Which brings in the third particular.

Forma, the manner how to number, etc. sic so: so teach us, etc.

Now God in all our sacred performances has especial respect unto this,
preferring the manner of the doing of them before the matter it self: hence he
is said to be better pleased with Adverbs, then with Adjectives, non quam
bonum, sed quam been; God never accounts that for good, which is not well done.
It is not therefore enough to pray, but we must so pray as to be heard; Not
enough to hear, but we must so hear as to profit; Not enough to believe, but
we must so believe as to be saved; Not enough to run, but we must so run as
to obtain; not enough to number our days, but we must so number them as to
apply etc.

Now there are six rules teaching us so to number our days; taken from the
practice of ordinary Arithmeticke: The

First, is knowledge, he that goes about to cast an account must know his
rules, how to number, how to divide, how to multiply, how to substract, etc.
Else when he has cast up his sums, he cannot tell, whether they be done
right or wrong, and contain more or less. In like manner who so will number
his days, must have knowledge of the Rules to number by: Now there are,

Two rules, by which all men living number their days, viz. a rule of Folly,
and a rule of Wisdom.

The wicked and ungodly, number by the rule of folly, they by looking upon
death at the wrong end of the perspective, think it to be farther off, then
indeed it is; and their days to be more then they prove to be; and so secure
themselves in sin, Matthew 25.5.8.10
till in a moment they are taken away. By this rule the Foolish Virgins numbered
their days, thinking the bridegroom would not come so soon, they slept out
their oil, and neglected to buy more, till Christ came, and found them
unprepared, and so they were shut out. Thus the evil servant in the Gospel
numbered, Luke 12.45 46.
etc. When supposing his Master would still delay his coming, he began to beat
his fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken, till his Master
came, in an hour that he was not aware of, and cut him off, and gave him his
portion with the Hypocrites, etc. Thus the rich Glutton numbered, etc. Luke
12.18.19.20.
Soul take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many days, etc. when that
night his soul was taken from him.

The good and godly, they number their days, by the rule of Wisdom, which
consists in the serious consideration of three things. Psalm. 39.6.


1. Of the vanity of man's life: so vain that it will not admit of any
extenuation, being compared in Scripture to things of (smallest if) no account,
Psalm 102.11.
as to a dream to a shadow, to grasle, to a weavers shutle, to a shepherds
tent, to a Bubble, Esaias 40.^.
of which it may be said, Quamprimum oritur, moritur, as soon out as in,
Colos. 3.2. Iam. 4.14.
which should instruct us to place our affections, on more enduring objects,
and not to trust too much to this vapor of life.

2. Of the Brevity of man's life. There are long spaces, which by a speedy
course are quickly ended; and there are short spaces, which having a slow mover
are long in going; but where the space is short, and the motion quick, that
journey must needs be soon dispatched; such a thing is life. The swiftest
motion in the world has been stayed, Ios 10.12 ^3.
the Sun stood still at the prayer of Iosuah; and went not down in one whole
day, and yet then at that instant the life of man went a days journey forward.
Admit that of the Psalmist, Ps. 90.10.
viz. that the days of our age are threescore years and ten, which can be
granted, but by way of supposition, for where one attaines unto it, threescore
and ten, threescore and ten times told go before; yet I say admit it: and then
he that knows how to number these days, by the rule of Wisdom, can tell you,
how that half of these years, by the rule of division, are lost in sleep:
there remains then but 35. whereof 15. at least by the rule of substraction
must also be taken away for our childhood, wherein we were ignorant how to
glorify God, or help our selves aright; then remains but 20. years, which
being joined by the rule of Multiplication, to our troubles, sicknesses,
sorrows, necessary cares, etc. so often multiplied upon us, tell me (if God
account of no time but what is spent in his service, if what the Philosopher
spoke of man be not true: that his life is but a day song, Nay, if what the
Prophet David spoke be not true also, Ps 36.6.
that this day is but a span long.

3. Of the uncertainty of Man's life; The time past is gone, as if it had never
been; the time to come is uncertain, we are altogether unsure of it; we have
no time but (...) this very instant; and we know not how long we shall hold
that: It was the saying of one of our own Poets, Fleres, si scires unum tua
tempora mensem;
Rides, cum non sit forsitan una dies.


Thou would weep if thou knew thy life would end this month: How can
thou laugh, when perhaps thou shall not live one day? Luke 12.39.
If the good man of the house knew at what time the thief would come, he would
watch (says our Savior,) and not suffer himself to be surprised: nor his
house to be broken up; our bodies are the house, our souls the prize, death
the thief, and because thou know not at what hour he will come, watch
every hour. Ideo obscuratur unus, ut observentur multi, said S. Austin, God
has therefore concealed from thee, that one day of thy death; that thou
might so expect it every day. The Ancients persuaded to this care by this
familiar instance: Had thou seven servants, and were fully ascertained that
at some time, or other, one of them would kill thee, but which or when thou
could not tell, would thou not be very cautelous of them all, and very
careful of giving any of them any advantage? why now remember thy life is but
a multiplication of seven days, and one of these will kill thee, but which of
these, or when, because thou know not, thou ought to be prepared on all
of them. Let not the thought of thy last end, be the last end of thy thought,
but foresee this Basiliske death in time, so shall thou prevent the danger.

2. The second Rule for the so numbering, etc. is Intention, a man that goes
about to cast an account, must mind it, and intend it as he goes in order,
else if he forget any of his sums, or omit any of his rules, he must begin
again, all before is to no purpose. So must every Christian be diligent, and
intent in this his spiritual Arithmeticke, and mind this duty of numbering his
days, with all circumspection: a man that minds one thing so much, that he
forgets another, we say in our usual phrase, that he is out of his numbers,
the like may be said of those who are so much given to number their earthly,
that they forget their heavenly estate. I speak not this to withold any man
from a moderate care to provide necessaries for this life, No; He that does it
not is worse than an Infidel, John. 11.19.
says Saint Paul. Martha and Mary may dwell together: Christ would have us to
be wise as serpents, if withal we be innocent as Doves. Matthew. 10.16.
The thing I dissuade is, that we suffer not the serpent to eat up the Dove,
nor Martha to turn Mary out of doors, that our overmuch care for the world
make us not negligent of heaven: a Christian should imitate the Dolphin which,
is said to swim, with one eye on the waters, and the other looking on the
sky; so must he have an eye to heaven, in providing for his soul in the
sight of God, 2 Cor. 8.21.
and an eye to the earth in providing things honest in the sight of men.

3 The third Rule: They that cast an account, they begin with the least
figures first, and so proceed from units to tennes from tennes to hundreds,
from hundreds to thousands, etc. So in our numbering of our days, though at
first, our knowledge of God be but small, yet let us go on, and it will
multiply like good seed in good ground, in some 30. in some 60. Math. 13.8.
in some 100. fold, the way of virtue is like the Rock to Jonathan, and his
armor-bearer, hard to clyme, 1 Samuel 14.13.14.
but victory at the top, or like the Greek T, and Roman Y, narrow at the
bottom, but as we ascend they branch out: So will Gods gifts increase, if we
use them well, Ezekiel. 47.3.4.
grace is like Ezekiells waters which did rise more and more till they came up
to the head, or like our Saviors wheat which grew more and more, Mark 4.27.28.
till it came to the Harvest. Samuel was dedicated to the Lord from his youth,
but it was observed of him, that the elder he grew, the more zealous he was
in his course, thus should old men be, and all men too, quo seniores eo
sanctiores.

Cantator Cignus funeris ipse sui: was said of a Reverent man, that like the
Swan, the nearer his death, the sweeter he sung, the more heavenly his
Meditations. Christians should be like Rivers, which the nearer they come to
the Sea, the swifter they run; and it should be said of them as of the Church
of Thyatira, Their latter end should be better then their first. Revel. 1.19.


The fourth Rule. They that cast accounts begin at the left hand, and proceed
to the right; so must we in the numbering of our days. All men number, but the
wicked begin at the right hand, viz. in praising their good deeds, boasting of
their gifts, and glorying in the Creatures of God by them abused, but end at
the left hand of Gods displeasure. Luke 18.11.
Thus the Pharisee numbered, God I thank thee, I am not as other men are,
beginning at the right hand, but he ended at the left, for the text says, he
went away not justified. Thus Dives began to number at the right hand in purple
and fine linen and delicious fare, Luke 16.19.
but ended at the left in hell. Thus they number that cry, Let us eat and
drink, 1 Cor. 15.32.
for to morrow we shall dye, saying with the wicked, fill us more wine, and we
will satisfy our selves with strong drink, Esaias 56.12.
and to morrow shall be as to day, and much more abundant.

But the godly begin at the left hand, mortifying and sorrowing for their
sins, and end at the right hand of Gods favor: Luke 18.13.
Thus the Publican numbered his days beginning at the left hand, God be
merciful unto me a sinner, and ended at the right hand, he went, says the
text, unto his house justified. Thus Saint Paul numbered, 1 Timothy 1.13.
beginning at the left hand; I was a persecutor, etc. but ending at right, I
found mercy, because I did it ignorantly. Thus Polycarpus numbered his days,
when going to his sufferings, he was told, if he would swear by Caesar, and
rail at Christ, he should be spared; he answered, these fourscore and odd
years have I served him, and found him my good Master, and I will not now deny
him. Thus S. Chrysostom taught his charge to number their days, to cast up
how many hours there were in the week, viz. 168. and to be careful, that
God had his due out of them, viz. all the hours of the seventh day, and some
hours of every day.

The fifth Rule: They that cast an account, must know the place of every figure,
for what it stands. So must we know, and try our selves, in what place we
stand in Gods service, according to his talents given to us. No man must stand
as a cipher; if he do, God will so esteem him. The Lacedaemonians did use to
decline their military men through three tenses of the Indicative Mood, in the
first Rank or Chorus came the old worn Soldiers, whose strength was spent,
and their word was Fuimus, we have been valiant in our time: in the second,
came the lusty young gallants, and their word was Sumus, we are valiant, try
who dare; and in the third came the children, whose word was Erimus, we shall
be valiant if we live to it, according to the old verse, Vota senum, consulta
virorum, facta juventae. Let young men be valiant in action, middle age men in
consultation, old men in devotion, God allows no man to live without some
calling, Genesis 3 19.
In the sweat of thy brows, or of thy brains, thou must eat thy bread.

Lastly, they that cast an account, though they set never so many ciphers
together, yet if they have no figure before them, they stand for nothing: but
add but one figure in the first place, and that will give them all their
several quantities, and make the ciphers to be great sums.

In like manner all we possess are but ciphers, unless Christ be preferred
before them. It is he that gives the blessing and the comfortable use of what
we have: without Christ, beauty is but vanity: wisdom but folly: strength
but infirmity: and riches but misery. Ideo malus faelix putatur quia quid sit
faelicitas ignoratur, says S. Austin; worldly men are counted happy by none
but such who know not what happiness is. The whole world without Christ is but
a bare cipher which it properly resembles, and cannot profit in the day of
wrath, for Christ tells us so much: What will it profit a man to gain the
whole world, Mark 8.36.
and to lose his own soul? But place Christ before it, and then every
creature in it shall be avaylable for our good: And Christ assures us this too,
Matthew. 6.33.
first seek the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all other
things shall be added unto you. So then the way to be truly great, is to be
truly good, virtue is the best Nobility, Christianity the greatest dignity,
and godliness the surest gain. Let it be then our chief labor, So to
number our days, since it will both supply our houses with wealth, and apply
our hearts to wisdom, which brings me to the last particular, viz.

Finis, the End, why we desire to be so taught: That we may apply our hearts
to wisdom. Wherein observe first, What kind of wisdom this is. Secondly, how
our hearts are said to be applied unto it.

For the first, there are two sorts of wisdom, as Heady wisdom, and Hearty
wisdom; Earthly wisdom, and Heavenly wisdom: Marthas wisdom, and Maryes
wisdom.

Now were we ever to live in this world, Marthas wisdom would be preferred,
but since our days are numbered with God, Maryes choice will best teach us so
to number them our selves as to apply our hearts to heavenly wisdom. Which may
be distinguished from the earthly in 4. particulars.

1. By the Object: The Object of heavenly wisdom is Christ, who is made unto
us, Wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. 1 Corinthians. 1.30.
But of earthly wisdom, vanity and sin.

2. By the Properties: Heavenly wisdom is pure, peaceable, gentle and easy to
be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality and without
Hypocrisy. Iam. 3.17. But earthly wisdom is mixed with sin, mudded with lust,
cruel, crafty, and quarelsome. Iam. 3.15.

3. By the School where they are to be learnt, Heavenly wisdom is taught
only of God, by his Spirit, and in his Word; but the other has as many
Masters as there are corrupt minds.

4. By the end at which they aim. The one tends chiefly to the good of the
soul, howsoever it fare with the body: But the other chiefly to satisfy, and
fulfill the lusts of the flesh without respect unto the soul: Let an earthly
wise man have Esaus blessing, Genesis 27.39.28.
the fatness of the earth, and let who will take Jacobs blessing the dew of
Heaven. Psalm. 4.8.
Let their corn and wine and oil increase; it is all they care for, as for
the light of Gods countenance, they regard it not.

For the Second, he that believes what God affirms, applies his heart to
faith: He that does what God commands, applies his heart to Obedidience; and
he that makes use of both these in their benefits, and effects to the good of
his soul, applies his heart to wisdom.

Now, he that will so number his days as is before laid down, must thus
apply his heart to a sixfold wisdom.

First, to the Virgins Wisdom, the wisdom of Preparation Math. 25.4. The wise
Virgins took oil in their Vessels: We all know the Bridegroom Christ Jesus
will come, but when we know not, and therefore we ought always to be
prepared with the oil of grace in our lamps, that when he shall come, we may
be ready, to enter with him, into his everlasting glory. I find no other
difference betwixt the wise Virgins and the foolish, but only this; the one
did that in time, which the other would feign have done when it was too late.
If thou be wise then: prepare in time, least thou repent when it is too late.

Secondly, to the serpents wisdom, the wisdom of Preservation. Matthew. 10.16.
Be ye wise as serpents, etc. It is accounted a great part of wisdom in the
Serpent to preserve his head with all the care that may be, because all his
life lies in his head: a little blow on the head quickly kills him, but wound
him never so much on the body (his head being safe) he will recover it again.
Now the Apostle tells us, that our life is hid with God, in Christ our head,
Colos. 3.3.
in whom we must be careful to preserve, and keep our Faith, though we
suffer never so many wounds in our persons, goods, or good names, Resolving
with the Apostle, that neither tribulation, nor anguish, nor persecution, etc.
shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. Romans 8. ult.

Thirdly, to the Stewards wisdom, the wisdom of Prevention. Luke 16.8. The
Lord commended the unjust Steward, because he had done wisely, etc. The
Steward we know, being ready to be put from his place, to prevent poverty,
made himselse friends with his Masters goods, which was reputed a point of
wisdom in him. Now we are all but Stewards of what we possess, and know not
how soon we shall be taken from them, or they from us: Here then is our
wisdom, in time to make us friends with these Mammons of unrighteousnes (for
so Christ calls these earthly riches in comparison of the true treasure) that
when they sail us, Luke 16.9.
we may be received into everlasting habitations: which may be best done by
our Charity to the poor members of Christ, for, Prove. 19.17.
what we give to the poor, we lend to the Lord, says Solomon, and what is
laid out, he will repay us again. The poor man's hand is the rich man's
reasury, what he lays up there, he shall find in heaven: he that feeds the
hungry, puts bread into Christ's own mouth; he that clothes the naked, puts a
garment on Christ's own back; and he that gives to the poor, puts a penny in
Christ's own hand; himself has said it, Matthew 25.45. Eccl. 11 7.
whatsoever you do unto any of these little ones, ye do it unto me. Cast
your bread then upon these waters, and after many days you shall find it
again with a great reward.

Fourthly, to the Ants wisdom, the wisdom of Providence. Proverb. 6.6. Go to
the Ant thou sluggard, consider her ways and be wise. It is observed of the
Ant that she labors very painefully in the Summer to get provision together to
keep her in the Winter: so should we do, during the summer of health, and
prosperity, and Sunshine of the Gospel of peace, 1 Timothy 6.19.
lay up for our selves a good foundation against the Winter of trouble, need,
sorrow, sickness or other adversity: The Apostles Counsel is, Gal. 6.10.
while you have time do good to all, especially to those who are of the
household of Faith: and the Prophet renders you a reason of it, because in death
God is not remembered, Psalm 6.5.
nor will any give him thanks in the grave, while you have the light walk,
John. 11. Phil. 2.12.
and while it is called to day work out your salvation with fear and
trembling, preserve with Moses a pot of heavenly Manna, in the Arc of your
hearts, and provide with Joseph a storehouse of spiritual food in your
souls, that you may live and not dye, if God should withhold you from the
benefit of his public Ordinances.

Fifthly, to the Sydonians wisdom, the wisdom of Peace, Acts 12.20. It is
reputed a great point of wisdom in them of Tire and Sydon, that having highly
displeased King Herod, they came with one accord, and having made Blastus the
Kings Chamberlain their friend desired Peace, because their Country was
nourished by the Kings Country: Let it be our care to go, and do likewise:
we have highly offended the great King of Heaven and Earth by our manifold
sins and wickedness, having so long turned his grace into wantonness, that
we have now just cause to fear, he will turn our peace into war: withal
we know it is not for us to strive with our maker, for we are nourished by
him, by him we live and move and have our being. Here then is our wisdom, to
make Christ Jesus the Kings Son our friend: 2 Cor. 5.19.
let us by timely repentance and faith reconcile our selves unto him, and he
will reconcile us to his Father.

Sixthly, to David's wisdom, the wisdom of Piety, Psalm 119.98. I have more
wisdom then my teachers, because I keep thy Commandments, The old word for
righteousness is right wisenesse, and it is a good one, for the righteous man
is the right wise man. Otherwise how can they be wise says Jeremy, since they
have forsaken the law of their God: you may see it in Achitophel, his great
wisdom unsanctified turned to his destruction. In the fourth of Deuteronomy
the 6. Moses there tells Israel, that the keeping of Gods Commandments would
be their Wisdom in the sight of the people, and their observance of his
Statuts, would get them such renown, that all the Nations round about would
say, surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding people. I have read
of one who toward his end sequestring himself from the cares, and affairs of
the world, and betaking him to a religious course of life; a friend of his,
after some time coming to visit him, would needs know of him, how (being
unlettered as he was) he could possibly spend his time in that solitude, to
whom he replied, that since he had devoted himself to that way, he had
learnt three letters, which took up his whole time. The first he said, was a
Black letter, and that put him in mind of his sins, and some of his time he
spent here in sorrowing and bewayling his transgressions, and repenting for
them. The second was a Red letter, and this minded him of the Passion and
sufferings of his Savior, which, while he labored by Faith, to apply to
himself, did employ another part of his time: and the third, was a Golden
letter, which remembered him with the joys of Heaven, and the happiness of
Gods Elect, after this life; and the Meditation of this, took up the rest of
his thoughts. And indeed, he that has learnt these three letters well, is a
good Scholar, though he have learned no more, for by these, he shall learn to
fear God, and the fear of God, says David, is the beginning of wisdom, Ps.
ni. 10.
yea, and the end too, Eccl. 12.13.
for Salomons tells us to fear God, and to keep his Commandments, is the
whole duty of man. With this then will I end the Text; and blessed shall we
be if we can all of us so end our time; viz. in the fear of God, which that
we may the better do, I pray for my self, and you; as Moses for himself,
and Israel; Lord so teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts
unto Wisdom. Amen.

Thus having done with my Text, I suppose it may be in the next place expected
that I should in particular add something of the party, for whose sake and for
yours this Sermon is composed. This employment is not without hazard: and (as
Pericles well expressed it), Apud. Thucyd.
The Auditors will hardly be satisfied; For the near friends to the deceased,
and such as love their memory will think all too little, when others who are
either ignorant of her virtues, or envious at all praise, will think all too
much. And my self the performer may be thought by some in one place Frigide
laudare, and by others in another place nimis adulari: on the one side blamed
with partiality, on the other blasted with flattery.

I have usually been very sparing in exercises of this nature, referring the
Encomion of the dead unto the words of Solomon, Proverb. 31.31. Laudent eam in
portis facta ejus. Let their own works praise them: Being in this point very
Tender and scrupulous, how I do expose either them or my self to censure.

Nevertheless I cannot deny but that this Ceremony in it self, is both
ancient, and imitable, amongst Gods people: we read how David praises Abner
and celebrats his funeral 2 Samuel 3. How he commends Saul and Jonathan, and
how the Canonical Scripture keeps the Record of it 2 Samuel 1.

In the New Testament, Iam 5.11. Heb. 11,
we find S. James commemorating the patience of Job. S. Paul the faith of the
Fathers; Acts 9.^9.
And the devout Saints intimating to S. Peter the Charity of Doreas by showing
unto him the coats and garments which she made while she was with them: The
Fathers also were frequent in this duty. S. Bernard extolls Malachy and his
brother Gerard; S. Hierome praises Nepotian, Marcella, Blesilla, Paulina with
other virtuous women; S. Ambrose commends the Emperors, Valentinian, and
Theodosius; And Nazianzen has extant in his works whole Orations celebrating
the virtues of his brother Caesarius, his sister Gorgonia, his father Gregory,
his friend Achanasi us, and others. So that as Polanus has well observed,
howsoever the infirmities of the faithful ought to be buried with their
bodies, yet the Memorial of their virtues (so it be modestly, and moderatly
done) is a part of that civil honor which we owe to those that are departed
this life, and at rest with God. And S. Austin tells us, fiden^iore laud
praedicamus jam in vita feliciore victores, quam in ista adhuc pugnantes, we
do and may with much better confidence commend those that are Conquerors in
that far more happy life, then we can do those that are yet but combatants
in this vale of misery: for (says he) the dead are not sensible of either
flattery, or detraction; and therefore we need not fear to yield them their
due praises; nec laudantem sdulatio movet, nec laudatum tentat Elatio. Neither
the party praising does sooth with flattery, nor the party praised can swell
with vanity.

Since then the thing is not New in it self, I hope it will not be repute I
strange in me, if (straining courtesy with my usual Method) I powrea box of
Spicknard on the head of this deceased Gentlewoman: she was a wise Rebecca, and
a faithful Sarah; an amiable Rachel, anda fruitful Leah; a discreet Abigal, and
an obedient Hester; a provident Martha, and a prudent Mary; a charitable
Dorcas, and a cheerful Deborah; in a word, adevoute and a pious Elizabeth;
endeavoring to walk in all the Commandments of God blameles and without
reproof. Luke 1.6.
The chief labor of her life was rightly to learn my Text, So to number her
days as to apply her heart unto wisdom; and though she numbered but few,(to
what she might have done in the ordinary course of nature had God so pleased)
yet she profited in this divine Arithmeticke so well that she made up a mighty
total, and attained to such a portion of heavenly Wisdom, that the like is
rarely to be found in either her sex or age.

But because we know it is the end which crowns the action, and -- Vltima
semper
Expectanda dies homini, diciq. beatus
Ante obitum nemo, supremaq. funera debet:


The last day is ever to be expected, and happy can no man be said to be till
death has showed how he departed, says the Philosopher. Thereforefore I will
leave you to judge more fully of the integrity, and uprightness of her life;
by some remarkable passages before her death; the manner whereof I shall
declare unto you more particularly.

She received the sentence of death within her self, long before the execution
thereof, by means of a lingering Consumption, sent from her heavenly Father
with the same Message that the Prophet Isaiah brought to Hezekiah; Set thy
house in order, 2 Kin. 20.1.
for thou must dye, whereby her strength daily decaying, and (notwithstanding
the good use of all lawful means possible for prevention) the glass of her
life being well nigh run out; those motions of grace that were in her (like
those of nature) became now In fine velociores more quick and lively toward
her end, mounting up her soul on a swifter wing toward her happiness: the
Spirit of God did now fill the sails of her affections, with more then an
extraordinary desire of her wished-for heaven.

But Satan envying that so fure a vessel should arive at the Port without a
storm raised; a sudden tempest of doubts, and distrustful thoughts in her
soul, laboring thereby (had it been possible) to wrack her faith upon the
rock of despair, and God (willing to show his strength in her weakness)
suffers for a time this Eclipse of his wonted presence, being delighted to see
her (with the Disciples) rowing and towing against the streams of Satan's
temptations, whilst himself (with our Savior) walks by on the waves, ready
to succor her in the greatest necessity.

During which weakness, both of mind and body, her sorrowful husband with
other her choice friends (who sincerely loved her) being desirous to comply
with any course which might be thought conducible to her welfare, upon good
advise her desire brought her on Tuesday the 14 day of July last past from
London, toward Pluckley in Kent, the residence of her husbands (and truly
also) of her dearest and most tenderly affected kindred and friends.

Now as she was traveling upon the way, there happened unto her (as to Jacob in
his journey from Padan-Aram to Canaan) a grievous wrestling, Genesis 32.24.
with a fore and heavy conflict, which caused her for the time (like him) to
halt very much, not on her feet, but in her affections, beginning now
extremely to complain of her want of faith, and to doubt of the assurance of
her salvation, in both which before-time she lived fully confirmed, and this
trial was so full of trouble to her self, and grief to her loving husband
and friends then in company, that they were necessitated for that to night
lodge her and themselves short of that place whither they intended; where
having reposed her body with all sit accommodation, their chief care was how
to compose her doubts, and to comfort her weak and feeble mind: and to this
end they requested my assistance (the most unworthy pastor of that place where
then she rested) and (considering the office required, to be in it self both
Christian and charitable, and an essential part of my Ministerial charge, to
support the weak, And to bind up the broken hearted) I was gladly entreated to
assist with the best counsels that lay in me, for the reestablishing of her
peace.

Being come unto her she began to repeat unto me her former complaints,
accusing her self of a wonderful dullness, and deadness of heart; of a
mavelous want of faith, that she could not apply the comsorts of God to her
soul, nor repent as she ought for her sins; that she could not feel the
comfortable presence of Gods Spirit, as she was wont, that she had no mind to
sue unto him by prayer as before; and thereupon concludes against her self,
that certainly the Lord had forsaken her, and cast her off; and would not
restore her to the joy of his salvation: which words, she uttered with many
sighs and groans, with strong cryings, which argued truly the anguish and
distress of her soul. Whereupon sorrowing to behold her in this extremity of
affliction: (for as Solomon tells us, the spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmity, But a wounded spirit who can bear? Proverb. 18.14.)

I addressed my self to apply unto her what comfort God should enable meto
Minister: Assuring her that these spiritual desertions for a time are
familiar, to the dearest of Gods Children; instancing in David, in Job, and in
S. Paul, with other Saints, whose particular trials I dilated unto her, adding
moreover that God like a wise Father, is not always kissing his sons, but many
times correcting of them; and that his love in their humiliation, is as much
magnifyed toward them, by the saving effects of it, as is his mercy in their
exaltation. I told her farther that the sense of her weakness which she
complained of, was not weakness, but strength; for it comes not from our
corruption, that we feel our corruption, but from Gods grace, and that the
detestation of sin, with a desire to repent; is true repentance indeed, and a
manifest work of the spirit; and though God find many things in us that he
likes not, yet he ever loves and likes this in us, that we do dislike and
loath our selves; for God respects not so much our state, as our purpose, nor
regards so much what we are, as what we desire to be. For a desire to be good,
is a good step to, yea a good part of goodness it self: I prayed her therefore,
not to wrong her self so much, as to imagine she could not repent, while she
professed she hated sin, and desired to repent; nor to offer that indignity to
Gods mercy, as to fear he should be unwilling to forgive and pardon, what she
was so willing to forgo and part withal.

I showed her also concerning her want of faith, and spiritual feeling, how
that though God might suffer her faith to faint, yet would he never suffer it
to fail: and that it is the firmest faith, which believes without feeling,
when a man can say with Job, though he kill me, Job 13.15.
yet will I trust in him. For our own feeling is no fit judge of faith, for
that is often overwhelmed with temptations, but faith must be judged of by the
word of God: Now the word tells us, that faith is not always a burning Lamp,
but sometimes, yea often a smoking Flax, Mat. 12.20.
which is so weak that it sends out neither heat nor flame, but only a smoke,
and yet will not the Lord quench this small spark of faith, neither can it
perish being begotten of immortal seed, viz. the word of God which endures for
ever. 2 Pet. 1.23.
Again we know, Magis et minus non mutant speciem, a little or a sick man is
a man as well as a great or a sound one, and a foul and a feeble hand may
receive an Alms, as well as a fair and strong one, so little and weak faith
is faith, as well as that which is great and firm, and the one may as truly
apply Christ as the other: For we do not imagine that faith does justify us,
because it is a strong and perfect virtue, but it justifies us, for the object
which it apprehends, that is, Christ the Mediator. Nor are we so much to
conclude of faith from the firm persuasion it works in us; as from the resting
and relying thereby, on the merits of Christ for salvation.

Moreover I labored to possess her with this truth, that God can be no more
said, to forsake his Servants, when for a time he hides away his face, then the
Sun can be said to be set, when it is but under a cloud: for howsoever the
sensible presence of Gods Spirit, (whereby he makes his Children to feel him,
by the gracious effects which he works in them) be subject to changes and
Eclipses; yet the secret presence of his Spirit, never departs from them, but
is continually ruling, guiding, and sustaining them in all their troubles,
according to his promise in the old Testament, Esaias 43.2. and in the New, Math.
28.20. Yea, by virtue of this secret presence, he entertaines life in our
souls, when to our own judgments we are become altogether dead and
senseless; as there is life and sap in a tree, when it has neither fruit nor
leaves, which is evident by our standing in many temptations, wherein we could
find no present grace upholding us. For had we our happiness in our own hands
(as once we had) we could not be able to hold out against the least of Satan's
assaults, but that he must needs deprive us of it: but God seeing what bad
keepers we are of our own Jewels, has translated the custody of them unto
Christ, and hung the keys at his girdle, by whom they are so safely kept for
us, 1 Pet. 1.4.5.
and we for them (as says S. Peter) that now the least spark of saving-grace
in any believer, is more then all the power of Hell is able to quench.

Thus having spent some time with her by enlarging these, and adding many other
comforts out of the Scripture, which need not here to be repeated,
(endeavoring in what I could, to satisfy her in every doubt) and perceiving a
great part of her distemper to be occasioned from the weakness of her body,
the weariness of her spirits, and the want of rest, I took my leave of her
for that time; not without this acknowledgement of comfort from her self, that
she hoped I had done her some good; promising (at the entreating of her
friends) to visit her again within few days, at the house of the worthy Lady
Dering, the now sorrowing mother of this Gentlewoman, whither the next day she
was removed: which accordingly I did the friday following; and understanding
that she with her had bindiscoursing, immediately before my coming, and her
entirely loving Brother, the right Worshipful Sir Edward Dering, (whose
observation of her was this, that those doubts and fears whereof she
complained, proceeded not so much from any sinful cause occasioned by her
self, whereof she could accuse her self, as from an over-earnest, and longing
desire of more spiritual comfort and illumination, then God was pleased for the
present to make her sensible of; as afterward it more clearly appeared):
unwilling then to tire her enfeebled spirits with too much talk together; I
stayed a while before I saw her. Then being brought into her Chamber, she told
me she much rejoiced at my coming, being persuaded that she should reap
comfort by my discourse, and was minded to request me to pray with her,
whereunto then she had a great desire, but the continuance of these good
motions (she said) was so short, that before she could call for me they were
gone, and she re-possest so with her former doubts and fears, that now she had
no heart thereto; whereupon I replied that I made no question but that these
good motions would return again: In the mean time she might hereby take notice
of Gods Method with his dearest Children, sometimes ravishing them with S.
Paul, 2 Cor. 12.4.
as it were into the third heavens, by filling their souls with unspeakeable
joy and gladness; sometimes again (with the same Apostle) humbling them as it
were to hell, by casting his angry countenance upon them, and suffering satan
also to buffet them, yet making them gainers both by his coming to them, and
his going from them; for by the one they gain comfort against despair, by the
other warning against persumption; therefore as she ought, when she felt those
heavenly Motions in her heart, to cherish them; so when she felt them not, she
ought not to think her self contemned. Withal I showed her that it is the
endeavor of many believers, so eagerly to pursue after more grace, as that
they deny themselves the comfortable use of what they have; like many
worldlings, who having a competent portion of earthly things in the eye of
others, yet repine as if they had nothing, because they have not so much as
themselves desire: wherefore I besought her, as to remember carefully to seek
for more; so not to forget thankefully to acknowledge what she had; which was
the only way to invite God, to confer upon her a larger measure of
Spiritual consolation.

I then offered unto her the assistance of my prayers, which she embraced, and
while we were entreating at the throne of grace on her behalf, for the return
of Gods favorable presence, and the light of his countenance upon her, and
that he would again restore her to the joy of his salvation etc. I applied
unto her that petition of David, Lord comfort the soul of thy Servant, for in
thee has she put her trust; which words were no sooner uttered, but she cried
with a loud voice, o that I was assured that I am thy Servant! and that I could
trust in thee as I ought, then should my soul be comforted indeed.

This done, insisting some while in directing her how she might purchase that
assurance, and that trust she so heartily prayed for, I left her until the
Thursday after.

By which time the Sun of righteousness with healing in his wings (having
dispelled in good measure those mysts of diffidence which eclipsed the light,
and peace of her soul) began again to shine forth in his wonted cleerenesse,
reviving and cheering up those drooping affections which had so long languished
in the want of his comfortable presence, insomuch that (to my great rejoicing)
I found her magnifying of mercy which before she doubted of, and comforting her
self with those Scriptures, which before her soul refused comfort in, being
tendered unto her. I told her I did heartily bless God for this happy change in
her: and she replied, that the grace of Christ was sufficient for her, upon
whom she did wholly rest and rely for her salvation, disclayming all conceit
of worth, or merit in her self; entreating me to pray to God for her, that it
would please him to pardon those distrustful thoughts which she had formerly
of his goodness, and to perfect that re-assurance of his love in her heart;
she joining with us very cheerfully, and devoutly all the time, expressing a
marvelous longing for the fulness of spiritual and heavenly joy. Insomuch
that while I inserted that petition of the Prophet, Do well unto thy Servant,
that she may live, and praise thy name; she interrupted me saying, o pray only
for my soul, for I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is
far better.

The Sunday following in the afternoon, I was requested, to preach to the
Congregation of this Parish, whither being come, and enquiring of her health, I
was generally assured that they had observed her to be that day more composed
and cheerful, then usually she had bin; but while the whole Families of her
friends were Religiously exercised in the Church, she intimated to those that
waited about her, that she felt her self sensibly to change, (her Cough having
a little before left her, a sure sign in those diseases of death approaching,
whereupon they asked her if they should call the Lady her mother, or husband,
or any other unto her? but she answered no, they were (she said) about a good
work, and she hoped that she should live till they had done; and God granted
her request, for no sooner was the Sermon ended, and all her friends again
returned about her, but she heartily wished for some one, to recommend her
soul to God: it was my happiness to be there at that time, and they entreated
me to perform that last office for her, which we hasted to do, perceiving
her to decline apace, while she (to the admiration of all that were present,
considering her great weakness) repeated after me very zealously almost what
soever I delivered, and concluding with the Lords Prayer, she most devoutly
rehearsed that word for word, which as it was the first she learnt, so I may
truly say it was the last she uttered; for immediately hereupon, (as if she
had only staid for this Convoy to her eternal rest) she most sweetly and
peaceably exchanged this life, leaving her surviving friends (like the Apostle)
in a strait betwixt two, not knowing which to choose, whether more to mourn for
her loss, or to rejoice for her so blessed and happy departure.

But why do I speak of loss, (since to use Saint Paul's phrase) to her to
live was Christ, and to dye was gain, for she is not amissa, but praemissa,
not lost, but gone before; death to her, being but like Jordan to Israel, a
waftage from the wilderness of this world, to the Canaan of everlasting
blessedness: where her soul is bound up in the bundle of life securely reposed in
the bosom of Abraham, 1 Cor. 15.^4.
her body like seed being sown in the Lords gleb-Land (for so the Germans call
the grave) shall be there safely preserved by her heavenly Father that good
Husbandman, Ioh. 15.1.
unto the harvest of that great day, when by virtue of the resurrection of
Christ, 1 Cor. 15.20.
The first fruits of them that sleep, she shall awake out of this Sepulchrall
vault again, both glorious and honorable; and the grave being dispossessed of
her body, her body shall be re-possest by her soul, and both body and soul
everlastingly possessed of that immortal; incorruptible, and never fading
Kingdom, 1 Pet. 1.4.
reserved in heaven for her, whose King is Christ, whose Subjects are Saints,
whose Law is love, whose rule is equity, whose honor is verity, whose peace is
felicity, and whose life is Eternity. Unto which he brings us all who has
bought it for us, and us for himself, Christ Jesus therighteous, to whom with
the Father, and the holy Spirit, three Persons one eternal, immortal,
invisible, and only wise God, be rendered and ascribed, all glory, honor,
power, praise, might, majesty, dignity, and dominion, henceforth and for
evermore, Amen.

In praematura fata Dominae Elizabethae nuper uxoris patrui mei charissimi
Caroli Dering, (...).
CAEtera cuncta licet rapias Libitina, putabam
Virtutem exemptam legibus esse tuis:
Sed verum est, querulo cecinit quod carmine vates,
Omnia mors pedibus calcat avara suis.
Quae nunc ploranda est, aeterna fuisset Eliza,
Si virtus auidum vinceret ipsa rogum.
Hinc mihi singultus, la^ hyrmae, suspiria, fletus,
Et quicquid luget fertilis art dolor.
Damna tamen, fateor (foecundo carmine nostra)
Musa ferax lachrymis connumerare nequit.
Ergo tuos mea musa libet deponere planctus:
Amissae cruciant, dum memorantur, opes.
Edoardus Dering praedicti Dom. Edoardi Filius.

Charissimo fratri meo, CAROLO DERING KANCIANOLONDINATI Amissam deflenti, QVAM
(Ut Amorem nostrum decuit, ut virtus defunctae meruit, in communi nominis
DERINGANI Hypogaeo arquato sociatam) pie condidimus. (...).
ELISABETHA meos habuit prima vxor Amores:
Prima calet flammis ELSABETHA tuis.
CAROLE fatorum frater consor sq. meorum,
Quam fugit (heu cito) nos utraq. ELSA duos!
Sic fit, sic FIAT PATRIS divina VOLVNTAS:
Transtulit ille meam, transtulit ille tuam.
Haud peterint Elegi nostros numerare dolores,
Si foret in luctus Musa diser^a novos.
Illarum Heroo poterit nec earmine diei,
Caendor, Amor, Pietas, Gratia, Forma, Fides.
Prussia dilectam tibi CAROLE credit ELISAM:
Vicina ad thalames venit ELISA m^os.
Vtraq. nunc uno est vxor tumulata sepulcher:
Et cadit in cineres Vtraq. ELISA simul.
Disce meo exemplo. Vivacem nolo Dolorem:
Sed memor aeterno tempore vivat Amor,
Frater tuus (...) Dom. Edoardus Dering miles et Baronettus.

FINIS.

