A VINDICATION OF THE ANSWER TO THE HUMBLE REMONSTRANCE FROM THE UNJUST
IMPUTATION OF FRIVOLOUSNESSE AND FALSEHOOD. Wherein, The cause of LITURGY and
EPISCOPACY is further debated.

By the same SMECTYMNUUS.

LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell at the Fountain and Bear in Cheapside.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE LORDS AND THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, AND BVRGESSES OF THE
HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS.
IT was the expectation that the whole Kingdom had of your high worth, and
faithful resolutions, to reform what was amiss both in Church and State,
which gave us the confidence to present unto you our former treatise. And now
your real performance, and noble Actions tending to the public peace and
good, have added much more cheerfulness in our second address toward you;
the rather, for that the cause in question between us and the Remonstrant,
about Episcopacy and Liturgy, is a great part of that work to which God has
directed your present consultations. Seeing therefore it belongs to you next
under God and his Majesty, to dispose and order these things: We leave our
endeavors at your feet, beseeching you to consider, not only how we have
vindicated our selves from the accusations of our adversary, but more
especially what may be gathered out of it for the advancement of the
reformation now happily begun among us. The Lord of life and glory be a
Sun and shield unto you.

TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
THE Book which we here undertake to answer, is so full fraught with bitter
invectives, false aspertions, hyperbolicall confidence, self contradictions,
and such like extravagancies, as that we have thought fit to lay them all
before thee in one full view by way of preface, rather then to interrupt our
following discourse by observing them as they lie scattered in the book it
self. Suffer us therefore to give thee notice of these few particulars.

First, we are deeply charged and accused not only to the ordinary Reader
but even to the Kings Majesty himself, of misallegations, misinterpretations,
mistranslations, and false quotations, and that in such an high nature as that
the Author calls God to witness, before whom he is shortly to give an
account that he never saw any Author that would dare to profess Christian
sincerity so foul to overlash. And this is not once or twice but often
repeated with great asseveration and exclamations. Which when we first read
(being conscious of our innocence and fidelity) we could not but stand amazed
and wonder to see our selves so unexpectedly and we hope undeservedly
transformed into men (or rather monsters of men) so transcedently perfidious,
and so supersuperlatively unfaithful and wicked. And indeed, if to be accused
to a fault be a sufficient argument to make us guilty, we must needs be for
ever branded with such an high measure of ignominy, as that it is not a whole
sea of water that will serve to wash off the filth of such accusations. But we
doubt not but that the ingenuous peruser of this book will find that as it
was the glory of one of the Cato's that he was thirty times accused and yet
never sound guilty: so it will be our honor and credit when he shall see
that all this clamor and noise is but a bearing of false witness against his
brethren. Si accusasse sat est quis erit innocens. It was the the wicked
counsel of Matchiavell Calumniare fortiter and aliquid adhoerebit. This
counsel the Papists have made use of in answering of Protestant writers, and
the Bishops themselves in their answers to some of the unconforming Ministers
books. And we have good reason to think that the Author of this Defense has
trod in the same steps. For after all his general exclamations and
accusations, there are but four places in which he undertakes to prove us
false. The first is for half citing of Hieroms testimony. The second is for
abusing Nazianzene. The third is for misinterpreting Origin about Lay Elders.
The fourth is for foysting in Cyprian. True it is, he tells us of want of
fidelity in citing the Counsel of Antioch and Ancyra, of misalledging of
Whitakers, of misenglishing Tertullian, and of guilty translating of Justin
Martyr. But he does not so much as endeavor to make good what he tells us,
and therefore we cannot but believe that he used more Machiavelisme then
honestly in such aspersions. As for Authors which he himself has both
misalledged and misinterpreted, we do not only say it, but the Reader shall
find it demonstratively proved in the ensuring treatise.

Secondly, if to be railed upon, reviled, slighted, and scorned be sufficient
to bring men into discredit, then certainly, we must be esteemed as (...) as
the dung, of scouring, and filth of the world. For never man since Mountagues
Appeal, wrote with more scorn and contempt. We are called Vain, frivolous,
Cavillers, insolent, spightfull, riotous, proud, false, unjust, triflers,
factious, Brotherly slanderers, sullen and crabbed pieces, Liars, egregious and
palpable calumniators, wilfully shutting our eyes against the truth such as the
Readers may be ashamed off, witless, malicious, uncharitable, envious,
frivolous wasters of unseasonable words, swelling up a windy bulk with
groundless exceptions against our eyes and conscience, tedious and loose
disputers, Patronizers of branded Heretics, impotent, weak, and absurd men,
grossly ignorant, such as fowly overreach, men of weak judgment, and strong
malice; commonly spightfull, and seldom witty, violent and subtle machinators
against, and disturbers of Gods ordinances, some whole sections mere
declamations, worthy of nothing but of contempt and silence, ill bred sons of
the Church, spitting in the face of our Mother, fomentors of unjust dislikes
against lawful government, making wickedly false suggestions, wanting wit and
grace to understand the true meaning of the Jus Divinum of Episcopacy, worthy
to be punished for their presumption, and disobedience, men that make no
conscience by what means we uphold a side and win a Proselyte. These are
the flowers with which his defense is garnished, and the titles with which he
honors those whom he calls his Brethren. We will make no other Apology for
our selves, but what Austin did in the same kind, who when he was told that
his railing adversary was to hard for him, he said it was and easy thing
that way to conquer Austin, but the Reader should perceive it was Clamore not
veritate, by loud crying not by truth: And what Hierom says against Helvidius,
Arbitror te veritate convictum a maledicta converti. It is a sign of a man not
able to stand before the truth, when he betakes himself to reproachful
language.

Thirdly, if multitude of daring protestations and bold asseverations be
sufficient proofs of arguments propounded, and if confident slightings, and
scornful denyalls be sufficient answers to us, and our arguments, never any
man has better defended Episcopacie or more strongly confuted those that
oppose it. In his very first page he begges the question, and affirms his
cause to be Gods cause, Gods truth, and if his opposers were as many Legions
as men, he would meet them undismayed, and say with holy David; Though an host
should encampe against me, my heart should not fear, but with just confidence
I gladly fly to the bar of this high and Honorable Court, (And yet by his
leave he thought it his best wisdom to fly from this bar, and to dedicate
his book to the Kings Majesty alone, and not to the two houses:) And in
another place he says, the Apostles practice is so irrefragable for them,
that if we do but add the unquestionable practice of their immediate
successors: he knows not what more light can be desired for the
manifestation of the truth of his opinion. In his Epistle to the King he
says, That if he does not make it appear that we have abused our Reader
with false shows of misalleadged antiquities, and merely colorable pretenses
of proofs, let the blemish of his reputation lead way to the sharpest censure
upon his person. (Just like the Author of Episcopacie by Divine right, who is
so confident against Lay Elders; That he offers to forfeit his life to
justice, and his reputation to shame, if any man living can show that ever
there was a Ruling Elder in the world till Farel and Viret first created them:
(And yet he could not but know that Archbishop Whitgift (as well seen in
Antiquity as himself) confesses that there were Ruling Elders in the
Primitive Church. Thus also does Bishop King; Saravia himself thinks the
government of Ruling Elders to be good and profitable.) In his answer to our
arguments, sometimes he tells us that we prove nothing but our bold ignorance
and absurd inconsequences: Otherwhile he says, Poor arguments scarce worthy
of a pass. These are trifling cavills not worth the answer. Verbal exceptions
which will sink like light froath. Mere declamations worthy of no answer but
contempt and scorn. forbear Reader, if you can to smile at this curious
subtilty: What Cabalisme have we here? Our quaeries are made up of nothing but
spite and slander. His ordinary answer toour Testimonies out of Antiquity is:
This Author is misalledged. That Father abused. This Council shuffled up with
little fidelity. Away with your unproving illustrations and unregardable
testimonies. And this is all the answer he gives. Throughout the whole book
he endeavors to render us to the Reader as destitute of all learning, as if
our reading had never gone beyond a Polyanthea. He calls us boldly ignorant.
And that we would make the Reader believe that we had seen a Father. And
that we would seem to have seen the Canon Law. And that it is enough we can
show a little reading to no purpose. But in all these and many more such like
Sarcasmes and vain Rhetorications he does but act the part of his
Hierarchicall predecessors whose chief answers have been scoffs and scorns;
and therefore what learned Rivetus says of Bishop Mountague may with as much
truth be averred of this namelesse Author. Montacutius vir certedoctus, sed
admodum praefidens, and tumidus aliorum contemptor, and suggillator. And in
another place. Apol. pro Sancta Manic. page 77. 95.
Non potest vir ille sine convitijs quemquam a quo dissentit vel in levissimis
nominare. But what strength and weight there is in such kind of arguments and
answers, let the wise Reader judge.

And yet not withstanding all this confidence and Thrasonicall boasting we
desire thee to observe:

Fourthly, That if the whole book were divided into four parts, there is one
quarter of which he makes no mention, but passes it over either with scorn or
silence. And where our arguments are strongest there he slides away without
answering, which cannot but make the judicious Reader believe that he thought
the iron to hot for him, and therefore would not touch it least it should burn
his own fingers; as himself says page 21. And even in those things wherein
he undertakes to answer us we cannot but give notice that we have
confitentem reum, and in effect the cause granted in those things which are
most material. For when we prove from Scripture the Identity of Bishops and
Presbyters both in name and office, he tells us with a little varying of our
words; We idly loose our labor. It need be no scruple to us: It is in
express terms granted, when we prove that there are not three degrees of
Ministry in the Scripture (to wit, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacous) he
answers, it is granted; you speak of the Apostles writings, but I of their
successors. He grants also that the Primitive Bishops were elected by the
Clergy, and people. That Bishops ought not to have sole power in Ordination,
and Jurisdiction. That they ought not to delegate their power to others. That
the ordinary managing of secular employments is improper for them. And he does
almost grant that there were Lay Elders in antiquity. For whereas the Author of
Episcopacy by Divine right affirms, that the name of Elders of the Church in
all antiquity comprehends none but Preachers, and that therefore they only
may be called Seniores Ecclesiae, though some others may have the title of
Seniores populi, because of their civil authority. This Author acknowledges
that besides Pastors, and besides the Magistrates and Elders of the City there
are to be found in antiquity Seniores Ecclesiastici. Indeed he says, that
these were but as our Churchwardens, or Vestry men. But how true this is, the
Reader shall see in due place: Lastly, he grants that all that we say in the
Postscripts about the Popish Prelates is true, Celari non potuit negari non
debuit. And for what we say of the Protestant Bishops he denies not the truth
of it only he chides for taxing all for the fault of some.

And in these things wherein he does diametrically oppose us, he does
frequently contradict himself and his best friends. In his Epistle dedicatory
he professes that he taxes not our ability, yet in the same Epistle he
calls us impotent assailants, and afterward. Men of weak judgments and
strong malice. And Men that would seem to have seen a Father. And that all
that we say is nothing but bold ignorance. Page 94. he says, That to
acknowledge an Ordinary Evangelist is a fancy and a dream. And yet elsewhere
he makes every Preacher of the Gospel to be an Evangelist. In his Remonstrant
and in his defense he says, that Bishops had been every where throughout all
the Regions of the Christian world. And that all Churches throughout the whole
Christian world have uniformely and constantly maintained Episcopacy. And yet
elsewhere he denies that ever he said, That Bishops were every where, and
confesses that there are less noble Churches that do not confer to
Episcopal Government. Page 161. he tells us, that for 1600 years the name
of Bishops has bin appropriated (in a plain contradistinction) to the
governors of the Church: But in other places he often grants that the Name was
confounded, and ascribed to Presbyters are well as Bishops. In his 36. page he
says, That in his Remonstrance he made no mention of Diocesan Bishops,
whereas all know that he undertook the defense of such Bishops which were
petitioned against in Parliament, whom none will deny to be Diocesan Bishops.
In his 5. page (speaking of the changing of Civil government mentioned in the
Remonstrance) he professes that he did not aim at our Civil Government. Let
but the Reader survey the words of the Remonstance page 8. and it will appear
plainly ac si solaribus radijs descriptum esset. That the comparison was
purposely made betwixt the attempts of them that would have altered our Civil
government, and those that indeavored the alteration of our Church
government. And whereas he bids as page 135. to take our soleordination and
sole jurisdiction to sole our next pair of shoes withal, yet notwitstanding
he makes it his great work to answer all our arguments against the sole power
of Bishops, and when all is done, allows the Presbyter only an assistance,
but no power in Ordination nor jurisdiction. Lastly, in the stating of the
question he distinguishes between divine and Apostolical authority, and
denies that Bishops are of Divine authority as ordained immediately by Christ.
And yet he says, That Christ himself has laid the ground of this imparitie
in his first agents. And that by the evidence of Timothy and Titus, and the
Asian Angels (to whom Christ himself wrote) he has made good that just claim
of the sacred Hierarchy.

This is the sum of that (good Reader) that we thought fit to praemonish thee
of. We now dismiss thee to the book it self, and commend thee and it, to
the blessing of God.

A Vindication of the ANSWER to the humble Remonstrance.
SECT. I.
IF we thought our silence would only prejudice our selves, we could
contentedly sit down and forbear Replies, not doubting, but intelligent men,
comparing cause with cause, and reason with reason, would easily see with whom
the truth rests: but we fearing that many who have not either ability or
leisure to search into the grounds of things themselves, would fearce think it
possible, that so much confidence as the Remonstrant shows, should be severed
from a good cause, or so much contempt should be powered upon us that are not
the bad defenders of a cause much worse. We must discharge our duty in
clearing the cause and truth of God, and that will clear us from all the foul
aspersions which the Remonstrant has been nothing sparing to cast upon us.
Whose Defense in every Leaf terms us either ignorant, liars, witless,
falsifiers, malicious, spightfull, slanderous, violent, and subtle Machinators
against the Church, and disturbers of her peace, etc. and this not only in a
cursory way, but in such a devout and religious form, Page 1^3.
as we make question whether ever any man before him did so solemnly traduce,
speaking it in the presence of God, that he never saw any Writer professing
Christian sincerity so foully to overlash. To the presence of God before whom
his protestation is made, our access is equal, and at that Tribunal we
doubt not, through the grace of Christ, but to approve both our selves and our
cause. And had we the same access unto our Sovereigne, we should less regard
those bitter invective accusations, wherewith he has so profusely charged us
in his Sacred ears.

But our meanness forbids us to make immediate addresses to the throne, which
he has made his refuge: yet may it please that Royal Majesty, whom God has
anointed over us, to vouchsafe an eye unto these papers, we have that trust in
the Justice of our Sovereigne, the goodness of our Cause, the integrity of our
consciences in all our Quotations, as we doubt not but his Majesty will clearly
see, that our Persons, cause, and carriage, have been misrepresented to him.

The cause our Remonstrant says is Gods; it is true of the cause agitated,
though not of the cause by him defended: and we desire (what ever he has done)
to manage it in Gods way; to love in the truth, and speak the truth in love.

The charity of our Remonstrant we will not question, though in the first
congresse he does as good as call us Devils: because so often in his book he
calls us Brethren. But that which he calls truth, and the truth of God, we must
crave leave to do more, then bring in question, notwithstanding the
impregnable confidence of this Irrefragable Doctor.

Our Histories record of Harold, Cupbearer to Edward the Confessor, that
waiting on the Cup, he stumbled with one foot, and almost fell, but that he
recovered himself with the other; at which his father smiling said, Now one
brother helps another. The Remonstrant calls us Brethren, and supposes he
sees us stumbling in the very entrance of our answer, and what help does our
Brother lend us? Only entertains us Sannis and Cathinnis, and tells us, it is
an ill sign to stumble at the threshold. Yet not always an ill sign Sir, we
accept this stumbling for such an Omen, as Caesar had at his Landing in
Afric, and our William the Conqueror at his first landing in England, which
they took for the first sign of their victory and possession.

An what is this Stumble? The Answer mentions the Areopagi instead of the
Areopagites, Grande nefas! Of such an impiety as this, did Duraeus once accuse
our Learned Whitakers, from whom we will in part borrow our answer: Bone habet
his in^^bus non ve^tuntur fortune Ecclesiae.
It is well the good of the Church depends not upon a piece of Latin.

But can our Remonstrant persuade himself, that his Answerers should have so
much Clarklike ignorance, as never to have heard of Areopagita? If he can, yet
we are sure he can never persuade his ingenious Readers, but some one at least
of that Legion, which he fancies conjured up against his Remonstrance, might
have heard of Dionysius Areopagita, that by a man that had not studied to cast
contempt upon us, it might have been thought rather a stumble in the
Transcribers or Printers, then the Authors.

But what if there be no stumble here? What if the fault be in the Remonstrants
eyes, and not in the Answerers words? What if he stumble and not they? and
what if it be but a straw he stumbles at? For though Areopagus be the name of
the place, and Areopagitae the name of the persons; yet it is no such
impropriety in speech, to signify the persons by the place: had we said the
Admired sons of Justice, the two Houses of Parliament, had this been such a
Soloecisme? and will this Remonstrant deny us that liberty, for which we have
Natures Patent, and the example of the best Authors in other Tongues, To
smooth, or square, to lengthen, or cut off Exoticke words, according as will
best suit with our own Dialect? If we were called to give an account of this
Syllabicall Error before a Deske of Grammarians, we could with ease produce
presidents enough in approved Authors: but we will only give an instance in
the word it self from Joan. Sarisburi. lib. 5. de Nugis Curialibus, cap. 9. Eum
[Senatum] vero Athenienses Areopagum dicebant eo quod in illis totius populi
virtus consisteret.

We hope our Remonstrant has now recovered his stumble, and next we find him
leaping, being as good at leaping over blocks, as he is at stumbling at
straws: it is his practice through his whole book, what ever objection made by
us, he finds too heavy to remove, he over-leaps it.

This course he begins here, for we having charged him with some words
sounding to contempt in his Preface, he falls a quarrellling with our Logic,
for calling that a Preface, which he intended as one of the main pieces of the
substance of his book. Which certainly, if Captatio Benevolentiae be the work
of a Preface, he that reads the Remonstrance to the ninth page, will find that
the preceding pages have been but by way of insinuation; and there he comes to
the proposition and narration of his cause.

But if our Logic was bad, he knew his Ethics were worse: and therefore
these misdemeanors which we justly charged upon him, and he knew not how to
excuse or answer, his Politics taught him to leap over. Counting all to the
fourth page, as light froth that will sink alone; which seems to us a strange
piece of Physik; and if we would cry quit with the Remonstrant, and make our
Reader as merry with him, as he would make his Readers with us, we could tell
him a Tale in the margent A Gentleman student in Philosophy, that was by chance
present at the reading of this passage, took such a fancy to this rare mystery
of light froath, sinking aloan, that he would take no nay, till he had
entreated us to obtain so much of the Remonstrant, as to publish his receipt of
making light froath sink alone, that it may be added to the Secrets of Alexis,
or the rare experiments of Baptista Porta.
. But some thing it seems is of a little more solid substance, it is as scum
that will not so easily sink alone; wherein you appe^l to indifferent eyes to
judge whether we do not endeavor to cast unjust envy upon you against the clear
evidence of any knowing man's conscience. Content. Only put the case right: you
tell your Judges that you had said, That if Antiquity may be the rule, the
Civil policy (as in general notion) has sometimes varied, the Sacred never;
the Civil came from Arburary Impos^rs, the Sacred from men inspired: now these
gracious Interpreters would draw your words to the present and particular
government of our own Monarchy, as if you implied that variable and arbitrary;
and are not ashamed to mention that deadly name of Treason. Our charge upon
this is, that in the judgment of this Remonstrant, if any had dared to attempt
the alteration of Monarchical Government, they had been less culpable then in
petitioning the alteration of Episcopal, and conclude, that if he had found
such a passage in any of those whom he calls lewd Libellers, all had rung with
Treason, Treason.

Now let the indifferent Reader, let the most Honorable Parliament, let the
Sacred Majesty of our King Judge whether we do the man wrong. First, this we
know, that one of the most confident Advocates of Episcopacie has said it,
(...). 25.
that where a National Church is settled in the orderly regiment of certain
grave Overseers, to seek to abandon this form, and to bring in a foreign
Discipline, is as unreasonable as to cast off the yoke of just an^ hereditary
Monarchy, and to affect many headed Sovereignty: which we think is an
assertion insolent enough, that sets the Mitre as high as the Crown: God
bless our sacred Monarchy from such friends.

But this Remonstrant rises higher, and sets the Mitre above the Crown. Telling
us, that Civil Government comes from Arbitrarie Imposers, this from men
inspired, and is in that respect by the Remonstrant challenged to be of divine
right. If Civil Government here include Monarchy, as by the Remonstrants own
explication it does, certainly this is to advance Episcopacie above Monarchy,
and to make it more sinful and dangerous to alter Episcopacy, which, according
to the Remonstrant, challenges God for the founder, then Monarchy, which says
this Remonstrant according to original Authority had its foundation in the
^^ee Arbitrament of men.

Yet did we never say that this was Treason; knowing such crimes to be above
our cognizance; we mentioned indeed the name of Treason, but as from your
mouth, not our own. We said, If you had found any such in any, etc. the world
would have rung with the loud cries of treason, treason: it was our conjecture
which you have now made good in this defense, For you that are so full of
charity to impute it to us, as if that we had vilified the judgment of King
James, as you do page 23. whom we mentioned not, but as a most famous, and ever
admired Prince, had any lord fallen from us (which through the grace of God we
hope never shall) tending to the disparagement either of the Royal Person or
power, What work would you have made with that? Be sparing, Sir, of charging
your poor Neighbors so impetuously with malice and uncharitableness, till
ye have taught your self to be more charitable, and less mali^ious.

To what we alleged in the instance of William Rufus King, and Pope Pius, to
show that Episcopal Government, which he calls sacred, naturally tends not
only not to depend upon, but to subdue the civil authority to it self; His
answer is, first, That William Rufus was a Prince noted for grossly irreligious.
That those were tyrannical Popish Bishops. That the Pope was Antichrist. That
he answered so because he was unwilling they should show as good cards for
their standing as he pretended for his own. And lastly, all this makes nothing
against our Bishops, who profess, notwithstanding the divine right of their
calling, to hold their places, and the exercise of their jurisdiction wholly
from the King.

So then here is no Falsification: all that was produced is granted true, only
exception taken against the persons produced. King William he was irreligious.
Daniel observes that former times being unhappy in their compilers of History
(the Scepter which rules over the fames of Princes) who for the most part were
Monks, had all their Princes personated either Religious or irreligious as they
humoured or offended the Bishops Rochet, and the Monks belly. No wonder then if
so small a friend to Bishops be condemned as irreligious.

But then those Bishops were Popish, Tyrannous Bishops. But it was not their
Popery, but their Episcopal dignity that made them tyrannize; and it was their
Tyranny and not their Popery that made them odious to their King, who was
Popish as well as they. And it has been ever usual to both former and latter
Bishops to tyrannize over such as fear them, and to flatter such as they fear.

The Pope he is Antichrist; we are glad to hear you call him so; some
thought a year ago you would scarce have given him such a nickname, unless
you meant to have fallen out with the rest of your brethren: and what if the
Pope be Antichrist? may we not bring the testimony of Antichrist against
Antichristian Bishops? As Paul brought the witness of a Cretian Poet, against
Cretian Liers. May not we allege Beelzebub against Beliall without honoring
him?

But the Pope so answered because he was unwilling they should show as good
cards for their standing as he pretends for his own; grant it so, what will
follow upon that but this? That Bishops clayming the same grounds for their
standing that the Pope does, aspire to be as independent from Princes as the
Pope is, and that they have no more Divine Right, then the Pope: But what is this
to our Bishops who profess, notwithstanding their Divine Right, to hold their
places, and exercise of Jurisdiction wholly from the King? Surely ours have
begun to affect the same Exemption from Secular power, to make large and
haughty strides toward an independent Hierarchy. So that it is no envious
upbraid to parallel ours with the former Bishops. For it has well appeared
that the Hierarchicall Episcopacie is full of such high and large principles of
Pride, Ambition, Tyranny, as can be circumscribed in no moderate bounds: But is
always swelling to the affectation of an Absolute Ecclesiastical Monarchy.
And it is worth the enquiring, whether the three last books of Hookers
Ecclesiastical Polity be not suppressed by him that has them, because they
give the Prince too much power in Ecclesiastical matters, and are not for the
Divine Right of Bishops.

But we shall be chid anon, and accused of spite for this, as we are for the
observation formerly made upon his comparison between the attempts of
Alteration in our Neighbor Church by the Episcopal faction, and that which is
now justly desired by the humble Petitioners to this Honorable House. This
says the Remonstrant, is a foul slander to charge the name of Episcopacie
with a Faction For a fact imputed to some few. Were they but a few that did
attempt and prosecute that alteration? the more is our misery, that a few
Bishops can put both Kingdoms into so dangerous a combustion, what stir
would they all make if they should unite their powers? And were they but a few
that were the Factors for that Attempt? how then was it that one of the
Episcopal Tribe in public Court called the Scotch design Bellum Episcopale?
and where were the rest of the peaceable Orthodox Bishops the while? that might
in love to peace and truth have opposed those bold attempts, and not have
suffered a few, upon whom you now leave the guilt of faction, to expose the
dear and precious name of Episcopacie to that obloquie.

Let the Remonstrant never cry fie upon his brethren, that dare challenge
Episcopacie of Faction: but fie upon his Fathers the bishops, that have
subjected it to that challenge: had bishops done so in Cyprians time, we doubt
not but the^e would have bin fonnd Presbyters who would have said as much, and
need never have feared Gaoles nor Pillories, nor high Commissions, the holy
Discipline wherewith the Fathers of the sacred Hierarchy have of late years
visited such offenses.

SECT. II.
WE are in this and the following Sections not to contend for words, but
things, things precious to the Remonstrant, Liturgy, and Episcopacie, for
which he fights, tanquam pro aris and focis.

The subject of this Section is the Liturgy, where first he falls upon us for
the Alterations, and Additions, mentioned by us, which he calls such an
envious and groundless suggestion as must needs cover our faces with a blush.
Truly, Sir, If we were able to produce no fuller evidence of this then you have
done of your Jewish Liturgy ever since Mosestime, we should blush indeed; but
if we can bring forth instances of such Alterations as shall prove this
present Liturgy to be none of that, which has been confirmed by
Parliamentary Acts; keep your blushes to make Liveries for yourself and friends.

The Liturgy confirmed by our Parliamentary Acts is the same which was made
and confirmed in the fifth and sixth of Edward the sixth, with one alteration,
and additions of certain Lessons to be used upon every Sunday; and the form
of the Letany altered and amended, and two sentences only added in the
delivery of the Sacrament: And none other or otherwise. But this book is so
altered from that, that in it is left out,

First a clause in the Letany, From the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all
his detestable enormities, good Lord deliver us, etc. 32. Chapters of the Old
Testament, a Prayer against death, a Rubric, or declaration of the manner of
the presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament. Besides some other
things of less moment.

Secondly, added 26 Apocryphal Chapters, more to be read 47 Proper Lessons,
The Prayers for Bishops and Curats, many Collects after the Communion, A
Rubric in the examination of private Baptism. In the Calendar Fish days are
now called Fasting days. A Catalogue of Holidays.

Thirdly, many things changed; in the title of Confirmation, the words for
imposition of hands are added. In the Epistle for Palm Sunday, in the Name of
Jesus, turned into, at the Name of Jesus, besides such smaller alterations,
which himself acknowledges. These are sufficient to evince that the Liturgy
now in use is not that Liturgy that was established by Act of Parliament, and
therefore that Act binds not to the use of this Liturgy, as we conceive. Now
if to these we should add the late alterations in the use of the Liturgy,
Bringing in loud Music, uncouth and unedifying Anthems, a pompous,
superstitious Altar-service, we think any indifferent eye will say this is
not the Liturgy established by Parliament: we hope that these alterations are
so visible, as any, that will not fully shut their eyes, will say it is with
this misaltered Liturgy as with the disguised Dames mentioned of old by Doctor
Hall.

And we hope, nay we know we have some Bishops of our mind in this, as well
as you have some of yours; and how ever you slight the words of one of them,
not inferior to any of them that we know, with an effut^it labiis: yet it is
a subtle shift you have to pervert the Bishops words. For whereas he said
that the Service of the Church of England was now so dressed, that if the Pope
should come and see it, he would claim it as his own, but that it is in
English, The Remonstrant would seem to understand by this only such an
inoffensivenesse, in the devotion of it, as the Pope himself could find no
fault in it: whereas the Bishop meant such a symmetry and correspondency of our
present devotion and service with the Popish, as was in his esteem just matter
of Humiliation to all the Bishops in the Kingdom, in a day of solemn and
national Fasting.

Instead of bringing out those great applauses, that foreign Divines and
Churches have given to our Liturgy, he falls (though more gently then he is
wont) upon Master Calvin for his Tolerabiles ineptiae, as if that he did
(...). It seems the Remonstrant did not either consider the occasion of that
Censure, or else his not Omniscient eyes never saw the Epistle that the Learned
Calvin wrote to the dispersed at Frankfort, which would tell him that the
occasion of this Censure was the troubles raised up among the English Exiles
then at Frankford, about the book of Liturgy (which was then as since a
spring of unhappy contentions in the Church) hereupon he writes a Letter to
them, wherein he uses that phrase of tolerable fooleries: and in a Christian
way persuades both disagreeing sides to accord: which he puts not upon them by
way of authority, but Christian advise: nay, he says more, that these fooleries
were tolerable then, yet he doubted not if Religion flourished in England, many
of these would be removed, and other things amended: and though they might
begin with such weak rudiments, yet it was behovefull for the grave and pious
Ministers of Christ to rise to a higher pitch, etc. So that here Master Calvin
did not unwarrantably intrude in alienam rempublicam: Nor did any other then
would become any of our grave and learned Divines, in the case of the Wafers,
or Lords Day Markets of his Charge, if called unto that service, as Master
Calvin was to this.

The Remonstrant leads us from the English Liturgy, to a Discourse of
Liturgies in general: which we call unparalleld, because no man that ever we
have seen drew the line of Liturgy so high as he has done, even as high as
Moses time; to which his answer is, Perhaps there are some things our not
omniscient eyes have not seen, and perhaps this may be one of them: and
perhaps there are some things which he has confidently avouched that his
Lincean eyes have not seen, and perhaps this is one of them; or else we should
see it too. But that needs not says the Remonstrant for we almost yield the
question before we argue it: the happier man he to obain that by concession
that he never could by argumentation: but how do we yield the question? in
granting an order of divine administrations observed in Church Assemblies, but
denying an imposition of set forms. Just. Mart. Apolog 2.
We find in antiquity, that when the Church met together upon the Lords day,
first the Scriptures were read of the old and new Testament, after the reading
followed an Exhortation to the practice and imitation of what was read, then
they all rose and joined in Prayer: Prayer being ended, they went to the
Sacrament, in the beginning whereof the President of the Assembly powered out
Prayers and Thanksgiving according to his ability, and the people said Amen;
then followed the distribution of the Sacrament: After that the collection of
Alms, etc. this was Iustine Martyrs Liturgy. Will you now see Tertullians?

First, the Congregation meets, Tertull. Apol. cap. 39.
and do as it were besiege God with their prayers, wherein they pray for the
Emperors, for their servants, officers, etc? then they went to repeating the
Scriptures according to the time and occasion, then they edified themselves in
faith and hope by holy exhortations. There they had also the exercise of
Discipline, there they had their Love Feasts which began and ended with
prayers, and were celebrated with singing of Psalms. This was Tertullians
Liturgy. From these two Writers of the purest times, it is evident that it was
the custom or order of the Church in their Assemblies to pray, read, and
expound the Scriptures, administer the Sacraments; but that there were set
forms of Prayer prescribed and imposed upon the (...), that they were tied to
read such and such Scriptures, that the (...) had words of exhortation put into
his mouth, that he must use without adding, or altering, or diminishing, all
which are in a stinted Liturgy, this does not appear, but rather the contrary,
Tertullian says, Coimus ad sacrarum literarum commemorationem si quid
praesentium temporum qualitas aut praemonere cogit aut recognoscere.

And now we hope our Remonstrant will see how we will avoid our own
contradiction. To say there was an order of administrations although there were
no set and prescribed forms is no contradiction: You see it in the Churches
practice. To say there was an order of prophesying given to the Church of
Corinth by the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 14.
and yet no stinted forms of prophesying imposed upon them, we hope the
Remonstrant himself will say is not contradictory.

But these quotations are blasted already; it is but a silly ostentation of
antiquity, that these men bring against the Liturgy; so is all we bring if
the Remonstrant may be judge: but we appeal to the learned Reader. And what
can our Remonstrant accuse us of: First in our quotation of Tertullian, We
mis-english it, Sine Monitore quia depectore, without any prompter, but their
own heart. Is this a mistranslation? what then will you say to that approved
Glossator Zephirus? who thus expounds this place; Our Prayers are not dictated
to us as are the Prayers of the Heathens, by their Priests, but proceed from
the bottom of our hearts, etc. Is not this to pray without any other prompter
but their own hearts? Nor does Heraldus contradict this sense. If Zephirus his
Gloss like not you, your English likes us, as well as our own, and proves
what we desire. Sine Monitore: not being urged by any superior injunction,
though we think Monitor may as well be translated prompter as injunction;
Dictatas ^sacrificulo preces non concipimus, sed ex ipsa sede Animi Spiritusque
nostri cum suspiriis gemituque, etc.
but if no injunction, how could it be a Liturgy, a commanded, imposed form?
and if neither of these, neither Zephirus nor your own please you, then take
Nicholas Rigaltius. Nicholl. Riga^^. 1. C. in Tertull. Animad. Apud Ethunicos,
Monitor praeibat preces, ac de script. quidem ne quid verborum praete^iretur
art praeposterum diceretur, rursusque alius cust^s erat, qui attenderet, alius
qui linguis favere juberet.
The Heathens had a Monitor that led them along in their prayers, out of a
writing, that they might miss nor mistake no words, etc. yet what is this to a
prescribed form? yes, if they prayed sine Monitore, it overthrows a prescribed
form, read it as you will; if you read it without a prompter it overthrowes a
form, if it be as you read it without any Superior injunction, it overthrows
a prescribed form.

But why may not we says the Remonstrant, as well argue, that because our
Ministers do ordinarily in their pulpits pray for the King in their own
expressions, therefore there is no form of Liturgy enjoined? quite from the
purpose; we show you in Tertullian, where there were prayers that were not
stinted and prescribed forms, show us if you can in Tertullian, any such there
were.

Our other testimony out of Terullian and Austine, is full to the purpose we
intended; we brought them to prove that it was free for Christians to pray as
their occasions did require, without being limited to prescribed forms: The
changing of orationes sua^ in the text, into orationes nostras in his margin is
not overmuch faithfulness.
and though we will not say peremptorily there were no public Liturgies in
Augustines time, yet we dare say the place he brings proves it not, in which
there is not one word of prescribed or public forms.

The next place he quarrels with, is Justin Martyr, the fault there is in the
Translation, (...), is guiltily translated the instructor of the people, (...),
falsely turned according to his ability. (...)
We must quit our selves of both these crimes: First, (...), we render not the
word but the person, the instructor of the people, because the same Father but
a few lines before told us, that was his proper work, and why should the
Remonstrant call this a guilty translation? Did he think we were afraid to use
the word President or Bishop, for fear of advantaging the adverse cause? (...)
No such matter, take it, translate it you, Bishop if you please, make this
(...) to be the same with (...), in the Apocalypse, what will you gain by it?
but this, that such a President or Bishop there was in every Congregation,
whether in the City or Country.

But besides the supposed guilt, we are charged with false Translation for
turning (...), according to his ability, if this be a false Translation, let
the crime lie upon Langius, and not contradicted by Sylburgius in his notes,
who before us translated (...) quantum pro virili potest, (...)
which we know not how to conster better then according to his ability. And
this Remonstrant grants they did pray according to their ability, and so (says
he) do ours, and yet we have a public Liturgy, and so had they. It follows
not, that they had because we have; we would fain see better proof of it.

The Remonstrant thinks it is proof enough to pick a quarrel with what we
have spoken, ^^ssander.
and therefore scorns to trouble himself any further then to tell the Reader it
is Magisterially said by these men that set and imposed forms were not
introduced till the Arrian and Pelagian Heresies did invade the Church, and as
Clerkly they confute themselves by their own testimony. So then, if we cite
testimony, it is not Magisterially spoken, and how is it Clerkly confuted?
Besides what we have done our selves, he vouchsafes us the honor to bestow a
marginall confutation upon us out of Conc. Laod. cap. 19. we will do the Canon
and the Cause right, and give you the full view of it. Oportere seorsum primum
post Episcoporum Homilias Catechumenorum Orationem peragi, and postquam
exierunt Catechumeni eorum qui poenitentiam agunt fieri orationem, and cum i^
sub manum accesserint and recesserint fidelium, preces sic ter fieri. Vnam
quidem scilicet primam silentio, secundam autem and tertiam per pronuntiationem
impleri; deinde sic pacem dari, and sic sanctam oblationem perfici and solis
licere sacratis ad altar accedere and communicare.

We desire the Reader to remember that the question is not about a set Order or
Rubric, (as the Remonstrant calls it) of administrations, but about set and
imposed forms of prayer. Now what does this Canon require? that after Sermon,
Prayer should be made first for the Catechumeni, Secondly, for the penitents,
Thirdly, for the faithful. But does it bind to set forms of prayer in all
these? that the Reader sees it does not, for some of the prayers required in
that Canon are mental prayers, therefore not stinted, nor prescribed prayers,
as appears by that clause in the Canon, Vn^m quidem, scilicet primam silentio.
which the Remonstrant (shuffling up with much less fidelity then we have done
the Milevitan Council) leaves out in his quotation

But Clerklike we confute our selves. First, in going about to prove that set
and imposed forms were not introduced till the Arrian and Pelagian heresy did
invade the Church, by the testimony of a Council that was before Arrianisme.
He that is so quick to take others in their self co^futations, does as
Clerklike confute himself, in granting that the Laodicean Council was between
the Neocesarian, and the Nicene, and yet so long before Arrtanisme, as it
seems ridiculous to refer from the one to the other: Now the Neocesarian
Council was as Binius from Baronius computes in the year 314, and the Nicene
was 325, or according to Eusebius, 320. And was the Arrian heresy just born at
the period of the Nicene Council? if not, why may not the Arrian Heresy
invade the Church before the time of the Laodicean Council, especially
considering that the heresy of Arrius did trouble the Church sometime before
it borrowed Arrius his name; and under his name, some years doubtless, before
the Nicen Council. Yet our meaning was not, to affix the introducing of set
forms into the Church upon that Council; the Remonstrant if that he had
pleased might have conceived, that speaking of the bringing in such forms, we
show how it was done by degrees. And first as a step, the Laodicean Council
did forbid men's varying their prayers as they listed, and did enjoin all men to
use the same prayers: (...). This Remonstrant says, we said, was a form of
man's own prescribing. No, we said of a man's own composing; and how will the
Remonstrant disprove it from the words of the Canon? To prove our assertion we
brought the words of the Council of Carthage, which our Remonstrant derides as
a gross absurdity to explicate the Council of Laodicea, by that of Carthage,
which is yet no more then Z^naras did before us. But as the Remonstrant relates
it, the Fathers of Carthage will afford us little help. You shall hear
themselves speak Reader, and then judge. Vt nemo in precibus, velpatrem pro
filio, vel filium propatre nominet, and cum ^ltari assistitur semper ad patrem
dirigatur Oration, and quicunque sibi preces aliunde describit non iis utatur
nisi prius eas cum fratribus instructoribus contulerit. Where it appears first,
that this Canon was made for poor ignorant Priests that knew not the
difference between the Father and the Son. Secondly, that when this Canon was
made, there was no set form in use in the Church, for it cannot come under the
possibility of imagination, that a man having a set form lying before him,
should so grossly mistake as to name the Father for the Son, or the Son for the
Father. Thirdly, that the limiting or circumscribing the liberty in prayer was
such as did not tie him to a set Liturgy, but he might use the help of any
other prayer, so he did confer with the more learned of his Brethren.

The Milevitan Council went something further, Quamvi (...) haec precum and
aliaru^ orationum conscribendarum privata ^bido imperitos homines usque adeo
invas^rit ut necessum fuerit in Conciliis modum aliquem huic rei constitui ne
temere quae^is orationes in usum praesertim Eccl^siasticum admitte^^tur.
wherein he challenges our fidelity in shufling up the Council; our fidelity
in citing of this Council is nothing inferior to his in this, and far above
his in the former. Let the Reader consider how much difference there is between
what we speak, and what the Remonstrant reports from this Council, and judge
of the fidelity of both. If we have for brevity sake given too short a
representation of the Canon, it will appear upon are view, to redound only to
our own prejudice. The Canon is this, Placuit etiam illud ut preces vel
orationes, etc. quae prob^tae fuerint in Concilio sive praefationes etc. ab
omnibus celebre^tur. Castand. p. 30^ ubi cit. Conc^ Carth. and Mil^
Nec altae omnino dicantur in Ecclesia nisi quae a prudentioribus Tractatae,
vel a Synodo comprobatae fuerint ne forte, aliquid contra fidem, velper
ignorantiam, vel per minus stu^ium ^it compositum.

Where we observe that this is the first mention of prayers to be approved or
ratified in a Synod and the restraining to the use of them.

Secondly, that the restriction was not such but there was a toleration of such
Prayers as were tractatae a prudentioribus used by the wise and prudent men in
the Church as well as of those Prayers that were approved by the Synod.

Thirdly, that the occasion of this restriction was the prevention of Error in
the Church, ne aliquid contrae fidem, etc. So that here the Remonstrant may see
how that we have made it good, that liberty in Prayer was not taken away,
Council. Milevit. cont. Caelest, and Pelag.
and set forms imposed, till the Arian and Pelagian Heresy invaded the
Church: his own quotations would have told him this.

Next to these Testimonies, as a strong inducement to us to think that there
were no Liturgies of the first and most venerable antiquity producible, we
added this consideration, that the great admirers of, and searchers after
ancient Liturgies either Jewish or Christian could never yet show any to the
World. And now we verily thought that if the Sun did this day behold them, the
Remonstrant whose eyes are acquainted with those secrets and rarities that we
cannot be blessed with the sight of, would have brought them to public view
for the defense of his own Cause, but we fear if there ever were any such,
the World has wholly lost them: he cannot serve you with a whole Liturgy, such
fragments as he found served in, we shall anon taste off.

His miserable mistake in saying that part of the Lords Prayers was taken out
of the Jewish forms, we pardon because he does half acknowledge it. The
Seder Teph^ll^th to which he now refers being 700 years after Christ.
So do we, his prudent passing by in silence what we objected against his
confident assertion of Peter and John's praying by a form, Answ. page 8.
and that which we brought of the Publican and Pharise to make good what we
objected, because we know he cannot answer it.

Three things he speaks of, The Lords Prayer, the Jewish Liturgies, and
Christian Liturgies, for the Lords Prayer he says nothing can be more plain
then that our Savior prescribed to his Disciples, besides the Rules, a direct
form of Prayer, we grant indeed nothing can be more plain then that both our
blessed Savior and John taught their new Converts to pray, yet the Remonstrant
will have a hard task to prove from Scripture that either John or our Savior
gave to their Disciples public Liturgies or that the Disciples were tied to
the use of this form.

But though his proof fall short in the Lords Prayer, yet it is sure he says,
that Christ was pleased to make use in the Celebration of his last and heavenly
Banquet, both of the fashions and words, which were usually in the Jewish
Feasts, as Cassander has showed in his Liturgica. Yet Cassander who is his
sure proof says but this, observasse videtur seems to have observed.
Secondly, the evidence of all this comes from no better author then Maymonides
who wrote not till above a 1000 years after Christ. Thirdly, though it were
granted that our Savior did pro arbitrio or ex occasion, use the fashion or
words usually in the Jewish feast, it does not at all follow that he did assume
these words and fashions out of Jewish Liturgies; an Arbitrary custom is one
thing a prescribed Liturgy is an other.

Yet to prove such a Liturgy, that he might (as far as he can) stand to his
assertion, he brings something out of Capellus, the Samaritan Chronicle, and
Buxtorfius his Synagoga Iudaica.

We begin with what he brings out of a Samaritan Chronicle, sometimes in the
hands of the famously learned Joseph Scaliger, out of which he tells us of an
imbezel'd book, wherein were contained the Songs and Prayers used before the
Sacrifices: which although we might let pass without danger to our cause, and
answer, that they were only divine Hymns wherein there was always some thing
of prayer; because the Remonstrant himself in his second mentioning of them
names only Songs: and were there any thing for set prayers, it is like he
would have put down some thing of them in the Authors own words, as well as he
has burdened his margent with some thing which is nothing to the purpose.

But we shall make bold (under correction) to examine the authority of his
Samaritan Chronicle. De Emend. Tem^.
Joseph Scaliger had certainly but two Samaritan Chronicles (had he had any
other he would certainly have mentioned it when he undertook to speak of all
accounts and Chronicles) whereof that shorter is printed in his Emendat.
Temporum, lib. 7. which is so fond and absurd a thing, that he calls it
ineptissimum: and there gives this censure of the Samaritans in point of
antiquity: Gens est totius vetustatis, etiam quae ad ipsos pertinet,
ignarissima: They are a people most ignorant of all antiquity, even of that
which does most concern themselves. And more he would have said against it, if
he had lived to know how much it varied from the Samaritans own Pentateuch, as
it is since discovered by that learned Antiquarie Master Seldom in his Preface
ad Marmora Arundeliana.

This we know is not the Chronicle the Remonstrant means: there is another
which Scaliger had, of which himself thus: Habemus eorum magnum Chronicon ex
Hebraica lingua in Arabicam conversum, sed charactere Samaritano descriptum: is
liber incipit ab excessu Mosis, desinit infra tempora Imperatoris Adriani, etc.
We have also their great Chronicle translated out of the Hebrew into the
Arabic tong^e, but written in a Samaritan character: which Book begins from
Moses departure, and ends beneath the times of Adrian the Emperor, etc.

Of which Book Scaliger his own censure is, that though it has many things
worthy of knowledge, Yet they are crusted ^ver with Samaritan devices,
Commentis Samaritanis incrustat^.
and judge how much credit we are to give to this Book for antiquity, as far
as Moses, which makes no mention of their own original any other ways, then
that they came out of Egypt by Moses: does not so much as speak of any of the
ancient Kings of Samaria, nor the defection of the ten Tribes under Rehoboam,
and does only touch the names of Samson, Samuel, David, etc. as Scaliger
speaks in the beginning of his notes; and so will let your Samaritan Chron^cle
pass, and give you leave to make the best of it.

But to this testimony, what ever it be, we oppose the testimony of a learned
Jew, who is rather to be heard, then a Samaritan. The famous Rabbi Moses
Maymonides, who pleases to read part of his first, second, and eleventh
Chapters, in his Mishneh of the Law, Halachah Tephillah, shall evidently find,
that from Moses his time to Ezra (above a 1000 years) there were no stinted
forms of prayers heard of in the Jewish Church, but every man prayed according
to his ability. Secondly, that in Ezra his time eighteen short forms of
Prayers were composed for the scattered Jews, which had lost the use of the
holy language; because they thought it best to continue their Prayers and
Worship of God in that sacred tongue. Thirdly, but not a word of any set forms
which the Priests or Levits were to use, but only to help the ignorant Jews,
to express themselves in prayer to God in the holy language; at the time or
hours of prayer, Which the men of the great Synagogue had appointed: Peter and
John went up together to the Temple at the hour of prayer, being the ninth
hour.

Though we allege not this of Maymonides, as a testimony to command belief,
yet we conceive it far more to be regarded then any Samaritan Chronicle.

Secondly, he has some scraps of Jewish Liturgies out of Capellus, concerning
which a short answer may serve; first there is not one of the Jewish Liturgies
now extant, which was made before the Jews ceased to be the Church of God: for
besides the eighteen short forms before mentioned, there were no other made
till Rabbi Gamaliel his time, who according to the judgment of learned Critics
is that Gamaliel mentioned in the Acts, (from whom Paul got such bitter
principles against Christian Religion.) But whenever they began, Capellus
would laugh, should he hear what a strange conceit this Remonstrant had gotten
from him, that the Jewish Liturgies were as ancient as the time of Moses,
merely, because he parallels some Jewish phrases which he found in them with
certain phrases in the Gospel, which the Jews retained by Tradition from
their Fathers, and put into their Liturgies. Synag. Iudaiea, lib. 1.
But Buxtorfius would fall out with him, that he should so much abuse him, as to
say he had affirmed that Maymonides took his Creed out of the Liturgy; for the
man is not guilty of any such gross mistake: he says indeed, that the
Articles of the Jewish Creed are printed in the Liturgies, but withal he tells
the Remonstrant, that Maymonides was the first composer of them, whence
therefore the Jews put them into their Liturgy. Thus we leave his Jewish
Liturgy, which the Reader will easily see to be more Jewish, then he could
justly suppose our instance of William Rufus was, and that it affords him as
little furtherance.

For Christian Liturgies, which the Remonstrant had affirmed to have been the
best improvement of the peace and happiness of the Evangelicall Church ever
since the Apostles times, we challenged the Remonstrant, setting aside those
that are confessedly spurious, to produce any Liturgy that was the issue of
the first 300 years; in answer to which, he brings us forth the Liturgies which
we have under the names of James, Basil, and Chrysostom: to which our Reply
may be the briefer, because he himself dares not vouch them for the genuine
writings of those holy men. Only, says he, we have them under their names:
Secondly, he confesses there are some intersertions spurious in them. Thirdly,
all that he affirms is, that the substance of them cannot be taxed for any
other then holy and ancient: what censure the learned Critics, both
Protestants and Papists have p^st upon these Liturgies, we hope the Remonstrant
knows; we will only mind him of what the le^rned Rivetus speaks of the
Liturgies of James, Peter, Matthew, Mark, has omnes profectas esse ab inimico
homine q^i bonae semenii Domini, nocte super seminavit z^z^nia solidis
rationibus probavit Nobilisque and illustris Philip Morneus lib. 1. de Missae
and partihus ejus. Which because the Remonstrant so often finds fault with our
misenglishing, we leave to him to see if he can construe these Zizania to be
any other then these Liturgies, and this inimicus homo to be any other then the
Devil.

Nor will his implication of the ancient* Council of Ancyra help him, which
forbade those Priests that had not sacrificed (...), Will the Restrant say that
(...), was to serve in the holy Liturgies, that is, reading set Litnrgies, he
may as well say that (...) is the reading of set Homilies. Balsamon, Zonaras,
Dionysius, Isidore, and Gentian Harvet do all translate (...) aliquod munus
sacerdotale subire.

And that the Remonstrant may not delude himself nor others with the ambiguitie
of the word (...) and (...), as if every mention of these did by implication
prove such a Liturgy, as for which he contends. (...), etc. (...)
Let him know that the word (...) is variously used in Antiquity sometimes for
all the Ministerial Offices, so Zonaras in Council. Antioch. Can. 4. and so
Council. 4. Ancyra. Can. 1. quoted by himself, if he would either have
observed, or acknowledged it: (...) Chrysostom. Psalm. 41
sometimes only for prayer, so Balsamon in Can. 12. Council. Sardic. 6.
Sometimes singing of our Psalms is termed by Chrysostom, (...). The same
Father expounds (...), Acts 13. by (...), Hom. 27. in Act. so that for the
proof of such Liturgies as are the Subject of this question, it is not enough
to show us the word (...), or (...) in antiquity, let him show the thing before
he so Dictator-like condemn those for giddy heads that will not take his word
for proofs, and believe it was the undeniable practice of antiquity to use
Liturgies and forms of prayer, because he says so.

His supercillious censure upon our passage about conceived prayer, is not
worth the taking notice of, he says, Quis tuler^s Grac^^os.
We are sullen and crabbed pieces, tecchy and quarrelsome men, and why? because
we said his large praises of conceived prayer, were but a vantage ground to
advance public forms the higher, how truly judge; what cause we had so to think
we declared from the cruel and ungodly practices of the late times which he
will scarce take notice of.

Our arguing about the original and confirmation of our Church Liturgy, he
calls wrangling. For the original, the Remonstrant said it was taken out of
the ancient Models, not Roman but Christian: here we took notice of the
opposition between Roman and Christian, because by the Remonstrant made
Termini sese mu^u^ removentes: which we perceive now he is not willing should
pass for his meaning, he will not have it meant of an opposition, but of a
different modification. Though his instances brought to exemplify it are not
all ad oppositum.

We will not make digressive excursions into new controversies, though we are
not afraid of burning our fingers with his hot Iron. Only we tell him, that
the Suffrages of unquestionable Divines are not so unanimous, but that from
some of them we could fetch sparks to fling in the face of him that desired
their suffrages, without burning our-own fingers. Compare what the book called
the Old Religion speaks of the Church of Rome, p. 6. where a speech imputed to
Luther is justified as a charitahle and not too indulgent a profession, viz.
That under the Papacy is all good, true Christianity, the very kernel of
Christianity, etc. Compare this with what the Bishop of Salisbury says in his
begged suffrage, who thus speaks, That the Church of Rome is no more a true
Church than an arrant Whore is a true wife to her husband.

To disprove what he affirmed, that the Liturgy was taken out of Models not
Roman but Christian, We produced King Edwards Proclamation, to which he answers
nothing, only ownes that, and scorns us: thinking to wipe off all exceptions
with the glorious names of Martyrs and Confessors that composed it. For whom
(though we dare not glory in man) yet we bless God as well as he. But with
all if we should say there were some holy Martyrs and Confessors of the same
reformed Religion that were Opposers of it, and suffered in opposition even to
a persecution, the lives of some of them being pursued from City to City,
(which he knows is most true, and so may any that will read the book called
the troubles of Frankfort) Would this be a sufficient argument in his judgment
for the remo^all of it? But this is not the strength by which our Liturgy
stands, it stands confirmed by Parliamentary Acts, and King James his
Proclamation; to which we answered, that neither the King nor the Parliament
intended such a rigorous pressing of the Liturgy as we have felt. Secondly,
that neither our own Laws nor the Proclamation of that ever admired Prince are
as unalterable as the Laws of the Medes and Persians; this he calls a bold
flout, of purpose to render us odious to our dread Sovereigne, and the
Honorable house; as likewise in the next page seems to impute that language to
us, which is his own: our loyal hearts startle to think of a repetition of the
words, they are in page 23. of the Defense, and are concerning King James, whom
in the clause we had last in hand, we mentioned with the deserved memory of a
famous and ever admired Prince. We confess in some passages of that book, we
took liberty to use some cheerful expressions, provoked thereto by the
strange confidence, and little strength of our Remonstrant, Remembering that of
Tertullian, It well agrees with truth to laugh, because it is of a pleasant
disposition, and to sport with her competitors, because it is secure, and
fears not the walls of her bulwarks. But what ever we have done in other
places, here (we attest the great Searcher of hearts) it never came into our
thoughts to use a light expression, much less to flout in so bold a manner as
he accuses us. Nor do we think it possible that any charitable Reader
could suppose we aimed at any other then what we express more plainly page
20. of our answer, of the power of Princes and Parliaments in changing their
laws.

His next business is with our queres, the first whereof was this, Whether it
be not fit to consider of the alteration of the Liturgy, which we hoped had
been presented in such modest terms (speaking of an alteration, not an utter
abrogation, of consideration of an alteration not prescribing the alteration,
only of a fitnes of such an alteration, not of the necessity of such an
alteration as should never have occasioned such a sarcasticall Declaration, as
he their makes.

The thing propounded is so equal that the Remonstrant who makes conscience to
agree with us in as little as he may: here is forced to confess much against
his will (for which we may thank the Honorable Parliament) there is some need
of alteration, but this confession is joined with such a height of sco^n^t
seems to threaten those who ever they are that should dare attempt it, and
expressed in such away of diminution, as gives just cause to suspect, it is a
mere design to gain upon the Parliament, and by a pretended shadow of an
alteration to prevent a real and total reformation; he tells us of wiser heads
then our own, that will consider of the alteration: if here he mean the
Parliament, he means the same to whom we have presented these
considerations, concerning whom we doubt not, but they will make another
manner of an alteration then the Remonstrant speaks of, consisting only of a
bare change of a few expressions, and that in the manner of them Only.

But if these wise heads he here speaks of, are such as his own, that it may
be are complotting some kind of a castigation of the Liturgy, then we fear
that although the times will not serve to make such an alteration, as that of
the English Liturgy sent into Scotland: yet the alteration is like to be no
better than in Queen Elizabeth's time, when the Parliament having given order
for the alteration and correction of the Letany, all the Alteration that was
made in it, was only the taking out of that one suffrage, from the Pope of
Rome, and all his detestable enormities, good Lord deliver us.

The Remonstraut tells us of a Martyr (whom he calls Silly and Ignorant, we dare
not) Doctor Tailor that magnified the Liturgy to Bishop Gardener, as complete;
but where this story is you tell us not; we could answer story with story,
which would please you much less then this does us: we could tell you of a
Martyr that said it was the Mark of the Beast to receive from the Bishop a
License to preach; We could tell you of that Doctor Tailor, who when he was
degraded, having his corner Cap, and the rest of his Priestly Robes put on,
when they were taken off again, said he, now I am rid of my fools coat.

That our proposition of entering into consideration about altering the
Liturgy, might not seem unreasonable, we set down our reasons enforcing
such alteration; all which the Remonstrant brings under the severity of his
censure. First, (we say) it symbolizeth so much with the Popish Mass, as that
the Pope would have approved it: which he denies not, if he had, we could have
proved it from a man above suspicion in this cause, Doctor Morton. Only he
says, If the Devil confess Christ to be the Son of God, shall I disclaim the
truth, because it passed through a damned mouth? but you know Sir, that Christ
would not receive such a Confession from the Devils mouth, nor Paul neither,
Act. 16. and loath we would be to go to the Devil to learn a confession. It
is true, Gold in the impurest Channel is not to be contemned, but what need we
go to the Channel for gold, when we can have it in the purest stream? or what
need we go to the Roman Portu^se for a Prayer, when we can have one more free
from jealousies in another place? Will a wiseman go to the Stews to seek an
honest woman to make his wife?

Our second Reason why we propounded this quaere was, because this was
composed into this form on purpose to bring the Papist to our Churches, which
we find to be with so little success, etc. In answer to which the
Remonstrant first commends the project as charitable and gracious. The nature
of the project we never intended to dispute, only we produced this to show
that there was not the same reason for the retaining of this form, that there
was for the first introducing of it, We know the Apostles gro^^d, this (...)
tolerate the Jewish Ceremonies a while, but wh^^ they saw the I^ws remaining
ha^d^ed still, they quickly purged the Church of them.
because experience tells us it has not prevailed to that end to which it was
at first designed. Yes it did, says the Remonstrant; for Sir Edward Coke tells
us, till the eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth all came to Church, those times
knew no recusant. Pardon us Sir, If we tell you that it was not the converting
power of the Liturgy, but the constraining power of the Law that brought them
thither; which afterward not being pressed with that life and vigor that it
had bin, gave incourageme^t to the Popish fact o^, to take heart: add also,
that at the same time the Pope negotiated to have her Liturgy to be allowed by
his authority, so as the Queen would acknowledge his Supremacy, which when it
grew hopeless, then the Jesuitish Casuists begun to draw on the Papists to a
Recusancie. But might the complying of our Papists be attributed soly to the
inoffensivenesse of our Liturgy; Yet what credit is this to our Church to have
such a form of public worship, as Papists may without offense join with us
in, and yet their Popish principles live in their hearts still? How shall that
reclayme an erring soul, that brings their bodies to Church, and leaves their
hearts still in error? And whereas the Remonstrant would impute the not winning
of Papists rather to the want or weakness in preaching; Be it so, in the mean
time, let the Bishops see how they will clear their souls of this sin, who
having the sole power of admitting Ministers into the Church, have admitted so
many weak ones, and have rejected so many faithful, able Preachers, for not
conforming to their beggarly rudiments. And when we said that this our Liturgy
has lost us many rather then won any, We meant not only of such as are
lost to the Popish part. But let the Remonstrant take it so, it is neither
paradox nor slander. For let an acute Jesuit have but this argument to weild
against a Protestant not well grounded in our Religion (as too many such there
are in England) It is evident that the Church of Rome is the ancient and true
Church, and not yours, for you see your Service is wholly taken out of ours,
How would a weak Christian expedite himself here? Among the rest Master Abbot
whom we quoted ^n out answer but by a mistake it is referred to the fourth
(...) instead of this


To the third reason, this quaere was grounded upon the many stumbling blocks
the Liturgy lays before the feet of many. He tells us that these stumbling
blocks are removed by many. We confess, indeed, endeavors used by many,
whether effected or no that we question; we know it is no easy thing, when a
scruple has once taken possession of the conscience to cast it out again.
Among the many, the Remonstrant is pleased to refer us to Master Fisher (for
himself will not vouchsafe to foul his fingers with the removing of one of
those blocks we mentioned) whose book, among all that have traveled in that
way, we think that any int^lligent Reader will judge most unable to give solid
satisfaction to a scrupling conscience. Tell us we beseech you, is it enough
for a conscience that scruples the Surplice, to say, That it is as lawful for
you to enjoin the Surplice, and punish the omitting of it, as it was for
Solomon to enjoin Shimei, not to go out of Jerusalem, and to punish him for
the breach of that injunction? or, That the Surplice is a significative of
divine alacrity and integrity, and the expectation of glory? Is it possible
that a man that reads this should stu^ble at the Surplice after? The Cross is
not only lawful in the use of it, but the removal of it would be scandalous
and perilous to the State; Baptism is necessary to salvation; Children dying
unbaptized are in a forlorn condition, therefore Midwives may baptize, etc.
Let the Reader judge whether this be to remove stumbling blocks from before the
feet of men, or to lay more. But if this Remonstrant think Master Fisher so
able and happy a remover of those occasions of offense, we wonder how his
quick sight could see cause of any alteration, so much as in the manner of the
expression, knowing Master Fisher undertakes the defense not only of the
Substance, but of the very Circumstances and Syllables in the whole Book. But
his last put off is this, that if there be ought in it that may danger
scandal, it is under careful hands to remove it. The Lord be praised it is
so: it is under careful hands and hearts, more merciful then this Remonstrant
is, to remit troubled Consciences to No Better Cure then Master Fishers Book,
who we hope will do by those as the Helvetians did by some things that were
stumbled at among them; though they were none but Anabaptists that stumbled at
them, yet the State did by Authority remove them, and Zwinglius their professed
adversary gives them thanks for occasioning the removal.

To the fourth, which was that it is Idolized and accounted as the only
worship of God in England, etc. At Amsterdame, says he; but he knew we
spoke of such as adore it as an Idol, not such as abhor it as an Idol,
though it pleases him to put it off with a scoff, retorting upon us, others
say, rather too many do injuriously make an Idol of preaching, shall we
therefore consider of abandoning it? We hope, Sir, you are not serious, if you
be, and that not a little your self is guilty of Idolizing the Liturgy. Dare
you in cool bloodequalize this very individual Liturgy with Gods Ordinance of
preaching, and say there is as little sin or danger in considering of the
utter abandoning of preaching, as there is in the abandoning of this present
established Liturgy? Cave dixeris.

The fifth Argument was from the great distaste it meets with in many. This he
imputes to nothing but their ill teaching, and betakes himself to his old
shifts of diversion, and says, By the same reason, multitudes of people
distasting the truth of wholesome doctrine, shall we to humor them abandon both?

It is a grief to see this distaste grow to such a height as tends to a
separation; and it is as strange to us that this Remonstrant should have a
heart so void of pity as that the yielding to the altering or removing of a
thing indifferent (which stands as a wall of separation betwixt us and our
brethren) should be presented to public view under no better notion then the
humouring of a company of ill taught men, or as the Remonstrant elsewhere calls
them brainsick men, or as another Book, men that have need of dark rooms and
Ellebore. For that ill teaching to which he imputes this general distaste, if
there be any such, we for our parts are innocent; our care for our part has
been to inform our people, that such stumbling blocks as these are not
sufficient causes of Separation. But we think, nay, we know, that some few
Prelates by their overrigorous pressing of the Service Book and Ceremonies, have
made more Separatists, than all the Preachers disaffected to the Ceremonies in
England. Our last reason was from the difference between this and all other
Churches. To which he answers, that difference in Liturgies will breed no
disunion between Churches. Secondly, if it be requisite to seek conformity,
our is the more ancient Liturgy, and our the more noble Church: Therefore fit
for them to conform to us rather then we to them. It is true, every difference
in Liturgies does not necessitate a disunion of Churches: but here the
difference is too large to be covered with a few fig leaves. It is too well
known, our Ceremonies and other things in our Liturgies will not down with
other reformed Churches: to the second, it is not the precedencie in times that
gains the Glory, but the exactness of the work.

Our first Reformation was only in doctrine, theirs in doctrine and discipline
too. For the third, that ours is the more noble Church. We desire not to
eclipse the glory of this Church, but rather to entreat the Lord to increase
it a thousand fold, how great soever it be, and to ennoble it in this
particular, in removing what ever is a stumbling block out of the way of his
people. But why says the Remonstrant should we rather conform to the
Liturgies of the Reformed Churches, then those of all other Christians,
Grecians, Armenians, Copths, etc. should we set down what we have read in the
Liturgies of those Churches, we believe the Remonstrant would blush for
intimating, there is as much reason to conform to their Liturgies as those of
the Reformed Churches.

Our second quaere is not so weak as this Remonstrant supposes; it is this,
whether the first Reformers of Religion did ever intend the use of a Liturgy,
further then to be a help in the want, and to the weakness of the Ministers? In
way of Answer he asks, Whether we can think that our Reformers had any other
intentions then all other the founders of Liturgies. No, indeed, we think no
other, and howsoever the Remonstrant according to his confidence tells us that
the least part of their ear was the help of the Ministers weakness, yet
their words tell us it was the main drift of those that first brought
prescribed forms of prayer into the Church (and therefore we conceived it
might possibly be the intention of our Reformers also) witness the 23 Canon of
the fourth Council of Carthage, ut nemo patrem nominet profilio, etc. So the
Composers of the Liturgy for the French Church in in Frankfort, He formulae
serviunt tantum rudioribus, nullius liberiati praescribitur. These forms serve
only for the ignorant, not prescribing to any man's liberty. And were it so
that the mayn drift of the Composers of Liturgies were to help the d^votion of
the people, yet (what a help to devotion many find it, though we dispute not)
it will be hard f^r this Remonstrant to persuade many thousands who desire with
devout hearts to worship God, that the being constantly bound to the same
forms, though in themselves neither for matter nor composure subject to just
exception, will prove such a great help to their devotion. But this we are
sure, that if the knowing before hand the matter and the words wherewith it
should be clothed make people the more intent upon devotion, if this be an
infallible argument, it pleads against the use of present conception, either in
praying or preaching, or any other administration either public or private:
and how contradictory this is to what the Remonstrant has professed of his
reverent and pious esteem of conceived prayer, let himself see.

It is neither boldly nor untruly said, that all other reformed Churches,
though they use Liturgies, do not bind Ministers to the use of them: If we may
trust the Canons and the Rubricks of those Churches we may both boldly and
truly say it. Har. Synod. Belg. cap. 11. Ca^. 21.


In the Canons of the Dutch Churches, agreed upon in their Synod, Minister
preces vel dictante spiritu, vel certa sibi propos^^a for^ula concipiet.
we find a Canon enjoining some days in every week to be set apart for
preaching and praying, and the very next Canon says, the Minister shall
conceive prayers either by the Dictate of the Spirit, or by a set form. So in
the first Rubricke of the Liturgy of Geneva, the Minister is to exhort the
people to pray, quibus ei visum fuerit verbis, in what words he shall think
fit; and though that Liturgy contain forms of prayer for public use, yet we
do not find in all that Liturgy where they are tied to the use of those
forms, and no other; we find, where they are left free, as in one place, in
Dominico die mane haec ut plurimum adhibetur formula, Upon the Lords Day in the
morning, for the most part this prayer is used; for the most part, then not
always. So in another, after the Lords Super, Peracta coena haec gratiarum aut
aliqua ei similis adhibetur.
this thanksgiving or some other like it is used; then they are not absolutely
tied to the use of that: and by this we have learned how to construe what he
has quoted out of Master Calvine. And indeed any man that reads that Epistle
may easily construe what was Master Calvines judgment about Liturgies, not
that men should be so tied to words and forms, as to have no liberty to recede
from them. For in the same Epistle he does advise to have a summary collection
of doctrine which all should follow, and to the observing of which all, both
Bishops and Ministers should be bound by Oath; Yet we hope the Remonstrant will
not say that Calvine did advise that Bishops and Ministers should be bound by
oath not to vary from that form of doctrine? Calvine advises a set form of
Catechism, will the Remonstrant say that Calvine meant the Ministers should
never vary from the syllables of that form, provided they did dictate pro
captu populi, in quibus situs sit verus Christianismus? The very words by
himself quoted show what Calvin's end was in advising a set Liturgy, viz. to
help the simplicity and unskilfulnesse of some, to prevent the innovation of
others, and that the consort of all Churches among themselves might more
certainly appear, all which ends may be obtained without limiting all
Ministers to the words and syllables of a set form, provided they pray to that
effect. Which is all that is required in the Liturgies of other Churches.

We could name you many other Liturgies, wherein there are not further bounds
laid upon the Minister then thus, Hae sunt formulae, quas tamen sequitur
Minister pro suo arbitrio, These are forms which the Minister follows according
to his liking. And again, Spiritus sanctus non est alligandus formulis, The
Holy Ghost is not to be tied to forms. Minister concludit Orationem, quam pro
suo arbitrio dicit. Haec esto formula nisi quid ille sua sponie possit melius.
The Minister concludes the prayer, which he says according to his own
discretion: let this be that form, except of his own accord he can do
better. In another, Minister ad precandum hisce aut similibus verbis invitat ad
hunc modum orat, in these or the like words.

And by this, (we hope) the Remonstrant sees that what we have said, was more
truly then boldly spoken. As for the Lutheran Churches, though we bless God
for that truth, that is among them, for that glorious instrument of their
Reformation, yet we think the Remonstrant will not say, that the Lutheran
Churches came out so perfectly in the first Edition, but that desiderantur
nonnulla; nor can he be ignorant, that in the ordinary phrase of writing, they
are called the Protestant Churches, the other the Reformed Churches: and what
if the Reformed Churches be as the Remonstrant calls them, out of his respect
he bears them, but a poor handful? yet is this handful in respect of
purity, of truth, and worship among them, to be preferred before all the
Christian World besides.

The Rubric in the Liturgy of Edward the sixth, says he, is misconstrued,
Because it intends only the peoples ease and more willing addiction to
hearing. Two of the very ends for which we desire a liberty; which if some
Ordinaries (upon his certain knowledge) have often yielded, many now upon our
certain knowledge have denied it, and ordered Sermons should rather be
constantly cut short then any part of the Liturgy omitted, why should it be a
fault in us to desire that as a favor from this Honorable House, which the
Remonstrant grants an ordinary may without offense yield at his own discretion?

3 The Homilies we say are left free, reason therefore the Liturgy should:
which argument he confesses might hold force, did they utterly abridge all
Ministers of the public use of any conceived prayers. We know some men have
endeavored sacrilegiously, to rob all Ministers of the exercise of the gift of
prayer, on what occasion soever: And our argument is as strong against limiting
in prayer, as it is against limiting in preaching, either in whole or in part,
and he says nothing against it, only determines tanquam e Cathedra, that it
is no less sacrilege to rob the people of a set form, by the liberty of a free
expr^ssion, Then it is to rob them of the Ministers gift of preaching or
praying. But the Remonstrant must prove that set forms and Liturgies stinted
and enjoined, are not only lawful, but Ordinances of God, and not only
warranted but commanded, as well as preaching or praying, before he do so
peremptorily conclude the taking of set forms away by the liberty of a free
expression to be sacrilege; and his bold closure of this Answer, how true it is
let him look in what we have said before of the Liturgies of other Churches.

4 His fourth Answer, That it is a false ground, that the imposing of the book
ties godly men from exercising their gift in prayer, would have been condemned
for heresy in some Consistories in England, within these few years, by such
as did, from the imposition of the one, forbid the other. Whether the liberty
of prayer be infringed wholly, by a set Liturgy, we dispute not. But it is
beyond dispute, that the not binding to a Liturgy would endanger the liberty
of prayer less.

5 Our fifth Reason was, because many deny their presence at our Church-meeting,
in regard of those imposed prayers, and we find no better way to recover them
from that distance in which they stand, then by leaving the Liturgy free. The
Remonstrant says, There is no reason of such alienation from our assemblies
upon such grounds. The reasonableness or unreasonablenesse of this we
determine not; in the mean time we are sure thus it is. For our parts we
profess, that we are not against a free use of a Liturgy, nor do we count a
Liturgy a sufficient ground of separation from the Church, we say with
Augustine, Non putamus scindendas esse Ecclesias, propter ea quae nos ex se,
neque digniores, neque indigniores, coram Deo facere possunt.

Yet we fear it is not the Remonstrants Dilemma that will reduce such as upon
this ground are upon point of forsaking our Church assemblies. The Liturgy
(says he) is either good or evil, if evil it is not lawful to be used, if
good it is not unlawful to be imposed. The persons of whom we speak, and
with whom in this argument he has to deal will deny both, and tell him the
Liturgy is neither good, nor yet may lawfully be imposed if it were good, it
may be the Remonstram might have work enough to persuade some men of either:
and whether it be easier to satisfy the consciences of many thousands in
England, that are troubled about this, by argument and disputing, or by loosing
the bond of imposition, and taking away the cause of dispute and trouble, or to
behold the confusion that will follow, if the Lord do not in mercy direct to
some means of prevention, is not hard to determine.

The Remonstran^ inclines to the third, and making it but a small matter, turns
it off with O miserable misled people, whom nothing will reclaim but a perfect
confusion! a perfect deformity, a more profitable nonsense! And so confident he
is that this will be the issue, that though this confusion appear in no other
Churches who perhaps (he grants contradicting himself) begun without a
Liturgy; yet with us it could be no less then what he has prophesied: yea,
so resolute he is not to yield to a liberty in what is established, that
whereas we said that liberty in Liturgies could breed no more confusion then
liberty in the Homilies, we evidently see by his answer, that had the reading
of Homilies been as strictly enjoined as the Book of Common Prayer, the ablest
Minister in England, were the Law in the Remonstrants hands, must be held as
strictly to them, as to this. Yea, lastly, whereas we had said, that if
enjoined at all, it might be as a punishment upon the insufficient, thereby to
quicken them up to more diligence and care: he scoffs at this as a singular
project and unheard of mulct; and yet himself comes out with a project about
preaching, never a whit better, and does as good as confirm our saying in the
latter end; Surely where God has bestowed gifts, it is fit they should be
employed, and improved to the best advantage of his people: But where there is
nothing but an empty, over-meening, and proud ignorance, there is great reason
for a just restraint. Let the ingenious Reader peruse the words, and consider
how much they differ from that which he calls our singular project: and withal
judge whether this conclusion of the Remonstrant after all his wrangling
against our Queres, be not as like Bellarmines, tutissimum tamen, etc. This
speech was spoken in the Lords house by a Noble Peer, and had the approbation
of many others.
as if it had been cast ^n the same Scull? How this way that the Remonstrant
has chosen would speed, let the Reader judge: In the mean time we bless God,
who has put it into the hearts of others, into whose hands he has
concredited the work, to judge more wisely, and consider more mercifully; and
to profess in the hearing of some of us, that they would willingly part with
that which was indifferent to themselves, if they were but truly informed, it
was offensive to others. According to that of Gregory, Greg. l. 6. epist. 6 ep.
64.
Those customs which are known to bring any burdens upon the Churches, it
becomes us to consider of the removing of them.

Thus we have vindicated the first part of our answer concerning Liturgy,
Wherein we profess, as in the presence of God, that we have written nothing
out of a spirit of contention and faction, but only as lovers of the Truth,
and the peace of the Church, which is now miserably divided in judgment and
affections, and like a young Heart upon the mountains of Bether; which rents and
distractions, Came. 2. 17. Bether in Heb. is division.
we are so far from fomenting, that we would willingly go over diverse Seas
(as Calvin once said) to find out one uniforme way of worshipping of God, in
which all Christians might happily agree. We well know that peace is the
Helena, Pocem Ecclesie Martyrio praeferim^^. Cypr. Pax sine veritate est
execrabile adulterium. Cyp.
that all are suitors unto; and we know as well, that peace without truth is
as a painted Iezabell, and to be thrown down by all those who are on the Lords
side. And therefore it has and always shall be our chief care and prayer,
that peace and truth may kiss and greet each other: And we hope that the
Worthies of that Honorable Assembly, who are the great Patrons of peace and
truth, will give a candid interpretation to these our endeavors, and will do
that for which present and succeeding generations may justly record them as the
Nehemiah's, Ezrae's, and Zorobabels, of our decayed Jerusalem.

SECT. III.
THe business of the third Section, is to extricate himself from those
snares, in which his own words have entangled him: his affection to his cause,
had transported him to use some overreaching expressions, lifting up the
Antiquity, and extending the Universalitie of Episcopal Government beyond
truth, vilifying (as we know his custom is) whatsoever has been spoken or
written to the contrary. Those things we laid to his charge; Now see how
miserably he excuses himself: read the Remonstrance, our c^llections from it
in this Section, and judge whether he has sufficiently redeemed his credit,
who has neither made any one ingenious confession of an oversight, nor yet
made good what he had spoken; yet he enters with his wonted confidence,
persuading himself he has blown away all the arguments of the former Section,
and lays on us unmercifully, calling us Cavellers, Leasers, Slanderers,
Calumniators, worthy to be spit upon, etc. Such let us be esteemed, if we be
found deserving.

His first care, and almost his greatest, is, to clear himself from that which
we spoke of but by the way; His condemning all, that either writ or spoke
against Episcopacy, as weak, or factious, The God of heaven knows this (says
he) never came within the verge of my thoughts. Sir, we cannot parley with
your thoughts, but certainly if it were not in your thoughts, your words
mistake their errand: For this proposition, Episcopacie is cried down abroad
either by weak or factious persons, We beseech you, let your Logic (the want
whereof you upbraid us with) tell us, quae, quanta, qualis; if any man should
say it grieves his heart to hear, how the pure Protestant Religion is cried
down abroad, by either weak or factious persons, would this have been
interpreted to concern only such as cry down the Protestant Religion here in
England? Certainly, abroad not being limited, as it was not in your
Remonstrance, though now you would limit it in your Defense, is a word of such
vast extent, as reaches not only beyond the bounds of the Parliament, but of
the Kingdom too.

But see how justly you deal with us, where you personate us as saying, Page
35.
Sure the man is not in his right wits, hear how he raves, sure he is in a
deep frenzy: who ever spoke of the Remonstrant so contumeliously? It is
language more like his, who sends men to dark rooms, and to Ellebore. We
said indeed, Episc. by divine Right, part. 2. p. 6.
the Remonstrant was self-confounded, and we know as well as you can tell
us, there is a self-confusion that is the effect of extreme sorrow, such a
sorrow as makes men speak they know not what; and so did this Remonstrant:
some of which expressions he yet justifies, some he minces.

This he justifies, and says, Page 35.
he ever will; that he is no peaceable, nor well-affected son of the Church
of England, that does not wish well to Liturgy and Episcopacie. What? tell us
now once for all, whither the Parliament do not here come under the verge of
your Proposition? Whom before you were so careful to exempt by one word
abroad. For this is well known, if all those of the Nobility, Gentry, and
Communaltie, that at this time stand not well affected to the present
Liturgy, and Hierarchy, are to be counted factious and ill affected, the
Reverend Fathers will have multitudes of disobedient sons to disple.

In the next page, he endeavors to make good what he had spoken in the
Remonstrance, that Episcopal government, by the joint confession of all
Reformed Divines, derived it self from the times of the Apostles (without the
contradiction of any one Congregation gregation in the Christian World) unto
this present Age. His Defense is first, he said nothing of Diocesan Bishops
(then as good have said nothing at all) but spoke only of Episcopal
Government: But was it not that Sacred Government which some seek to wound?
Page 36. Bishop Hall says expressly in Episcopacie by divine right, p. 29. that
Timothy was a Diocesan Bishop, and Ephesus a Diocesan Church; it seems you dare
^ot say so.
and what is that but Government by Diocesan Bishops? which he must prove to
derive it self from the Apostles times, or else eat his words. Nay, more then
so, he must prove that the joint Confession of all Reformed Divines
acknowledge it; and not think to put the Reader and us off, with telling us, no
true Divines ever questioned, whether Bishops were derived from the Apostles or
no, but what kind of Bishops they were; We know what kind of Bishops the
Remonstrant pleads for, and of them he said, by the joint confession of all
Reformed Divines, they were derived from the Apostles: prove this, or
acknowledge your error. It is this kind of Bishops you must prove has
continued in the Christian World unto this age, without the contradiction of
any one Congregation. We tell you of Scotland without Bishops: you would put us
off with China and Brasile, etc. but are they parts of the Christian World, as
Scotland is? You never meant that every place through the whole World has had
a continued line of Bishops ever since the Apostles, we thought you had; for we
are sure it is the assertion of Episcopal men: Episc. div. Right 2 part. p.
113.
else what is the meaning of Doctor Halls semper and ubique? and what is the
meaning of that irrefragable proposition? no man living, no History can show
any well allowed and settled National Church in the whole Christian World, that
has been governed otherwise then by Bishops, in a meet and moderate imparity,
ever since the times of Christ and his Apostles, unto this present age. And
what means that other expression? Episc. div. Right part. 2. p. 110, 111.
Turn over all Histories, seek the records of all times and places, if ever
it can be shown, that any Orthodox Church in the whole Christian World, since
the time of Christ, and his Apostles, was governed otherwise then by a Bishop,
Superior to his Clergy (unless perhaps during the time of some persecution,
or short interregnum) Let me forfeit my part of the cause. The instances
brought to prove the falsnesse of that Assertion, that Episcopacie had never
met with contradiction in any Christian Congregation, Page 39.
The one he turns off with the evasion of a personal quarrel; whereas the
Histories tell us it was an ancient custom; and adds an odious Marginall ill
becoming his so deeply protested loyalty to his Sovereigne, Page 39.
as if it were no less crime to offer an affront to a Prelate, then to the
King. The other instances of the Reformed Churches, he puts off with this
shift; that if we did not wilfully shut our eyes, we might see he limited his
time unto this present age. Good Sir, bethink you, take up your Remonstrance,
read your own words, Mark the Parenthesis. Episcopal Government derives it
self from the times of the Apostles without any interruption (without the
contradiction of any one Congregation in the Christian World) to this present
age. The limitation of time here, has reference to the continuance of
Episcopacie, not the contradiction of Episcopacie, that is hedged in with your
parenthesis, which excludes your limitation. Just such another is your next,
having said, Episcopal Government continued in this Island ever since the
plantation of the Gospel, without contradiction; and being here taken in the
manner, to salve your credit, you would here alter your words and sense, and
make it, that it cannot be contradicted, Page 40.
that the form of this Government has continued in the Island ever since the
first plantation of the Gospel; pray review your words, and see how well they
admit this sense. Were this Ordinance merely humane, and Ecclesiastical, if
there could no more be said for it, but that it is exceeding ancient, of more
then fifteen hundred years standing, and that it has continued in this Island
since the first Plantation of the Gospel, to this present day, without
contradiction. You would make the sense to go thus, this proposition is true
without contradiction, that Episcopal Government has continued in this
Island: we say the sense must be thus, that this Government has continued
without contradiction, or has received no contradiction, during all the time
it has continued, until this present day.

If any impartial Reader would not take the words in that sense we did, rather
then in the sense you have drawn them to, let us be counted slanderers. But in
excusing the last mistake, he would be a little more serious. The Remonstrant
had said; Except all Histories, all Authors fail us, Page 41.
nothing can be more certain then this truth. We cry out here of such a
shamelessness, as dares equal this opinion of his of Episcopal Government, to
an Article of our Creed. This he does seriously deny, professing he spoke it
only as an ordinary phrase in hourly discourse; and did He so too, that in
Episcopacie by divine Righ, Part. 2. page 47. faith, That for his part, he is
so confident of the divine institution of the Majoritie of Bishops above
Presbyters, that he dare boldly say, there are weighty points of Faith, which
have not so strong evidence in Scripture. And the same Author in the same place
professes, that men may with much better color cavil at those blessed
Ordinances of God, viz. (consecration and distribution of the holy Eucharist,
and baptizing of Infants) then quarrel at the divine institution of Bishops.
God give the man less confidence, or more truth: is not this to equalize this
fancy to an Article of the Creed? We would not have cast away so much time
and paper upon this worthless business, but only to clear our selves from
that uncharitableness, falsehood, lying, and slandring, wherewith the
Remonstrant here bespatters us. It is in his power to save himself and us this
ungrateful labor, if he will give less scope to his luxuriant pen, speak
more cautiously, let his words be more in weight, and less in number.

SECT. IV.
IN the next Section, Page 42.
the Remonstrant according to his Rhetoric, says, Now I hope, they will
strike; it is a Trope, sperare pro timere. He had pleaded for the establishment
of Episcopacie, the long continuance of it in the world, and in this Island:
this we called Argumentum galeatum, quoting Hierom for that Epithet, for which
his great learning scoffs us. Well, we must put it up; an argument, or if you
will an Almanac, (for it is growing out of date apace) and calculated for the
Meridian of Episcopacie, etc. meaning the argument, though applied to
Episcopacie, might serve for any other Right, Custom, Order, Religion, that
might plead antiquity, which he denies not, but plainly grants, saying, it is
calculated for whatsoever Government; if so long time have given it peaceable
possession; in so much, that could the Presbytery plead so long continuance,
he should never yield his vote to alter it. No, should not? to bring in that
Episcopal Government which (says the Remonstrant) has such a divine
institution, as not only warrants it, where it is, but requires it where it may
be had. How can these things consist? Surely if your grounds for the Divine
Right of Episcopacie be Convictive and Irrefragable, you must renounce that
Government which is merely humane, and Ecclesiastical, be the Antiquity of it
never so venerable, if it stand in Competition with that which may plead a jus
divinnm.

To divert that which he saw would overthrow this plea, intitling the Pope to
as much strength in this argument as the Bishops, he will needs add this: That
long continuance may challenge an immunity from thoughts of alteration, uulesse
where the ground of the change is fully Convictive and Irrefragable. But first,
Sir, you must not make a limitation in your conclusion, above what was in your
premises; but since you are at a dead lift, we will take it in, and yet tell
you, that this helps you no more, then the Pope still: if he may judge, he
will say there is no reason for his abolition: may others judge, the ground is
fully Convictive and Irrefragable. The Bishops being Judges, and the
Remonstrant, they determine; no reason in the world for the change of
Episcopacie; but what if others that must be Judges in this controversy see
grounds Irrefragable, and Convictive: where is your argument from the long
standing of Episcopacie? The other things which he refers to their more proper
place we shall expect there. Only for his confident challenge he makes to us,
to name any man in this Nation that has contradicted Episcopacie till this
present age: Page 45.
We must put him in remembrance, that in his Remonstrance his words were unto
this present day. Which unless he will have recourse to his Trope, is more
then this Age, if by this age he mean this last Century: but let it be this
age, we can produce instances of some (and that long before this Age) in this
Kingdom that have contradicted Episcopacie; and our instances shall not be
mean.

That blessed man Wickliffe ages ago did judge there ought only to be two
Orders of Ministers, Catolog. Test. verit. Tom. 2.
and who these be he expresses in the following words, Tantum duos ordines
ministrerum esse debere judicavit, viz. Presbyteros and Diaconos.
viz. Presbyters and Deacons, if there be but two Orders of Ministers in the
Church Presbyters and Deacons, then where is your Sacred Order of Episcopacie?
And if Wickliffe deny the being of that Order, does he not contradict it? In
the following page he says, Pauli, etc. That in the time of Paul, two distinct
Orders of Clergy men were sufficient, Priests and Deacons: Neither was there
in the time of the Apostles any distinction of Popes, Patriarchs, Archbishops;
it was enough that there were Presbyters and Deacons.

So, Walls. Hist. Aug. Rich. 2. p. 205.
there is one in this Nation, who before this age contradicts Episcopacie.

Of him also Walsingham says, That this was one of Wickliffs errors, that
every Priest rightly ordained, has sufficient power to administer all
Sacraments (and consequently Orders and Penance) for they were then esteemed
Sacraments.

Consonant to this of Wickliffe, was the judgment of John Lambert, Fox Martyre^.
who in his answer to Articles objected against him says, thus, As touching
Priesthood in the Primitive Church; when virtue bare (as Ancient Doctors do
deem, and Scripture in mine opinion records the same) most room, there were
no more officers in the Churches of God then Bishops and Deacons, that it
Ministers; as witnesses, besides Scripture, Hierome full apertly in his
Commentaries upon the Epistles of Paul. Though these were but single men, yet
they were Martyrs, therefore we hope their words will bear some weight. We
could tell you further that Richardus de media Valla in 4. Sent. Did. 24.
quaest. 2. Non ordo qui est Sacramentum, sed potius quaedam ordinis dignitas
Episcopatus dicendus est: Episcopacie is not to be called order, but a kind of
a dignity of an order. Catal. Test. T. 2.


Guli. Occam Anno 1330 Quod Sacerdotes omnes cujuscunque gradus existant, sunt
aequalis autoritatis, potestatis, and jurisdictionis institutione Christi: sed
Caesaris institutione Papam esse Superiorem, qui etiam potest hoc revocare.
That all Priests of whatsoever degree they be, are of equal authority, power,
and jurisdiction, by the institution of Christ: but by Caesar's institution the
Pope is the Superior, who may also recall this.

We could tell you further of one Gualter Mapes, a man whom History records
famous for Learning, who flourisht in the year 1210, that wrote many books:
among the rest, one called A Complaint against Bishops. Silvest. Gi^ald. in
specim. Eccles. li. 3. c. 1. and 14. Balcent. 3. c. 61.
Another against the Pope and his Court. Another to the wicked Prelates. In
which he calls the Pope Plutonem and Asinum, Prelates, Animalia bruta, and
stercora: Whether this man did contradict Episcopacie or no? let themselves
judge. But we are sure, if any man a few years ago should have so written or
spoken, it had been a crime next L^sae Majestatis: we could tell them of many
more, but the Remonstrant desired but to name any one, we hope we shall
indifferently well satisfy his desire, by that time we have mentioned one
more, Robert Longland, a Scholar of Wickliffs, who put forth a Book in English,
called the Ploughmans Dream, which ends thus, God save the King and speed the
plough,
And send the Prelates care enough,
Enough, enough, enough, enough.


If single instances will not serve the turn, we can give instance of a
combination of learned and godly men in Oxford; who being called in question
before the King, Math. Paris. l. 4. Anno 960.
and the Bishops of the Kingdom, were condemned to be stigmatized and banished
the Kingdom (the fatal punishment of the Adversaries of Episcopacie) for
saying that the Church of Rome was the Whore of Babylon, the barren fig tree
that God had cursed, and for saying, non obediendum esse Papae and Episcopis,
that neither Pope nor Bishops are to be obeyed.

If this be not enough, we can produce the combination of the whole Kingdom,
Anno 1537 (somewhat above an age ago) out of a Book called, The institution of
a Christian Man, made by the whole Clergy in their Provincial Synod, set
forth by the authority of the Kings Majesty, and approved by the whole
Parliament, and commanded to be preached to the whole Kingdom, wherein
speaking of the Sacrament of Orders, it is said expressly, that although the
Fathers of the succeeding Church after the Apostles, instituted certain
inferior degrees of Ministry, yet the truth is, Quod in novo Testamento nulla
mentio facta est ullorum graduu^, aut dist^ncti onum in Ordinibus, sed tantum
Diaconorum vel Ministrorum and Presbyteroru^ sive Episcoporu^.
that in the New Testament, there is no mention made of any other degrees or
distinction in Orders, but only of Deacons or Ministers, and Presbyters or
Bishops, and throughout the whole discourse makes Presbyters and Bishops the
same: from whence it is evident, that in that age the whole Clergy knew not any
difference made by the Scriptures between Presbyters and Bishops, and by this
time (we hope) you have more then one in this Kingdom, who have contradicted
your Episcopacie before this age. And if we should expatiate beyond the bounds
of this Kingdom, we might with ease produce, not only testimonies of
Schoolmen but of others, who acknowledge but two Orders in the Ministry; but
seeing you required only home-born witnesses weell trouble you with no other:
and entreat you to make much of them. Only we shall entreat the Reader to
view, to his abundant satisfaction, Doctor Reinolds his Epistle to Sir Francis
Knowls, who shows out of Chrysostom Hierom, Ambrose, Augustine, Theod.
Primasius, Sedulius, Theophilact, that Bishops and Presbyters are all one in
Scripture, and that Aerius could be no more justly condemned for heresy, for
holding Bishops and Presbyters to be all one, then all those Fathers with whom
agree (says he) Oecumenius, and Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, and another
Anselme, and Gregory, and Gratian: and affirms, that it was once enrolled in
the Canon Law for sound and Catholic doctrine, and thereupon taught by learned
men, he adds further that it is unlikely that Anselme should have been
Canonized for a Saint by the Pope of Rome, and the other Anselme and Gregory so
esteemed in the Popes Library, that Gratians Works should be allowed so long
time by so many Popes for the golden fountain of the Canon law, if they had
taught that for sound doctrine, which by the whole Church in her most
flourishing time was condemned for heresy, and concludes that they who have
labored about the Reformation of the Church, these five hundred years (of
whom he names abundance) have taught that all Pastors be they intitulated
Bishops or Priests have equal authority and power by the Word of God, and by
this the Reader may know Doctor Reinolds his judgment concerning Episcopacie.

There is one thing more belongs to this Section, as to the proper seat, and
that is the establishment which he seeks to Episcopacie from the laws of the
Kingdom, to which we having answered, that Laws are repealable, the Parliament
having a Nomotheticall power, He answers though laws are repealable, Page 46.
yet fundamental laws are not subject to alteration upon personal abuses:
Secondly, that he speaks not against an impossibility, but an easiness of
change, which our guiltiness would willingly overlook.

But consider, we beseech you, how fitly is Episcopal Government made a piece
of the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom? How did the Kingdom then once stand
without Bishops, as in the very page, you had now to answer, you might have
seen once it did? For does not the Marginall tell you from Sir Edward Coke, or
rather from an Act reported by him in the 23 year of Edward the first, that
the holy Church was founded in the state of Prelacie, within the Realm of
England, by the King and his progenitors, which your guiltiness will needs
overlooke, for fear you should see that there was a King of this Realm of
England, before there was a Prelacie. And how then is Episcopacie one of the
fundamentals of the Kingdom? And whereas you say you spoke only against an
easiness of change, read your words in the eighteenth page of your
Remonstrance, A man would think it were plea enough to challenge a reverend
respect, and an immunitie from all thoughts of alteration: is this to speak
against an easiness, or rather against a possibility of change? For your
conclusion, that things indifferent or good, having by continuance and general
approbation been well rooted in Church and State, may not upon light grounds
be pulled up, Good Sir, never trouble your self about such an indifferent
thing, as Episcopacie is. Never fear, but if Episcopacie be rooted up, it will
be done by such hands as will not do it upon light grounds.

SECT. V.
THey that would defend the Divine right of Episcopacie, derive the pedigree of
it from no less then Apostolical, and in that right, divine institution; so
did this Remonstrant. This we labored in this Section to disprove, and show,
that it might be said of our Bishops, as of those men, Ezra 62. These men
sought their Register among those that were reckoned by Genealogy, but they
were not found: therefore were they as polluted put from the Priestho^d. For
the Bishops, whose pedigree is derived from the Apostles, were no others then
Presbyters: this we evinced by four mediums out of Scripture, but insisted
only upon two, the identitie of their name and office.

Before we come to the Remonstrants answer, we will mind the Reader of what
the Remonstrant says, That we have a better faculty at gathering then at
strewing: Page 128.
which if we have, we shall here make good use of our faculty, in gathering the
choice flowers which himself has scattered; yielding unto us the mayn
Scripture grounds whereby the Patrons of Episcopacie have endeavored to uphold
their cause. For himself confesses the Bishops cause to be bad, if it stand
not by divine Right, and compares the leaving of divine right, Page 125.
and supporting themselves by the indulgence and munificence of religious
Princes, The Author of Episc. by divine Right, affirms the same part 2. page
49.
unto the evil condition of such men, who when God has withdrawn himself,
make flesh their arm. And whether himself has not surrendered up this divine
right, judge by that which follows. Our main argument was, That Bishops and
Presbyters in the original authority of Scripture were the same. He answers
in the name of himself and his Party, Page 47.
This is in express terms granted by us. We argue it further, That we never
find in Scripture any other orders of Ministry but Bishops and Deacons. He
answers, Brethren, you might have spared to tell me that which I have told you
before, And adds, That when we allege the Apostles writings, for the identity
of Bishops and Presbyt^rs, we oppose not his assertion, Page 47. 48.
because he speaks of the monuments of immediate succession to the Apostolic
times, but we of the writing of the Apostles. And for the two other arguments
drawn from the identitie of the qualifications of Bishops and Presbyters for
their Office, and Ordination to their office, he answers Ne (...) quidem. And
yet notwithstanding, that the Reader may not perceive how the Remonstrant
betrays his own cause, he deals like the fish Sepia, and casts out a great
deal of black ink before the eyes of the Reader, that so he may escape
without observation. But we will trace him and find him out, where he thinks
himself most secure. For first, he falsely quotes our answer. Whereas we say,
That in original authority Bishops and Presbyters are the same, he tells us, we
say, That Bishops and Presbyters went originally for the same, That is, says
he, There was at first a plain indentity in their denomination. Which two
answers differ, Immane quantum! And yet howsoever this very identity of
denomination in Scripture is of no small consequence, what ever the Remonstrant
makes of it.

For the proper ends of Names being to distinguish things, according to the
difference of their natures, and the supreme wisdom of God being the imposer
of these names, who could neither be ignorant of the nature of these offices,
nor mistake the proper end of the imposition of names, nor want variety to
express himself, the argument taken from the constant identity of
denomination, is not so contemptible as the Remonstrant pretends. Especially
considering that all the texts brought to prove the identity of names prove as
intrinsecally, the identity of Offices, which we did clearly manifest, by that
text, Titus 1. 5, 6, 7. Where the Apostle requiring Presbyters to be thus and
thus qualified, renders the reason, because Bishops must be so. Which argument
would no ways evince what the Apostle intended, if there were only an
idenditie of names, and not also of offices and qualifications When the names
are the same, and the Offices distinct, who but one that cares not what he
affirms, would infer the same offices as a consequent from the identity of
their names? Who would say that the properties of the Constellation called
Canis ought to be the same with the bruit creature so called, because they have
both one name? And this we desire the Reader to take the more notice of,
because the Remonstrant passes it over in silence.

Secondly, the Remonstrant seems to recant that which he had before granted,
and Page 48.
tells us that though in the Apostolic Epistles there be no nominal distinction
of the titles, yet here is a real distinction and specification of the duties,
as we shall see in due place. But this place is in Vtopia, and we shall find
it paulo post finem, for we find it no where in this book; but we hope in due
place faithfully to perform the contrary to what he has deludingly promised,
and also to show how these words of his do contradict what himself says in
other places of his book.

The testimonies brought out of antiquities, to show that the names of Bishops
and Presbyters were used (...), he calls trifling, and challenges us to name
any one of his Writers that has stood up in the cause of Episcopacy that has
not granted and proclaimed this which we contend for. We answer first, the
better is our cause, when our adversaries are forced to grant us thus much.

Secondly, the Authors we allege, do as well hold the offices of Bishops and
Presbyters, to be used in Scripture (...), as well as the names.

Thirdly, though we cannot name the man, yet he who names himself the humble
Remonstrant, in the 96 page of his Defense, does impropriate the name (...),
Acts 20. to Bishops in an imparity distinct from mere Presbyters, saying, If
they were indeed Bishops, and not mere Presbyters as the word it self imports,
etc. And we think you should know the name of this man.

We mentioned Anicetus, Pius, Higinus, Telesphorus, under the denomination of
Presbyters. Page 48.
You Answer we could not have brought a stronger argument against our selves.
Why? They are called Presbyters as well as Bishops. Ergo, the names are used
indifferently. Does it not fully prove as much as we intended? Page 49.
But they are famously known (say you) to have been in a height of elevation
above Presbyters.

It is yet to be proved they were so: yet how ever, no such elevation as did
advance them into an order above Presbytery.

For Irenaeus speaking of the Successors to the Apostles says, Irenaeus lib 4.
cap. 44.
Cum Prebyterio ordine sermonem sanum and conversationem sine offensa
praestant, ad informationem and correctionem reliquorum, And our Remonstrant
granting an identitie of names, and yet thinking to maintain a distinction of
offices out of Irenaeus, comes nearer to the sense of the Popish Commentator
Feuardentius, then of the orthodox Father Irenaeus. Page 49.


To Cyprian whom the Presbyters called frater, He replies that though the
Presbyters were so familiar with him as to call him brother, yet he did never
so condescend to them as to call them Bishops, but stiffly maintains the
eminency of his superiority, and is sometimes honor ^dutth the st^le of
Beatissimus Papa. To all which we answer, first, that as the Presbyters call
Cyprian brother, so he calls them Brethren, Colleagues, Fellow-Presbyters, etc.
And Augustine a Bishop, writing to Hierom a Presbyter, disdains not to write in
this style, Domino dilectissimo, and Ep. 19.
in Christi vesceribus honorando, sancto fratri and Compresbytero Hieronymo. So
to Praesidius, Domino beatissimo and merito venerando fratri Consacerdoti
Praesidio: Ep. 16.
Yet was Praesidius but a Deacon as Hierome says. For Cyprians maintaining his
Superiority stiffly, we are sure he never maintained it so stiffly as this
Remonstrant Answ. p 38.
and our Bishops do: for he (as we fully showed in our Answer) never
maintained any sole superior power, but disclaimed it wholly, yet this is the
thing our Bishops contend for, as you may read, Episcopacie by Divine Right,
part. 2 page 16.

As for the glorious Title of Beatissimus Papa Cyprianus, we tell you, in that
age, it was a title common to Presbyters as well as Bishops, as appears ex
Bibliotheca Patrum, Primum, singulos habent Papas, Bibl. Pat. T^m. 15^. 170 de
Gcrae^o (...) rat^r Liturgica.
sic enim vocant Presbyteros vel Curiones, in singulis Parochiis, cum uno
Diacono. It is therefore but a mere false supposition of the Remonstrant, that
the title Papa was never given to a mere Presbyter. And we hope the name Papa
is as great, and Rome will say as incommunicable, as the Remonstrant would make
the name Episcopus, Page 49.
out of Cyprian.

In the next Paragraph, the Remonstrant leaving the indentity of names,
addresseth himself to the great question about the distinction of the Offices
of Bishops and Presbyters. And here we demanded, and now demand again, What
these men, that maintain the office of a Bishop distinct from a Presbyter,
make the Bishops proper office? Is it to edify the Church by Word and
Sacraments, etc. Page 49.
Here says the Remonstrant, They fall somewhat unhappily upon the very words
of the branded Heretic Aerius. So said S^^via of Hierom before.
Good Reader, compare the expressions, and see whether they be the very words:
but had we fallen upon the very words, how can that man that has said so often,
the Liturgy is never the worse, Page 24.
because the words of it are taken out of the Roman Portuise, tr^duce either
our persons or cause, for falling unhappily upon the words of Aerius? But it
seems he is very willing to take all advantages, to involve us in the crime of
Heresy; For in this, and several other passages, he charge us with being
the Disciples of that frantic Heretic Aerius, which makes us almost suspect,
that great deserving Champion of Episcopacy, Fran. Sancta Clara.
Franciscus a Sancta Clara, had a hand in this Remonstrance, who has driven
the Divine right of Episcopacie so high, Apol. Epis. page 67. 68.
as to charge all with heresy that deny it.

But how ever, the Remonstrant should have done well, to have given better
satisfaction to our tenth Quere concerning Aerius, and taken away what we
spoke, before he cry out against him as a stigmatized Heretic. But if he
scorn to answer us, we would entreat him to lend Bellarmine a lift in answering
the famous Doctor Whitakers, Whit. Contr. a^ Quaest. 5.
Who says, I answer, Aerius was not accounted by all for an heretic:
Epiphanius indeed, and Augustine following him, reckon him among the heretics,
but if he held nothing besides those things, he was not an heretic, for the
Scriptures and Fathers themselves confirm all these: and Theodoret in his
book of the Fables of the Jews, does not rank him among heretics, nor the
Ecclesiastical history, but rather Eustathius that did oppose him, etc.

If your greatness will not stoop to answer a single Doctor, we will subjoyn a
second, Learned Doctor Willet Contr. Genesis 5. Quaest. 3. and a third,
Chemnitius in Exam. Council. Trid. part 4. de Orig. Iejunii, and a fourth,
Springlius de hodiernis haeresibus part. 1. l. 3. c. 2. which have spoken as
fully in the justification of Aerius his opinion, as ever your answerers did.

But what says the Remonstrant to this Aerian question? Brethren, God speed
you with your question. Sir, if you speak this cordially, and seriously, we
are glad of your ingenuity, 2 John 10. 11.
that though you have called us Heretics, yet our heresy is not so damnable,
but you dare bestow an Ave upon us. But if you speak this scoffingly, as we are
verify afraid you do, then we beseech you in the fear of God, consider how
you will answer this taking of Gods Name in vain, before that great tribunal,
to which you make such bold appeals.

The office we distributed into administering, Word and Sacraments, Orders and
Discipline. For the first, administering the Word and Sacraments, Page 50.
this the Remonstrant grants in common to Bishops and Presbyters without any
difference but what our distance makes: Which exception we understand not,
unless your meaning be that Bishops may preach as often, and as seldom as
they please: and we must preach no oftener then they give us leave.

The quarrel as he makes it (we called it controversy) lies especially in the
power of Ordination and Jurisdiction; which say we by divine Authority is
common to all Presbyters, which yet our Bishops have impropriated to
themselves. To prove that the power of Ordination was in the hands of
Presbyters, we produced the 1 Timothy 4. 14. to this he answers nothing of his
own: only tells us in an Hyperbole, it has received answer, (...), and he
gives but one, and that borrowed too from Calvine, who takes Presbyterium of
the office, not of the persons. Page 51.
Wherein says the Remonstrant he follows the judgment of Hierome, Primasius,
Anselme, Haymo, Lyranus, Erasmus, and others, as Bishop Downham has showed.
We do believe that this is borrowed of Bishop Downham, for had he consulted
with those Authors, he might easily have seen how little they favor that
exposition. For what says Hierome, whom Primasius follows in his very words?
Prophetiae gratiam habebat cum ordinatione Episcopatus. Does this prove that
Presbyterium is there the name of the office? If so? You must grant Episcopacie
and Presbytery to be the same office, which is the very question. But we
would feign know, why cum ordinatione Presbyterii or Episcopatus should be
understood rather of the office, then of the person: when, (in propriety of
phrase) if they had meant it of the office they would rather have said
ordinatio ad Episcopatum, then Episcopatus. For Anselme, what says he?
Impositionem manuum eam dicit, quae in ordinatione ejus facta est, quae manuum
impositio fuit presbyterii, quia per hanc impositionem accepit presbyterium, id
est, Episcopatum, vel haec impositio manuum fuit presbyterii, qui Latinis
dicitur Senior, quia ipse Apostolus, qui juxta hunc sensum presbyter
intelligitur, imposuit manus suas cap^^ ejus dum illum consecraret Episcopum.
The comment is a sufficient confutation of it self, for the first exposition
wracks the text with a violent and unusual hyperba^on. And therefore he
recedes from that, and falls upon a second, Presbyterii qui dicitur Senior,
quia Apostolus ipse, etc.

Now what an unlikely exposition is this? What Author can these followers of
Anselme produce, wherein Presbyterium is called Senior. For those other, Lira,
Haymo, and Erasmus, we will oppose to them the Fathers of the Greek Church, who
are likely to know best the genuine sense of the Greek Text.

The same Doctor Do^nham (from whom the defendant has borrowed these
interpretations) tells him that Chrysostom, Theodoret, and other Greek Fathers
understand it of the persons, and not of the office.

As for learned Calvin, in his Institutions we grant he understands it of the
office, yet in his Comments (wherein we may more justly expect the full sense
of the Text) he compares these two interpretations together, and let any Reader
judge, which he prefers, Presbyterium qui hic Collect^vum Nomen esse putant pro
Collegio Presbyterorum posi^um, RECTE SENTIUNT MEO JUDICIO: Tametsi omnibus
expensis, diversum sensum non male quadrare fateor, ut sit nomen officii,
Ceremoniam pro ipso actu ordinationis posuit. Itaque sensus, Timotheum cum
prophetarum voce ascitus fuit in Ministerium, and deinde solemni ritu
ordinatut, simul gratia Spiritus Sancti instructum fuisse ad functionem suam
exequendam. Now which sense does Calvin prefer? Of that which we give, he
speaks positively, Recte sentiunt. Of the other, he only says, Non male
quadrat.

And that this Text must needs be understood of the persons ordaining, and not
of the office Timothy was ordained too, will appear by these reasons.

For first, it cannot stand with the signification of the word (...): The
office or dignity (as le^rned Critics observe) is rather called (...) then
(...). Nor can it well stand with the sense and construction of the words (...)
What shall it be governed of? Would not any Grammarian refer it to (...),
immediately preceding, rather then to the word (...), from which it is so far
dis-joyned. The words in the Greek lie thus. Neglect not the gift that is in
thee, which was given thee by proph^cie and the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery. Now according to the sense the Remonstrant strives for, it is thus.
Neglect not the gift of the office of the Presbytery, which was given thee by
the laying on of hands. Bishop Downham himself, without the bold foysting in
(to use the Remonstrants words) of a Parenthesis into the Text, cannot make
this interpretation good.

We thought we had sufficiently proved this interpretation in our answer, by
producing all the Texts in the new Testament, in which the word (...) is used,
and showing that in them it signifies the persons, and not the office, and
several Texts out of Hierom, Ignatius, and Council. Ancyr. to the same purpose.
The Fathers and Councels he is willing to pass by in silence. The Scripture
he pecks at, and tells us we do merely delude the Reader; Page 51.
For there it is meant of Elders of the people not of the Church Good Sir, do
not you delude your self, and your reader too out of a desire to traduce us. Be
they Elders of the people or of the Church, it is sufficient to prove that
(...) signifies not the office of Presbytery, but the persons in that office.
And this also may answer that objection, which he makes from the 2 Timothy 1. 6.
For though we grant indeed Master Calvin was more skilled in the harmony then
our selves, (the Remonstrant might have let it pass so without putting it
among his Errata, turning it to themselves) yet we must crave leave herein to
dissent from Master Calvin, as well as Beza, Cameron, Chameir, and others since
him have done before us.

And let not the Remonstrant call it boldness in us, to say that power of
Ordination is communicated to Presbyters, because Hierome and Council. Aquisgr.
still except Ordination, we must rather marvel at his boldness in putting
that upon us which we spoke not: we say indeed, page 24. of our answer, it was
in the hands of Presbyters. The Remonstrant would have us say Communicated to
Presbyters, that we might seem to acknowledge the power of Ordination to be
originally in Bishops, and in Presbyters only by derivation from them, which
we never meant; and if we ever did use the word Communicated, it was only to
note a Community in that power, not a derivation of it: as for his authors
which he alleages for sole Ordination, let the Reader please to view our
answer, page 37. 38. wherein he may receive full satisfaction, and the rather
because the Remonstrant passes over it. The third part of that office which
the Bishops call theirs, is ruling. To prove this to belong to Presbyters as
well as Bishops, we cite Heb. 13. 17. Here the Remonstrant cries out, Oh
injurious imputation! do we not give you the title of Rectores Ecclesiarum?
And do we not commit to you regimen Animarum? Page 53.
So then you grant this place is rightly both interpreted and applied; but you
give us, say you, the title of rectores Animarum, and regimen Animarum. You
give us? No, This Text is brought by a late Writer for Episcopacy, to prove
that as yet there were no bishops over Presbyters in the Church of the
Apostles, And for this purpose he brings Hirome upon the same text, affirming
the same thing.
it is the Scripture gives it us: yet you would assume it to your selves, and
perswad, that as the Pope communicates to his Bishops partem solicitudinis, so
you to us Presbyters: but if the Scriptures gave us no more then you do, it
would prove (...). You make your selves the sole Pastors, us but the Curates;
your selves, Chancellours, Officials, the sole Judges, us but the executioners
of your and their sentences, whether just or unjust.

The other Text 1 These. 5. 12. and those four things observed from thence for
the confirming of this assertion, the Remonstrant passes over: so he does our
argument which was this, They which have the same name, the same Ordination to
their office, the same qualification for their office, the same work, to feed
the flock of God, to ordain Pastors and Elders, to rule and govern, they are
one and the same. But such are Bishops and Presbyters, ergo. And thus deals he
also with the two quotations, the one of the Council of Aquisgra. the other
out of the writing of Smalcald; all which being to hard for the Remonstrant to
evade, he leaps over to a conclusion of such strange things, as he never went
about to prove in his Section.

SECT. VI.
HAving from Scripture manifested the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters in
their original institution; we applied our selves in this section to find out
the authors and occasion of this imparity which now appears between them.

To expedite our selves from needless controversies, we laid down three
particulars, as consented to by both sides: First, that the first and best
antiquity used the names of Bishops and Presbyters promiscuously; this the
Remonstrant subscribes to. Secondly, that in process of time some one was
honored with the name of Bishop, the rest were called Presbyters: Page 55.
this the Remonstrant quarrels, and desires to know what was this process of
time, charge us either with error or fraud, confidently defends this time had
no process at all, but was in the very (...) of the living Apostles, and
undertakes to make this good in the sequel. And how he does that, you shall
find in this very section page 59. where to that of Hierom, The Presbyters
governed the Church by their common Council, he answers, So they did doubtless
altogether, till Episcopacy was settled, who dare deny it?

Here the Remonstrant grants a process of time between the planting of the
Church by the Apostles, and the settling of Episcopacy in the Churches Shall we
say now this is the Remonstrants either error or fraud, not to set down how
long it was before Episcopacy was settled in the Church? let him take heed
another time how he charge men with error or fraud, for affirming that which
himself cannot but give his Suffrage to.

The third thing agreed upon was, that this was not nomen inane, an idle title,
but attended upon with some kind of imparity: the question was digested into
these terms. Whether the impropriation of the name, and the imparity of the
place and power of a Bishop be of divine right? The Remonstrant for fear of
mistaking, desires to explicate the terms of the question, and therefore
tells, how fetching the pedigree of Episcopacy from Apostolical (and therefore
in that right divine institution,) he interprets himself to understand by
divine right, not any express Law of God, Page 55.
requiring it as of absolute necessity to the being of a Church, but an
institution of the Apostles inspired by the holy Ghost, warranting it where it
is, and requiring it where it may be had; but, Nihil infelicius Retorico
definiente: the Remonstrant if he would avoid mistaking, or at least would not
say that he was mistaken, should have dealt a little more clearly and
punctually in the stateing of the Question.

For first he tells us, that it is an institution of the Apostles inspired by
the Holy ghost: Def. p. 56.
if the Remonstrant be not here mistaken why does he page 47. in express terms
grant us, that in original authority of Scripture, Bishops and Presbyters were
originally the same. For so were our words, not as the Remonstrant reports
them, went for the same: and why again, when we tell him we never find in
Scripture these three orders, Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons (we say not the
names, but orders) why does he grant that in the same page, and fly from the
writings of the Apostles to the monuments of their immediate successers? can we
imagine that the Apostles did by inspiration from the holy Ghost, ordain any
thing in the Church of God as of perpetual use; the record where of is not
found in sacred Scripture, which was given by the same inspiration to the same
men; if we may imagine it, sure we cannot believe it. And if it be an
institution of the Apostles inspired by the holy Ghost, why must it be
distinguished from the express law of God? does he make it but an evangelicall
counsel; not requiring it as necessary to the being of a Church; sure this is
some opinion of a newer cut; for the last defendant of Episcopacy before this
Remonstrant says thus, Episcop. by divine right, part 2. p. 91.
The power of Ordination has been ever held so intrinsecall to Episcopacy,
that I would feign see, where it can be showed that any extremity of necessity
was ever acknowledged a warrant sufficient for others to ordain. So that in
his judgment, where there is no Bishop, there can be no lawful ordination,
let it be in the case of extremest necessity; and where no ordination, no
ministry, and so consequently no Word and Sacraments, and no Church: and how
then in the judgment of these men is Episcopacy not required to the being of a
Church?

And if not requiring it to the being of a Church, how then? requiring it only
where it may be had: what a strange limitation is this? where is it that
Episcopacy may not, must not be had, if it be an ordinance of Christ? where is
it that the Churches of Christ may not have Word, Sacraments, Pastors and
Bishops too, if they be his ordinance? It is true indeed, some there are that
cannot have Lord Bishops, pompous Bishops, and once a Canon provides that they
should not be in little Villages, Can. Sardic. can. 6.
Ne vilesceret honos Episcopatus: but these himself acknowledges, are but the
accessaries of Episcopacy by the donations of Magnificent Princes. But what is
the meaning of this, where it may be had? what does he mean, where it may be
had with the favor of the Prince? then the Primitive Church had never had any.
Or where it may be had with the willing subjection of the people? then
Episcopacy shall be an ordinance, if the people will have it so. Where it may
be had; what? with quiet and convenience? then you make that which you call an
ordinance of God subject to man's convenience. Or what? with possibility?
requiring that where Episcopacy may be had possibly, it should? what is this
less than a command? yet says the Remonstrant, here is no express law of God
requiring it. Now we pray you review your work, and see how well you have
stated the question.

To prove that Episcopacy was not a divine, but a humane institution; we
produced out of antiquity some places, that mention the occasion and authors of
Episcopal imparity, which are not (as the Remonstrant absurdly) the only
countenance of our cause.

Our first was, that known text of Hiereme in the 1. Titus, Page 56.
out of which we collected five things, which the Remonstrant sums up thus:
First, that a Bishop and a Presbyter are originally one. Secondly, that the
imparity was grounded upon Ecclesiastical custom. That before this priority,
the Church was governed by the common Council of Presbyters, and that Bishops
ought still so to govern. And lastly, that the occasion of this imparity was
the division, which through the devils instinct fell among Christians: this the
Remonstrant calls the sum of our collection. But if his Arithmeticke be no
honester then thus, he shall sum no sums for us; for he leaves out one
Collection which is indeed principally considerable, That this was not Hieromes
own opinion, but the opinion of the scriptures. This would have stopped the
mouth of his satis imperite. Well what says the Remonstrant? Beliar. de Script.
Eccles.
You look now that I should tell you the book is of uncertain credit. No
indeed sir, we looked for no such matter; because we know that book is
approved by men both of as great learning and of as little affection to
Hieromes opinion as the Remonstrant is, though his lesser commentaries on the
epistles be questioned. Or else you look, that I should tell you Hierome was a
Presbyter, and not without some touch of envy to that higher dignity which he
missed. Truly sir, this we looked for, and the rather because Doct. Hall in
his Episcopacy by Divine right, part 2. page 122. says, that as he was
naturally a waspish, and a hot good man, so being now vexed with some cross
proceedings, as he thought, with John of Jerusalem, he flew out, etc. but what
a slender answer is this; Hierome was a Presbyter, what then? Hierome says
nothing here, but what he says from Scripture; and is Scripture the less
Scripture because produced by a Presbyter? Hierome was a Presbyter, and pleads
for his own order; does that make his argument the less creditable? the
author of Episcopacy by Divine right was a Bishop; is it sufficient confutation
of that book to say he was a Bishop that made it, he must plead for his own
honor and order? Or you look, say you, that I should tell you that wiser men
then your selves have censured him in this point of Arrianisme. No indeed, for
fear you should thereby comfort us against the same censure past so often upon
our selves. If Hierome suffer under the name of Aerian, no wonder we do: but
if wisermen than we have condemned him for Aerianisme, wiser men then the
Remonstant have quitted him of that crime.

But the Remonstrant thinks to decline these common ways, and set Hierome to
answer Hierome; which yet is no more then Bellarmine did before him; and and
puts us in mind that the same father passes a satis imperite upon the same
opinion in the Bishop of Jerusalem; but a satis imperite does not condemn the
opinion, but the man; for it may be truth which a man speaks, though he
speaks it imperite: yet to make sure work the Remonstrant will set Hierome to
answer himself: Page 57.
what says Hierome? at first says he, Bishops and Presbyters had but one
title: No, Hierome said not so, nor did we. Idem est ergo Presbyter qui
Episcopus: How does the Remonstrant construe this? Is this in English, a Bishop
and a Presbyter is the same: or is it, at first Bishops and Presbyters had but
one title? with what face can the Remonstrant charge us with infidelity in
quotation and mis-englishing, who uses no more fidelity himself? that which
Hierome speaks of the office, he would restrain to the title; that which
Hierome speaks in the present tense, as true in all the moments and fluxes of
time, he would remit to the time past; They had but one title; This the
Remonstrant passes from, and slips from their Identity to their imparity;
inquiring the time and occasion of that, and will needs force Hierome here to
confess Bishops in the Apostles days: because then they began to say, I am of
Paul, etc. but will take no notice at all of what our answer spoke for the
removing of this inference, unless it be to slight it, as a poor shift: nor
will take notice of that which Hierome himself speaks. Haec propterea ut
oftenderemus apud veteres eosdem fuisse Presbyteros quos and Episcopos:
paulatim vero ut dissentionum plantaria evellerentur, ad unum omnem
solicitudinem esse delatam: intimating that Episcopacy was not presently
invented as a cure of schism, but paulatim: so that should it be granted, that
the schisms spoken of here were those in the Apostles days, yet it does not
follow, that Episcopacy should be coaetaneous to these schisms, because
Hierome says, Paulatim ad unum omnem solicitudinem esse delatam. Let the
Remonstrant now ask Hierome, not us; why the remedy should be so late after
the disease? and here we desire the reader to observe that the Remonstrant does
merely abuse him in telling him that Clemens in his Epistle to the Corinthians
taxes the continuance of the distractions raised in the Apostles days: Def.
58.
when it is apparent that Clement speaks of a new schism different from that
Paul speaks of, raised against there Presbyters, and the former schism
mentioned in the Scripture was only among the people. As for those Bishops
whom Hierome names as made by the Apostles, at present we say no more, but
this: Hierome, as a Divine says, Bishops and Presbyters are the same; and to
prove this produces Scripture: but Hierome speaking as an Historian, mentions
Bishops made by the Apostles, and brings no Scripture for the proof of that,
but only the testimony of Eusebius his history, who alone had writ before him
of that subject: Now let the Christian Reader judge whether more credit be to
be given to Hierome as an Historian quoting humane History, Ierom de
Scriptoribus Eccles.
or to Hierome as a Divine quoting Scriptures. And yet what can be brought to
prove that those Bishops were not the same with Presbyters?

For the diabolical occasion of bringing in Episcopacy into the Church: if
there be any fault in the phrase, it is Hieromes, not ours: therefore the
weakness and absurdity is slung in the face of that waspish, hot good man
Hierome, not in ours.

The institution of Episcopacy, Hierome says, was rather by the custom of the
Church then by the truth of the Lords disposition; to avoid the stroke of
which, the Remonstrant would feign persuade Hierome to own that, which in the
judgment of Belarm. Spalato, and almost as many as have writ before the
Remonstrant, never entered into his thoughts; nor can be the proper meaning of
his words; That by the custom of the Church, the father means the Church
Apostolic, and by the Lords disposition, Christ's immediate institution.

This were to make Hierome of their mind. How well this may be done, let their
sworn friend Spalato give his verdict. Sunt qui Hieronymum in rect am
sententiam vel invitum velint trahere; one of these must this Remonstrant be.

As for that passage of Hierome ad Euagrium, where he says, Page 59.
this superiority of Bishops above Presbyters is by Apostolical tradition,
Hierome in that Epistle sharpens his reproof against some Deacons, that would
equallize themselves to Presbyters; an opinion which the Remonstrant thinks
more reasonable, then that Presbyters should be equal to Bishops: In his
defense, p. 125.
to make this reproof the stronger he says, Presbyteris ad est, Episcopis^
and a little after, he does out of the Scripture most manifestly prove eundem
esse Presbyterum at que Episcopum: and carries this proof by Paul, by Peter,
and by John the longest surviver of the Apostles: then add, quod autem postea
unus electus qui caeteris praeponeretur, in schismatis remedium factum. The
reason why afterward one was elected, and set over the rest was the cure of
schism. It is hard to conceive how this imparity can be properly called an
Apostolical tradition when Hierome having mentioned John the last of the
Apostles, says it was postea afterward that one was set over the rest, yet
should we grant it an Apostolical tradition in Hieromes sense, it would be no
prejudice to our cause, seeing with him Apostolical tradition and
Ecclesiastical custom are the same; witness that instance of the observation
of Lent, which he writing ad Marcellum says, is Apostolica traditio; yet
writing adversus Luciferianos, faith it is Ecclesiae consuetudo; whereby it
fully appears that Hierome by Apostolical tradition meant not an Apostlicall
institution, but an ecclesiastical custom, and so much we granted Episcopacie
to have.

Hierome says toto orb decretum est, and it was decreed all the world over
(say you) in the time of the first divisions. Hierome said not so (say we) but
after these divisions, not in the time of these first divisions. Is this
faithful translating? By what power, say you, besides Apostolical could it be
decreed so soon and so universally? But how if it were decreed neither soon
nor universally? If we may believe Hierome, it was neither soon nor at once;
but paulatim by little and little, not by Apostolical decree, but by the
custom of the Church.

Hierome says, the Presbyters governed the Church by their Canon Council. So
they did, says the Remonstrant, altogether till Episcopacy was settled, who
dare deny it? sure he dares deny it, who in the 55. page of his defense,
charge us with error and fraud, for saying that though at first the name and
office of a Bishop and Presbyter was the same, yet in process of time some one
was honored with the name of Bishop; and confidently defends that this time
had no process, but was the very (...) of the living Apostles: but how his
(...) there without any process of time, can stand with his donec here^, and
with Hieromes paulatim, postquam, postea, let him see to that. Hierome says
they ought so to govern still: so (says the Remonstrant) say we also, Page 59.
and so in some cases they do. Good sir, and why not in all cases? Church
government, you say, is Aristocraticall. True, when it is in the hands of the
best men, then it is (...). But when the men in whose hands the government of
the Church is, are bad; then it is (...), or Kakistocraticall. But our present
Church government is not Aristocraticall, but Monarchical: because not only
one Bishop Lords it over his Diocese, but also one Primate appoints to all
other Bishops. Besides, if it were Aristocraticall, then ought every Minister
to be a member of that Aristocracy; for certainly no man will account the
Minister de plebe: in the judgment not only of the ancient Fathers, but of
reason it self, none can be accounted plebs but the Laics; seeing every
Minister is elected optimatim, Job 33. 23.
and is as one of a thousand: Next you tell us there is no Bishop so absolute,
as not to be subject to the judgment of a Synod. It is much he should not,
when all the fixed members of our Synod are the Bishops mere dependants, and
such packing used in the choice of the rest, as perhaps worse was not at the
Council of Trent.

Thus all the art the Remonstrant has cannot persuade Hierome to befriend our
Bishops in his judgment; and is it not strange boldness to persuade the
Reader that Hierome should against his judgment befriend them in his history?

After the allegation, we produced some reasons to show, that though it should
be granted these were in the times of the Apostles* yet the Invention of
Bishops for the taking away of th^se schisms is not Apostolical: our
arguments the Remonstrant, Page 60.
according to his greatness calls poor negative arguments, which yet we
entreat the Reader to view for his further satisfaction, and remember that in
Sacra Spriptura locus tenet ab authori^ate, negative. And good sir, how do we
in them g^e about to Confute our own Authors? what do these reasons conclude
more, but that Bishops were neither of Divine, nor Apostolical institution,
and what does Hierome say less? Tell not us of striking our own friend, let
him suffer as an Hieronymomastix, that when Hierome crosses his opinion, calls
him a waspish hot, good man.

In the next place you looked for Ambrose: Def. p. 61.
yet you might have taken notice that we spoke but of the Commentaries that go
under the name of Ambrose; Down. def. 3. lib. cap. 4. pa. 80.
which if you call a foyst, all your own side are as guilty as our selves,
that cite him as well as we, and some for Ambrose; how ever this is much less
then your self did in point of Liturgy. Where we desiring to see some
Liturgies not Spurious, you produced the Liturgy of James, etc.

For the persons that brought in this Imparity, we tell you, they were the
Presbyters; and prove this from Hierome ad Euagrium. Page 62.
The Presbyters of Alexandria did call him their Bishop, whom they had chosen
from among themselves, and placed in a higher degree. This you call a
faithless and a halved citation: Good sir, be not so hearty, its neither false,
nor halved: not false, because it fully proves the thing for which we brought
it, which was, that the advancing of one to an eminency and superiority above
the rest was not a divine, but a humane act; it was not God, but man that was
the author of this imparity; and does not the place fully prove this?
Presbyteri unum ex se electum in excelsiori gradu collocatum Episcopum
nominabant, and say we any more? Nor is it halved, though he says this was
done a Marco Evangelista, usque ad Heraclam: yet this concerned not the purpose
for which the text was quoted, and therefore might warrantably be omitted,
especially having proved before that, which the Remonstrant would persuade his
reader we are shie of here, that Bishops were not in the Apostles times: and if
the leaving out a few words in a quotation, not pertinent to the question, be
the halving of it, how will the Remonstrant clear himself of this sin, who
citing the Council of Laodicea p. 15. makes bold to leave out a great deal
more then we did here: where a most material passage was omitted, as before we
have observed. Neither did we leave out a Marco Evangelista, for fear it
should prove that there were Bishops as early as the Corinthian schism. Nor
did our hearts tell us that Mark died many years within the Apostles time;
Page 62.
for Irenaeus tells us lib. 3. Contra Haeres. that he writ his Gospel after
Peter and Paul's death. That which we quoted proves abundantly that the
Presbyters both chose and placed one of the Presbytersin a higher degree, by
their own authority, giving him both the degree and the name. Do you (who
brought in A Marco Evangelista to trouble your reader and to slander us)
reconcile if you can, Authors about the time of his death.

But the last place he brings out of Hierom, Page 63.
is a most rare place, and may well make any man wonder with what face we can
say, Hiero me ever spoke against Bishops: and why so? because Hierome says,
Episcopacy is Gods own work: where is it? in Isa. 60. 17. what are the words?
Hierome reading that text according to the 72 translation, says: Ponam inquit,
Principes tuos in pacem, and Episcopos tuos in justisiam, in quo, says
Hierome, Scripturae sanctae admir anda Majestas, quod Principes futuros
Ecclesiae Episcopos nominavit, quorum omnes visitatio in pace est, etc. herein
the majesty of the Scripture is to be admired, which has named the future
Princes of the Church, Bishops; all whose visitations are in peace. Good
reader, consider this mighty mouth-stopping argument. God has promised the
Princes of the Church shall be as Bishops. Ergo, Bishops in imparity are Gods
own work: good sir, your Page 77.
Baculus in angulo take to your self against you walk to find texts again
in Hierome to prove Bishops to be of divine institution.

The rest of your quotations out of Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Chrysostom, they
are places have been often alleged, and as often answered: we will be brief
with you. For if you had not lain hid under the equivocation of the word
Episcopi, you might have spared your self and us a labor. These Episcopi were
Presbyteri, you your self grant that their names were common in the days of
Linus, Polycarpe, and Ignatius, which are the men you here cite for Bishops.
And therefore unless you can show that they had a superiority of power over
Presbyters, such as ours have; you do b^t delude the Reader with a gross
Homonymie, whom we refer to a passage in learned Iunius. controv. 3. lib. 2.
c 5. not. 18. In which he labors to remove the contradictions of Historians
concerning the order of succession of the Roman Bishops, Linus, Clemens,
Anacletus etc. And he says, That these or some of these were Presbyters or
Bishops of Rome at the same time, ruling the Church in common. But the
following writers, fancying to themselves such Bishops as then had obtained in
the Church, fell into these snares of tradition, because they supposed,
according to the custom of their own times, that there could be but one
Bishop in one Church at the same time: which is quite cross to the
Apostolical times.

To that of Ambrose calling James Bishop of Jerusalem, we gave a sufficient
answer in our former Book page 51. out of Doct. Raynolds; and shall (God
willing) add more in due place.

Our slip as you tell us, Page 64.
talks of a council; No more ours then yours, for your party can, when he
speaks for them, vouch him with much more confidence then we do. But what
says this slip? he talks of a council as false as himself. Why? because the
Nicene was the first general Synod: but yet there were provincial Councels
before. And the Commentaries mentioned before do not say it was done by a
general Council, but only by a Council; though you by subtle coupling this
Council and Hieromes toto or be decretum erat, would feign force him to this
sense: which toto orb decretum est implies no Apostolical act, nor act of a
general Council neither, as we have showed before. And yet this we tell you,
the Nicene was the first Council, in which toto orb decretum erat that there
should be but one Bishop in a City.

As for Saint Austin his phrase, Page 64.
that the original of Episcopacy above Presbytery was only secundum usum
Ecclesiae, you say it was but a modest word, and it is a just wonder that we
dare cite him. Well, let us put it to the trial; Hierome having taken distate
at Augustine, writes two sharp Epistles to him, Epist. 11. 13.
in both which Epistles be does extol Augustine ironically as a great man,
because he was in pontificali culmine Constitutus advanced to Episcopal
dignity, and speaks of himself as a poor, contemptible underling: to which
Augustine answering among other things says thus: Rogo ut me fidenter
corrigas, ubi mihi hoc opus esse perspexeris: quanquam enim secundum honorum
vocabula quae Ecclesiae usus obtinuit, Episcopatus Presbyterio major est: tamen
in multis Augustinus Hieronymo minor. This was Augustines modesty say you.
Well, and had not Augustine been as modest, if he had left out that phrase
quae Ecclesiae usus obtinuit? his modesty appears in these words, tamen in
multis Augustinus Hieronymo minor; not in the former. In the diminution of his
person, not of his calling. S. Paul knew how to speak humbly of himself, yet
highly of his office, Romans 11. 13.
and so might Austin; and if he had known that the majority of Bishops above
Presbyters had been of Divine, or Apostolical institution, he might have said
so much; and not have been the less modest, but the more; nay he would have
said so much. Quis enim est humilitatis fructus ubi detrimentum est veritatis?
August. contra Maxim. Arian. Episc. Lib. 3. August. de verbo Ap. sec. 29.
What profit is there in humility with the loss of truth. And he that could
tell another non accipiet Deus mendacem humilitatem tuam, God will not accept
of your lying humility, could tell himself as much. So then though it be in
humilitate personae that he says, Augustinus Hieronymo minor est, yet it is in
veritate rei that he says Secundum honourm vocabula quae Ecclesiae usus
obtinuit, Ep. scopatus Presbyterio Major est. Thus much for Augustines modesty.
And as for the Herauldry in blazoning Aerius for an heretic falsely objected
ad nauseam usque and usque, We refer to former answers.

The Remonstrant will put us and the Readers to more trouble in the next place,
Page 65.
because he calls our fidelity into so deep question about the quotation of
Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. 28. Where the father is mustering up the armies of
evils that might seem to threaten him, showing the invincible magnanimity of
his Spirit more then conquering, contemning all: Among those evils he reckons
his ejection out of his Episcopacy: which what ever others would esteem, he
counts as nothing, Suidas tells us (...) was a principal place (...), aliis
studio est princeps locus, and he calls him (...) qui primam tenet sedemet (...)
est sedibus primis vel honoribus primis dignari.
and held it a principal part of wisdom in that age to shun it, and then
wishes (...) utinam nulla sit princeps dignitas, that there were no principal
dignity (to wit, in the Church) of which he is speaking. Secondly, he wishes
(...), that there were no dignity or tyrannical prerogative of place, that
they might be known only by virtue: to which belongs that Dextrum and
sinistrum, those challenges of places of which the Remonstrant speaks. All
which he speaks upon supposall of the loss of his Episcopacy. And for that
Dextru^ and sinistrum, Balsamon says it was the manner of their distinguishing
of the place of Bishops, Balsam. in Can. 89. Conc. Carthagin:
according to their seniority and this occasioned those competitions among
Bishops of which he speaks. The Series of this discourse is long, we must not
insert it all: but let the learned reader vouchsafe to view it at larg, and if
it do not appear that we have alleged the place according to the genuine
sense of the Author, let us in his thoughts lie under all the reproaches,
which our virulent Remonstrant labors to cast upon us in his whole book.
However the Remonstrant has little cause to reproach Nazianzen with that
scoff of his Egyptian adversaries (...), as if he had out of an ambitious
humor changed his seat: when he that peruseth his life shall find, it would
be an easier matter to remove an English Bishop from one Bishopric to another
till he come to Canturbury, then it was to remove Nazianzen from one place to
another. And as little reason with open mouth to fall upon us, and bid us eat
our words, for saying that if our Bishops will deduce their pedigree from the
Apostles time in an uninterrupted line unto this day, Page 66.
they must draw the line of their pedigree through the loins of Antichrist: we
tell him again, let him take it never so angerly: What ever Bishops have been
in other places besides Rome, if our Bishops will draw their pedigree from the
Apostles, they must draw it through Antichrists loins.

SECT. VII, VIII.
IN this seventh Section the Remonstrant has cut us out little work: so much
of our answer as he is loath to meddle with, he balkes under the terms of idle
words. The rest concerning the election of former Bishops, he seems to
consent to in opinion and option: only that the shortest Section may not be
closed without more frumps then one, he tells us we are besides the Cushion. The
objection was, Page 68.
that the Apostles Bishops, and ours were two in respect of mannaging their
functions. The Remonstrant will give us leave (we hope) to form our own
objection. He makes it indeed of the Apostles Bishops. We having proved no
Bishops (ut nuncupantur as they are now termed) Apostolical. Bring it down
to the Bishops of inferior times. He (as here he tells us) spoke only of the
difference between the one and the other in managing of their function. We
intending to present the differences between ours and former Bishops fully to
view; instance not only in the managing of their function, but in their
election and accessories; and is this to be beside the Cushion? This first
point of difference our Remonstrant grants, that our Bishops and former differ
in their election.

And he makes half from hence to follow us into the execution of their
Episcopal office. Page 69.
We make as much haste to meet him, and make good what we formerly laid down,
that our Bishops and the Bishops of former times are two: First, in the sole
jurisdiction they assume to themselves, which former Bishops never did, nor
durst; which jurisdiction (being taken here in a large sense for the execution
of all Episcopal power) we distributed into the administration of orders and
censures, which (says the Remonstrant) And yet the wise writer of this Defense
did not contradistinguish them in his defense, p. 78. where he expresses
ordination under spiritual jurisdiction.
in all wise writers were wont to be contradistinguished. Distinguished they
are we grant, and so did we distinguish them, page 24, 25. of our answer, which
the wisdom of the Remonstrant might have taken notice of and forborne this
scorn. Yet not so contradistinguished, but that the power of ordination may be
reckoned as a part of Episcopal jurisdiction; taking that word jurisdiction
(which was unknown to first antiquity) for the whole execution of Episcopal
power, as the Remonstrant here takes it.

The first of these, the sole power of ordination; and the sole exercise of
that power, which was a stranger, and a monster to former times. This our
Bishops assume to themselves, and herein differ from the former Bishops. The
latter of these he grants, That Bishops of former times did not assume to
themselves the sole exercise of ordination. Only he cannot let us pass;
without his usual courtesy. But the former he denies, Page 70.
the ordination is (he says) the Bishops, but the sole in that sense we use
it, is ours. Bishops did never challenge it nor practice it, we will wash off
all this; and show first that our English Bishops have challenged to themselves
this sole power, and have practiced this power, and then make good our
quotation: and when this is done, let it be tried not who can blush, but who
has more reason to blush; the Remonstrant, or his answerers.

For the first: that Bishops challenge to themselves sole power of ordination.
We did never think that in these knowing times we should have been put to
prove the Snow is white, or the Crow black. But seeing the Remonstrant will
have it so, we will show first out of Episcopacy by Divine right, part 2. Sect.
15. the title of which Section is this, power of ordination is ONLY in
Bishops: and in the beginning of the Section he says, This was one of the Acts
that was APPROPRIATED to Bishops ALONE: and is not this to challenge sole power
of ordination? afterward in the same Section, he says, Ordination is one of
the things so Intrinsecall to Episcopacy, that in the judgment of the Church,
no extremity of Necessity was sufficient warrant to diffuse it into other
hands. The same power of ordination do Bishop Bilson, Andrews, Davenant,
Mountague, etc. challenge to Episcopacy. Now Reader judge, is the sole theirs
by challenge or no?

And what they challenge, that they practice: we doubt not but the Remonstrants
conscience can tell him, there are many instances in England to be produced of
men ordained in England without the hands of any Presbyter. The Remonstrant is
as unhappy as peremptory in his challenge he makes. I challenge them to show
any one instance in the Church of England.

Sir, the instances are without number. Some of us are ocular witnesses of many
scores at several ordinations ordained by a Bishop in his private Chapel
without the presence of any Presbyter, but his own domesticke Chaplain, and
without any assistance from him save only in reading prayers. But alas what
should we fall to instances! Put case an Irish or Welsh Bishop ordaines one at
London in his chamber, or some Chapel, and admits him which commends the
person to him to join for fashion sake in the gesture of imposition of hands,
be he of what place or Diocese he will: how little does this differ from sole
ordination, and how much from that Regular and ordinate ordination of former
times? Sir, these are poor toys to mock the Church withal, if not God
himself too. Could such a Bishop say, as well as Cyprian, Ego and Collegae?
You tell us our Bishops may say no less then Cyprian did. But does the style
of your Letters of orders speak any such thing? Let the Reader judge by a
copy, Tenore praesentium nos N. N. Providentia Divina Episc. notum facimus
universis quod die mensis Anno in Capella. Nos praefatus Episcopus sacros
ordines dei praesidio celebrantes, dilectum nobis etc. E. B. de vita sua
laudabili, etc. a nobis examinat: and approbat. ad sacro sanct. Presbyt.
ordinem ad misimus rite and Canonice ordinavimus and promovimus. In cujus rei
testimonium sigillum nostrum Episcopale praesentibus apponi fecimus. Construe
you this, Ego and Collegae, brethren?

But you tell us, Cyprians phrase, Ego and Collegae, Page 70.
was in the case of Aurelius made a Lector, much to your advantage. If a Reader
could not be ordained by a Bishop alone, do we think a Presbyter could? As
for Cyprians 58. Epist. we produced it not as a proof of ordination in the
hands of Presbyters, much less for the concurrent act of the people, as the
Remonstrant would intimate, but only for the explication of the word Collegae.
But it seems the Remonstrant was resolved to pick some quarrel, and rather
to play at small game then stand out.

And if it be the order of the Church of England as well as of the Council of
Carthage, Page 71.
that when a Presbyter is ordained all the Presbyters that are present shall
lay hands, etc. if there be such an order, the more blame worthy the Bishops,
who being such severe censurers of the breach of Church orders in others, are
themselves in the same crime, for though you set a stout face upon the
business, and tell us that this order is perpetually and infallibly kept by
you; Yet the world knows it is no such matter unless you mean that all the
Presbyters present do infallibly and perpetually lay on hands in ordination,
because our ordinations are so carried, that for the most part there is but
one, sometimes not one Presbyter there besides the Bishop.

But why do you take notice here of one Canon of the Council of Carthage,
Page 71.
and not of the other? ut Episcopus sine, etc. that a Bishop should ordain
none of the Clergy without the Counsel of his Clergy, unless it be, because
here is such a manifest deflexion in the practice of ours from former times, as
all the wit and Rhetoric the Remonstrant has cannot cover.

Your next evasion is a plain leaving the question; we are to prove that
Bishops in ancient times did not ordain without Presbyters. You challenge us
to prove a Presbyters Regular ordaining without a Bishop; which is not the
point in question. Who does here most abuse the Reader, let himself judge: but
we are accused not only of abusing our Readers, but our Authors too. And the
Remonstrant hopes he has us here at such a vantage, as shall try what modesty
is in us. Three foul scapes are laid to our charge. First, we abuse
Firmilianus, in casting upon him an opinion of Presbyters ordaining, which he
never held; let us once again view the place. Firmilianus speaking of the true
Church, says, ubi Praesident Majores natu, qui and Baptizandi and manum
imponendi and ordinandi possident potestatem: the controversy is, who these
Majores natu be? Bishops says he. Bishops and Elders say we. To prove it, we
explicate Firmilian by Firmilian, calling a little before those whom here he
calls Majores natu, Seniores and praepositi. Which are not so far from that
clause but that they may be brought without wire drawing or foysting; Page 72.
and are not so remote from that place, as those words which himself
produces, which we desire the courteous Reader to consider, because we are
charged by him, for foysting in and wyre drawing the words of the Author: and
also because the very words there cited by the Remonstrant speak of a power of
remitting sins, which we hope he will not ingrosse to Bishops, excluding
Presbyters. Pamelius himself is with us: who understands by Seniores and
prepositi, the Presbyters and Bishops.

Our next escape, is but gross ignorance, in translating Ambroses Presbyteri
consignant by Presbyters ordaining. Every Novice knows consigning signifies
confirmation, and not ordaining. Sir, we appeal from your Novices to judicious
Readers, and entreat them to peruse the text: and we doubt not but upon due
consideration they will conclude for our sense: let us then plead the case, and
tell you first, In Arnob. li. 3.
That your Desiderius Heraldus shows both the word signare or consignare in
the phrase of antiquity to be as much as consecrare, and so does Cyprian Epist.
2. and therefore it is not incapable of such a sense as we have put upon it.

2. If the Reader please to view the place in Ambrose, he shall find that
Ambrose there is speaking of ordaining men to public offices in the Church;
and not of confirmation.

3. Though it should be taken for confirmation, yet you gain nothing; for the
same Canon, that put power of ordination into the hands of Bishops, places the
power of confirmation also in their hands. And they among us that challenge the
sole power of ordination, Episc. Di. Right, part. 2. p. 91.
challenge also sole power of confirmation. If any man object that confirmation
is not so appropriated to Bishops as ordination is, because (as some of you
say) confirmation is only reserved to them honoris gratia ordination they have
necessitatis gratia this objection we have satisfied in our answer page 38.
wherein we have showed not only from Loo, that the power of ordination was
reserved to them only authoritate canonum: but also that it was appropriated
to them for their credit and authority. Augustine speaks almost in the same
words: Quaest. de utroque mixtim. 101.
Nam and in Alexandria, and per totum Aegyptum, si desit Episcopus, consecrat
Presbyter: that which in Ambrose is called consignat, is here called consecrat;
and albeit the authors of both these books be questioned, yet both of them are
acknowledged ancient, yea Doctor Raynolds affirms the last of them from the
44. question was written above 300. years after Christ: this is enough to us,
that in antiquity consignat is expounded by consecrat; which cleares us of that
imagined guilt of a solaecisme, that he would fasten upon us: and this may
satisfy (if this man be satisfiable) that bold challenge of the former page:
show us but one instance of a Presbyters regular and practiced ordaining
without a Bishop, and carry the cause.

Our third charge is double, first of skill not too much: secondly, Page 72.
of less fidelity. Our want of skill is, in not distinguishing of Chorepiscopi
(who^ we brought as instances of Presbyters ordaining without a Bishop) some of
whom (says the Remonstrant) had the nature and power of Episcopacy to all
purposes: and therefore might well, by the Bishops license in his own charge
impose hands. Now, we may return it to the Remonstrant, that he discovers not
too much skill in saying that some Chorepiscopi had both the nature and power
of Episcopacy to all purposes, and yet might not ordain in his own charge
without the Bishops license. For what needs a Bishops license to enable a
Chorepiscopus in his own charge to do that, for the doing of which he had
before the nature and power of Episcopacy to all purposes. This is just as our
Bishops are wont to do, who give a full power to a Presbyter at his ordination
to preach the Gospel, with a charge also to do it, and yet will not suffer him
to preach, no not in his own Cure, without a license. But how does the
Remonstrant make good his distinction of his two sorts of Chorepiscopi from
antiquity? Here we have ipse dixit and no more. The peremptorinesse of
Pythagoras the master in affirming, and the silence of his scholars when he
comes to prove. Bellarmine indeed tells us that some Chorepiscopi were ordained
by more Bishops then one, and these had power to ordain. Others were ordained
by one Bishop, and those were mere Presbyters and might not ordain. But with
how much fidelity Bellarmine, and after him the Remonstrant does thus
distinguish, De Clericis, l. 1. c. 17.
let the Council of Antioch determine: (...). Let the Chorepiscopus be
ordained by the Bishop of the City, to whom he is subject. From which Council
we gather that the Chorepiscopi were mere Presbyters, and that there were but
one sort of them. First, because the Chorepiscopus was to be ordained by one
Bishop, ab Episcopo, not ab Episcopis: whereas by the Canons a Bishop was to be
ordained by many, or two at least. As for Bellarmine, his Chorepiscopus
ordained by more Bishops then one; we leave it to him to make good: indeed we
find in the same Canon, the Chorepiscopi in the plural number had the
imposition of the hands of Bishops, but when Chorepiscopus in the singular
number is mentioned, then only one Bishop is said to ordain him.

2. Because the Chorepiscopus was to be subject to the Bishop of the City, ab
Episcopo civitatis cui subjicitur: now we read no where of the subjection of
one Bishop and his charge to another: Cyprian pleads the freedom of Bishops:
telling us that each of them has a portion of Christ's flock assigned to him,
for which he is to give account to God.

3. Because he could not, nay he durst not exercise the power of Ordination
without the leave of the Bishop: the Council of Antioch says, non audeat
absque urbis Episcopo: Conc. Ancyr. says, non licere nisi cum literis ab
Episcopo permissum fuerit. None of this would have been said, if he had been
a Bishop, as we have in part showed in our answer, page 36.

We deny not, but that this power of ordaining was afterward taken away from
the Chorepiscopi by the same authority of the Canons, and Ecclesiastical
rules, by which it was first appropriated to Bishops themselves, as Leo. ep.
88. witnesses, which to us is a 4th argument to prove that they once had it,
and that they had it as Presbyters: for if they had it as Bishops, the taking
of it away would have been a degradation of them.

5. We might bring an argument ad hominem, to prove the Chorepiscopi to be but
Presbyters, because they are said Conc. Naeocaesar. Can. 14. to be after the
manner, or in imitation of the seventy: now according to the opinion of
Hierarchicall men Bishops succeed the Apostles, not the seventy.

To all that we have said in this point, we might ad that not only Damasus in
that Epistle which goes under his name, ep. 4. but also Leo ep. 88. proves them
to be but mere Presbyters, to whose sentence conc. 2. Hispal. can. 7.
subscribes.

Now leaving the Chorepiscopi we will give the reader a hint to prove, that not
only the Presbyters of Alexandria, and the Chorepiscopi, but further, the
Presbyters of the City with the Bishops leave might ordain, which we prove
from cenc. Ancyr. can. 13. named before: where it is said, It is not lawful
for Chorepiscopi to ordain Presbyters or Deacons: nor for the Presbyters of
the City without the Bishop his letters in an other parish: from which it
appears, that Presbyters of the City had the same power to ordain which the
rural Bishops had. Because the restraint is laid equally upon both: this is
not only our construction of the Canon, Bishop Bilson, Doctor Downam. def.
lib. 1. cap. 8. say the same, Perpet^gon. c. 14.
and Doctor Downam gathers from thence, that Presbyters in the City might do
more then rural Presbyters. Lib. 2. c. ^. 52, 53.
So does Spalatensis, who endeavoring to elude the text has no other way but
by foisting in a passage, which is not in the Greek text. And by this time we
hope we have cleared our fidelity in quoting of the Councels of Antioch and
Ancyra: both which the Remonstrant thought his bare word enough to blast. Now
we appeal to equal judgments whether the labor of this section were merely
cast away or no. The Remonstrant grants sole ordination was in regard of the
exercise not challenged by Bishops in the Primitive times, Though he would
persuade the reader we cannot but confess it out of Hierome and Chrysostom.
Yet let the reader consult the 37. page of our answer which the Remonstrant
leaves unanswered, and judge between us, how far we are from such
confession: his only shift now is to say our Bishops neither challenge nor
exercise any such power. We have evidently proved they do both, manet ergo
inconcussum, our Bishops and the Bishops of former times are two.

SECT. IX.
HEre says the Remonstrant, Page 73.
we beat the air. And yet not the air, but the Remonstrant too into the
confession of that which would not be confessed heretofore by such of the^
especially as have contended for such a Bishop as exercised spiritual
jurisdiction out of his own peculiarly demandated authority. If jurisdiction
exercised from an authority peculiarly demandated, how not solely? Episc. Di.
Right, part. 2. p. 10.
Well, now it is granted that this sole is cried down by store of antiquity.
So then here we do not falsify, Page 74.
and it is granted that Presbyters have and ought to have and exercise a
jurisdiction within their own charge. But here the Remonstrant will
distinguish again, it is in foro conscientiae. But consider Reader, whether
this be the jurisdiction here under dispute. Whether that store of antiquity
which he confesses to cry down sole jurisdiction, speak of a jurisdiction in
foro conscientiae, as his false Margent says, Clem Alexan. (whom we cited)
does. But indeed this distinction of the Remonstrant of a jurisdiction in foro
interno and in foro externo, is like that distinction of Reflexive and
Archipodialiter. For all humane jurisdiction is in foro externo. If preaching
the word (which is especially aimed at by the Remonstrant, be an exercise of
jurisdiction, Then he that has the Bishops license to preach in the Diocese,
has power to exercise jurisdiction through the Diocese, and an University
preacher throughout the whole Kingdom. Away with these toys. He grants
again, that Presbyters ought to be consulted with in the great affairs of the
Church, but do our quotations prove no more? Bishops had their Ecclesiastical
Council of Presbyters, with whom they did consult in the greatest matters: and
was it only in the greatest matters? Is this all that Cyprian says? All that
the Council of Carthage says when it determines ut Episcopus nullius causam
audiat absque praesentia Clericorum; alioquin irrita erit sententia Episcopi,
nisi Clericorum praesentia confirmetur. In our former book sententia was by a
mistake printed for presentia, the whole Canon not being quoted*
Does this speak only of great matters; when it says Nullius causam audiat?
Is this only of a jurisdiction the Presbyters had in foro conscientiae? Were
Bishops with their Consistory wont to sit to hear* and judge causes in foro
conscientiae? good Reader judge of this man's truth and ingenuity, who not being
able to divert the stroke of that Antiquity we brought to manifest a difference
between ours and the former Bishops in the exercise of their jurisdiction,
would cast a mist before his Readers eyes, and persuade him he grants the whole
section, when indeed he grants nothing, only seeks to slide away in the
dark.

But our Bishops have their Deanes and Chapters (say you) and the laws of our
Church frequently make that use of them. Yes you have Deanes and Chapters, but
who knows not that they have a jurisdiction distinct from the Bishops, in
which the Bishop has nothing to do with theirs, nor they with his. And the
Bishops also derive the exercise of jurisdiction to others (we know it too
well) to Chancellours, Commissaries, Officials, and other of their underlings,
even to the commanding of Christ's Ministers to denounce their censures without
any discerning what equity is in the cause. And what advise or assistance of
Ministers is required, appears by the very style of your excommunications. G.
R. Doctor of Law, Commissary, etc. to all Rectors, etc. For as much as we
proceeding rightly, etc. have adjudged all and every one whose names are
underwritten to be excommunicated. We do therefore commit to you, etc. to
denounce openly under pain and peril, etc. Given under our Seal such a day,
etc. Let any footsteps of such a power be showed in antiquity.

Presbyters he grants had their votes in Provincial synods: we from good
authority say more, they had their votes in all ordinary Iudicatures.

But after all these grants, Page 74.
which are as good as nothing; now he comes to plead his own. We justly say
that the superiority of jurisdiction is so in the Bishop, as that Presbyters
neither may, nor did exercise it without him? to what purpose is this? if the
Remonstrant speak of Scripture times: We have proved there was no superiority
in them: if of latter times, it is not to the question: we are proving Bishops
never exercised jurisdiction without their Presbyters, as ours do. He puts us
to prove Presbyters exercised jurisdiction without Bishops, quam inique?

But the exercise of external jurisdiction is derived from, by, and under the
Bishop: No, neither from, by, nor under the Bishop, but from God, who has made
them overseers and rulers, and by the same Ecclesiastical authority that has
made you Bishops: and under Bishops not in respect of divine power, but (if at
all) in respect of Ecclesiastical Canons only. Your Timothy and Titus we
shall meet in due place. Your Ignatius and the rest of your testimonies you
could produce would (as you say truly) but surfeit the readers eyes, Page 75.
unless you could bring them to prove, that Bishops did and might exercise
sole jurisdiction. Only because you so triumph in our supposed scapes; let us
entreat you, or the reader for you to look upon your cited Council of Antioch
24, 25, Canon; where you say the Bishop has power of those things that belong
to the Church, Page 75.
and see whether that speaks one word of jurisdiction: or be not wholly to be
understood, of the distribution of the goods of the Church, as both the
instance given in the Canon, and Zonaras on that place manifest.

One shift yet the Remonstrant has more: and that is to tell us, that this
joint government was but occasional and temporary in times of persecution.
Page 76.
But when a general peace had blessed them, and they had a concurrence of
sovereign and subordinate authority with them, they began so much to ^emit
this care of conjoyning their forces, as they supposed to find less need of
it. Doctor Downham to whom he referres in the page before, assigns other
reasons. Namely Presbyters desiring their ease and Scholasticall quietness
(which he says and proves not) and also the Bishops desiring to rule alone:
Down. Defen. 1. lib. c. 8.
which we find to be the true cause by experience. For if the Bishops be of
the Remonstrants mind, persuaded that the more frequent communicating of all
the important business of the Church, whether censures or determinations with
those grave assistants, which in the eye of the Law are designed to this
purpose, were a thing not only unprejudiciall to the honor of Episcopacy, but
behovefull to the Church. Why should not the Bishops do it? save only, that
their ambitious desires of ruling alone swayes them against their own
judgment, and the determinations of the law. But indeed if this communicating
of all the important business of the Church with those grave assistants you
speak of or with the Presbyters of the whole Diocese, if you will, be only
an assuming them into the fellowship of consulting and deliberating without any
decisive suffrage, leaving the Bishop to follow or not to follow their advise;
this is but a mere cosenage of the reader, and does not hinder the sole power
of Episcopal jurisdiction. And this is all that Downam grants lib. 1. c. 7. p.
161. where he says that Bishops do assume Presbyters for advise and
direction, as a Prince does his Counselors, not as a Consul does his Senators
who are cojudges with the Consul. And this we perceive the Remonstrant well
likes of, as that which makes much for the honor of their function.

And now sir, Page 76.
you see that we have not fished all night, and caught nothing: we have caught
your sole jurisdiction: and might have caught your self, were you not such a
Proteus, such a Polypus to shift your self into all forms and Colors. Having
proved that Bishops in all times, succeeding the Apostles, had Presbyters
joined with them in the exercise of their jurisdiction; and that our Bishops
have none, is more evident then that it needs proof. This is more to you then
Baculus in Angulo: it cannot but be Spina in oculis, and Sagittain visceribus,
a thorn in your eye, and an arrow in your heart, convincing you to your
grief, that the Bishops you plead for, and the Bishops of former times are two.

SECT. X.
OUr next Section the Remonstrant says, runs yet wilder; Page 77.
it is then because we prosecute a practice of the Bishops more extravagant
then the former: And that is the delegation of the power of their jurisdictio^
to others; which the Remonstrant would first excuse, as an accidental error of
some particular man, not to be fastened upon all. But we desire to know the man,
the Bishop in all England who has not given power to Chancellors,
Commissaries, Officials to suspend, excommunicate, absolve, execute all
censures, but one: and does the Remonstrant think now to stop our mouths
with saying, it is a particular error of some men? whereas it is evident enough
that our English Episcopacy cannot possibly be exercised without delegating of
their power to a multitude of inferior instruments. Can one Bishop having 500.
or a 1000. Parishes under him, discharge all businesses belonging to
testamentary and decimall causes and suites, to preach Word, and administer the
Sacraments, etc. to take a due oversight also of all Ministers and people
without the help of others. Page 77.
Nor will that other excuse do it, That it is but an accidental error, and
though granted, concludes not, that our Bishops challenge to themselves any
other spiritual power, then was delegated to Timothy and Titus, Sir we abhor
it, as an unworthy thing, to compare our Bishops with Timothy or Titus; the
comparison is between our Bishops and Bishops of former times.

But to please you this once, we will admit the comparison and show howeven in
this particular that you count so monstrous, our Bishops challenge a power
never delegated to Timothy nor Titus. Page 78.
And we prove it thus:

Timothy and Titus never had a power delegated to them to devolve that power of
governing the Church, which God had entrusted into their hands upon persons
incapable of it by Gods ordinance. But our Bishops do so. Ergo.

The Remonstrant thinks by impleading other reformed Churches, as guilty of
the same crime; to force us either to condemn them, or to acquit him. But the
reformed Churches, if they do practice any such thing, are of age to answer
for themselves. Our business is with the Remonstrant and the persons and
practices which he has taken the tuition of. Whom we charging as in a
generality with wholly intrusting the power of spiritual jurisdiction to their
Chancellors, and their Commissaries: Page 78.
their good friend tells us we foulely overreach. The assistance of these
creatures they use indeed, but they neither negligently or wilfully divest
themselves of that, and wholly put it into Laicke hands. This is a mere
slander: that Bishops divest themselves of their power we never said. That they
do either negligently or wilfully decline that office which they call theirs,
we need not say, it is so apparent. And as apparent it is, that they do
entrust the power of jurisdiction wholly into Laicke hands: for their
Chancellors; and Commissaries having power of jurisdiction by patent settled
upon them, and exercising that jurisdiction in all the parts of it, conventing,
admonishing, suspending, excommunicating, absolving without the presence or
assistance of a Bishop or recourse to him: we think impartial Judges will say
we are neither slanderers nor over-reachers.

In our former answer we fully cleared from Cyprian, Page 79.
how far he was from delegating his power to a Chancellor, etc. This he
sleights as a negative authority, yet it is sufficient to condemn a practice
that never had being in the thoughts of primitive times. And we believe it
satisfies all others, because the Remonstrant says it is very like it was so:
Though according to his old way of diversion he tells us, Page 79.
as Cyprian did not refer to a Chancellor, so neither to the bench of a
Laicke Presbytery: yet he that is but meanly versed in Cyprian, may easily see
that it is no unusual thing in that holy martyr, to refer the determinations
of causes ad Clerum and Plebe^.

But the Remonstrant thinks to patronize the practice of our present Bishops
by Silvanus the good Bishop of Troas. And what did Silvanus to the
countenancing of this practice? perceiving that some of his Clergy did
corruptly make gain of causes (civil causes, causes of difference between
party and party, or as you phrase it, page 91. unkind quarrels of dissenting
neighbors) he would no more appoint any of his Clergy to be Judge, but made
choice of some faithful man of the Laity. Now this is as much to the purpose
(good sir) as Posthumus his pleading in Martial. Lisest mihi de tribus
capellis: Tu Cannas, Mithridati cumque bellum, Magra voce sonas Iam dic
Posthume, de tribus capellis. Mart. l. 6
We are confuting the practice of our Bishops in making over their spiritual
jurisdiction to Laymen, and he brings in a story of a good Bishop, that having
a bad Clergy, entrusted honest men with civil judicature rather then them.

As full to the purpose is that of Ecclesiae ecdici, Page 80.
or Episcoporum Ecdici, to prove the Antiquity of Chancellors and Commissaries.
Balsum. in Can. 78 Council. Carthag. in can. 100. Zonar. in can. Council. Carth.
81. and can. 108.
For their Ecdici were men appointed to be the advocates of the Church, to
plead the Churches cause before the Emperors against the tyranny of their
potent adversaries. But we never read that the Bishops did put over the
government of the Church to them: we could with all our hearts give this honor
to Civilians to be the Churches advocates, but not the Churches Judges, which
the Bishops give them leave to be: to defend the Church against the tyranny of
others, but not to tyrannize over the Church: Doctor Downeham was more
ingenuous in this, then this Remonstrant; who grants that till about 400 years
after Christ, Bishops had no ordinary Vicars that were not Clergy men; No, say
we, nor Clergy men neither: the office was not known in those times: neither
can they produce any instance of any, either of Laity or Clergy that ever those
times saw in that office. This says the Remonstrant, is a poor brave. Page 79.
But till he can produce such instances, our challenge will stand strong enough
notwithstanding his great words. But his put off is poorer; Page 73.
to fly from officers entrusted with spiritual jurisdiction unto such
inferior instruments, ( Secretaries and Atturneys) as are of necessary service
in all Courts of judicature, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical.

To make all sure, the Remonstrant referres his Reader to Sir Thomas Ridley
(whose Treatise he stumbled upon in an ill hour for the maine of his cause:
for he tells us page 116. that Chancellors are equal, or near equal in time
to Bishops; as both the Law it self and stories show. So that while the
Remonstrant is over studious to prove the Antiquity of Chancellors, he
overthrowes the Antiquity of Bishops: incidit in Scyllam, etc. As for that he
spoke of the Ecclesiae Ecdici, that they were the same in former times that our
Chancellors are now: If there be more credit to be given to his Papias and
Gothofred, then to the original Canons themselves (where they are called not
(...), but (...)) we yield the cause.

SECT. XI.
HAving entered upon the differences between ours and former Bishops in point
of jurisdiction: we descended into a discovery of this in three particulars.
First, in the sole jurisdiction ours assume. Secondly, In that delegation they
make of this power. Thirdly, in their execution of that jurisdiction: and here
we fall upon that unchristian and unnatural proceeding of theirs, by oaths
Ex officio; which the Remonstrant is very angry at, and that he may still
approve himself the (...) or advocate of the worst causes, engages all his
strength and wit for the maintaining of that, which has been the ruin of so
many persons, the rack of so many consciences, the worst part of the Spanish
Inquisition -- quo siculi non invenere Tyranni Torm^ntum majus.

To defend this, he cares not how he abuses us, Mr. Calume, the Lawyes, the
Scriptures; So that he may but uphold this oath, that is now sinking under the
weight of its own guilt.

First, Page 81.
he abuses Scriptures in producing, Exodus 22. 10, 11. Number. 5. 19. as presidents
for the oath. Truly sir, the only text that would best have fitted your
purpose, is that of Caiphas the High Priest adjudging our Lord in the name of
the living God. Matthew. 26. 63.
Which how tyrannous an adjuration it was will easily appear to any that
consults interpreters upon that place. Your alleged texts help you not a
whit; that of Exodus 22. 10, 11. speaks to this purpose: A man commits goods to
his neighbor, they miscarry under his hand; it is known he had them, how they
miscarried it is not known; in this case the man is to clear his innocence
upon his oath: what is this to the compelling of a man in cases criminal to
betray himself by an oath? The other text Numb. 5. 19. availes you less, for
if such an oath were now lawful, Your Bishop of the Church of Thyatira, might
have given his wife lezabel (as you call her) this oath.
then oaths Ex officio might be ministered in causes of death. It is known,
Adultery was death by Moses his law; and it is as well known that this Law of
the water of jelousie was not moral, but judicial, peculiar to the policy of
the Jews, and that upon particular causes, to wit, the invate jealousy of
that Nation which could no otherwise be appeased. As for your instance out of
Master Calvin's Epistle, wherein you would make your reader believe that the
Consistory of Geneva did give such an oath to Camperell whereby he and the rest
should be tied to discover their purposes and intentions; Calv. ad Farel.
No such thing appears in the Epistle. We find indeed that two of that
company having confes^ed the wickedness wherewith they were charged, and the
rest impudently denying it, Calvin thought it fit to make them confess the
truth upon oath. Corneus, who had confessed all before, pressing them not to
forswear themselves, prevailed so, as that they confessed all; and the dancing
also above what was charged upon them. All that we can collect is, that an oath
was thought meet to be given, to make them confess to Gods glory, what was
proved by two witnesses, but that they were bound to confess their intentions
here is no syllable of it in the epistle. And therefore to what purpose you
bring in this to warrant your oath Ex officio, unless it be for want of better
instances, we know not.

The Acts of Dioclesian Maxim. Page 83.
(Let them be blamed that called him Maximilian: poor men cannot have their
Press waited on, as your greatness may:) You do as good as pass by, so do
you the practice of the ancient times, and which is a greater jeofailer then
our Maximillian; and think it is enough to tell us, this hinders not but in
case of a justly grounded suspicion and complaint of a half approved offense,
a man should manifest his innocence by oath. Page 84.
When as we produced these testimonies to show that of old no party was put to
his oath upon half proof, nor proceeded against, but upon apparent
testimonies of more witnesses then one, which might be conceived to be
impartial.

Whereby it is manifest that the proceedings in judicature, for which you
contend herein, differ from them of old. So hot is the man in the quarrel of
his oath, that he strikes his own friends, to reach a blow at us; charging his
good friend Gregory with a plain contradiction (for the words are his not ours)
in which he says we contradict our selves. Page 74.
This is the poor all he has said in defense of the oath Ex Officio; and
could he have said more, it is like we should have heard it. If the reader
desire to see further how abominable this oath is, how cried down by learned
men, how contrary to the Word of God, By Bishop Hall, in his Episcopacy by
divine right.
the law of nature, to the civil and and Canon laws, and to the statutes of
our kingdom, he may find it in that proud braying schismatic Master Parker;
Parker on the coss e, part. 2. c. 8. sect. 2.
for so he is called in print. For our parts, we shall need to say no more
about this oath, God in mercy to his afflicted having put into the hearts of
our Worthies to condemn it to hell from whence it came.

SECT. XII.
OUr next Section the Remonstrant tells us, he is resolved to neglect: we should
have as soon believed him, if he had said so of all the rest: we believe the
neglect springs neither from a desire to ease us, nor to anger us; but because
he knows not what to say against it. If he did intend to anger us he is much
mistaken, for it pleases us well to hear him give so full a testimony, that
secular employments are unsuitable to the Ministers of the Gospel. Unless in
those two excepted cases of the extraordinary occasions and services of a
Prince or State. Page 90, 91.
And the composing of unkind quarrels of dissenting neighbors. We take what he
grants us here so kindly, that we pardon his unfit comparison between S. Paul's
Tent-making to supply his own necessities, that he might not be burdensome to
the Church, and the State employment of our Bishops. And should in this Section
fully have joined hands with him, but that we must needs tell him at the
parting, that had our Bishops never engaged themselves in secular affairs; but
ex officio generali Charitatis and had been so free from ambition as he would
make the world believe they are (neither should we have been so large in this
Section, nor so abundant in our process, nor would the Parliament have made
that provision against the secular employment of Clergy men as they have lately
done.

SECT. XIII.
THe best Charter pleaded for Episcopacy in former times was Ecclesiastical
constitution, and the favor of Princes. But our latter Bishops suspecting this
would prove too weak and sandy a foundation to support a building of that
transcending loftiness, that they have studied to advance the Babell of
Episcopacy unto, have endeavored to under-pinne it with some texts of
Scripture, that they might plead a Ius divinum for it: that the consciences of
all might be tied up from attempting to pull down their proud Fabric; but
none of them is more confident in this plea then this Remonstrant, who is
content that Bishops should for ever be hooted out of the Church, and be
disclaimed as usurpers, if they claim any other power then what the Scripture
gives them, especially bearing his cause upon Timothy, and Titus, and the
Angels of the 7. Churches.

Now because one grain of Scripture is of more efficacy and esteem to faith,
then whole volumes of humane testimonies; we endeavored to show the
impertinency of his allegations especially in those two instances.

And concerning Timothy and Titus, we undertook two things: First, that they
were not Bishops (in his sense) but Evangelists, the companions of the Apostles
in founding of Churches, or sent by them from place to place, but never settled
in any fixed pastoral charge, and this we showed out of the story of the
Acts, and the Epistles. The other was, that granting ex abundanti they had
been Bishops, yet they never exercised any such jurisdiction as ours do.

But because the great hinge of the controversy depends upon the instances of
Timothy and Titus, before we come to answer our Remonstrant, we will promise
these few propositions granted by most of the patrons of Episcopacy.

First, Evangelists properly so called, were men extraordinarily employed in
preaching the Gospel without a settled residence upon any one charge. Def. p.
94.
They were Comites, and Vicarii Apostolorum, Vice-Apostles, who had Curam
Vicariam omnium Ecclesiarum, as the Apostles had Curam principalem. And did (as
Ambrose speaks) Evangelizare sine Cathedra.

Secondly, Page 100.
It is granted by our Remonstrant, and his appendant Scultetus, and many
others. That Timothy was properly an Evangelist, while he traveled up and
down with the Apostles.

Thirdly, It is expressly granted, that Timothy and Titus were no Bishops till
after Paul's first being at Rome. Page 97.
That is after the end of the Histories of the Acts of the Apostles.

Fourthly, The first Epistle to Timothy, and the Epistle to Titus, from whence
all their grounds for Episcopacy are fetched, Vide Lud. Capell. hist. Eccles. p.
66. 74.
were written by Paul before his first going to Rome. And this is acknowledged
by all interpreters and Chronologers, that we have consulted with upon this
point, Baronius himself affirming it. And the Remonstrants own grounds will
force him to acknowledge that the second Epistle to Timothy was also written at
Paul's first being at Rome. Page 60.
For that second Epistle orders him to bring Mark alone with him, who by the
Remonstrants account died five or six years before Paul. Which could not have
been, Estius in Arg. in secundam ep ad Tim.
if this Epistle were written at Paul's second coming to Rome. Estius also
following Baronius gives good reason that the second Epistle to Timothy was
written at Paul's first being at Rome.

Fifthly, If Timothy and Titus were not Bishops when these Epistles were written
unto them, then the maine grounds of Episcopacy by divine right sink by their
own confession. Bishop Hall, in his Episcopacy by divine right, part 2. sect.
4. concludes thus peremptorily. That that if the especial power of ordination
and power of ruling and censuring Presbyters be not clear in the Apostles
charge to these two Bishops, the one of Creete, So Bilson.
the other of Ephesus, I shall yield the cause, and confess to want my senses.
And it must needs be so; for if Timothy were not then a Bishop, the Bishops
power of charging Presbyters, of proving and examining Deacons, of rebuking
Elders, and ruling over them, and his imposition of hands to ordain
Presbyters, etc. do all fail. And Bishops in these can plead no succession to
Timothy and Titus by these Scriptures more then other Presbyters may. For if
they were not Bishops, then all these were done by them as extraordinary
Officers, to which there were no successors.

Sixthly, By the confession of the patrons of Episcopacy. It is not only
incongruous, Vide Episc. by Di. Right, p. 2.
but sacrilegious for a Minister to descend from a superior order to an
inferior, according to the great Counsel of Chalcedon.

Seventhly, In all that space of time from the end of the Acts of the Apostles
until the middle of Trajans reign there is nothing certain to be drawn out
of Ecclesiastical Authors about the affairs of the Church, thus writes
Josephus Scaliger. Thus Tilenus when he was most Episcopal, Prolegum. in
Chron. Eusebius.
and Eusebius long before them both says, It cannot be easily showed who were
the true followers of the Apostles, no further then it can be gathered out of
the Epistles of Paul.

If the intelligent Reader weigh and consider these granted propositions,
Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 4.
he may with ease see how the lifeblood of Episcopacy from Timothy and Titus
is drayn'd out: for if they were not Bishops till after Paul's first being at
Rome, then not when the Epistles were written to them according to the fourth
proposition, and then their cause fails: if any shall say they were Bishops
before Paul's first being at Rome, contrary to the third proposition, then they
make them Bishops, while by the story its apparent they were Evangelists, and
did Evangelizare sine cathedra, and so clash against the second.

In a word, the office of an Evangelist being a higher degree of Ministry then
that of Bishops, Ephesians. 4. 11.
make them Bishops when you please, you degrade them contrary to our sixth
proposition: whiles the Remonstrant tryes to reconcile these things, we shall
make further use of them in our scanning his allegations in this section, to
which we now proceed.

Where first the Reader may please to observe that the Remonstrant slideth by
our marginall wherein we showed the delineation that Eusebius makes of an
Evangelist, and desired the Reader to judge thereby whether Timothy and Titus
were not Evangelists. Page 92.
Only he charge us with boldness for calling them so, though himself
afterward confesses it, page 98: p. 100. But why must this be boldness?
Forsooth, because though Timothy be expressly called an Evangelist, yet there
is no text, no not the least intimation, no not so much as the least ground of
a conjecture, that Titus was an Evangelist. And if so, why do you afterward
grant it? But whether you do or no, that it was so we have proved sufficiently
in our answer. But let any indifferent man here consider the iniquity of the
Remonstrant that challenges us for calling Titus an Evangelist without a text
for his name; and yet thinks himself much wronged if we grant him not, that
Timothy and Titus and the Angels of the Church were Bishops, though he has no
text for the name, nor for the office? Secondly, To our text, 2. Tim. 4. 5.
(...) (...), do the work of an Evangelist, says he, Page 93.
rather intimates he was no Evangelist, then that he was: as if it were no
more, then for the Remonstrant to desire his friend to do the work of a
Secretary or Solicitor for him, this implies he is neither. A very clear
gloss. Paul does not here entreat, as we conceive, but charge. He speaks
Imperative, not Impetrative. Compare this, not with the phrases of the
Remonstrant, but with the phrases of the sam Apostle: and then judge. In the
same Epistle 2 Chapt. 3. The same Apostle says to the same person, endure
hardness as a good soldier of Christ: does that imply Timothy was no soldier
of Christ, but only so employed for the time? So again, in the 15. verse of
the same Chapter, when the Apostle says, study to approve thy self a workman
that needs not to be ashamed: does this prove that Timothy was not a workman
but only for the time? When Paul says, 1 Cor. 16. 13. quite your selves like
men, does that show they were not men? but only so employed for the time. How
would the Remonstrant have triumphed over such a high piece of ridiculous
learning in our answer? had we turned off all these texts which use to be
produced as proofs of Episcopal authority in Timothy and Titus with such a
shift as this? this does not show it was their work, but only they were so
employed for the time.

We add further, That when you acknowledge Timothy was to do the office of
an Evangelist (for so your comparison of your friends doings the office of a
Secretary warrants us to interpret you) you must necessarily mean the
extraordinary Evangelist (for you scoff page 94. at an ordinary Evangelist, as
a new fiction) which if so, then consider how absurd a thing it is to bid the
inferior do the work of a superior. Superiors may be entreated to do the
work of inferiors, because they come within the sphere of their activity,
and comprehend either virtually or formally what the inferiors are to do. As
Apostles have power to do all that Evangelists, Presbyters and Deacons can
do; and Evangelists all that Presbyters, etc. but not e converso. Would it not
be absurd to bid a Curate do the office of a Bishop? Or a Presbyter the office
of an Apostle? From all this we conclude, That when Paul bids Timothy, Do the
work of an Evangelist: he bids him go on with speed to execute his
Vice-Apostolicall office in watering the several Churches in Asia, etc.

But says he, if he were an Evangelist, Part 2. p. 2. An Evangelist in the
natural sense of the words is he that preaches the glad tidings of the
Gospel.
he may be that, and a Bishop too. For we do but dream when we distinguish
of Evangelists. Truly sir, this dream was the fruit of our reading, the fancy
of the Author of Episcopacies divine right, and there we find our ordinary
guifted Evangelist, under which name indeed we comprise all preachers.

The other branch of that distinction; Evangelists of extraordinary gifts and
employments we find in Scripture: and in this defense too, Truth is, their
ordinary Evangelists are a new fiction. Page 94.
True, if we speak of the office of the Evangelists, but to give the title of
Evangelist, according to the natural signification of the word to ordinary
preachers of the Gospel, is neither new nor fiction.

Well, our argument we raise upon this ground is slight. Paul besought Timothy
to abide still at Ephesus, 1. Tim. 1. 3. which had been a needless
importunity, Page 95.
if he had had the Episcopal charge of Ephesus, for then necessarily he must
have resided there. But what is his answer to this argument? Nothing, only
says it is slight.

And that other argument brought from Timothies perpetual moving from place to
place, to prove that he was never fixed in an Episcopal station, is of as
little force with him. The necessities of those times were such, as made even
the most fixed Stars planetary, calling them frequently, from the places of
their abode to those Services that were of most use for the success of that
great work: yet so that after their err^nds fully dome they returned to their
own charge. Let us once profess as much confidence in our cause as the
Remonstrant does in his: We challenge him to show in all the new Testament, any
one that was appointed overseer of a particular Church, whose motion was as
planetary as we have showed that of Timothy and Titus to have been. Or if
that fail, let him but show that after Timothy or Titus went abroad upon the
Service of the Churches, they did constantly or ordinarily return either to
Ephesus or Creet, and not to the places either of the Apostles present abode or
appointment. And let them take Timothy and Titus as theirs, the patrons and
presidents of Episcopacy. But till they can show this, we must believe and
affirm Timothy and Titus are Evangelists and no Bishops.

Our next argument, from Act. 20. is but a Reed. Happy Remonstrant that deals
with such impotent adversaries; our first argument is slight, You cannot shake
it out so easily.
our second is of no force, our third is but a reed. Yet let us tell you,
Haeret Lateri Lethalis Arundo. We affirmed, and upon certain grounds, Acts 20.
4: (though the Remonstrant know it not) that Timothy was with Paul at the
meeting at Miletum, and from thence argued that had Timothy been B. of Ephesus,
Paul would have given him a charge of feeding the flock, and not the Elders,
but would have given them direction for their carriage, at least, would not so
have forgot himself as to call the Elders Bishops, before their Bishops face.

In all which the Remonstrant says, Page 96.
we go upon a wrong ground: But sure sir, you are not so ignorant of our
meaning, as by your questions you would seem to be. We grant that these
assembled persons, were Presbyters or Bishops in a parity, but neither in
imparity, neither under Timothy nor any other Bishop. And to this purpose is
our argument, from the want of directions to them as inferior: yet
notwithstanding the Remonstrant would be glad to pick what holes he can in our
argument; yet in part he grants what we conclude: That they were all Bishops,
only with this addition, they were not mere Presbyters: but upon what ground?
The word it self imports they were Bishops (...). And does not the other word*
(...) import as strongly they were Presbyters? And the truth is they were
Presbyters, whom the holy Ghost had made Bishops. Foreseeing how his own words
would snarle him, if he should grant them all Bishops, he must grant there were
more Bishops then one in Ephesus; he puts by that blow telling us that though
they were sent for from Ephesus, yet they were not said to be all of Ephesus
Thither they were called from diverse parts, which seems to be employed in these
words ye all amongst whom, etc. This is but a poor evasion: For first the holy
Ghost tells us, that Paul did now study expedition, and did decline Ephesus of
purpose because he would not spend time in Assia: Now if Paul coming to
Miletum had sent from thence to Ephesus, for the Elders of that Church, and
they had sent for the rest of the Asian Churches, and Paul had stayed at
Miletum till they could assemble to him, this would have been such an expense
of time, as Paul's haste to Jerusalem could not admit. Secondly, these Elders
were all of one Church made by God, Bishops over one flock; and therefore may
with most probability be affirmed to be the Elders of the Church of Ephesus.
For the Apostles were always exact in distinguishing Churches; that of a City,
they always called a Church; those of a Province, Churches; Churches of
Galatia, Churches of Macedonia, Churches of Judea, etc. And that evasion which
you use, page 12^* that they might be all called one Church because united
under one government, makes your cause far worse. Because notwithstanding
this union you speak of S. John joining them all together in one Epistle,
(...) 1. calls them the Churches of Asia, and now here the Church* Besides
this, the Syriack translation (thought by some to be almost as ancient as the
Church of Antioch) reads it, the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, not only the
Elders of the Church. Thirdly, you say they were Bishops or Superintendents of
other Churches as well as Ephesus. But your self grants in this very page,
that Timothy was not yet Bishop of Ephesus, and yet you all say that he was the
first Bishop that ever Ephesus had. And that Ephesus was the Metropolis of all
Asia. How then came the Daughter Churches to have Bishops before their mother
as you call it. Lastly, that we may cut asunder the sinews (as your phrase is)
of your far-fetched answer, borrowed from Bishop Barlow and Andrews. Whereas
you lay the weight of it upon those words, Ye all among whom I have gone
preaching the Kingdom of God. Collecting from thence, that there must be some
Superintendents present from all those places, where he had traveled
preaching; Your self would quickly see the weakness of it, were you not
pleading your own cause. Should any man speaking with three or four of the
members of the late convocation, say, you all who had your hand in the late
oath and Canons are in danger, etc. would it imply a presence of all the
members of the Convocation because the speech concerned them all? you know it
would not. But if this do not suffice, then tell us, Why must his ( All) be
meant as such superintendents as you plead for, except because they were called
Bishops, and so you would raise an argument from the name to the thing; which
kind of argument if it may prevail, you know your cause is lost.

But the Acumen of this answer by which he makes account to cut asunder the
sinews of all our proofs, is this; That it is more then probable, that
Timothy and Titus were made Bishops after, Paul's first being at Rome. Page 97,
98.
Truly sir, here you desert your old friend, Episc. by Div. right, (out of
whom you have hitherto borrowed a great part both of your matter and words.
Epist. 2. part. p. 39.
He says, Timothy was at this time a Bishop and present, and Paul's assessor.
You it seems think otherwise. Agree as well as you can; we will not set you
at variance. We think he was as much bishop before as after; only we desire
to learn when, where, and by whom Timothy received his ordination to
Episcopacy: The first Epistle to Timothy tells us of an ordination which he had
received to another office. And Chronologers tell us, that that Epistle was
writ many years before Timothy was made Bishop of Ephesus, according to your
computation: and we leave to you to tell us when, and where he received
ordination to your Episcopal office: we have perused the Chronologicall tables
of Lud^vicus Capellus, whom you call Jacob Cappellus, and have compared him
with Ba oniu^, and from thence have learned that the Epistle was writ to him
before Paul's going to Rome, but cannot learn from their Chronology that ever
he was made Bishops afterward.

The same answer (say you) may serve you for Titus; and the same reply serves
us: Page 98.
only whereas you accuse us of guilt for our translating (...) (every
variation from the ordinary translation must be guilty) know that (...) will be
translated things that remain, Page 99.
when you and we are dead and rotten* And if our translators did not render
(...) so, yet so they render (...) Revil. 3. 2.

Your second quarrel is to these words ( for a while) to which because our
margent allots the space of between five or six years, you think you have us
at a great advantage. If we had said he tarried there but a little while, you
might have had some what whereon to fasten; but we spoke of a while, not in
respect of the shortness of his residence at Creet, but as it stands in
opposition to residence for term of life. He was left there but for a while.
Ergo not fixed there during life. Chrysostom. in Tit. c. 1. Hom. 2.
The end why the Apostle left Titus at Creet was to ordain Elders or Bishops
in every City, and not to be Bishop there himself. For as Chrysostom says,
Paul would not commit the whole Island to one man, but would have every man
appointed to his charge and Cure. For so he knew his labor would be the
lighter, and the people that were under him would be governed with the greater
diligence. For the Teacher should not be troubled with the government of many
Churches, but only intend one, and study for to adorn that. Therefore this
was Titus his work, not to be Bishop in Creet himself, but to ordain Elders
in every City, which was an office above that of a Bishop. For Creet was (...);
Now you know sir, that i^ is above the work of an ordinary Bishop to plant and
erect Churches to their due frame, in an hundred Cities. Bishops are given to
particular Churches when they are framed to keep them in the Apostolical
truth, not to lay foundations, or to exaessifie some imperfect beginnings. This
service Titus did in Creet, (the same work which the Apostle did when he
visited the Churches of Asia, Acts 14. 23.) which being finished, the same
Apostolical power which sent him thither, removed him thence again for the
service of other Churches, as we have formerly showed from Scripture. And
though the Remonstrant tells us this calling away could no whit have impeached
the truth of his Episcopacy; We must crave leave to tell him, that though it
may be one journey upon some extraordinary Church service might consist with
such a fixed station as Episcopacy is. Yet an ordinary frequent course of
jornying, such as Titus his was cannot; unless he will grant that Timothy
might be a Bishop and an Evangelist at the same time. But this is contrary to
the Remonstrants one definition of an Evangelist, page 94. And therefore he
chus^th rather to say Timothy was first an Evangelist when he traveled abroad,
and afterward a Bishop when he settled at home. Page 100.
This is more absurd then the former. For if ever Titus were a Bishop; it was
then when Paul left him in Creet to ordain Elders in every City: And after
that time was the greatest part of his travels, as we have showed in our
answer. Ans. p. 51.
All these journeys did Titus make after he was left in Creet, nor do we find
any where record of his return thither: Therefore according to this rule,
Titus should be first a Bishop, and afterward an Evangelist. Or if the
greatest part of Titus his travels had been before his delegation to Creet,
yet it had been no less absurd to say that afterward he did descend from the
degree of an Evangelist to the station of Episcopacy. We hope the Remonstrant
will not deny but an Evangelist was as far above a Bishop as any Bishop can
fancy himself to be above a Presbyter. (...)
And if for a Bishop to quit his Episcopacy and suffer himself to be reduced
to the rank of a mere Presbyter, be a crime so heinous, so odious, Epis. Div.
Rig. part 2.
that it had been much better to have been unborne then to live to give so
heinous a scandal to Gods Church, and so deep a wound to his holy truth and
ordinances, a river, an ocean can neither drown nor wash off the offense. What
is it to reduce an Evangelist to the form of a Bishop?

We had granted that some Fathers call Timothy and Titus Bishops; the
Remonstrant replies, some, nay all, Be it so, as long as himself has granted
the Fathers did use the titles of Bishops and Presbyters (...), But there is a
Cloud of witnesses of much antiquity which avers Timothy and Titus to have
liv^d and died Bishop of Ephesus and Creet. But this cloud will soon blow
over. Centur. 1. lib. 2. cap. 10.
The Magdeburgenses tell us, That there is nothing expressly or certainly
delivered by any approved writer to show how, or how long Timothy was Doctor
or Governor of the Church of Ephesus. Therefore we cannot certainly affirm
that he suffered martyrdom at Ephesus, being stoned to death for reproving the
idolatry of the Ephesians at the porch of Dian^s Temple, which yet the most
have reported. Let the Reader further know that his cloud of witnesses, who
aver Timothy and Titus to be Bishops, have borrowed their testimonies from
Eusebius, of whom Scaliger says, and Doctor Raynolds approves of it. That he
read ancient Histories parum attente, which they prove by many instances. And
all that Eusebius says, is only sic scribitur. It is so reported. But from
whence had he this History? even from Clemens fabulous, and Hegesippus not
exstant. (...)
And therefore that which is answered by our learned Divines concerning Peter's
being at Rome and dying there (which is also recorded by Eusebius) That because
Eusebiu^ had it from Papias an Author of little esteem: hence they think it a
sufficient argument to deny the truth of the History, though asserted by never
so many Authors relying upon one of so little credit. The same answer will
fully serve to all the authorities produced for Timothies and Titus being
Bishops from antiquity. And that which Thucidides says of the ancient Greek
Historia^s, may as truly be said of Eusebius Irenaeus and others: Quae a
majoribus acceperant Posteri, (...) securi examinis suis item posteris
tradiderunt.

We further showed how the Fathers called Timothy and Titus Bishops viz. in the
same sense which learned D. Raynolds says, they also used to call the Apostles
Bishops, even in a general signification, because they did attend that Church
for a time. etc. This the Remonstrant will not give us leave to do, but
without his leave we shall make it good. We say therefore further: That when
the Apostles or Evangelists (perhaps James at Jerusalem, Timothy at Ephesus,
Titus at Creet) did stay longer at one Church, and exercised such a power, as
the Bishops in succeeding ages did aspire unto: when the Fathers would set
forth this power of an Apostle or Evangelists long residing in one Church, they
(laboring to do it in a famil^ar way) did similitudinarily call them Bishops,
and sometimes Archbishops or Patriarcks, which all confess were offices not
heard of in the Apostles times; not meaning they were so formally, but
eminently: neither could they call them so properly, for the power they
exercised was in them formally Apostolical or Evangelicall, reaching not only
to the Church where then they resided, but to all neighboring and bordering
Churches, as far as was possible for them to oversee, or the occasions of the
Church did require; they having no bounded Diocesses, but had the care of all
the Churches. In this sense they might call them so, but for either an Apostle
or Evangelist to be ordained a Bishop or Presbyter had been both unnecessary
and absurd: unnecessary, because the higher degree includes the inferior
eminently, though not formally; and absurd to descend lower, that after they
had been Apostolically or Evangelically employed in taking care of all the
Churches, they should be ordained to a work which should so limit them, as to
make them less useful to the Church of God.

But, says he, all this discourse is needless, whether Timothy or Titus were
Evangelists or no; sure we are, here they stand for persons charged with those
offices and cares which are delivered to the ordinary Church Governors in all
succeeding generations: Here first you give us no ground of your surenesse, nor
can give us any other then what may be said of the Apostles, for they also
stand as persons charged, etc. Secondly, it is true the substance of those
cares and offices, which belong to Apostles and Evangelists is transmitted to
the ordinary Church Governors, as far as is necessary for the edification of
the Church, else the Lord had not sufficiently provided for his Church: all the
question is, whether these Church Governors are by way of Aristocracy the
common Council of Presbyters, or by way of Monarchy Diocesan Bishops? Now
unless you prove that Timothy and Titus were ordinary officers (or as Doctor
Hall calls them, Diocesan Bishops) to whom as to individual persons such care
and offices were individually entrusted, you will never out of Timothy and
Titus defend Diocesan Bishops. Thirdly, though the substance of these cares and
offices were to be transmitted to ordinary Church Governors, yet they are not
transmitted in that eminency or personal height, in which they were in the
Apostles and Evangelists: an Apostle where ever he lived might govern and
command all Evangelists, all Presbyters etc. an Evangelist might govern all
Presbyters, etc. but no Presbyter or Bishop might command others, only the
common Council of Presbyters may charge any or many Presbyters, as occasion
shall require. In a word, these ordinary Church Governors succeed the
extraordinary officers, not in the same line and degree, as one brother dying,
another succeeds him in the inheritance; but as men of an other order, and in a
different line. Let the Remonstrant therefore take Timothy and Titus as he
finds them, that is, Evangelists, men of extraordinary dignity and authority
in the Church of Christ: Let him with his first confidence maintain that our
Bishops challenge no other spiritual power then was delegated to them. We
shall upon better grounds maintain with better confidence, that if they
challenge the same, they ought to be disclaimed for usurpers.

But much more challenging such a power as was never exercised by Timothy and
Titus, as we demonstrated in our former answer in several instances; which are
so commonly known as our Remonstrant is ashamed to deny them: only plays
them off, partly with his old shift, the abuse of the person, not of the
Calling. But we beseech you sir, tell us whether these persons do not
perpetrate these abuses (though by their own vice, yet) by virtue of their
place and Callings. Partly by retorting questions upon us; when, or where did
our Bishops challenge to ordain alone; or to govern alone? we have showed you
when and where already, when or where did our Bishops challenge power to pass
a rough and unbeseeming rebuke upon an Elder? Page 102.
Sure your own conscience can tell that has taught you to apply that to an
Elder in office which we only spoke (in Scripture phrase) of an Elder in
general. It was your guilt, not our ignorance that turned it to an Elder in
office. Where did, say you, our Bishops give Commission to Chancellors,
Commissaries, etc. to rail upon Presbyters; to accuse them without just
ground, etc. where have not Chancellors done so? and what power have they but
by Bishops Commission to meddle with any thing in Church affairs? And where is
the Bishop that has forbid it them? Qui non prohibet facit. Only there is one
practice of our Bishops he is something more laborious to justify: That is,
their casting out unconforming brethren, commonly known in their Court
language by the name of schismatickes and heretics, which Timothy and Titus
never did, nor had any such power delegated to them; heretics indeed the
Apostles gave them power to reject: but we had hoped the refusal of the use
of a ceremony should never have been equalized in the punishment either to
heresy or schism. But the Remonstrant has found Scripture for it. Loath not
the Apostle wish that they were cut off that trouble you? but sure it is one
thing to wish men cut off by God, and another thing to cut them off by the
censure of the Church. Besides this was written to the Galatians; and they that
troubled them, were such as maintained doctrines against the foundation, i.
Justification by works of the Law, etc. which we think are very near of
kin to heretics. I am sure far above the crime of the Remonstrants
unconforming brethren, who are unsettled in points of a mean difference, (which
their usual language knows by no better terms then of schismatickes and
factious) yet even such have fallen under the heaviest censures of suspension,
excommunication, deprivation, etc. which the Remonstrant unable to deny would
justify, which when he shall be able to do, he may do something toward the
patronizing of Bishops. But in the mean time let him not say they are our own
ill raised suggestions, but their own ill assumed and worse managed
authority, that makes them fear to be disclaimed as usurpers.

The second Scripture ground which the Remonstrant is ambitious to draw in for
the support of his Episcopal cause, is the instance of the Angels of the seven
Churches, which because it is locus (...) and cried up as argumentum vere
Achilleum, we did on purpose enlarge our selves about it. And for our pains
the Remonstrant, as if all learning and acuteness were locked up in his breast
( Narcissus like in love with his own shadow) professes that this piece of
the task fell unhappily upon some dull and tedious hand, etc. Which if it be
so, Page 103.
it will redound the more to the Remonstrants discredit, when it shall appear
that he is so shamefully foiled and wounded by so dull an adversary. He objects
Colemorts often sod, when he cannot but know that the whole substance of his own
book is borrowed from Bishop Bilson and Doctor Downham. And that there is
nothing in this discourse about the Angels, but either it is (...) of if (...),
it is (...). But before we come to answer our Remonstrants particulars, we will
premise something in general about these Asian Angels.

It may seem strange that the defenders of Episcopacy lay so much weight of
argument upon the word or appellation of Angel; which themselves know to be a
title not impropriated to the chief Ministers of the Church, but common to all
that bring the glad tidings of the Gospel; yea to all the messengers of the
Lord of Hosts. We conceive there are 2. maine reasons that induce them to
insist so much on this: First they find it the most easy way of avoiding the
dint of all the Arguments brought against them out of the History of the Acts
and Epistles, by placing one above the rest of the Presbyters in the period of
the Apostles times. And so finding in the Revelation (which was written the
last of all the parts of the Scripture, except peradventure the Gospel written
by the same pen) an expression which may seem to favor their cause, they
improve it to the utmost. Partly because hereby they evade all our arguments
which we bring out of the Scripture. Do we prove out of the 20. of Acts,
Presbyters and Bishops to be all one? Do we prove the Bishops described in
Timothy and Titus to be one and the same in name and office with a Presbyter?
Do we prove that their Churches were all governed Communi Consilio
Presbyterorum? All shall be granted us, and yet the Divine right of Episcopacy
be still held up by this slight, by telling us, that before the Apostles left
the earth they made over their authority to some prime men. Demand where this
is extant? The Angels of the seven Churches are pleaded presently. And partly
because we have no other Scripture of latter inspiration and edition, whereby
to prove the contrary.

Another inducement is, because the writers near the Apostles times make
frequent mention of a Bishop, and as they would have us believe, some ways
distinguished from a Presbyter. Some of them mentioning the very men that were
the Angels of these Churches; as Polycarpus of Smyrna and Ignatius (who is said
to have been martyred within twelve years after the Revelation was written,)
wrote letters to the several Churches, wherein he mentions their Bishops
distinct from their Presbyters. Episc. by Di. Right, 1 pt. 35.
Now (says the author of Episcopacy by divine right) the Apostles immediate
successors could best tell what they next before them did. Who can better tell
a man's pace then he that follows him close at heels? And this has so
plausib^e a show, that all are condemned as blind, or wilful, who will either
doubt that Episcopacy was of Apostolical institution, or think that the
Church of Christ, should in so short a time deviate from the institution of the
Apostles. But now how insufficient a ground this is for the raising up of so
mighty a Fabric as Episcopacy by Divine right, or Apostolical institution
we desire the Reader to judge by that that follows.

First, the thing they lay as their foundation is a mere metaphorical word,
and such as is ordinarily applied to Presbyters in common.

Secondly, the Penman of those seven Epistles did never in them nor in any of
his other writings so much as use the name of Bishop, he names Presbyters
frequently; especially in this book, yea where he would set out the office of
those that are nearest to the throne of Christ in his Church, Revel. 4. And
whereas in Saint John's days some new expressions were used in the Christian
Church, which were not in Scripture: As the Christian Sabbath began to be
called (...) and Christ himself (...). Now both these are found in the
writings of S. John; and it is strange to us that the Apostle should mention a
new phrase, and not mention a new office erected in the Church, as you would
make us believe.

Neither thirdly, in any of his writings the least intimation of superiority of
one Presbyter over another, save only where he names Diotrephes as one
ambitiously affecting such a Primacy. Nor is there any one word in these
Epistles whence an Episcopal authority may be collected. So that did not the
testimonies that lived soon after make the argument plausible, it would
appear ridiculous. But alas the suffrage of all the writers in the world is
infinitely unable to command an Act of Divine faith without which divine right
cannot be apprehended.

Suppose we were as verily persuaded that Ignatius wrote the Epistles which go
under his name (which yet we have just cause to doubt of, as knowing that many
learned men reject a great part of them, and some all) as we can be persuaded
that Tully wrote his: All this can persuade no further that the Apostles
ordained and appointed Bishops as their successors, but only by a humane
faith: but neither is that so. The most immediate and unquestionable successors
of the Apostles give clear evidence to the contrary. It is granted on all
sides that there is no piece of antiquity that deserves more esteem then the
Epistle of Clement, For the further high commendation of Clement and this his
piece, See Epil. by div. right part ^ ^^ct. 10. p. 59, 60. Whom yet he has
wronged in his quotations.
lately brought to light by the industry and labor of that learned Gentleman
Master Patricke Young. And in that Epistle Bishops and Presbyters are all one,
as appears by what follows: The occasion of that Epistle seems to be a new
sedition raised by the Corinthians against their Presbyters, page 57. 58. (not
as Bishop Hall says, the continuation of the schisms amongst them in the
Apostles days:) Clemens to remove their present sedition tells them how God
has always appointed several orders in his Church, which must not be
confounded; first, telling them how it was in the Jewish Church; then for the
times of the Gospel, tells them, that Christ sent his Apostles through
Countries and Cities, in which they constituted the first fruits (or the chief
of them) unto Bishops and Deacons, for them who should believe afterward, p.
54. 55.

Those whom he calls there Bishops afterward throughout the Epistle he calls
Presbyters, pa. 58, 62, 69. All which places do evidently convince that in
Clement his judgment, the Apostle appointed but two officers (that is Bishops
and Deacons) to bring men to believe: Because when he had reckoned up three
orders appointed by God among the Jews, Highpriests, Priests, and Levites,
coming to recite orders appointed by the Apostles under the Gospel, he does
mention only Bishops and Deacons: and those Bishops which at first he opposes
to Deacons, ever after he calls Presbyters. And here we cannot but wonder at the
strange boldness of the author of Epis. by divine right, who has endeavored
to wire-draw this Author (so much magnified by him) to maintain his
Prelaticall Episcopacy: and that both by foysting in the word withal into this
translation which is not in the Text, that the Reader might be seduced to
believe that the offices of Episcopacy and Presbytery were two different
offices. And also by willingly misunderstanding Clement his phrase (...): for
by the word ((...)) he would have us understand Episcopacy as distinct from
Presbytery: whereas the whole series of the Epistle evidently proves that the
word Episcopus and Presbyter are (...): And so also by the word ((...)) he
would have us to understand that the contention then in Corinth was only about
the name: whereas it appears by the Epistle it self, that the controversy
was not about the name, but dignity of Episcopacy: for it was about the
deposition of their godly Presbyters, p. 57, 58. And the word (...) is thus
interpreted by Beza Ephesians. 1. 21. Phil. 2. 9. and Heb. 1. 4. and Mead in Apoc.
11. p. 156. In which places (...) is rendered by (...), so here (...) is put for
(...). By all this we see that the most genuine and nearest successor of the
Apostles knew no such difference.

Lastly, it is worth our observation, that the same writers who (as they say)
testify that these 7. Angels were in a superior degree to Presbyters, do
likewise affirm that the Apostle John sat many years B. of Ephesus, and was
the Metropolitan of all Asia, in which we suppose the Remonstrant will allow
his readers a liberty of believing him, and allow us a liberty to tell him that
D Whitakers says, Patres cum Iacobum Episcopum vocant aut etiam Petrum, non
proprie sumunt Episcopi nomen, Whitak. de Pontif. qu. 2. cap 15.
sed vocant eos Episcopos illarum Ecclesiarum in quibus aliquamdin commorati
sunt. And in the same place, Et si proprie de Episcopo loquatur, absurdum est
Apostolos suisse Episcopos. Nam qui proprie Episcopus est, is Apostolous non
potest esse* quia Episcopus est unius tantum Ecclesiae. At Apostoli plurium
Ecclesiarum fundatores and inspectores erant. And again, Hoc enim non mul^um
distat ab insania, dicere Petrum fuisse proprie Episcopum, out reliquos
Apostolos.

Now we return to our Remonstrant. Our answer to his objection from the Angels
was: That the word Angel* is to be taken collectively, not individually, which
he calls, pro more suo, a shift and a conceit which no wise man can ever
believe. Page 104.
And yet he could not but take notice that we alleged Austin, Gregory, Fulke,
Perkins, Fox, Brightman, Mede, and diverse others for this interpretation: which
will make the world to accuse him for want of wisdom, for calling the wisdom
of such men into question. Before he addresseth himself to answer our reasons,
he propounds two queres.

1. If the interest be common and equally appertaining to all, why should one
be singled out above the rest? Page 104.
A very dull question, which is indeed a very begging of the cause. For the
question in agitation is, whether when Christ writes to the 7. Angels, he meant
to single out 7. individual persons above the rest, or else writes to the 7.
Angels collectively meaning all the Angels that were in all the Churches.

The second question is as dull as the first. If you will yield the person to
be such as had more then others, a right in the administration of all, it is
that weseeke for. But he knew we would not yield it. And therefore we may
justly use his own words, that those questions are tedious and might well have
been spared. And so also the instances of a letter indorsed from the Lords of
the Council to the Bishop of Durham, concerning some affairs of the whole
Clergy of his Diocese: No man will deny but that the Bishop of Durham is an
individual Bishop. This example supposes the Angel about whom we dispute to
be meant individually, which you know is the (...) between you and us. Quid
haec ad Rhombum? We will give you instances more suitable to the purpose.
Suppose one in Christ's time, or his Apostles had indorsed a letter to the
Chiefe-priest concerning the affairs of the Sanhedrim, and another letter to
the chief Ruler of the Synagogue concerning the affairs of the Synagogue, and
another letter to the Captain of the Temple, concerning the business of the
Temple; could any man imagine but that these indorsments must necessarily be
understood collectively? considering there were more Chiefe-priests then one in
Jerusalem, Luke 22. 4. and more chief Rulers of the Synagogue then one, Math.
19. 18. compared with Acts 18. 8. 17. And more Captains of the Temple then
one, Acts 4* 1. compared with Luke the ^2. 4. and so also semblably more Angels
and Ministers in the seven Churches then seven. But stay sir, we hope you are
not of opinion, that any of your Asian Bishops had as much spiritual and
temporal power as the Lord Bishop of Salisbury, and the Lord Bishop and
Palatine of Durham, Cave dixeris.

At last you come to our proofs, which you scoffingly call invincible. You
should have done better to have called them irrefragable, like your good
friends irrefragable propositions.

Our first argument is drawn from the Epistle to Thyatira, Revel. 2. 24. But I
say unto you (in the plural number, not unto thee in the singular) and unto
the rest in Thyatira. Here is a plain distinction between the Governors, and
the governed. And the Governors in the plural number; which apparently proves
that the Angel is collective. The Remonstrant has no way to put this off,
Page 105.
but by a pitiful shift to use his own words. He tells us he has found a
better copy; which is a very unhappy and unbecoming expression, apt to make
ignorant people doubt of the original text, and so in time rather to deny the
Divinity of the Scriptures, then of Episcopacy. But this better copy is but
lately searched into, for we find that Bishop Hall, in his Episcopacy by Divine
right, reads it as we do. But I say unto you, and the rest in Thyatira. But
what is this better Copy? It is a Manuscript written by the hand of Teela;
which if it be no truer then Itinerarium Pauli and Teclae, it will have little
credit among the Learned. But that which makes you to magnify it the more, is
that doughty argument which it helped you to against us, concerning the same
Church of ^hyatira, in which the Angel is charged for suffering that woman
Iezabel. And now you say, in that memorable copy of Tecla, it is (...), which
you interpret, thy wife Iczebel. And just as Archimedes, you come with an
(...), And call upon us to blush for shame. What say you in a different
character, shall we think she was wife to the whole company or to one Bishop
alone? Page 106.
But for our part we do think you have more cause to blush for making such a
Translation, The memorable copy of Tecla^s may be translated, Thy woman
Iezeb^l, or That woman of thine Iezebel. We see no shadow of reason why the
Remonstrant should translate it, Thy wise Iezebel. In the Arabic it is, Quod
sivisti muli^rem ^ocatam Iezebel, according to our ordinary Greek copies.
and rather then you will not prove the Angel of Thyatira to be an individual
Bishop, you will un-Angell him, and make him an other Ahab, to marry a cursed
Iezebel. We wonder that never any protestant writer had the wit to bring this
text against the papists to prove the lawfulness of Priests marriages; no not
Doctor Hall himself in his defense of the married Clergy. Give us leave here
to use your own words, page 108. Forbear Reader if you can, to smile at this
curious subtilty, what Cabalisme have we here? judge Reader what to expect of
so deep speculations. And also to repeat what you say, page 110. If you
please your self with this new subtilty it is well from us you have no cause
to expect an answer: it can neither draw our assent, nor merit our confutation.
We believe it to be as true that Iezebel was the wife of the Bishop of
Thyatira, as that Tecla was the wife of Paul. But to return to the former
text: Let any judicious reader survey the latter part of the 23. verse (which
is the verse before that out of which we bring our reason) there he shall find
Christ speaking to the Church of Thyatira, says: And I will give to every one
of you (in the plural number.) And then follows, But I say unto you and the
rest in Thyatira. And he will not only con^esse that though the 24. verse
should fail, yet the 23. would prove the same thing, as effectually as the 24.
but also will grant that from the co^^erence it is evident that the old copies
are better then that which this Remonstrant calls the better copy of Tecla. But
besides this text, let the Reader cast his eye upon what Christ says to the
Angel of the Church of Smyrna, Revel. 2. 10. fear none of those things which
thou shall suffer, behold the devil shall cast some of you into prison, (of
you in the plural number:) that ye may be tried (ye in the plural number)
and you (in the plural again) shall have tribulation ten days; be thou
faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a Crown of life. Observe here
how our Savior Christ changes the number. Be thou faithful. And the devil
shall cast some of you, etc. to show unto us, that the Angel is not meant of
one singular person, but of all the whole company of Presbyters that were in
Smyrna. So also Christ writing to the Angel of the Church of Pergamus says,
verse 13. in the beginning of the verse, I know thy works, in the singular
number; but in the latter end, who was slain among you, in the plural number.
We expect that the Remonstrant will when best at leisure bring tidings of
another better copy, to avoid the dint of these texts that do as we think
demonstratively prove the thing in question.

Our second argument is drawn from the like phrases even in this very book of
the Revelation, where it is usual to express a company under one singular
person; as the civil state of Rome, as opposite to Christ, is called a beast
with ten horns: and the Ecclesiastical state Antichristian, is called, the
whore of Babylon. Page 106.
To which you answer. 1. That if it be thus in visions and Emblematicall
representations, must it needs be so in plain narrations? But good sir
consider, this very thing we are about was seen by Saint John in a vision: and
you your self confess in the next page, that the word Angel is
metaphorical. How then is it a plain narration? Secondly, you say because it
is so in one phrase of speech, must it be so in all? We answer, Page 106.
that this argument was not brought to prove that the word Angel must needs be
taken collectively, but only that it might be so taken, and that it was the
likeliest interpretation, especially considering what was added out of Master
Mede (who was better skilled in the meaning of the Revelation then your self)
that the word Angel is commonly (if not always) in the Revelation taken
collectively. Thus the seven Angels that blew the seven trumpets, and the seven
Angels that poured out the seven vials, are not literally to be taken, but
Synecdochically, you reply. Perhaps so, but then the Synecdoche lies in the
seven, not in the Angels, and so you grant the word Angel to be metaphorical,
but we are never a whit the nearer to our imagined Synecdoche. But this is but
a mere fallacy. Let but the reader expect, till we make good our fourth
reason, and then we shall see our imagined Synecdoche made real. For the
present it is sufficient, that it is the ordinary custom of the holy Ghost in
the Revelation, by Angel to mean Angels; by seven Angels, not seven
individually, but collectively. But whether the Synecdoche be in the word
seven, or in the word Angel, that is nothing to the purpose in hand.

Our third argument, is drawn from the word Angel, which is a common name to
all the Ministers and messengers, etc. And surely had Christ intended to point
out some one individual person by the Angel, he would have used some
distinguishing name to set him out by: he would have called him Rector, or
President, or Superintendent; but calling him by a name common to all
Ministers, why should we think that there should be any thing spoken to him
that does not as much concern all the rest who are Angels as well as he? All
that you answer is, that Christ knew this well enough, and if he had meant it,
had it not been as easy to have mentioned many as one? Page 107.
But here we humbly desire the Reader to consider two things. 1. The
unreasonablenesse of this answer: we brought three reasons why Christ when he
meant diverse Angels, spoke in the singular number Angel, not Angels. These
reasons the Remonstrant passes over with a scorn, (the commonest, safest,
surest way of answering, the Remonstrant has:) and yet he demands page 104.
why should one be singled ou^ above all, if the interest be common? And here,
why does not Christ say to the Angels? But let ^im first answer our Therefores,
and we will quickly answer his Wherefores. Secondly, how justly we may retort
this answer upon the Remonstrant and say, If Christ had meant by the seven
Angels seven Bishops, how easy had it been for him to have written to the
Bishop of Ephesus (as he was lately called at the Spittle by a Bishop) to the
Bish. of Smyrna, instead of the Angel of Ephesus, and the Angel of Smyrna.
But this Christ does not do, and not only so, but Saint John also in all his
books makes not any mention of the name Bishop. And therefore it seems
strange to us that Episcopacy by divine right should be fetched out of his
writings. I but says the Remonstrant, Page 107.
it is written (...). And therefore the denoted person must needs be singular.
For surely you cannot say that all the Presbyters at Eph^sus were one Angel.
Yes sir, we can say they were all one Angel collectively, though not
individually And we can show you where Christ speaks in the singular number,
and joyneth the Article with it also, and yet means Synecdochically more, for
one, as John 4. 37. John 10. 11. (...), which must be all meant indefinitely,
not individually. You suppose again, that if that Christ had said, To the
Star of Ephesus, no body would have construed it but of one eminent person.
But herein also you are much mistaken, for the word Star is as common a name
to all Ministers as the word Angel, as we have showed in our answer.

The fourth argument you account ridiculous, and in a proud scorn pass it
over with a jeere. But you will see in the conclusion you your self to be the
ridiculum caput, not we. Our argument stands thus: Our Savior says, The seven
Candlestickes which thou saw are the seven Churches: but he does not say,
the seven stars are the seven Angels of the same Churches. But the Angels of
the seven Churches omitting not without mystery the number of the Angels, least
we should understand by Angel one Minister alone, and not a company. Page 108.
To omit your scoffs, you answer it is plain that every Church has his
Angel mentioned, and there being seven Chruches, how many Angels (I beseech
you) are there? This answer is as easily blown away, as the wind blows away
chafe. It is true, every Church has his Angel mentioned, but whether Angel
individually or Angel collectively, that is still the question, and therefore
for ought you say, though there were but seven Churches, there might be seven,
and seven times seven Angels in those Churches. But you intimate that Christ
says, the 7. stars, though he does not say the seven Angels. Now here give
us leave to put our Remonstrant in mind of the imagined Syneedoche. For we
justly conceive that these words, The seven Stars are the Angels, are
figurative, and that there are two figures in them, a metaphor in the word
Star and Angel, and a Synecdoche in the word seven. For we do not think
that the seven Stars signify seven individual Angels, for then indeed the
reader might have justly smiled at our curious speculation, but we think them
to be taken collectively. Thus Revil. 8. 2. John saw seven Angels which stood
before God, by which seven Angels Doctor Reynolds does not understand seven
individual Angels, but by a Synecdoche all the Angels. For there are no seven
particular Angels that do stand before God, but all do so, Dan. 7. The words
of Doctor Reynolds are these, Censura lib. Apooryph. prael. 64.
Quare cum commune sit omnibus electis Angelis Dei stare coram throno, videtur
nomine septem Angelorum significari universos Angelos Dei Item, Ita numero
septenario saepe significari omnes, numeruni saltem infinitum numero finito
docent, septem columnae Pro. 9. septem pastores Math. 5. septem oculi Zach. 3.
sed imprimis in istis mysteriis Apocalypseos, septem Candelabra, septem
lampades, septem phyaelae, septem plagae. And now let the Reader judge whether
this argument be so ridiculous as the mocking Remonstrant would make it.

But that you may see how dull the answerer himself, is whilst he accuses
others of dullness let us a little consider what pitiful shifts he uses in
his answer to our last reason.

Our last argument is; Though but one Angel be mentioned in the forefront, yet
it is evident the Epistles themselves are dedicated to all the Angels and
Ministers in every Church, and to the Churches themselves: and if unto the
whole Church, much more unto the Presbyters of that Church. To this you answer.

1. By granting the argument which is to grant the cause, as will appear to
any judicious Reader: For the reason does not only say that the whole Church
is concerned in the Epistles, and spoken unto in them, but that they are
dedicated to all the Ministers as well as one, and to all the Churches as well
as to the Angels, as appears Revel. 1. 11. send it to the seven Churches: and
also by the Epiphonema of every Epistle, he that has an ear to hear, let him
hear what the Spirit says to the Churches, not only concerning the Churches,
but to the Churches. But then you argue secondly, Page 109.
if every Epistle be written to all the Churches, then we must say that every
of these seven Angels must be the whole company of all the seven Churches,
which were a foul nonsense. But you must understand that though every Epistle
be written to all the Churches, yet not eodem modo. As for example; the Epistle
to Ephesus was written primario, proprie and formaliter to the Church of
Ephesus, but to the other Churches only, reflexive and per modum exempli. And
therefore we return your nonsense upon your self. For we do not confound the
Angels and the Churches (we know there is a distinction between the Stars
and the Candlestickes) but we affirm that the Epistles are written to the
Churches as well as to the Angels, and to all the Angels as well as to any one.

Thirdly, Page 109.
you say we might have saved the labor both of Ausbertus and the rest of our
Authors, and our own. But surely unless you meant to yield the cause, you
would never say so. For we proved out of Ausbertus, that according to his
judgment, by Angel is meant the whole Church. And out of Perkins, Brightman,
Fulke, Fox, Austin, Gregory, Primasius, Hamo, Beda, Richard, Thomas, etc. That
the word Angel is to be taken not individually, but collectively. And further
we showed that in these seven Epistles where one person is singled out and
spoken unto in particular, either by way of praise or dispraise; that such
places are not to be understood of one individual person, but of the whole
company of the Ministers in all things equal with that our Angel: which are
proved by such reasons, which because you knew not how to answer, you say we
might have saved our labor; and in that indeed we should have saved your
credit, but have done the cause much prejudice.

Lastly, you say satis Magisterialiter (for you prove it not) That there are
such particularities both of commendations and exceptions in the body of the
several Epistles as cannot but have relation to those several overseers to
whom they were indorsed, as you have elsewhere specified. But whom you are, and
where this is specified you refuse to tell us. Page 110.
Only you put us to answer: Had all the Presbyters of Ephesus lost their first
love? Had each of them tried the false Apostles? Had all those of Sardis a name
to live and were dead? Were all the Laodicean Ministers of one temper? You say,
no doubt it was otherwise. But this is (...). We say, No doubt that not only
the Presbyters of Ephesus, Sardis, Laodicea, but that the whole Church had lost
their first love, and were become lukewarm, and had a name to live and were
dead, (we say all that is genera singulorum, not singula generum) and this we
prove. Because the punishment threatened by Christ is threatened not only
against that one Angel, but against all the Church, Revel. 2. 5. I will remove
thy Candlestick. Revel. 2. 16. 24. Now we have no warrant in the word of God
to think that God would remove his Gospel from a Church, because one Angel
in that Church has lost his first love, when all the other, and the whole
Church also are ^ervent and zealous in their love to Christ. Or that God would
spue out a whole Church out of his mouth, for the lukewarmenesse of one man,
when the Church it self and all the other Ministers are zealous. This is the
reason that makes us believe that though one Angel be sometimes spoken unto in
particular, yet it must necessarily be understood in a collective sense, not in
an individual sense, which we hinted in our answer. But the Remonstrant comes
with his Index expurgatorius, and answers us only with a Deleatur. And thus
he serves us also in the following reasons, why Christ did not write To the
Angels in the plural number; but To the Angel in the singular. And this he
does throughout the whole book, passing by unanswered those things which are
most material. Vas vitreum lambens, pultem non attingens.

As for that tedious discourse that follows in four leaves (about our
overliberall concession, that, suppose the word Angel be meant Individually,
yet it made nothing for the upholding of a Dioce san Bishop with sole power of
ordination, and jurisdiction, as a distinct order superior to Presbyters) we
will be very brief in our answer to it, to prevent surfeit, and because it is
more then we need have yielded, and also because so little is said of it to the
purpose by this Remonstrant. And here let the Reader observe: 1. That of the
four Authors cited in the upholding of the individual Angel, Doctor Fulke is
falsely alleged, and the other three, Master Beza, Doctor Raynolds and Pareus,
though they interpret the word Angel (...), for one singular person, yet we
are sure none of them held Episcopacy by divine right. For D. Raynolds his
letters to S. Francis Knowles now in print will witness: and for Beza and
Pareus, it is well known that they were Presbyterians. We expected many of the
ancient Fathers to make good this interpretation; but we see he is beholding to
those for it who are none of the lest enemies to the Hierarchall preeminency,
and therefore we may be the more secure that no great prejudice can come to our
cause by this interpretation, if taken in the sense of these Authors.

2. That the great question is: what makes this interpretation for a Diocesan
Bishop, with sole power of ordination and jurisdiction, as a distinct order
above Presbyters? But the Remonstrant cunningly conceales half the question,
and answers, much every way. And why so? Because if there were many Angels in
each Church, and yet but one singled out and called The Angel of that Church,
Page 111.
it must needs follow that there was a superiority, and inequality. But what is
this to the question in hand? The thing to be proved is, not only that this
Angel had a superiority, but a superiority of jurisdiction over his fellow
Angels; but of this altum silentium. Doctor Reynolds will tell you that this
was only a superiority of order; and that all jurisdiction was exercised in
common. Beza will tell you, that this Angel was only (...), and that he was
Angelus Praeses, not Angelus Princeps. And that he was Praeses mutabilis, and
ambulatorius, just as a Moderator in an assembly, or as the Speaker in the
House of Commons, which is only during the Parliament. Both which
interpretations may well stand with the superiority and inequality you speak
of.

Our first argument to prove that though the word Angel be taken individually,
that yet nothing will hence follow to uphold a Diocesan Bishop with sole power
of jurisdiction as a distinct order Superior to Presbyters was, because it was
never yet, nor never will be proved that these Angels were Diocesan Bishops;
considering that parishes were not so numerous as to be divided into Diocesses
in Saint John's days. And the seven Stars are said to be fixed in their seven
Candlestickes, not one Star over diverse Candlesticks. And Tindall together with
the old translation calls them seven congregations. And because we read that at
Ephesus, that was one of those Candlestickes, there was but one flock, for the
answer of all which we expected a learned discourse to prove that the seven
Churches were Diocesan, and so consequently the Angels Diocesan Angels. But the
Remonstrant baulkes his work as too great for his shoulders, and instead of
solid Divinity turns critic, and plays upon words and syllables Domitian
like, catching at flies, when he should have been busied about greater matters.

First, he tells, us, That if Parishes were not united into Diocesses (or were
not so many as to be divided into Diocesses which we think all one
notwithstanding your parenthesis) in Saint John's days, Page 111, 112.
and therefore no Diocesan Bishop; by the same reason we may as well argue,
that there were no parochial Bishops neither, since that then no parishes were
as yet distinguished. Which we grant to be very true. But if there were no
Parochial Bishops in the Apostles days, much less Diocesan. The Apostolical
Bishops were Bishops of one Church, and not of one parish (as we mean by
parish) till many years after. But not to quarrel at the word parish, or
diocese; let but the Remonstrant show us that these Angels were Bishops over
diverse settled Churches, or diverse fixed congregations, and nobis erit alter
Apollo. For our parts we are sure that at first the number of believers, even
in the greatest Cities, were so few, as that they might well meet (...) in one
and the same place; and these were called the Church of the City, and therefore
to ordain Elders (...), and (...), are all one in Scripture. And it cannot be
demonstratively proved that they became so numerous in the Apostles days in
any great City, so as that they could not meet in one and the same place. But
yet we confess that it is very probable that it was so in Jerusalem, if you
compare Acts 2. 41. 4. 4. 5. 14. And whether it was so also in these several
Asian Churches we know not; but however, this is agreed upon on all parts. That
believers in great Cities were not divided into set and fixed congregations or
parishes till long after the Apostles days. And that therefore if when they
multiplied, they had diverse meeting places, that yet notwithstanding these
meeting places were frequented promiscuously, and indistinctly, and were taught
and governed by all the Presbyters promiscuously and in common, and were all
called but one Church, as is evident in Jerusalem, Act. 8. 1. Act. 15. 6. 22.
16. 4. 21. 18.

So also in these seven Churches, where the believers of every City are called
but one Church, and were governed in common by diverse Angels, or Presbyters; as
we see plainly proved in the Church of Ephesus, Acts 20. 28. Hen^e it
follows that there were no sole-ruling Bishops, nor one Bishop over diverse
Churches, or set Congregations in Saint John's days.

Secondly, according to his wonted language, Page 112.
he tells us of making Bulls and Solecismes, because we say that the seven
Stars are said to be fixed in their seven Candlestickes, whereas these
Stars are said to be in the right hand of Christ, as if these two were (...).
Know sir, That in regard of their protection they are said to be in Christ's
right hand, but in regard of their ^unction and Office they may be truly said
to be fixed in their seven Candlestickes. But instead of picking quarrels at
words, you should have done well (if you could) to prove that these
Candlestickes were diocesan Churches. We say each Star had its Candlestick,
not one Star over diverse. And we think that this Candlestick was but one
particular Church, or one set Congregation (though happily when they
multiplied, they might meet indistinctly in diverse, under diverse Angels
equally governing*) For this we alleged Obiter Tindals translating the seven
Churches seven Congregations. All you answer is, Page 113
only to show that in other places of the Scripture by Congregation in Tindals
sense cannot be meant a parishionall meeting. But what if it be not so in other
places, how do you make it appear that it is not so in this place? We are
sure it is so taken in twenty other places of Tindals translation, and may very
properly be taken here also. We allege also, that in Ephesus which was one of
these Candlestickes, there was but one flock. You demand whether this flock
were National, Page 114.
Provincial, or Diocesan? And why do you not demand whether it were not
Oecumenicall also? that so the Pope may in time come to challenge his flock
universal. But you are sure, you say, that this flock was not a parochial
flock, because it cannot be proved, that all the Elders to whom Paul spoke,
were only belonging to Ephesus. But can this Remonstant prove that there were
more Elders or Bishops then those of Ephesus? This is to answer Socratically,
and in answering not to answer. Howsoever it is not so much material. You your
self confess that the Elders or Bishops of Ephesus had but one flock. And if
diverse Bishops were over one flock in the Apostles days, where is your
individual Bishops over diverse flocks in the Apostles days?

Our second argument is also drawn from the Church of Ephesus, which was one
of the seven Candlestickes, in which we are sure in Saint Paul's days there
were many Angels, and those called Bishops, Acts 20. 28. And to one of those in
all likelihood was the Epistle to Ephesus directed, if the direction be meant
individually. But yet we read not a word of any superiority, or
superintendency of one Bishop over another. To them the Church in general is
committed, without any respect to Timothy who stood at his elbow. But to all
this ne (...) quideu^, only he tells us it is answered in answering the first.
But how true this is, let any Reader judge. Page 114.
At the end of this reason, we produce Epiphanlus affirming that in ancient
time it was peculiar to Alexandria, that it had but one Bishop, whereas other
Cities had two. Here our Remonstrant takes a great deal of pains not to
confute us, but to confute Epiphanius. All that we will reply is this; to
desire the Reader to consider that this Epiphanius was the first that (out of
his own private opinion) accused Aerius of madness, and (as this Author
says) of heresy, for denying the superiority of Bishops over Presbyters. And
if this Remonstrant think it no disparagement to himself to be a confuter of
Epiphanius, why should we be cried down so heavily for not agreeing with
Epiphanius in his judgment concerning Aerius?

The third argument the Remonstrant cuts off in the midst. For whereas we say,
that there is nothing said in the seven Epistles that implies any superiority,
or majority of rule, or power that those Angels had over the other Angels that
were joined with them in their Churches: the answerer makes it run thus, Page
116.
That there is nothing said in the seven Epistles that implies a superiority;
which indeed is to spoil the argument. For we grant there is something said
to imply a superiority of the Ministers over the people, but the question is of
a superiority of power of one Angel over the other Angels which were joined
with him in his Church. But this he conceales, because he knew it was
unanswerable. Only he tells us; First, that the Epistles are superscribed to
the Angel, not Angels. This is crambe millies cocta. But what is this to a
majority of rule or power? Secondly, he tells us it will appear from the matter
of the several Epistles. For he asks; Page 117.
Why should an ordinary Presbyter be taxed for that which he has no power to
redress? That the Angel of Pergamus should be blamed for having those which
hold the doctrine of Balaam, or the Nicola^tans, when he had no power to
proceed against them. Or the Angel of the Church of Thyatira for suffering the
woman Iezebel (if it must be so read) to teach and seduce when he had no power
of public censure to restrain her? This discourse is very loose and wild, Vt
nihil pejus dicamus. Does not the Remonstrant plead here for sole power of
jurisdiction (which he does so much disclaim in other places of his book)
when he would have the singular Angel of Pergamus and Thyatira, to have power
to proceed against offenders, either he does this or nothing. For our parts we
answer without lisping; That it was in the power not of one Angel, but of all
the Angels of Pergamus and Thyatira, to proceed against those that held the
doctrine of Balaam and the Nicolaitans. To restrain that woman Iezebel, or the
Bishop of Thyatira his wife (if it must needs be so read) we do not think
that one ordinary Presbyter (as you call him) was to exercise censures alone,
nor one extraordinary Bishop neither. We find the contrary Matthew. 8. 1 Corinthians.
5. And therefore we refer it to the Minister or Ministers of each
Congregation with the advice, and consent of the Presbyters adjoining which we
are sure, is more consonant to the word then to leave it to the Hierarchicall
Bishop, and his Chancellor, Commissary, or Official.

In the next paragraph, we challenge you to show us what kind of superiority
this Angel had, if he had any at all? We require you to prove that he had any
more then a superiority in parts and abilities, or of order. Where is it said
that the Angel was a superior degree or order of Ministry above Presbyters?
Or that he had solepower of ordination and jurisdiction? But you fly from
those questions as far as from a Snake that would sting you, and disdaining
all that we say (which is your accustomed way of answering) you tell us that
you are able to show who were the parties to whom some of these Epistles Page
117.
were directed, and to evince the high degree of their superiority. Parturiunt
montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Alas sir, you tell us but what we told you
before, and what others have ingeminated (...). You say, Page 118.
That Ignatius and Tertullian tell us that Onesimus was now the Angel or
Bishop of Ephesus, and Polycarpus of Smyrna. But mark what we answer.

First, we doubt of the truth of the story. For others tell us that Timothy was
Bishop (as they call him of Ephesus when Christ wrote this Epistle: and this
opinion Ribera, Lyra, and Pererius follow. Others leave it in medio, and say it
is uncertain. But suppose the story were true, we answer

Secondly, it does not follow because Onesimus was Bishop of Ephesus in Saint
John's days, that therefore he was the only party to whom Christ wrote his
Epistle. For Saint Paul tells us that there were many Bishops at Ephesus besides
Onesimus, and he may very well write to him, and to all the rest as well as
him. That Christ wrote not only to Polycarpus (if he were Angel of Smyrna)
but to all the other Angels that were at Smyrna, appears by what we said
before out of Revelation 2. 10.

Thirdly, you know sir, that by your own confession Bishops and Presbyters had
all one name in the Apostles days, and long after, even in Irenaeus his time.
And therefore what though Polycarpus be called the Bishop of Smyrna; and
Onesimus Bishop of Ephesus: still the question remains, whether they were
Bishops phrasi Apostolica? (that is Presbyters) or phrasi Pontificia? Whether
Bishops Antonomastice and (...) so called, or whether Bishops in a general
sense, as all Presbyters are called Bishops. And suppose they were Bishops
properly so called (which we believe not) yet still it lies upon you to prove
that these were Hierarchicall Bishops. That they had such power as our Bishops
assume to themselves. That they were a distinct order superior to Presbyters.
And that they had sole power of ordination and jurisdiction. We are confident
that you are so far from being able to prove that they had a sole power, as
that you cannot prove they had any superiority of power over their fellow
Angels. For ought of any thing said by you in this large discourse, This
individual Angel may be nothing else then a Moderator of a company of
Presbyters, having only a superiority of order, and this also mutable and
changeable, according as Paraeus and Beza hold, whom you follow in this
interpretation.

In the shutting up of this discourse concerning the Angels, the Remonstrant as
if he were very angry, spits out nothing but scorn and contempt against his
adversaries. We bring one example and two testimonies to prove that the Angels
of the seven Churches were not superior one to another, and he cries out as one
much displeased, Away then with these your unproving illustrations and
unregardable testimonies which you as destitute Page 118.
of all antiquity shut up the Scene withal. But though you fling them away in
your anger and fury, yet we trust the ingenious Reader will gather them up, and
consider also that this Remonstrant (that like another Champion against Doctor
Whitaker bragges that all the Fathers, and all the Councels are of his side and
yet he) brings neither Fathers nor Councels for to prove that these Angels are
to be understood vidually: and so we take our leave of this discourse.

In the next place we come to the two postscripts (which indeed were
post-scripta after the book was made, and inserted to avoid an hiatus) which
all the defenders of Hierarchy cite for the averring of Episcopacy by divine
right. To this you reply:

First, That you are no ways engaged to defend these postscripts: It is true,
not as you are a Remonstrant, but as you are juratus in verba Magistri, sworn
to maintain any thing that may uphold Hierarchicall Episcopacy.

Secondly, you confess ingeniously they are not canonical; yet you say they
are of great antiquity; but you durst not set down how ancient. For we have
good reason and authority to think that they are not ancienter then Theodoret
who lived 435. years after Christ. We brought many arguments to prove not
only the Apocryphalnes, but the falsenesse of these subscriptions. To all
which you subscribe by your silence. Only you would feign (if you could)
justify that clause in the subscription to Titus written from Nicopolis; and
the rather because you find it so in that famous ancient Manuscript of Tecla
sent by the late Patriarch of Constantinople. Page 121.
It seems then you have seen that Manuscript. And if so, why do you not
deal faithfully with your Reader, and discover what you find in it; for we
are credibly informed in that copy there is no mention of Titus his being
Bishop of Creet, or of Timothy his being Bishop of Ephesus. But this is your
constant course, to conceal whatsoever makes against you, and to magnify
whatsoever has but a shadow of appearance for you, that all men may perceive
you seek victory rather then truth.

But before we leave the Postscripts we will answer to your two questions.
First, Page 119.
you would feign see any pretense of so much age against the matter of these
subscriptions, the averred Episcopacy of Timothy and Titus. For reply, we
refer you to what is said before at large in answer to this demand. Only we
will put you in mind of a speech of Bishop Barlows: We are not unwilling to be
judged by antiquity, so it be such an antiquity to which Ignatius appeals.
(...). Nothing more acceptable to us then Histories, if such as are written by
him who styles himself, The ancient of days. And for the Fathers, none more
welcome to us then him whom Justin Martyr calls Pater Patriae, and that is Saint
Paul. Now Saint Paul, when he wrote his first Epistle to Timothy, and purposely
undertook in his third Chapter to set out the Office of a Bishop, mentions
nothing in that Office which is not competent to a Presbyter; and therefore
omits the Office of a Presbyter, including it in the Office of a Bishop; which
he would never have done, if he had at the same time made Timothy an
Hierarchicall Bishop, with a power to do that formally which was unlawful for
a Presbyter to do. And besides we have proved that this Epistle was written
before Paul's first being at Rome, and so before the time that you say Paul made
him Bishop. As for his Epistle to Titus, he directly confounds the Offices of
Presbyters and Bishops, and makes them one and the same, Chapter 1. Verses 5,
6, 7. Which he certainly would not have done if he had made them at that time
distinct Orders with distinct Offices. The ancient Fathers indeed some of them
call Timothy and Titus Bishops in an improper sense, because they staid longer
in Ephesus and Creet then Evangelists ordinarily did. And did preach, and
ordain, and do those things which Bishops in their time used to do, which
notwithstanding they did not formally do as Bishops, but virtually and
eminently as Officers of an higher degree. Hence Salmeron himself says in his
first disputation upon Timothy, Videtur ergo quod fuerit plusquam Episcopus,
eti^^si ad tempus in ea civitate ut pastor praedicaverit, and sacros ordines
promoverit. Vnde quidam vocant eum Episcopum. Ambrose says one while he was a
Deacon, another while a Prethyter. Others a Primate, and others a Bishop. Lyra
proves him to have been an Archbishop, and Titus a Priest. Beda calls him
an Apostle. Aquinas thinks that Titus was Bishop of Dalmatia, because when
Paul, wrote his second Epistle to Timothy he was at Dalmatia, 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Thus you see the Fathers agree not amongst themselves, and therefore help you
little in this point.

Your second question is: Page 122.
Whether ever we have been urged to subscribe to any other cerem^nies then
have been established by the Laws of this Realm and Church? And why these
Ceremonies are the Bishops more then Ours? We answer: First, That to our
knowledge some have been urged to subscribe to other ceremonies then have
been established by the Laws of this Realm, and Church, and to promise
obedience editis and ^dendis. Secondly, that this very urging of us to
subscribe to the ceremonies established, is more then the Laws require; For
the Laws require to subscription only to the thirty nine Articles. Thirdly,
We cannot but justly dislike your distinction of, The Laws of this Realm and
Church. For we know no Laws of the Church obligatory, but such as are
established by the Laws of the Realm, as both Houses of Parliament have
lately determined. And whereas you ask, Why these Ceremonies are the Bishops,
more then ours? We answer: First, because it is ordinarily said, No Ceremony,
no Bishop, But it was never said, No Ceremony, no Presbyter. Secondly, because
in the Convocation (which you here term the Church) the Bishops, or rather the
Archbishop swayes all. And there are five or six which are there, Ex m^ero
Officio, and for the most part are the Bishops creatures, and hang their
suffrages upon his lips: and but two Clerks for the Presbyters, which also
for the most part are forced upon them by the Bishop, and his Officers.
Thirdly, because they are ours, if ours as a burden. But theirs, as their
crown, and glory, for which they fight as for a second Purgatory, to uphold
their Courts and Kitchins.

In the next place we propounded an objection framed by Bishop Andrews and
diverse others from the inequality in the Ministry appointed by Christ
himself, between the twelve Apostles and the seventy Disciples. To which we
answered: First, that it cannot be proved that the Apostles had any superiority
over the seventy, either of ordination, or jurisdiction. S^condly, suppose it
could; yet, That superiority and inferiority between Officers of different
kinds, will not prove that there should be a superiority and inferiority
between Officers of the same kind. To which you reply; first, That the
Apostles ordained the Deacons, Page 123.
that Paul laid hands on Timothy. But this is no solution of the objection,
unless you can prove the Deacons and Timothy to have been amongst the number
of the seventy Disciples, or Paul to have been one of the twelve Apostles.
Secondly, you answer, That Bishops and Presbyters differ toto genere, Page 124.
and are Offieers of different kind, as much as the Apostles and the seventy
Disciples. Which is an assertion not only contrary to the Fathers (who
accounted the Bishop to be but Primus Presbyter; and as Hierome says, Aquin.
Aureol. Capreol. etc.
Vnum ex se electum celsiori gradu collocatum.) But also more unsound then most
of the Papists who freely acknowledge that Presbyteratus is the highest order
in the ministry, and that Episcopacy is but a different degree of the same
order, and not a superior order from Presbyters. An order may be reputed
higher, either because it has intrinsecally an higher virtue, or because it
has an higher degree of honor and dignity. Now we deny not but the latter
antiquity did by their Canons make Episcopacy an higher Order in regard of
dignity and honor, (...) or (...) (as a Council speaks) but did never
account it an higher power by divine right. This last branch the Remonstrant
would feign prove (if he could) by an argument drawn from succession; because
(says he) the Bishops succeed the Apostles, and the Presbyters the seventy
Disciples. And we are challenged, page 158. to show whether ever any Father or
Doctor of the Church till this present age held that Presbyters were the
successors to the Apostles, and not to the seventy Disciples rather. But here
is nothing in which the Remonstrant shows more wilful ignorance then in this.
For the ancient Fathers do make the Presbyters successors of the Apostles as
well as Bishops. Thus Irenaeus liber 4. cap. 43, 44. Quapropter and eis, qui in
Ecclesia sunt Presbyteris obedire oportet, his qui successionem habent ab
Apostolis, sicut ostendimus qui eum Episcopatus successione charisma veritatis
certum secundum placitum patris acceperunt. So also cap 44. and lib. 3. cap. 2.
Thus also our Jerome (as you call him) in his Epistle ad Heliodorum, Clerici
dicuntur Apostolico grad^i successisse. So Origin in Matthew. 16. says, all
Presbyters succeeded the Apostles in the power of the keys. And Ignatius ad
Smy^nonses says the same. Yet still like (as you say you have heard) page
125.) some beaten cock, you dare erow, and tell your Reader, that all
antiquity has acknowledged (...) three several ranks in the Church
Hierarchy. Page 124.
But where will you begin your antiquity? We say with the Father, i^ verum quod
antiquissimum. Show us your three degrees in Scripture. You confess page 47.
that these three orders are not there to be found. We read in Scripture, the
Deacon to be a step to a Presbyter, but not a Presbyter to a Bishop. And we
deny that ever it was accounted in antiquity, that a Bishop did ever differ
from a Presbyter, as a Presbyter from a Deacon. For these differ Genere proximo
(No ^erint Diaconi se ad ministerium, non ad sacerdotium vocari.) But a Bishop
differs from a Presbyter as from one who has that power of Priesthood no less
than himself; and therefore the difference between these Priests be
circumstantiall, and not so essential as betwixt the other. Thus Bishops and
Archbishops are diverse orders of Bishops according to some Canons of the
Church: not that one excelled the other, as a power of higher virtue, but of
higher dignity then the other. Indeed of late years Episcopacy has been a
(...) to preferment, and a ladder for all pious and conscientious men to be
suspended upon, as Mordecai upon Hamans gallows; but now is in danger to
become (like Hamans ladder) their own ruin and downe-fall. Page 125.
Iam sumus ergo pares.

In your transition to your next Paragraph, that you might disparage the
opposets of the Hierarchicall Episcopacy by divine right, you endeavor to make
them the Disciples of none but Jerome. But here in you cannot but know how
injuriously you deal with them, considering the numberless number of Authors,
both ancient and modern, that assert that, which you would fasten upon him
alone. In the Paragraph it self, you confess what we undertook to prove;
That the ancient Bishops and others differ in regard of their Accessories,
dignities, titles, and maintenance. But only whereas among other instances we
told you of golden Chalices and wooden Priests; You tell us, That if in time we
should see wooden Chalicer, Page 127.
and wooden Priests, we may thank our selves; Truly sir, we may thank you,
and not our selves; for the Lordlinesse and in solent carriages of some Bishops
under the great revenues and the multitude of wooden Priests which they have
made, who have been intoxicated with the Golden Chalice of the whore of
Babylons abominations, has so alienated the affections of people from them; as
that what doom so ever they are sentenced unto, it is no other then what they
have brought upon themselves. As for our part, we are still of the same mind,
that honorable maintenance ought to be given to the Ministers of the Gospel,
not only to live, but to be hospitable. Indeed we instanced in many that did
abuse their large revenues. But you are pleased to say, That in this Ablative
age the fault is rare and hardly instanceable. We think the contrary is more
hardly instanceable. And as for your Ablative age, if you mean it of poor
Presbyters, who have been deprived of all their subsistence by the
unmercifulness of Bishops, whom they with tears have besought to pity their
wives and children, we yield it to be too true. Or if you mean, in regard of
the purity of the ordinances, the frequency of preaching, the freedom of
conceived prayer; We deny not but in this sense also it may be called the
Ablative age. But if you relate it to Episcopacy and their Cathedrals (with
whom it is now the Accusative age) We hope that the year of recompense is
come, and that in due time for all their Ablations they may be made a grateful
ablation. We have done with this section, and fear not to appeal to the same
judicious eyes the Remonstrant does, to judge to whose part that Vale of absurd
inconsequences and bold ignorance which he brands us withal does most
properly appertain. Page 128.


SECT. XIV.
IN this Section he comes to make good his an^wers formerly given to some
objections by him propounded, Remonst. p. 26.
and by us further urged: The first objection was from that prejudice which
Episcopacy challenging a divine original does to Sovereignty, which was wont
to be acknowledged, not only as the conserving but as the creating cause of it
in former times. The Remonstrant thinks this objection is sufficiently removed,
by telling us, there is a compatiblenesse in this case of Gods act and the
Kings. Page 129.
And what can we say to this? Sir, you know what we have said already, and not
only said but proved it, and yet will confidently tell us you have made good
by undeniable proofs, that (besides the ground which our Savior laid of this
imparity) the blessed Apostles by inspiration from God made this difference,
etc. Made good? when? where? by what proofs? Something you have told us about
the Apostles, but not a word in all the defense of any ground laid by our
Savior of this imparitie; yet the man dreams of undeniable proofs of that
whereof he never spoke word.

We must therefore tell you again, take it as you please, that if the Bishops
disclaim the influence of Sovereignty into their creation, and say that the
King does not make them Bishops; they must have no being at all. Nor can your
questions stop our mouths: Where or when did the King ever create a Bishop?
Page 130.
Name the man and take the cause. We grant you Sir, that so much as there is
of a Presbyter in a Bishop, so much is Divine: But that imparity and
jurisdiction exercised out of his own demandated authority, which are the very
formalities of Episcopacie, these had their first derivation from the Consent,
Customs, Council, Constitution of the Church, which did first demandate this
Episcopal authority to one particular person; afterward the Pope having
obtained a Monarchy over the Church, did from himself demandate that authority
that formerly the Church did, and since the happy ejection of the Popes
tyrannical usurpations out of these Dominions, our Princes being invested with
all that Ecclesiastical power which that Tyrant had usurped, that same
imparity and authority, which was originally demandated from the Church,
successively from the Pope, is now from the King. Look what influence the
Church ever had into the creation of Bishops, the same the Pope had after; and
look what influence the Pope had heretofore, the same our Laws have placed in
the King which is so clear that the Remonstrant dares not touch, or answer.

There was a Statute made the first of Edward the sixth, inabling the King to
make Bishops by his Letters patents Only: Hence all the Bishops in King
Edwards the sixth time were created Bishops by the Kings Letters patents ONLY;
in which all parts of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction are granted them in precise
words, praeter and ultra jus divinum, Besides and beyond divine right, to be
executed only, nomine, vice, and Authoritate nostri Regis, in the Kings royal
stead, name, and Authority, as the patents of several Bishops in the Rolls
declare.

But besides the Kings Letters, the Bishop is solemnly ordained by the
imposition of the hands of the Metropolitan, Page 130.
and other of his brethren, and these as from God invest him in his holy
calling. As from God? Good sir prove that; prove that the Metropolitan and
Bishops in such imposition of hands are the instruments of God, and not the
instruments of the King: prove they do it by Commission received from God, and
not by command of the King only. Produce one warrant from Scripture, one
president of a Bishop so ordained by a Metropolitan and fellow Bishops, and
without more dispute take all. Shortly, resolve us but this one thing; what is
it that takes a man out of the ordinary rank of Presbyters, and advances him
to an imparity and power of jurisdiction? is it humane authority testified in
the Letters of the King, or is it divine authority testified by the
significative action of imposition of hands by the Metropolitan and fellow
Bishops? if the former, you grant the cause, if the latter, consider with what
good warrant you can make a form of Ordination (by the hands of a Metropolitan
and fellow Bishops) which is a mere humane invention, to be not only a sign,
but a mean of conveying a peculiar and superior power from Divine Authority,
and of making a Presbyter a Bishop Iuredivino.

Finally, Sir, make as much as you can of your Ordination by a Metropolitan,
slight as much as you please your unworthy comparison between the King and our
Patrons, yet did the Kings Conge d'eslire give you no more humane right to
Episcopacie, then the hands of the Metropolitan and fellow Bishops give you of
right Divine, you would be Bishops by neither. It is not your confident
re-inforcing of your comparison that shall call carry it, till you have first
proved it from Scripture, that God never instituted an order of Presbyters or
Ministers in his Church, as we have proved, God never instituted an order of
Bishops. Secondly, that by the Laws of the land as much of the Ministerial
power over a particular Congregation is in the patron, as there is of
Episcopal power in the King. Till then (we beseech you) let it rest
undetermined whether your self, or we may best be sent to Simons Cell. We say
no more, lest you should think we flout your modesty with an unbeseeming
frumpe, which whither our answer be guilty of, as you here charge us, let the
Reader compare the 28 and 29 pages of your Remonstrance, and our Answer to
those pages, and determine.

The second objection was from that imputation which this truth casts upon all
Reformed Churches which want this government; this the Remonstrant must needs
endeavor to satisfy, that he may decline the envy that attends this opinion.
But what needs the Remonstrant fear this envy? Alas, the Reformed Churches
are but a poor handful! Rumpantur ilia, need the Remonstrant care? Yet is it
neither his large protestation of his honorable esteem of those Sister
Churches, nor his solicitous clearing himself from the scandalous censures and
disgraceful terms cast upon them by others (under whose colors he now
militares) that will divert this envy, unless he either desert his opinion,
or make a more just defense then he has yet done. Page 132.
The Defense is, That from the opinion of the Di. right of Episc. no such
consequence can be drawn, as that those Churches that want Bishops are no
Churches. Episcopacy though reckoned among matters essential to the Church, yet
is not of the essence of a Church, and this is no contradiction neither. If you
would have avoided the contradiction, you should have expressed your self more
distinctly; knowing that things essential are of two sorts; either such as are
essential constitutive;, or such as are essential consecutive, You had done
well here, had you declared whether you count Episcopacie essential to a
Church constitutive, or consecutive; if constitutive, then it is necessary to
the being of a Church, and it must follow, where there is no Bishop, there can
be no Church: If essential only consecutive, we would be glad to learn how
those officers which by Divine institution have demandated to them peculiarly a
power of ordaining all other officers in the Church (without which the Church
it self cannot be constituted) and such a power as that those officers cannot
be ordained without their hands, should not be essential to the Constitution
of a Church, or tend only to the well being, not to the being of it? Either
you must disclaim your own propositions, or own this inference, and not think
to put it off with telling your Reader. It is enough for our friends to hold
discipline of the being of a Church, Page 133.
you dare not be so zealous. If heat in an Episcopal cause may be called
zeal, you dare be as zealous as any man we know. Your friends we are sure are
as zealous in the cause of their Episcopacie as any of ours have been in the
defense of discipline. Did ever any of our friends in their zeal rise higher
then to frame an oath, whereby to bind all men to maintain their discipline?
You know some of yours have done as much: but them we know you will leave to
their own defense, as you do your learned Bishop of Norwich, Page 134.
now he is dead. It is work enough for you to defend your self, and give
satisfaction to the questions propounded.

First, we demanded the reason why Popish Priests converted to our Religion are
admitted without new ordination, when some of our brethren flying in Queen
Mary's time, and having received Ordination in the Reformed Churches were urged
at their return to receive it again from our Bishops? This shameless and
partial practice of our Prelates he could not deny, but frames two such
answers of which the second confutes the first, and neither second nor first
justifies their practice. In the first he denies a capability of admittance by
our laws, and yet in his second, he confesses many to be admitted without any
legal exception, which how well they consist, let the Reader judge.

The second question was, whether that office which by divine Right has sole
power of Ordination, and ruling of all other officers in the Church, belong not
to the being, but only to the glory and perfection of a Church? The
Remonstrant is so angry at this question, that before he can find leisure to
answer it, he must needs give a little vent to his choler: Can we tell what
these men would have? (says he) have they a mind to go beyond us in asserting
that necessity and essential use of Episcopacie, which we dare not avow? What
is that which you dare not avow? is it that Episcopacy has sole power of
ordaining and ruling all other Officers in the Church? But this we are sure
you will avow, That imposition of hands in ordination and confirmation have
ever been held so intrinsecall to Episcopacie, that I would feign see where it
can be showed that ANY EXTREMITY OF NECESSITY was by the Catholic Church of
Christ ever yet acknowledged for a warrant sufficient to diffuse them into
other hands. Episc. div. Right part. 2. p. 91.
Is not this to say that the sole power of ordaining Officers is in the hands
of the Bishop? And dare not WE avow this now? Blessed be they that have taken
down your confidence. And where you are witty by the way, Page 135.
you tell us we still talk of sole Ordination and sole Jurisdiction, we may if
we please keep that pair of soles for our next shoes. Good Sir, we thank
you for your liberality, but we doubt you either part with them out of fear
you shall no longer keep them, or they will prove no longer worth the keeping.
But consider one thing, we beseech you, if you make this donation not only in
your own name, but in the name of the whole Episcopal order, you and they may
turn Fratres Mendicantes, and go bare foot, if you part with these pair of
soles, and what will become of your Quid facit Episcopus, quod non facit
Presbyter excepta ordinatione? You do not contend (say you) for such a height
of propriety, etc. that in what case soever of extremity and irresistible
necessity, this should be done only by Episcopal hands. You do not? It is
well you do not, but did you never mean to affirm it none of you? Consider
(we beseech) that forecited place Episcopacie Divine Right, part. 2. page 91.
weigh the words and then speak, and tell the Author your judgment.

Our third question was, There being in this man's thoughts the same jus divinum
for Bishops that there is for Pastors and Elders, whether if those reformed
Churches wanted Pastors and Elders too, they should want nothing of the essence
of a Church, but only of the glory and perfection of it? The answer (says he)
is ready, which is indeed no answer, it is in sum but this, that it would be
better with them if they had Bishops too. But how it would be if they wanted
Bishops and Pastors and Elders too, of that he says nothing.

The Remonstrant had presumed to know so much of the mind of the Reformed
Churches as to aver, that if they might have their option, they would gladly
embrace Episcopal government; Page 136.
a foul imputation says the Remonstrant: we say so too; a foul imputation to
charge the Reformed Churches of a secret inclination to Apostatize from their
own confessions, which do not only maintain a justifiablenesse of their
present government, but a necessity of it as the only government appointed by
GOD in his Church, as we showed in five Corollaries drawn out of those
confessions, which the Remonstrant slides over, wherein they do not only
defend the condition they are in, but tell us by consequence they would not
change it for any other form in the World: Because they tell us Theirs is the
form God has set down in his Word, the form Christ has appointed in his
Church, the form by which the Church ought to be governed. Can we think the
Churches that thus profess and believe, can ever look for a better form? Or
would accept another though propounded to them as better, when they profess
this is that form by which they ought to be governed?

The testimonies of particular Divines must not be put in the balance against
the confessions of whole Churches. God forbid, that all that has flowed from
the pens of Divines of great Learning and place in England should pass for the
Doctrine of the English Church abroad. We will believe you it is possible many
eminent Divines of the Churches abroad have wished themselves in your
condition, Page 137.
that is in Episcopal Government, not in our condition under Episcopal
Government. And as easily we believe, they have magnified our Church as the
most famous exemplary glorious Church in the whole Christian World. It better a
great deal becomes them then Laodicean like to say (as you say, page 26.)
their own is the most glorious and exemplary Church, the rest are but a poor
handful, and reason they should conform to it, not it to them. But whether it
be the beauty, perfection, and glory of Episcopal government, or the
powerful and lively preaching of the World, the powerful and lively practice
of piety, which through the special grace of God are found in this Church
(then which there has been nothing more hated or persecuted under Episco.
government) that has made them magnify the Church of England, there is the
question, which is not hard to determine.

To induce the Reader to believe the Reformed Churches would change theirs for
our government, the Remonstrant has told us that there is little difference
between their government and ours, save in perpetuity of moderatorship and
exclusion of Lay Elders. This says the Remonstrant, You say is a passage of
admirable absurdity. Sir, we said admirable; the absurdity is your own. To
mend it, you would persuade your self to fear, we know not what you speak
of: You speak not only of the next Churches of France and the Netherlands.
Sir, you spoke if we remember of the Neighbor Churches, and we conceive,
between our Neighbor Churches, and the next Churches of France and the
Netherlands, there is not much distance; sure any common understanding, by
Neighbor Churches, would a great deal sooner understand the next Churches of
France, and the Netherlands, then the Churches of Germany, Weteraw, Anhault,
etc. Especially considering your instance in those Churches, from whose
Moderators our Bishops differ only in perpetuity of Moderatorship: Which
perpetuity the Lutheran Superintendents have as well as our Bishops. And even
in these Churches of Germany, the Superintendents are nothing like our bishops.
They are of the same degree with other Ministers, they are only Presidents
while the Synod lasts; when it is dissolved, their prerogative cease: They
have no prerogative over their fellow Ministers, They are subject to their
Presbyteries. The Synod ended, they return to the care of their particular
Churches, Zepper. lib. 2. cap. 10.
This made us instance in the Geneva form, as knowing no Churches whose (...)
is not fixed, but such as follow their pattern, between which (...) and our
episcopacie we showed a sixfold difference: all which the Remonstrant wisely
passes; that he may not be forced to acknowledge the difference greater then
he pretended. Only tells us with what authority Master Calvin and the deputati
Synodi carried the affairs of the Church; which if the personal worth of the
one or the other did procure, what is that to carrying all the affairs of the
Church ex officio, by virtue of their own peculiarly demandated authority, as
our Bishops do, and challenge right to do?

You put us in mind, that you said the difference between them was little, and
we need not put you in mind of what our answer was, Manet alia mente repostum:
nor do we intend to change. You tell us our note is the note of Babylon, down
with it, down with it. Yet as long as neither we are Edomits, nor speak of
Sion, but of Sions enemies, the note is not Babylonish. As Babylon had her time
to cry against Sion, down with it, down with it even to the ground, so the
time is coming when Sion shall shout with as strong a cry against her enemies,
and the God of Heaven, whose promise is to arise for the sighing of the poor,
we doubt not will vindicate his Church from those proud adversaries that have
so long time tyrannized over her, and Judge between the Sheep and the Goats.
Ezekiel. 34. 16, 17, 18
Even he Judge, whether we that plead the truth against Bishops, or the
Bishops whose cause the Remonstrant ple^ds, have by violent and subtle
Machinations most disturbed Sions peace, and advanced Babylons power.

SECT. XV.
THe Remonstrant had said that Lay Presbytery never had footing in the
Christian Church until this age. Wherein, said we, he concludes so fully with
Doctor Hals irrefragrable propositions, as if he had conspired to swear to what
the Bishop had said. The Remonstrant, that it seems knows both better then we,
will phrase it thus; how like the man looks to Doctor Hall: And answers, Page
140.
As like him as we are like our selves, insolent and scornful. Truly Sir, we
could scarce conceive this likeness by the Remonstrance, and we can less
conceive it by this defense. For besides the flat contradictions which this
Defense gives to Episcopacie by Divine Right (for which we doubt the Doctor
will give the Remonstrant little thanks) the very language of the Defense
inclines to the contrary. For though we acknowledge the Defense, for the
substance of it wholly, and for the phrase of it in a great part, borrowed from
episcopacie by Divine Right, yet the extreme disdainfulnesse that breaths in
every page and line pleads with us, to think that it is not his, especially if
he have made that vow of leaving his insolent and scornful language, which an
ancient acquaintance of his has put the world in hope he would. Your Errata
bids us page 33. Read Invectives, truly we may read in every page Invectives:
and if to be scornful and insolent be to be unlike Doctor Hall, you have done
the Doctor exceeding wrong to say the Remonstrant looks like him.

But be the Remonstrant who he will, we hope he will not take it ill, if
coming into public nameless, he receive par pari, remembering especially the
saying of Hierom concerning Domitius a Senator to his scornful Consul, si non
vis me habere ut Senatorem, cur ego te habeam ut Consulem? Why should we use
him as a Father, that does not use us as Brethren? Make sport with our poor
wit, triumph over it. It is truth, not wit we contend for; yet Ridentem dicere
verum quis vetat.

You might have done as wisely to omit the flourish of your wit in scorn of
ours; Page 140.
as you say we did to omit those three known texts which we omitted, because
the question between us was not whether ruling Elders are an ordinance of God
and founded in the word or no, But whether ever they had existence in the
Christian Church before this present age. For the determining of this question,
(being de facto, not de ^ure) it is more proper to produce the practice of the
Churches then texts of Scripture; this does not please him. Alpatrons of
Layeldership before us would not, Page 141.
after the rakings of all the channells of time, have forborne the utmost
urging of those Testimonies, if they had not known them so far from being
convictive that they are unprooving. Is this the man whose chief plea for his
divine right is the monument of succeeding ages and Testimony of Antiquity, and
will he now vouchsafe the search after the footsteps of antiquity, Page 141.
no better name Then the raking of the Channel of time? had we spoken so much
in the vilification of Antiquity it would have been accounted hateful and
intolerable insolency in us.

But our evidences are not proving and convictive. Let us put them to the
trial. Our testimony from Origin cannot (you say) but shame us if yet we can
blush; belike you remember you have so often without just cause put us to the
blush, you begin to fear the color is spent; you charge us with willing
concealing the Chap. on purpose that we might not be discovered.

Were this a fault and worthy of blame, yet little reason has the Remonstrant
to quarrel with us, it is but this one place in which the Remonstrant charge
us, we are punctual in our other quotations. How-many quotations are there in
this defense in which the Remonstrance has not cited so much as the Book,
only thinks it enough to name the Author?

But here we are not so culpable as the Remonstrant makes us. The translation
of Origin which we followed did not distinguish the book into Chapters, No
more then the Original does, Nor other translations with which we have
consulted; Nor are we yet so happy as to meet with that edition where the
Chapters are distinguished: so here is no just cause of suspicion either of
fraud or fear.

For the text it self, whether your collection or ours be most according to
the sense of the Author, let the learned reader judge from the text it self,
which we here set down translated faithfully according to the Original.

Videamus an non Christiani magis and melius istis populum ad bonam frugem
excitent, nam Philosophi quidem, qui in publico disputant, discrimen auditorum
adhibent nullum, sed quisquis volet, adstet licet, atque audiat. Christiani
vero, quoad possunt, eorum, qui ipsos audire cupiunt, animos prius explorantes,
eosdemque privatimerudientes, cum videbuntur illi qui auditores sunt futuri,
priusquam in publicum processerint, usque eo profecisse satis, ut velint been
vivere, tum demum eos introducunt, sive admittunt, separatim quendem ordinem
constituentes eorum qui initiati recens, introductique sunt, signumque
expiationis nondum acceperunt: alter autem ordo est eorum qui pro virili
studium suum repraesentant, non aliud velle se, quam quae Christianis recta
videntur. Apud quos (vel supra quos) sunt quidam constituti, qui in vitam and
mores advenientium inquirant, ut qui flagitiosa perpetrant, illos a communi
eorum coetu prohibeant, qui vero istiusmodi non sunt, eos ex animo amplexantes,
indies reddant meliores. Cujusmodi quoque institutum habent in eos qui peccant,
maximeque si proterve se gerant, quos a suo coetu ejiciunt illi, qui Celso
judice, similes sunt iis qui inhonestissimas quasque res in foro ostentant. Et
Pythagoreorum quidem schola illa gravissima, illis qui ab ipsorum philosophia
desciverant sepulchra inania conficiebat, eosque perinde aestimans ac si
demortui plane essent. Hi autem quasi pereuntes and mortuos Deo, qui
petulantiae aut gravi cuipiam facinori obstringendos se tradiderunt, tanquam
mortuos lugent, and tanquam e mortuis excitatos, si non spernendam modo
oftenderint resispicentiam, longiori temporis spatio, quam qui primo introducti
sunt, tandem recipient, neque ad ullum gubernandi munus in Ecclesia Dei quae
dicitur, eligimus eum qui prius fuerit lapsus, postquam ad verbum accesserit,
etc.

The sense of this place, says the Remonstrant, is this, That those which were
newly admitted into the Church, Page 142. 143.
who by reason of their late acquaintance with such as were left behind them in
Pagan superstition, might be fit Monitors to know and notify the condition of
such Candidates as did offer to come into the Church, were designed to that
office of Monitorship.

Here we desired the Reader to consider: first that the scope of the place is
to vindicate the Christian assemblies from the imputations unjustly cast upon
them by Celsus, as if they were a confluence of base and worthless people. To
clear this, he divides all Christians into two Orders: the first were
Catechumeni, or beginners; and first he shows the care they took about them,
before they were baptized. The other order comprehends all such as were
baptized, whom he describes in these words. There is another order of such who
according to their ability express their endeavors to desire nothing but what
seems right to Christians, which two orders are in antiquity distinguished in
Catechumenos and Fideles. Austin. Sermon. 14 de verb. Apost.
Now that this same alter ordo might be kept to live acording to there
profession; (...), there were some designed or constituted, who should look to
the manners of all such as come to them; (that is to their meetings) that they
that lived wickedly might be banished their assemblies, and heartily embracing
such as lived well, they might make them better.

Those persons here spoken of, the Remonstrant grants to be lay persons (as we
term them) and does not so much as once go about to affirm them Presbyters.
Only the question is, who those so constituted were? He says Novices newly
added to the Church. Secondly of whom they had the inspection? he says only
of such as were coming out of paganism and offered themselves to be added to
their Assemblies. Thirdly, what their power was? he says, only to notify
the lives of such: to be as it were Monitores, and no more.

For the two first, we conceive it impossible for him to show in all antiquity
that ever the Church did appoint Novices over Novices to be overseers of their
manners, and much more impossible to collect it from this place, since Origin
speaks indefinitely of any of this order (to wit of Fideles) and punctually of
such who had attained such a measure of grace as they were able to express
endeavors to do that which is right, and were fit and able by their
acquaintance to better others, and therefore these could not be Novices. Page
142. 143.
For the second, to wit, over whom they had power? they were not only such as
were lately admitted: for Origin speaks generally of all wicked or scandalous
livers among them, who were to be inhibited their assemblies. For the third,
the power they had, (which says he was only to be Monitors) it appears from
the text, that they had power either to keep back from their assemblies, or to
receive into their assemblies, according as the lives of men were good or bad,
and were of that ability, as that they could better them daily with their good
counsel. And if any were froward or contumacious, what course was further to
be taken with them the following words declare; and although it is true, the
acts of casting such out of the Church is attributed primarily to the teachers;
yet who dare exclude those former (...) from all interest in this act? when
Origin himself says, (...), etc. the like custom they have about offenders,
and chiefly such as are incorrigible.

But this great Corrector of Translations cannot let us pass here without a
castigation, for translating (...) Praepositi sunt. Unfaithfully, deceitfully
says he. Sir it would have become you to spare your censure till you
considered better; if you had but looked in your Lexicon you might have found
that (...) signifies not only constituor, but praeficior, and between
Praefecti and praep^siti certainly there is no such great difference as might
deserve the censure of unfaithfulness for using the one instead of the other;
besides Turrianus translated it thus before us, who, we persuade our selves,
was as able to understand the language of Origin as our Critical Remonstran^,
if we may judge of him as he here discovers himself; would any man so
confidently charge unfaithfulness upon the translation of others, and himself
go and translate (...), Page 142.
They do privately examine such as are bewitched with Paganism? it is true
(...) signifies incant^ as well as frequenter admoneo, to inchaunt as well as
to instruct or admonish, but here it must of necessity be rendered in the latter
signification, because it is here the participle of the active voice, and the
case agrees not with (...), but with (...), Which is put in the beginning of that
clause: so again (...) he t^anslates, the rest that are like themselves they
may gladly Receive, whereas it should be thus, but receiving those that are not
such (that is) as those wicked persons last spoke of.

These are poor Grammarpec adillio's not worth the taking notice of, but that
our Remonstrant is so busy with his Ferula, that no sooner can he think we
trip, but he is presently upon us, Corrig^ Magn ficat.

The rest of our testimonies produced in this cause, he thus answers, First,
he could double our files, and produce many more. Page 143.
But secondly, in sadierms, we do nothing herein, Page 144.
but abuse our Reader: For all the places are nothing at all to the purpose in
hand. For the first, The numbers he could add to our forces, are no more then
our own, except one only place out of Gregory Turonen, is: all the rest were
urged by us, Even that which he says is more pregnant then any we have
brought. Did ever poor man make so great a brag of nothing? Truly, Sir, you
have much enriched us by paying us with our own colne. Only here we are
beholding to you for your testimony of the pregnancie of some of them, when as
you said before, All of them were nothing to the purpose in hand: it seems
your second thoughts correct your former. For his second answer, he tells us,
all these places are nothing to the purpose. And why? because those Seniors,
are Civil Magistrates, such as we call Aldermen, whose advice and assistance
was used in all great occasions of the Church. To prove this he brings the
African Canons, Can. 100. where (...) are mentioned, and expounds it by the 91
Canon of the African, which he calls a Commentary upon this point, Debere
unumquemque no strum in civitate sua co^venire Donatistarum Praepositos, aut
adjungere sibi vicinum collegam, Page 145
ut pariter eos in singulis qnibusque civitatibus per Magistratus vel Seniores
locorum conveniant.

To which we answer, That this his Commentary corrupts the text; For in this 91
Canon there is no mention of (...), The words are (...). By the Magistrate, or
those that are of chief authority in those places: these we grant were as it
were our Aldermen, men of civil power and authority, but they were not as
those Elders mentioned in the 100 Canon. And why should the Remonstrant choose
rather to follow Iustellus, in reading (...) Seniores locorum, then Balsamon,
and Zonaras, who read it, Quiprimas ferant, unless it were to deceive his
credulous Reader, and induce him to think there were no other Elders in the
Church, then such as were Civil Magistrates; whereas his own Iustellus in his
exposition of the 100 Canon says, Erant Seniores, Laici, extra Ecclesiam, de
quibus supra ad Can. 91. Erant and Seniores Ecclesiastici; There were
Lay Elders out of the Church, of whom we spoke, Can. 91, and there are
Ecclesiastic or Church-elders: To prove which he brings forth the very
testimonies which we produced from Baronius, and others. And certainly, he
that compares the two Canons quoted by the Remonstrant, will see how absurdly
the (...) in the one Canon are drawn to expound the (...) in the other. For the
former were the Magistrates, who having a coercive power, might compel the
Donatists to meet for conference and disputations, if they did refuse it: The
other were not Magistrates but Seniores, sent by the Church to accuse their
Bishop. Now how well is the one expounded by the other?

But if the Seniors were not Aldermen, yet they were (say you) but as our
Churchwardens and Vestry-men, only trusted with the Viensils, Page 146.
Stocks, and outward affairs of the Church; business of seats and rates, etc.
This the Remonstrant will, if you will believe him, evince out of our own
testimonies, and yet meddles not with that, which is the most pregnant
testimony to prove that the power of these elders did reach to things of a
higher nature then seats and rates, and that is the Letter of Pu^purius, which
gives to the Seniors a concurrent power with the Clergy, to enquire about the
dissentions which troubled the Church, that by their wisdom and care peace
might be settled in the same. These dissentions were not about seats or rates,
but a contention between Silvanus the Bishop, and Nundinarius the Deacon, in a
matter of a high nature, too high for our Church Wardens, Gest Purgationis
(...) and Faelicis.
or Vestrymen to meddle in; The Bishop being accused, that he was Traditor and
fur rerum pauperum. Did ever Churchwardens, or Vestry men among us, hear,
inquire, judge, compose such differences as these are? What should John a
Nokes, and John a Styles, To answer your margin in a margin: why may not
Presbyteri be as truly translated Elders as Seniors?
and Smug the Smith, meddle with a business of Bishops? says Episcopacie by
Divine Right, part. 3. page 32. But how does he prove they were but as our
Churchwardens, or Vestrymen? First, because Deacons are named before these
Seniors where ever they are mentioned. Secondly, because Optatus reckoning up
quatuor genera capitum, mentions not Elders. Page 147.


For the first, though the order of reckoning them be not so much to be
insisted upon, yet we can tell you (if here your confidence had not been
greater then your consideration) that you might have observed, that in some
places they are mentioned not only before Deacons, but the whole clergy; For
so Gregory's letter cited by us; Tabellarium cum consensu Seniorum, and Cleri
memineris ordinandum: Are not Seniors here mentioned before the clergy?

His second proof, that these Elders were no better then mere Churchmardens
and Vestry men was, because Optatus mentioning four sorts of men in the Church
mentions not these Elders. But is this the man that has with such height of
scorn vilified poor negative arguments, though drawn from sacred Scripture?
And will he now lay such weight upon a negative argument? Surely, if all the
truth and practice of the primitive times were bound up in one Optatus, (as all
Divine truth is lodged in the sacred Volume of the Scriptures) the Remonstrant
might have made much of his negative argument, yet he scorns to hear us
reasoning, that because we do not read that the holy Ghost did by the Apostles
appoint Bishops, in remedium Schismatis, therefore we cannot believe Bishops
are of Divine or Apostolical institution, but of humane. Away (says he) with
this poor negative argument. And because the Apostle, Ephesians the fourth,
reckoning the Officers whom Christ has given and gifted for the edification of
his Church, reckons up only Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and
Teachers, if we should conclude, Ergo, there were no Bishops, The Remonstrant
would cry out again, Away with these negative arguments, yet such an argument
from Scripture may be valid, though from no other authority. As for Optatus,
First, though in these places he mentions not Elders, yet that other place
which we brought out of the same Author does, which the learned Antiquary
Albaspinaeus (though a Papist) with us acknowledges.

Secondly, these places produced by the Remonstrant cross one another as much
as they cross us, for Ministri are left out in one as well as Seniores in
both. Thirdly, these Seniores are included in turba fidelium, as the Apostle,
Romans 10. 14. comprehends all the Church under these two, hearers and teachers,
and so again, Heb. 13. 24. Rulers and Saints.

Yet the Remonstrant is resolved to hold the conclusion. Elders in a rank
above Deacons in a settled power of government with the Pastors, Page 147.
shall be damned by him for a new and unjustifiable opinion. Yet this is the
man that would by no means be thought to condemn the Reformed Churches,
Though he fall as unhappily near the very words of their professed enemies, the
Netherland Remonstants, as ever we did the words of Aerius. Quod attinet Praxin
antiquitatis ex ^a videlicet id demonstrari posse idoneis argumentis (ut Censor
asserit) audaciae and temeritatis est: and again, Tota antiquitatis Praxis ei
repugnat: but oh that our Remonstrant would once learn to take the counsel he
gives! And he that advises us to give glory to God in yielding to undoubted
and clear truth, would do so himself! For if it be not more clear, that
there were elders anciently in the Church, then that there were none, and that
these elders were not civil Aldermen, but ecclesiastical Officers, Not mere
Churchwardens and Vestry men busied about inferior things of seats and rates,
but employed in matters of higher nature, let the Remonstrant never renounce
episcopacy. But if it be, let him take heed he do not renounce his word, which
he utters, page 147. I do here solemnly profess that if any one such
instance can be brought, I will renounce episcopacy for ever.

SECT. XVI. XVII. XVIII.
THe rest of our Answer (you say) is but a mere declamation. And good Sir,
Page 148.
what was your whole Remonstrance but a declamation? And what is your Defense
but a Satyr? But ours is worthy of no other answer then contempt and silence.
You are very dextrous and happy in those kind of Answers, your whole Defense is
full of them. It is true you say, The religious Bishops of all times have
strongly upheld the truth of God against Satan, and against his Antichrist. And
it is as true that we told you, that others have upheld the truth as strongly
as Bishops ever did; Yea, and at sometimes when there was never a Bishop in the
world to appear for the truth. And therefore never impropriate all the glory
to Episcopacie. It is also true that we told you, that some irreligious
Bishops have upheld Satan and his Antichrist against the truth of God, and what
can you say to this? What is this to their calling? Sir, their upholding
Antichrist makes as much against their calling, as their upholding the truth
makes for their calling. If you fetch an argument from the one for their
calling, we may as Logically fetch an argument from the other against their
calling with as much concluding strength; but you can tell us of Presbyters
wicked and irreligious, shall the function it self therefore suffer? Like
enough. And we could tell you that they find more co^ntenance from Bishops then
the painfullest Ministers. But if Presbyters should be as generally corrupted
as Bishops now are, have as much strength to suppress the Gospel, and promote
Popery, as the Bishops by their supreme power have, if they can bring no more
evidence of Divine institution then Bishops can, and are of no more necessity
to the Church then Bishops are, let the Function suffer.

We told you what an unpreaching Bishop said of a preaching Bishop; this say
you is our slander not their just Epithet, and challenge us to show any
unpreaching Bishop in the Church of England this day. Sir, pardon us if we tell
you that you put us in mind of a poor Sir John that because he had made one
Sermon in 40. years would needs be counted a preaching minister: if you speak
of preaching after that rate, then indeed you may call all the Bishops in
England preaching Bishops. But the people of England can so well tell who
deserves the name of a preaching Bishop, that it is not the preaching of a
Sermon once a year, or a quarter, or a month, that will be sufficient to
merit and maintain that name. Some indeed have taken some pains heretofore;
But there are so few of them now, that sure the Remonstrant intended this book
for posterity: The present Age will never believe that England is so full of
preaching Bishops, that there is not an unpreaching Bishop to be found. But
what if we should challenge the Remonstrant to show any preaching Bishop in
England, such a preaching Bishop as Chrysostom, Augustine, and the rest of
those ancient worthies were (...) who if they had preached no oftener then our
Bishops, Chrysostom had never mentioned his (...) so often, nor his
Nudi^tertius, Nor his cras and perendie, Nor Austin his Nudius tertiani and
hes^erni Sermones, Nor Cyprian his Quotidiani Tractatus.

Indeed of old, one says, Bishops gloried of their chair, and teaching, as
the flower of their garland; preferring it far before government; but when they
were fallen from spiritual felicity, and inf^cted with Secular smoke, then they
commended the labor of teaching to Presbyters, then the Jurisdiction and
Consistory did carry all the credit; Every Office in the Church being counted a
dignity as it had more or less jurisdiction annexed to it, and this dignity
has almost crowded out the duty.

The scandal of inferior Ministers he professes to bleed for, Page 149.
but says, we blazon: No Sir, as we told you before, and tell you again, they
have been the trumpets of their own shame, that like Hophne and Phineas made
the sacrifices of the Lord to be abhorred. But we beseech you, what is the
English of your desires to have had the faults made less public? Do you mean
you would not have had them meddled withal in open Parliament? or that you
would have had the Parliament do by all Petitions brought in against such
seandalous persons, as Constantine did by those Papers that the proud
contentious Bishops gave one against another, commit them to the fire? if so,
then as you are Christian tells us, whether you do not think this had been the
only way to involve the whole Parliament, and Nation in the guilt of those
sins; and expose them to that wrath and vengeance that would from heaven pursue
them?

Bethink your self how you will answer this at that great Tribunal to which
you make so many rash and bold appeals, as also your profaning the glorious
title of the God of peace, that you might under the sweet name of peace
persuade an impunity for sin. Sir, we nothing fear but we shall answer our
opposing the unerring rule of the Word of God (which texts you never went about
to answer) against that example of Constantine (who as a man, though good, was
subject to error) ten thousand times better then you will do either of these.

In our next Section, says our Remonstrant, we spit in the face of our Mother.
Page 149.
Good Reader please to review our Answer, Section 17. and judge. The
Remonstrant will deny presently, that he and the Bishops are the Church of
England, and yet here, that which is spoken against them and their Perseus-like
practices is spoken against our Mother the Church. Well, be what you please,
Fathers, and Mothers, and Sons, and all.

Only we desire the Remonstrant if he can, to tell us what the Church of
England is. Page 149.
For it does not please him here that we should call the Convocation the Church
of England, much less the Bishops, or Archbishops. Yet if we be not mistaken,
you your self call the Convocation the Church of England, page 122. In the late
Canons the Bishops Consistory is called the Church.
And the Canons and Constitutions made in the Convocation are called the Canons
and Constitutions of the Church of England, which the Convocation alone
excluding the Parliament cannot be so much as a representative of, unless you
will count the whole Laity of the Nation represented in Parliament none of the
Church of England. Yet this is the Church so cried up, These Canons are the
commands of the Church, so rigorously urged, Who ever breaks a Canon especially
in point of Ceremony is no dutiful son of the Church; Indeed, in point of
Morality, Drinking, Swearing, Gaming, there is more indulgence. Nay, how many
Bishops in England are there that have urged their own private
paper-injunctions as the commands of the Church, and proceeded against such as
would not observe them, as disobedient or refractory against their Mother the
Church? That Sir, upon the point there will appear to be more Churches in
England then one. For tell us, we beseech you, when the Church of England at
Norwich forbade all prayer before and after Sermon, but only in the words of
the 55 Canon, forbad all preaching in the afternoons, all expounding of
Catechism, or Scriptures, the Church of England in London forbad none of these
things; when the Church of England in London enjoined railing in Communion
Tables, and all communicants to make their approaches thither, the Church of
another Diocese went further, and enjoined setting of them Altarwise. And all
these were the commands of the church of England. The transgression of any one
of these, No^e the sixteenth of the new Canons.
the omission of any other thing enjoined, was condemned as disobedience to the
church. Now how many churches of England were there at this time?

But you will play off all this as merriment with a Ridiculum caput. Page 150.
To deal with you therefore seriously; Because you make so strange a thing of
hearing of more churches of England then one, and distinguish so deeply between
Churches of England, and Churches in England, we beseech you consider whither
the Scripture do not speak as properly, when it speaks of the Churches of
Judea and of Galatia, as if it had said the churches in Judea, and in Galatia?
And what difference between Saint John when hoe writes to the Church of
Ephesus, of Laodicea, and the church in Sardis, in Thyatira? Yet, we are not
ridiculous enough: therefore the Remonstrant will help the matter, and to make
his jeere will corrupt our words. For whereas we had said, if the bounds of a
Kingdom must needs be the limits of a Churth, Why are not England, Scotland,
and Ireland all one church? to make it nonsense, he adds of England; are not
England, Scotland, and Ireland, all one Church of England? He that made it,
let him take it.

This discourse of Churches of England, cannot end without a descent into the
Prelaticall and Anti-prelaticall Church. We said, We acknowledge no
Anti-prelaticall Church. The Remonstrant tells us if we make and condemn the
Prelaticall Church, what shall be the other part of the contradistinction. Our
reply must be, that not we, but themselves make the Prelaticall Church, we do
but show it; and we show also the other part of the contradistinction which the
Remonstrant pleases to call the Antiprelaticall Church. The Remonstrant had
upbrayded the Divisions of that part, we made our just defense, and therein
declared that the Prelaticall party were the chief Authors and Fomentors of
those divisions, which the Remonstrant directly does not deny, only bids us
lay our hands upon our hearts, Page 151.
and consider whether our fomenting of so unjust and deep dislikes of lawful
government have not been too much guilty of those woeful breaches. Sir, we
have considered it, and can before the great heart-searching God plead not
guilty. The dislike of present Church government, which its own exorbitancy
has caused, we have not fomented, but have smothered our thoughts and griefs
even until this present, wherein the gracious hand of God has inclined the
heart of our gracious Sovereign to call a Parliament, that he and they might
together consult of the pressures and grievances of his people, and conclude
their removal. And now we cannot, we dare not hold our peace, but declare our
judgments, that if it shall seem good to our dread Sovereigne, and this
Honorable Parliament, upon the many complaints brought in against Bishops and
their Hierarchicall government, to remove the Hierarchy, This Act of State may
appear to all to be far from sin; this not being a government appointed by
Christ, nor stamped with a Ius Divinum, though some will make that their
protection.

As One that loves the peace of the Church, Page 152.
which we (you say) are willing to trouble, You ask after the Bounders, etc.
Are you one that loves the peace of the Church? We pray of what Church? Sure
that Church that is called Prelaticall, and no other, Where of we give you the
boundaries and characters, which it seems please you not.

The bounders we showed from your late Canons, which (say you) are too narrow:
let them see to that that first made them. It is apparent, that the Canons made
by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, and Archdeacons, in their Convocation, were
never consented to, much less confirmed by Parliament, and yet those are
called the Canons and Constitutions of the Church of England. And therefore
sure, though we do not exclude Bishops, Deanes, etc. from being members of
the Church, yet They have excluded all the rest of the Nation.

For distinction we brought bowing to the East, to Altars, etc. Now these (say
you) are not fit distinctions whereon to ground different Churches. Yes Sir, if
it be true that some have held, Page 153.
that the outward Forms of worship, and ceremonies attending it are the
characters whereby one Church is differenced from another; but especially when
such as will not practice these, shall be disclaimed by such as do them, as
none of the sons of the Church. When men shall be forced to subscribe to the
practice of these things, or else they shall not be admitted either into
Livings, or Cures, (as in the instanced particulars we have known it) then
they make a difference of Churches. And who are the authors of such
differences, but such as thus urge them? Next we brought their Creed and
instanced in Episcopacie by divine right: He replies, Did ever man make this
an Article of Faith? Judge you by what Bishop Hall says in his Episcopacie by
Divine right part 2. page 47. I am so confident of the Divine institution of
the Majority of Bishops above Presbyters, that I dare boldly say, there are
weighty points of faith that have not so strong ground in Scripture. Is this to
make it an article of Faith or no? And if not an Article of Faith, yet we are
sure it is made an Article of the Church. For whereas by the orders of the
Church of England, a man upon the admission to his ministry is to be examined
upon no other Articles then the Articles of Religion established in the Church
of ENGLAND, we have known more then one, whose first question has been, what
do you think of Episcopaice?

We added, absolute and blind obedience to all commands of the Bishop and
Ordinaries: you bid us blush. But alas Sir we are not such strangers in
England, nor your self neither, we believe, as not to know but that this has
been the common doctrine, and almost the sole Doctrine preached by prelaticall
men these many years together. And the blinder the better. This we have heard,
nor is it your limitation of the Oath of canonical obedience, in Omnibus
licitis and honestis, will help you: when some in stead of that have put in, In
omnibus editis and edendis?

We added Election upon faith foreseen. The Remonstrant cries What? nothing but
gross untruthes. Page 153.
Is this the Doctrine of the Bishops of England, have they not strongly
confuted it? Yes sure some few have, we know it. And does not the Remonstrant
know that these few have been had in suspicion, as no true friends of the
Church, much less sons of the Church, more puritanicall then prelaticall,
And we would none of them had said, They have been laboring these twelve
years to get off the name of Puritan, and yet tt will not do, and because of
this have been printed Tantum non in Episcopatu Puritani. And the same Author
in an other book after that, Dico iterum iterumque dicam, Tantam non in
Episcopatu Puritani.

As for the Scriptures of Prelaticall men, we mentioned Apocripha and unwritten
traditions: meaning that that generation lay as much weight almost upon
traditions and Apocrypha, as upon a genuine text, and are more observant many
of them of a custom, and tradition, then of the command of God. For
Sacraments, we instanced, a Baptism of absolute necessity, an Eucharist that
must be administered upon an Altar. What are these (say you) to the Church of
England? Nothing, but to the Prelaticall Church they are. Call them if you
will, Popish fools, and addleheads, that maintain these opinions yet we know
the number of them is not small, that have declined into these popish ways: we
acknowledge also that these are men, if not that chiesly support the Prelacy,
yet such as have been chiefly suppoted and countenanced by it. We acknowledge
there are many men learned and orthodox, that have in their judgments approved
of Episcopal government; but what little encouragement these have had from the
Prelates, especially, if laborious in their ministry, or any way opposing the
Prelaticall innovation, in respect of the encouragements of those popish fools
and addle-heads as the Remonstrant calls them, a man may see with half an eye.

You demanded what Christ the Prelaticall Church had? Our answer is, a Christ
that has given the same power of obsolution to a Priest that himsefe has:
which answer, you say, is near to blasphemy: truly an opinion so near to
blasphemy can hardly be delivered in a language much distant from it: but this
(you say) is a slanderous fiction: no Christian Divine ever held Priests power
of absolution was any other then ministerial. Page 155.
If we know the man bring him forth that he may be stoned. Truly sir, we knew
the man that said the Priests power in absolution was more then Ministerial,
it was judiciary; ^ Montague.
but he is past stoning, he is dead: and we know another said as much; but he
sung Agags song long ago, surely the bitterness of death is past. For when he
was brought forth to be stoned, he was rescued by Prelaticall power, and his
Sermon for which he was questioned, printed with license, and in print
presented to the Consistory. We know a third that in a Commencement did openly
affirm Absolution by a Priest to be absolutely necessary to salvation.

Their Heaven we said was a receptacle of drunkards, swearers, adulterers; and
surely justly we might say so, for when did your Consistories, that pretend to
have the keys that open and shut Heaven, so shut the gates of Heaven against
such sinners, as that a silver key could not open them again? and though your
charity keep them in Heaven while they live such, yet our charity shuts them
not out of Heaven, if they did not die such. But it may be you think
confession to a Priest, when they lie a dying shall infallibly save them, what
ever their lives have been; and that's the reason you slide by that prelaticall
opinion and do not question us who hold it?

We profess still we had rather go on in our own ways, then theirs, and
think it our duty to separate from these ways and opinions, rather then
embrace them: yet far we are from any thoughts of separating from the Church
of England; nor did we ever intend to affixe those exoticall positions of
unsound teachers (as you call them) upon her: but on the faction who has held
promoted, countenanced them, and sheltred themselves all the while under the
name of the Church. But if the Remonstrant hate these opinions as much as our
selves; we are glad, if he know others do (because he speaks in the plural)
it is well. But we would be glad to know in what Palace that Prelate lives,
that has drawn out his assumed sword of discipline against these unsound
teachers? Or if he has drawn, has struck, or if struck, has not struck
with the back; while the poor Non conformists has been slain with the
edge? or where he lives that has opposed these exoticke positions so far as
to hazard the Archprelates froune in the opposition.

Having given sufficient answer to the Remonstrant, we thought it not unfit to
subjoyne some Quaeres about Episcopacy, for the Remonstrant, (if he pleased) to
answer. Which though he says are made up of nothing but spite and slander:
Page 156.
yet surely his own conscience tells him, there is much truth and strength in
them; else why does he conclude we put so much trust in them? (when we never
told him so.) And why does he not else apply himself to answer? but like a
Socraticall disputant put off the question with question; knowing it is safer
and easier to propound new questions, then to answer ours.

1. Your first Quere is, who ever held the Lordships of Bishops to be jure
Divivo? if no body, whether this be not to falsify and slander? you might have
considered that we spoke not of the Lordships of Bishops in abstracto; but of
Lordbishops in concreto: And who holds them to be jure Divino, is sufficiently
known. But you ask why it is a greater fault in one of our Doctors to hold
the Lords day to stand by humane right (and is there but one of our Doctors of
that opinion?) then it is for Master Calvine, (whom for honors sake no doubt
you name here as else where, seldom through your whole defense mentioning that
worthy, but in some disgraceful passage.) But did Master Calvin ever hold
Bishops to be jure Divino, or did Master Calvine ever as one of our
Lord-bishops, who having received a letter from a Gentleman of his City,
against the publication of the Book of sports, returned no other answer then a
sharp censure of his zeal as giddy and indiscreet? Or did Master Calvin ever
cry up Altars instead of Communion Tables, or Priests instead of Ministers? yet
in these terms our Quere was propounded, and what ever Master Calvin does in
his institution, yet in his Comment upon Deuteronomy he stands for the strict
observation of the Lords day?

2. Whether it were any other than King James himself, of blessed memory,
Quaere 2.
that said, No Bishop no King, etc. King James of blessed memory, never spoke
this of Bishops by divine right, which are the Bishops now contended for. And
if King James of blessed memory said, no Bishop, no King: it was not he, but
others that added, no Ceremony, no Bishop; nay some have risen higher, and
said; if neither Bishop, nor a King, how a God?

3. Whether since it is proved that Bishops are of more then mere humane
ordinance, and have so long continued in the Christian Church to the great good
of Church and State, it be not fit to establish them for ever, and to avoid a
dangerous motion of innovation? sure if the Remonstrants words may go for
proof it is proved, else not; that Bishops are of more then humane ordinance,
and so long continuance, and how advantageous to the good of Church and State,
Acta probant, and though motions of innovation may be dangerous, yet motions of
Renovation are not. Non est pudor ad meliora transire, Ambr.
its no shame to amend.

4. Whether these Answerers have the wit or grace to understand the true
meaning of the Divine right of Episcopacy? We will not impute it to want of
wit, or grace in the Remonstrant; but sure himself does not clearly
understand it, he is so unconstant to his opinions: but whether the
Remonstrant or his answerers understand the right of Episcopacy better, let the
Readers to whose censure both in this controversy must stand or fall,
determine: for our parts we hope, we understand what jus divinum means, but
do ingenuously confess we have neither wit nor grace to understand the jus
divinum of Episcopacy.

5. Whether there be any question at all in the fifth question? Page 157.
yes certainly, if the Remonstrant would not have baulked that which he knew
not how to take away; the distinction of Apostolical right, which say we, is
either such as is founded upon the Acts, or Epistles of the Apostles, and is
(we grant) divine: or such, as is not recorded in their writings, and is only
of things reported to be introduced into the Church the Apostles yet living.
Now if the Remonstrant hold Episcopacy to be of Apostolical right in the first
sense, why does he then grant us in express terms that in original
authority of Scripture Bishops and Presbyters are originally the sam^? Def. p.
47.
and why does he in the same page make his retreat from the writings of the
Apostles, to the monuments of succeeding times? If he hold it in the latter
sense, these two things yet remain to be done: First, he is to prove that
Bishops in a superiority of power over Presbyters, were introduced into the
Church the Apostles yet living, and answer his friend Cassander, and our other
testimonies produced to the contrary. Secondly, to prove, that such things may
be of Divine right, whereof no record is found in Divine writings.

6. Whether Master Beza have not heard soundly of his distinction of the three
kinds of Episcopacy in the full and learned answer of Soravia? Yes, and
Soravia, and others that have borrowed from him, have heard as foundly of their
defenses of Episcopacy, both by domesticke and foreign Divines, who have
sufficiently declared how well our story of the Painter suits with your
Discipline: but i^ that please you not, we can ^it you with an other of the
Painter, mentioned in Plutarch; who having drawn a cock very unskilfully and
rudely, could not endure any cock to stand within view, for fear of
discovering the deformity of his picture: So our Bishops having drawn a form
and line of government, which they propose to the world as divine; will not
endure the true divine government to come in view, for fear of discovering the
irregularity of theirs.

7. Whether it were not fit that we also should speak as the ancient Fathers
did? Sir, Page 158.
by your leave it is safe to speak in the language the Scripture speaks, but
you should have done well to have spoken to the reason upon which our Quere was
grounded, and what further reasons we then had, and still have to make this
Quere may appear by what we have said before in vindicating Timothy and Titus
from such like objections.

8. Whether Presbyters can without sin arrogate unto themselves the exercise
of the power of public Church Government, etc. to say nothing what honor here
you give to your dear Sister-Churches: Our answer is, Yes they may take the
exercise of that power without sin, though not without danger, if your
High Commission were standing. For our Savior Christ when he gave to Peter the
promise of the keys, made in one undistinguishable act, a donation of the
power both of preaching and governing; and therefore if Presbyters may without
sin publicly exercise the one by virtue of that donation, they may by the same
charter as warrantably exercise the other. The last branch of your quere;
Whether any Father or Doctor till this age held that Presbyters were successors
to the Apostles? etc. We wonder that any man who has but the repute of
learning should^ make such a quere. And for the answer, we refer you to what we
have said before in this book.

9. Whether ever any Bishops assumed to themselves power temporal to be
Barons? etc. Our answer is: You show better writts for your temporalties, then
you have done yet for your spiritualties. And our quaere was directed to show
the spiritual power of Bishops to be of more dangerous consequence then their
temporal; to which purpose we produced five reasons, which we persuade our
selves you scarcely read over (for in the third there is a fault in the
printing, which had you seen, your charity would scarce have let pass without
an observation) which remaining unanswered, we conclude as before; it
concerns all those that have spiritual eyes, to endeavor to abrogate their
spiritual usurpations^ as well as their temporal. As for the latter part of
this Quere, it is a begging of the whole dispute, Et eadem facilitate
rejicitur, qua affirmatur.

10. Whether the answerers have not just cause to be ashamed of patronizing a
noted heretic Aerius, etc. To this we answer: That if Aerius was accounted an
heretic for denying Bishops to be all one with Presbyters by divine right, we
are not ashamed to patronize him, till you have answered our allegations for
his defense which are brought in this quere, and in diverse places in this
Book. But you could not be so ignorant but to know how Bellarmine and diverse
others do say. That Aerius was accounted an heretic, not for denying the
inequality of Bishops and Presbyters by Scripture, but by the Canons of the
Church. But we wonder how we escaped the brand of the heresy of the Audiani,
who by the same Epiphanius are called heretics (though men of a blameless
conversation) because they did not without just cause) freely and boldly
reprove the vices of the Bishops of their days.

11. Whether the great apostasy of the Church of Rome do, Page 160.
or did consist in the maintaining the order of government set by the Apostles
themselves, etc. Sure no: we never said, nor thought it. But that a great part
of the Apostasy of the Church of Rome consisted in swarving from the discipline
of Christ and hi^ Apostles, as well as from the doctrine and setting up and
maintaining a new Hierarchicall form, which cannot enter into our hearts to
think the Apostles did ever set up: and which the most part of the Churches in
the Christian World, that are professedly opposite unto the Church of Rome do
oppose, as much as they do Rome it self; though you bear the Reader in hand,
they all maintain it no less constantly then Rome it self does; which no man
but he that has captivated reason, and modesty to his cause, and will, would
have so confidently and untruly spoken. Once again let us ask you, whether by
this bold speech all the reformed Churches of Christ be not now shut out of
the number of Churches?

12. Whether if Episcopacy be (through the m^nificence of good Princes)
honored with a title of dignity, etc. it to be ever the more declined?

Since the time that Episcopacy has bin honored with dignity, and revenues, the
office has not bin declined; but the Bishops themselves have bin declining.
Yet our Quere was not whether this were a ground of declining the place, but
rather of desiring the place. As for our crying up the Presbytery, because we
hope to carry some sway in it. We acknowledge our selves unworthy to bear any
part in it; but we heartily desire that Christ may rule, and we shall most
willingly subject our selves to his government.

13. Whether there be no other apparent causes to be given for the increase of
popery and superstition in the Kingdom, besides Episcopacy (which has
strongly labored to oppose it) etc. We deny not but there may have bin other
causes, but none so apparent as Episcopacy. But whereas in a parenthesis which
you might well have left out without any detriment either to your sense or the
truth, you say that, Episcopacy has strongly labored to oppose popery: we
answer Quid verba audimus cum facta videmus? you ask again whether the
multitude of Sects (you should have added which the tyranny of Bishops has
made,) And professed ^lovenlinesse in Gods service have not bin guilty of the
increase of profaneness. We answer again, not so much as the forbidding of
preaching and Catechizing, as the countenancing of sports on the Lords day, as
the scandalous lives of too too many episcopal men, and the libertinisme of
the Bishops houses and Courts.

14. Your 14. Quere consists of a Paradox, and a Sol^cisme. A Paradox in
saying, That all Churches throughout the whole Christian world have ever
observed, and do constantly and uniformely observe and maintain Episcopal
government. When as you know all your dear sisters of whom you profess a
tender care, do disclaim it. Of a Bull and sol^cisme in saying That all
Christian Churches do constantly and uniformely observe it. And yet
confessing, that there are less noble Churches that conform not unto it.

15. In your next Quere you contradict your self and the truth as a self
confounded man. For here you say, That the name of Bishop has bin for this
1600 years appropriated (in a plain contradistinction) to the governors of
the Church. But page 48 where we bring Iren^us calling Anicetus, Pius, Hyginus,
etc. Bishops of Rome Presbyters, And others also using the name (...); You cry
out with a loud voice, Is this al? that your trifling may appear to all the
World. Name but any one of our writers, who have hitherto stood up in the cause
of Episcopacy, that have not granted and proclaimed this which you contend for.
In the latter end of this quere, you think to stop our mouths with Balaams
wages, and demand. Whether if we will allow you to be Bishops, all will not be
well? We are scripture Bishops without your allowance. As for to be
Hierarchicall Bishops, since God will not allow it, we care not for your
allowance. But what Patent or Monopoly have you among all the multitude of late
Projectors obtained, that without your allowance a Presbyter may not be
admitted into a Bishopric?

16. To your last Quere we answer. That if God had set your episcopal
government in his Church; we know it could not be lawful for us to deny
subjection unto it. But we have proved the contrary in this discourse. Neither
have the Laws of this land so firmly established it; but that it may be
repealed by the same Laws, and suffer a just period for its matchless pride,
and insufferable oppressions. Which for the present we perceive is out of fear
a little aba^ed, and that makes you ask; Whether it were not most lawful and
just to punish our presumption and disobedience, etc. Time was when the High
commission and other Episcopal Courts would have made both our ears more then
tingle for such a question without enquiring either the lawfulness and justice
of it.

Thus we have answered his 16. Queries, but before we end our book, we cannot
but take notice of what the Remonstrant adds in the conclu^ion. For there he
tells us, That he hopes he has given a sufficient answer to our bold and
unjust demands: And yet notwithstanding he does not vouchsafe to give any
answer at all, but only propounds new questions, instead of answers: which if
the Reader will conceive a sufficient way of answering; we doubt not but we
shall quickly give satisfaction to all that ever has bin written for
Episcopal government, either by Bishop Bilson, Bishop Downham, Bishop Hall, or
any other whatsoever.

To all the Postscripts.
We will not create trouble to the Reader, by a reiterated justification of
our sincerity, though it be again prodigiously wounded. Here is much cry, and
little wool. He cannot deny what in our Postscript we have proved to be the
practices of Prelates, ever since Austins erection of the Sea of Canterbury,
only first he salsely tells us, that we have borrowed a great part of it out
of Sions plea. But if that Author has collected any of the same Stories (which
yet we know not) out of the Chronicles, why should we be thought to have
borrowed them from him, (whom we durst not for fear of the Prelates keep in
our studies) rather then from the Chronicles themselves?

Secondly he answers, That they were popish Bishops, limbs of that body whose
head we abjure, etc. But Sr you know that in Henry the eights time, when this
head abjured, the Body of popery still remained. This Body of popery
(comprehended in six Articles) was called a wh^p of six strings, And you with
all your Rhetoric will hardly persuade the people, but that they have bin
lashed for these many years with a whip of six and twenty strings. Have not
most of these denied this Head to be Antichrist? And that if wise men had the
handling of it, we might be reconciled unto it? Has not one of their abettors
written, that the Religion of the Church of Rome is not only a possible, but a
safe way to Heaven? What then will it avail to say that our Bishops and they
have different heads?

Thirdly, he answers, That a charitable man might have made a longer Catalogue
of the good fruits of our Episcopacy, and reckons up a multitude of their good
deeds, many whereof, should ^ee wipe our eyes never so much, we fear we
should not see, and the rest which are in any kind visible, will not, if
weighed in a just ballanc^, bear any proportion, to all those unnatural
fruits mentioned in our Postscrips.

In his close he tells us, That the Bishops foot has bin in our book, which
is quite spoiled by his just confutation. We confess truly the Bishops ^o
(...) has left much dirt behind it; but could many hundred^ of godly
Ministers, have as easily got the Green Wax and Red Wax of the Bishops out of
their mouths with which they have bin a long time stopped, As we have wiped
away the dirt that has bin thrown upon our book; The Church of England had
never made so many sad complaints, and presented so many doleful petitions
unto the high and supreme Court of Justice.

2. His second Postscript is an advertisement to the Reader, for the
vindication of the credit of the person of Doctor Hall, and his Episcopacy by
divine right, from the censure which Doctor Voetius is reported to have passed
upon them both. True it is, there was tendered to us a justification of what
that angry Pamphlet (as he calls it) had published to the world. But because
we found that it would deeply reflect upon the credit of Doctor Hall, and that
in a language more disgraceful then that was before said, we refused to
insert it. Our business is with a namelesse Remonstrant, not with the
undervaluation of any man's person in particular. If he please to call for it,
he may have it.

His third Postscript brings in the judgment of Scultetus to ^make the World
believe that his new opinion of Episcopacy by divine right is not destitute of
Patrons in the reformed Churches. But what is one Scultetus to the many hundred
learned men amongst them of a contrary judgment? We might here retort upon our
Remonstrant, that he says concerning the moderator of Geneva page 138. You
tell me of the moderator of Geneva as if all the Church of God were included in
those strait walls. We could have translated Voetius his Theses for the
justification of lay Elders both out of Scripture and antiquity. But for
brevity sake we will content our selves with what that learned Rivet spoke
(when these two Treatises of Scultetus were showed to him by a great Prelate
amongst us, and his judgment required) Haec omnia jamdudum sunt protrita and
profligata. This was related to us by Doctor Twisse, who had it from Doctor
Rivet himself.

FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
WE cannot but confess, that the crouding in of many little Pamphlets into the
Press has for many weeks detained this Book, to the great grief of the
Authors: We desire thee to correct with thy pen these following Errata, and to
cover the lesser faults with thy Charity.

PAge 12 line 11 dele more to be read^line 18 read ^r. p 14 l 5 deest Although.
l 30 r obtain. p 18 d Zanchy and Cassander out of the marge^t. p 21 l 6 r
^nstruct^oribus. p 26 l 17 next appointed add, a hint thereof we have Acts 3.
1. p 18 l 17 r Presb^ters for Priests. l 18 for not r once. p 29 l 27 d
because. p 38 l 12 d for our part. l 31 r time. p 42 l pen. r Reformed
Protestant Churches. p 36 l 18 r Their. p 64 l 24 r Prebyterii. p 74 l 30 At
That make a comma. p 81 l ult r Common. p 84 r hasty. p 86 l 15 r
Contradiction. p 92 l 25 for are r have been p 93 l 16 r admisimus. p 96 l 14 r
Leo^ p 111 l 31 r proved. p 112 l 27 r please. p 113 l 18 r proofs for
process. p 114 l ^6 for promise r. prem^se p 115 l 21 for alone r along. p 118
18 r office for work. p 126 l 24 make a comma at of. p 127 l 21 r of for as^ p
129 l 14 r Capp^llus. p 132 l 29 to Dowah^m, add Epis^opacie by Divine Right.
p 135 l 11 next to Thirdly add is there. p 136 l 26 add The in the beginning
of the line p 159 l 27 r Campian. p 160 l 31 for we r you, and for you r we. p
174 l 11 dele particular. p 176 l 6 dele Call.


