THE MARQVES OF CLANRICKARDS ENGAGEMENT Of the nineteenth of November, 1646.
Upon the engagement and Protestation of the Generals Nobility and Officers
of the Confederate Catholics Forces hereunto annexed, I Vllycke, Marquis of
Clanrickard, do on my pair, solemnly bind and engage my self, unto them, by
the reputation and honor of a Peer, and by sacred Protestation upon the faith
of a Catholic, in the presence of Almighty God, that I will procure the
ensuing undertakings to be made good unto them, within such convenient time, as
securities of that nature, which are to be fetched from beyond, can well be
procured, and at the furthest by the first day of September next ensuing the
date hereof, or failing therein to unite my self to their parties, and never
to sever from them, and these their Interests till I have secured them unto
them.

First, That there shall be a revocation by act of Parliament of all the Laws
in force within this kingdom, in as much as shall concern any penalty,
inhibition or restraint upon Catholics, for the free exercise of their
Religion

Secondly, that they shall not be disturbed in the enjoyment of their Churches,
or any other Ecclesiastical possessions which were in their hands at the
publication of the late Peace, until that matters with others referred
already, receive a settlement upon a declaration of His Majesty's gracious
intentions in a free Parliament held in this kingdom, His Majesty being in a
free condition himself.

Thirdly, And I do further engage my self never to consent to any thing that
may bring them in hazard of being dispossessed, and never to sever from them,
till I see them so secured therein, either by Concession or by their trust and
power in the Armies and Garrisons of this kingdom, as to put them out of all
danger of being dispossessed.

Fourthly, And I do further engage my self, that forthwith there shall be a
Catholic Lieutenant General of all the Forces of the kingdom invested by
His Majesty's authority, and that the Generals or either of them signing to
the said engagement shall be forthwith invested by His Majesty's Authority
with principal Commands worthy of them, in the standing Army of this kingdom,
and likewise in some important Garrisons now under His Majesty's obedience, and
that a considerable number of the Confederate Catholic Forces shall
immediately be drawn into all the Chief Garrisons under His Majesty's
obedience; And I do further assure proportionable advantages to such of any
other Armies in this kingdom, as shall in like manner submit unto the Peace
and His Majesty's authority.

Fifthly, This for security of as many of those particulars, as shall not forth
with be performed; and made good unto them by the Lord Marquis of Ormond His
Majesty's Lieutenant Governor of this kingdom, I will procure them the Kings
hand, the Queen and Prince of Wales His engagement; and an engagement of the
Crown of France to see the same performed unto them.

Sixthly, And further, for their assurance that my Lord Lieutenant shall engage
himself punctually to observe such free Commands as he shall receive from His
Majesty, to the advantage of the Catholics of this kingdom, or during the
Kings want of freedom ftom the Queen or Prince of Wales, or such as shall be
signified to him as the Kings positive pleasure by the Lord Digby, as
principal Secretary of State; And further that whilst the King shall be in
an unfree Condition, he will not obey any orders, which shall be procured from
His Majesty, by advantage of His Majesty's want of freedom, to the prejudice
of what is undertaken.

And Lastly, I do protest that I shall never esteem my self discharged from
this engagement, by any power or authority whatsoever.

Provided on both parts, that this engagement and undertaking be not understood
or extended to debar or hinder His Majesty's Catholic Subjects of this
kingdom, from the benefit of any further graces and favors which His Majesty
may be graciously enduced to concede unto them, upon the Queens Majesty's
mediation, or any other treaty abroad with His Holiness.

And I do further engage my self to employ my utmost endeavor and power by
way of petition, solicitation, and persuasion to His Majesty to afford all
the Subjects of this kingdom, that shall appear to have been injured in their
estates redress in the next free Parliament.

And I do also further undertake, that all persons joining, or that shall
join in the present engagement shall be included in the act of Oblivion
promised in the articles of Peace for any acts done by them since the
publication of the said Peace unto the date of the said engagement.

Signed Clanrikard.

BY THE COUNCIL AND CONGREGATION.
Kilkenny 24. November, 1646.
WE taking into consideration an Instrument entitled the Marquis of
Clanrickard his Engagement of the nineteenth of Novermber, 1646. do first
observe that his Lordship is qualified with no known authority that might
enable him to make good the undertakings therein exptessed (if they did
contain advantageous Concessions) as they do not, and then let any man judge
that looks with an indifferent eye whether the Peace of a kingdom to follow
thereupon be grounded on sufficient fundation.

The next to be considered is the third Article, where it is expressed, that
there shall be a revocation of all the laws in force in this kingdom in as
much as shall concern any penalty, inhibition or restraint upon Catholics
for the free exercise of their Religion.

These words seem plausible, but he that will look into (...) Statute of 2.
Elizabethae in the 1. 2. 3. and fourth Chapters and other the Statutes of force
within this kingdom, will find that no Bishop can be made or consecrated, or
do the office of a Bishop in conferring orders of Priesthood, or granting
dispensations or faculties, or any Priest exercise his Function after the Rites
of the Roman Catholic Church by authority of the Sea of Rome, but that by
express words of the said Statute of 2. Eliz. in one of the said Chapters, the
first offense of that nature is under pain of Praemunire, which extends to
imprisonment during life, and the forfeiture of goods and lands, the second
offense is Felony, and the third offense against that law is High Treason in
the principalls a betters, relievers, and maintainers, etc. and the words of
the said first Article do extend only to the revocation of the penalties
against the exercise of Religion, which will not take away the branches of
those laws, that are against the exercise of Spiritual Jurisdictions, or
functions, so as all our Prelates and Priests are left subject to the former
dangers, which doubtless the Confederate Catholics did intend to free them
from upon the taking of their oath of association, by one of the Chapters of
that Statute of 2. Eliz. Catholic Service or Mass is excluded out of the
Churches, and the Common Prayer Book which the Protestants used, introduced,
and clearly for any thing mentioned in the said first Article, no Mass can be
said in any Church without incurring the penalty ordained by that law, and
those that are versed in the late treaty with the Lord Lieutenant do well
know, and all others that saw an Instrument sent by the Lord Lieutenant in a
letter of the seventh of August, 1644. importing a brief of Collections,
whereby the singing, saying and hearing of Mass, was granted, may obsetve that
notwithstanding that Concession the Lord Lieurenant, did add a Proviso that no
Mass should be said or sung, in Churches Cathedral or Parochial, or Chapel
thereunto belonging, by means whereof, and of an express (...) grant the
Catholics liberty to have a Catholic (...) any authority from the Sea of
Rome, and for want of (...) Concessions in matters of Religion without
Provisoes or C^^^^ that would spoil them, matters of Religion, were referred
by the late Articles to further or other Concessions, and as we are taught by
the tenants of Catholic Doctrine, that there can be no Catholic Religion
nor essential parts thereof with out Bishops, who in matters of Religion
depend and ought to depend of the Sea Apostolic, and without Priest, made by
such Bishops, or the Pope himself, nor the Sacrament, administered without such
Prelates, and Pastors, thereof are the exercise of Religion as to those, and
several other particulars essential ought to be made certain; or else that
the said Statuts of 2. Eliz. and the Statuts of Faculties 28. H. 8. be totally
repealed as to His Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects, and a provision made by
act of Parliament for Roman Catholic Bishops and Pastors to be and remain in
this kingdom with impunitie.

Upon consideration of the second Article, where it is expressed that they shall
not be disturbed in the enjoyment of their Churches or any other
Ecclesiastical possessions, which were in their hands at the publication of
the late Peace, until that matter with other referred already, receive a
settlement upon a Declaration of His Majesty's Gracious intentions in a free
Parliament held in this kingdom, His Majesty being in a free Condition
himself. It is apparent by this second Article, besides what is said before,
that the first Article concerning the revocation of the penal laws is not
intended by the undertaking of that engagement to extend to the taking away of
the penal Laws that prohibit Mass to be said in Churches, and seems as to
the Churches to put us by our own assent, to this Proposition, in worse
Condition than we were by the late rejected Peace for then and still we have
the resolution of the General Assembly expressed in an order to hold our
Churches always and not to part with them, and now if this second Article were
agreed on, we express only a promissive enjoying of them until Parliament,
and so are left as to that in a worse Condition then before, and even until
Parliament it self, there is no security at all for Churches or
Church Livings within our Quarters other then the undertaking of the said Lord
Marquis of Clanrickard, who is subject to mortality, and changes, as other
mortal men, and who was never yet of our union, and admit this were an
assurance until Parliament, the same will sall, on the Kings Declaration to
the Contrary, if in a free Condition, which Declaration to be contrary, may
probably be expected so long as His Majesty is of a different Religion, and
before that Parliament be, all persons engaged or to be (...), are subject to
mortality, upon all which we (...) at all for Churches or Church Livings.

As to the third, it contains no Concession, and is but an engagement of the
said Lord Marquis his word, which is uncertain and unsafe to rely on, without
mentioning what Garrisons, and what Catholics in them, and what number and by
whom they are to be Commanded in regard the Commander in chief may by his
order remove or alter them as he sees cause, without looking after the Lord
Marquis of Clanrickard for advise or consent, and in effect, if the number to
be put into Garrison be not so ascertained that it may master the rest there
from the Protestant party, it is but to offer our men to the slaughter, and
expose our selves to what Conditions they please, our Army abroad being thereby
diminished, and the party put into Garrison, subject to be removed at the
pleasure of him that shall Command in Chief.

As for the fourth, whither the Catholic Lieutenant General be of the
Catholic union, or faithful to the same, and what Commands to be canferred
on our Generals or Commanders, or upon which of them, or for what time to
continue, or to what Chief Garrisons they shall be drawn, or in what number,
or how long they shall continue there, are wholly uncertain, and all the
particulars are alterable, and subject to the will and pleasure of the Chief
Governor for the time being.

The fifth only is matter of security and mends not the conditions granted,
if the same were obtained as is propounded, and if our union were dissolved by
any agreement before performance, what means is left us to expect or obtain
performance, and certainly where the Lord Marquis of Clanrickard grounds all
he does in this on his own undertaking without warrant from His Majesty, We
cannot prudently suppose (having no other grounds for it) but His Majesty will
disavow it, when he did disavow the undertaking of the Earl of Glamorgan to
the Confederate Catholics made more solemnly to the persons wherewith the
government was entrusted, and who had thus far an advantage beyond the Marquis
of Clanrickard, that his Lordships the Earl of Glamorgans Concessions were
grounded on His Majesty's known authority under His Seal Manual, and
attested with His Royal signature: Whereas the Marquis of Clanrickard goes
only on his own undertaking.

As to the sixth it contained no certain Command or order which may in future
be had from His Majesty and being an uncertain contingencie needs no answer.

As to the seventh concerning his Lordships undertaking to solicit for
redress to be had in the next Parliament, therein we find no manner of
assurance for all those, who unjustly lost their estates in Ireland, other
then, that the Lord Marquis of Clanrickard will petition, solicit, persuade,
and use his best endeavors, whereof no man is Judge but himself, and the
event and engagement uncertain, and the act of oblivion being only by that
Instrument of engagement to extend to those that shall join therein, and which
engagement is now suddenly expected to be concluded there; all others of the
Nation that are absent, who cannot join therein so suddenly, and are not
privy, are left open to the danger of the extremities of the law both for their
lives and estate.

And lastly, we conclude, that the General Assembly now at hand is the only
mean left to conclude a certain stable peace, in this kingdom, and no
private or particular undertaking of any Subject unqualified with any appearing
authority: Besides the former inducements to satisfy you, you ought seriously
to consider that the Earl of Glamorgans Concessions ground on His Majesty's
authority and read in the General Assembly held in Lent last, and on which
they wholly relied, will by these Propositions (if accepted) be absolutely waved
contrary to the intention of the whole kingdom which we desire may be
seriously reflected on, amongst the rest, those Concessions by many degrees
being more valuable, and grounded on cleerer, authority, then the offers, or
undertakings now made.

Joan. Bapt. Archiepiscopus Firmanus Nuncius Apostolicus. Io. Clonpert. Fr. Pa.
Plunket Rob. Lynch. Emer. Clogherensis. Alex. Mac Donnell. Fires Butler.
Louthe. N. Plunket.


By the Council and Congregation.

Whereas an Instrument entitled the Engagement of the Marquis of Clanrickard
of the nineteenth of November was presented unto us, importing Propositions to
induce the Confederate Catholics, to a Peace, on those terms, to the
defects and uncertainties whereof exceptions are offered and what further is
necessary for the settling of the Catholic Religion, and the good of the
Nation otherwise and to the end all the Confederate Catholics may clearly
see what those offers and answers are at full, we have directed them to be sent
to the press, and dispersed.

FINIS.

