THE TRUE COPY OF THE LETTER, Which was sent from diverse MINISTERS, BY Mr
Marshall, and Mr Nigh, TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF SCOTLAND.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Gellibrand. September. 8. 1643.

Reverend and Beloved,
THE experience we have had of your forwardness in receiving, and
faithfulness in weighing our former addresses, has given us abundant
encouragement, to take hold upon this present opportunity of breathing out
something of our sorrows, which your Love, and our Necessity command us to
represent to your consideration and compassion. Much we know, we may commit to
the Wisdom and Fidelity of our Brethren, these Messengers, to impart unto
you, concerning our miserable Condition, and unto them shall leave the most.
Your own National, but specially Christian Interest, will not permit you to
hide your Eyes from the bleeding Condi^ion of your poor distressed Brethren in
England, should neither Messengers, nor Letters be sent unto you. But
Messengers coming, we should at once neglect our selves, should we not thus a
little ease our burdened Hearts by pouring them out into your Bosoms, and
seem ^^gratefull to you, of whose readiness to suffer with us, and do for us,
we have had so great and ample Testimonies.

Surely, if ever a poor Nation were upon the edge of a most desperate
precipice: If ever a poor Church were ready to be swallowed up by Satan and his
Instruments; we are that Na^ion, we are that Church. And in both respects, by
so much the more miserable, by how much we expected, not a Preservation only,
but an Augmentation also, to Happiness in the one, and Glory in the other. We
looked for peace, but no good came, and for (...) of healing, and behold
trouble? Our God, who in his former Judgments was as Mo^^h and Rottenness
(and yet had of late begun to send us Health and Cure) is now turned into a.
Lion to us, and threatens to rend the very Caul of our Hearts. From above he
has sent a Fire into our Bones, and it prevails against us. From our own
Bowels he has called forth and strengthe^ed an Adversary against us, a
Genera^ion of Brutish Hellish men, the Rod of his anger, and the Staff of his
indignation; under whose cruelties we bleed, and if present mercy step not in,
we dye* Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are all thy Judgments! But, O the
more then barbarous carriages of our Enemies; where ever God give any of his
hidden ones up into their Hands! We need not express it unto You, who know the
inveterate, and deadly malice of the Antichristian faction, against the Members
of our LORD JESUS: And it is well, we need not, for in truth we cannot. Your
own thoughts may tell you better then any words of ours what the mercy of
Papists is toward the Ministers and Servants of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. But the
Lord knows we are not troubled so much with (...) Miseries and Dangers; but
that which breaks our Hearts is, The danger we behold, the Protestant Religion,
and all the Reformed Churches in, at this time, through that too great and
formidable strength, the Popish Faction is now arrived at: If our God will lay
our Bodies as the Ground, and as the Street under their Feet, and power out our
Blood as Dust before their fury, The Will of the Lord be done. Might our Blood
be a Sacrifice to ransom the rest of the Saints or Churches of Christ from
Antichristian fury, we would offer it up upon this Service gladly. But we know
their rage is insatiable, and will not be quenched with our bloods; Immortal,
and will not die with us; Armed against us, not as men, but as Christians, but
as Protestants, but as men desiring to Reform our Selves, and to draw our
Selves and others yet near unto GOD. And if GOD give us up to be devoured by
this rage, it will take the more strength and courage, at least to Attempt the
like against all the Protestant and Reformed Churches.

In a deeper sense of this extreme danger, threatening us, and you, and all the
Churches, then we can express, we have made this address unto you: In the
Bowels of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, humbly imploring your most fervent Prayers to
the God that hears Prayers, who, should we Judge Providence, seems to be angry
with our Prayers. (Though we trust, he does but seem so: And though he kill us,
yet will we trust in him.) Oh give us the Brotherly aid of your reinforced
Tears and Prayers, that the Blessings of Truth and Peace which our Prayers
alone have not obtained, yours, conjoined, may. And give us, Reverend and much
Honored in our Lord, your Advises, What remains for us further to do, for the
making of our own, and the Kingdoms Peace with GOD? We have lain in the Dust
before him; we have powered out our Hearts in Humiliations to him; we have in
sincerity endeavored to reform our Selves; and no less sincerely desired,
studied, labored the public Reformation; nevertheless, The Lord has not yet
turned himself from the fierceness of his anger. And be pleased to advise us
further, what may be the happyest course, for the uniting of the Protestant
party more firmly? That we may all serve God with one consent, and stand up
against Antichrist as one man: That our God, who now hides himself from our
People; may, Return unto us, delight in us, scatter and subdue his, and uur
enemies, and cause his Face to shine upon us. The Lord prosper you, and
preserve us; so that the great work of these latter Ages may be finished, to
his honor and our own, and the Churches happiness, through CHRIST JESUS.

FINIS.

