A SERMON PREACHED AT St. MARGARETTS in Westminster,

On Sunday the sixth of February, last, before many of the worthy members of the
Honorable House of Commons in this present PARLIAMENT.

By John Marston Master of Arts, and Rector of the Parish Church of Saint Mary
Magdalen in Canterbury.

Printed upon the importunity of many Auditors.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Io. Burroughes, and Io. Frank, and are to be
sold at the sign of the Golden Drag^n near the Inner Temple Gate in
Fleetstreet. 1642.

To the Reader.
READER,
IF thou be Courteous, thou have here a fit object of ^hy mercy; If
Critical? here is work enough to make thee thine own plague as well as mine:
you must adventure to your own perrill if you deny me pity. Accept then a
lean discourse, shuffled over hastily into the pulpit, and thence spurred on
(in a full speed) unto the press: The importunity of no mean hearers, has
extorted this, and they can testify, I was almost a Rebel to persuasion; But,
conquered at last with the kindness, not the Cause, I now stand upon the stall
to hail the passengers; And if thou be ihtrap't to a small expense, think
not that dear, which will invite thee to repent (I hope of all thy sins) at
least of this, that thou layd'st out this money no better: It Is a scribbling
age, and the unhappie comfort is, imperfections could never fly abroad with
less inconvenience to their author: Use me Charitably and I am.

Thy Servant, John Marston.

A SERMON PREACHED at St. Margrets in Westminster on Sunday the Sixth of
February. 1642.
IOELL 2. 12. and part of the 13. VERSE. Therefore also now says the Lord,
Turn unto me with all your heart, with fasting, and with weeping, and with
mourning; And rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn to the Lord
your God.
THE Gospells glad tidings are not now in season; Something to make us sad
suits these times best: I find a woe pronounced against those that laugh: Now
then, hang we up our Harpes, and sit we down by the waters of Babylon, where
we shall not choose but weep, if we but remember this our Syon.

And to complete our woe, let us measure greifes, lay our calamities of England
against those calamities which God here threatens against I^dea: Calamities
able to fright the reader, and make him (considering them) forget his own.
Such Calamities as must live, when they (for whom they were provided) are dead,
for the old men must leave the story of them, as a sad legacy to their
children, so we read chap. 1. ver. 2.

But the news of this Judgment must come first, which invades them with such
horror, as makes the judgments come before they come, in the apprehension of
them: And so the news was to them like the presence of our Savior to the
Devils, to torment them before the time. For God under an Alegorie of the
Locust and Canker worm, threatens a future destruction by the Invasion of the
Caldeans: A lion like Nation shall destroy their vines, and the drunkards must
weep for the loss of them, ver. 5. So that now their cupps must be empty, or
they must fill them with their tears.

The trees must be undrest, and stand naked without their bark, that so they
may wither and dye, and for their death the whole land mourned at the 10.
verse. Nay such scarcity did succeed, that the meat and drink offerings were
cut off from the house of the Lord* and therefore do the Priests mourn, and
lie all night in sackcloth, ver. 13. And now in the second chapter, all their
Judgments are proclaimed by the sound of a Trumpet, nay the day is so near at
hand, that the very allarum sounds, and the dism^ll day may beseene (at the
Second verse) though it be only seen in this, that it cannot be seen; for a
day of darkness shall it be, and gloominesse, says the Prophet. And just it
is, that they in their distress should want the light, who in their prosperity
(whilst they had the light) were the children of dark n^sse.

Now horror invades the people, who through fear and affrightment are so
transformed, that their faces gather blackness, the blackness of a
Po^s-out-side (for so the Hebrew word the^e signifies) and so were mask^ in the
livery of their own terror, and distructions* all things as black as their
own thoughts.

^reade of one who (...) at onceboth with enemies and darkness, d^sired. God
only so much light as might serve to see himself dye valiantly; He loved
light well, that was so loath to dye without it.

But here Sion has it not; Heaven winkes at their ealamitie, and draws a
curtain of darkness before all her eyes: the Sun, and Moon shall be
dark, and the Stars shall withdraw their shinning ver. 10.

Nay the Lord himself shall be General of the forces that come against them,
and shall utter his voice before his army to encourage it, the day of his
ven^ance is terrible, and who can abide it? And in this horror and distress
whether shall they got? whether shall they ^^ye? their darkness cannot cover
them, for the darkness is no darkness with him; all their power summoned
together cannot withstand his wrath, for who can stand when he is angry? There
is no way to turn from these dismal and approaching evils, but by turning
unto him that brings them, and that by repentance.

But Quid ad nos? what is all this to us? would God it were not: do not dangers
threaten us also? and such dangers that if we parallel them with these, we
shall soon see they do exceed.

God threatened to destroy them by their enemies, but we have been in danger to
be destroyed by our friends, for what could it be less then the judgment of
God upon us, that thus one Nation should rise against another, both professing
the same true religion, both the dutiful Subjects of the same King, both
having the same ground of quarrel to maintain Religion? will not this make
riddals in the Chronicles.

And truly was not the day of the Lord, the day of (...) judgment near at
hand, when these loving enemies were ready to send the messages of death to one
another, in the dreadful language of the Cannon? and their distress, picture
out the horror of the last day, in blood, and Fire, and vapor of smoke? And
what a day of black confusion had followed, had the war proceeded? when two
valiant Nations, united hitherto both in love, and religion should have been
united only in the mixture of their blood; but in this respect I confess the
hand of the Lord is not still stretched out, for he has removed far from us
the Notherne army, and our friendship (I hope) like a fracture of a bone in
our bodies, is the stronger knit, for being broken.

But though that danger's vanished, a worse now succeeds it, and under the fear
of that we groan more then did Judea here, for fear of the Chaldeans: if a
foreign foe did threaten us, I hope we should be all united in resistance.

But it is not an open enemy that now does us this dishonor, but the serpents
lie in the bosom of the Kingdom, and so much are we our own enemies, that
there is great cause to fear we may destroy our selves (we read not of Sion
so) and doubtless it is desperate with that state, that is ready to stabbe it
self.

For now this fortunate Island, which heretofore was like the paradise of God,
where God walked not but in the Cool of the day, gently dropping down our
peaceful happiness (which found the neighboring Nations work enough to
admire us) sees God now in the fire, punishing us with the schorching flames of
hombred divisions, our foes being chiefly those of our own househould. And
do not our hearts begin to fail us for fear? and do we not (as Sion here)
gather blackness? every man betraying sensibly the fear of his own
confusion? Nay more, may we not fear that the Sun and moon may be darkened,
and the stars may which draw their shining? that is, that the glorious light
of the Gospel of truth may be totally ecclip'st, when as the papist on one
side, and the (I cannot tell what to call them) on the other, both strive to
blow out our Candle? (But Lord let death strike me blind before I see that
day) So that we may now say as the voice did to the Emperor of Constantinople,
when he was raising fortifications against the foe with out, (...), The evil
is within, and why is it within? but because it is within, within us in our
sins, and therefore within us by divisions amongst our selves, which is the
Emphasis of Judgment and shows the world our sins in our sufferings.

True it is the state has long lain sick of a feavour, and we have had more
then a College of Physicians in this blessed Parliament; And to assuage the heat
of this distemper, they have let it blood, but discreetly in one vain only,
least it bleed to death. But oh! we are still sick at heart, and our feauour
increases whilst we are under cure, and now we find that the Policy of
state cannot reach our Malady, and that it is ou^ very Physician, our heavenly
Physician that makes us sick. Our sins, our sins have so far kindled his
wrath, that unless now in his wrath he remember mercy, we may well fear our
feavour may end in a Consumption, (for our God is a consuming fire) and we be
cons^med and brought to nothing. How long have we wished (for what we have) a
Parliament? as thinking that then we should be disburthened of all our
pressures: But I fear we have put to much confidence in man, and so neglected
God. For, all their great care and studdie for the good of Sion, has as yet
brought us no perfect ease (so much has opposition multiplied) for in what are
we better (for the present) then that we Cannot well be worse; and this
doubtless is the hand of heaven, to show that a decree of Judgment is gone out
against us; and that where God resolves to punish, in vain is the help of man.

It Is reported of the Athenians that they never demanded peace but in their
mourning garments, when war lay heavy upon them, and they able to hold out
no longer; And I wish we we^e not to much interessed in their unhappie
property. We have stood it out with our God to the last, and have not sued for
peace by repentance; lets now all put on mourning garments, and ^loath our
^erie souls in black. Let Us all join in a sadd Consort of lamentation, to
suppress the loud clamor of our sins: And fit it is, we should not be
divided in our repentance, that have been joined, and so (ill, well) agreeing
in a fatal Confederacy of sinning, being noe way divided (in respect of
sin) but in the sin of our division: It Is my sin, and it is your sin, the
sins of this City, and the sins of all this Kingdom, the sins of the
Priests, and the sins of all the people, for the sins of every man are
these things come upon us. And therefore as every man has bin to readily
officious in the Curssed proiects of impiety, so let every man contribute the
best of his devotion to the work of these times; summon all the force of his
soul into his prayers, and so conquer danger by repentance. And because my
soul must ever take up Saint Paul's quorum ego primus, ever confessing that of
sinners I am chief, give me leave o^t of an humble and penitent ambition, to
smite my own breast first and say, God be merciful to me a Sinner. And then
as a Priest and Minister of the Lord, to weep here between the Porch and the
Alrar and say Spare thy people o Lord and give not thine heritage to reproach
that the heathen should rule over us, for wherefore should they say among the
people, where is now their God. Oh what a ioyefull sight twill be to all the
Angels of heaven, nay to God him self, to se us now rep^nting all together;
to hear a whole Congregation knock at heaven gates with their tears; how will
the Angels rejoice to hear us mourne^ nay how forcible is the Nature of true
repentance that will make God him self repent to? For if we now turn unto
him, he will turn unto us and repent, and chase away all our distractions,
making fair weather in the state (Now threatened with so many storms) that
so we may serve him again without fear, and Cronicle the hartinesse of our
humiliation, in that prosperity with which he will reward it. But with out this
Conversion, we must expect nothing but woe, and horror, and confusion, and that
for want of religious fasting now, we may ere while starve for hunger: And for
want of tears now, we may ere while cry to our oppressors, and not be
regarded: When happily we may see o^r Children made a sacrifice to the fury of
the Sword and we our selves unhappier then they, that we dyed not before we saw
it. The hills cannot hide us, nor can the mountains show us so much mercy as
to fall upon us; or if they did, the power of him that gave so much power unto
faith, as to remove mountains, shall turn up our massy Coverlids, and lay us
naked to our Judgment: No, no, we have no way to fly from him, but by turning
to him, no way to quench his wrath, but with our tears, no way to be united
among our selves, but by renting ou^ hearts assunder. The Prophet bespeaks it
in the text, and God him self expects it, and both bespeake it Now, Now
therefore faith the Lord Turn unto me with all your heart. etc In the Text are
two General parts.

1 Preface: Therefore also now says the Lord. 2 Precept: Turn unto me with
all your heart etc
In the Preface 2 things, 1 Author, The Lord says, 2 Opportunity, Now says
th the Lord.


In the Precept 2. things, 1. Duty, Active, Turn, Objective adme to me. 2.
Direction, with all your heart with fasting etc.


The Direction is double.

1. Extrinsecall. 2. Intrinsecall.
The Extrinsecall part is considered. 1. Positively, with fasting and with
weeping. 2. Privatively, not with rending your garments.
Secondly Intrinsecall with the heart, with all the heart, with mourning, and a
rent heart.

Then for conclusion follows an Anacephalaiosis or summarie recapitulation of
the whole Text, by a patheticall ingemmination, which makes the Text a turning
Text, for it goes round in a Circle and ends where it began, And turn to the
Lord your God.

Where we note the earnestness of the Prophet in that Itteration, and have,
two arguments to persuade us to turn.

1. Of Justice and power the Lord 2. Of mercy and love our God.
These are the parts, and I shall prosecute them plainly, speaking to the soul
no less then to the ear; And I beseech thee O God of power so to assist me
with thy Spirit, that thy words in my mouth may forcibly enter the stoniest
heart here, and make it yield and turn to thee: And so I begin with the first
part etc.

The Proclamations we receive from the King, are usually prefaced, thus, a
Proclamation by the King, etc. And why so? but only to beget in all a more
awful attention for the present, and a strickt performance after.

But a greater then the king is here. It Is nunc dici^ Dominus, now says the
Lord, and give me leave to say what the Lord himself said elsewhere, He that
has ears to hear, let him hear what the Lord says.

Hear with his heart as well as with his ears, for the word in the Hebrew
Haazjnu, and the word in the Greek (...) both signify percipite from per and
Capio to take it in thoroughly, to our very hearts, for with the heart we
properly perceive.

And if we but remember the Author, and that it is a message from the King of
Kings, I hope we will call up our hearts into our ears, and hear just as we
must turn, with a^l our heart. Ipse dixit among the Pythagoreans begot a
Catholic observance, to tell them that Pythagoras had said this or that, made
it no less then Oracle: And certainly from such an au^hor as the Lord,
nothing can proceed, but matter of extraordinary concernment. The phrase
promises no less, now says the Lord, not now the Lord spoke: For the
Critticks put a difference between loqui and dicere: Speaking is general, and
belongs to the whole community of men, that have the Organs of speech rightly
disposed, but saying is more special and foretells some weighty matter to
ensue.

Tully in his Rhetorickes gives the difference, Solius est oratoris dicere,
loqui autem communis vulgi: Nor has this escaped the Graetians, (...).

And truly should we forget the Author of this message, the very gravity of the
phrase will draw our thoughts to the subject of it.

It Is a Proclamation of peace and pardon to all that will perform it, so that
this Prophet prophesies good to us, and not evil: For now God having must'red
up his judgments against Judea to take veniance for their sins, and the day
of wrath near at hand, yet he will not take them in their disadvantage, but
blows his Tr^mpet in Sion, excitare dormientes, to rouse up them that sleep
in their sins (as says the praef^ce to this Prophecy in Saint Ieroms Bible)
that so they sleep not in death.

God indeed prepared the Instruments of Death, but as yet he withheld the
execution; he had one thing more to do when every thing was ready, and that
was to send (...) to them to sue to him, that so he might do nothing.

Strange mercy in an offended God to threaten a people with destruction, that
so he may not distroy them? It Is reported of Tamberlayne that in all his
enterprises of war before the fury of the sword began, that he hung out first
a white flagg, to intimate that if now they would sue for mercy with
submission, they might be secure from cruelty and all the sad effects of
Conquest: but if upon this they yielded not, then he hung out a red flagg in
token of displeasure, and that he would now write the story of their
disobedience in their blood; And if they yield not at that, then he hung out a
black flagg of defiance, to show that now nothing was to be expected but utter
ruin and devastation; which truly was a merciful discretion, well worth so
brave a spirit. But Judah here had the white flagg last, and that displayed the
greater mercy; for first God displayed his black flagge, by threatening a dark
and gloomy day of desolation, yet only in terrorem, to awe them to convertion:
Then a red flagge, to show the means of this destruction, by fatal and bloody
war: and when all things were thus ready to their confusion, when hope
languished, and despair grew bold; then he hung out a white flagg in the offer
of his grace and mercy, that if yet they would turn unto him and repent, he
would cease to be angry, and that very wrath it self should consume, that was
kindled to consume them.

Thus God dealt with, Hezekiah, he sent him word that he should die, only
that he might live; for Hezekiah repenting wept, and prayed; and then the
message of his death, was the very death of that message; for Hezekia had not
lived so long, if he had not been told he should die so soon.

Thus God dealt with Ninivie; Jonah must prophecy that within forty days
Ninive shall be destroyed, but upon their repentance the Prophecy was
destroyed, and not the City: and it is singularly observable, that it was the
consideration and forecast of Gods mercy, that begot Ionah's disobedience in
flying to Tarshish, as you may see Jonah 4. verse 2. For he knew that God being
merciful and slow to anger, would soon repent him of the evil, and then the
message of truth from the God of truth should seem a lie, and put Jonah in
hazard to the loss his of reputation, if not his life: And therefore we
read, that upon Gods sparing the City, Jonah was very angry, Gods mercy to
them, stirred up his wrath, to see how kindly God had deceived them: and in
that mercy he thought the credit of a Prophet lost.

Nor is God by this alteration inconstant to himself, for his resolutions of
punishment, are ever ushered with condition; if not exp^est, yet understood.
The rule of sinners is, that they shall perish, but this rule (as general as
it is) has an exception, for it is except ye repent ye shall all likewise
perish; but if they repent, they are as far from perishing, as God is from
Injustice.

For aliud est mutare voluntatem, aliud velle mutationem, it is one thing to
alter the will, and another thing to will an alteration, that God never does,
but this often; Mutat sententiam, non matat consilium, say the Schools: So
that this alteration argues no change in God, since in every thing he does
what he will, and so is constant to his will, and that will is himself.

But they that repent not at the gracious messages of mercy, find a double
punishment; one, for offending, another, for dispising favor; and think then
(I beseech you) what madness it is (after we have sinned) to withstand our own
pardon, by Impenitence; and how fearful a thing it will then to fall into the
hands of the living Lord.

For if we repent not, we treasure up wrath against the day of wrath making our
selves more miserable in this that our impenitency procures our compleater
veniance: For God though he be merciful and long suffering and waits the
leisure of our repentance by many expectations of ^onuersion yet if a man will
not turn he will whet^ his sword, and wound the hairie scalpe of such a one as
goes on still in his wickedness.

And why think you is it there said that God will whet his sword where it is
said if men will not turn, but only to show that those that refuse the offers
of Grace, shall have sharper veniance, deep wounding Judgments, be quite cut
off, in utter ruin and confusion.

Beloved, God has dealt every way graciously with us and he has not dealt so
with every Nation, But now I Confess our sins have provoked him to whet his
sword, nay more his hand has bin stretched out, nor is his arm now shortened,
but his hand is stretched out still, Nay more (...), as the Septuagint render
that place, not only extenta, but exce^sa, not only stretched out, for so it is
in the least stroke of correction, (and those have not reformed us) but his
hand is high, lifted up, to strike us with full force and fury.

But as yet we hope there is mercy, and that we may turn away all these evils
with our tears, for sprinkled with these, the destroying Angel will pass by
us: And let us consider with wonder and thankfulness, that as h^louingly
invited Iudeas Conversion by his Prophet; so he (...) ours now, for Ioell being
dead yet speaks, and tells you that God would feign have you turn unto him.
The proclamations of princes, usualy threaten penalty to all that either
neglect or contemn them, what then will become or those that slight the
messages of heaven? It Is as much as your souls are worth, if now knowing who it
is that Commands you to turn, you should not obey him And where fore is it
that God thus earnestly longs for our repentance? that he mercifully desires
not our merrited destrnction, that he should so thirst to show us mercy, that
h^s very bowels should yearne within him; For the word in the Hebrew for
mercy is Racham, an signifies and inward Commotion, and yearning of the
bowels, God is in pain for want of our repentance.

And why all this? does our Conversion advantage him? cannot he glorify
himself as well in our Confusion? truly yes? but here appears his love to
us, that all he aims at is our good, that so his mercy might make us happy,
and not his Justice mise^able.

How ready are we to perform the Diuils command, thongh we see damnation at the
end of it? wheither it be with Adam to eat forbidden fruit, and mounting the
tree fall presently: whether it be with Caine to murder our Brother, and so
live, for Cains life was his punishment, and a wounded Conscience is worse then
death: Though* it be to plot mischeife in a State with Achitophell, and prove
cunning at last only in our own confusion; though it be with Judas to betray
our Master and with Pilat to Condemn him, and then presently (through
despair) bid the world farewell in a halter, Though it be to deny the Holy
one, to mu^ther the Lord of life, and desire the life of a murderer, though by
putting out that light, we bring darkness upon our souls and contrive a
curse through a general blessing, bringing his blood upon us and all our
Children. We do this and more at the Diuils command, and have we no obedience
for the Lord of heaven? what other wages can the Diuil (...), then the
multiplication of our torments? But God for our obedience, gives us such p^ace
of conscience in this life, as no storm can d^sturb us: Prepares our souls
for Glory by such daily augmentations of his Grace, as will make us love to
serve him being never so well Contented, as when he Commands us; Gives us such
a faith, as brings heaven down into our souls, to give us earnest, that he
will one day call up our souls to heaven, where, to reward our obedience he
will have us live eternally with him who commands us, and in the mean time
such a love and desire to him, that in Comparison of heaven, we esteem
Paradise but a hell, and life it self, but Martyrdom.

The Angels are more excellent then we, yet are they nothing else but obedience
in the very nature of their being; messingers, to go upon the employment he
sends them, for are they not all ministering spirits? See then, to be obedient
to God, is to live the life of angels, But oh God stooping our contemplations
lower, how are we ashamed and confounded, at the obedience of Abraham, who was
ready at the command of god, to slay his son, his only son, the son whom he
loved, and so take a way his life, that was the joy of his own, to sacrifice
Isaac to his God, and so become a religious Murderer.

But God lays no such harsh Commands upon us: not to sacrifice a son, but to
Kill a sin, not to shed blood, but to abstain from shedding it; No horror in
our services, no Cruelty in his Commands; Not to do any thing against the
nature of a Compassionate heart, but to turn unto him withal our heart, Not to
give him o^r childrens blood, but our own tears, and those not to advantage
him, but cleanse us.

And as a motive to all this, I beseech you consider who it is that commands
you, it is the Lord, the Lord that made you, and can confound you, the Lord that
made you of clay, and can break you in pieces like a Potters vessel. The Lord
who to plague you can create a Hell in your consciences in this life, and when
you dye (if you live but to resist his commands) will cast your soul into Hell
where the worm never dies.

The Angels do his will both Cito; and Celeriter: without delay when they go
about it, and with the speediest dispatch when they are in the employment of
it: consider then that now the Lord calls upon you to turn, and he calls upon
you to turn to him, Now, and that is the next point.

The second point.
And next to the Author, the opportunity speaks the importance of the
message, he expects it Now, not any time this year, for we may dye this
Month, and bring our years to an end now in the beginning of this; not any
time this month, for we may be, benighted in our graves before the next Moon
gives us light; Nay, not any time this Week, for this night our Souls may be
req^ired of us, and so we change our bed for a grave.

But Now, this minute, this very moment, for we cannot promise to our selves
the enjoyment of another, and this lost, can never be recalled.

Time is a thing that is lost, before we have it; and if learned men have found
such difficulty to discover what time is, for Saint Augustine (a rare wit)
strugleth in this question as a bird in a string, Quid est tempus? si nemo ex
me quaerat, Scio, si quaerenti explicare velim, nescio. (11. Book of his
confession. Chap. 14.) He knows enough to hold his peace, but not enough to
speak.

And if he could not give a certain definition of it, by reason of the
uncertain and vicissitudinarie Nature of it, how shall we think to possess
it?

This Nun^ of so little lasting, that it is lost while we speak it, how then can
we be Masters of that, whose very being is not to be? Like a swift river it
comes not, but to pass away.

And yet so necessary is this time that measures allour actions, that
Pythagoras calls it (...) the very soul of all things, but the neglect of this
soul to often ensnares our soul, and so two Souls perish both together.

How many are overwhelmed for want of the true employment of time) with
anguish, with remorsse, and sadness, when as time well employed makes a man
(without arrogance) reio^ce in the works of his own hands.

This is one of the great confusions, which at this day swayes the lives and
actions of great men; who are so overwhelmed with the multiplicity of affairs
(from morning until night) that they have leisure to think of every thing,
but themselves. Others roll themselves in vain occupations, and never
understand the principal business of their time which is to turn, to our
angry God.

(...) we labor in the maine point, as if it were but an accessorie, and take
the accessories, as if they were the choicest principalls.

All the petty trifles which concern the ease, and accommodation of our bodies
have their regularti^e, and seldom are forgotten; as to eat when we are
hungry; to drink when we are thirsty; to sleep when we are weary, to sport
when the Iocound fi^t comes on us; we give to all th^se their time; but for the
great affair of Salvation, we set apart no time; as if that were not worth the
wearing out a day.

God has reserved to himself the Government of the worlds great Dyall, Time,
he alone determines the hours, and will give this commission to no man. If the
Sun were stayed, in the time^ of Io^ua^, it was done says Saint Chrysostom
in honor to Jesus of whom this great captain was a figure: And if it reco^led
ba^k^ 10. Degrees in the time of Hezekiah, it was to ^ignifie the (...) of the
Incarnation, when the eternal. Word abased himself below the 9. Quires of
Angels, and united himself with humane Nature, the Tenth and last of
reasonable Creatures; Time indeed went backward, when Et^rnity came into the
world: but the course of Time was never stopped, unless for some special
mystery of our faith. To dream then that such a change should be produced for
us, to repair our Precious los^es, were such a mad folly, that whosoever
thinks it, shall find his error to soon, that is, when it is to late. If a
I^well be lost, i^ may be found; if a house be bu^nt down, it may be
reedified, and perhaps flourish most after ruin; But (O God) why should we
loose that which we can never find? Let Us catch the time while the Sun
strikes upon our line, or we are lost for ever.

Antigonus spoke wisely when he said, his was the warefare of time as well as
of arms, for truly all our Christian warfare Consists but in well managing our
time; then to have the breast plate of righteousness when the diuill thrusts at
us; then to have the Sword of the spirit when we need to resist; then to have
the helmet of salvation ^hen our heads are quite under water, that so we sink
but to Death, not do Despair, this is to suite the time well, and punctually
to employ it.

Gregory Nazianzen tells us ^agely (...). etc. that life is an open fair for
all the world to trade in, where we may barter a Vale of te^res for a Paradise
of joy, earth for heaven, a moment for Eternity, but reason rerequires that we
should com while the fair^ lasts, before the shops are shut, before the tents
of our bodies be pul^d down, before the Night of Death approaches, or we lose
our market: But O wretched men that we are! sin robb's us of our time to
prevent our repentance, and (...) cheates us at last of heaven: One man spends
his time in plotting mis^heife against another, w^^n as that time (...)
employed might have saved his ^oule: Another bestow^^ ^im self wholly on his
pleasure, as if he would fly at heaven with his Hawke, to which he seldom
looks but in his sport: Do we not see Ladies, who in the morning when they
should offer to God the first fruits of the day, will Consult an hour or two
with their looking glass, and scarce a minute with their prayer book? as if
they lou^d the shadow of their own face (which always is not the best)
better then the vision of God himself: These are houses still at reparations;
the face (which is the forefront of the house and next the street) must be new
painted, this, or that wr^nkle in the wall new pla^stred over, to which they
add so much of the Tyre-woman, till at last, they are quite lost in lime and
hair, and the whole fabric strewn with sweets, shows that the powder quite
forgets the dust. Is this to spend the time well? Can this trifling (to call it
no worse) fit us for eternity? Will not the Saints of the primitive times (who
as if the day were to little, destined the nights to devotion in their Vigills)
will not these rise up in judgment against us, who make our whole life a trade
of sin, or doing nothing.

Think (I beseech you, and tremble while you think) how many damned souls
are now broyling in hell fire (which the whole Ocean cannot extinguish) for the
contempt and misuse of time; who, because they have ill, and vainly spent
their time, are now swallowed up of the worst Eternity.

And think again, what time can there be imagined for repentance (the most
needful work of all) when all our life is swallowed up of impiety: And
therefore, it is good council that one gives us! Omnia ista contemnito, quibus
corpore solutus, non indigebis: Timely despise those things, in the body, of
which thou have no need out of the body: despise, and defer all other things,
as unworthy the expense of a moment; but thy repentance put not off from day to
day; do that Now, least perhaps you do it never.

And sure I am, that the Devil has no greater policy to circumvent us, then
by benumming of our zeal, by this hanging weights upon our souls, by the
delay of our repentance: and I dare be peremptory to conclude, that more perish
this way, then any other. For the Devil can work on few so far, as to
persuade them that they never need Turn to God at all, but alas who does he
not endanger, by delaying it?

Saint Augustine found this in himself, as he tells us in the Eight Book of
his confessions Chap. 12. For there finding the Devil flattering his soul
with persuasions to delay his repentance (at that time when he was most
resolved to perform it) he had much strife in himself, but knowing that now
the Divill had no other Engine to batter his soul withal; (so much was his
resolution for the maine, strengthened by assisting grace) and knowing the
Divill's plot by this procrastination, was only to bind him faster in the
custom of his sin; Now at last, he violently breaks the snare and
complains, and cries bitterly to his God: Vsque quo domine, quam diu? quam diu
cras, and cras? quare non modo? quare non hac hor a est finis t^rpitudinis meae?

Oh my God (says he) how long will thou suffer me thus? How long shall I say
to morrow, to morrow? why should I not do it now? and this minute end that
filthynesse of life, which otherwise will betray me to a life of woe for ever.

But beside the example of this godly Saint, give me leave to present you with
the reasons why we should Now without any delay turn to our God.

First because by delaying our repentance; sin is so fortified by custom and
continuance, that every day drives the nail in further, till it is hard to be
removed, and so our conversion becomes a task of greater difficulty. Again the
longer we continue in our sins, the more God calls back his grace and
assistance from us, so that the bancke breaking which did defend us, the full
streams of temptation break in, and overflow us. Thirdly, By continuance
sin takes deeper rooting, and so the weed which had but little fastening
before, requires more strengh and violence to pluck it up: Lastly, all the good
motions and inclynations of our wills, by the strength and growth of sin, are
more infeebled: That plant pines, where elder and stronger we^ds attract all
the moisture: Passions grow bold, where reason dares not stir against a
custom: When sin shall be fast rooted in the habit of it, when the Divill
shall be near to assault, and God far from assisting, O how diffi^ult will
our conversion be!

He that but stand^ in the way of sinners, is in a posture of to unhappy
constancy; he that goes on, thrives to fast in that trade which will undo him,
and is never no true a proficient as when he goes backward: but if once it come
to sitting in the seat of the scornful (quasi ad hoc vacans) (as Saint
Augustine glosseth that place) having nothing else to do, but to sin: To sit
at ease upon the Stool of wickedness, and imagine mischeife as a law, this is
to give sin a cushion, which is loath enough to rise, from the uneasiest
constancy.

Saint Augustine Commenting on that miracle of Jesus, in raising Lazirus from
the grave when he had been dead four days, searches the reason why Jesus
begun that work with a Prologue of tears, why he groaned and troubled
himself so much, when as he raised others with facility, without those sadd^r
Prefaces; and from the Consideration of this, extracts this mortal Divinity;
That there are four degrees of a sinner, corresponding to the four days of
Lazarus his interment: The First is a voluntary Delectation, the second is
Consent, the third is Accomplishment, the fourth is the Custom and Continuance
of sin; and he that has layne out these four days in the grave of sin,
buried thus, is hardly raised to life again; says that Father. No less then
a miracle can call back such a man, he must have tears, and sights, and
groans; inward trouble and consternation, and when these are grown to
perfection, the dead man is raised indeed.

And though I will not conclude (as some have done) that Lazarus thus raised
dyed no more; yet sure I am, that from this spiritual resurrection, no death
of sin shall relap's us; and therefore Lazarus must leave off his grave
clothes, and be unbound, forsaking all relations to the grave, to show that
those very sins being dead that killed him, he lives by their mortality.

Saint Augustine (Lib. 6. de Civit^t Dei cap. 10.) makes mention of an old
Comedian (a constant actor in those Comedyes which the blind Idolaters of
those times instituted to the honor of their false Gods) that he was so
innamored of the applaus the people gave him, that playing for the Gods, he
acted all as for men: but being old, and forsaken of his usual troop of
auditors; he would crawle to the Capitol and feebly act his Comedyes before
the Statues of his false Gods, doing all (as he said) then for the Gods, and
nothing for men. And do we not act our parts thus, when we dedicate the first
fruits of our time to our own sensuallity; and give God (in whom we live) but
the gleanings of our lives? Beginning then to serve God, when feeble age has
made ^s unapt for the service of sin; Never trembling in the sense of Gods
wrath, nor shaking in any thing but our palsy? Are we then fit to run the path
of Gods Commandments, when we cannot go without a staff? And truly we do
not unfitly to take the help of more legs to carry us out of the world, then
we had to bring us into it, who by a long life have contracted a greater
burden of sin upon us. Then only to cease from beholding vanity, when we
have not faculty enough left to see, to frequent the house of God with deaf
ears; Then only to come to hear, when with David's idols we have Ears only
not to Hear? Not to sin because of the innab^lity of age, is impotency, not
innocence; for the taynt and habit of our youthful sins, remain though the
act be wanting. O miserable condition of sin! never to grow old? not in Age
it sel^? Never to dye, whilst we live? when we can do nothing else, to be able
to do that?

Strange power of impotency to be able to do nothing but sin; and stranger
life of sin, that lives in us only to kill us alive, and lives when we are
dead in the guilt, and obligation to eternal punishment, and lives with us in
Hell, to keep us everlastingly living, or dying; (for I cannot tell whether it
be life or death, to live in nothing but torment, and dead to nothing else but
happiness.)

I beseech you think Now what will be Then, and let the thought of that Th^n,
teach you how to prize the Prophets Now; for Ex hoc m^mento pendet aeternitas,
the eternal Condition of your souls depends upon it.

O now for the Tongue of Angels to persuade you, but miserable man that I am,
I check that holy ambition, knowing that to be so excellent that I cannot
attain unto it; but such as I have I give unto you; and beseech you, as you
vallue the joys of Heaven, as you dread the pains of Hell, by those Souls of
yours to redeem which cost Christ himself his blood, and by that precious
blood, the pri^e of your souls redemption, by the love of that God who was
before all (...) and lasting beyond all time (being the Eternity it self) to
make a true use of this time Now.

O let not this day pass with out some reformation; let not this days Sun
set, and the wrath of God still upon us; but draw near unto him now, so near
that you may kiss the son, for if his wrath be kindled (yea but a little)
Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

Let me expostulate with the prophet, does not the Su^llow and the Crane, know
their time, yet poor man (for whom these were made) knows it not.

Happily sometimes we feel Agrip^as ague, some motions, and groouings of
repentance, but we are still at a stand for a Convenient season, and so the fit
goes off: (for the souls ague (Contrary to that of the body) beginns with a
hott fit, and ends in a Cold:) Truly though no time be amiss in respect of
God, for at what time soever a sinner does repent. that is the acceptable time,
that is the day of salvation: yet Esaw's tears when the time was past, the
Virg^ns knocking when the doors were shut, these show (what Solomon said) that
there is a time for every thing, and if we loose that time, we shall weep, and
knock, as foolishly as they.

Opportunity is it self a favor, and it is a second favor to discern it, but
the greatest is to lay hold fit, and from the want of these, spring the causes
of our Procrastination, which is the common error of repentance, (I beseech you
mark it) either our Ignorance in not discerning the time, or our Negligence,
that when we do discern it, do not yet embrace it.

This Christ laments with bitter tears, and of that, God himself complains,
Ier 8. verse. 7. Even the Storke in the air, the Turtle and the Crane, and the
S^allow, observe the time of their coming, but my people knows not the
Judgment of the Lord. God uses not thus to complain but in ^reat cases, to
slight his so graciously offered opportunity, he accounts no trivial matter:
It Is a point of the greatest consideration in all Christianity, else God would
not have complained, nor Christ so passonatly have bemoaned Jerusalem for the
loss of it, O says he If thou had known that this day had bin the day of
thy visitation, and what then? there he breaks off the tears coming so fast,
that he was forced to weep out the rest of his meaning: O those tears
silently tell us what the loss of time is, for therefore did he weep then,
because they wept no sooner.

But me thinks I hear flesh and blood begin to pleado May I not lay by the
consideration of my repentance a little? I am young and healthy, and gladly
would I befriend my youth with the pleasures of the world a little longer, and
then I will turn to God with all my heart* O be not deceaved; a sudden death
may snatch us hence, and send the soul into the other world with all our sins
upon it; and what the condition of that soul is, I dread to tell you.

But suppose the best, that Death send his harbinger, and by some languishing
si^knesse, kindly gives us warning of our departure, yet let me tell you, that
infinite are the perplexities which disturb the repentance of the death bed:
Our own pains will disquiet us, and make us roar for uery anguish, and so to
cry to God, is rather passion, then repentance: Can we be fit to turn unto
God, when we can scarce turn our selves in our bedds? the thought of the poor
widow we shall leave behind us, will make the soul forget her spowse and
swetest bridgrome Christ the fear of death will horribly affright us, and a
trembling dread so over whelme us, that fearing to die, we think not how to
dye, and so loose the life of the blessed: the enemy will then raise Devils in
our consciences, and present our thoughts with a sad Idea of hell, and show us
all the torments we have deserved; torments so intolerable, so immarcessible,
that the damned soul would be glad to be but a Devil, and think it a high
preferment to be nothing: And to show f^ll malice in the conclusion, at our
very departure, he will show us all our sins in such a shape that (despairing)
we may grow mad, and die.

Tell me then is this a fit time for repentance? Is the death bed a convenient
Altar to offer up our bodies a living sa^rifice, and then to when we lie a
dying? O God gi^e us grace to think of this betimes; and let me add, that the
Conversion of our last time is seldom free, but enforced, by the fear of hell;
but in that fear there is no love, and with out love, there is no hope of
heaven: To fear him only for his judgments, and not as sonns, is to find him
a Judge, and not a Father.

Besides the actions of virtue performed then, are not of that vallue with God,
as those which come to him winged with cherfulness in our health and
prospe^ity: What great mercy is it to pardon an enemy when we have no power to
hurt him? or what great charity to distribute ou^ goods, when we cannot keep
them? Alas in this estate, Peccat^te dimiserunt, non tu illa, thy sins
forsake thee, Thou do not forsake thy sins; And let me argue the
unsoundnesse of late repentance by the usual experience of sick men, who make
prot^tations of great contrition, but restored to health, return to sin, as
the dog t^ his vomit, and so as they mend, grow worse. But sin I know is
full of flattery; and now I call to mind the Th^ife on the Cross, was not he
saved the very last hour of his life, though he scarcely ever thought on God
before, was not he preferred from the Cross to Paradise, without the trouble of
more r^pentance?

Vnhapily argued; but show me such another example, and sin on, till you lie
a dying; and truly that souls hardly put to it, that has no better shift
then to make that a ground of presumption, which only is a help in despair:
This was a particular act of Christ as Saint Augustine notes, and so can make
no general rule; if a Prince pardon one malefactor at the place of execution,
a thousand others dye without it: This was to display the power of Christ on
the Cross, then, in his greatest infirmity, that when he would not save
himself from a temporal death, yet he would save him from an eternal death;
'Twas a rare thing, that a Thief should confess Christ, when his nearest
friends forsook him; and the reward of this, was as rare as his goodness.

Truly the point is of such consequence, I know not how to leave it, and
therefore let me infer further, that this late repentance must needs be very
dangerous, when as repentance at the best, withal advantages of life, is a
work of the greatest difficulty; why then should we post off that to the last
minute, for which all our life is to little?

Converse with a soul newly loosed from ^infull slave^ie, and it will tell
you, that She sailed in a calm, while she went the Devils voyage; but when
once she begun to think of returning home, and leave that Sea so full of
Sy^ens, then the storm arose, temptations multiplied like the Waves, every
billow striving which should first devour her.

And truly I have spent many thoughts upon that story of him (in the 9. of
Mark) possessed with a dumb, and deaf spirit; and I think it wonderfully
remarkable, that the Devil would neither hear, nor speak, whilst he had a
quiet possession of that body, but when Christ went about to turn him out of
doors (charging him to go out of him) then the mercy of Christ to the man,
wrought an unpleasing miracle on the D^vills, for the deaf heard presently,
and the dumb spoke, and now forced to depart, he tore and rent him, and
tormented him into such a trance, tha^ (...) spectators thought him dead.

(...) hear the Wise man in this: My son, when thou (...) come to the
service of God, prepare thy soul for temptations, though perhaps we feel not
the Devil in us before, yet when holy resolutions come upon us, then he begins
to strive and struggle presently.

And would it not make one afraid to pray with David, Creat^ in m^e O Lord a
clean heart, (humanum dico) (I speak now after the manner of men) when as the
^ouse i^ the Gospel was no sooner swept, but ^ight D^^vills rusht in at once:
but the Text there gives the reason, they found it empty; but if God be in thy
heart; if the Trinity keep house there; we need fear no Devilish
intrusions.

But to prosequte the point in hand, See it figured out in Pharaoh, who when he
found in the Children of Israel a disposition to depart, then his boiling rage
ran over in the multiplication of afflictions.

If Saint Paul have a motion of the law of the spirit, presently the Divill
urges his statute law in the law of his members, to resist the law of the
spirit: you see then repentance is not without strife and conflict, it stirr's
up war in the soul, and blessed is he who in this strife can get the
Victory, and I hope we shall think it a hard work ere we have done, it will
be a sign we are the nearer to it.

Much more might be added to this purpose; The Fathers are full of it, but I Will
shutt up the point with some breife collections out of the conversion of Saint
Augustine in the eight book of whose confessions, 1. and 2. Chap: we find his
flesh and spirit, in a dreadful conflict; God drawing on one side, the world,
the flesh, and the Divill pulling him back on the other: In this Agony of
temptation, he repaires to Simplicianus, a learned and a devout man, then to
Saint Ambrose, these were his Council of war in these assaults of his soul;
But after consultation with these, he was more furiously encountered then
before, (The Divill it seems was loath to loose this great wit,) Then he
retired him self to privacie, and then (Says he) what did I not say against
my self, how did I beat and whipe my Soul forward, to make her follow thee
(O God) but like a ^ullen jade she hung back, loath to leave her old path of
sin.

Here insued a grievous conflict, and then, (some truce made for a time) he
goes into an Orchard, ('I Will not dispute the conveniencie of that place, but if
Saint Augustine come off here, he will do more then Adam did.) But here all
his Carnal pleasure^ past, begun to Court him Dimittesne nos? and a moment^
issto non erimus tecum ultra in aeternum? will thou forsake us; and must we
part with thee now for ever? And then (as the same Father tells us) the Devil
bayted his hook with all his sinful pleasures past, (and truly it was
doubtful but he might then have swallowed some of them) but contrary, at the
thought of these, a sudden tempest of tears shrow'rd from his eyes, and
whilst he was thus weeping and talking to God in deep contrition of spirit, he
heard a voice from heaven, Toll lege; Toll lege; Take up and read.

Then opening his book, the first Scripture that presented it self was that
of Saint Paul Not in chambering and wantonness etc. Which hit Saint Augustines
disease right, and then denying all worldly lusts, he accomplished his final
Conversion; and in exultancie of Spirit, sends forth his soul in thanksgiving:
O Lord I am thy Servant, thou have broken my bonds in sunder, let my heart and
my tongue praise thee O Lord, and let my bones cry unto thee and say who is
like unto thee O Lord, and say thou to me I am thy salvation.

And now to sum up this: Repentance is a work of war, many assaults,
st^ong resistance, It wants first council, then grace to follow it, it
requires private an often conferrence with God by prayer, an over-ma^^ering
force of zeal to spur the sluggish soul forward, a contempt of former
pleasures, which will now again flatter us for entertainment.

It requires ^^ouds of tears, and the voice of God to call us, (though not
thus miraculously) yet by the still voice of his spirit; (and all this
considered,) now tell me, whether it be so easy a thing to repent, that it
should be left to the last? Whether we can retreat back to God in an hour,
that have strayed from him all our lives? whether a few dropps at the end of
our days are sufficient to cleanse that soul, to whom, sin has contributed
the stains of many years?

No, no; And therefore for this, shall every man that is godly make his prayer
unto thee in a time when thou may be found, but in the great water floods
they shall not come nigh t^ee.

Now then (doubtless) is our time to seek (and I pray God we be not near our
time, not to find): The waters of affl^ction are risen indeed, and the fl^^ds
have lift up their voice, in the sad menacings and report of war; but as yet
we are not in the great water floods, the waters are not gone over us, the
blood runs not down the streets, so that if yet, we cry e profundis as Jonas
did, and learn of the Waves to lift up our voice in hearty devotion; the
waters, (though they rise high,) shall be to us, but as the waters, of the
flood to N^ahs Arc, only to lift our souls nearer unto Heaven.

And thus you see, I have discourst out the First part of the Text, and have
considered the Author of this great matter in charge, Dicit Dominus, the Lord
says it: we have observed his loving kindness, in that he invites our
Conversion, and so turns to us first, and that for God to spare us, upon our
repentance, after a resolution of destruction, shows his mercy to us, and
betrays no inconstancy in himself: and therefore we to be very ready to obey
him, in a matter that so nearly concerns our Souls.

The second point was the opportunity of time: Now, where we considered time
int he flitting, and Vicissitudinarie Nature of it, and that we must expect no
stop of time to attend the leisure of our conversion; since God never stopped
the son, but to declare some great mystery* And therefore time being so
transient, we not prodigally^ to mispend, but penitently to employ it: where we
noted that the greatest policy the Devil has to circumvent us, is to
persuade us to delay our repentance, and in that discourse we saw how Saint
Augustine discovered this Stratageme in his own particular, and with what
resolutions he avoided it.

We have had reasons to against this delay, and seen how unsuitable it is to
the Majesty of God, to offer him a lame, and a blind, and a decrepit
sacrifice, in a late conversion; and here I showed, that to observe our time,
was the chiefest point in all Christianity, and that the neglect of this made
God compl^ine, and Jesus weep.

Then we saw the disturbances that disadvantage late repentance, and answered
the objection concerning the thei^e on the Cross; and lastly, we saw the
danger of late repentance in this, that repentance at the best, with all the
advantages of life, is a work of greatest difficulty: thus much I have done,
and yet we are but at the door of the text, Give me leave to enter it; I Will not
dwell i^ it; only (...) survey of every room, and briefly paraphrase on the
particulars of my second p^rt, which will prove little more then an application
of my first part, and then I have done.

The second General Part.
Saint Origin held an opinion (upon what grounds I dispute not) that as all
things flowed from God in the beginning, so all things should one day slide
back again into the bosom of God, (the Devils themselves not excepted) that
as at first, there was no other being but God, so at last, all things should
be God again:

Of this error of his I might say enough in saying nothing yet this I will;
It Were not so great a happiness for us to turn unto God, if the Devils could
return from damnation; neither need God, nor we, take so much care for our
turning: True it is that repentance is nothing else but redire ad principia; a
Circ'ling about to the point we begun at, to come as near to God as we can, to
return to him by repentance, from whom we turned away by impiety.

Now this term of turning, properly belongs to one that has lost his way;
Pilgrims we are all, and a falls light of sin has mislead us, it were madness
to persist now^ we know our error; it is high time to return, or we are lost
for ever: The Prophet that went the way he should not met a Lion in the way
which soon devoured him: there is a Lion in the way indeed, and to walk that
way, is but to dare our own confusion: Balaam was madd upon this way, when he
beat his Ass for being to slow in his Masters Destruction: an Angel must
come from heaven to beat him back, (so resolute we are in a wrong way) when
as the very Ass (as if it had more Grace then the Rider) chose rather to fall
down an object of his masters fury, then traitorously to Convey him to his
danger:

The Ass preached to Balaam, and may to us; and teach us an unwillingnesse to
paths of danger; and if by chance our fraylties lead us thither, let us rather
fall down in an humble acknowledgment, then post on to meet our misery.

Our life then in the Metaphor is a way, and the end of our way is to bring us
to our end; that summum bonum, which we call happiness; Adam went out of the
way so son as he was in it, and we are all to like our Father, as soon as
ever we are borne, we go astray says the Prophet: The best way then will be,
to have the end of our Journey still in consideration, with Enoch to walk with
God in the Contemplation of the place we tend to, And truly if we could do
so, the Prophet might be stow his Counsel where he pleased, we were well
enough with out it.

But wretched men that we are are! this is not our case we are in a way that
leads to destruction, yet cofidently we travayle on, till some twitch of
conscience begin to startle us, some close and thundering passage of a Sermon
pull in the reins, and we stand to consider whether we are going; some
threatened woe in a Prophet shows us the pit, and we, upon the brinke of it;
and then, what have we to do, but that, which Lott's wife might not do?
Look back first, and then return.

And indeed the very nature of Conversion will have it so; for it implies both
a turning from, and a turning to; a turning from sin, and a turning unto God.

And truly if we would but seriously consider the ugly shape of sin, how
horrid it is in the apparition of it; (with devout Saint Anselme,) we should
rather choose to runn^ headlong into hell, then make use of sin to carry us
thither: Nay that Devout soul goes further, Malim enim a peccato purus,
infernum intr^re, etc. I had rather (says he,) make hell my habitation if
there no sin might approach, then enjoy Heav^n it self, if sin were there.

And now fancy (with me) a soul drencht in woe, wallowing in the blood of his
own murders, with vollyes of oaths, and blasphemies, hanging at his lips;
with un^avorie discourses, (liek jewels) at his ears, with atraducing tongue
set on fire of hell; With eyes full of vanity, (or worse) with rapine at his
hands, with gluttony and disgorgings about his belly, and his feet mired with
all sensuality^ (to show the path he treades in;) and then to make him look
worse, all this veyl'd over with dissimulation: Would not this be a strange
spectacle, would it not affright us? would we not turn away from such a sight,
if there were but any way to turn? And if so, (God knows) we must run away
from our selves: and unless we run away from our selves, we shall run from
all that is God's, except his judgments, and those we cannot escape: unless we
turn from our selves by repentance, we shall turn from God by despair, and
that is the worst turning.

O whether then shall they be turned, that will not turn to the Lord? Truly I
am loath to tell you: David will do it for me, The wicked shall be turned into
hell, and all the people that forg^t God.

But Quo me vertam ut convertar ad te Domine? (is Saint Bernards question)
Lord, which way shall turn, that I may turn to thee? for thou art every
where; Supra, ^n infra? ad dextram, an ad sinistram? shall I turn upward or
downward? to the right hand, or to the left? All these ways we have gone from
God, and therefore all these ways let us return: First let us return upward,
by raising our souls from earth to heaven, esteeming all things but dross and
^ung, to those treasures which are above. Then let us tu^^e dow^ewards, by
descending low into our souls, in horror and humili^tion for our sins;
acknowledging it were just with God to cast us into the bottomless pit; and in
expression of this humility, to (...) with Iobe on the Dunghill; to lie with
David on the earth; nay with the Primitive Christians to lie under the earth,
by strowing ashes on our heads:

God himself was humbled, disdain not then to walk the path that he has
trodden; we cannot turn to God better, then in his own way: Humiliare, and
apprehendisti (says Saint Bernard,) be but humbled, and thou have him.

Turn next upon the right hand, in the true use of prosperity, employ the
blessings of God the right way, and if with the pr^digall we have spent our
portion, let us return to our father.

Specially if we have wasted our stock of Grace, nothing left, but the
miserable inheritance of wanting it, and a snatch now and then with the swine
(the proper punishment of our sensuality.) O then it is high time to return, he
has Shoes, he has a Robe, he has a Ring: Shoes to stay at home in, and
wander this way no more; a Robe of righteousness that shall cover all our
sins; a Ring, which shows our wandering has been circular, and that we are
now come in, where we went out; And by this Ring to testify that our souls
are married to our Savior for ever, never to part again.

Lastly, we must turn ad sinistram, to the left hand, by a willing patience to
endure afflictions: Christ was rayl'd on, despised, spited on, and beaten, and
wounded, and all for our transgressions, and shall we repine at our just
punishment?

Hear but Bonaventur's passion in this point; Nolo viuere sine Vulnerecumte
videam vulneratum: O my god, my wounded God, as long as I see thee wounded, I
^will never live with out a wound; Crist's Cross is the Christians
inheritance; and therefore it is obseruable, that he bare it not all the way
himself, but part of the way Simon carried it for him: we have, and shall keep
an interest in this, to the world's end.

O disturb not the joy of the Martyrs by shunning Christian sufferings; Make
not the Confessors blush in heaven to behold our tergiversations. But let us
march barefoot through the path that leads to Heaven, though the way be
strow'd with thorns; go through fire, and water; Go upon the point of swords,
Nay pass through hell it self, if that were the way to heaven, any thing, any
thing, for Christ: and if any of us have been apt to recoyle from our faith,
for any fear of danger, let us now turn to him, in a willingness to endure
the worst, this will be a brave Conversion, and a true testimony that we do not
turn only Complementally, but Cordially without heart: And indeed the Prophet
makes that the condition of our Conversion, we must turn In c^rde, with ou^
heart: a Corporal Conversion, will not advantage us God regards not much the
outside of the platter: I doubt not Herodias charger was fair and clean
without; but there was blood, and Murder within it: If revenge, and malice;
thirst of ruin more then reformation, lurk within our hearts, for all our
cunning complying in the outside of Religion, we do but offer to God John
Baptists head in a platter.

In the choice of friends we desire hartines, let us then measure our duty to
God, by our own desire, If we should unbowell our selves, and pull out our own
hearts, and give them to God a sacrifice for our sins; it were to little.

But God requires a cheaper sacrifice, that we would turn to him with the
affections of our heart, and shall we not do that?

O yes, I know you will say you will; and I^le put you to your trial presently:
Can you first but take off your heart from the things of this world, and make
your treasure in Heaven?

Could you be content now (if God should require it) to sell all you have and
give to the poor? would you not begin to shrug, and with the young man in the
Gospel g^e away sorrowful? Could you be content now to sit down and wash all
your servants feet? yet Christ did it.

Could you be content to kill your only son, and make a burnt offering of him,
yet Abram did it; did it, in his willingness to do it, did it though he did
it, not.

Nay more; could you give your only son to your enemies, to your enemies to
kill him, and yet that death (rightly applied) to save the Murderers? yet God
him self did it: Once more, could you be Crucified, and reviled, and mocked,
and wounded, have your hands and your feet peirc't, so that the Iron should
enter into your soul, and in the midst of all this, pray heartily to your
Father to forgive your tormentors? Yet Christ did it.

Are you not startled now? O Lord who is sufficient for these things? I see I
must descend lower.

Can you pray fervently, and send your heart up to Heaven in desire of mercy?
Are you sorry when you think upon your sins? and do you think upon them?

Nay more, and that is less; when you find a defect of these, can you heartily
wish you could perform them?

If you find that you do not greive sufficiently for your sins, can you
grieve (heartily) that you cannot grieve? Well; if but so, this is a hearty
turning, and God accepts it.

But here is one Condition more it must be in toto Cord with all the heart,
that is with all the four affections of the heart: First that we love him so,
that we love nothing else but for him, Secondly that we fear him and no other,
no not those that kill the body; Thirdly that we make him the joy of our hearts,
and Lastly to sorrow for nothing so much, as that by sin we have displeased
him.

Agripp^ said nothing when he said something; persuaded to be a Christian in
modico (for so the Latin renders it) but Saint Paul spoke it home, in modico
and in toto some what, and all together, to be as he was: To give God apart,
and apart to the world, is to rent our hearts the wrong way, and so make that a
fault now, which will be a virtue by and by: No no, we must avoid the very
occasions of sin, like Saint John, who fledd out of the bath, when he saw
Corinthus in it, as if he might have bin defiled in that very element that
clen^'d him, this is in toto cord with all thy heart.

And to testify this, the Prophet directs us further cum ieiunio to turn to
him with fasting; Before, I caled repentance a war, and Saint Ambrose makes
this the very skirmish, Certamen nostrum ieiunium est, the hottest of our
strife is our fasting: thus our Savior fought, and was victorious: thus Elias
went to heaven, nay to fast, is the very life of Angels, for their meat is to
do the will of their Father.

Well does the scripture call John Baptist more then a* Prophet, (and that is
more then a man;) and why? but because he lived the life of Angels by
abstinence: nay he is flatly caled an Angel, Ecce mitto Angelum, behold I send
my Angel, (that is my messenger) to prepare my way before me; and what way did
he prepare him? amongst others, A way in the wilderness, for there he fasted,
and there Christ fasted after him:

Eating came in with the creation of beasts, and so sensual a thing, it
seems God thought it, that the first law did conduce to fasting; and the first
sin was the breach of that Law; and we suffer for it to this hour.

Adam when he had eaten was clothed with the skinns of beasts (as the livery
of a beastly appetite,) but John Baptist that was a man of abstinence, had only
a girdle of skinns about him, to show no more appetite, then what conduced to
the necessity of his being:

But above all; we must abstain from sin; for what will it profit us to
abstain from wine, and to be drunk with rage? what will it advantage us not
to eat flesh, and yet perform the lusts of the flesh? what will it profit us
to forbear those things, which are sometimes lawful, if we do those things
which are never lawful? The Fathers conclusion is good counsel, Sic ieiunemus
a Cibis, ut multo magis ieiunemus a vit iis, Aug:) let us so fast from food,
that we much more fast from sin.

Ioels phrase is more then ordinary, Sanctify a fast; no true fast then with
out some sanctification, and therefore God by his Prophet Esaias derides their
formality, who dressed themselves in dissembled looks that so they might appear
to fast.

Is this your fast (says God) to hang down your head like bulrush? to put on
sackcloth and ashes? To hang down your head like a bulrush and yet still
remain a stiff necked people? to clothe the body in sackcloth when as the
soul is naked, not one ragg of righteousness upon it? To sprinkle our selves
with ashes, when as our lust burns in a full fire? so far are we by such a
fast from vanquishing the Devil, that it makes us like him: To abstain from
meat and not from Iniquity, is but to imitate the Devil (Says Isidore) Cui
^sea non est, sed semper adest nequitia, He eats nothing and yet is full of
wickedness; Better to be stuffed with meat then sin, but the true fast will
have neither.

But yet there is bread which we may eat when we fast, and fast the better for
eating it: David calls it panem lachrima rum Psalm. 80. The bread of tears, and
truly we shall turn to God the better, when in the strength of penitence, we
shall do a miracle, which the Devil never thought to tempt Christ with, turn
our very tears into bread.

And why does David call his tears his meat? They were more likely to be his
drink; but only to tell us, that with these, the soul is no less nourisht,
then the body is with bread, our spiritual life is not better maintained, then
by Lamentation.

And this is it our Prophet cales for next, our return must be in Fletu with
weeping: The Ancients were prodigal of their tears, Iobes eyes powered them
forth, David's eyes gushed out with water: And it is remarkable, that in the
Sacred Fountain tongue, the same word signifies both the eye and a well, to
show that our eyes must be over^lowing spring, whose inundation (like that of
Nylus,) makes the whole soil fruitful a long time after: our earth is barren
without these showrs, we live best, when we are drowned every day.

But the Day was not sufficient for David's sorrow, the night begets sins as
well as the day; and therefore David laid to rest, opens his eyes to weep, so
wakefull in his penitence, that every night he washed his bed; and well he did
to wash that: David had a sin of the bed, and therefore now (as with that rare
Emplaister, which applied to the weapon, cures the wound) he washed his bed, to
cleanse himself.

And we may well be Prodigal of our tears, when God himself is so thrifty to
treasure them in his bott^e; where (in Heaven) they shall lie desposited, as
the earnest of our coming thither; and when we do arive that place of bliss,
every drop shall be as a pearl to adorn our souls.

In David, we read of the waters above the heavens, and one of the Fathers (I
remember) interprets those waters to be the tears of penitents; (how litterall
I dispute not) but by application, it is very proper to the point: for
repentance (like that wondered Engine of Archimedes) makes water rise high, by
descending: It makes a miracle (otherwise never done) it makes it rain upward:
Mary Magdalen perfumed our Saviors feet more then his head: some devotion she
powered out of her box, but more dropped from her eyes, and washing him, in that
bath she cleans'd her self.

I have read of a Student in Paris, who coming to Confession, was so nothing
else but sorrow at the consideration of his sins; that grief locking up his
tongue, his sorrow found no passage but through his eyes; where every evil was
plainly seen in watery perspectives; and this was all the language grief had
left him: His Confessor seeing him stand thus speechl^sse, bid him write his
Confession, which he did and presented it to his Ghostly Father; who could read
in it nothing else but Miracle, for the black Caracters all vanished, and left
the paper unstained, to Emblemise that penitence is a second innocence.

Be this true, or false; sure I am, the melting soul, which has a flood of
tears for every transgression, washes off all her staynes, and appears
before God (to whom alone she is bound to Confess) pure and spotless.

And truly it is a good degree of our turning unto God, that when we rise out of
the mire of sin, we begin to see our own foulness, and then wash our selves
with our tears, And if Christ (who never laughed,) wept thrice, and yet had no
sin of his own, how many tears need we, who often laugh, and yet do nothing
else but sin?

If one we love die, passion presently leapes out at our eyes, and we weep
much: Alas, our souls by sin die daily, and do we not take it so heavily as
to weep? Can we loose a nearer friend? To have sins past number, and so few
tears, as perhaps, will not make a number? this is a strange disproportion.

Weep then a Sea of tears, that so the ship of your soul may sail to heaven
in her own sorrow; and for our speedier arivall, let us raise our selves a
prosperous gale, and with deep and hart-breaking sighs, fill her ^ayles: But
the ship of our souls is of great burden; sin has loaded us, we draw much
water, and every complexion is not fit for tears; if therefore we stick
aground for want of water, we must return by flying: hence David calls for
wings, and what wings are they? but the wings of a Dove, because that is the
most mournful creature, and this is another quality of our Conversion, it
must be in planctu with mourning: strong sobbes, deep groans, such inward
Compunction as if our hearts were stuck with needles: All cannot weep, but
all must mourn, or one day gnash their teeth: But the morning grows old, and
I must hasten: If we return rightly, the heart must be rent; and not the
garments; that is but Jewish madness, The sorrow of the outside, is but the
outside of sorrow, the very heart of sorrow, is the sorrow of the heart;
without which, we make a stage play of religion, every man seeming something
else, not that which he is; and then God will not behold us; or if he do,
'twill be oculo reprobationis, not ocul^ approbationis; with an eye of
dislike, not of love; behold us a far off, and what is further from heaven,
then hell?

No, no, when God look's upon us, we must be miserable objects; our hearts are
only beautiful in his sight, when they are broken:

Paenitentia est quaedam dolentis vindicta: Repentance is a kind of revenge,
and we do no less then stabb the soul in hearty sorrow; there must be first
(...), indignation, wrath and anger against our selves: then (...), very
revenge: Think then what a holy excess necessarily concurr's to true
repentance, that no one word will express the Nature of it, but we are forced
to make it up with many): Do de me paenas, ut ille parcat, says Saint Aug: I
punish my self, that so thou O God may spare me: Broken hearts are not
sufficient, we must have contrite hearts, hearts ground to powder, for
remorse of sin: And then here is the happiness, that turning to God th^s
broken, thus bruised, he will bind us up.

See Saint Orig^n lying on the floor, in the Church Porch crying out Calcate
me, trample upon me all ye people, as unsavorie salt, made by sin fit for
nothing but the dunghill: and truly so pitiful was the state of the
primitive penitents in this kind, that (transformed with grief) they became
such aruefull spectacle, that men had not the hearts to behold them, but turned
away their eyes from those, who were thus turning to the Lord: But here is the
comfort, that God, will never turn away his eyes from those, that thus turn
unto him; and that we may do so, we are put in mind of it now again, by the
turning of the text, for the beginning of the text, is wheeled about to the end
of it; And turn to the Lord your God.

And that we may do so, here is two enforcing arguments, one of terror, the
other of love; of terror, he is the Lord, powerful in punishing: such a stone
as when he falls upon thee in the execution of his judgments, he will grind
thee to powder: and make thee so miserable, and so near nothing, that thou
shall be nothing, but in misery.

Then an argument of love (for he assaies all means to (...) us) he is your
God: your God who created you, your God, who redeemed you, yours by all
promises of favor; to refresh you, when you come laden unto him: not to
despise you when you are broken hearted, not to Judge you, if you Judge your
selves, not to laugh at your Calamity if you timely weep for it, not to send
you away empty, when you hunger and thirst after righteousness* if we
perform our parts, he will do his:

This, this is the way, to appease his wrath, for though the Prophet's phrase
seem to question it, Quis scit? as it follows the text, who knows, if he
will return and leave a blessing behind him? Yet we know that interogations of
this Nature, are equivalent to affirmations, and so here is the sense, we know
that he will return and have mercy upon us, and for our turning unto him with
fasting, ^he will return unto us with a meat and drink offering, as it
follows in our Prophet: that if we turn unto him with weeping, he will f^^l
us with fullness of joy; Not that our souls shall, or can, comprehend the
joys of heaven, that were to narrow our happiness, but our souls (which is
more) shall be possessed of joy; Totum gaudium non intrabit in ga^dentes, sed
toti gaudentes intrabunt in g^udiu^, says Peter Lombard out of Saint Aug:

O think then what the joys of heaven are, into which the soul shall be
plunged as into an Ocean, and so be devoured of happiness: Here Is fair
invitation; he will be ours, by making us his, and we may give the state of
Grace a glimp's of the state of Glory, by turning to him as he is our God, for
then he will turn to us as his people, (and his indignation ceasing^ (to begin
our heaven) joy (in a degree) shall here on earth, descend into our souls;
and we (not charioted up to heaven (with Elias) nor raped thithe^ (with Saint
Paul^ shall by a cheaper and easier state, wear every day a taste of
happiness in our hearts.

Thus, thus shall peace be settled in the Kingdom; our hearts all united in the
true Religion; all our fears expelled; and the voice of joy return into our
dwellings: and that it may be thus; Turn^ thou us O good Lord, and so shall we
be turned, turned from sin unto righteousness here, and one day translated
from Earth to Heaven: Even so Lord Jesus, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 4. line 29. read withdraw. p. 5. l. 21. r. for what we now have. p. 6.
l. 4. r. put on our. p. 10. l. 11. for yield. r. yielded. p. 11. l. 8. r. of
his l. 33. r. will be then. p. 13. l. 5. for an r. And. and for And an. p. 15.
l. 18. r. we think we have it. p. 20. l. 8. for no r. so. l. 32. for mortal
r. moral. p. 27. l. 31. for famously r. furiously.


