THE HEAVENLY PASSENGER: OR, THE Pilgrims Progress, From this WORLD, to that
which is to come.

Delivered under the Similitude of a DREAM.

Destruction

I in a Dream beheld this Theme, then when I did awake,

With much Delight, I soon did write, for every Readers sake.



Wherein is Discovered, the manner of his setting out, his Dangerous Journey,
and safe Arrival at the desired Country.

Newly done into Verse, By S. M.

Licenced and entered according to Order.

Printed for J. Deacon at the Sign of the Angel in Guilt-Spur-Street, without
Newgate. 1687.

The Heavenly Passenger: Or, The Pilgrims Progress, from this World, to that
which is to come, etc.
WHen Phoebus did her gilded Beams display,
Into a silent shade I took my way,
There to divert and spend an hours space,
In solid sort within a silent place;
With sweet content, for none molested me,
Then down I sat beneath a spacious Tree,
Each pleasant object did my fancy please,
Till silent slumber did my senses seizse.
I Dreamed, and behold! I thought I see
A man with Tears, in sad extremity,
With careful Visage, looking too and fro,
As if he would run, but knew not where to go,
And in his Hand behold he held a Book,
Then in the same he carefully did look;
Upon his back a burden he did bear,
Which seemed to drive him almost to despair.
While he was shedding many a bitter tear,
One called Evangelist did there appear,
And did demand the reason of his woe,
To whom he said he knew not where to go,
I read and find I stand condemned to dye,
This is my grief, I know not where to fly:
Then said Evangelist, why fear you Death?
Since every Mortal must resign his Breath.
Dear Sir, said he, the burden which I have,
I fear will sink me lower then the Grave;
How shall I with that mighty Judge prevail,
If I with guilt am hurried to the Jail?
Then to be Tried, and not my Conscience clear,
This makes me tremble with a sense of fear.
Then said Evangelist, Is this thy case,
Why stand you still? be thrifty, mend thy pace:
Dear sir, said he, I know not where to run,
A cloud of sorrow does Eclipse my Sun;
A Parchment Role he gave the Man with speed,
Where in the same these words he then did read.
Flee from the danger of the Wrath to come,
Which will not fail, though not believed by some,
Then said the Christian, for his name was so,
Alas! alas! I know not where to go,
Then said Evangelist, and pointing strait,
O do thou not behold yon wicket-Gate?
That way he pointed then, he set his Face,
But yet the Christian could not see the place;
Nor do you not behold yon shining light?
Said he, I do, then keep it in your sight,
And that will lead you to the very Gate;
And there you will find, that it will soon abate
The woeful anguish of your bitter Grief,
For there is the very Fountain of relief;
Knock at the Gate, and you will receive I say,
A full direction of the perfect way.
No sooner was it said, but he begun,
With expedition willingly to run;
No doubts nor scruples, he begins his Race,
With resolution to obtain the place.
I Dreamed, and behold I thought I see,
His Wife and Children running hastily
To call him back, with cries and b^inish tears,
But yet he stopped his Fingers in his Ears,
Forsaking all his Children, Friends and Wife,
Saying, I now must seek Eternal Life;
Some of his feigned Friends to him did call,
But yet he would not turn his head at all:
Two of his Neighbors after him they went,
Whose Resolution now was fully bent,
To overruled him by their crafty wit,
One Pliable, the other Obstinate;
Then they the Christian soon did overtake,
Persuading him his journey to forsake:
No, said the Christian, back I will not go,
Destruction will the City overthrow,
Destroying Fire, this will be their doom,
Which will their City utterly consume:
Now for this cause my Friends from thence I fly,
Which is the place of my Nativity:
Read in my Book, you will find it as I say,
Then come and go with me my Friends I pray;
Said Obstinate, tush, talk not of your Book,
Do you suppose that we your ways can brook,
To undertake along with you to go;
Come, will you now return with us or no:
Christian. No, I have set my Hand here to the Plow,
And therefore am resolved to pay my Vow.

Then said Obstinate, come then Neighbor Pliable, let us return again and go
home without him, there is a company of these cross headed Coxcombs, that when
they take a fancy by the end, are wiser in their own Eyes, than seven Men that
can render a Reason.

Forbear said Pliable, do not revile
Against the Christian, but attend a while,
Unto his Words, for they have pierst my Heart,
Believe me he does choose the better part.
By me my Carnal Friends shall be forgot,
With him I Will travel, thus I Will take my Lot:
Nay then said Obstinate, if it be so,
Then he and you may both together go;
Unto the City i will return again,
And both your Companies I will refrain,
My course of Life, I never mean to change,
Who knows where such fantastic Fools may range.
Chri. Come Neighbor Pliable, along with me,
For there is joy and true felicity;
If you will not believe me what I say,
Take here my Book and read the truth, I pray.

Pli. But Neighbor Christian do you know the way?


Chapter Yes, one Evangelist, whose love was great,
Did bid me speed to yonder is wicket Gate,
When coming there, there w^ll be no delay,
To give the true direction of the way.

Ply. Now Neighbor Christian, Obstinate is gone,
Then in discourse I pray you to go on,
Since here is none that can our peace annoy,
Then freely tell me what we shall enjoy:

Said Christian, though I keep them in my Breast,
By me they cannot fully be expressed,
But yet I am resolved to proceed,
And in my Book I mean of them to read.
Ply. But is your Book all Truth in verity,


Chapter Yes, It was made by him which cannot lie.


Ply. What you affirm, I willingly believe,
Now freely talk of what we shall receive.

Chapter A Kingdom free from pains and misery,
There Is peace and rest to all Eternity;
With shining Robes the Lord will us array,
And Crowns of Glory, which will never decay,
There is no mourning nor no weeping there,
But every one is free from grief and care;
The Lord that owns the place, will end our fears,
And give us joy and dry up all our Tears.
There will you see each glorious Cher^bim,
With Saints and Angels, which will ever sing
Great Hallelujah to our Heavenly King,
In Presence of that sweet Celestial Quire,
Each Holy Soul will ^ave its full desire:
There Is thousands gone before which we shall see,
All clothed with glor'ous Immortallity;
There Is perfect love and peace with one accord,
All walking in the presence of the Lord.

Ply. The thoughts of this does ravish now my Heart,
But how shall we herein obtain a part.

Chapter He that is Lord and Ruler of the place,
Will freely give it those that seek his Face.

Ply. Then Neighbor Christian, let us mend our pace.


Chr. I travel slow the more's my solid care,
Because this burden on my back I bear.

Thus in my dream methoughts I see them walk,
Where instantly they both did end their talk.
Then in a foul and filthy plashy sl^ugh,
They both slipped in, but yet I knew not how,
The slough of Dispond, was the very place,
Where they did wallow in a woeful case,
Poor Christian then alas! some help did lack,
By reason of the burden of his back,
Did seem to sink him lower with the weight,
Then Christian was in a most dismal state,
Ply. Alas! my Neighbor Christian, where are we?
Is this the place of which you talk to me*
If I get out, you by your self shall rome,
For back I will return unto my home:

Then striving hard with all his might and main
He did get out, and home returned again;
But Christian in the slough did still remain.
Now Pliable he went away therefore,
And Christian never did behold him more.
In this Distress the Christian he was tried,
But he endeavored for the other side,
That in his Journey he might still abide;
One called Help, did presently appear,
And said to him, my Friend how came you here?
He freely told him all at his demand,
Then Help immediately did lend his hand
To pull him out, and set him in his way,
Then Christian traveled on without delay;
His weighty burden made him sigh and groan,
Yet he will not turn away, though left alone;
But yet before he crossed over the Plain,
He met a Man, whose end was Carnal Gain,
He from the City of Destruction came,
One Worldly Wiseman, he was called by name,
Who said, my Neighbor, whether art thou bound?
What is the cause that Fortune thus has frowned,
To make you leave your Wife and Children dear?
Besides, who would have thought to meet you here?
Chr.] My Journey is to yonder Wicke-Gate,
For this my burden is of such a weight
Upon my shoulders, that my bones are pressed,
But I am told, that there I shall have rest.

Worcester. Wise.] How came you by this load and careful look?

Said he, dear Sir, by reading in this Book;
Now this it is, the Worldly wiseman said,
For to neglect your business and your trade,
To read those things, that cannot well agree
With Men's mean parts, and low capacity;
Now may you see, and perfectly discry,
What danger is in reading things too high,
But who advised thee to undertake,
To go this way, and all your Friends forsake?
Chr.] 'Twas one Evangelist who did relate
A remedy, for this my wretched state,
By going unto yonder is wicket-Gate.

Worcester. Wise.] Beshrow him for his News, is he thy friend,
That such a journey can to thee commend,
Where many fatal Perils does attend?
You met with one already I suppose,
I see the slough of Dispond on your Clothes,
Yet take my word, you will meet with many more
Such fatal dangers, that will grieve you sore;
You Will meet with Monstrous Giants by the way,
And roaring Lions hunting for their prey;
And in the Valley of Humility,
A thousand oppositions you will see:
Take my advice, my Counsel never despise,
Return, go back I say, if you are wise.

Chr.] There is no place of rest for my abode,
So long as on my back I beat this load,
None of those fears shall make me turn aside,
My way I Will keep, whatever me betide;

Worl. wise.] Then take your chance, no more to you I Will say,

And thus he left the Christian in his way.
He being gone, the Christian mends his pace,
'Till he arrived to the appointed place;
Over the Gate this writing then he see,
Now knock, and it shall open be to thee,
Then he did knock, and after that again,
'Till free admittance in he did obtain:
One let him in, whose name was free Good will,
And after that he then discoursed still
With Christian, who declared to him the sum
Of all his fears, concerning wrath to come.
Chr.] Destructions in the City, I foresee,
Which was the place of my Nativity,

Good Will.] But how came thee to travel all alone,
Did thou not speak of this and make it known?

Chr.] Yes Sir, I told my Wife and Children too,
And all my Friends what danger would ensue,
Yet still they cried, persuading me to stay,
But yet I stopped my Ears and came my way,
I was resolved to come, though all alone,
To the Celestial City, Mount Sion,

Good Will.] Then welcome friend, for you I have respect,
Take my advice, keep in this Path direct.

Said Christian, Sir, will you that love extend.
To ease my burden, which does make me bend
Good Will.] Bear it with Patience, then you will be blessed,
And be releast from it with perfect rest:
You soon will come up to another Gate,
Where one does live that will interpretate
The sense of what you do not understand,
And will direct you to the blessed Land.

Then in my Dream my-thought I saw indeed,
The Man Good Will, bid Christian now God-speeds,
Then Christian girding up his Loins, he went
And knocked at the Gate, where he was sent,
An ancient Man came mildly to the Gate,
To whom the Christian did in brief relate
The truth of all, and let him understand,
He was a Pilgrim to the blessed I and;
He bid him then come in and rest a while,
And with a pleasant Countenance did smile,
And then he showed him many Glorious things,
And said, from hence all mutual comfort springs,
To cheer the Souls of those that will engage,
To persevere in this their Pilgrimage,
Then did the Christian unto him reply,
Is there no fear of fainting? may not I,
By reason of this burden which I bear,
Sink in the very Gulf of deep Despair.
Interpreter.] No, never faint nor fear, but run thy race*
Thou will have comfort in a little space;
Then keep the Path and turn to never a side,
Be watchful too, for fear your Feet should slide;
For every fall will fill thy Soul with grief,
But perservere and thou will find relief.
Farewell, dear Sir, the Christian said with joy,
The hope of Bliss does all my grief destroy:
The Path he run was fenced with a Wall,
And Man's Salvation they the same did call,
And near that place a Cross the Christian see,
Which gave him ease and true felicity.
The Cords that bound his Burden here did crack,
And then it loosed from the Christians back.
The Christian then with joyful voice replied,
Here is the place whereon my Savior died,
And freely did surrender up his breath,
That he might ransom our vile Souls from Death.
While tears did trickle down the Christians Face,
Three shining ones appeared in the place:
The one of them said, Peace be unto thee,
Thy Sins are pardoned, and thou shall be free,
Then stripped him of his Rags, and gave no less
To him then the fair Rob^s of Righteousness,
They likewise gave to him a Parchment Role,
Where reading in the same he might condole,
And gather comfort in this present state,
And give it in at the Celestial Gate:
The Christian then proceeded on again,
He lost that load, of which he did complain,
That grievous burden was the s^nse of Sin,
None can express the joy that he wa^ in.
Then did the Christian strive to mend his pace;
And as he run, he turned aside his Face,
Where he beheld three Men in Fetters bound,
Near to the Path, all sleeping on the ground;
The Christian did for them in sorrow weep,
Said he, I Will strive to wake them from their sleep,
One's Name was Simple, and the other Sloth,
The third Presumption, sleeping with them both:
The Christian said to them, awake and rise,
Behold the tears that trickle from mine Eyes!
Arise, I Will help you off with all your Chains,
And it will be for your Eternal gains;
For, should the roaring Lion come this way,
Then to his Teeth you would become a prey.
First Simple roused, yet would not lend an ear,
Saying, here is no danger, I Will not fear,
Said Sloathful then, yet still a little sleep,
Go on your way, for us you need not weep;
Yea, then Presumption pusht away his hand,
And said, each Tub must on his bottom s;tand.
Then Christian left them, and away he went,
Yet grieved to see, that they could be content
To sleep secure, without a sense of fear
Of future Dangers that approached near,
And though my very Heart for them does bleed,
Yet I must to my Journey now with speed,
The Christian constantly continued still,
And traveled up a vast and mighty Hill;
This Hill was called Difficult by name,
And Christian now must needs go up the same,
This Path could not be trod with sloathsul ease,
But Christian labored on his Hands and Knees;
With resolution Christian did apply,
His full and firm endeavors constantly,
Until he arrived to the top of all
That mighty Hill, yet many drops did fall
Of soft distilled tears, down from his Eyes,
As Messengers of Joys, not mournful Cries.
Thus in my Dream, as I beheld him still,
Two Men did meet him running down the Hill,
To whom the Christian lovingly did say,
Dear Friends, why run you the contrary way?
Kind Sir, said they, we needs must tell you true,
We have been Pilgrims both as well as you,
And also traveled up the steepy Hill,
But after that we found more danger still,
We saw two Lions lying in the way,
To whom we feared we might become a prey,
Such dread and fear did seize us in that place,
That we resolved with speed to turn the chase.

Chr. This dismal tidings makes me half afraid,
But yet I trust my God will be my aid;
The race is set before me, still I Will run,
For should I now go back I am undone.
Why should I faint or fear this blast of breath,
I Will venture on betide me Life or Death?

Then Christian girding up his Loins, began,
With Resolution willingly to run,
That glorious City he does hope to venture,
And there he left those two that would not enter;
His nimble feet did make no stop nor stay,
Till he arrived where these two Lions lay,
He trembled then, to venture he was loath,
For why the path did lie betwixt them both,
He knew not where to go, nor what to say,
He must pass through, there was no other way,
Beyond these Lions just before his face,
There was a stately House, a sumptuous place,
One Watchful was the Porter of the Gate,
Who said, come on and guide your feet, step straight,
For though they roar, they are chained, they cannot stir,
Then Christian he with joy, said, thank you Sir;
Now by this time the night approached near,
Said Christian, Sir, may I have lodging here?
The Porter then of Christian ^rav'd his name,
He told it him, and likewise whence he came;
The Porter said it was the gracious will
Of him who was the Lord of this great Hill*
To build this place, to mitigate the grief
Of weary Pilgrims, yiedling them relief;
Then stand you still and I will ring my Bell
And call Discretion, if she likes you well,
You will obtain your own desired ends,
Here to repose and rest your wearied Limbs:
The Porter rang his Bell, then straight came there
Discretion, who was beautiful and fair,
To whom the Porter said, this man's request
Is, that he may this night find place of rest;
She asked Christian, what might be his name,
He freely told her, and from whence he came;
Much talk they had, which did her then surprise,
And tears did flow from fair Discretions Eyes,
After a little pause, she called out more,
Who met him at the threshold of the Door:
Prudence and Charity with one accord,
Did say, come in thou blessed of the Lord,
Prudence and Piety till Supper-time,
Did talk with him about those things Divine;
The supper being dressed, the table spread,
They all set down where they with comfort sed,
Then at the table there they talk their fill,
Concerning of the Lord that owned the hill,
Who built this house, yea, for the very sake,
Of those that do this Journey undertake;
Then after many things they had expressed,
They showed poor Christian then his place of rest,
It was a fair and spacious upper room,
Of choice delights with Myrrh and sweet perfume,
His window then did open to wards the East,
Where he in comfort all the night encreast,
Then in the morning when the household rose,
They to the Christian freely did disclose,
The many worthy things upon record,
Done by the ancient Servants of the Lord,
Then after this unto the top they went
Of all the house, to show him more content,
His Eye was pleased, his heart with joy was filled,
When looking toward the South he there beheld,
A fruitful Land, with Wood, most stately trees,
With Vines and Olives, stich like things as these,
With many pleasant flowing Fountains too,
All most delightful to the Christians view;
The Christian he desires now with speed
That he might go, to which they all agreed,
In mighty Armor him they did array,
Lest he should be assaulted by the way,
As Christian then was passing through the gate,
He said to Watchful, now my joys are great,
The Porter then to Christian did reply,
A man whose name was Faithful passed by,
At this the Christians joy did more excel,
He is my Neighbor, and I know him well,
How far is he before, pray can you tell?
Porter. He Is hardly at the bottom of the hill:


Chr. Farewell good sir, I thank you heartily,
For all your love and kind civ^^^ty,

Likewise the Damsels still will be his guide,
Lest going down the hill his Feet should slide,
They knew full well that many dangers be,
In going down to true Humility,
Then Piety she gave him Bread and Wine
To nourish him, this was their good design,
And bidding him see that he did not fall,
So Christian he was thankful to them all:
Now in the Valley of Humil^ty
Poor Christian traveled, and at length he see,
A foul and filthy Fiend approaching near,
Which made the Christian tremble then for fear,
But Christian taking courage by his side,
Resolved to go on what e're betide;
The Monsters back was then like Fishes Scales,
Wings like a Dragon, and he loudly yeals,
Mouthed like a Lion with his furious ire,
Out of his throat came smoke and burning fire;
His Feet was also like the savage Bear,
His Eyes like fire sparkl'd in the air:
He then beholding Christian with disdain,
Demanded of him likewise whence he came.
Chr. I from the City of Destruction fly,
The ancient place of my Nativity.

Then said Apolyon, (for his name was so)
That's my Dominion, you your self does know,
How dare you then to act so strange a thing,
To leave my service and desert your King?
Chri. Your Service is severe, and what you give,
Upon it none is able for to live,
Therefore I will not spend my strength and breath
In sin, whose Wages is Eternal Death.

Sometimes Apollyon threatening Christian sore,
But Christian standing on his Guard the more*
Apollyon then he spread his dreadful Wings,
And Darts of Fire at the Christian flings;
But Christian taking then his Shield in hand,
He turned his Da^t and manfully ^id stand,
Then Christian drew his Sword for to defend
Himself against that Fiend which did contend;
Apollyon striving still for to prevail,
Causing his Darts to fly as thick as Hail.
This cruel Combat lasted half a day,
Poor Christian had almost become his prey,
He grew so faint and feeble with each wound,
That fierce Apollyon threw him to the ground,
The sword out of poor Christian's Hands did fly;
Apollyon said, proud slave thou now shall dye,
He then with fierce and flaming Eyes did stare,
Poor Christian then was almost in despair;
But now the Lord his gracious love did show,
When this fierce fiend was fetching his last blow,
In hopes thereby the Christian to have slain,
But Christian got his Sword in hand again,
Saying, rejoice not, for it is in vain,
For though I fall, yet shall I rise again.
Now Christian by his Courage gained ground,
And gave the cruel Fiend the fatal Wound,
Which Christian seeing fought with Heart and Limb,
And said, more then a Conqueror through him,
Who loved me, and did afford me strength,
To overcome my Enemy at length,
Apollyon spreading of his Wings did rore,
And took to flight, he never saw him more;
During the time of this most dreadful fray,
Mythoughts my Heart did ache, and what to say
I knew not well, Apollyon loved did yeal,
And like a Dragon sm^ting with his tail
Poor Christian all the while did sigh and groan,
Which almost would have broke a Heart of stone,
Till at the last his two edge sword he found,
Had won the day, and then his joys was crowned;
The like encounter sure I never beheld,
But after this he was with comfort filled,
And said, I will kneel down to give the praise
To him, who is the Guide of all my ways,
Whose strength and force will evermore engage,
Against my Foes in this my Pilgrimago.
Then after that he sat him down at length,
To eat and drink then to increase his strength,
Then strength and courage came, so on he went,
His Sword drawn in his hand, still to prevent
Those fearful Fiends which might him still assail,
He being ready they might never prevail,
But he immediately approached near
A dismal place, where light did disappear,
It was the shadow and the Vale of Death;
Then Christian feared, for every moving breath,
Brought dreadful groans and shrieks to Christians Ears,
Though he went on it was with doubts and fears;
Strange Apparitions, most infernal Fiends
Did there surround him, thus his grief begins,
Dark dismal Cloulds did overspread that place,
With Dragons, S^rpents, in this frightful case,
He forced was to put his Sword up then,
For smoke and flame from the infernal Den,
For Christians sword, it seemed not to care,
Then did he take the Weapon called all-Prayer,
O Lord, said he, deliver thou my Soul,
For in thy mercies I will still condole:
Dark was the place, no Creature could he meet,
He knew not how or where to set his feet,
Yet he went on, and heard a Voice at length,
Saying, great God, I navel in thy strength;
This caused Christian mainly to rejoice,
When he had heard that comfortable voice,
This was the reason he rejoyc't the more,
He knew some Holy Man was gone before,
He traveled on, though in a woeful plight,
Until the Day did break, that blessed light;
He looking back, discovered to his view,
The many dangers which he had gone through,
Then he went on, though there was many mares,
The Sun did shine, and therefore now his cares,
Did keep him safe from ov^^y danger still,
So that he soon arrived to a Hill,
And then his joys increased more and more,
He saw his Brother Faithful just before,
And earnestly desired him to stay,
Though he looked back, he still kept on his way,
I am upon my Life, for why I find
The Messenger of Death pursues behind.
Then Christian ran with all his might and main,
Where ground of him he instantly did gain,
Dear Brother Faithful, I am, glad said he,
That I have overtook you now to be,
A fellow-Pilgrim in thy company*
Then both rejoicing, they together walk,
And frequently of many things did talk,
Of all their troubles they had undergone,
And now with cheerful Hearts they travel on,
While their kind Friend Evangelist did meet,
Those two poor Pilgrims, whom he thus did greet,
Peace be to you, behold (...) a friend,
To all that will be faithful to the end.
They thanks return for all his former love,
And for those gracious favors from above;
Evangelist he told them one thing more,
They would come to a town not far before,
Where they would meet with many cruel foes,
Like Tigers wild, poor Pilgrims they oppose.
They thanked him for all his tender care,
And soon they did arrive unto that Fair,
Where all their tempting toys, men did set forth,
But they accounted them as little worth:
Now those that kept the Fair when they did find,
That these poor Pilgrims was not of their mind,
To be delighted with those empty toys,
But aiming still at more Celestial Joys,
They rose in wrath, and did revile them there,
Nay, hardly one in ten that kept the Fair,
But in their Malice did their Verdict give,
They came as Spies and were not fit to live:
Now those poor Pilgrims standing in the throng,
Mythoughts the conflict had not lasted-long,
Before poor Faithful's Life they did betray,
Thus to his joys he found the nearer way,
And bid his Follow-traveller adieu,
Who had still many troubles to go through
Then in my Dream I thought poor Christian said,
To those Celestial joys thou art conveyed,
Thy Foes of this they could not thee deprive,
For though they killed thee, thou art still alive,
My faithful Friend, I come, I come to thee,
Then straight my thoughts he was at liberty,
And on his journey he went cheerfully,
Then Hopeful came to bear him company,
Who said, dear Friend, my lot with thee i will take,
In Life or Death I never will forsake
Thy sweet Society, for I am bound,
To the Celestial City so Renowned,
With Saints and Angels who in glory sings,
Sweet Hallelujahs to the King of Kings.
Thrice welcome, said the Christian, I profess,
We may support each other in distress,
They both united were to their content,
Then cheerfully they on their Journey went,
Their path was rugged all along the way,
Their feet with travel tender, therefore they
Espied a path which did their fancy please,
In which they went with more delight and ease,
But yet they found before the close of day,
By sad experience, they had lost their way,
Then were they both in a most woeful plight,
The waters rise, and dolesome was the night;
They labored to go back, but all in vain;
They forced was till morning to remain:
Now near this place there was a Castle strong,
To which a sturdy Giant did belong,
'Twas Doubting Castle which was fixed there,
The Giants name was called deep Despair:
This Giant seized upon those Pilgrims then,
He led them Captive to his dismal den,
Then under Locks and Bolts they were confined,
Three nights and days with a perplexed mind,
Then came the Giant who to them did say,
I will enslave you, make your selves away,
For why, there is none alive can set you free,
From my confined sharp severity:
Then did he lock them up, and left them there,
But they continued still in fervent prayer,
For strength to quit themselves like valiant men,
Tho they were in a dark and dismal den,
Said Hopeful, why should we obey his will,
We are commanded that we shall not kill:
Let us not grieve nor be in too much doubt,
For ought we know at length we may get out:
Then Christian said, here is comfort in our Lot,
My Brother Hopeful, what have I forgot?
Sure in my bosom, here I have a Key,
The which will set us soon at Liberty,
The Key of promise which will never fail,
To set those free, who striveth to prevail,
Then with his Key no sooner had he tried,
But all the Locks were loose, Gates open wide,
Then did they run with all their might and main,
And got into the Kings Highway again,
At which those Pilgrims heartily rejoice,
With thankful Hearts and with a lively voice;
Then girding up their Loins, they went with speed,
Resolving now they would take better heed,
For well they found what grief did them surround.
Because they trod upon forbidden ground,
Then in my Dream mythoughts they did repair
Unto the Mountains beautiful and fair,
Where faithful Shepherds with their snowy locks,
In pleasant pastures sed their tender Flocks,
There these two Pilgrims on their staves did lean,
To talk awhile, and view the Mountains green,
Then turning to the Shepherds, their request
Was, that they would inform them in the rest
Of their intended Journey, who replied,
With all our Hearts, we will be your careful Guide,
Over these Mountains here, the path lies straight,
That leads to the Celestial City Gate;
Then to their travel they did both proceed,
And all the Shepherds bidding them God speed.
They had not traveled far before their chance
Was, to espy a Man named Ignorance,
In whom a grain of Sense could not be found,
Yet he was likewise to the City bound:
As he with them did walk along the way,
Have you a true Certificate, said they?
No, I have none, and yet I make no doubt,
If you go in, that I shall be left out:
Then to instruct him, they did both begin,
And said, we fear you will not enter in:
But Ignorance in froward terms replied,
Can I not walk in quiet by your side,
If that I cannot I leave your company;
What need you take this thought or care for me?
Now when they found his froppish peevish mind,
They walked before, he came aloof behind;
Now by this time those Travelers drew near,
The pleasant Vineyards, fountains flowing clear,
They eat and drank and from their toil was weaned,
For they were almost at their journeys end;
But now their sorrow did begin anew,
They had one trial more still to go through,
For coming to a spacious River side,
Whose Waters was not only deep but wide,
They must wade through, not linger nor delay,
For why they found there was no other way,
Then Hope and Christian both with one consent,
Into the Deluge of the waters went,
Poor Christian sinking, said, My Brother dear,
I never shall go through this Flood I fear,
But perish here, this is my woeful dread,
See how the Billows passes over my Head:
O! then said Hopeful, Brother don't distrust,
For I Will assure you we are past the worst,
Upon good ground I find my Foot does stand,
Whereby I know we are not far from Land:
Thus through the Floods and Waves of Death th^^ past,
Met by two shining ones on shore at last,
Who guarded them in a most glorious state,
And did conduct them to the City Gate,
Then their Certificate they did give in,
Which did their Everlasting joys begin:
Now in my Dream methoughts I did behold,
The City shine like most resined Gold,
Alas! the Glory was beyond compare,
A thousand times I wished I had been there;
Then by this time poor Ignorance arrived
Unto the River, where he then contrived
To call Vain Hope, the which he soon employed,
To land him safe upon the other side,
So all alone up to the Gate he came,
But he was suddenly sent back with shame,
Bound Hand and Foot, this was his Destiny,
Convey d to Everlasting Misery,
But though it made my very Heart to ache,
'Twas but a DREAM, and so I did Awake.
Now Reader you have had a view,
Of what in DREAMS I see,
But let it not remain with you,
A hidden Mystery;
But draw the Curtain quite aside,
And look within the Vail,
Let Reason be your Rule and Guide,
Let Wisdom never fail,
Then will you freely run the Race,
And never faint nor fall,
But gain that sweet Celestial place,
Which makes amends for all.
FINIS.
October. 20. 1693.

Imprimatur,

Geo. Oxenden, Procan, Jo. Beaumont, S. Th. Pr. Jo. Mountagu, Coll. Trin.
Magister. Ja. Johnfon, Coll. Sid. Magister.

