A Tender Visitation IN THE Love of God UNTO All People every where,
Particularly unto the Inhabitants of Wiltshire, Gloucestershire and Bristol.
And to my Neighbors in and about Tetherton, Calloways, and the adjacent Towns
and Villages.

By Charles Marshall.

(...), 21.8. And unto this People thou shall say, Thus says the Lord, behold
I set before you the Way of Life, and the Way of Death.

Prove. 6.23. For the Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is Light, and the
Reproofs of Instruction are the Way of Life.

Prove. 4.13. Take fast hold of Instruction, let her not go, keep her, for she
is thy Life.

Cor. 5.10, 11. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad; knowing therefore the Terrors of the Lord, we
persuade men, etc.

Romans 2.9, 10. Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of man that does Evil,
of the Jew first, and also the Gentile; but Glory, Honor and Peace to every
man that works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile; for there is
no respect of Persons with God.

London, Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul, 1684.

A Tender Visitation, etc.
Friends, Neighbors and Countrymen;
AMongst whom I have had my Conversation (in times past) in the sear of the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth (and now being a Sufferer in this Prison for Jesus
Christ's sake) I am constrained in his tender Love to visit you by these Lines,
stirring you up to a tender and serious Examination and Consideration, What Way
on are walking in? seeing there is but Two Ways, as Christ Jesus says, Mat.
7.13, 14. Enter ye in at the strait Gate, for wide is the Gate and broad is the
Way that leads to Destruction, and many there be that go in thereat; because
straight is the Gate and narrow is the Way that leads unto Life, and few
there be that find it. Now, commune with your own Hearts, and be truly still in
your Minds, and say unto your own Souls, Job 22.15.
What Way are we walking in? For Christ Jesus here takes no notice of the many
Ways and Professions of Religion, both among Jews and Gentiles, Isa. 45.17.
but plainly concludes all People walking in one of these Ways, namely, the
wide Gate and broad Way, or the straight Gate and narrow Way. Its true, Prove.
14.12.
there are now many Ways and Professions of Religion in this Age of the World,
but now, as then, they are all concluded under these two, Romans 8.6. Prove. 72.7.
Matt. 3.8. John 15.2.
The Way of Life and the Way of Sin and Death. And as these Two Ways are
contrary one to another, so are the Fruits different that are brought forth by
Men and Women walking in these Ways. All that are walking in the broad Way,
are bringing sorth the Fruits of the broad Way, which are, Wrath, Matt. 15.18,
19, 20. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
Murder, evil Thoughts, Adulteries, Thefts, false Witnesses, Blasphemies, which
the Apostle also summing up together, says, are these, Adulteries,
Fornications, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred,
Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Sedition, Heresies, Envyings, Murders,
Drunkenness, Revelling Mark, Neighbors, Revelling.
, and such like; and says, that they which do such things, shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God: 1 John 15.2.
Now these are the Fruits of the broad Way, and of those walking therein. And
this Way is called Broad because here men may walk in their Sins and
Iniquities, Prove. 4.15, 16.
in the Pleasures and Vanities of their Minds; and the Gate is wide to receive
all that spend their precious Times, both Morning and Evening of their Day,
Psalm. 86 11.
and not in the Fear, Awe and Dread of the holy God: And here the Multitude, as
aforesaid, walk in this Way; Prove. 15.9, 10.
for the Enemy of Mankind, the Devil, cares not what men may profess, in words,
of God, Christ, the Kingdom of Heaven, Religion and Worship, while they
continue walking in the Broad Way, which leads to his Kingdom of Darkness.
Prove. 4.19. Matt. 15.7, 8, 9.
Hence it was that the great God by his Servants, the Prophets and Apostles,
testified against their Worships and Performances, and that of several things,
which were once commanded; And why? ye may see it was, they had forsaken the
Right Way of the Lord, and were performing their Worship in the same Nature,
Psalm. 146.9.
Spirit and Way they were sinning in against God; their Hearts were corrupt and
Consciences defiled. And he complains by Isaiah (chap. 65.2.) I have spread out
my Hands all the day unto a Rebellious and Gainsaying People, which walk in a
Way that was not good, after their own Hearts: Prove. 12.16.
This Way that was not good, was the Broad Way, in which they were, as now many
are walking in, notwithstanding all their outside profession of Religion: and
as says the Lord by his Prophet Isaiah, chap. 1. v. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17. To what purpose is the m^ltitude of your Sacrifices unto me, says the
Lord? I am full of Burnt-offerings, of Rams and the fat of fed Beasts, and I
delight not in the blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of the Hee-Goats. When ye
come to appear before me, who has required this at our hand, to tread my
Courts? Bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an Abomination to me; the New
Moons and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with; it is
INIQVITY, even the solmn Meeting; your New Moons, and your Appointed Feasts my
Soul hates, they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them. And when ye
spread forth your hands, I will hide mine Eyes from you; yea, when ye make many
Prayers, I will not hear; your hands are full of Blood. Wash ye, make ye clean,
put away the Evil of your Doings from before mine Eyes, cease to do Evil, learn
to do well; seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, plead for the Widow, etc. So
you may see, Acts 17.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Isa. 55.7.
that no Performances of Worship, or Service, were any longer acceptable in the
sight of God, than they were performed by Men and Women walking in the Way of
the Lord, denying themselves, and cleaving to the good Spirit of God, which the
Lord said by his Prophet, he gave to instruct and guide them, but they (says
the Lord) rebelled against it. Genesis 3.17.18.24. Isa. 43.27, 28. Genesis 4.7, 8.
This is the broad Way Adam and Eve through Degeneration went into, when they
disobeyed God, and transgressed his Righteous Law and Commandment. This is the
Broad Way that Cain walked in, when he slew his innocent Brother Abel: This is
the Way that the Old World walked in, Genesis 6.5, 6, 7. Genesis 6.3.
when they had through disobedience turned aside, so as that the Lord said, My
spirit shall not always strive with man; and it repented the Lord that he had
made Man on Earth, and it grieved him at his Heart. This is the Broad Way in
which Israel walked when they had forsaken the Lord, the Fountain of their
living Mercies, Jer. 17.13.
and provoked him to Anger both in the Wilderness and through several
Generations, as you may read in the Prophets, whom the Lord sent to testify
against them. 1 Cor. 10.22. Psalm. 119.104. Mat. 27.46.
This is the Broad Way the Scribes and Pharisees were walking in,
notwithstanding all their great Professions of Religion, who killed the Lord of
Life and Glory, Christ Jesus. This Broad Way is that which the apostatizing
Christians walked, and are walking, which Jude pronounced Woe against, Jude 11.
because they walked in the Way of Cain. It was a going out of the Narrow Way
of Obedience, and walking in the Broad Way of Disobedience that brought the
Judgments, Plagues and Calamities, Lamen. 2.
Miseries, Exhaustings and Depopulations of Nations and Kingdoms from Adam's
day to this day: 'Twas going out of the Narrow Way of Obedience into the Broad
Way of Disobedience, Genesis 3.17, 18. Genesis 4.11, 12 Genesis 6.5, 6, 7. Exodus 32.3,
4, 5, 6. Isa. 34.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
that brought Misery on Adam, the Curse on Cain, Destruction by a Flood on the
Old World, Judgment on the Children of Israel in the Wilderness, and sore
Plagues and Calamities through several Generations, as you may read even all
along in the Prophets; and then what befell Jerusalem and that People, and
since through the Ages and Generations to this day?

Now having in short said something of the Broad Way, and Wide Gate, and of the
Walkers therein; I am to write something of the Narrow Way and Straight Gate,
which Christ Jesus says, John 14.6. Jer. 6.16.
few find: This is the Way called in Scripture the Ancient Way of Holiness, and
is called Narrow, and the Gate Straight, because no double-minded Man can walk
therein. James 1.8. Prove. 10.29.
For all mankind, that come to walk in this way, must leave their Iniquities
behind; for there is no coming out of the Broad into the Narrow, Jer. 10.2^.
but by putting off (as the Apostle says) the Old Man with his Deeds; and this
is effected by adhearing, Ephesians. 4.22.
joining and obeying the Grace that came by Christ Jesus; Tit. 2.11, 12.
which the Apostle says, brings Salvation, teaches to deny Ungodliness, and
worldly Lusts, and not only so, but leads into a living Godly, Righteously and
Soberly in this present World: This makes manifest the Broad Way, gives a sense
of the Destruction it leads to, Isa. 30.20, 21.
and leads out of it into the Narrow Way. And albeit this Way is narrow, and
the Gate straight to mankind in the Fall and Alienation from God, walking in
the Broad Way, laden with Sins, Jer. 22.36.
as beforementioned, yet as Men and Women come out of the broad Way, and from
delighting in Unrighteousness, and come to delight in following the Lamb of
God, Mat. 19.28.
Christ Jesus by his Spirit, who leads the Obedient on in the blessed work of
Regeneration, Isa. 42.16.
he will see that the Way of the Lord is a pleasant Way, and the Just man's
Path a shining Light, Prove. 4.18.
that shines more and more to the perfect Day, and so shall drink of the Brook
of Comfort and Consolation by the way, and say with Solomon; Chapter 12.28.
In the Way of Righteousness is Life, and in the Pathway thereof there is no
Death: [Mark,] Life to the Soul, Chapter 13.15.
is Death to Sin; here the Ransomed by the precious Blood of Christ Jesus
return to Sion, with everlasting Joy upon their Heads.

But now all that come to walk in the straight Way, Heb. 10.20.
and enter in at the straight Gate, Luke 9.23, 24, 25.
must take up the Cross of Christ Jesus daily, and deny themselves; and in the
strength received by the heavenly Grace of God resist and withstand all the
Temptations of the Devil, who Tempts most to that Sin and Iniquity, he knows
Man is most prone to: but when he comes to Tempt, Prove. 2.7, 8.
and thy mind exercised in the Light of Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. 2.9.
thou see his Temptations, and thy Soul's Desires and breathing Supplications
ascend to the Lord God of Strength, for the lifting up of his spiritual
Standard in thy Soul against the Temptations and power of the Enemy in every
evil Thought and Inclination, 1 Cor. 10.13.
in which the Enemy works first. And therefore in Matt. 15. ver. 18. thou
may read, Christ Jesus put Evil Thoughts first, before Wrath, Murder and
Adultry, James 1.15.
etc. for there is a time of Sin's Conceiving in the inward parts, before
bringing forth and finishing, which the Apostle observing, says, When it is
finished, it brings forth Death; for the Wages of Sin is Death, but the Gift of
God is Eternal Life through Jesus Christ, etc.

Now the holy Light and saving Grace of God gives the sight, John 1.
and makes a discovery of Sin in its first arising, even when the power of the
Enemy works to Tempt and Allure man, and draw him aside: but now while it is
only in the Temptation, James 1.14. James 1.12.13.
and man in the Spirit of his mind not joined to the Temptation, it is not
charged as Sin; but when man gives up and closes with the Temptation, so as to
obey it, then is Sin finished, and brings forth Death: Romans 6.16.
For his Servants ye are (says the Apostle) whom ye obey, whether it is of sin
unto Death, or of Righteousness unto Life.

Now read here a little Neighbors and Countrymen, How far reaches your
Experience in this Narrow Way, where Men and Women with their sins cannot walk?
for this is the Holy Way and Divine Path, Psalm. 16.11 Prove. 4.18.
that man finds in his coming out of sin, and departing from all Iniquity. But
some will be ready to say, If we should hearken to this Counsel, and obey the
Grace of God, thou art directing to, Tit. 2.11, 12.
which brings Salvation, which the Apostle says, Teaches to deny all
Ungodliness and worldly Lusts; and not only so, but it brings to live Soberly,
Godlily and Righteously in this present evil World, and so teaches to forsake
the Devil and all his Works, tho Pomps and Vanities of this evil World, and all
the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, Ephesians. 14.22.
which many have promised in their Baptism, so called; and so have our whole
Conversation changed, and become other men, not walking in the way most of our
Country-Town or Village walks in; we fear we should become a Byword and Scorn
of our Neighbors and Acquaintance; nay, Psalm. 27.10, 11, 12.
we doubt our Kindred and near Relations would forsake us, and we should become
as strangers unto them, and lose their Respect, and it may be lose our Employ
and Trade, and endanger a disappointment on our selves of the expectation we
had from some Relations; and should we go to Markets and Fairs, Psalm. 24.11.
and use but few and savoury Words in our Dealing, as the fear of the Lord
teaches, and refuse to drink to Excess, Psalm. 5.8.12.
beyond what Nature requires for its nourishment and refreshment, and not be
vainly Merry, as in times past we were, Prove. 2.15.20. Prove. 4.19.
should be a Derision and a Byword, and scorned by such who have been our
Companions in those things in times past: And this might be very hard to bear,
not only to us, but also some nearest Relations.

To which I Answer: If any should meet with such Exercises as these, for
turning from Sin and Evil, Ps. 139.24.
and ceasing to walk in the Broad Way, which many walk in, as aforesaid, there
is no cause to be discouraged: Ps. 119.104.
for those, says the Scripture, that depart from Iniquity, make themselves a
Prey; Psalm. 69.12.
And the Servants of the Lord were the song of the Drunkard: And the Apostle
says, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Wherein they think it strange that you run not with them to the same excess of
Riot, speaking Evil of you; who shall give an Account to him that is ready to
judge the Quick and Dead. Psalm. 58.11.
So look over all the Reproaches you meet with for Righteousness sake: Prove.
2.12, 13. Psalm. 71.7. Psalm. 71.8 Mark 8.34. Luke 9.23. Romans 8.18.
For ye may remember how Christ Jesus the Lord was Reproached, for following
whom ye may be reproached. But after ye are exercised in the Narrow Way, taking
up the Cross of Christ Jesus (despising the shame) you will feel that
Soul-satisfaction, inward. Peace and divine Consolation, that will administer
that heavenly Content, that will out-ballance all Exercises and Trials of this
Nature; so that you will have often cause to magnify the Lord, Psalm. 71.15, 16.
and to say, He is good, and abounding in his Love and Tender Mercies over the
workmanship of his own Hand, who has visited our Souls when we were posting on
in the Broad Way of Destruction, Romans 3.16, 17.
and had only a Profession (by the hearing of the Ear) of God, Christ and his
Kingdom, Scriptures, Religion, and once a Week confessing, We were miserable
Sinners, erring and straying from the right Way of the Lord, but knew not the
True Repentance, Acts 3.19.
which is always accompanied with a true forsaking Sin and Iniquity. But the
God of the Hebrews has met with us, Acts 17.30, 31. Joh. 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8.
who beheld us as Bondslaves in spiritual Egypt, and he has visited our Souls
with his heavenly Morning of Light, by which we have seen our sinful Ways and
Life in Iniquity, and vain Worships, which was so far from being performed in
the Spirit, that we were some of that number in our Parish that despised the
Spirit, Luke 10.16.
and mocked them that worship in it, which is the Ancient Worship Christ Jesus
set up above sixteen hundred years ago, as ye may read, Jefus said unto the
Woman, John 4.23, 24.
The hour comes, and now is, the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in
Spirit and in Truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him; for God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. So
we see now, that all Worship not performed thus in the Spirit and Truth, has
no Acceptance with the holy, righteous and equal God of tender Mercies and
Compassions, through whose favor we contemn and despise all the Reproaches for
his Namesake, Heb. 11.26. 1 Pet. 4.14.
rather choosing to suffer Reproaches with a People truly fearing God, and
eschewing Evil, than live in the Pleasures of Sin, which is but for a season, 2
These. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. Luke 16.23, 24, 25, 28.
and then ends in Torment, Pains, Miseries and Astonishment beyond all
expressions of Words, etc. Now where any poor traveling Souls are thus
exercised in coming out of the Broad Way into the Narrow Way of Life Eternal,
and inwardly waiting on the Lord, receiving the Instruction of his Heavenly
Gift, Prove. 10.17.
such will see and understand more and more of the Heavenly straight Gate, and
narrow Way, and it will be daily more and more easy and delightful to the
Obedient; so that such will Experience what Christ Jesus says, Take my Yoke on
you and learn of me, Mat. 11.29, 30.
for I am meek, and lowly in Heart, and ye shall find Rest unto your souls, for
my Yoke is easy and Burden light. The Yoke and Burden of Christ Jesus is
indeed easy when the Mind is subjected unto the saving Grace of God, which
teaches, as I mentioned before, what to deny, Ephesians. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. Psalm.
119.265.
and how to walk, so as thou may have an answer of Peace, in pleasing God the
Fountain of all our Mercies: and then when any mock or scoff, thou will
remember, thou wast walking once in Ishmael's way of Scoffing, as they are, and
thou will pity them, and thy Soul will be concerned for thy Neighbors,
Relations and Acquaintance, crying to the Lord, that as he has visited thy Soul
through his Grace, that brings Salvation, and showed thee Kindness, so he would
do for thy Neighbors. And this leads into the Christian Nature and Spirit, not
to render Evil for Evil, 1 Pet. 3.9.
Anger for Anger, Scoffing and Reproathing for the same; but Good for Evil,
Love for Hatred; praying for them as Christ Jesus did; Father, forgive them,
they know not what they do.

So following this meek Lamb of God, the Savior of Mankind, thou will have an
increased sight of the difference between a Christian in Name, and a Christian
in Nature: A Christian in Name is such that have only an outside Profession of
Christianity, God, Christ, the Scriptures and Religion, drawing near to the
Lord with the Lips, Isa. 29.13. Mark 7.6.
and honoring him with the Mouth, whilst the Heart is going after Sin and
Vanity, and is far from Righteousness, etc. A Christian in Name and Profession
of Christianity only, is a Talker of the narrow Way and straight Gate, but is a
Walker in the broad Way, having a Name to live, Romans 11.28, 29.
but is dead in Sins and Trespasses. But a True Christian in the divine Nature
is Circumcised inward, and is a Jew inward, one that is born again, without
which Christ Jesus says, there cannot be an entering into the Kingdom of
Heaven; Joh. 3.5.
so is really changed in Nature, Joh. 15.11.
and cut off from the wild Olive, and planted into the true Vine, the Divine
Nature, from whence Fruits of Christianity are brought forth: here the
Circumcision is not that of the Flesh, John 5.4.
but that of the Spirit: A Christian in the Divine Nature is one that has
followed the Lamb in the Regeneration, and so has put off the evil corrupt
Nature, and now appears amongst men in sinplicity, bringing forth the Fruits of
the Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace, Longsuffering, Gal. 5.20.25.22, 23, 24.
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, Mercy and good Will to
mankind. And so persevering in the Way of the Lord, thy Experience will
increase in the knowledge of the Footsteps of the Flock of Christ Jesus, Cant.
1.8.
seeing first how thou wast turned from Darkness unto the marvelous Light of
God's Holy Day, Acts 26.18.
with which thy Heart was searched, and sin became exceeding sinful, and
unexpressibly burdensome. And then thy Soul cried out in distress unto the Lord
God for Deliverance, Psalm. 12.5.
who has heard the Cry of the poor in spirit, and sighing of the needy, and
made bare his delivering Arm, and in due time gave Remission of sin, and a
blotting out of Transgression. Acts 3.19.
And then Times of Refreshment came from the Presence of the Lord, and from the
Glory of his divine Power, that has wrought effectually for the cutting off
from the Wild Olive, and brought thee out of the Broad Way, and planted thee
into the heavenly Vine of Life (that is the Way) and made thee a Branch of the
heavenly Vine, daily receiving heavenly Sap and divine Virtue from this
heavenly holy Root; and then lets thee see thy daily spiritual incumbant Duty,
which is, to abide in the Vine, Christ Jesus. Joh. 15.4, 5.
For as the Natural Branch cannot bring forth Fruit, except it abide in the
natural Vine, no more can any bring forth Fruit to God (acceptable) except they
abide in the heavenly Vine, Christ Jesus.

So Neighbors and Countrymen, thus coming out of the Broad Way of Sin and
Iniquity, Matthew 7.
and walking in the Narrow Way of Righteousness and Holiness, following the
Lamb of God, Christ Jesus, in the Regeneration, ye are fitted for his glorious
Kingdom; and they are indeed blessed that are come to that state (who can in
truth) say, For them to live is Christ, and to dye, gain. Phil. 1, 2.
Surely these have put off the sins of the flesh, the old Man with his Deeds,
and have put on the New Man, who is created after God in Righteousness and
Holiness. Ephesians. 4.24.
For our Life here is very uncertain and momentary, so that when we lie down in
the Evening, we are uncertain of rising in the Morning; and when we rise in the
Morning, we are uncertain we shall live until the Evening: so as the Servants
of God said, Our Life is like Water spilt on the Ground, that cannot be
gathered up again; it is like unto a Weavers shuttle quickly displayed and cut
off; Job 7.6.
and like the trace of a Bird through the Air.

Well therefore, since our Life is so uncertain, and Death so certain, dear
Countrymen and Neighbors, in the tender Bowels of Christ Jesus, I beseech
you, for your own poor Soul's sake, whilst you have time (a very little time)
so to number your days, and remember your latter End, Psalm. 90.12.
as to apply your hearts to that heavenly Wisdom, which teaches and
instructs to walk in the Narrow Way of Self-denial, which leads to Life
Eternal: that when the Messenger of Death comes, the King of Terrors (to all
Evil Doers) it may meet with you walking in the Way of Life that endures
forever, Job 18.14. Joh. 14.6.
which will be the Comfort, Joy and Satisfaction of all Men and Women that have
prized their precious time, that God Almighty has given them in the Riches of
his Infinite Love, to obtain the heavenly Translation out of the Kingdom of
Darkness, Col. 1.13.
into the Kingdom of his dear Son, Christ Jesus, and thereby is fitted for that
Huor, Psalm. 146.4, 5, 6.
that when nothing but DEATH is expected every Moment, thy Breath in thy
Nostrils withdrawing, and thy dear Relations, Friends and Acquaintance are
about thy Deathbed, Mourning and Lamenting, thou can comfort them with
telling thy spiritual Experience, that thou art passed from Death unto Life
spiritually, Joh. 5.24.
and that thou art assured, when this Earthly Tabernacle is dissolved, thou
have an House from Heaven made without hands eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor.
5.1, 2, 3, 4.
an Eternal Immortal Mansion of Joy and Ever-blessedness; that having fought
the good Fight, 2 Timothy 4.7. 1 Pet. 18, 19.
thou have overcome Sin, Death, Hell and the Grave, through him that has loved
and redeemed thee with his precious Blood, Christ Jesus, the King of Eternal
Glory; and the Seal of God's Favor is upon thy Soul, and the Joy of his
Salvation on thy spirit: Heb. 11.25.
And call thy Neighbors that are ignorant of this precious Work; Oh,
Neighbors! do not content your selves with the Pleasures of Sin which are but
for a season (Oh! a little season indeed) and lose your own souls, and be shut
out of the Paradise of God; Oh! but redeem your time, spend no more of it in
sin and Iniquity, in vain and foolish Discourses; but prize every hour, Matthew
7. 1 Pet. 1.8.
walking in the Narrow Way, that ye may enter in at the strait Gate into the
Kingdom of Joy and Immortal Glory, where the Redeemed enjoy endless Blessings
of Peace, and unspeakable Consolations, in the beholding the Amiable,
Celestial Beauty of him who sits at the Immortal Table of divine love, saying,
Eat, O Friends, and drink, O Friends, Cant. 5.
of the Bread of Life, and let your souls be satisfied with the fatness of the
House of God. Oh! Here (in this Kingdom) is an end of all pains, Sorrows,
Burdens, Tears, Rev. 2.10. Mat. 5.11, 12.
Conflicts, Cruelties of Wicked Men, an end of Inhuman Ungodly Imprisonments,
and here the Redeemed of the Lord are out of the reach of all cruel
Hard-hearted men; yea, here the Weary are at Rest in an Immortal Sabbath,
beholding him who is a Fountain of Gardens, Cant. 4 15.
and Well of living Waters and divine streams: And here the New Song is sung
before the Throne of God in the springing up of endless increasing Joy, and
divine Refreshments, Rev. 7.12.
in which arises Blessings and Glory, Wisdom and Thanksgivings: Honor, Power
and Might be unto our God foreyer and evermore, Amen.

Friends, Neighbors and Countrymen, who may have any doubt which are true
Prophets, Ministers or Teachers of Christ Jesus, and which are false Prophets,
Ministers and Teachers of Antichrist, since there have been both through many
Ages of the World; unto all such I make this friendly, reasonable and Christian
Proposition, namely, to do like the noble Bereans, (who were desirous of Truth)
search the Scriptures from Genesis the first to Revelations the last, and mark
in what Way they walked, and what Fruits they brought forth that were true
Prophts, Ministers or Teachers, both under the Law and Prophets; and on the
other hand, what Way they walked in and what Fruits they brought forth, that
manifestly were declared to be the false Prophets, Ministers and Teachers, by
the true Prophets, Christ Jesus and his Apostles; so may ye safely conclude,
those that walk in the way of the true, and brings forth the Fruits of the true
Ministers of Christ Jesus to be now true; and those false now that walk in the
Way and Footsteps of the false Prophets and Ministers of Antichrist. So search
the Scriptures, in the spirit of Truth that leads into all Truth, and receive
Christ Jesus's Precept, Mat. 17.12, 14. about the straight Gate and narrow Way,
of which I have in his Love treated before; and in verse. 15. following, he
says, Beware of false Prophets, etc. (v. 16.) Ye shall know them by their
Fruits, etc.

True Ministers.
Christ sent them forth to prench the Kingdom of God, saying, The Harvest truly
is great, but the Laborers are few, pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest,
that he would send forth Laborers into his Harvest; go your ways, behold I
send you forth as Lambs among Wolves, carry neither Purse nor Scrip, nor Shoes;
and into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house; and if
the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it, if not, it shall
return to you again, Luke 9.2, 3. chapter 10.2, 3, 4. The Elders which are among
you, I exhort to feed the flock of God which is among you, not by constraint,
but willingly, not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready mind; neither as being
Lords over Gods Heritage, but being Ensamples to the stock, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. Read
Mat. 10.7.14. Luke 3.4, 5. chapter 10.10, 11. Acts 2.17, 18. chapter 20.33, 34. Romans
12.7, 8. to 17. 1 Cor. 2.13, 14. chapter 4.9, 10, 11, 12. chapter 9.18, 19. 2 Cor. 3.4,
6. Col. 1.25. 1 These. 2.9. 2 These. 3.8. 1 Timothy 6.10, 11. 2 Iim. 2.24. chapter 4.2.
1 Pet. 4.10, 11. Jer. 7.25.

False Ministers.
Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my People err, that bite
with their Teeth, and cry Peace, and he that puts not into their Mouths,
they even prepare War against him; the heads thereof judge for Reward, and the
Priests thereof teach for Hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for Money,
Mica. 3.5. Woe be to the Shepherds of Israel, that feed themselves; should not
the shepherds feed the flock? Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the Wool;
ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the flock, etc. Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4, 5.
Also, read Psalm. 94.3, 4. Isa. 46.10, 11. Jer. 2.8. chap. 5.25, to 31. chapter
14.13, 14, 15. chapter 23.11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 21, 25, 26, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. chapter
27.16. chapter 29.8. chapter 32.32. chapter 37.19. Ezekiel. 13.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 16, 17.
chapter 34.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc. Zeph. 3.4. Mat. 6.5. chapter 7.15, 16. chapter 23.7,
8, 13, 14. Mark 12.38, 39, 40. chapter 13.22. Luke 6.26. John 10.12, 13, 2 Pet.
2.1, 2, 3, 4. chapter 2.3.4. 1 John 4.1. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. chapter 4.12. Jude ver. 11,
16.

POSTSCRIPT. A Memorial of the Tender Mercies of the Lord unto Bristol's
Inhabitants, with an Invitation to, and Lamentation over them.
OH, Bristol, Bristol! a City savoured of the Lord, and tenderly dealt with by
him! how good has the Merciful Compassionate God been unto thy Inhabitants,
and to the Countries round about thee! Its now many years since ye were
exercised with the Sword and Pestilence, since which, how many Favors have
thou received and enjoyed in an abundant manner, from the hand of a tender
merciful God! Thou have been in thy Buildings much enlarged, and thy
Inhabitants much in creased; Corn, Wine and Oil, with Riches, and abundance of
the good Creatures, even all things necessary has the Lord God Almighty given
thy Inhabitants. And in the season he stretched out his hand over the
Metropolitan of this Nation, and with the dreadful Stroke of the Pistilence
took away Multitudes (even many Thousands) he shaked his Hand only over thee,
taking away a few of thy Inhabitants, as a fatherly Threatening, and then giving
thy Inhabitants, (and many places in this Land) an opportunity and season of
wonderful Kindness and great Mercy, to fear and dread his Great, Glorious and
Terrible Name, and wonderful Power, and by that terrible Judgment provoke thy
Inhabitants (with the Thousands of this Land every one to repent, and turn from
the Evil of his Doings, and remove the stumbling Block of their Iniquities,
etc. And not only these Mercies and Favors has the Lord extended to thy
Inhabitants, O City of Bristol! which surely ye cannot but confess unto; but he
has shown thy Inhabitants a Mercy exceeding all these, namely, he has visited
you Dwellers in that City with the Morning of his holy Day springing from on
High, and by his Celestial Light has shined in the Hearts of many, to give an
Understanding of their states in the Separation and Alienation from God, and to
beget tender Breathings and Soul. Pantings after the knowledge of Christ Jesus,
the Savior and Redeemer of Mankind; for without the Knowledge of God, and
Christ Jesus, whom he has sent, Eternal Life cannot be obtained.

And this Day of unexpressible tender Visitation from God Almighty, reached
unto many of thy Inhabitants, and awakened them inwardly to seek after the
Knowledge of Salvation, and to walk in the narrow Way, and experience the Work
of God (before mentioned in this little Treatise, etc.) Oh! Prove. 1.20, 21 22,
23.
how has Wisdom uttered her Voice in the streets! She cries in the chief
places of Concourse; in the opening of the Gates in the City, she utters her
words, saying, How long, ye simple Ones, will ye love simplicity, and ye
Scorners delight in scorning, and Fools hate Knowledge? Turn ye at my Reproof;
behold, I will pour out my Spirit unto you, I will make known my Words unto
you. Indeed the Lord God of Life and Glory has through his Son Christ Jesus
called unto, and stretched out his divine Hand of Love, and Arm of Salvation
unto you; and thus the Lord, in unexpressible loving Kindness, has dealt with
thee, O Bristol! sparing thy Inhabitants, and lengthening out the Day of his
Love, stretching out his Hand and Arm all the day long, and crying to you, as
he did by his Prophet to Israel, Why will ye dye, O House of Israel! Ah! the
Tenderness of a Long-suffering God! How has he waited on you, that his
Long-suffering might lead to Repentance, and your Turning, Repenting and
Forsaking your sin and Iniquities that have grieved his good spirit, might have
prevailed with the Lord to spare you: Oh! what shall I say of the deep Love and
wonderful Kindness of the Lord, and his long waiting on you! but in the sense
and Admiration thereof, say, Who is like to the Lord? excellent in Majesty,
Almighty in Power, Glorious in Strength, and Wonderful in Wisdom and Mercy!
Well might the servant of the Lord cry out and say, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26.
Oh! the Height, Length, Breadth and Depth of the Love of God in Christ Jesus,
to the Sons and Daughters of men! of the extending of which Love, you the
Inhabitants of that City have been large Partakers, etc. But now, O Inhabitants
of that great City! how have ye answered the Lord for all his tender Mercies
and undeclarable loving Kindness? Hive you so hearkened to the Voice of Wisdom,
as to break off your sins by true Repentance? Have you heard her cry, and
turned to the Lord? Have you loved Judgment, Mercy, Truth and Righteousness?
Are ye of that Number that shall obtain Mercy, because ye are Merciful? In a
word, Have ye answered the Requirings of Almighty God, and prized the Day of
your Visitation, and all the Mercies multiplied unto you, honoring the great
Creator of Heaven and Earth, in bringing forth the Fruits of the Spirit, Love,
Joy, Peace, Long-suffering. Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meeknoss, Temperance,
etc. But, O Bristol, Bristol! have you not evilly requited the Lord? Have ye
not slighted the tender Day of his Loving Kindness? Are not your Sins of a deep
Die, and your Iniquities of a Crying Nature, like unto the Sins of Sodom and
Gomorrah, great and grievious? And are you not bringing forth Fruits altogether
contrary to those of the Spirit, before mentioned, which are these, Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath,
Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envying, Murder, Drunkenness, Revelling, as the
Apostle says, they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.
Read, and consider whether many of you, thy Inhabitants, are not guilty of
several of these grievous Sins, summed up by the Apostle: Is not Violence in
your hands, as it was in Nineveh? Are not you cruelly Persecuting and
Imprisoning those whose Cries ascend to Heaven, and are entered into the Ears of
the most high Lord God of Sabbaths? Are not vain Lifeless Professions and
Profaneness multiplied in thee? Oh! consider these things, and be invited, in
the Bowels of Christ Jesus, to break off all these Sins by Repentance, and turn
to the Lord God with all your Hearts, and Repent as the Inhabitants of Nineveh
did, who cried mightily to the Lord, and said, Yea, let them turn every man
from the Evil of his way, and from the Violence that is in their Hands; who can
tell if the Lord will turn away from his fierce Anger, that we perish not? but
if ye shall still go on, and persist in your Iniquities, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26.
and resist the Counsel of God against your selves, then hear the Voice of that
Wisdom that invited, and invites; Because I have called, and ye have refused; I
have stretched out my Hand, and no man regarded but ye have set at naught all
my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof; I will also laugh at your Calamities;
I will mock when your Fear comes as Desolation, your Destruction as a
Whirlwind; when Distress and Anguish comes on you, then shall they call upon
me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find
me, for that they hated Knowledge, and did choose the Fear of the Lord; they
would none of my Counsel, therefore shall they eat of the Fruit of their own
Way, and ^e filled with their own De^i^es, etc. Ah poor Bristol! what
Lamentation shall I take up over thee? First, in the Consideration of the
unexpressible Love, Mercy, Tender Dealings and Long-suffering of a tender
Father: secondly, of thy Inhabitants grievous Sins, Ingratitude and great
Provocation, which is a very unsuitable return to the Lord for all his tender
Mercies: And thirdly, of thy deplorable estate (on several considerations) but
mourn over thee, in the Compassion of the Spirit of Christ Jesus, who when he
was come near Jerusalem, he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying, If thou
had known, (even thou) at least in this thy Day the things which belong unto
thy Peace, but now they are hid from thine Eyes, etc. My Soul is concerned for
you deeply, in the sense of the Lord's being angry with you, because you have,
and do continue to sin against great Mercies, yea, adding Sin unto Sin. Oh! be
prevailed with to go on no further in the Broad Way of Destruction, before
demonstrated, lest you provoke the Lord more and more, and he pour forth his
Fury like Fire.

Oh! Inhabitants of Bristol, Awake, Awake, high and Low, Rich and Poor, Male
and Female, Bond and Free, consider your states, in this Evening of many of thy
Inhabitants Day, Ps. 2.11.12.
before it be too late: Return, return, and serve the Lord with Fear and
Trembling, kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the Way; when his
Wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their Trust in
him. Oh! that the Dread of the Most-High God might seize on your Spirits, to
give you that sense the Inhabitants of the City of Nineveh had, John 3.5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10.
and what Mercy and Kindness of the Lord followed the turning every man from
the Evil of his Way, and from the Violence that was in their Hand, might be thy
Inhabitants lot, how should my Soul rejoice, and Spirit be right glad, and bow
before the Lord God of the whole Earth in Humility, with Thanksgivings, etc.
But if you will harden your Hearts, and stiffen your Necks, and will not hear,
my Soul shall mourn in the sight of your Distress that will overtake as Travail
on a Woman, wherein your Faces will gather Paleness, your Hearts be filled with
Anguish.

Fleet-Prison, the 9th Month, 1683. C. M.

AH! thou holy Most-high God of Mercy and tender Compassion, look down with an
Eye of Pity on the Inhabitants of the Earth, and send forth thy Light and Truth
more and more, to guide the People out of the Broad Way of Destruction into thy
narrow Way of Life, which leads to thy Holy Mountain, where there is no burting
nor destroying: O! that through the glorious outstretched Arm of thy
Salvation, Sin may be finished, and Iniquity brought to an end, that the
Righteousness of Christ Jesus (the dear Son of thy Love) may cover the Earth,
as the Waters cover the Sea: Ah! for thy Name's sake hear the Cry of the Poor,
and Sighing of the Needy, and stretch forth thy Arm and deliver thy oppressed
out of their Distresses, that thy Creation, O Lord, may be eased, and thy great
Name, and the Noble Acts of thy Almighty Arm and divine Power may be renowned
gloriously through all Lands; Amen, Amen.

THE END.

