MEROZ Cursed, OR, A SERMON PREACHED To the Honorable House OF COMMONS, At
their late Solemn FAST, Febr. 23. 1641 By STEPHEN MARSHALL, B. D. Minister of
Finchingfitld in Essex. Published by order of that House.

PSALM. 122. Verse. 6, and 9. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall
prosper that love thee.
Because of the House of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good.
LONDON, Printed by R. BADGER, for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Brazen Serpent in
St. Paul's Church yard. 1641.

TO THE Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS. Now ASSEMBLED in PARLIAMENT.
IT is fit my obedience should last as long as your commands, for so I have
always interpreted your Requests and desires to be. As I never had the
confidence to present you with any thing properly mine, so neither will I be
guilty of that Injustice, as to deny you any thing so truly your own, as is
this fruit of my poor yet willing endeavors. It is yours truly, but most
principally the Churches, whose both you, and I, and all that you can do, or I
speak, are. If it may be serviceable to you, and you by it made more
serviceable to the Church and cause of God, I have my option. But I am resolved
not to make that use of my experience of your patience in hearing the Sermon,
as to try it further with the length of a Dedication: Only I think it my duty
to second my proposition with my prayers, That God would vouchsafe a blessing
to your endeavors for his Church, and to you for your endeavors. These shall
be the constant and earnest desires of

Your Servant Stephen Marshall.

A SERMON PREACHED At the late FAST BEFORE The COMMONS HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT.
JUDGES V. XXIII. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye
bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the
Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty.
RIght Honorable and beloved, Introduction showing.
it has been a custom almost amongst all Nations, after any notable Victory,
to have their (...), their Triumphant Songs, wherein the illustrious acts of
their own worthy Leaders, and the shame and confusion of their enemies were
celebrated, preserved and so delivered over to posterity. The Romans had their
Salii Priests, who after any victory went dancing through the City, singing
their Hymes, and Paeans to Mars, and the rest of the favorable Gods. And the
Grecians, sometimes in Verses, sometimes by Sculpture, used to set forth their
famous Battles and Victories, yet always attributing the highest glory of all
to their Gods, who^ they supposed to be present with them, Protectors over
them, and fighters for them. This course, I think, the Devil learned from the
Lord Jehovah's dealing with his own people, who always directs them thus to
celebrate his noble acts, and their great deliverances. Thus Moses and Aaron
sang unto the Lord, when he triumphed gloriously over Pharaoh and all his Host,
Exodus 15.
making them sink like a stone to the bottom of the Red Sea. Thus the women
in their song and dance celebrated their victory over the Philistims. 1 Samuel 8.
The scope of the Chapter.
And this whole Chapter is nothing but a Triumphant song, setting forth in an
elegant and lofty verse, the great Victory which Barak and Deborah and a small
army with them had gotten, (the Lord marching before them) against King Jabin
and his General Sisera, Judge* 4 3.
who for twenty years had mightily oppressed the children of Israel.

In which song, First, all praise and glory is given to Jehovah the Lord of
hoasts the Prince who lead them, by whose strength alone the victory was
obtained. Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel. I will sing unto the
Lord. Lord when thou wentest out of Seir, etc. Then the Song descends to the
due praises of their general Barak, and his assistant Deborah, yea the
several Regiments and Companies both of Horse and Foot do receive the praise
and reward of their courage and valor. And not only so, but the Song proceeds
to Stigmatize and brand with reproach, and mark out for punishment all such
companies, as had played either the Traitors or the Cowards, or were otherwise
wanting to their duty in this great expedition. Reuben had other Sheep to
turn. he tarried amongst his Sheepfolds to hear the bleating of his flock.
Verse 16.
Gilead durst not cross the Water: Dan cowardly withdrew into his Ships: Ashur
durst not come from his own coasts. God takes notice and remembers them all,
and lets them know he had great thoughts of heart about it, and in time would
reckon with them for it.

But above all his wrath was most incensed against Meroz, Especially of this
verse.
a people of whom we find no mention in the whole Book of God, nor I think
in any other Story, but only in this place, upon this unhappy occasion, you
can know no more of them than what this place tells you: and these few relics
of them, remain as the lake of Sodom as a mounment of their sin, or as a Mast
of a Ship swallowed up in the quicksand, to warn passengers to take heed of
that dangerous place: or as Lots Wife turned into a Pillar of Salt, to season
others. This their short Chronicle I may call their Gravestone, which seems
to hold out such an inscription, as they say Sennacharibs Tomb had, Look upon
me, and learn to be godly. So theirs, Look upon me, and learn your own
duty, Look upon me, and take heed of disserting the cause and Church of God,
when they stand in need of you.

A Text and Theme exceeding seasonable. And the suitableness of it to the
occasion
Seasonable to the times wherein we live, when abundance of mighty enemies rise
up against the Lord, and against his Church. Seasonable to the temper of most
people who generally mind their own things, Psalm 2. 2^
and not the things of Christ. Seasonable to the occasion of this days
meeting, which is purposely for the help of the Lord, and his cause, and
people now distressed in Ireland. But to me it seems most of all seasonable
for this present honorable Assembly who all should be as the Lord: their
Horses as his Horses, their Chariots as his Chariots, they being all called to
be Leaders and Captains of the Lords Host. The Lord make it but as
profitable, as I am sure it is seasonable, and I doubt not but we shall be
exceeding gainers by it.

In this Text which I may call the doom of Meroz, Division.
there are these two things.

First, the Author of the doom or sentence, the Angel of the Lord. Curse ye
Meroz said the Angel of the Lord.

Secondly, the Sentence given against them: Curse ye Meroz, etc.

Wherein likewise consider these two things.

First, What their fault was.

Secondly, What their punishment was.

Their Fault ye have in these words, They came not out to the help of the
Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty.

Their Punishment was a curse, and a bitter one: Curse ye Meroz, Curse ye
bitterly, or (as the word signifies) in cursing, curse the inhabitants of
Meroz, continue to curse them, vehemently curse them, never leave cursing them.

I shall briefly interpret the words, And interpretation.
and so proceed (with Gods assistance) to some profitable instructions.

First, the Angel of the Lord. I find great difference among Interpreters,
who this Angel of the Lord should be. Some think it was Deborah the
Prophetess who penned this Song. Some think Barak the General was likewise
at this time inspired by the Holy Ghost. Some think it was the Angel that led
them, Michael their Prince who went out with them. Some think the Angel of
the Lord, signifies all that have Divine inspiration, but all agree in the
intent of it, namely, that the Author is alleged, that all might know that
this curse came not from the private Spirit of Deborah or Barak (as Saul's once
did, 1 Samuel 14. 24.
when he cursed every one that shall taste any meat until the evening, that
he might be avenged on his enemies) but was pronounced by the direction of God
himself, and so consequently, they who are thus cursed are cursed indeed, The
Angel of the Lord, that is divine Authority.

2. Meroz. Who was Meroz, and what people were they? I could never learn
whether Meroz were a City or a Province, few or many, rich or poor, weak or
strong; in this all agree that they were Jews; the Canaanites should not have
been cursed for not joining with Israel, in their wars. All likewise agree,
that they dwelt near Mount Tabor and the River Kison, the place where this
battle was fought, and so consequently near the danger: and in all probability
were called by Deborah and Barak to come and assist them. Which is likewise
judged to be the cause, why they had a heavier doom than any other. God cannot
abide to have such ill neighbors to his people when they are in distress.

3. Curse them. The word signifies, Maled^cere verbo, malefacere re, to speak
evil of them, to revile them, to reproach them and wish mischief to them, to
do any evil against them, to execute in deed, what they would wish in words.
What the particular Curse was, or what the event of it was, no man can
determine; this I find, which is most probable, It was ordinarily observed
among the Jews, that whatsoever was justly cursed grew unfruitful presently.
If a Woman were cursed she proved barren. If the Earth were cursed, it brought
forth Briars and Thorns, no profitable Seed or Plants would grow there. If
Trees were cursed they withered away. If Gods curse fell upon Houses or Cities,
the Walls and Foundations would fall down. Gods curse always wasted that
which it fell. So in all likelihood this curse is the cause we never read more
of them. If they were a Province, their Land proved a desolate Wilderness. If
a City it was destroyed, or grew unpeopled: this bitter curse like the Water of
Jelousie made an end of them. Numb. 5* 27*


4. They came not to the help of the Lord against the Mighty, Who are these
Mighty? Without all question by the mighty are literally meant King Iabin, and
his General Sisera, because these were those potent enemies, against whom the
battle was fought. But in Gods intent (this being a prophetical Song) the
mighty are all, of what rank or quality soever, who are eminent in wisdom,
strength, authority or riches, and manage an ill cause against the Lord or
against his Church.

Lastly, they came not out to the help of the Lord by the help of the Lord
you will easily conclude, that in this particular, the help of Deborah and
Barak are meant. They came not to join with the Tribes of Zabulon and
Nepthaly, and that small handful of Israelites who by Gods direction
undertook this battle against the great Captain Sisera. Because they joined
not their strength with Gods people, they are judged not to help the Lord. For
(as I shall show anon) the Lord and his People are so conjoined, that their
friends are his friends, and their enemies are his enemies, and whosoever
helps not them, are interpreted to refuse to assist the Lord himself. I know
nothing else in the Text, that has the least show of difficulty.

Were this Text to be handled at large in many Sermons, such Observations as
these could not briefly be passed over: as first,

That although Gods people must ((...)) bless, bless I say, and not curse.
Curses are edged tools, dangerous to be meddled with, yet there may fall out
such cases, that Gods blessed servants must come down from Mount Gerizim, the
Mount of blessing; and go up on Mount Ebal, the Mount of Cursing; and there
curse, and curse bitterly. Curse ye Meroz said the Angel of the Lord.

Secondly, That although it be true that the curse causeless shall not come,
yet when Gods people according to Gods direction, (clave non errante) do curse,
their curse is like the flying Roll which we read of, Zech. 5. 3. 4.
it consumes the house it lights upon, the timber thereof, and the stones
thereof. It is like the Wolfes foot, of which they say, that no herb upon
which it has once trod will grow afterward.

Thirdly, That the mighty do frequently oppose the Lord: it is no new thing to
find the Mighty in strength, the Mighty in authority, the Mighty in wealth,
the Mighty in parts, in Learning, in Counsel, to engage all against the Lord,
his Church, and Cause. The Lambs followers and servants, are often the poor
and offscouring of the World, Rev. 17. 18.
when Kings, and Captains, Merchants, and Wisemen, being drunk with the Wine
of the Whores fornications, proceed to make war with the Lamb, and to give
all their strength unto the Beast, till the Words of God shall be fulfilled.

Fourthly, That when the mighty of the World do oppose the Lord, Gods meanest
servants must not be afraid to oppose the Mighty.

And fifthly, That whosoever come out to join their strength, and to give
assistance to the Lords people, the Lord does interpret them all to give help
and assistance to himself.

But because my Discourse upon this Text, in this place must be hedged into one
Sermon, I may not let it out into such a spacious field. I shall pass by all
these and many other seasonable truths, which in this Text are obvious to all
your eyes, and betake my self to clear one lesson only; which you will
quickly see to be the maine scope and intent, not only of this verse, but of
the greatest part of this Chapter, and most seasonable for these times, for
this Assembly and occasion, The maine Doctrine propounded.
viz.

All people are cursed or blessed according as they do or do not join their
strength and give their best assistance to the Lords people against their
enemies. I beseech you see how clear this is, Explained.
not only in this verse (God laid nothing else to Meroz charge but only this,
they came not out to help the Lord against the mighty) but in other passages of
this Chapter. And proved v. 9.
My heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly
among the people. Hallelujah, Praise the Lord. v. 15.
They are not so much as named without an Euge. The Princes of Issachar are
blessed for being with Barak. Zebulun and Nepthali were a people that jeoparded
their lives to the death in the high places of the field. These are blessed
also. Blessed above women was Iael the wife of Heber the Kenite. v. 18.
What made Jael such a blessed woman? v. 24.
Even this, she put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmans
hammer, and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head, when she
had pierced and smitten through his temples. On the other side see the
displeasure that there is against the Tribes who came not out to help in this
expedition. Ruben had business of his own, his flocks were to be attended.
Gilead could plead that the River Jordan divided him, from Barak and his
company: Men are cursed or blessed.
Asher had his own breaches to make up, and the Sea coasts to look to. A man
might think, these were fair excuses. But God had great thoughts of heart
against them all. And woe to him, or them, against whom God has great thoughts.
The whole Chapter runs in this strain, they are cried up, they are honored
and blessed: not only the heart of Gods people, but the soul of God himself
(as I may say) took pleasure in them, who appeared on the Churches side; his
displeasure, indignation, wrath and curse did rise against all, who came not to
the help.

This is most plain in many other Scriptures. I shall cull out but three among
three hundred, Jer. 48. 10. That whole Chapter contains the doom of Moab.
Esaias 16.
Gods curse was now to be executed upon Moab, and you may read of Moab, that
the Lord once sent to him when his people were in distress. v. 3.
Let my outcasts devil with thee Moab, be thou a shelter to them in the time
of a storm. But Moab was too proud to listen to Gods counsel. Moab was
always an ill enemy to Israel. Now God comes to reckon with him for it. Now
the spoyler shall come upon all his Cities. And to them who were to execute
this vengeance of God against them, mark what a charge is given in the tenth
verse, Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently, or
fraudulently, or deceitfully, as the word signifies; Now what was the work
which was to be done? the next words will tell you, Cursed is every one that
withholds his hand from shedding of blood: the strangest reason of a curse that
ever was read of, if ever a man might have pleaded (with Peter when the voice
said unto him. Arise Peter kill and eat) not so Lord. as they help or help not
the Church of God.
I have not been accustomed to this, here were room for such a plea, when his
work was to go and embrew his hands in the blood of men, to spill and power
out the blood of women and children, like water in every street. But he is a
cursed man that withholds his hand from this, or that shall do it fraudulently,
that is, if he do it as Saul did against the Amalekites, kill some and save
some, if he go not through with the work: he is a cursed man, when this is to
be done upon Moab the enemy of Gods-Church. So that whatsoever employment men
are put to, they are cursed men, that take not part with God in his work.
Another place you shall find in Psalm. 137. v. 8, 9. The daughter of Babylon was
there to be destroyed, observe now the epithete which God gives to the
executioners of his wrath against Babylon. Blessed is the man that rewards
thee, as thou have served us. Blessed is the man that makes Babylon drink the
same cup, which Babylon had made Gods people to drink. Now he that reads the
book of the Lamentations, may find how Babylon had used the Church of God,
they had broken their bones as a Lion breaks the bones of a Lamb, brought
their necks under persecution, made their skin black like an oven, hanged up
their Princes by the hand, and which is most of all cruel, had dashed their
children against the stones. Now says the Spirit of God, Blessed is the man,
that thus rewards Babylon, yea, blessed is the man that takes their little ones
and dashes them against the stones. What Soldiers heart would not start at
this, not only when he is in hot blood to cut down armed enemies in the field,
but afterward deliberately to come into a subdued City, and take the little
ones upon the spears point, to take them by the heels and beat out their
brains against the walls, what inhumanity and barbarousnesse would this be
thought? Yet if this work be to revenge Gods Church against Babylon, he is a
blessed man that takes and dashes the little ones against the stones.

But there is one Text of Scripture (if no other were to be found in the whole
book of God) which is a sufficient proof that all are blessed or cursed,
according as they do or do not help the Church of God in their need: and
that you shall find, Matthew. 25. 33. etc. The sum whereof in a few words is
this, At the latter end of that Chapter is a description of the day of
judgment, and of the manner of Christ's proceeding at that day. First, that
when Jesus Christ shall come in the glory of his Father, he will divide all the
godly to the right hand, and all the wicked to the left hand, as the Shepherd
divides the Sheep from the Goats. Secondly, he pronounces all on his right
hand blessed, all upon the left hand cursed: Come ye blessed, go ye cursed.
Here are all the blessed, and there are all the cursed. Mark now what is
assigned as the only reason and evidence why the one sort are blessed, and the
other cursed. It is most plain in the Scripture, that at that day the Lord
will call people to an account for all they have done in their whole course,
whether good or evil: but in this place, Christ gathers all that shall be
opened and come to receive blessing or cursing, reward or punishment to this
one head, according as they did or did not help and succor his Church and
people in their time of need. To, the one side, Come ye blessed, receive the
Kingdom prepared for you, for you visited my Church when it was sick, you
gave meal to my Church when it was hungry, you gave my people drink when they
were thirsty, you took them in when they were strangers, you clothed them
when they were naked, you came to them when they were in prison: Inasmuch as
you have done it unto these, even unto one of the least of these my brethren,
you have done it unto me. On the other side, Go ye cursed* Why are they cursed?
I was hungry and ye gave me no meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me no drink, I
was a stranger and ye took me not in, naked and you clothed me not, sick and
in prison and ye visited me not: Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as you did it
not unto the least of of one of these, ye did it not to me. As if the Lord at
that great day did take notice of nothing, but what the carriage of all people
has been to or against his Church and children. What greater evidence can
there be in the world, that men are blessed or cursed, than this? that they
either do, or do not help the Church of God.

This will yet be clearer if we consider the Church, Demonstrated.
First, as it stands in relation to God. Secondly, as we stand in relation to
the Church.

First, First from the Churches relation to God*
as the Church stands in relation to God: when I speak of God in relation to
the Church, or the Church to God; you must always understand God in Christ,
Being made one with him in Christ*
Emanuel. God is in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. And thus the
Churches relation to God, gives us two excellent grounds of this doctrine.

First, the Church and the meanest member of it is united to him, made one with
him, they are not only his servants, his friends, such as he loves, but he and
they make but one person, I mean one mystical person. Insomuch that
throughout the whole Scripture he that blesses them blesses him, he that
curses them curses him, he that relieveth them relieveth him, he that fights
against them fights against him, All are cursed or blessed.
he that touches them touches the Apple of his eye, all the relations which
argue intimacy, tenderness and dearness, meet in this conjunction betwixt
God and his Church, he is their Father they are his children, he is their head,
they are his members, he is their husband, they are his wife, yea they are
called by his name and he vouchsafes to be called by their name. Take but this
for granted, and you will make no doubt, but all men are blessed or cursed, as
they do or do not help the Lord. The Lord Jehovah is the fountain of all
blessedness more than the Sun is the fountain of light, from his favor and
good will necessarily flows all happiness, and consequently all are blessed or
cursed, according as the aspect between God and them is malignant or
benevolent. This ground is fully laid down in that forementioned placed,
Matthew 25. You did it to them, therefore you did it to me, you refused it to
them, therefore you refused it to me. It is clearly there taught, but I
believe there is no man on earth that understands it, or believes it fully. And
that very Text gives me a hint to think so. Because the very righteous
themselves, though they do all to the Saints out of the good will they bear to
Christ, yet when Christ shall acknowledge this and say, Come ye blessed, you
fed me, you clothed me, you visited me, They shall answer, Lord, when saw we
thee an hungered, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison
and administered unto thee? It shows that themselves did not fully understand how
near they were to Christ for whom they did all these things. I have somewhere
read a story of a Sarazen Ambassador, who being with a Christian Prince, and
seeing Nobles and great men to wait upon him, as they help or help not Gods
Chur.
and the Prince himself to wait upon a Table full of poor ragged people,
desired to know what they were, to whom he showed so much respect, he answered
to this effect, they were the servants of his Lord, and that he served his
Savior in them. Well said the Ambassador, if your Lord have no better servants
than these, I desire to be none of them. I care not for your Religion. And
truly it is a hard thing to persuade not only Sarazens but even Christians
themselves, that whatsoever is done to poor abjects, the offscouring of the
world should be done to Christ himself. No earthly Prince would do so, equally
to accept and reward him, that should give a nights lodging or any succor to
one of his meanest and basest grooms, as if it had been done to the person of
himself or of his son. Yet this is the very case betwixt Christ and his Church.

Secondly, another ground from the Churches relation to God, is this, that as
their persons are nearly united to him, so their cause is his cause. As they
account every cause of God to be their cause, so God accounts every cause of
theirs to be his cause, Their cause is his cause.
2 Chro. 20. Moab and Ammon and they of Mount Seir, came with a huge army
against Jehoshaphat, he and his people being suddenly surprised betake
themselves to prayer, and seek help from God: Now mark what Gods answer was,
Verse 15.
Be not you afraid nor dismayed by reason of this great multitude, the battle
is not yours but Gods. Was not the battle theirs, all they were worth lay upon
that battle, their wives and children, their lives and liberties, their
country and religion, lay all at the stake, and yet the battle none of
theirs, that is, not so much theirs as Gods, so in the 74. Psalm. When Asaph
had laid down all the Churches sufferings, the pulling down of their
Synagogues, the wasting of their Country, the reproach and scorn cast upon
them by their enemies, ^. 22, 23.
he interests God in all this, Arise O God, plead thine own cause, remember how
the foolish man reproacheth thee, forget not the voice of thine enemies. Thus
is their cause Gods cause, their enemies Gods enemies: and indeed, if we look
into it narrowly, whatsoever is done to them and their cause, good or evil, is
done for Gods sake. This then is a strong argument to prove men blessed or
cursed, according as they join with, or oppose the cause of God. Because first,
if it be Gods cause, it is a good cause. Secondly, it is a noble cause.
Thirdly, it is a successful cause.

First, I say it is a good cause. The just Lord that is in the midst of his
Church will do no iniquity. Zeph. 3. 4:
The righteous Lord loves righteousness. Psalm. 11. 7:
Now you know it is a blessed thing to have a good cause, Therefore a good
cause*
though it be a mean cause. Psalm. 35. 27.
David often pleaded this before God, that his cause was just, his cause was
upright. Let them shout for joy, that favor my righteous cause. And on the
other side it must needs be a cursed thing to manage a cursed cause: when
David's cause was good, his adversaries must needs be evil, and then he could
foretell that they should be ashamed and brought to confusion, Psalm. 35. 26:
clothed with reproach and dishonor who opposed themselves against him.

Secondly, A noble cause:
being Gods cause, it is a noble cause: a man may possibly among men have a
good cause and the thing but a trifle, a thing of no great consequence: but if
it be Gods cause, let it appear never so contemptible, it is subservient to
the highest end, that can possibly be thought of. All are blessed or cursed.
The salvation of souls, the glory of God, etc. Honor uses to put men upon
hard and desperate services, men will run, wrestle, fight for a crown, 1
Cor. 9. 25*
though but a corruptible crown. There is comfort in doing good to one, but to
advance the good of many, especially of the Church of God, how honorable, how
glorious is it?

Thirdly, A successful cause.
Gods cause is a successful cause, no weapon can prosper that is formed
against it, Isay 44. 17.
and every tongue that rises up in judgment against it shall be condemned. The
mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Acts 5. 38.
This Gamaliel saw, when he advised the council of the high Priests, and
Pharisees, and Rulers, to refrain from opposing the Apostles, If this work be
of men it will come to naught, but if it be of God ye cannot overthrow it, it
is in vain to fight against God. Since then the Churches cause is Gods cause,
and consequently a good cause, a noble and succesful cause, you may easily
hence conclude the happiness that accompanies the promoting of it. And on the
contrary as easily discern, how cursed a thing it is, not only to undergo the
disgrace of mannaging a wicked and base enterprise, but to fail of that which
wicked men use to cherish themselves with, the hopes of the comfort of reward
and obtaining their desires.

Secondly, 2 Our relation to the Church.
consider our relation to the Church. And that affords three other excellent
arguments to prove men blessed or cursed, according as they help or help not
the Church of God.

First, whatsoever abilities any man enjoyes, wherewith he may any ways be
useful, All our talents are given us to serve the Church.
they are all given him to this very end, to make him serviceable to the
Church. All the manifestations of the spirit are given to profit withal. 1
Cor. 12, 7.
All the gifts which Christ powered out when he ascended up on high, are for the
perfecting of the Saints, and the building up of the body of Christ. As every
one has received a gift, so let him minister, as good stewards of the manifold
graces of God. Ephesians. 4. 15.
The Church is the common storehouse to which all our wealth must be carried. 1
Pet. 4. 10.
Salus Ecclesiae suprema lex. Which being so, the happiness of every thing
being the attaining of the end for which it was appointed, and the curse of it
the perverting of it to a wrong end, they must needs be blessed who serve the
Church, and he must needs be cursed that deprives the Church of its own due.
Solomon says, that he that withholds corn in a time of famine, Prove. 11. 26
the people shall curse him, though it were his own corn, but suppose a man
had the keeping of the provision of the whole town corn, which were none of
his own, he only entrusted with the keys of it, and should let the people
starve for want of that food* which he should keep purposely for them: or that
a man had the keeping of a Magazen for an Army to furnish them with what might
make them victorious, and their safety and victory hazzarded, if not lost
through his default, were not this man a villain and a traitor to his country?

Secondly, Our conjunction with the Church.
Consider how near the relation is betwixt the Church and us, (except we be of
the malignant Church, of the Dragons army, and then no more need be said to
prove men cursed.) The Church is our Mother, and all the Saints are our
Brethren, a Relation which all Laws of God and man do fasten duty upon. Prove.
30. 17.
The eye that mocketh at his father or despises to obey his mother, Rom, 9, 2,
3,
the Ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat
it. Paul thought he did no more than his duty, when he had great heavines and
continual sorrow in his heart, and could wish himself accursed from Christ
for his Brethren his kinsmen, who were Israelites.

Thirdly, All our own blessedness stands or falls with the blessedness of the
Church. Our standing and faling with the Church Romans 12. 4.
The Church is such a corporation or mystical body, as has in it all the
properties of a natural body wherein no members can be happy in an abstracted
sense, 1. Coo. 12, 1^
but as parts conjoined with the whole: because every part has besides the
near relation to the whole a subsistency in it, which is the foundation of any
other good it receives. And so consequently, the good or gain of the whole is
the gain of every member, and whatsoever tends to the dissolution of the
whole, cannot but be destructive to all the parts. As when a company of
Merchants have but one joined stock, every penny gained or lost is gain or
loss to them all. Or as it is with a company of passengers in the same Ship,
save the vessel and you save all, sink the Ship, and every man's Cabin is
cast away. Now this is a more prevailing argument than reason can make, it is
grounded in nature which must prevail with all; Nature makes heavy things to
ascend, rather than the whole should be endangered by a vacuum. Nature teaches
the tongue to cry out, when the toe is trod upon, the hand to work, that the
belly starve not, the feet to run, that the back be not cold. Every man finds
this in the natural body; and Gods Spirit dwelling in all the Saints works
the same spiritual disposition in them that are partakers of the divine
nature, 1 Cor. 12. 25 26.
That there be no Schism or division in the body of Christ, but that all the
members may have the same care one for another, That whether one member suffer,
all the members should suffer with it, or one member be honored, all the
members should rejoice with it.

By this time I hope it is clear, that if we look upon Gods promises or
threatenings, men's experience in all ages, or the Churches interest in God, his
near union with it, his affection to it, his owning the Churches cause, or if
we consider our own engagements to the Church, our near conjunction with it,
and under God the dependence of all our comforts and welfare upon it, we may
and must conclude, that all men are blessed or cursed according as they help or
help not the church of God. Application


The rest of the time I shall spend in the Application of it, that what is thus
clear to your judgment and conscience, may by Gods blessing take due place in
your hearts and conversations. And there are but two collections which I shall
make for use. The first, briefly for terror and reproof, the second more
largely, for exhortation and duty.

First, 1 For reproof to them who help against the Church.
for reproof. This speaks very sadly against two sorts of people whereof (God
knows) there are many hundreds of thousands who yet profess themselves to be
Christians. As first, Are all they cursed that do not thus help the Lord
against the mighty? what then are they, who instead of helping the Lord against
the mighty, do help the mighty against the Lord? who instead of joining all
their strength, and giving all their assistance to the Church in her distress,
do give all the assistance they can to the enemies of the Church, that they
may do mischief against the Church? What shall we think of these men? How many
are there who have as it were entered their names into the Dragons muster-book,
openly bidding defiance against the Church of Christ, in every good cause? who
walk Antipodes against the cause of God, like Antiochus, making war against
the Saints, like the little horn in Daniel, wearing out the Saints of the most
high in all places where they can prevail? how many others, like the Kings and
Princes in the 2. Psalm. Set themselves, and take counsel against the Lord and
against his Anointed, digging as deep as hell for counsel to do all the
mischief they can to the servants of the Lord Jesus Christ? How many others
with Balaam, do what in them lies to curse them for reward, who for very
malice rail upon and revile the children of the most High? How many others,
with Edom, look upon the affliction of Israel, rejoicing over them in the day
of their destruction, speaking proudly in the day of their distress, Psalm. 137.
crying out against Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. 25. 17
down with it, down with it even to the ground How many others, with Amal^k,
smite the hindmost of Gods Church, all who are weak and feeble, when they are
faint and weary, adding sorrows and increasing the burden of the afflicted?
How many, with Sanballat and Tobiah, are grieved when any are found to do good
in Israel, endeavoring to hinder the building of Sion, and to further the
repairing of the walls of Babylon? God knows there are too many such, I hope
not many such present here this day before the Lord. But concerning these, if
there should be any such here by what name or title shall I call them? The
Giants who make war against heaven, (...), fighters against God, I know no
appellation fitter for them. But whatsoever they delight to be called, I most
earnestly beseech them in their most secret thoughts to answer these few
questions. By what injury has the Lord provoked thee thus against him? what
iniquity have thou found in him? what hurt has Christ done to thee? what
evils are his righteous servants guilty of against thee? Or if thou can give
no reason of this, but only, non amo te, nec possum dicere quare. I know no
reason, but my heart stands against them. What honor or reward do thou
expect for this desperate service? What hope have thou of speeding? Can thou
make thy forces strong enough to carry the day? O friend though thou be
proud and daring, yet be not mad, no weapon will prosper which is formed
against them God has sworn it against all the people who fight against
Jerusalem, Zech, 14, 12,
that their flesh shall consume whilst they stand upon their feet, their eyes
shall rot in their holes, their tongue shall consume away in their mouth. O set
not Briars and Thorns to fight against devouring fire. Let the potsheards
strive with the Potsheards of the Earth, but let not a poor worm fight against
his maker. Isa, 27* ^4,
Thou art too weak to strive with God. Isa, 45. 9,
Kick not against these pricks, abstain, abstain from those men of whom the
Lord has said, he that touches them, touches the apple of mine eye.

Secondly, 2 To them who stand Neuters,
There are others (not open enemies professing to take part against the Church)
who stand as neuters, who stand a loofe off, showing themselves neither open
enemies nor true friends, like the Samaritans, who feared the Lord and served
their Idols, of whom also Josephus says, that when the Jews were in
prosperity the Samaritans were their friends, 2 Kings 17, 33, 3^, 41,
but were ever severed from them in their adversity. But as the Lord said of
them when they feared the Lord and served their Idols, they feared not the
Lord: so he will one day say of these, they love not the Lord. They say such as
stand neuters are ordinarily crushed, which side soever wins, but the Lord
acknowledges no Neuters. This text curses all them who come not out to help
him, as well as those who came to fight against him, And our Savior at the
last day will as well denounce go ye cursed against them, who gave them not
bread when they were hungry, as them who plucked their bread away from them.
And in this case it is a certain rule, for it is Christ's rule, he that is not
with me, is against me. And of these Neuters there are two sorts. First, some
stand Neuters out of policy, Mat, 12, 30,
because they will see which side shall prevail, Of which two sorts Some out
of policy,
that they may be sure to join with the winning side; Judge, 8^4, 5
of these we have a notable example Judge. 8. when Gideon was pursuing Zeba and
Zalmunnah the Kings of Midian, he calls to the men of Succoth, and the men of
Penuel, to help to victual his Army. Give, I pray you, loaves to them that
follow me, for they are faint. But they would first see what would be the event
of the war, Verse 6,
Are the heads of Zeba and Zalmunnah in thine hands, that we should give bread
unto thine Army? As who should say, if you gave gotten the day, we are for you;
if not, you must pardon us, we will look on a while longer; and even so do
many falsehearted friends deal with the Church of God, turn Jews, when they
have an honored Mordecai, and as ready to cut their throats when Haman
prevails against them. They will be sure to be of the winning side, that they
may save their own stake; but what Gideons answer was to the men of Succoth and
Penuel, when the Lord has delivered Zeba and Zalmunnah into mine hand, Verse
6, 7 16, 17,
then then will I tear your flesh with briars and thorns of the wilderness,
then will I beat down your Towers, and slay the men of your City, and
accordingly did it: such like doom and execution shall all politic Neuters
receive from the hand of Christ.

2 There is a second sort of Neuters who neither oppose the Church nor help
it; 2 Out of slothful carelessness
not out of policy, but mere sluggishnesse and desire of ease or baseness of
spirit: loving only their worldly profits and sensual pleasures, nothing
regarding what concerns religion, or the Church: like Gallio the Deputy of
Achaia, who when the Jews, one while beat Paul, another while the Ruler of the
Synagogue (as the Text says) cared for none of these things. Acts 18. 14.
If it had been a matter of right or equity, things belonging to the Roman
laws, he was ready to appear, but if it be a matter of Religion, it was out
of his element, he is indifferent, whether the Bear bite the Dog, or the Dog
bite the Bear, it is all one to him. Abundance of these are to be found every
where, of whom we may say, as Solomon in another case, The heart knows his
own bitterness, etc. They neither know the Churches bitterness, Prove. 14. 10.
nor are acquainted with the joy of it. Iud, 21. 9
Such (I think) were the men of Iabesh Gilead, who when all the Tribes of
Israel had bound themselves by oath to prosecute that bloody murder of the
Levites Concubine, against the Benjamites, and never to return until they had
avenged it, they let both sides alone, they had business enough of their own
at home, not doubting but there were men enough to do the work, though they
kept themselves quiet. But this neutrality of theirs cost them dear in the
end, their own heart blood paid for it: and it is most probable, that Meroz in
this Text was guilty of no other fault. The Lord grant that they may be
warnings to us, that we be not made warnings to others. I hope this may
suffice for reproof.

The second Use, Verse. 10, 2 For Exhortation.
and that which I most aim at, is for exhortation. Oh that I were able to
speak somewhat to raise up your spirits, to make you these blessed men who
willingly help the Lord against the mighty: I confess the day, the occasion
of our meeting, this Text, and your place and office. (Right Honorable and
beloved) give me an infinite advantage to speak, To give our selves up to the
service of the Chur.
if I were able to improve all for your good. The thing I aim at, is, to send
you home with Luthers resolution, who protested to God, that no portion, which
God could give him in this world should content him but only this, to be Gods
Servant, to be a useful man in his Church, he would care neither for silver
nor gold, neither for honor nor reproach: ease and labor should be all one,
so that he might be accepted and useful. And would the Lord vouchsafe to
make my labor effectual with you in this thing, I should be a blessed man in
my work, and you should go home the blessedest company that ever met in such
an Assembly. To this end I shall endeavor two things,

First, Motives thereunto.
to give you motives or incentives to inflame your hearts after such a temper
of spirit, that you may be willing to give up your selves to the help of the
Lord and his Church.

Secondly, some directions to enable you in truth and realitie to be useful.
And although most of the things that I shall speak do chiefly concern you,
our honorable Worthies, yet they will in their proportion reach the meanest in
the congregation.

To stir you up, 1 From Gods honor.
consider these three motives.

First, the honor of God. Certainly the highest end of our living in this
world, is to honor God. Hallowed be thy name, is the first petition of every
one that says the Lords Prayer. Now a man never gives glory to God as God,
never sets up God in his right place, till he have devoted himself wholly and
absolutely to serve him in what is most acceptable with him. And I have made it
apparent that the Church of Christ is that field from which he expects the most
plentiful crop of glory, and and therefore would have the most cost bestowed
on it; He gets glory by all our actions, but in what we do for the Church,
we give him glory and that in the highest degree.

Secondly, 3 From our relation to the Church and the churches gain
as for Gods sake, so for the Churches sake. It is ever well with the Church,
when the members of it, do prefer the Churches good above their own.
Politicians and Historians observe this of States and Empires, that they
usually thrive when the Subjects are Commonwealths men, every one endeavoring
to promote the public good. Livie observes this of Rome, that so long as men
would leave their trades, farms and merchandise, Ladies part with their Jewels
and ornaments, rather than any detriment should come to the City, all Nations
were subdued to them: But when they grew private, wealths men, every one
laboring to preserve and adorn his own Cabin only; the ship presently was
endangered and went to decay. This is as true of the Church. In all the rising
times of it, God has ever stirred up such noble and generous spirits, who have
given themselves to the Lord, and the service of the Church. In the Acts of the
Apostles you shall find that they were all of one heart and one mind. Cap, 2,
44, ^, 4, 31.
No man said that ought of the things that he possessed was his own, they had
all things common. Sold their possessions and goods, distributing them as every
man had need, and lived so, as if one soul possessed them all: This was the
thriving time of the Church. Then their multitude increased by thousands and
ten thousands and walking in the fear of the Lord, and the comfort of the Holy
Ghost were multiplied. But when once men grew to seek their own things, and
not the things of Jesus Christ, and his Church, the Church soon fell into a
languishing condition. Act. 9. 3.
As therefore you desire to keep up the spirits and strength of the Church, so
labor to keep up your own spirits for the Church, as you desire that may not
faint, so do you take heed of fainting in the service of it.

Thirdly, as for Gods sake, and the Churches sake, so for your own sake, 3
From our own good* both
for your own comfort and benefit, and that in many respects. As first, Such a
frame of Spirit as this will be the best evidence of your own safe condition,
of your peace with God; it is a comfortable thing for a man to hate his lusts, to
strive against them, to wait upon duties, to attend upon Ordinances, In our
in, wardpeace
to be often enquiring, What shall I do to be saved? but all this may be
but self love (although such a love God approves of) but when the soul comes
to enquire, what shall I do that Christ may be glorified, that his Church may
be edified? to know no cross but the Churches cross? to prefer the joy of
the Church before all his own peace and welfare? this is not only an Argument
of a man looking Heavenward, but one that has proceeded far in the way; A
Scholar of the first and highest form; and this is that which Saint John
means, when he does so frequently ang all our evidence to Heaven, upon Love
of the brethren, Hereby we know that we are translated from death to life,
because we Love the Brethren* In this are the Children of God manifest from
the children of the Devil: He that loves not his brother, 1 Ioh. 3. 14
is not of God: Hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our
hearts before him. Every one that loves God, Verse. 10.
loves him also that is begotten of him. And many other expressions, as if
Saint John knew no other evidence but Love; now what Love is it? He means it
not of an inward affection only, to wish well to them, and so forth, but by
love to serve our brethren, to lay out our selves, our lives, and parts, and
all to serve them, To lay down our lives for the Brethren, as Christ laid
down his life for us. V. 16
This was that that bore up Hezekiahs heart in the time of his sickness, Isa.
38. 3.
when he could plead, Lord, remember that I have done that which is good in
thy sight. What was the good that Hezekiah had done? even this, He had set
himself to purge Religion, to set up Gods Ordinances, to make the Church
prosper, given up himself to the public service of the Church of God, This
made Nehemiah comfortably to go to God; Oh my God, wipe not out the good
deeds, that I have done for the House of my God, Heb 13.. 41
And indeed, there neither is nor can be, any more certain or infallible sign
of a living member of Christ's body, and of our communion with Jesus Christ in
his holy Spirit, that Spirit which dwells and acts in his whole mystical body,
then this, to sympathize with the Church, to suffer in the sufferings of it, to
rejoice in the consolations of it and to prefer the good of it, before that
of our own souls: Secondly, the honor of it may provoke you. Ingenuous and
Noble Spirits will do more for their honor than for their gain, now if you
weigh it in the Balance of the Sanctuary, And our honor before God and men.
you shall find, that to be a public servant of the Church, to have an
influence into the welfare of many, Heb. 1, 14
is the greatest honor which God communicates to any Creature; The Creatures
which are for public and universal use, are most noble and excellent, the
World might stand well enough without Pearls and Jewels, and a thousand such
like things, but the fire, the water, the Sun, the Earth, which are servants
to all, the World were ruined without them. Yea this will make us like to the
Angels, the excellentest of all Gods creatures, whose delightful employment is
to be Ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister for them, who shall be
heirs of salvation. What shall I say, this makes us (more than any thing else)
like unto God himself, thou art good and do good: almost all the knowledge
which we have of the glory of God, comes from the good which God diffuseth into
the Creature, and they partake most of Gods nature, and most eminently bear
his Image, who are his most useful instruments in doing good to his Church and
people; and if we mark it, we shall seldom find the Holy Ghost in the
Scripture, to point out any as truly honorable, but under this notion, that
they study the welfare and good of Sion. Mark them whom Saint Paul commends
in the twelfth to the Romans, and ye shall see this is the matter of their
praise; Phaebe was a servant of the Church at Cenchrea, she was a favourer of
many: Aquila and Priscilla were Paul's helpers, ready to lay down their necks
for a public good. Mary, Andronicus, Urban, Triphena, Triphosa, and many
other, this is their commendation, They labored much in the Lord. So the
household of Stephanus, Paul would have all of them subject to the household of
Stephanus, he would have them numbered among the Patricii. 1 Cor. 6. 15.
What was the household of Stephanus? It may be some honest Tradesman in his
Civil rank: but here is the Crown: They addicted themselves to the service
of the Saints: 2 Cor, 8, 23.
and of the messengers of the Churches, some good men that came on the Churches
errand, the Apostle says, if any inquired what they were, what rank or
quality they were of, he answers, they were The Messengers of the Churches,
the glory of Christ. Yea Saint Paul of himself, who seldom gloryed of
himself, who though he were the greatest Apostle, esteemed himself the
greatest sinner, yet could not forbear glorying in this, That he labored
more abundantly than any others, that the Care of all the Churches lay upon
him, that he became all things to all men, that he might save some, and the
Stigmata, the brands or marks that he bore about his body for his service in
the Church, he did more glory in, than any Noble man can of his George or Blew
Ribband: You shall see it, Galathians 6. verse 17. The Galathians had used
Saint Paul somewhat coursely, judged his actions and intentions, and mark how
Saint Paul seems to take state upon him, from henceforth let no man trouble
me; What made him thus high in his Spirit? I bear in my body, the Stigmata,
the marks of the Lord Jesus: this was a badge of his honor, and therefore
they must use him honorably, and indeed if we compare the honor and glory
that rests upon men for the service of Christ and his Church, and that which
vain men seek in other things, the truth of this would easily be seen.
Suppose one man could say, this would I received in fighting for a Mistress in a
Duel: Another thus, my state is empaired in brangling suites at Law, Another
in gameing and Whoreing. What fruit? what glory is in these things? but now on
the other side, when a servant of God can say, Haec manus ob Ecclesiam
pugnando, etc. these offices I lost, this preferment I went without, thus was I
scorned, thus is my body wasted for Christ's sake and for his Churches sake;
this is glory indeed, this glory exceeds the happiness of mortality, and will
outlive all wealth and pleasure. And all experience shows us, that however
such men are most opposed and scorned by the enemies of the Church, who always
most fight against the Capraines and Leaders, yet among the Saints these are
the most precious men, one of them esteemed worth a thousand of others: and
this some think Saint Paul to aim at in the fifth to the Romans, when he
says, scarcely for a righteous man will one dye, yet peradventure for a good
man, that is, a useful Man, a serviceable Man, a Man whose life and labors
benefits many, v. 7. Thirdly in the greatness of our reward.
Some would even dare to die. Thirdly, nor is the Reward less, Mat. 1^. 29
at the present it may be such instruments may loose Houses, or brethren, or
children, or lands, and their own lives, but they shall find it again, in
this life a hundred fold besides the inheritance of everlasting life. Bread
cast upon these waters is seed sown in fertile ground; the bosom of the
Church is the most fruitful soil in the world. Flesh and blood will never
believe this, but Jesus Christ the Lord of Life and Glory, whose all the Silver
and Gold in the World is, who has power enough to promote his servants and
savourites, has sufficiently assured us of this in his Gospel; Men will
securely adventure their estates upon Ropes and Cables in the deep Seas, when
the ensuring office is engaged for their security; if ye dare trust the
insureing office of Heaven, go on, serve the Church, I promise in the Name of
Christ to you, ye shall be paid every penny, every hours sleep which ye
have broken, every gray hair which is hereby scattered upon your head, every
disease which ye have contracted, every reproach which you have suffered, ye
shall loose nothing by all or any of these, he will repay it you in this world
an hundred fold in better things, it may be with trouble and persecution, but
in the world to come ye shall have life everlasting; Thus far the motives,
which would the Lord let sink into your hearts: how would ye with Paul
rejoice to be offered up a Sacrifice for the Church of Christ? how willingly
would ye continue to spend, and to be spent in so good work?

Secondly, some directions how we may be able to do this: where

First, I shall show what is requisite to prepare us and fit us to be the
Churches servants. Secondly, how and wherein they that are fit should help the
Church.

First, Means to make us useful.
men must be fitted for it; this Mercury is not made of every wood; the Lord
needs no Instruments; if he use any, it is propter munificentiam, not propter
indigentiam; because he means to honor them, not because they can benefit
him: and therefore he will make them choice spirits, rare and singular men,
The persons must be
to whom he will thus communicate his own glory, and three things must meet in
them. First Godly
First, They must be godly; a General in an Army neither gives pay nor command
to any, until they be duly entered into his musterbook: Now men are never
numbered among the Lambs followers, their names are not entered into his List,
until they be Saints. Read Revelation, where ever the Lambs followers are
described, Rev. 7. 14.
They are such as have washed their Robes, made them white in the blood of the
Lamb, 14. 4.
serving him night and day; they are redeemed from the earth; in their mouth is
found no guile. They that are with the Lamb are called, and chosen, and
faithful. And it must needs be so; for so long as men are in their
unregenerate condition, they are Satan's vassals in the maine; there is not in
them a substratum of real usefulness to the Church; their heart cannot be
with the Lord nor his people: It Is only the new life which is the right
principle of this service which is here expected: If therefore the Lord has
kindled in any of your hearts a desire to do him service, I beseech you,
first, humble your souls deeply before God for your sins; get your Robes
washed in the blood of the Lamb, rest not till the Spirit of Christ come to
dwell in you, and when ye have, once with the Thessalonians, given your selves
first to the Lord, then ye are fit to give your selves to the Church for the
Lords sake.

Secondly, ^ Deniers of themselves.
as they must be godly, who would be servants to the Church; so they must learn
to deny themselves; they must be taken off from all private selfe-engagements;
they must set light by their own ease, their own profit, and their own life: If
any man (says Christ) come to me, Luke 14. 26.
and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and
sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple. Search through
all the Scriptures, you shall hardly find a man who ever was fitted to be
useful in the Church, till he had set himself aside; No man that warreth, ^
Tim. 2. 4.
entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him who
has chosen him to be a soldier. And therefore it was the A, B, C, which
Christ taught all his followers, even this lesson of self-denial: You shall
read Mat. 20. v. 22. That when the mother of James and John came to seek
preferment at Christ's hand for her two sons, that the one might sit at his
right hand, and the other at his left in his Kingdom; Christ presently nips
that motion in the head, and tells them, that instead of expecting such high
and pleasant things in this world, they must (if they meant to be his Apostles)
prepare to drink of his cup, and to be baptized with his baptism; that is,
take pains and suffer trouble. And verily sad experience has taught this,
that men are never cordial to the Church of Christ, who embrace this present
world. It is recorded of the King of Navarre then a Protestant, being pressed
by Beza, to appear more in the cause of God, and to own religion to the
purpose: He makes him answer to this effect, That he was their friend, but he
resolved to put no further to Sea, than that he might get to shore if a storm
should rise; he resolved not to hazard his hopes of the Crown of France, and
you know what became of him. So when men will make religion as twelve, and the
world as thirteen, they will in sad trials, 2 Timothy 4. 23.
with Demas, forsake the cause and servants of God, and embrace the present
world: Like those Potters recorded in the first of the Chro. who dwelt among
plants and hedges: There they dwelt with the King for his work. A brand which
the holy Ghost sets upon them, who when Cyrus proclaimed liberty and
encouragement to return to Jerusalem; to rebuild the Temple, and set up the
worship of God, refused to go back with their brethren, and chose rather to
dwell among plants and hedges, than to hazard a gainefull trade, which they
made of the Kings work. O beloved, take heed of these choking thorns, the
riches, cares, and pleasures of this world; especially beware of the world,
when it comes with flattering allurements: Many ships have been swallowed in a
calm, when they have outrid several storms. Troubles and persecutions, (like
the wind in Plutarchs Parable) make men gird their cloak (their profession of
religion and service to the cause of God) closer to them, when the warm
Sunshine of preferments steals it from them: Men are cursed or blessed


Rebus in adversis facile est contemnere vitam. There is a notable story of a
soldier of Antigonus, one whom the Prince observed to be a very valiant man,
ready to adventure upon any desperate service, and therefore much favored him;
and observing that he still looked pale and lean, would needs know what he
ayled, and finding that he had a secret and dangerous disease, he caused all
possible means to be used for his recovery; which when it was accomplished,
the Prince observed him to be less forward in service than formerly, and
demanding the reason, he ingenuously acknowledged that now he felt the
sweetness of life, and was loath to lose it. And thus do many thousands, who
with Jonathan when they come into a wood that drops with honey, leave the chase
of Gods enemies, and feed upon the sweetness of worldly advancement. But, O
ye Worthies, Acts 20. 24
fly all these things; with Paul, esteem your lives not dear to you: Let no
earthly thing move you, so you may finish your course and service appointed you
from and for the Lord Jesus Christ: and conclude with Esther, if I perish, I
perish.

Thirdly, 3 They must love the Church.
whosoever would be a real useful instrument for the good of the Church,
must get an unfaigned love to the Church planted in his heart, that it may
bear fruit in his life and actions. All we do is nothing but our labor of
love. Love will force more than the strappado, draw more than a yoke of oxen;
It is a sweet and strong tyrant. When the Apostle Paul had pressed the
Corinthians earnestly to study for the best gifts to make them useful in the
Church: and to this purpose gives them a catalogue of the several gifts and
graces which Christ, for this end, had shed abroad, when he ascended up on
high: 1 Cor. 12. 27, 28.
Yet in the last verse of that chapter he promises to show them a more
excellent way, and that is the way of love, which he lays down in the
thirteenth chapter: which will do all things, endure all things, without which
if men had the tongues of men and Angels, all other gifts of prophecy,
knowledge, etc. they are but as sounding brass, or tinckling cymbals. This is
the reason why Saint John throughout all his Epistles calls for almost nothing
but love; because in that he calls for all. My little children, love one
another. And this is also the reason why the Devil does so infinitely labor to
sow the tares of division in the field of the Church; he knows if he can
break the bond of love, he breaks the bond of perfection, and opens the
floodgates to confusion. Rest not therefore, who ever thou art that desire
to do good in the Church, till the love of it be fixed in thy breast, as deeply
as the love of the Ark was in the heart of the wife of Phinehas, who died for
grief when the Ark of God was taken: Or as Calice is said to have been in
Queen Mary's, who affirmed, that if her body were opened Calice would be found
in her heart. To this end, consider often how dear the Church is to thy dear
Redeemer; how comely and beautiful it is in it self; comely as the curtains of
Solomon, even when it is black as the tents of Kedar with persecution: How
deformed, unclean, and every way vain all other societies are in comparison of
this; As the Lilly among the thorns; How near to thy self, begotten of the
same seed, laid in the same womb with thee, and thou also were laid in its
womb, and sucked its breasts, redeemed with the same blood, enjoyest all the
same privileges, have all thy welfare in this world wrapped up in its welfare,
and expectest to live with it to all eternity in the same glory. These thoughts
rightly working upon thy heart, would make thee willingly spend and be spent
for the Churches good: thy services would not be as the motion of a stone cast
out of a sling, at first swift by virtue of a violent impression; but constant,
and strongest rather toward the later end, as those motions are said to be
which proceed from a natural inward principle. So then you easily apprehend
the excellent use, and indeed the necessity of the concurrence of these three
qualifications of godliness, self-denial, and love, to the making up of a
good Chruch-man: the Lord make them evident in all your hearts and ways.

Next follows, What these friends of the Church must do.
What men thus accomplished may and must do for the Church. The service
required may be reduced to these two heads:

First, somewhat to prepare us for action.

Secondly, to act as we are prepared.

By way of preparation three things are requisite. First, 1 By way of
preparation, the^ must
carefully to inform our selves of the state and condition in which the Church
is, otherwise we deprive our selves of all possibility of being helpful to
it. Be a man never so willing, and never so able to relieve the distresses of
his brethren, he can neither heal the sick, nor help the poor, unless he
knew who and where they were that needed, 1 Know the wan^s of the Church.
and what help they wanted. This made Nehemiah so diligently to enquire
concerning Jerusalem, Neh. 1 2.
and his brethren which were left of the captivity. This made Daniel search
into Ieremiahs Prophesies, Dan. 9.
to know the condition of the Church, and learn his own duty.

2. This enquiry must not be out of Athenian curiosity, 2 Sympathize with them.
as most people enquire after news; but so to know, as to work our hearts to a
fellowfeeling of their condition, otherwise all our intelligence will be as dry
clouds, flying over our heads without a drop of rain. Thus did Nehemiah as
soon as he understood that his brethren were in great affliction and
reproach, Neh. 1 4.
the wall of Jerusalem broken down, and the gates thereof burnt with fire, he
sat down and wept: this prepared him for the good service he did afterward.
Dan 8 27.
Thus also did Daniel, who when God had showed him, though but in a vision, the
calamities that were to come upon the Church of the Jews by Antiochus
Epiphanes, he fainted, and was sick certain days. And the want of this
fellow-feeling is both taxed and threatened by God in Amos 6. No man is sorry
for the affliction of Joseph. God esteeming it an argument of little love to
sit down with Haman at a banquet, when the City of Shushan is in perplexity.

3. As we must know and be affected with the Churches want, 3 They must
enquire what is in their hand to help.
so we must enquire what is in our power to do for it, wherein we may be
helpful. This I shall have occasion to speak of afterward.

The second sort of directions are for action. And these may be brought to two
heads.

First, 2 By way of action, they must
somewhat we must do immediately to God for the Church.

Secondly, somewhat we must do for the Church from God.

First, 1 Pray for it.
that which we are to do to God for the Church is to pray for it. I name this
first, because it is the first and chiefest service that we can perform. If any
other talent be a penny, Prayer is a pound. This is the talent of all talents:
concerning which I shall speak a little more fully, as the seasonablenesse of
it requires.

First it must be granted, that all the friends of the Church may help it with
their prayers: if with Peter they have no silver nor gold, but will give such
as they have, they may afford a subsidy of prayer. They have all the spirit of
adoption, enabling them to cry, Abba, Father: So that what the Master of the
ship said to Jonah, What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise and call upon thy God:
(though he could neither sit at stern, nor handle the tacklings, yet he might
pray;) may be said to any man in regard of the Church; though thou can
neither run, nor ride, nor write, nor fight, yet thou can pray: Awake,
awake. And as plain it is, that God requires it should be so. O pray for the
peace of Jerusalem. Psalm. 122. 6.
You that make mention of the Lord keep not silence: Isa. 62. 6, 7.
give him no rest, till he establish and make Jerusalem the praise of the
earth. You that have escaped the sword remember the Lord afar off, Ier. 51. 50.
and let Jerusalem come into your mind. But the chief thing I aim at is, to
discover the power of Prayer. Which I shall never be able fully to express:
None can tell what Prayer can do, but he that can tell what God can do. What
great things Prayer is able to do.
Yet these few conclusions may give some light toward it.

First, God has not promised to do any thing without it. It is confessed, he
does many things without Prayer, but he has not promised to do any thing for
his Church without it. Ezekiel 36 37.
All this will I do, (says the Lord) but for all these things will I be
enquired by the house of Israel. Secondly, As he has promised to do nothing
without, Ier. 29. 10. 17.
so he will do all things by it: I will visit you (says God) and perform my
good word toward you; but you must perform your good work toward me: Then
shall ye call upon me, and you shall go and pray unto me. 1 Ioh. 14, 15.
Ask and you shall receive: this is the confidence that we have, that
whatsoever we ask according to his will, we know that we have the petitions
that we desire of him. What cannot Prayer do? It is able to overthrow all
enemies: Psalm. 56 9.
When I pray, mine enemies shall turn back. Isa. 37. 36.
An hundred eighty five thousand were overthrown in one night, 1 Kin. 8. 37,
39.
after the Prayer of Hezekiah. It is able to turn away all plagues,
pestilence, famine, sword, wild-beasts; whatsoever plague or sickness there
be, prayer and supplication will heal all. It is able to bring down all
mercies; it is the key of heaven: Eliah, a man subject to the same infirmities
with us, he prayed, and the heaven was shut; he prayed again, and the heaven
was opened. It is the most efficacious engine in the world; it opened the
prison doors, and the iron gate, to set Peter at liberty. It is the sum of
all wisdom, strength, and policy. What should I say more? It prevails over
God himself. Jacob wrastled with God, and prevailed: What was his wrestling?
What was the strength, Gen 32 26. and Hos. 12. 4
whereby, as a Prince, he had power with God? Even this, he wept and made
supplication to him. It will not only stop the Sun in his course, as Joshua
did, Sun stand thou still in Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon; but
(with reverence be it spoken) it holds that hand which rules heaven and earth.
Let me alone, said God to Moses, (...). 32. 10.
that I may destroy them: Moses prayer hindered God from doing what he seemed
resolved to do. He said he would have destroyed them, had not Moses his
chosen stood before him in the gap, to turn away his wrathful indignation* And
thus some interpret that place of the Prophet Isaiah, ^ap. 45 v. 10
Ask me of things to come, concerning my Sons; and as concerning the works
of my hands command ye me: as if God had made over his own omnipotency to
Prayer.

But whence is it that Prayer becomes thus efficacious? Quest.
What is there in the submissions and supplications of poor worms to work such
wonders?

I answer, Answ. And the reasons of it.
These four things meet in prayer, which are the strength of it, and may be
your satisfaction. First, The persons who pray are Gods own children, dearer
to him than heaven and earth, tender as the apple of his own eye: and we who
are parents know how prevalent the cries of our own children are: we being
evil can give good things to our children. Secondly, Gods own Spirit dictates
and endites their prayers for them: We know not what to pray for as we ought,
Ro^. 8. 2^
but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us. Now as it is said of the
Son, I know thou hear me always; so may it be said of the Spirit. What
regard soever he may bear to us poor sinners, he will certainly regard the
intercessions of his own Spirit. Thirdly, The Prayers of Gods people they are
offered up and presented to God by his own Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, the
high Priest of our profession, the Angel of his presence, who is at the right
hand of God, who daily makes intercession for us, as the Spirit makes
intercession in us, and mingles his incense, with the prayers of the Saints,
Rev. 8. 3.
upon the golden altar which is before the throne. Fourthly, There is this in
prayer, that it gives the greatest glory unto God. Of all gifts or graces which
God has given to any creature, never any thing (except faith only) was found
to give that glory to God which prayer does: especially in these two things.
First, it brings God into the field to fight the battle for them, makes him to
work all their works for them; as indeed he does. Whatsoever a man prays for,
he does by interpretation say, Lord, I never shall have this, unless thou give
it me; I never shall do this, unless thou do it for me. And that is the
reason why in 2 Chronicles. 20. after Hezekiah and his people had prayed, and
professed they had no strength of their own, left the work only and wholly
upon Gods hand. Then God tells them, The battle is not yours, but Gods; Now
you have put it into my hands, you shall see what I will do for you. And
secondly, When the work is done it ascribes the praise and glory of all to him,
to whom alone it is due. If we mark it, God has little glory in the world for
those good things which men receive without Prayer; their friends, parts, wit,
industry, must share with God; but what is won by Prayer is worn with
thankfulness; there being a natural relation betwixt praying and praising, as
the rivers return by the sea from whence they come.

O that I were able to teach you the right use of this engine. (...)
And first let me speak to you (right Honorable and Beloved) the Lords and
Commons assembled in this Parliament: Give me leave to show you the true
spring of all that good, which has come through your hands, (...)
since your happy entrance upon your great work. God knows I would not eclipse
your worth nor due praise: We rejoice in you, 1. Whence all our present mercies
and deliverances come
and bless God for you; we have received great mercies by your means: but are
you the cause of them? Have they been done by your wisdom and forecast, or for
any worthiness found in your selves? Has not God done them all almost by
contraries? Have not you been many times at a loss, even at your wits end?
Has not God marvellously discovered wicked enterprises against you, and almost
miraculously preserved you by his own naked arm, ever since the beginning of
your meeting? Give therefore the glory where it is due, you shall have the
honor of excellent instruments, but this honor is too high for you. Know
therefore, Beloved, (and it will increase your honor to acknowledge it) that
Prayer, and God by Prayer has done all this: While you have been with Ioshuah
fighting in the valley, Moses, Aaron and Hur have been at prayer upon the
mountain. God has poured out upon many parts of the Kingdom, but more
especially in and about this great City, a most fervent Spirit of Prayer: In
many thousand families you are every day mentioned at the throne of grace; few
days of your Sessions have passed over, without extraordinary fasting and
prayer, either public or private on your behalf: And when prayer does thus
ascend, mercies must needs descend. Let God therefore have the chief honor for
pouring out the spirit of prayer and supplication, the fruit whereof is the
upholding your hearts and spirits daily in your work.

And this also intimates the best hope we have of your good success for the
time to come, And our hopes of more.
even because God has put it into the heart of the Kings Majesty and your
selves, to put the whole kingdom into a posture of prayer; we hope your care
in putting the Kingdom into a posture of defense, will be serviceable: but we
expect our greatest help and advantage, as from our daily prayers, so more
especially from those solemn monthly days of humiliation, that are afforded
and appointed us.

William the Conqueror, when he was Duke of Normandy (according to the
superstition of those times) builded many Abbeys, Monasteries and Nunneries,
and told his friends he was at this cost to strengthen his Kingdom, esteeming
them as strong fortifications, wherein he provided many to fight against the
devil, the world, and the flesh: this he said according to his light. I can
more truly speak from God that in every congregation where godly Ministers and
godly people shall, according to public direction, ly in the dust, fasting,
and mourning, and praying before the Lord; there are strong holds set up for
the safety of the Kingdom.

Secondly, how sadly does this speak against many thousands of professed
Christians! some cannot pray, 2 For reproof.
some will not pray, sure I am many do not pray, who in all this long time of
Germanies afflictions have never separated themselves to afford one days
prayer for the help of their brethren: and in all our own exigents and
darknesses have never stood upon the walls to help either England, Scotland,
Ireland, King, or Parliament: these are a miserable generation. And this their
not praying for the Church is a sad token against them, that when the Church of
Christ shall sing for joy of heart, themselves shall cry for sorrow of heart,
Isa. 5. 4.
and howl for vexation of spirit.

What remains then, 3 Exhortation to help the Church by Prayer.
but that all you who make mention of the Lord, and bear his Name, who have
received this mercy, that you may have access to the throne of grace, be
quickened up, for the time to come, to stand upon the walls, to give God no rest
night nor day, to let Jerusalem come into your mind, constantly to do that
which Master Bradford made the subscription of his letters, Motives thereunto.
pray, pray, pray. God has done great things for us; but many great things are
yet to be done; much rubbish to be removed; many obstructions to be cleared,
many enemies to be overthrown. Ireland is to be relieved, Religion to be
established; Prayer may do all this; we may overmatch all our enemies by
prayer, discover all their plots by prayer. Let us not be traitors against the
Church and State, in slighting or forbearing the use of that, which may work
all our works for us; this is to betray the forts of the Kingdom, But remember
when I exhort you to pray, I mean, First, it must be prayer indeed; many can
read prayers, say prayers, sing prayers, many can conceive or utter prayers,
who yet cannot pray: Prayer is a pouring out of the soul to God. And secondly,
this spirit poured out in prayer must be a pure spirit: If I regard iniquity
in my heart, Psalm. 66. And d^^ction herein.
the Lord will not hear my prayer. And thirdly, this prayer must be a prayer
of faith; Pray in faith and waver not: And in a prayer of faith three things
must meet. First, That the things begged be according to the will of God.
Secondly, That they be begged in the name of Christ. Thirdly, that we rely
upon the faithfulness of God, for the performance of them. This is to pray in
faith. Fourthly, Our prayers must be fervent, humble, constant; and when we
have prayed, we must remember, that though prayer be the great means, yet
prayer is not all the means. Prayer must quicken us up to the use of other
means, and sanctify us in the use of other means; other means are fruitless
without prayer, and prayer not seconded with the use of other means, where they
may be had, prevails not. These things you cannot be ignorant of, and
therefore I only point at them, especially in these streights of time.

One thing more I must needs advise about, 2 Exhortation to p^ize such ^s have
the spirit of Prayer.
before I pass from this great help of prayer. And that is, in what esteem
praying spirits should be had amongst all wise men; I know the world slights
and scorns them, but in truth they are the very Chariots and Horsemen of
Israel: Ten praying men might have saved Sodom, and the Cities round about.
Solomon says, There was a little City and few men it, and a poor wise man by
his wisdom delivered this City from the siege of a great King; Eccles 9. 14.
Yet no man remembered that same poor man. Truly thus it is with poor praying
Christians, they deliver the Island and yet no man regards them. David knew how
to prize such spirits, who, though he were a King, thought them fit to be his
companions who called upon the name of God. Romans 15 30.
Paul knew how to prize them who begged for prayers, as a prisoner for a
ransom, Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that you
pray for me. Yea, Ioash though an Idolater, when the praying Prophet Elisha lay
a dying, wept, and cried, as sensible of loosing the chief support of his
Kingdom, 2 King 13 14.
O my father, my father, the Chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. Nay,
which is yet more, a heathen Emperor Marcus Aurelius, finding by experience
the power of the prayers of Christians, gave all the world notice of it, staid
the persecution against the Christians, and called that band of Christians
Legio fulminatrix, the thundering band. Let us therefore not fall short of
heathens, let us not undervalue or slight them, who carry the Keys of heaven
at their girdle. Isa. 19. 24.
Verily (Right honorable and beloved) if you knew what blessings they are in
the midst of the land, you would take pleasure in them, you would seek for
praying friends, praying servants, praying tenants; you would desire to have a
stock go in every one of their vessels. You would say to them all, as they to
their companions going up to the house of God, Zech. 8. 21. etc.
To pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts, I will go also. Yea,
you would lay hold upon the skirt of these men, saying we will go with you,
for we have heard that God is with you. This is the greatest help which we can
give to the Church of Christ. This we do immediately to God for the Church.

There are some things also which we must do for the Church from God: 2 To
employ all our gifts and Tale^s as Stewards and servants for the Church.
The particulars are innumerable, but in regard the time is wholly spent, I
shall give you the sum of all in one short conclusion. And indeed a little
time may make it clear to your understandings, although the practice of it
require the study of your whole lives.

The conclusion is this, Whatsoever abilities any have received in any kind,
they are given to them to this very end, to be serviceable and useful to the
Church of Christ with them: 1 Cor. 12. 7.
All the manifestations of the spirit in gifts and graces, are chiefly given
for this end to profit the Church with; all the livelihood of our natural
faculties, of our actions, of our wordly wealth, of office or authority, are
given us, not for our own carnal ends, no nor primarily for our own salvation;
but that with them all we should be as good Stewards of the manifold graces of
God. 1 Pet. 4. 1^.
So that our hands if skillful to write, should be employed as Secretaries of
the Church, our feet as Messengers of the Church, our tongues as Advocates for
the Church, our Wisdom and learning as Counselors for the Church, our wealth
as Stewards or Almoners for the Church. Whatever any man has, the Lord would
have his Church to be the Common-storehouse, into which all should be brought,
the body to which all should be serviceable: just as it was when the Tabernacle
was to be built: (...) are cu^s^d or blessed as they
Not only Bezaleel and Aholiab, men skillful in all manner of work, E^o^. 3^.
were to bestow their labors upon it; but all with whom any thing was to be
found, whether silver or brass, or fine linen, or Goats hair, or Badgers
skins, or Rams skins; all with a willing heart were to bring it in; yea, the
very women, that could spinne either linen, or woollen, or hair, were all to
be employed to further the work of the Tabernacle.

This needs no proof, every man's spirit carries him to do all this for
whatsoever is his summum bonum, his chiefest happiness; such as make Mammon
their God, or their belly, do readily contribute all they have or can do to
the service of them. I shall shut up all with a brief application, (...),
First, for reproof, Secondly for duty.

How sadly does this speak concerning them whose serviceablenesse to the Church
consists only in empty and barren wishes! 1 For reproof of most who are
strangers to this duty.
the same which they can and do afford to any creature which they see to be in
distress; they love the Church, they pity the miseries of the Church, they are
sorry for Germany, when they think on it, and that is but seldom: They grieve
for Ireland; but require either their hands to underwrite, their legs to walk,
their purses to contribute, their authority to command or countenance, etc.
they can spare none of all these. They have a bottomless gulf called self,
which swallows all they are, have, or can do, and yet is never satisfied.
Ask them if they have a heart to do nothing for the Church, they answer
readily they pray for it with all their heart, and that is all they can do.
But let all such false-hearted Christians know, that the Lord needs none of
their help, and cares as little for their dry barren prayers, as the poor
beggar did for the Bishops blessing, who begging for a penny, but denied that,
and put off with the offer of a benediction, told him that he perceived his
penny was better than his blessing, otherwise he had denied him that also. In
the mean time think how thou will appear in the day of thine account, when
the not having much, but the improving of what we had to our masters advantage,
will bring the Euge bone serve; when others shall come in and say, Lord thy
pound has gained five pounds; when (as Gregory says) Peter shall come in with
his gain of Judea, Andrew of Africa, Thomas of India, Paul, and the rest, of
many Nations; Ministers bring in their sheaves of souls, private Christians
their gleanings and bundles; And thou appear empty, thy talent buried or
embezelled, thy age spent, thy candle burnt out, nothing done by thee for the
Church; when it shall appear that thou have had gold and silver to feather thy
own nest, power and authority to terrify thy neighbors; like a great Tree
crushing or overdropping all that stand near thee; and have had this worlds
goods, as the Leviathan the Sea, only to take thy pleasure, and satisfy thy
lusts in them. Luke 12* 45.
Woe unto thee if thy Master find thee thus doing. This gain of thy Talents,
2 For Exhor^ation. 1 To the Horse of Parliament.
will be the loss of thy own soul.

Secondly, for exhortation to all, especially to you Right honorable, and
beloved; What words shall I use? How shall I make up a strength to prevail with
you, to give up your selves and all you have so wholly to the Lord and to his
Church, that all your other outward occasions may not so much as dare to expect
any thing from you, so long as the Church has need of it; that your pleasures
and superf^uities, nay your profits and sometimes necessities, may never offer
to come in competition with the Church of God, for any thing which you call
yours. O that you could hear the Lord speaking to you in the same language as
once he spoke to Cyrus, For Jacob my servants sake, and Israel mine elect, I
have even called thee by the name! I confess that instead of exhorting we have
just cause to bless God for you, when we consider how you, who heretofore have
lived at ease and in pleasure enjoying the delights of the sons of men, have
now changed your pleasures for pains, your delights for dangers, your profits
and gains for expenses, your houses for lodgings, and still continue to deny
your selves in all these things, and go on in your unwearied labors for the
Church and cause of God. This is great matter of praise to God, and honor to
your selves. Generous plants and odoriferous spices (they say) grow only in
hot regions: such fruits as yours are not brought forth by every plant, such
plants as you grow not on every ground. But go ye on, ye Nobles and Worthies,
forget what is behind; God and his people will not forget it: look and press
to the work which yet remains: Get the resolution of Zisca that brave Bohemian
Captain, who not only was willing to fight while he lived, but be queathed his
skin when he died, to be made a drum head for the service of the war. Hold
out to the end, Cloth ye with zeal as with a cloak, put on righteousness as
your ornament: Be good shepherds still, Job 29.
to rescue and feed the flock committed to you: Obad. v. ult.
Be so many Saviors upon mount Sion. All this shall be done for the best
Master; all this seed will be sown in the most fruitful ground, the bosom of
the Church: and to quicken you the more, remember how much of the golden time
which is gone you have wasted, with Domitian, in catching of flies; how much of
your estate has bin spent needlessly in pictures, feastings, buildings,
sportings, if not worse, in riot and disorder; how much of your strength has
been bestowed in the service of this world, and the God of it: and now when the
gray hairs are scattered upon many of you, and God might justly cast you aside
as broken vessels, the Lord should choose you, and accept you in the most
honorable service that the sons of men are capable of; nay that service which
he employed his own Son in. How readily and cheerfully ought you to consecrate
your selves and service to this work* you should come from your habitations and
countries, as the Levite from the place where he so journed, Deuteronomy. 18 60.
with all the desires of your minds to serve the Lord your God.

And to you the rest, 2 To all others.
beside your Prayers, the exigence of the Church at this present time requires
from you many otherthings. It may be some of you may be called, as soldiers,
to spend your blood in the Churches cause: If you knew the honor and the
reward that belongs to such a service, you would say, as the Martyr once, Had
every hair on your head a life, you would venture them all in the Churches
cause. It may be others of you may, with Nehemiah, be called from your own ease
and honor to some wearisome task, embrace it readily. It is like your
collections and contributions will be more frequent than ordinary, and very
shortly in an extraordinary occasion, for the relief of our distressed brethren
in Ireland: many in the City of London have set excellent examples, let me
provoke you by their pattern, as the Apostle Paul did the Corinthians to the
like work, by propounding to them the example of Macedonia: Only remember
this, that what you give in this case is interpreted by Christ as given to his
own person; Matthew. 25. 35.
and whom would not this provoke? It is reported of Master Fox, that when a
poor man asked something of him for Christ Jesus sake, he questioned with the
man, whether he knew Jesus Christ; and finding signs that the man was a
Believer, he gave him his horse, when he had no money. I commend not his
discretion, but his zeal and charity were admirable. Do somewhat proportionable
to the distress of your brethren; Behold your Savior coming naked, and
hungry, and banished in these his afflicted members. And in whatsoever else the
Lord and his Church may have any need of you, remember that Gods blessing is
upon them that come to help him: and that Meroz, and with Meroz all others are
cursed, who come not out to the help of the Lord against the mighty.

FINIS.
Die Veneris 25. Febr. 1641.
IT is this day ordered by the House of Commons, that no man shall Print the
Sermons Preached on the last Fast day, before the House of Commons, by Master
Calamy and Master Marshall, besides themselves, for the space of these two
months, without the particular License and Approbation of the said House of
Commons.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

THese are to give notice, that I appoint Samuel Gellibrand to print my Sermon.

Stephen Marshall.


