CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS UPON Some Texts of SCRIPTURE, GATHERED TOGETHER FOR THE
SETTING FORTH THE KINGS AVTHORITY, AND THE PEOPLES DVTY.

Col. 3.16. And now brethren, let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all
wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another. John. 5.39. Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they that
testify these things. Printed in the year, 1648.

To the READER.
GEntle Reader, J finding the work hereof to be very beneficial for the
public, it being a public work, durst not wrong mine own conscience so much
as to conceal it for mine own use, and wrap up my talent in a napkin, without
imparting it to the good of others: J desire therefore nothing more then your
Christian patience, because you must not expect the ensuing matter as a
discourse from the learned; but accept of it as a poor gift freely bestowed
upon the Kingdom from a weak Layman, who had rather speak five words with
understanding, then ten thousand in an unknown tongue: And whose wisdom was
not able to dive into any further discourse, but to take up and gather together
several Scriptures, and from thence plain truths, as are revealed in the
Scriptures by the Prophets and Apostles, in the Old and New Testament: that so
they may be more fully made known, to this end, that we may all in this
Kingdom, more speedily put them into practice: which is the prayer, and desire
of

Your friend and servant, T. M.

IF there be any that be desirous with Enoch to walk with God, and to please
him: Or with Abraham the father of the faithful, to walk before God and to be
upright: Or with Zacharias and Elizabeth the righteous servants of the Lord, to
walk in the Commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless:

Then with the Prophet Micah 4.2. Let them go to the mountain of the Lord, to
the house of the God of Jacob. And he will teach them of his ways, if they
will walk in his paths.

And with the Prophet Jeremiah 6.16. Let them stand in the way and see, and ask
for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and they shall find
rest for their souls.

And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon them and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God. Gal. 6.16.

And let us now hear what God the Lord speaks, Psalm. 85.8. As by the mouth of
all his holy Prophets which have been since the world began. Luke 1.70. For if
they will not believe Moses and the Prophets, neither will they believe though
one arose from the dead. Luke 16.31. And first what they speak for The Kings
AUTHORITY.

ANd let us now begin our work in the name of the Lord, and entreat his
blessing upon it: and hear what the Lord God himself says, who is the God of
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our fathers.

Numb. 12.8. Wherefore then were ye not afraid Aaron and Miriam, to speak
against my servant Moses ( marrying an Ethiopian woman) verse. 10. Miriam became
Leprous white as snow.

1. Observation. That neither high nor low ought to speak against Supreme
Authority, no not Aaron though the high Priest: Eccles. 8.4. Who may say unto
him, what do thou? They are the Lords servants. 2. Obs. That a Leprosy, or
some other judgment shall befall them that speak against supreme authority,
though in marriage; S. Jude calls them filthy dreamers, that despise dominion
and speak evil of dignities, v. 8.
Judges. 17.5. Micah had an house of gods, and consecrated one of his sons to
be his priest. And in those days there was no King in Israel, but every man
did that which was right in his own eyes.

1. Obs. That where no King is to rule a Nation, that Nation and people is
ready to consecrate priests to themselves. Heb. 4.5. No man ought to take this
honor to himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron, to be an high
priest. 2. Obs. That where there is no King in a Nation though Gods own people
Israel, yet Israel walks according to their own ways, and contrary to the
ways of God. Lev. 26.21. If ye walk contrary unto me, I will walk contrary
unto you, and bring seven more judgments upon you, for my ways are not your
ways, nor my thoughts your thoughts, says the Lord. Isay 55.8.
1 Samuel 8.4. When the Elders of Israel perceived that the sons of Samuel though
Judges, walked not aright, but followed lucre and perverted judgment. They
came to Samuel and said unto him, make us a King to judge us like all the
Nations.

1. Obs. That the Elders, and rulers, the heads of the Tribes of Israel, desire
to have a King, for to rule them and judge them. 2. Obs. That no Elder or ruler
ought to dis-throne a King from ruling or judging.
1 Samuel 10.24. And Samuel said unto the Elders and to all the people; See ye
him whom the Lord has chosen, that there is none like him amongst the people:
And all the people shouted: and said, God save the King.

1. Obs. That Kings have their original choice from the Lord. 2. Obs. That no
man ought to be compared to the King. 3. Obs. That no man ought to think
slightly of the King, but to rejoice in their King. 4. Obs. That its the
peoples duty to pray for the King, God save the King.
2 Samuel 16.16. Hushai being sent from David, said unto Absolon, God save the
King. God save the King.

1. Obs. That dissimulation has a cloak for every action. 2. Obs. That prayer
is made a cloak for dissimulation. 3. Obs. That fair speeches and the stronger
party, is made a maine cloak for dissemblers. 18.19.
1. Kings 1.39. And Zadok the priest Anointed Solomon King, and they blew the
trumpet, and all the people said, God save King Solomon.

1. Obs. That Kings are the Lords Anointed. 2. Obs. That great triumph ought to
be made at the Anointing of Kings. 3. Obs. That its the peoples duty to pray
for their King by name. King Solomon. King Charles.
1 Kings 20.31. And Benadads servants said, the Kings of the house of Israel
are merciful Kings, let us put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes upon our
heads, and go out to the King of Israel, peradventure he will save our lives.

1. Obs. That the council of servants ought not to be rejected. 2. Obs. That
Kings ought to be merciful. 3. Obs. That its the duty of the people to be
humbled and submit their lives to the Kings mercy. 4. Obs. That where there is
no humiliation, there ought to be no mercy. 5. Obs. That Kings have power in
themselves to pardon great offenders.
1 Kings 21.13. Children of Belial witnessed against Naboth, Naboth did
blaspheme God and the King: And they stoned him with stones that he died.

1. Obs. That blasphemers of God and the King, ought to suffer death. 2. Obs.
That we ought not to have an evil thought of the King: Eccles. 10.20. Curse not
the King, no not in thy thoughts. Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not curse the ruler
of thy people.
1 Chro. 28.4.29.1. And David the King said unto all the congregation, Solomon
my son whom alone God has chosen, is yet young and tender.

1. Obs. That God alone chooses Kings. 2. Obs. That God may choose Kings when
they are young and tender. 3. Obs. That it is not in the power and will of man
to choose Kings: Prove. 8.15. By me Kings reign. 4. Obs. That the congregation
ought to take notice, how the Lord alone chooses Kings.
2 Chro. 30.12. King Hezekiah and his Princes, took counsel together to keep
the passover: And the hand of God was to give them one heart, to do the
commandment of the King and the Princes, by the word of the Lord.

1. Obs. That Kings and Princes are to council together. 2. That Kings and
Princes ought to council together, for the establishing of Gods worship, the
Church Government. 3. That it is God that unites the hearts of the people to do
the Kings Commandment. 4. Obs. That the King and his Princes ought not to
establish any worship, but according to the word of the Lord.
Ezra. 6.10. King Darius made a decree, and gave to the priests to offer
sacrifices of sweet savor unto the God of heaven, and pray for the life of the
King, and his sons.

1. Obs. That all sacrifices are to be offered up unto the Lord. 2. Obs. That
in all our spiritual sacrifices, we ought to offer up our prayers to the God
of heaven, for the life of the King and his sons.
Ezra. 7.26. Artaxerxes King of Kings, said unto Ezra the priest, And whosoever
will not do the law of thy God, and the law of thy King, let judgment be
executed upon him speedily, whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to
confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.

1. Obs. That we all ought to be obedient to the laws of God. 2. Obs. That all
we ought to be obedient to the laws of the King. 3. Obs. That punishment ought
to be inflicted upon the transgressors of the laws, both of God and the King,
whether death, banishment, confiscation, imprisonment, according to the Kings
mercy.
Ezra 7.27. Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers, which has put such a thing
as this in the Kings heart, to beautify the house of the Lord, which is at
Jerusalem.

1. Obs. That the priests and the scribes of the law of the God of heaven,
ought to bless the Lord for the house of the Lord. 2. Obs. That the Lord ought
to have his house at Jerusalem, the Metropolis. 3. Obs. That the Lords house
ought to be sought unto, and to be beautified. Micah 4.2. 4. Obs. That they
ought to be punished, that go about to deface the house of the Lord. 5. Obs.
That its the Kings duty, to see that the house of the Lord be beautified.
Neh. 2.3. Nehemiah who was the Kings cupbearer said unto the King, Let the
King live for ever.

1. Obs. That Godly rulers ought to pray for their King. 2. Obs. That Godly
rulers ought to pray for the long life of their King. 3. Obs. That Godly rulers
ought not to think slightly of their King, but pray.
Neh. 2.6. And the King said unto me, the Queen sitting by him, for how long
shall thy journey be?

1. Obs. That there has been Kings and Queens to rule and govern the nations.
2. Obs. That no man ought to separate those that God has joined together.
Esther 7.5. King Ahashuerus said unto Queen Esther, who is he, and where is he
that durst presume in his heart to do so?

1. Obs. That Kings ought to maintain their Queens, and make enquiry after
those that oppose them. 2. Obs. That all those that oppose Queens, ought to
have the wrath of the King stirred up against them. 3. Obs. That all those that
provoke the King, sin against their own souls. Prove. 20.2.
Job 34.18. Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked, and to Princes, ye are
ungodly?

1. Obs. That no man ought to speak evil of the King. 2. Obs. That all men
ought to strive to maintain the Kings honor, and the Princes innocence.
Psalm. 18.50. Great deliverance gives he to his King, and shows mercy to his
Anointed, to David and his seed for evermore.

1. Obs. That we ought to pray for deliverance for our King. 2. Obs. That we
ought not to imprison our King. 3. Obs. That Kings are the Lords Anointed. 4.
Obs. That we ought to pray for the King by his name, David, Charles. 5. Obs.
That we ought to pray for the Kings seed for evermore.
Psalm. 72.1. Give the King thy judgments O God: and thy righteousness unto
the Kings son.

1. Obs. That we ought to pray to God for the King. 2. Obs. That we ought to
pray to God, that judgment, and wisdom, and understanding, may be given to
the King for government. 3. Obs. That we ought to pray that the Kings seed may
be endued with righteousness. 4. Obs. That we must all strive to maintain the
King in judgment, and his seed in righteousness.
Psalm. 84.9. Behold O God our shield, and look upon the face of thine Anointed.

1. Obs. That its the duty of Kings, to rely upon God; and make him their
shield. 2. Obs. That its the duty of Kings to pray to God for themselves. 3.
Obs. That Kings in their prayers, may set out their prerogatives before God:
[Anointed.]
Psalm. 89.18. For the Lord is our defense, the holy one of Israel is our king:
I have exalted one chosen out of the people. I have found David my servant,
with my holy oil have I Anointed him.

1. Obs. That Kings ought to rely upon the Lord for defense. 2. Obs. That Kings
must not put confidence in man for defense, but in the Lord. 3. Obs. That Kings
are the holy ones of God. 4. Obs. That Kings are exalted and set up by God. 5.
Obs. That Kings are chosen out of the people by God. 6. Obs. That Kings are the
Lords servants. 7. Obs. That the oil wherewith Kings are Anointed is an holy
oil.
Prove. 8.15. By me kings reign and princes decree justice.

1. Obs. That the reign of Kings is by the power of God, and their authority
is from the Lord. 2. Obs. That no man has power to subdue the King in his
reign. 3. Obs. That Princes ought to decree nothing, but that which is just.
4. Obs. That Kings and Princes ought to make no law, nor decree, but that which
is according to justice, according to the word of God.
Prove. 16.10. A divine sentence is in the lips of the king: his mouth
transgresses not in judgment.

1. Obs. That the sentences of Kings, ought to be highly esteemed, as the
oracles of God. 2. Obs. That in the judgment of a King is no transgression. 3.
Obs. That we are to yield to the Kings judgment, and not stand upon our own
judgment.
Prove. 16.15. In the light of the kings countenance is life, and his favor is
as a cloud of the latter rain.

1. Obs. That the life of a good subject is the cheerful countenance of the
King. 2. Obs. That the favor of the King, is like the former and the latter
rain upon the ground in his due season. 3. Obs. That Kings ought to show their
respects to their good subjects. 4. Obs. That no subject ought to provoke the
King to make him frown.
Prove. 20.2. The fear of a King is as the roaring of a Lion, who so provokes
him to anger, sins against his own soul.

1. Obs. That men ought to be afraid and tremble, for fear of the Kings anger.
2. Obs. That no man ought to vex the King, or provoke him to anger. 3. Obs.
That subject sins against his own soul, that provokes the King to anger. 4.
Obs. That we must use all our power and industry, to preserve the King in his
integrity.
Prove. 20.28. Mercy and truth preserve the King: and his Throne is upholden by
mercy.

1. Obs. That the preservation of Kings, is upheld by upholding the attributes
of God. 2. Obs. That the thrones of Kings are upholden, by holding forth the
word of truth, and the works of mercy. 3. Obs. That the Kings care ought to be
to show mercy. 4. Obs. That Kings are made glorious, both in the eyes of their
subjects, and to other Nations, by holding forth the works of mercy: And here
see King Charles glorious.
1. In his showing mercy to his enemies. 2. In preserving the truth from
error. 3. In praying for his persecutors. 4. In his desiring of peace in all
these wars. 5. In his joy in all his afflictions. 6. In his patience, in the
want and enjoyment of his desired Consort, and comforts. 7. In his manifesting
all the fruits of the spirit to be in him: his love to God, to the Kingdom, to
his Subjects: his joy in tribulations, his desire of peace, his long-suffering,
his gentleness, his goodness, his faith, his meekness, his temperance,
these have made him glorious: and this is his joy and crown of rejoicing, and
by these his Crown is upholden.
Prove. 24.21. My son fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to change.

1 Obs. That none can fear the Lord, but he that fears the King. 2 Obs. That
unless we honor the King, we cannot truly fear the Lord. 3 Obs. That
changelings are not to be trusted unto, nor to have any dealing withal.
Prove. 30.31. And a King against whom there is no rising up.

1 Obs. That no man ought to rise up against the King, not by thoughts to
think evil of him, not by words to curse him, nor by weapons to war against
him. 2 Obs. That we all ought to lay down our evil thoughts, our wicked words,
our ungodly weapons, and to submit unto him. 3 Obs. That we all ought to labor
in our thoughts, words, and weapons, to preserve and defend the King, and his
seed after him for evermore.
Eccles. 8.2. I council thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in
regard of the oath of God.

1 Obs. That wherein the King Commands the people are to obey. 2 Obs. That the
Kings Cammands ought to be according to the oath of God. 3 Obs. That the oath
of God, and the Kings Commands are to be kept.
Eccles. 8.4. Where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto
him, What do thou?

1 Obs. That the words of Kings, ought to be powerful words. 2 Obs. That no
man is to control the King, nor to speak against him. 3 Obs. That the works
of Kings, ought all to be righteous works.
Eccles. 10.20 Curse not the King, no not in thy thoughts, and curse not the
rich in thy bedchamber, for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that
which has wings shall tell the matter.

1 Obs. That we ought not so much as in our thoughts, to think evil, or to
curse the King. 2 Obs. That we ought with our lives and estates, in our
thoughts, words, and works, to maintain and uphold the Honor of the King. 3
Obs. That no man in Authority ought to be cursed. 4 Obs. That we ought to pray
for Kings, and for all in Authority. 5 Obs. That the Lord will reveal the
secrets of men's hearts, even of those that curse the King, or any in Authority.
Isaiah 49.23. Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy nursing
mothers.

1 Obs. That its the duty of Kings and Queens, to be tenderly affected toward
their subjects. 2 Obs. That its the subjects duty, to preserve and maintain
their Kings and Queens, with all fitting maintenance for their places. 3 Obs.
That Kings and Queens ought to live together, to be aiding and assisting one to
the other: As fathers and mothers.
Jer. 27.8. It shall come to pass that the Nation and Kingdom which will not
serve Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, will I punish with the sword, with the
famine, and with the pestilence, and hearken not to your Prophets, for they
prophecy a lie unto you, bringing your necks under the yoke of the King of
Babylon, and serve him and his people and live, why will ye die, thou and thy
people, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, as the Lord has
spoken against the Nation that will not serve the King of Babylon?

1 Obs. That Nations and Kingdoms are to be governed by Kings. 2. Obs. That
though a King be a wicked King, yet he must be served. 3. Obs. That the
punishment of a Nation or Kingdom, whether by sword, famine, or pestilence,
follows the disloyalty to the Kings commands. 4. Obs. That if Prophets
prophecy disloyalty to the Kings commands, we are not to hearken unto them:
they prophecy a lie. 5. Obs. That its the subjects special duty, to obey the
Kings command. 6. Obs. That all those that disobey the Kings commands shall be
punished by death: with sword, by famine, by pestilence. 7. Obs. That its the
Lord that brings his punishments, and inflicts them upon a disloyal Nation, or
Kingdom, where he pleases.
Jer. 30.9. But they shall serve the Lord their God, and David their King, whom
I will raise up unto them.

1. Obs. That the Lord God is to be served. 2. Obs. That David their King is to
be served. 3. Obs. That they are joined together to serve the Lord God, and
David their King: so serve the Lord God, and Charles their King. 4. Obs. That
the Lord raises up Kings, and commands all their subjects to serve them.
Ezekiel. 37.24. David my servant shall be King over them, and they all shall have
one shepherd, and they shall walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes
and do them.

1. Obs. That all Godly Kings are the Lords immediate servants. 2. Obs. That
where a Godly King Rules, there they have all one Godly ministry, one Godly
government, one faith, one baptism. 3. Obs. That no liberty ought to be given
to tender consciences, to walk contrary to Gods statutes. 4. Obs. That the
judgments, and statutes, and commandments of God, ought to be the rule and the
way, wherein every man ought to walk. 5. Obs. That no command of man binds
the Conscience to be observed, that is contrary to the statutes and
commandments of God.
Hosea 10.3. For now they shall say we have no King, because we feared not the
Lord, what then should a King do to us?

1. Obs. That where a people or a Nation begin to cast off the fear of the
Lord, that people or Nation desires no King. 2. Obs. That if England fear the
Lord, then England desires a King. 3. Obs. That people fear not the Lord, that
do not highly esteem of, and honor their King.
Hosea 13.10. O Israel, I will be thy King, thou said, give me a King and
Princes: I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath.

1. Obs. That God takes the title and name of a King to himself. 2. Obs. That
the people of God, has God to be their King. 3. Obs. That Kings are given, and
taken away by God. 4. Obs. That no man has power to place, or displace the
King, but God himself.
Mat. 17.12. Jesus asked Peter, what think thou Simon? of whom do the Kings
of the earth take custom? of strangers, or of their own children? yet lest we
should offend, go to the sea, cast an hook, take a fish, open his mouth, take
a piece of money, and pay for thee and me.

1. Obs. That Christ allows of Kings to be on the earth. 2. Obs. That Christ
will pay custom to Caesar, rather then offend Caesar. 3. Obs. That Christ will
work a miracle, to pay custom to the Kings of the earth, rather then offend. 4
Obs. That by Christ's Example all men must submit to the customs and
privileges of Kings. 5 Obs. That free children ought rather to submit to the
customs of their Kings, then offend.
Mat. 22.20. Mar. 12.17. Luke 20.25. Whose is this Image and Superscription?
Cesars. Render to Caesar the things that be Cesars, and to God the things that
be Gods.

1 Obs. That the Authority of Kings may be enquired after. 2 Obs. That when the
Kings Authority is made known, it presently must be obeyed. 3 Obs. That its the
command of God, to give Kings their due. 4 Obs. That no man ought to hinder the
King of his customs, and his dues, but render them to him.
Romans 13.1.2.7. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no
power but of God, and the powers that be are ordained of God: Whosoever
therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: And they that
resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.

1 Obs. That every man ought to submit himself to that Authority that is set
over him by God. 2 Obs. That where God sets not Authority, that soul ought not
to be subject. 3 Obs. That where Authority commands things contrary to God,
that Authority ought not to be obeyed, by active obedience. 4 Obs. That no man
ought to resist that Authority that is ordained of God. 5 Obs. That the
Authority of Kings is ordained of God, and no man ought to resist them. 6 Obs.
That damnation is the reward of disloyalty, to the Kings Authority.
1 Timothy 2.1.2. I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men, for Kings and all
that are in Authority. That we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty, for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior.

1 Obs. That all manner of prayers ought to be made for Kings, and all in
Authority. 2 Obs. That no quiet and peaceable living can be in any Kingdom,
where Kings and Magistrates are not prayed for. 3 Obs. That it is a good and
acceptable sacrifice to God our Savior, to offer up prayers and thanks for
Kings, and all in Authority.
Titus 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject to principalities, and powers, to
obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work.

1 Obs. That people must be put in mind of their duty, they are apt to forget
it. 2 Obs. That its the ministers duty to preach subjection to supreme
Authority. 3 Obs. That its the peoples duty, willingly to yield obedience to
all Authority. 4 Obs. That by our good works we show forth our obedience to
supreme Authority, and power of the Magistrate.
1 Pet. 2.13, 17. Submit your selves therefore to every ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors as
unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well, for so is the will of God: honor all men, love
the Brotherhood, fear God, Honor the King.

1 Obs. That the ordinances of man, that are made agreeable to the word of the
Lord, ought to be obeyed. 2 Obs. That the King is the supreme Governor, and
his Authority is supreme Authority, and his commands are supreamly to be
obeyed. 3. Obs. That governors are sent by the King, and have their authority
from the King. 4. Obs. That the authority of governors, is to punish evil
doers, and to praise them that do well. 5. Obs. That its Gods will that the
King is supreme governor, and he commands: his commands are supreamly to be
obeyed. 6. Obs. That no government ought to be set up, neither in Church nor
state, that is not according to the word and will of God. 7. Obs. That all men
ought to be honored in that place of authority, whereunto God has called
them. 8. Obs. That the Saints of God upon earth ought to be loved. 9. Obs. That
high and low, rich and poor, ought to fear God. 10. Obs. That all men, high and
low, rich and poor, noble and ignoble, young and old, it is their duty to
honor the King: God save the King, God save King Charles.
Thus gentle Reader, have we run through these places and texts of Scripture,
which has sufficiently to satifie every man's soul, proved unto us painly, the
work we have taken in hand to set forth The Kings AUTHORITY. And lest any
should with the Atheist deny there is a God, or a King; we will gather up these
fragments again, that nothing be lost. And now view and behold the The Kings
AUTHORITY, and the Subjects DUTY.

And so here we may plainly see and observe, That the Lord alone has chosen
Kings (not man.) And he has chosen them to Rule over and to Govern his own
people Israel. And Kings are the Lords immediate servants, his holy ones. The
Lords Anointed for that purpose to Govern his people, and their Thrones are
upholden by the Lord, and their AUTHORITY is from the Lord, and their AUTHORITY
is supreme AUTHORITY over ALL.

And yet they owe duty to God, as first,
1 To see that the house of the Lord be beautified. 2 To maintain their Queens,
against all that shall oppose them. 3 To pray to God for themselves, and to
make God their defense and shield, and not put confidence in man. 4 To make all
their Laws, and decrees, and ordinances, according to the Laws of God, and
their sentences and words, to be as the Oracles of God. 5 To show a cheerful
countenance, and their due respects to their good subjects: And to hold forth
the Attributes of God according to the word of truth, and to show mercy, and to
do righteous works. 6 To endeavor to have all one godly Ministry, one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism, one union in Religion and Church Government, and no
liberty if they walk contrary to God. 7 To appoint Governors, and to
Authorize them to punish evil doers, and to praise them that do well.
And let us now see the duty of Godly Rulers to their King.
1 GOdly Rulers and Elders, must desire to have a King, to Rule them and to
Govern them. 2 Godly Rulers have no power to choose a King, to dis-throne a
King, or to imprison a King. 3 Godly Rulers ought to pray for the King, to pray
for the long life of the King, and not compare themselves to the King, nor
think slightly of the King. 4 Godly Rulers ought to strive to maintain the
Kings Honor, the Princes innocence, and not to separate the King and the
Queen. 5 Godly Rulers ought to punish evil doers, and to praise them that do
well.
And here next behold the Prophets duty.
1 ANd they are to Prophecy Loyalty, and Obedience to the Kings commands. 2
They are to offer Sacrifice, to pray for the King and his Sons. 3 They are to
preach to the people subjection, to supreme Authority.
And because we will have compassion on the multitude, and not let them depart
without a blessing, we will show them their duty.

And here observe now, and behold the peoples duty to their King.
1. THe peoples duty is, to pray for wisdom and understanding for the King. 2.
The peoples duty is, to pray for the King by his name, God save King Solomon:
God save King Charles. 3. The peoples duty is, to pray for the King, and his
seed for evermore. 4. The peoples duty is, not to compare themselves to the
King, nor think slightly of the King, nor curse the King. 5. The peoples duty
is, to maintain and uphold with their lives and estates the Kings honor: and
to humble themselves, and submit their lives to the Kings mercy. 6. The peoples
duty is, to obey all the Laws and commands of the King. 7. The peoples duty is,
not to provoke the King to anger, nor to control the King, nor to rise up
against the King, by thought, by word, or by weapon. 8. The peoples duty is, to
serve and obey the King, lest the punishment of disloyalty to the Kings
commands befall them, as sword, famine, pestilence. 9. The peoples duty is, to
pay customs or tributes to their King, Caesar. 10. The peoples duty is to
observe the duty for fear of a greater punishment: damnation is the reward of
all those that resist the Kings supreme AUTHORITY: blessedness is the reward
of all those that submit unto, and obey the Kings supreme AUTHORITY.
And thus having laid ten commands upon the people, to which they must all
submit and obey: Let us again view and behold England.

And here by these commands of God by his servant Moses, and by all his holy
Prophets: by the practice of Jesus Christ, and by the commands of his holy
Apostles.

Let us now with Moses the servant of the Lord, call Israel to a reckoning, and
with Israel, England: and see what God could have done more for Israel England
then he has done. Deuteronomy. 10.12.

And now O Israel, O England: What does the Lord thy God require of thee? to
fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, to love him, and to serve the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul: and to keep the
commandments of the Lord and his statutes, and to do that which is good and
right in the sight of the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy. 12.28. for it is true which S.
Luke says, Luke 12.47. He that knows his Masters will and does it not, shall
be beaten with many stripes. And to this Christ himself says, Mat. 7.21. Not
every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven: but
he that does the will of my father which is in heaven.

Therefore I shall desire you with the Noble Bereans, Acts 17.11. to search the
Scriptures daily whether these things be so or no, that ye may believe, and in
believing have everlasting life.

But withal I must admonish you according to that of 1 Jo. 4.1. Believe not
every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God or no: for false
Prophets are gone out into the world. And behold they come unto you in sheeps
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves, and if it were possible, they
would deceive the very elect. Mat. 24.24. But by their fruits you shall know
them.

And if you desire to know them, then I shall exhort you as 2 Chro. 20.20.
Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established, believe his Prophets,
as Jam. 5.10. that have spoken to you in the name of the Lord, so shall ye
prosper.

1 John 3.23. And this is his commandment, that we should believe on the name
of his son Jesus Christ, and love one another, for there is no Name under
heaven given among men whereby we must be saved, but the name of the Lord
Jesus, Acts 4.12.

Think not to say within your selves we have Abraham to our father, Mat. 3.9.
or we are great, or rich, or have this privilege or other, God is greater, and
able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. But now the ax is laid
to the root of the tree: Therefore every tree that brings not forth good
fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. By their fruits therefore ye shall
know them: for now is the time of envying, strife and division, 1 Cor. 3.3. Now
is the time of confusion, and every evil work. Jam. 3.16.

Now then this is the time, as Jam. 5.16. That the fervent prayer of the
righteous man should avail much with the Lord.

And therefore shall we with Abraham the father of the faithful, shall we
follow his example, Genesis 18.23. stand and draw near before the Lod, and
intercede for Sodom: for England: and pray, peradventure, there be fifty
righteous within England; will thou also destroy, and not spare the Kingdom
for the fifty righteous that are therein?

Shall we follow the example of Moses the servant of the Lord, Exodus 32.30. Go
up unto the Lord, and make an atonement for the Kingdom, and say, this people
have sinned a great sin: They have denied the Kings AUTHORITY: Yet now, if thou will, forgive their sin; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of the Book thou
have written.

And likewise shall we follow his example again, for a good example cannot be
too much followed. As Deuteronomy. 9.25. Shall we fall down on our knees, and pray
unto the Lord, and say, Oh Lord God, destroy not this Kingdom, this people,
thine inheritance, which thou have redeemed, through thy greatness, and
brought out of Egypts darkness, with a mighty hand, and an outstretched arm.
Remember thy servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and look not upon the
stubbornness of this people, nor to their sin.

Shall we follow the example of Joshuah, a Ruler full of the spirit of wisdom,
Joshua 7.10. Unto whom the Lord said, Get thee up, wherefore lie thou thus
upon thy face? Israel has sinned, and they have also transgressed my covenant
which I commanded them, for they have even taken of the accursed thing, and
they have also stolen, and dissembled also: and they have put it even among
their own stuff. A goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels of
silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight. A goodly thing to destroy
the soul: England be warned by this; for what will it profit a man to gain the
whole world, and lose his own soul?

Shall we follow the example of David, a man after Gods own heart, who exhorts
us, Psalm. 95.6. O come let us worship and bow down, and kneel before the Lord
our Maker, lest he be grieved with us forty years, as he was with that
generation, and swear unto us in his wrath, we should not enter into his rest?

Shall we follow the example of Solomon, who, 1 Kings 8.22. stood before the
Altar of the Lord, and kneeled upon his knees, and spread forth his hands
toward heaven, and said, If Israel sinned, [if England] and they would turn
again, and confess their sin, and make supplication, then he would hear in
heaven, and forgive their sin, and heal the Land.

Shall we follow the example of Daniel, Dan. 9.3. who set his face unto the
Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and
ashes, and prayed unto the Lord, and made confession, saying, We have sinned,
and have committed iniquity, and have rebelled, and departed from thy precepts,
and from thy judgments: And have not harkned to thy servants the Prophets
which spoke in thy name to our Kings, our Princes, and our fathers, and to all
the people of the land: Hearken now and be no more rebellious.

Shall we now take the example of all examples, and follow Jesus Christ, who in
Mat. 26.39. fell on his face and prayed, Mar. 1.35. Who departed into a
solitary place and there prayed Luke 22.41. Who withdrew himself from them
about a stones cast, and kneeled down and prayed. Joh. 17.1. Who lift up his
eyes to heaven and said, Heb. 5.7. Who in the days of his flesh, when he had
offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him
that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared.

And withal take a caveat here with you, not to follow the example of the
hypocrites, who Mat. 6.5. love to pray standing in the Synagoges, and in the
corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. And Mat. 23.14. Who
devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayers, but these shall
receive greater damnation.

Having thus finished our course, and now brethren being thus compassed about
with such a cloud of examples of witnesses, that shall all in the last day rise
up in judgment against us, for heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one
tittle of the word of God shall fail.

Let us follow Jesus preaching, and saying, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven
is at hand. Mat. 4.17. And Luke 13.3. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise
perish. And Luke 21.36. Watch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be
accounted worthy to escape all those things that shall come to pass, and to
stand before the Son of man.

And let us follow S. Peter's rule, 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be vigilant, because
your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion walks about, seeking whom he may
devour.

And with the author to the Heb. 12.1. let us now look about us, Let us lay
aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily beset us, and let us run
with patience the race that is set before us.

We have a good example, Looking up unto Jesus the author and finisher of our
faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despised
the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God, from whence
he shall come in the glory of his father, with all his holy Angels, and he
shall reward every man according to his works, according to that he has done
in his body, whether it be good or bad, (no shifting from him in that day.)

For before him all nations shall be gathered together, and he shall separate
them one from another, as a shepherd divides the sheep from the goats. Mat.
25.32. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the
left.

Then shall the king say unto them on the right hand, Come ye blessed of my
father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
For ye are they that have obeyed my word, my servant Moses, my holy Prophets
and Apostles, and have obeyed the Kings AUTHORITY delivered by them.

But unto the goats on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels, for ye are they that
are disobedient, and rebellious against the word of the Lord, against the holy
Prophets and holy Apostles, and against the example and commands of Jesus
Christ himself, who commands obedience to Caesar: Submission to the Kings
Supreme AUTHORITY.

Now these things have I written unto you according to the power which the Lord
has given me for edification, 2 Cor. 13.10. In hopes the better learned will
amend it. And brethren be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, fear
God, honor the King: Live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be
with you.

And the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion
of the holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen.

The End.

