THE PARSON'S Vade Mecum:

Containing choice Observations about the accounts of the Year, Ecclesiastical
Censures, of the Primitive Fathers and their writings, a Catalogue of the
Archbishops, Bishops and Deans in England and Wales, their Election,
Consecration, Instalment, with the Clergies Tenths, and their Valuation in the
King's Book; Degrees of Marriage, Non-Residence, Dispensations, Pluralities,
Deprivation, Dilapidations, Tithes and Symony, etc.

Very fit for the Perusal of all Clergymen and Gentlemen.

Licensed, November. 4th, 1692. E. Bohur.

London, Printed for T. Salusbury at the King's-Arms near St. Dunstans Church
in Fleetstreet, 1693.

THE EPISTLE TO THE Clergy-Reader.
Reverend Sir,
I Have perused several voluminous pieces concerning the Acts, Offices
Qualifications and Privileges of your Sacred Function, and several other
matters and Ecclesiastical Histories, Laws and Statutes relating thereto; but
in some they lie scattered and immethodical, and in others, the treatises are
so prolix, that neither time nor money can well be spared by the inferior
laborious Clergy to read or purchase them. I then thought it would be a work
not unacceptable to cast my choicest observations into a methodical Abstract;
the persuance of which Thought has produced this little Piece; there are many
new things inserted, with which most of the Clergy are unacquainted, and which
they will take pleasure to be informed in. The rest are notes out of the Laws
and Statutes of this Kingdom under proper Titles, and the abstract of
Ecclesiastic Story, which will be very instructive to you in many cases;
especially the Chapter of Tithes, which comprehends the principal of the whole
Learning thereof, and many new cases lately adjudged, are therein cited. In
short, Parsons love to have good penniworths, and I dare presume to say, That
after perusal of this, you will not think twelve Pence ill bestowed.

I am your Humble Servant R. M.

THE Parsons Vade Mecum.
CHAP. I. Short observations of the account and beginning of the Years and
Days, Of certain Feast-days, And of Ember Weeks.
THE English Church and State begins the Year on the 25th day of March, which
is also observed in Spain. The Portuguese begin the Year on the 29th day of
August. The Venetians on the first of March. The Grecians on the longest day,
as the old Romans did on the shortest day.

The Natural Day consisting of Four and Twenty Hours, is begun at midnight in
England. In Italy, Bohemia and Poland, their account is from Sun setting; and
at Noremberg and Wittenberg in Germany, according to the old Babylonian
account, they begin the first hour after Sunrising to count one of the Clock,
and so again at the first hour after Sun set.

Amongst the Jews, the Night was divided into Four Quarters, or Watches, each
Watch containing three Hours. The first they called Caput Vigilarum. The second
the Middlewatch, because it ended at Midnight. The third began at Midnight, and
held till Three in the Morning, Luke 12. 38. The last, called the morning
Watch, began at three, and ended at six, Matt. 14. 25. In the Fourth Watch of
the Night Jesus went to them; the first was also called the Evening, the second
Midnight, the third Cock-crowing, the fourth Dawning. Ye know not when the
Master of the House will come, at Even, or at Midnight, or at Cock-crowing, or
at the Dawn, Matt. 13. 35. Their Day was likewise divided into Four Quarters,
Matt. 20. As appears by the Parable of the Vineyard. The first Quarter began at
six of the Clock in the Morning, and held till nine. The second Quarter ended
at twelve. The third Quarter at three in the afternoon, and the fourth at six
at night. The first Quarter was called the third Hour, The second Quarter the
sixth Hour* The third Quarter the ninth Hour, and the fourth Quarter the
eleventh Hour.

The Roman Account is ten Days before our English Account; so that our first
day of the Month is their Eleventh Day. This is called Stylo Novo The Old Style
or Julian Account is observed by the English Nation, and all other Reformed
States (except Holland and Zealand.) The new Style or Gregorian Account is
observed by all those still under the Romish Yoke.

Easter, and other moveable Feasts in England are thus sound.

Shrovetuesday is always the f^rst Tuesday after the first New Moon of January,
except that New Moon happen on a Tuesday, then the next is Shrovetuesday, and
the Sunday following is Quadragesima, and the sixth Sunday after is Easter day;
and the fifth Sunday after Easter is Rogation Sunday; and the Thursday
following, being forty Days after the Resurrection, is Ascension Day, ten Days
after which, or fifty Days after Easter is Pentecost or Whitsunday, and the
Sunday following is Trinity Sunday, which computation of the Church of England
agrees with all the Eastern Christian Churches; and these Rules were generally
received by all Christendom, till Anno Dom. 1582. It was altered by the Pope;
yet it cannot be denied but that old Computation is become Erroneous: For by
our Rules two Easters will be observed in one Year, as it was in the Year 1667.
Advent Sunday is always the fourth Sunday before Christmas Day, or the nearest
Sunday to St. Andrews, whether before or after.

Ember Days, which the Ancient Fathers call Quatuor Tempora, are observed on
Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, next after Quadragesima Sunday, Whitsunday,
Holyrood-day in September, and St. Lucyes day in December; therefore the Lord
L. Coke in his three Institutes. Fol. 200. where he says, These Ember Days are
next before Quadragesima, is under a mistake; they are called Ember Days,
because our Forefathers would in those Days Eat no Bread, but Cakes made under
Ashes; and so it put them in mind they were but Ashes, etc. And that these days
were devoutly observed by our Ancestors, we may be persuaded out of the Laws of
King Cnute, Chapter 16. Let every man observe the Fasts which are commanded with
earnest care, whether it be the Imber Fast or Lent Fast.

The Ordination of Priests and Deacons is four times in the Year, upon four
several Sundays in the Ember Weeks.

CHAP. II. Of Ecclesiastical Censures.
THE Punishments inflicted by Ecclesiastical Courts proceed in this manner.

1. Excommunicatio Minor, From the Lord's Supper, and he that is thus, is
disabled to be plaintiff in a Law Suit; this commonly is for Contumacy, in not
appearing on Summons, or not obeying Orders; this the Bishop may delegate to
any grave Priest with the Chancellor.

2. Excommunicatio Minor, As for Heresy, Schism, Incest, etc. pronounced by
the Bishop himself. If he continue so Excommunicate forty Days, an
Excommunicato Capiendo goes out against him, and he is thereby Imprisoned.

3. Anathamatismus, Against an obstinate Heretic.

4. Interdictum, Whereby he is prohibited all Divine Offices, as Christian
Burial, etc.

The Punishment of the Clergy, is,
1. Suspensio ab Officio. 2. Suspensio a Beneficio. 3. Deprivatio a Beneficio.
4. Deprivatio ab Officio, which is degradation.
Having met with an old Discourse about Excommunication out of the Canterbury
Book. I shall here set it down word for word as it was wrote in those times.

More of Excommunication, the Old Form.
THE general Sense of Execration was usually denounced four times a year; the
Greater and the Lesser Curse. The Canterbury Book says, Wherefore ye Shullen,
understand at the beginning, that this word Curse, is thus much to say, as
departing from God and Good Works: Of two manner of Cursing Holy Church
tells, the one is cleped the Less Curse, the other is cleped the More Curse.
That we clepen the Less Curse is of this strength, that every man and woman
that falls therein, it departs him from all the Sacraments that been in
Holy Church, that they may none of them receive till they be assoyled, etc. The
More Curse is much more worse, and is of this strength; for to depart a man
from God, and all the Holy Church, and also from the Company of all Christen
Folk ne to be saved by the Passion of Christ, ne to be helped by the Sacraments
that been done in Holy Church, etc.

After repeating the Articles of the Curse, the General Sentence was thundered
out every Quarter, as the Canterbury Book says, By the authority of our Lord
God Almighty, and our Lady St. Mary, and all Saints of Heaven, of Angels or
Archangels, Patriarks and Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors
and Virgins, also by the Power of all Holy Church, that our Lord Jesus gave to
St Peter: We denounce all those Accursed that we have thus reckned to you, and
all those that maintain 'em in her sins, or given 'em hereto either help or
council, so that they be departed from God and all Holy Church, and that they
have noe of the Passion of our Lord Jesu Christ, ne of no Sacraments that been
in Holy Church, ne no part of the Prayers amen Christen Folk, but that they be
accursed of God, and of Holy Church, from their soole of their foot unto the
crown of their head, sleeping and Waking, sitting and Standing, in all her
words, and in all her Works, and but if they have grace of God for to amend 'em
herein this Life, for to dwell in the Pain of Hell for ever withouten end
(Fiat, Fiat,) do to the Book, quench the Candle, ring the Bell, Amen, Amen.

CHAP. III. Of Bishops and Deans, Election, Consecration, Installation, etc.
NEXT to the two Arch: bishops are the Bishops of London, Durham and
Winchester, the order of the rest being by no other rule, than the Priority of
their Consecration.

The manner of making a Bishop is thus.
When a Bishops Sea becomes vacant, the Dean and Chapter give notice of it to
the King, and request him to give them leave to choose another; whereupon the
King grants them his Conge D'eslire, i. e. leave to Elect, and usually
recommends one. Then the Dean summons a Chapter, and they Elect; and they
certify the Party Elected, who having accepted it, it is certified to the King
and the Archbishop of the Province; whereupon the King gives his Royal Assent
under the great Seal of England, which is exhibited to the Archbishop of that
Province, with command to Confirm and Consecrate him; then the Archbishop
Subscribes Fiat Confirmatio, and gives commission under his Episcopal Seal to
his Vicar general, to perform all Acts thereto required; after which the Bishop
elect takes the Oaths of Supremacy, Simony and Canonical Obedience.

Sometime after this follows the Consecration, which in the inferior Clergy is
called Ordination, which is performed by the Archbishop of the Province, or
some other Bishop commissioned by him, with the assistance of two other Bishops
in the Archbishops Chapel, upon a Sunday, or an Holyday after Morning Service.

Next follows his Installation by virtue of a Mandate from the Archbishop, to
the Arch deacon of his Province. This is performed in the Cathedral Church in
the presence of a public notary, and the Arch deacon, with the Petty Canons,
accompany the Bishop to the Quire, and there place him in a Seat prepared for
him, and Te Deum is Sung, and then the Bishop is conducted into the
Chapter House; after this he is introduced into the King's Presence to do his
Homage for his Temporalities, or Barony; and then he compounds for the first
Fruits of his Bishopric.

The Bishops write Divinae Permissione, the Archbishop writes himself Divina
Providentia.

The inferior Bishops are styled right reverend Fathers in God, the
Archbishops most reverend.

Deans, Archdeacon and Prebendaries are the Dignified Clergy.

Deans of the Old Foundations which were before the Suppression of Monasteries,
are brought to their Dignities much like Bishops: Whereas the Deans of the New
Foundations (upon suppression of Abbeys are installed a much shorter way by
ve^tue of the King's Letters Patents, without either Election or Confirmation.
The chief of the Prebendaries is the Subdean, who supplies the Deans Place in
his Absence.

The Archdeacons upon the Bishops Mandate are to induct Clerks into their
Benefices.

Vicars properly Officiate in those Livings which are called Impropriations, of
which there are in England no less than 3845. For above a third part of the
best Benefices of England being anciently by the Popes Grant Appropiated to
Monasteries toward their Maintenance, were upon the dissolution of the
Monasteries made Lay-Fees.

CHAP. IV. A Chronological Table showing in what Ages the Primitive Fathers
lived, and Memorable things happened; and some other Memoirs of Ancient Times.
ST. Peter and St. Paul suffered Martyrdom at Rome, Anno Christi. 65.

Jerusalem Sacked and B^rnt, Ann. Christ. 70. And therein 110,000. of the Jews
Perished, and 9,000* taken Prisoners.

Linus Martyred at Rome, Anno 77.

Titus commands Josephus his History of the Jewish War to be laid up in the
Library at Rome, Anno. 80.

The second Persecation, Anno 90.

St. John wrote the Book of Revelation, Anno 94.

St. Clemens Bishop of Rome is thrown into the Sea, with an Anchor tied about
his Neck, Anno 100.

The third Persecution began 107. under Trajan.

Ignatius Martyred by wild Beasts, Anno. 107.

Onesimus Stoned at Rome, 109.

The Fourth Persecution under Adrian, 117.

Aquila a Kinsman of Adrian the Emperor, first turns Christian and then Jew,
Translates the old Testament into Greek, Anno. 128.

Justin Martyr converted to Christianity, Anno. 132.

Marcus the first of the Gentile Converts, made Bishop of Jerusalem, all
hitherto having been of the Circumcision, Anno. 135.

Justin Martyr presents his Apology to the Emperor in behalf of the Christians,
Anno. 162.

Justin Martyr suffered Martyrdom Anno. 163.

St. Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna Martyred, Anno 167.

Pantaenus a Christian Philosopher opens the Catholic School at Alexandria,
Anno. 180.

The Persecution against the Christians much abated after M. Aurelius his
Victory over the Marcomanni gained by the Prayers of the Christian Legion,
Anno. 174.

Lucius a King of Britain sends Letters to Pope Eleutherius for Christian
Preachers, Anno. 186.

Clemens Alexandrinus Pantaenus his Scholar and Successor Famous, Anno. 194.

Pope Victor revives the Controversy about the Celebration of Easter, threatens
to Excommunicate the Asiatick Churches, for which he is severely reproved by
Iraeneus, Anno. 196.

Tertullian Writes his Apology, Anno. 200.

Sixth Persecution, wherein Ireneus suffers Martyrdom in France, Anno. 202.
under Severus.

Origin sets up a School at Alexandria, Anno. 203.

Minutius Felix flourished A. 207.

Vlpian the Lawyer flourished An. 223. who instigated a cruel Persecution at
Rome.

Origin Persecuted and Synodically condemned by Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria,
Anno. 230.

Plotinus Scholar to Ammonius, 232

The seventh Persecution under Maximinus, Anno 235.

Babylas chosen Bishop of Antioch, Anno. 239.

Cyprian chosen Bishop of Carthage Anno. 248.

The Eighth Persecution by Decius, Anno 250.

Great Schisms in the African Church about the Lapsed, Anno. 251.

The Novatian Doctrine condemned in a Synod of 60 Bishops at Rome. 252.

The ninth Persecution under Valerian, Anno. 257

St. Cyprian beheaded at Carthage, Anno. 258

Gallienus the Emperor stops the Persecution against the Christians, Anno. 260.

Paulus Samosetanus Bishop of Antioch is Deposed, and Condemned by a Synod at
An^^och, Anno. 270.

The Manichaean Heresy sprung up, Anno. 277.

Cyril the 18th Bishop of Antioch, Anno ^78.

The Persecution under Dioclesian, Anno 3^0.

Writings falsely attributed to Dyonisius Areopagit^ (for the good of Students
in Divinity, that they may not be imposed on.)
De Divinis Nominibus. De Mistica Theologia. Epistola ad Polycarpum. Epist, ad
Titum. Epist, ad Johannem Evangelistam.
St. Clemens.

Epistola ad Corinthios, a genuine Writing, (...), as Photius styles it, worthy
all esteem and veneration; it breaths the true Genius and Spirit of the
Apostolic Age.

Epist. ad Jacobum, Fratrem Domini, is supposititious, so are the Home^iae
Clementinae. Constitutiones and Canones Apostolici.

Ignatius his Genuine Writing are.
Ad Ephesios. Ad Trallianos. A Philadelphenos. Ad Magnesianos. Ad Romanos. Ad
Smyneos.
Ad Polycarpum, the rest suppositious.

Justin Martyr's Genuine Writings.
Paraenesis ad Graecos. Apologia pro Christiani, two Parts Dialogus cum
Tryphone Judae.
Clemens Alexandrinus, his Genuine Writings.
Proterxticon ad Gentes. Pedagogi, Lib. 3. Stromat. Lib. 3.
Suppositious.
Commentariola in 1. Epist. Petri. Epist. Judae and 3 Epist. St. Johannis.
Tertullian, his chief Genuine Writings.
Apologeticus. De Spectaculis. De Corona. Ad Nationes. De Idolatria. Ad
Martyras. De Patientia. De Virgin. Valandis. De Baptismo. adversus
Valentinianos. De Anima. De Resurrectione.
Cyprian, his Genuine Writings.
Epistola ad Donatum. Epistolae 38. in secessu. Epistolae Variae. 8. De
Disciplina and Habitu Virginum. De Lapisis. De Vnitate Ecclesiae Catholaecie.
De Oratione Dominica. Ad Demetrianum. De Idolorum Vanitate. De Mortalitate. De
Opera and Eleemosynis. De Bono Patientiae. De Zelo. De Exhortatione Martirii ad
Fortunatum. Testimonium adversus Judaeos. Concilium Carthaginense. De
Baptizandis Haereticis.
St. Gregory Thaumaturgus, his Genuine Writings. (...) ad Origin. Metaphrasis
in Ecclesiastem: B^^^is Exposicio Fidei. Epis^ola Canonic^.


Since the first General Council at Nice against Arrius. 1351 years.

Since the second General Council holden at Constantinople against the Heresy
of Macedonius, who denied the Deity of the Holy Ghost^* 1287 years.

Since the third General Counc^^ ^g^^nst Pelagius and Nestorius, held at
Ephesus 1238 years. Summoned by Theodosius the Second, where in Nestorius
himself was present. St. Cyril therein earnestly contended for Christ's
Divinity, affirming him one and the same Son of God, begotten of the Father
before all Ages, and in the last times made Man of a Virgin; and that the
Blessed Virgin ought properly and truly to be called theutcho, or the Mother of
God. Hereat Nestorius rose up, and told them plainly he would not own a God
that grew to Man's Estate by two or three Months, and so forth, and so washed
his Hands, and would come no more into their company.

Since the fourth General Council held at Chalcedon against the Heresy of
Eutyches, under Martian, 1216. Years

The Dioclesian Persecution set on Foot, Anno 303.

Constantine the great, Emperor, Anno 306.

Eusebius Caesariensis flourished Anno 229.

Eusebius wrote a Confutation of Hierocles who wrote against the Christians, as
Origin did against Celsus and Porphyry.

Arius began cunningly to broach his Heresy in the time of Eusebius.

The Nicene Council summoned under Constantine, Anno 325.

Athanasius chosen to the Sea of Alexandria, Anno 326.

318 Bishops met at the Nicene Council, they with their Attendants were
Transported to Nice at the Emperors charge, and maintained at his cost, during
their being there. 17 Bishops appeared for the Arian Heresy, wherein
Constantine sat as a public Moderator, and Arius was banished into Illyricum.

In this Council of Nice was debated the Paschal Controversy, concerning the
time oi the Celebration of Easter, wherein the Christian World was so much
divided; the Eastern Churches observing it after the Jewish Custom, on the 14th
day after the Phasis or Appearance of the Moon, the rest on the next Lords Day
after the Jewish Passover. A question controverted from the very infancy of the
Church: And in this Council it was Universally agreed to follow the usage of
these Churches, whose custom it had heen from all Antiquity, to observe it on
the Lord's Day next ensuing the Jewish Festival. In this Council likewise were
digested Twenty Canons about Ecclesiastical Discipline, all extant, entire at
this day.

A Synod holden by the Arians at Tire, where they Try, Condemn and Depose
Athanasius, Anno 334.

Athanasius banished to Triers by Constantine, Anno 336.

And released by his Son Constantine, Anno. 337.

Arian Dies a sudden and sad Death, Anno 336.

Constantine the Great Dies, Anno 337.

Constantius (to whose share the Eastern Empire sell) and his Empress favor
the Arrians.

The Synod at Antioch, called Synodus in Encenys, Deposes Athanasius, Anno
341. But Athanasius Purges himself at a Synod at Rome called by Pope Julius.

The Synod at Sardica, where the Eastern Bishops refuse to join with them in
the West, notwithstanding which, Athanasius is heard, absolved and restored,
Anno. 347.

Athanasius condemned by the Arians in a Synod at Arles, Anno. 353.

Constantius, when the Orthodox Catholic Bishop refused to Subscribe the Arian
Tenants, said to them, What I command, let that be your Canon, either submit or
be banished.

The desperate attempts of the Arian Faction at Alexandria, under Count
Syrinus, who with a party of 500 Soldiers broke into the Church, where the
People were met for their common Devotion, and suddenly rusht in with drawn
Swords, Spears, Clubs, etc. The Guards were set round the Church, and the
Tragedy began, and there were multitudes Killed, Virgins Abused. Athanasius sat
still, till forced by the Monks through the Guards, narrowly escaped; the very
Gentiles were ashamed of their Actions. Athanasius retired to the Wilderness,
where he enjoyed the Company of devout Hermits; there were two sorts of them
Eremitae and Caenobitae, the first were wholly devoted to Solitude, and
conversed with none but God and themselves; the other kept in Societies in the
midst of Cities; ande led Mortified Lives amidst the noise and crowd.

The Arians held the Son was not Consubstantial, or (...), but (...), in
substance, and all things like to the Father.

The Council at Ariminum, by Western Bishops, and at the same time another at
Seleucia for the Eastern, Anno 359. The Nicene Creed confirmed.

Athanasius Dies, Anno 371.

St. Hillary flourished, Anno 385. he was Bishop of Poictiers in France, and
Died there, with this Epitaph on his Tomb, savouring of the Poetry of that Age.

Hilarious cubat hac fictavus Episcopus Vrna,
Defensor Nostrae Terrificus fidei.
St. Hillary's writings is in a Language Eloquent in its Kind, tho not chaste
and genuine; it being true what Erasmus observes upon this occasion, That the
Roman Provincials (some few only excepted who were brought up at Rome) seldom
or never attained the purity and simplicity of the Latin Tongue, but betray an
over anxious Affection of Eloquence.

St. Basil flourished, Anno 370.

Prohaeresius was St. Basil's Tutor, a man greatly honored by the Emperor
Constans, who sent him to Rome, where he was honored with a Statue of Brass,
with this Inscription, Rome the Queen of Cities to the King of Eloquence.

Basil being made Bishop of Caesarea, was a stout defender of the Nicene Faith,
Valens the Emperor intending to subdue the East to the Doctrine of Arins, came
to Caesarea, attended by Modestus the Pretorean Prefect. Basil is sent for
before Modestus, and the Discourse between them was in this manner.

Mod. What Is the matter, Basil, that you presume to oppose so great an Emperor
above all the rest? Bas. What do you mean, Sir, what Arrogance do you speak of?
I understand you not! Mod. I mean your refusing to comply with the Emperor's
Religion, when all others have struck sail to it. Bas. But that is inconsistent
with the Command and Will of my Sovereign Emperor; nor can I ever be brought
to worship a Creature, or one that is a made God. Mod. What then do you make of
us? Basil. Nothing at all, so long as you command such things as these. Mod.
But tell me, do not you think it a great Honor to come over to us? Bas. I
grant you to be illustrious Persons; yet you are not more Honorable than God.
And, know sir, Christianity is to be measured not by Dignity of Persons, but
soundness of the Faith. The Prefect in a Passion started out of his Chair and
proceeded in a sharper strain. Mod. What, then you are not afraid of the Power
we are armed with? Bas. What can happen, what can I suffer? Mod. Any one of
those things that are within my Power. Bas. What are they? Confiscation of
Goods, Banishment, Tortures, or Death? or if there be any thing worse than
these, threaten that; for of these there is none can reach us. Mod. How so?
Bas. He is not obnoxious to Confiscation who has nothing to lose, unless you
want these old tattered Clothes, and a few Books, wherein consists my whole
Estate. Banishment I regard not, who am tied to no place; the whole Earth is
God's, whose Pilgrim and Stranger I am. As for Tortures, what can they do,
where there is not a Body to bear them? Set aside the first blow, and there is
nothing else within your Power. And then for Death, I shall esteem it a
Kindness and Benefit; it will but sooner send me to God. Use your Pleasure: Let
the Emperor know, you shall never prevail with us to confederate with that
impious Sect. As for the Advantage you propound to me, and the Favor of the
Emperor, offer these things to Boys and Children, who are wont to be caught
with such gaudy Baits. I highly value the Emperor's Favor, when I can have it
with Piety, and the Favor of Heaven; but without that, I look upon it as
pernicious and deadly.

Nazianzen flourisht An. 371. and is made Bishop of Constantinople.

Theodosius promotes the Catholic Faith against the Arrians, An. 380.

The Second General Council holden at Constantinople, An. 381. wherein was
Ratified the Nicene Creed, which our Church has adopted into her solemn
Liturgy; which is an Explanation of the old Nicene Creed, especially about the
Article of the holy Ghost. In this Council were condemned the Sabellian,
Marcellian, Photinian, Eunomian, Apollmarian, and Macedonian Heresies, a short
account whereof is as follows.

Sabellius asserted the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, are but one and the same
Person, distinguished only by Three several Names, and that by Virtue of this
Oneness of Persons, the Father might be said to suffer, whence they are
sometimes styled Patripassians.

Marcllus, Bishop of Ancyra, held, that Christ began to be the Son of God at
his Incarnation, and that his Kingdom shall continue to the day of Judgment,
and then cease. In opposition to this the Council particularly levelled that
clause in the Creed, whose Kingdom shall have no end.

Photius Bishop of Sirmium, held Christ a mere Man, and received the begiuning
of his Existence from the Virgin Mary.

Aetius the Author of the Eunomean Haeresie, he corrupted the very Arian
Heresy; and held the Son altogether unlike in Nature and Substance to the
Father.

Apollinaris Bishop of Laodicea, held our Lord assumed a Body without an human
Soul, his Divinity supplying the room of that, and that the Son of God brought
his flesh along with him, when he came from Heaven.

Macedonius denied the Divinity of the Holy Ghost; and that was the chief
reason of calling the second general council.

Nazianzen in his Writings attained to the true temper of the Grecian
Eloquence. Basil excelled in the Panegyric way. Nazeanzen's style is more
Malculine; he did sometimes too far indulge the vein of Oratory, especially in
his Encomiasticks, wherein he sometimes takes a liberty of making addresses to
the dead, which succeeding Superstition improved to formal invocation: he did
it with hesitancy (...) if any sense be in departed Souls, of things here
below, and so.

More Oratorio.
St. Ambrose made Bishop of Milan, Anno 374. St. Austin comes to Milan, and is
converted by the Sermons of St. Ambrose, 385. Chrysostom consecrated Bishop of
Constantinople Anno 398. St. Austin ordained Bishop of Hippo, Anno 395.
Chrysostom condemned and deposed in the Synod ad quercum and banished, but soon
after recalled and acquitted in another Synod, Anno 403.

Chrisostom again condemned and banished, Anno 404. by the instigation of the
Empress Eudoxia.

After which Chrisostom underwent grievous persecutions, and suffered many
perils by traveling up and down strange Countries, by the malicious
contrivance of his Enemies, till he was released by death at Comana Portica,
and was buried there in the Tomb of St. Basilifcus the Martyr.

Eusebius his genuine Works.
De Preparatione Evangelica, lib. 15. De Demonstratione Evangelia. Contra
Hieroclem. Contra Marcellum. De Ecclesiastica Theologia. Chronicon. Historiae
Ecclesiasticae, lib. 10. De Vita Constantini. Oration de Laudibus Constantini.
De Locis Hebraicis. Epist. ad Caesarienses de fide Nicaena.
Nazianzen's genuine Works, most of them.
Apologeticus de fuga sua. In Julianum Imp. Invictivae duae. Oration post editum
ex fuga. Oration ad Gregorium Nyssenum. Oration de suis Sermonibus. Oration
funebris in laudem Caesarii Fratrii. De Pace Orat. 3. Oration de Pauperum Amore.
In Laudem Cypriani Martyris. Oration Funebris in Laudem Basil. Mag. Oration in
Laudem mag. Athanasii. Oration de moderatione in disputando. Oration de Dogmate
and Constitutione Episcoporum. Oration in presentia 150 Episcoporum habita. De
Theologia Oration. 5. Oration Panegyrica in Christi nativitatem. In Sanct.
Baptisma. In Pascha, 2. In Novam Dominicam. In Sanctam Pentecosten. In Laudem
Martyrum and adversus Arianos. Tract. de fide Lat. Epistolae 242. Testamentum.
Poemata 64. alia 78. De Episcopis, and de hominum ingratitudine Querela.
Supposititious.
Metaphrasis in Ecclesiastem. Hoc est opus Gregorii Thaumaturgi. Christus
Patiens. Tragaedia.
St. Epiphanius 's genuine Writings, his Style was Mean, but but the Matter
weighty.
Panarium, five Adversus Haereses LXXX. a Choice Book. Ancoratus, seu de fide
Sermo. Aenacephalaeosis, seu Panarii Epitome. De Ponderibus and Mensuris Liber.
Epistola ad Johannem Hierosolymitanum, Lat. Ad Hieronimum Epistola, Lat.
The first Martyr in Britain was St Alban, under Dioclesian's persecution.

Some will have 100 Christians martyred at Liechfield, which in the
Brittish-tongue signifies Golgotha. In allusion thereto the City Arms are a
Field Surcharged with Dead Bodies.

Anno 401. Arrianism having got a little riddance in Britain, Pelagianism
succeeded.

Pelagius was born in Britain, his name Morgan, i. e. near the Sea. Hence his
Latin Name. And the same day Pelagius was born in Britain. St. Austin was born
in Africa* His main Errors are,

1. That no man can be saved without Gods Grace by his own Mirits and Free will.

2. That Infants were born without Original Sin.

3. That they were Baptized, not to be freed from sin, but thereby to be
adopted into the Kingdom of God.

4. That Adam died not by reason of his sin, but by the condition of nature.

Germanus and Lupus, two French Bishops came and disputed with the Pelagian
Doctors, and confuted them.

Anno 501. Arthur flourished in Britain. It is more than comes to the
proportion of Britain, that amongst but nine Worthies in the whole World, two
should prove Natives of this Island, Constantine and Arthur. That there was an
Arthur is certain, for his Corpse, Coffin and Epitaph were taken out of his
Monument at Glassenbury, in the reign of King Henry II.

Anno 585. Pope Gregory sent Augustine the Monk, and Melitus and forty more to
preach the Gospel in Britain: he brought Interpreters with him out of France.

The Pagan Idols worshipped in Britain were,
Thur. i. e. Jupiter; hence dies Jovis, Thursday. Woden. i. e. Mercurius; hence
dies Mercury, Wednesday. Frea. i. e. Venus; hence Friday. Seater. i. e. Saturn;
hence Saturday. Tuisco, Mars; since Tuesday.
The Old Christian Britains served God in the Mountains, and cared not for
Austins alamode ceremonies.

Anno 601. The Archbishopric was translated from London to Canterbury* Austin
was Archbishop, he calls a Council of Saxon and Britain Bishops, where the
Abbot of Bangor spoke as the mouth of the rest; we are under the Government of
the Bishop of Carlion upon Vske, and above him unto God, without any
subordination to Rome. So that Religion came into Britain, not by the
semicircle of Rome, but in a direct line from the Asiatick Churches. Hereupon
Austin stirred up Ethelbert, King of Kent, to send to the Pagan King of
Northumberland to murder 1200 Monks of Bangor.

Anno 632. Sigebert, King of Eastangles, builded Cambridge; Bid calls him
Christianismus, and Doct^ssimus.

Anno 640. The first Lent was kept in England.

In the space of 82 years the whole Saxon Heptarchy was converted to
Christianity.

Anno 709. A Synod was called at London to introduce into England the Doctrine
of Image*worship. Binnius and Baronius say it was brought in by St. Austin the
Monk. But it is very improbable Austin would deliver a Doctrine point blank
against Gregory that sent him, who most zealously inveighed against all worship
of Images in his Epistle ad Serenum Massiliensem.

Venerable Bede was born in this Age. Saint Bede was too much while he lived, but
Venerable was a fit medium.

Anno 790. The Archbishopric was translated from Canterbury to Liechfield by
Offa, King of Mercia and Pope Adrian, but soon after it was restored back to
Canterbury.

Anno 867. The Danes enter into the heart of England, and burnt the Abbey at
Peterburrough, which was fifteen days a burning; and slew the Monks, who were
burial in a grave, where one may have four yards square of Martyrs dust, which
no place in England else does afford.

In these four last Centuries,

Scriptures were generally read.

The Original was preferred.

No Prayers for the dead in nature of propitiation, but only commemoration.

Communion was under both kinds*

Anno 1067. A contest was betwixt the Monks of Glassenbury, and Thurstan their
Norman Abbot, he obtruding a service upon them which they disliked; hence
Osmond, Bishop of Sarisbury, made a Liturgy for all England; hence the Old
Saying, Secundum usum Sarum.

Anno 1138. Theobald, Archbishop of Canterbury, was styled Legatus natus, which
from him was entayled on this See.

Nicholas Breakspeakers was Pope, by the Name of Adrian the Fourth. We never
had but four Popes and an half, I mean Cardinal Pool Pope Elect.

St. David's may vie Archiepiscopal jurisdiction before Canterbury, as being
first Christian, as the old verse has it about the proportion of pardons given
to Pilgrims visiting Religious Places,

Roma semel quantum bis dat Menevia tantum.

Anno 1205. Pope Innocent the third assoyled all the English Subjects of their
Allegiance from King John. John after granted his Kingdom to the Pope by
Pandulphus, who kept the Crown five days in his hands, then it was King
Innocent.

Anno. 1254. About this time the Popes oppression began to grow intolerable;
for it appeared that the Ecclesiastical Revenues of Italians* in England
amounted to threescore and ten thousand marks per annum, whereas the King's
income at that time was hardly twenty thousand.

King Edward I. expelled the Jews out of England, they seated in Germany and
Italy, where the profit from Jews and Stews much advanced the revenues of the
Pope.

Anno 1341. In this Age the Schoolmen were at the height, England had the best
of all, and the most. Hales Doctor Irrefragabilis. Roger Bacon. Doctor
Mirabils. John Duns Scotus. Doctor Subtilis. John Baconthrop. Doctor Resolutus.
William Occam. Doctor Singularis. Pater Nominalium. Doctor Bradwardine. Doctor
Profundus.

Anno 1336. A survey was exactly taken of all the Clergies Glebe Land, and the
same was returned into the Exchequer, and is at this day the most effectual
Record for Clery-men (and for Impropriators under their claim) to recover their
right.

Anno. 137^. Wickliff began to appear.

About this time was a dangerous Discord at Rome about 40 years begun between
Vban 6 and Clement 7. The one living at Rome, the other residing at Avinian.

The Papal Power in England fell by degrees. First by the state of Mortmain in
Ed. I. More by the Stat. of Provision in Ed. III. More by the Stat. of
Praemunire in Rich. II. time. This mauled the Popes Power in England. Pope
Martin sadly complained of it to the Duke of Bedford. Miramur (says he)
stupescimus dolemus execrabile statutu^r.

Lollards, so called from Walter Lollardus a Teacher in Germany, some years
before Wickle^ff: Their Doctrines were much the same.

Anno 1434. began that smart and active Council at Basil.

In the beginning of Hen. VIII. time, the poor Lollards had a mark on their
Clothes, put it off and be Burned, keep it on and be starved.

Henry Beauford, Bishop of Winchester, lent Hen. III. at once 20000 l. who
pawned his Crown to him.

Pope Clement was imprisoned by the Emperor, whereupon one said, Papa* non
potest errare.

Canons made in a Convocation with the Royal Assent, subject not any (for
recusancy to obey them) to a civil Penalty in Person or Propriety, unless
confirmed by act of Parliament.

In King Edward the VI. days Nonconformity was conceived.

In Q. Mary's days (but at Franckford) was Born.

In Q. Elizab. days was nursed, under King James it grew a tall Youth, and under
K. Charles, a Man able to conquer the Hierarchy its adversary.

Bishop Bonners Fury reached from John Fetty, a Lad of eight years old, by him
Scourged to Death, even to Hugh Laverock a cripple of 68 years old, whom he
caused to be Burnt.

In Q. Mary's days some eminent Professors, as Fox, Bale, Grindale, etc. fled
to Strasburg, Zurich and Franckford: They in Strasburg were of the most quiet
Temper, Zurich had the greatest Scholars, and Franckford the largest
Privileges.

CHAP. V. A particular of the Archbishopricks and Bishoprics, with their
Archdeaconaries, and their extent, with the Clergies Tenths, and their
valuations in the King's Books.
CAnterbury has only one Archdeacon, which is of Canterbury.

l. s. d. The Clergies Tenth comes to 651 18 2 q Archbishopric valued in the
K's. Book at -- 2816 17 9 q

St. Asaph, it contains part of Denbigh, Flint, Montgomery, Merioneth, and some
Towns in Salop; in it are 121 Parishes, most of them in the Patronage of the
Bishop; it has but one Archdeaconry, that of St. Asoph, which is united to the
Bishopric.

Tenths 186 19 7 ob q Valuation 187 11 6

Bangor, it contains Carnarvon, and the whole Isle of Anglesey, part of
Denbigh, Merioneth and Montgomery; in it 107 Parishes, whereof 36 are
impropriated; it has 3 Archdeacons, Bangor, Anglesey, Merioneth.

Tenths 151 14 3 q Valuation 131 16 4

Bath and Wells, contains the whole Gounty of Somerset; and in that 388
Parishes, whereof 160 are impropriate; it has 3 Archdeacons of Bath, Wells and
Taunton.

Tenths 353 18 ob. q. Valuation 533 01 3

Bristol, has a Dean and 6 Prebenddaries; it contains the City of Bristol, and
County of Dorset, and therein 236 Parishes, of which 64 are impropriated; it
has one Archdeacon, i. e. of Dorset.

Tenths 353 18 ob. q. Valuation 383 8 4

Chichester, contains all Sussex, and in it 250 Parishes, whereof 112 are
impropriated; 2 Archdeacons, of Chichester and Lewis.

Tenths 287 2 ob. q. Valuatlon 977 1 3

Coventry and Leichfeild, it contains the whole Counties of Derby and Stafford,
with a good part of Warwickshire and Shropshire, 557 Parishes, whereof 250
impropriated; it has 4 Archdeaconries, S^afford, Derby, Coventry and
Shrewsbury.

Tenths 590 11 11 q. Valuation 559 18 2 ob. q.

St. David's, it contains Pembroke, Cardigan Carmarthen, Radnor Brecknock and
some parts of Hereford, Monmouth, etc. in it 308 Parishes, whereof 120
impropriate; it has 4 Archdeacon, i. e. of Cardigan, Carmarthen, Brecknock and
S. David's.

Tenths 336 14 10 Valuation 457 1 10 ob. q.

Ely, it contains Cambridgshire, and the Isle of Ely, in which are 141
Parishes, whereof 75 are impropriate; it has but one Archdeacon, which is he
of Ely.

Tenths 384 14 9 q. Valuation 2135 18 5

Exeter, it contains the 2 Counties of Devon and Cornwall, 604 Parish Churches,
whereof 239 are impropriate. It has 4 Archdeacons, (viz.) of Cornwall, Exeter,
Barnstaple and Taunton, formerly valued 1566 l. 14 s. 6 d.

Valuation now ^00 0 0 Tenths 1240 15 2

Gloucester, It contains only Glocestershire, has in it 267 Parishes, whereof
125 impropriate; one Archdeacon (viz.) of Gloucester.

Valuation 315 17 2 Tenths 358 15 0

Hereford, it contains the County of Hereford and part of Shropshire; it has
313 Parish Churches, of which 166 are impropriate; it has 2 Archdeacons (viz.)
Hereford and Salop.

Valuation 768 10 6 ob. Tenths 34^ 2 2

Llandaff, it contains part of Glamorganshire, and part of Monmouthshire; 177
Parishes, whereof 98 impropriate; one Archdeacon of Land^ff.

Valuation 154 14 1 Tenths 156 5 4

Lincoln, it contains the Counties of Lincoln, Leicester, Huntington, Bedford,
Buckingham and part of Hertfordshire; in it 1255 Parishes, whereof 577 are
impropriations; 6 Archdeacons (viz.) Lincoln, Leicester, Bedford, Buckingham,
Stow and Huntington.

Tenths 1751 14 6 Valuation 894 10 1 ob.

London, it contains the Counties of Middlesex and Essex, and part of
Hartfordshire; 623 Parishes, and of them 189 impropriated; 5 Archdeacons, of
London, Midlesex, Essex, Colchester and St. Albans.

Valuation 1119 8 4 Tenth 821 15 1

Norwich, it contains Norfolk and Suffolk; 1121 Parish Churches, whereof 385
impropriate; it has 4 Archdeacons (viz.) of Norwich, Norfolk, Suffolk and
Sudbury.

Valuation 899 18 7 ob Tenths 1117 13 ob

Oxford, it contains the County of Oxford; 195 Parish Churches, of which 88 are
impropriated; it has one Archdeacon (viz.) of Oxford.

Valuation 354 16 4 Tenth 255 8

Peterborough, it contains the Counties of Northampton and Rutland; in them
293* Parishes, whereof 91. are impropriate; it has one Archdeacon (viz.) of
Northampton.

Valuation 414 19 11 Clergis Tenth 520 16 8

Rochester, it contains a small part of Kent; 98 Parishes, of which 36 are
impropriate; one Archdeacon (viz.) of Rochester.

Valuation 358 3 7 ob. Tenths 222 14 6 ob.

Salisbury, it contains the Counties of Berks and Wilts; and in them 544 Parish
Churches, of which 109 impropriate; 3 Archdeacons (viz.) Salisbury, Berks,
Wilts.

Valuation 1367 11 8 Tenth 901 8 ^

Winchester, it contains Surrey, Southampton and Isle of Wight; 362 Parishes of
which 131 impropriate; 2 Archdeacons (viz.) of Winchester and Surry.

Valuation 2793 4 2 q. Tenths 846 1 0

Worcester, it contains Worcestershire and part of Warwickshire; therein 241
Parishes, of which 71 are impropriate; one Arehdeacon (viz.) of Worcester.

Valuation 1049 17 3 ob. Clergies Tenth 288 0 0

York, contains the two Counties of York and Nottingham; and in them 581
Parish-churches, of which 336 are impropriations; it has four Archdeacons
(viz.) of York, Cleveland, Eastriding and Nottingham.

Valuation 1609 19 2 Tenths 1113 17 9 ob.

Carlisle, it contains Westmorland, and most part of Cumberland; 93 Parishes,
whereof 18 impropriate.

Valuation 530 4 11 ob. Tenths 161 1 7 ob.

Chester, contains part of Cumberland; Lancashire and Cheshire; 256 Parishes,
of which 101 are impropriate; 2 Archdeacons Richmond and Chester.

Valuation 420 1 8 Tenths 435 12

Durham, it contains the Bishopric of Durham, and County of Northumberland,
each of which has an Archdeacon, 135 Parishes, whereof 87 impropriate.

Tenth 385 5 6 ob* Valuation 1821 1 5 q.

A Catalogue of all the Bishops in England and Wales.
ARchbishop of Cant. Dr. Tillotson Archbishop of York. Dr. Sharp Bishop of
London -- Dr. Compton Bishop of Durham -- Dr. Crew Bishop of Winchester -- Dr.
Mew Bishop of Rochester -- Dr. Sprat Bishop of Salisbury -- Dr. Burnet Bishop
of Chester -- Dr. Stratford Bishop of Worcester -- Dr. Stillingfleet Bishop of
Chichester -- Dr. Patrick Bishop of Oxford -- Dr. Hough Bishop of Leichsield
and Coventry. Dr. Lloyd Bishop of Hereford -- Dr. -- Bishop of Norwich -- Dr.
Moore Bishop of Lincoln -- Dr. Tenison Bishop of Ely -- Dr. Patrick Bishop of
Carlisle --. -- Bp. of Bath and Wells -- Dr. K^^ten Bishop of Peterborough --
Dr. -- Bishop of Exeter. -- Sir J. Trelawny Bishop of Bristol -- Dr. Hall
Bishop of St. Asaph -- Dr. Jones Bishop of Llandaff -- Bishop of St. David's --
Dr. Wartson Bishop of Bangor --
A List of the present Deans, both in England and Wales.
ST. Asaph -- Dr. Bright Bangor -- Dr. Jones Bristol -- Dr. Levet Canterbury --
Dr. Hooper Carlisle -- Dr. Musgrave Chester -- Dr. Ardern Chichester -- Dr.
Hawkins Christ Church Oxon Dr. Aldrich St. David's -- Dr. Ellis Durham -- Dr.
Greenvile Ely -- Dr. Spencer Exeter -- Dr. Annesley Gloucester -- Dr. Jane
Hereford -- Dr. Benson Leichfeild -- Dr. Addison Lincoln -- Dr. B^evius Norwich
-- Dr. Fairfax St. Paul's -- Dr. Sherlock Peterborough -- D^. Freeman Rochester
-- Dr. Vllock Salisbury -- Dr. Price Wells -- Dr. Bachurst Westminer Dr. Sprat
Bp. of Rochester Winchester -- Dr. Meggot Windsor -- Dr. Hascard Worcester --
Dr. Talbot York -- Dr. Wickhaw
In England are 2 Archbishops, 26 Bishops, 26 Deans of Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches, 60 Archdeacons 544 Prebendaries 9700 Rectors and Vicars, besides
Curates.

There are several Rural Deans. The Rural Dean was anciently called
Archi-presbyter, and had the guidance and direction of the Presbyters. The
Pastors of every Parishare called Rectors, unless the Predial Tithes are
impropriated; and then they are called Vicars.

The Style of the Archbishop of Canterbury is, Johannes Divina Providentia
Archiepiscopus Cantuareusis Primas and Metropolita totius Anglae.

The Bishops write (D. vina Permissione.)

All the incomes of the Bishops in England are judged to amount to four hundred
and fifty thousand pounds per annum.

For institution aad induction of Parsons to benefices the Bishops have three
pounds a piece at least.

Licenses to Preach cost ten shillings.

The Churchwardens pay for their books of Articles every year, and for writing
their Presentiments by a Clerk, 2 s. 4.

Ministers pay 1 s. 8 d. for showing their Licenses to Preach to the Register
at every Bishops Visitation; and 4 s. Procurat to the Bishop, and 8 d. to the
Apparitor.

The 2 Archbishops have Precedence of all the Lord's Temporal, and every other
Bishop has place of all the Barons of the Realm, under the estate of Viscount
and other Superior Dignities. The Bishops have amongst themselves this
Precedence. First, The Bishop of London; and after him the Bishop of Durham,
and then the Bishop of Winchester, and after him every Bishop, as he is in
Seiniority.

CHAP. VI. Of the Original of Patronage, and of Presentation, Institution and
Induction.
AS for Foundation and Erection of Churches, etc. The Patron designed the
ground and building, but the Bishops consent was required; the Foundation being
provided, and Materials, the Bishop comes in his Formalities in Person, the
Collare and Humerale, and says certain Prayers, and Fumeth the Groundwork; and
the Singingmen say the polutkion (a kind of Collect) for the Saint, to whose
Name the Church is Dedicated, and crosses the cornerstone, and lays the
Foundation, the Founder Endowed it. For the particular manner of Consecration
of Churches, Vide, Dr. Plot^s History of Staffordshire.

Several well minded good me^ built Churches, and endowed them with several
parcels of Land, and other immunities, reserving to themselves, their Heirs and
Successors, a Right and Power to bestow the said Churches and Lands on such
Persons they thought fit; and this Right of Presentation is called Advowson.
The Patrons in the Civil Law are called Advocati; and P^tronia Patroci^o, or
Defense; and they Present an Incumbent on every Vacancy.

Presentation, It is nothing else but the nomination of a fit Person to the
Bishop to be admitted, instituted and inducted into the Church or Benefice
which is void; it is an instrument in the Nature of a Letter Missive, directed
to the Bishop; and is usually in this Form.

Reverendissimo in Christo Patri and Dom. Dom. Johanni per missione Divina
Eboracensi Archiepiscopo Angliae Primati and Metropolitani, ejusve in absentia
vicario suo in rebus Spiritualibus generali praenobilis T. P. Baro de P. verus
and indubitatus patronus Rectoriae Ecclesiae parochialis de H. Salutem in
domino sempiter nam. Ad Ecclesiam Parochialem de H. predict vestrae Diocesis
modo per mortem T. R. ultimi incumbentis ibidem vacantem, delectum mihi in
Christo T. H. Sacrae Theologiae prefessorem paternitati vestrae praesento,
humiliter supplicans ut prefa^um T. H. ad dict am Ecclesiam admittere, ipsumque
in Rectoram ejusdem instituti, and induci fa^ere, cum suis juribus and
pertinentis Vniversis, caeteraque omnia and singula peragere and adimplere in
hac part quae ad vestrum munus Episcopale per tin^re videbantur dignemini cum
fav^re in cujus rei Testimonium. etc.

If a feme covert has title to Present to a Church which is void, she cannot
present by her self, but the Presentation must be in the Names of the Husband
and Wife, except in the case of the Queen.

If a Clerk be presented to the Bishop, and the Bishop does refuse to admit or
institute him; the Bishop must show the particular cause why he does refuse
him, and not generally, that he is incapable or Schismaticus Inveteraius. Coke*
5. Rep. Specot's case. That a Clerk is a common haunter of Taverns, or a player
at unlawful Games, are no good causes of refusal; for tho they are Mala
Prohibita, yet they are not Mala in se. But Heretic, Schismatic, Perjured
Person, Bastard, Outlawed, Illiterate, are good causes to refuse, so as the
Bishop express the crime in certain by a Certificate; but in such cases, the
Ordinary must give notice to the Patron of his refusal.

The Law has appointed six Months to the Patron to present his Clerk to the
Bishop; and if the Patron does not Present his Clerk accordingly, then the
Bishop shall Present (by Lapse) a Clerk of his own choosing. This is called in
Law, a Collation, and if the Bishop shall not Collate within six Months; then
the Archbishop shall Collate his Clerk; and if the Archbishop do not Collate
within six Months, then the King shall Present.

The six Months shall be accounted according to the Calendar, and not according
to 28 days to the Month.

If the Church become void by Death of the incumbent, the six Months shall be
accounted from the time of his Death. So it is, if the Church become void by
Creation, i. e. by making the present incumbent there of a Bishop: but if the
Church become void by Resignation (which Resignation must be made to the
Bishop) or by Deprivation, then the Bishop must give notice of such Resignation
or Deprivation, and the six Months shall be accounted from the time of such
notice.

If the King be Patron, and does not present his Clerk to the Church within six
Months, there the Ordinary ought not de jure to Collate in regard of the said
Lapse; he ought only to Sequest the Profits of the Church, till the King will
Present.

A common Person cannot revoke, repeal or vary from his first Presentation,
because he has put it out of himself, and he has given the Bishop power to
perfect what he himself began; yet before Induction the King may revoke his
Presentment.

Before the Clerk is admitted and instituted, he ought to be examined by the
Bishop: If once the Bishop refuses a Man for insufficiency, he cannot
afterward accept of him.

The Clerk is not bound to show his Letters of Orders, or Letters Testimonial
to the Bishop upon his Examination. Trin. 43. Eliz. B. R. Palms, and the Bishop
of Peterborough's case.

If the Bishop find the Clerk able, he admits him in these words, Admitto te
habilem: And afterward he does institute him unto the benefice or Church,
thus, Instituo te rectorem Ecclaesie parochialis de D, and habere curam
animarum, accipe curam tuam and meam.

The Bishop may examine, admit and institute a man cut of his own Diocese.

In all cases if a Church Lapse to the Bishop or Archbishop, and the Pation
presents his Clerk before the Bishop or Archbishop have collated, the Bishop is
bound to admit the Clerk of the true Patron, and cannot take advantage of the
Lapse.

A Clerk must subscribe to three Articles. 1. To the Supremacy. 2. That the
book of Common prayer, and of ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons, contains
nothing in it contrary to the word of God. 3. That he allows of the 39
Articles of Religion, and acknowledges them to be agreeable to the word of God.

The Delinquent against the Canons of King James, made at a Convocation in
London, Anno Dom. 1003. is to be preceeded withal by the censures of the Church.

Chief Justice Wr^y. Pasch. 23. Eliz. reports, that whereas one Smith
subscribed the 39 Articles, with this addition (so far forth as the same were
agreeable to the word of God) that this was not according to the Stat. 13. Eliz.

Induction is usually done by the Archdeacon. It is the putting the Clerk in
Possession of the Church Glebelands, Tyths, etc. by the institution he is
admitted, ad Officium, by induction he is entitled ad beneficium.

No man is capable to be a Parson, Vicar, etc. before he is a Priest in Orders,
which cannot be before he is four and twenty years of (...).

By the Stat. 14. Car. 2. Cap. 4. he must make a Subscription according to the
said Act* and have a Certificate from the Bishop that he has so done.

Within 2 Months after he is inducted, he must, during Divine Service, read the
39 Articles in the Parish Church, and declare his unfeigned assent, and consent
to all that is therein contained positively.

He must within 2 Months after he is inducted, upon some Sunday, read the book
of Common Prayer, (i. e. the whole Service of the Church appointed for that
day) and likewise declare his assent and consent to all the matters and things
therein contained in these words.

J. A. B. Do declare my unfeigned assent and consent to all and every thing
contained and prescribed in and by the Book, entitled the Book of Common
Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, and other rites and ceremonies of
the Church, according to the use of the Church of England, together with the
Psalter or Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be sung or said in the
Churches, and the form or manner of making, ordaining and Consecrating of
Bishops, Priests and Deacons.

He must likewise within 3 Months after his Institution, upon some Lord's day
(during Divine Service) publicly read his Certificate from the Bishop, of his
Subscription to the Declaration following; and he must at the same time read
the Declaration it self in the Church where he is to Officiate, before the
Congregation there assembled. The Declaration follows.

I* A. B. declare, that it is not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take
Arms against the King, and that I do abhor that Traiterous position of taking
Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against these that are
Commissi^nated by him; and that I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, as it is now Established.

The clause about the solemn League and Covenant is now expired.

Observe, That the Parson, Vicar, etc. must upon the accoptance of every new
Living, or Ecclesiastical Preferment within this Law, repeat all these things.

Let him have some credible Witnesses present when he makes his Subscription
before the Bishop, and that they attest the Bishop's Certificate, and that they
get two books of Articles, and when they read them, that he gives one of them
to some Parishioners to read with him, and attest the same, that they were
present and heard the Clerk read the 39 Articles during the time of Common
Prayer, and declare his unfeigned assent and Consent to all the matters and
things therein contained, by subscribing their names thereunto.

When he reads the Book of Common Prayer, let some intelligent Parishoners read
with him, and give them a copy of the Declaration aforesaid, and let them
attest under their hands his reading of the Common Prayer and Declaration,
whith may be done in this Form.

In a fair legible hand, write the Declaration aforesaid. Then write under,

Memorandum, That upon Sunday the (...) in the year of our Lord (...) A. B.
Parson of D. in the County of D. read common Prayers in the said Parish Church
of D. both in the forenoon and afternoon of the same day, according to the form
and order prescribed and directed by the book, entitled, the book of Common
Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and other rights and ceremonies
of the Church, according to the use of the Church of England, etc. and
immediately after reading the same, made a declaration of his unfeigned assent
and consent to all the matters and things therein contained in the form and
words above written. And let the Witnesses subscribe the same Certificate, and
let these things be carefully kept.

CHAP. VII. Of Marriages.
Times Prohibiting Marriage.
MArriage comes in on the 13th day of January; and at Septuagessima Sunday it
is out again until Low Sunday (for we must fast from flesh in clear Lent) at
which time it comes in again, and goes not cut again till Rogation Sunday: For
Rogamen Vetitat. From whence it is forbidden again till Trinity Sunday; from
whence it is not fordidden till Advent Sunday: But then it goes out, and comes
not in again till the 13^h day of January next following; notwithstanding all
this, I would venture to Marry a prudent, comely and rich Woman at any time.

Affinity and Consanguinity forbidding Marriage.
A Man may not Marry his Grandmother, Grandfathers Wife, Wives Grandmother,
Fathers Sister, Mothers Sister, Fathers Brothers Wife, Mothers Brothers Wife.
Wives Fathers Sister Wives Mothers Sister, Mother, Stepmother, Wives Mother,
Daughter, Wives Daughter, Sons Wife.


A Woman may not Marry her Grandfather, Grandmothers Husband. Husbands
Grandfather, Fathers Brother, Mothers Brother Fathers Sisters Husband, Mothers
Sisters Husband, Husbands Fathers Brother, Husbands Mothers Brother, Father,
Stepfather, Husbands Father, Son Husbands Son, Daughters Husband.


A Man may not Marry his Sister, Wives Sister, Brothers Wife, Sons Daughter,
Daughters Daughter Sons Sons Wife Daughters Sons Wife Wives Sons Daughter,
Wives Daughters Daughter, Brothers Daughter, Sisters Daughter, Brothers Sons
Wife, Sisters Sons Wife, Wives Brothers Daughter, Wives Sisters Daughter.


A Woman may not Marry her Brother, Husbands Brother, Sisters Husband, Sons
Son, Daughters Son, Sons Daughters Husband Daughters Daughters Husband Husbands
Sons Son, Husbands Daughters Son, Brothers Son, Sisters Son, Brothers Daughters
Husband, Sisters Daughters Husband, Husbands Brothers Son, Husbands Sisters Son.


He that would see more of this, let him peruse Lord Chief Justice Vaughans
reports in Dr. Harrisons Case, where he shall meet with excellent and curious
Learning on this Subject.

CHAP. VIII. Of Non-residence.
BY Stat. 21. Hen. 8. cap. 13. every Archdeacon, Dean, Parson and Vicar, must
be personally resident, and abiding in, at, or upon his said Dignity or
Benefice, or one of them at the least; and upon wilful absence by the space of
one Month at a time, or two Months at several times in any one year, to forfeit
10 l.

The Stat. intends he should be Resident in and upon his Parsonage or
Vicaridg-house.

Imprisonment excuses the Parson, etc.

Removal for healths sake excuses.

He that is Resident in the University, and under forty years of age, to do
Exercises there, is excused.

Being in the King's Service beyond Sea, excuses.

A Chaplain qualified, is excused.

The King may give License to any of his own Chaplains to be Non-resident.

Arch bishops, Bishops, Lords, Household Chaplains are excused.

Vid. Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 20. 14 Eliz. cap. 11.

CHAP. IX. Of Dispensations and Pluralities.
A Dispensation granted by the Archbish, and confirmed by the King 's Letters
Patents, (as it must be) Retinere beneficium cum cura animarum, is good only to
such a person who is full and perfect incumbent of the Church at the time of
the Dispensation to him, by Stat. 21. Hen. 8. cap. 13.

The King, Queen and Prince, and other the King's Children, may retain as many
Chaplains as they please, and every of their Chaplains may purchase a
Dispensation for two Parsonages, or Benefices, with cure of Souls, or may hold
as many of the King's Gift as they can get.

Every Archbishop and Duke may have six Chaplains, and every one may have two
Parsonages.

Every Marquess and Earl may have five Chaplains, and every one may have two
Benefices.

Every Viscount and Bishop may have four Chaplains, and every one may keep two
Benefices.

The Lord Chancellor, every Barron and Knight of the Garter may have three
Chaplains.

Every Duchess, Countess and Barroness, being Widows, may have two Chaplains.

The Treasurer of the King's House, and Comptroler, the King's Secretary, Dean
of the Chapel, and Master of the Rolls may every of them have two Chaplains,
and the Chief Justice of the King's Bench, one Chaplain.

All Doctors and Batchelors of Divinity (not admitted by Grace only) may keep
two Benefices.

No Deanery, Archdeaconry, or Prebend is within this Act of Pluralities.

If any incumbent be Resident upon his Living, and keep a Curate, he is bound
by the Act of Uniformity once every Month at least to read the Common Prayers
in his Parish Church, or he forseits 5 l. for every time he fails therein.

CHAP. X. Causes of Deprivation,
CAuses of Deprivation in the Spiritual Court (all which are allowed by the
Common Law) are,

Conscientia Criminis. Debilitas Corporis. Irregularitaes Personae. Defectus
Scientiae. Grave Scandulun. Heresy, Schism, etc.
If the Clerk be convict of Perjury in the Spiritual Court, it is a good* cause
of Deprivation; but the Ordinary must give notice to the Patron of this
Deprivation.

If the Patron Present a mere Layman, the same is a good cause of Deprivation,
if he be instituted and inducted; but he must be deprived by sentence in the
Spiritual Court.

If a Judgment of Deprivation be against a Parson, if he make his Appeal, the
Church is not void, but he remains Parson during the time of the Appeal; and if
he do reverse the Judgment, there needs no new Institution and induction.
Hornogal^'s Case.

Disobedience to the Ordinary, Incontinency and Drunkeness, are good causes of
Deprivation; he must be a common Drunkard.

He that comes in by Simony, may be deprived.

To maintain any Doctrine against the 39 Articles of Religion, and persist
therein, is cause of Deprivation.

Nonconformity, is a good cause of Deprivation.

Taking a second Benefice, contrary to the Stat. 21 H. 8. cap. 13. without a
Dispensation, is a just cause of Deprivation.

Observe, avoidances by Act of Parliament need no sentence declaratory.

By Stat. 13 Eliz. cap. 12. He that does not subscribe unto the Articles, nor
read the Articles of Religion, shall be deprived ipso facto. But the Ordinary
must give notice thereof to the Patron.

CHAP. XI. Of Dilapidations.
A Dilapidation is the pulling down or destroying any of the Houses or
Buildings belonging to a Spiritual Living, or the Chancel, or suffering them to
run into ruin or decay, or wasting and destroying the woods of the Church.

Suits for Dilapidations are most properly to be sued in the Spiritual Courts.

But a special Action upon the case lies against the Dilapidator, his Executors
or Administrators at Common Law; and all the Money and Damage that shall be
recovered for Dilapidations, are to be expended and laid out, in and about the
Repairs. As to the Bishop and Parson's granting Leases, in such cases besure to
consult some able Councell^r.

CHAP. XII. The Privileges of Clergymen.
THey are not compelled to serve in any temporal Office; as Constable,
Overseer, etc.

They may not be arrested in the Church or Church yard, when they are attendant
on Divine Service.

The bodies of Clergymen cannot be arrested upon any Capias, upon a Statute
Merchant, or Statute Staple; and if he be Arrested thereupon, a Writ of False
Imprisonment lies against the Officers.

Their Goods are free from Tolls in Fairs and Markets.

They are not bound to appear at Court Leets.

If a Clark in Holy Orders be found guilty by the Petit Jury, of a Crime for
which the benefit of Clergy is allowable, he shall not be burned in the hand as
a Layman shall be.

A Lay man can have his Clergy but once, but a Clark in Holy Orders shall have
it ad infinitum.

No Execution shall be executed upon the Goods of the Church.

By the Stat. 1 Mariae cap. 3. he must not be disturbed Praying or Preaching.

CHAP. XIII. Of Tithes.
Tithes are an Ecclesiastical Inheritance, collateral to the state of the Land,
and therefore unity of possession cannot extinct or suspend them; but may be
dimissed or granted, notwithstanding such unity.

Tithes are,

Praedial; which arise from the profits of the Land. Mixed; such as arise from
Cattle. Personal; such as arise from Labor or Industry.
Tithes are also divided into

Great Tithes. Small Tithes, Minutae Decimae.
Corn, Hay and Wood accounted great Tithes.

Garden stuff, Fruits, Saffron, Woad, Flax, Hemp, and Personal and mixed Tithes,
are accounted small Tithes.

Many Vicaridges are endowed with the small Tithes only.

Before the time that the Parochial rights of Tithes were settled, the Owners of
Lands might grant their Tithes to any Ecclesiastical or Religious Persons; so
Tithes of some whole Paririshes were ^tanted to Abbots, etc. and to the Rectors
of other Parishes; which is the reason that at this day there are several
portions of Tithes held from the Parish Churches by Impropriators and the
Rectors of other Churches.

About the twelfth Century, the Parochial Rights of Tithes were generally
settled.

Many Abbots, who had Tithes of other Parishes granted to them, held out
against the Parish Priests, and after claimed the Tithes by prescription, i. e.
by forty years possession, and that is the reason that many portions of Tithes
are at this day held by Impropriators that had been gained by the Abbots by
such prescription, and by this means they got their prescrions de non
decimando; for one Clergyman may prescribe against another, but not a Layman.

No man was capable of Tithes in Pernancy, till the Statutes of Dissolutions of
Religious Houses enabled them. And since then those Tithes which were
appropriated to the Religious Houses, are become Lay-fee; and any Layman is
capable of them in Pernancy, and may sue for the same in the Spiritual Courts.

All Tithes not appropriated belong to the Rector of the Parish Church wherein
they arise, yet the Parson of one Parish may prescribe to have a Portion of
Tithes in the Parish of another; and so might Abbots and other religious
persons prescribe to have Portions of Tithes in Parishes, whereof they had not
the Advowsons, and by consequence the Patentees from the Crown, and the
Improprietators may claim the same by prescription in the Abbots, Priors, etc.
and the usage since the Dissolution will serve to prove the prescription and
usage in the Abbots, etc. that they held the same so time out of mind.

If a Parson lease his Gleab Land, and do not also grant the Tithe thereof, the
Tenant shall pay the Tithe to the Parson.

If a Parson sow his ground, and then sells the Corn growing, the Buyer shall
pay Tithes of it to the Parson.

By the Stat. 28. H. 8. cap 11. all the Tithes and other Profits belonging to
the Rectory, are given to the Successor from the death of the last Incumbent so
that the Executors have nothing to do with them.

The Vicar shall not pay tithes of his Gleab to the Parson, without special
words.

Personal tithes are to be paid where the party communicates, but praedial to
the Parson, within whose Parish the Land lies

The manner of the payment of Tithes, is for the most part governed by the
custom of the place, as in Sheaves, Hay cocks or Grass-cocks, no tithes are to
be paid of the Aftermaths of Meadow; but if the Meadow be so rich, that there
is two Crops of Hay or Woad got in one year, the Parson shall have tithe of
both.

Tithe shall be paid of Hay and Corn growing in Orchards, tho the tithes of
Fruit be paid the same year.

Gross Woods are such as are usually employed for building, as Oak, Ash, Elm,
Beech, and are not tythable; but Willows, Hasels, Hollies, Maples, Birch,
Alders, Thorns, etc. of what age or bigness soever, are tytheable; but if they
are for fuel in the Owners Houses, they are not tytheable.

Tithes shall be paid of Nursery Trees, if they are sold to be transplanted
into other Parishes.

If the Coppice has paid tithes, the grubbed wood shall not pay any.

If Oak, Ash, Elm be cut under one and twenty years growth, they are accounted
Sylva Caedua, and ought to pay tithes*

But the Loppings of great Oaks, Ashes, though the Lops be under twenty years
growth, shall not pay tithes; nor of the Shoots that grow from the Roots of
such Timber Trees.

No tithes shall be paid of the Bark of Timber Trees: But tithes shall be paid
of the Masts and Acrons; but then they ought to be collected and sold, Litt.
rep. p. 40

If Wood-ground be mixed with Woods tytheable, and Woods not tytheable, and the
greater part be such as are not tytheable, it shall privilege the rest, and so
e contrario, 16* Jac G. B. Leonards case.

The Parson may sue the buyer or Seller of the Woods for tithes at his Election.

The manner of payment of Wood tithes, is either by the measure of the ground,
or every tenth Faggot.

Herbage is to be paid for barren Cattle, which yield no profit to the Parson.

No herbage tithe shall be paid for the agistment of Beasts bred for the Plow
or Pail, and so employed in the same Parish. So if a man eat a ground with his
own Saddle-Horses, he shall pay no tithe for the same; but an Innkeeper that
eats with Guests Horses shall.

No tithe is due to the Parson for Deer, Conys, etc. without a Special Custom.

If a ground be eaten with profitable Cattle, as Milch Cows, Ewes, Lambs and
Cattle bred for Plow and Pa^l, shall not pay tithes.

If a Stranger or Parishioner buy barren Cattle, and feed them for sale, he
shall pay tithe for the herbage of them: So of young Cattle.

For the Grass of Fallows no herbage shall be paid, nor of Stubles.

If the Parishoner has under seven Lambs or Fleeces he shall pay an halfpenny
for every Lamb and Fleece. Where Sheep are kept in one Parish in Summer, and
another in Winter, the tithes are to be divided: So if one buy Sheep out of
another Parish: Tithe Cheese must be paid whilst Cheese is made; but in (...)
and Winter, tithe Milk is (...) be paid in kind. But in all places the custom
is to be observed.

Tithe of Lambs, Calves, Pigs, etc. is regularly when they are so old, that
they may be weaned and live without the Dam. Wool is to be paid at the
Sheer-day.

If a man's Sheep dye of the Rot, or the Owner kill them, he must pay tithe for
the Wool rateably.

Tithes are to be paid of Fruits in kind, when gathered: So of Mast, or to be
satisfied, if eaten with Swine. The tithe of Bees is to be paid by the tenth
part of the Honey and Wax: Of young Pigeons in Dovecoats, etc. tithes shall be
paid, if they be sold.

Geese, Ducks and Swans are usually paid in their kind; but of Hens and Turkies
commonly in their Eggs: Where they pay tithe of Eggs, there is no tithe of the
Young and sic e converso: No tithes due for Dwelling-Houses, properly.

No tithes shall be paid of those hings which do not annually increase, as
Stones, Turfs, Slates, Bricks, Tiles, Marble-lime, Tinn, Lead, Copper, unless
by special tcustom

Tithes due by Custom are of two kinds.
1 Where there is a modus decimandi, and by custom money or some other thing is
paid in lieu of tithes. 2. Where tithes has by custom been paid of things not
tytheable, as of Lead in Darbyshire, Tynn in Devonshire.


In some Countries they say, they pay tithe ale, a very proper place for fudling
Parsons to live in.

The Parson, Vicar, Impropriator or Farmer cannot come himself and set forth
the tithes without the License and Consent of the Owner, of the Corn, Hay, etc.
if he do, and carry it away, he is a Trespassor. But a Parson, Vicar, etc. may
after the tithes are set forth, come himself or his Servants, and spread abroad
and dry his Corn, Hay, etc. upon any convenient place in the ground, till the
same be fit to be carried into the Barn.

The Parson and Vicar may carry his tithes from the ground, either by the
common way, or any such way as the Owner of the Land uses to carry away his
nine parts: but if the Owner of the ground will not suffer the Parson, Vicar,
etc. to spread and dry the Corn or Hay upon the ground, or will stop the ways,
and not suffer the Parson to carry them away; this is no good setting forth
within the Stat. 2 Edward 6. and they may have an action upon the Case for such
disturbance.

In all Cases where a spiritual person prescribes in non decimando, his Tenant
and Farmers shall take the benefit thereof.

If any of the Abbots, Priors, etc. that came to the Crown, by the Stat. 27
Heu. 8. c. 28. were discharged of payment of tithes by prescription, de non
dicimando, yet the Patentees of the Lands shall not have the benefit of such
prescriptions, but shall pay tithes.

But if the Kings Patentees of those Abbey Lands, that came to the Crown by
Stat. 31 H. 8. may take the advantage.

But every Layman may prescribe de modo decimandi, as to pay so much in lieu
of all tyth^s to the Parson.

It has been held a void prescription to pay a Load of Hay yearly, in
discharge of all his tythehay, that is to a part in discharge of the whole.

It is no good modus to pay for every milch Cow, 2 d. and for every Calf 1 d.
in discharge of the tithes of all other Cattle; but it is a good modus for the
Calves and Milk, only.

A modus to pay thirty Eggs in Lent, in satisfaction of all the tithe of Eggs,
has been held a good modus.

It is a good modus, that the Parson, time out of mind, has had so much, or
such a parsel of Meadow or Land in satisfaction and discharge of the tithes of
Hay, etc. arising upon the Land.

A modus that in consideration the Parishioner has cut, dried and shockt the
Corn, he has been freed from the payment of tythehay, has been held a good
prescription.

The Aftermath is freed from the payment of tithes.

If a man prescribe to pay six shillings and eight pence for all the tithes
arising and happening in such a Park, and the Park is disparked and turned to
tillage, the prescription is gone.

It has been held a good modus to give a Buck or Do yearly to the Rector,
etc. in discharge of all the tithe arising within the Park. And it shall hold,
though the Park be discharged. But if the modus have been only for the herbage
of the Park, and it be disparkt and sown with Corn, the modus is gone.

If a man have a modus for all the Hay and Grass upon twenty Acres of Land, and
converts the same to Tillage, he shall pay tithes thereof. So it appears a
great difference, where the modus goes to all manner of tithes in general, and
where to particular tithes.

At Yarmoth, etc. when they return from fishing, they divide the Doles, and the
first Dole which is set out, is called Christ's Dole, half of this is given to
the Parson of the place where they Land, and the other half is to be
distributed amongst them to give to the Parson, where every one inhabits. If
the Parishioner compound for his tithes, during his life, without deed, its ill.

Alteragium, are such minute tithes which the Vicar shall have, and shall be
expounded according to the use, as Wood, Wool, etc. Lit. Rep. 243.

Copper Mills, Fulling-Mills, Glass-House, etc. shall not pay tithes.

Where a modus is alleged to pay a certain sum to a Vicar in discharge of any
tithes due to the Parson, it seems to be a good modus.

Tithes must pass by grant under hand and seal, or by fine, etc.

Tithes impropriate, are become Lay-fee, and may pass by Will, and may be
granted by name of Hereditaments.

Upon a Lease for Lives of tithes, no rent can be reserved: But upon a demise
of tithes for years, a rent may be reserved, and an action of debt may lie for
it.

Barren Heaths by Stat. 2 Ed. 6. shall be discharged of payment of tithes of
Corn or Hay, for the first seven years after the improvement.

If a Wood be grubbed up, and made fit for tillage, it shall pay tithes
presently.

Parsons and Vicars at this day, notwithstanding the confirmation of the Patron
and Ordinary, cannot make a real composition for no longer than the Parson and
Vicars Life.

Offerings which are customary and certain, as for Communicants, Marriages,
Christnings, Churchings of Women, Burials; are by Stat. 2 Eliz 6. confirmed to
the Parish Priests, Vicars and Curats of the Parishes where the parties live
that ought to pay the same.

All Monasteries under 200 l. per annum value were dissolved by Stat. 27 H. 8.
and none of those Abbey or Priory Lands are freed or discharged of the payment
of tithes by the Stat. 31. H. 8. c. 8. or by any other Law.

The Abbots at the time of their dissolution held their Lands discharged of
tithes.

1. By the Popes Bull. When the Pope here in England would grant exemption to
this or that Abbot, as pleased him.

2. By real composition between the Parson and the Abbots, confirmed by the
Patron and Ordinary.

3. By Prescription.

4. By Order. Cistertians, Hospitalers and Templars and the Praemonstratenses
were discharged of the payment of tithes. But the privileges granted to these
Orders, extended only to the Lands, these Orders held in their own hands, and
not to any which was held by their Tenants or Farmers.

The Templars, Anno Dom. 1311. were condemned for Heresy, and their
possessions were by Act of Parliament given to the Hospitalers or Knights of
St. John of Jerusalem.

5. By Perpetual Unity. That is, where an Abbot, Prior, etc. time out of mind
has been seized of the Lands, out of which the tithes arise, and the Rectory
within which Parish the Lands lie. It must be perpetual, that is, the Abbey must
be founded and endowed with the Land and Rectory before the time of memory
which by the Rules of the Common Law, must be before the first year of Rich. 1.
for if by any Records, Deeds, or other Legal Evidence it can be made appear,
that eirher the Land or Rectory came to the Abbey since the first year of R. 1
the Union is not perpetual.

The Stat. 31 H. 8. extends not to free or discharge any Lands from the payment
of tithes, save those that came to the Crown by that Act.

No man shall pay a Mortuary, unless he died possessed of Goods to the value of
ten Marks. If he had ten Marks in moveable goods, and under thirty pounds, then
he should pay 3 s. 6 d. if above thirty, and under forty pounds, then he should
6 s. 8 d. if above forty pounds 10 s.

The Citizens of London* pay yearly for every ten shillings rent of all Houses,
Shops, etc. within London 16 d. ob.

If tithes be in the hands of temporal men, they are by reason of them
contributory to temporal charges.

Tithes are at this day chargeable with all charges imposed by Act of
Parliament, wherein they are not exempted.

Tithes are at this day subject to pay first fruits, which are the first years
profits of every Spiritual Benefice, at a new Incumbents entry into his Living.

The First Fruits are not rated at full and utmost value of the Living they are
to be paid for, but according to the valuation taken and made in the 26th year
of King H 8. and now used in the First Fruits Office.

These First Fruits are not to be paid all at once, but one quarter of them is
to be paid at the end of six months, from the time of the induction, another
fourth part at the end of twelve months, another fourth part at the end of
eighteen months, and the last fourth part at the end of two years.

All Vicaridges not exceeding ten pounds, and all Parsonages not exceeding ten
Marks, according to the valuation in the First Fruits Office, are discharged
from the payment of First Fruits by Stat. 1 Eliz. c. 4. now the reason why
Vicaridges, not exceeding ten pounds should be freed of this charge, and
Parsonages of ten marks should pay them, was, that the Vicaridges in time of
Popery, and when the valuation was taken, had a great income by voluntary
Offerings, which falling to little or nothing upon the dissolution of
Monasteries, this favor was afforded them in their First Fruits.

CHAP. XIV. Simony. Vid. Stat. 13 Eliz. Cap. 6.
IF any shall receive or take Money Fee, Reward or Profit for any Presentation
to a Benifice, with Cure, although he which was presented, be not knowing of it,
yet the Presentation, Admission and Induction are void. For he is Simoniace
Promotus, 12 Rep. Coll. Dr. Hucthinsons Case.

Every Incumbent that comes in by Simony is so disabled for ever after to be
presented to the same Church, that the King (to whom the Law gives the
presentment) cannot present the same man again to the same Church.

The King cannot dispense with the said Statute by any non obstante; and though
he pardon the Simony, yet that makes not the party capable.

If the Church be void by Simony, the Ordinary is not* bound to give notice of
the Avoidance to the Patron.

One presents I. S. to a Church which is void, and upon the Presentation he
takes an Obligation of him to resign upon request, that the Obligee may present
his Son when he is of full Age, this is a good Obligation, and not made on a
Simoniacal Contract M. 8. Jac. B. R. John's and Lanrence's Case.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some New curious Books, the four first never Published before
^his Michaelmass Term, 1692, and most of the others published but a little
before in the same year; all Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Salusbury, at at the
King's Arms next S. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet.
THE Reformed Gentleman, or the Old English Morals rescued from the
Immoralities of the present Age; showing how Inconsistent those pretended
Geenteel Accomplishments of Swearing, Drinking, Whoring, and Sabbath breaking
are with the true Generosity of an English man. With an account of the
proceedings of the Government for the Reformation of Manners By A. M. of the
Church of England, Bound in 8. price 1* s. 6 d.

2. An Essay against Unequal Marriages, in four Chapters, 1. The Introduction.
2. Against Old Persons Marrying with Young. 3. Against Persons Marrying without
Parents or Friends Consent. 4. Against Persons Marrying without their own
Consent. By S. Bufford, Gent. in 12. bound price 1 s.

3. The Parsons Vade Mecum: or, A Treatise containing Choice Observations about
the accounts of the year, moveable Feasts, Ember-weeks, Ecclefiastical
Censures, the memorable things in the three first Centuries, and some after
Ages, Archbishops and Bishoprics, their Election, Consecration, Installment,
etc. Patronage, Institution, Induction, Non-residence, Dispensations,
Pluralities, Deprivation, Dilapidation, Privileges of Clergymen. Tithes and
Simony; very fit for all Clergymen and Gentlemen in 12. bound, price 1. s.

4 Sermo Mirabilis: or the silent Language. Whereby one may learn perfectly, in
the space of six hours, how to impart his mind to his Friend in any Language,
English, Latin, French, Dutch, etc. tho never so deep and dangerous a Secret,
without the least Noise, Word or Voice; and without the Knowledge of any in
Company. Being a wonderful Art kept secret for several Ages, in Padua, and now
published only for the wise and prudent, who will not expose it, as a
Prostitute, to every Foolish and Ignorant Fellow. By Monfieur La Fin, once
Secretary to his Eminence, the Cardinal of Richlieu.

5 Blunts Law Dictionary, being the best extant, 10 s.

6 Behmens Theosopick Philosophy unfolded, 4 to 6 s.

7 The History of the late great Revolution in England and Scotland, 5 s.

8 Eachara's Gazzetteer, or Newsmans Interpreter, 2 s.

9 -- Compendium of Geography, general and special, etc. 1 s, 6 d.

10 -- Description of Ireland, with 5 Maps, 1 s. 6. d.

11 -- Description of Flanders, with a Map, 1 s.

12 -- Description of the Duke of Savoys Dominions, 3 d.

13 Tryons new Art of Brewing Beer, Ale, etc. 1 s.

14 -- his Rules for preserving health, 1 s.

15 -- Mystery of Dreams and Visions unfolded, 1 s. 6 d.

16 New Art of making English Wines and Brandy, 1 s. 6 d.

17 Chymicus Rationalis or the Art of Chemistry, 2 s.

18 Leadbetter's Arithmetical Rules made easy, 1 s.

19 Barker's Measurers Guide, with the Art of Gaging, 1 s.

20 Secret History of the French King, 1 s.

21 Taxilla, or Love preferred before Duty, 1 s.

22 Treatise of Civil Bonds and Contracts, 1 s. 6 d.

23 Bragadcia, a Comedy, 1 s.

24 George Whither's wonderful Prophesies, 6 d.

25 Remarks on the late Queen's Dream, 6 d.

26 The Declaration of the Vaudois, 2 d.

27 Rale's Vindication of the Church of Scotland, 6 d.

28 Whitehall's Miscellany Poems, 6 d.

29 Rise and Progress of the New Reformation, 6 d.

30 An Essay against unequal Marriages, etc. 1 s.


