A LETTER OF Spiritual Advice: Written to Mr STEPHEN MARSHALL IN HIS
SICKNESS, By One of his Brethren in the Clergy, Mart. 1. M.DC.XLIII.

Printed in the Year M.DC.XLIII.

TO Mr STEPHEN MARSHALL.
SIR,
WHen I heard of your sickness, (though considering the woeful miseries of the
times I do usually rather congratulate with men their happiness, whom God
seems to favor so much as to call to himself, and to his own rest, from
being spectators or actors or sufferers in these calamities wherein this
Kingdom is involved, yet) I assure you I found in my self such a different
apprehension of your state, from that of other ordinary sick men, that I think
you will not wonder, if all the Kings Subjects, who wish good success unto His
Majesty in this war, cannot impute your visitation to any thing but to the
just severity and revenge of Almighty God upon you, for having had so strong an
influence upon the ruin of this Kingdom and Church. For, Sir, is it not
apparent, that, among others your eminent gifts of preaching have been made
use of for the kindling of those flames of Rebellion and civil war, and most
unchristian bloodshed? Have not you with all the earnestness, and (as you call
it) zeal imaginable, persuaded your Hearers to a liberal contribution for the
maintaining of this unnatural war? Have not you forsaken your own charge to
accompany and strengthen the General of your Army in his resolution and
attempts, against the just power and life of his and your Anointed Sovereign?
Does not the whole Kingdom impute almost all the distractions and combustions
therein, as much to the seditious sermons of the Preachers of your faction, as
to the contrivances of those persons, who set you on work? Let your own
conscience be your own judge in this matter, and it will tell you, that if all
these new designs should succeed to your wish, if there should happen a change
in government, either of Kingdom or Church, you would think your selves
wronged if you should be defrauded of being acknowledged very effectual
instruments in that change. These things therefore being so, you cannot accuse
of uncharitablenes those who think these designs not only unjust but ruinous
both to Justice and Religion, if they attribute it to Gods mercy to them, and
vengeance on you, if he take out of the world such a firebrand as you are.

Sir, whether your sickness be unto death or no, I know not, I am sure those
sins (without unusual and miraculous mercy) will prove sins unto death in
all those that are guilty of them, and die without repentance and amendment,
and satisfaction to Gods Church for the scandal of them. And upon this ground
I how unworthy soever yet by my profession being one of your brethren and
companions in the ministry of the Gospel, thought it my duty to beseech you in
the bowels of Christ to take a survey of your present condition, with other
eyes then heretofore, I doubt, you have done; And to take it patiently from me,
though a stranger to your person, if I offer you some hints, which your own
better understanding will make use of for a more exact discerning apprehension
and judgment of the nature of this business, now to be decided by the sword:
which though it prevail to your own wish, yet it is not the sword or victory
will justify you before Gods Tribunal. Remember Sir, it is not a Close
Committee pack't together of your own friends or faction, that must determine
the cause between God and you, neither are they any new invented fundamental
Laws of Kingdom or Nature that are to be your rule, but only the Laws of the
New Covenant; And from them it is that I intend to suggest unto your thoughts,
arguments which I desire you impartially to examine, to the end that when you
appear before the throne of Christ you may be able to justify your self,
either that you have fulfilled your duty, or if you have failed therein, yet at
least that you have failed after a reasonable and prudent examination by that
Rule.

I suppose you will not assume such infallibility of judgment to your own
person or party, as to think that the right is so unquestionably on your side,
that nothing can be objected against you that deserves to be considered; since
at least an equal part of the best judgments in the Kingdom, and most
learned persons in the Church, are your adversaries in this cause; And (which
ought to be of great moment with you) since a far greater number of the
Members of both Houses (though perhaps through negligence or fear not now
sitting in Westminster,) do protest against these proceedings. Let it but be
granted, that all those which oppose you have some seeming probability on their
side; and then I am sure you will judge it necessary especially for a dying
person, (if that be your present condition,) to be suspicious of himself, and
to hearken to all objections, and to use all prudent means for settling of his
conscience before he depart out of the world. If you look upon this war (and
surely your mind will not be so busy other ways, but sometimes you will
look upon this war) the result of your late-two-yeares sermons, the effect of
all those published lying Pamphlets, and discourses of forged conspiracies,
fears and jealousies, (now so confessedly groundless, that they are become a
Proverb of vanity) it cannot be avoided but you will have now and then some
accusing thoughts among others, they will not be all altogether excusing or
justifying. I pray you give me leave to marshall in order before your eyes
certain accusing thoughts, and put it to the trial of your own heart whether
they do with any force or justice accuse you, I assure you I will take upon
me no further then to accuse you, for it is God only must be your Judge, and
I beseech him to prepare you for that judgment, and to perform it with all
possible elemency and mercy.

You have at last Sir, obtained one end of all your endeavors, your watchings
and fastings and prayers and Sermons; you see there is at length a war
inflameing the whole Kingdom, you have obtained that it be put to the trial
of fire and sword, whether God will so bless both these as by their means to
purge this Kingdom and Church of the stains, which you suppose are in them
both, and set up that pretended Scepter of Christ's Kingdom, the Presbytery or
independency: (we know not yet whether is designed.)

Now in this war now raised, I shall principally consider the condition of
the persons between whom it was waged, and the grounds and pretenses thereof,
and from thence raise such Articles of accusation, as I must needs fear you
cannot choose but answer guilty unto them at the bar of conscience. And these
I will consider, with an intention not so much to interpose mine own judgment
concerning the legality of them, as desireous to show that you, as a Preacher
of the Gospel, ought not so to have interessed your self in them.

1. The parties opposed and in collision against one another in this war are;
on the one side the Kings Majesty assisted by the most considerable part of the
Nobility and Gentry and Commons, and all the Clergy that are indeed the true
English Protestant Clergy; and on the other side, No King (nor so much as an
usurping pretended King) but only Subjects, (or such as ought to be such, and
have often sworn they will be such) and among them, the only forward persons
are Sectaries, such as abhor the established Doctrine and Discipline of our
Church; as appears in that wheresoever almost that Army comes, there is all
the violence and despite imaginable exercised against the Leiturgy and
Ceremonies of the Church, and persons of Churchmen; witness Canterbury,
Worcester, Winchester, Salisbury, and the other day, Lambeth.

And herein I accuse you first (or rather, I desire you that you would permit
your own thoughts to accuse you, I do not yet say to condemn you, but accuse
you) that you have forgotten or wilfully transgressed the duty of a minister of
the Gospel of Peace, in being forward to kindle a war of what nature or with
what pretenses soever. Do you in the Gospel, Master S. Marshall, (which is
your Commission) find any encouragements, or which is more, any command to
foment War? From whence are Wars, in general, and fightings among you? S.
James will answer, Come they not even (...), from your lusts which war in
your Members? Christ our Master indeed says that he came to send fire and the
sword upon the Earth, showing, not what he intended or commanded, but what,
through the wickedness and malice of Satan and profane men would be a
consequent of the preaching of the Gospel, even that Gospel which is not
withstanding the Gospel of meekness, and patience, and charity, viz, that
the enemies thereof would express all possible fury and rage against it. For
that fire (as appears in the text) is the Baptism of persecutions, wherewith
Christ himself and his followers were to be baptized, a war wherein he and
they were to be patients only and not agents, he came not to put the sword into
the hands but into the bowels of his own servants. You stand therefore accused
for being active your self, and encouraging other Christians to be active and
invaders in this war, for being a most unchristian Baptizer of Christians
with this fire.

But, secondly, the accusation against you for being a fomenter of war, in
Subjects against their lawful Prince, acknowledged for such both by you and
them, is far more heavy and pressing: (I know you have pretty distinctions
whereby you can gain applause of your hearers, by dividing the King from
Charles Stuart, and defending the one by murdering the other; but remember now
it is God and your own conscience before whom I accuse you, who will prove
Judges too cunning for such distinctions.) For Gods sake therefore lay your
hand upon your heart, and ask your own soul what pretense or excuse can be
found for this in any law, either of the Kingdom of England, or Heaven. Is
there any one word either in the Common or Statute Law, which allows an
English Subject with Arms in hand to resist the King in person? Is he not
indeed, and as you have often sworn to acknowledge him, the supreme Monarch
in his dominions? does not all exercise of coercion and power from all Courts
issue by his writ? Have not all subordinate Magistrates their power from him,
and therefore are they not with respect to him, mere private persons? Do the
two Houses of Parliament themselves in all their addresses, petitions etc. unto
His Majesty assume any other title unto themselves both severally and jointly,
but only your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects? These things being
so, and you knowing them to be so, I beseech you next search diligently the
Gospel, and find but one clause where you are allowed, or where the least
suspicion may be given you that you may hope that you may in any case be
allowed to dispense with this your duty to His Majesty; and I will confess
that you and your friends only have showed your selves good Subjects and good
Christians, and that all we who pray for him and wish him victory in this
war, are Traitors to him, and Apostates from Christianity. But no such thing
appearing, as you too well know, (for I wish for your own sake that it were
but ignorance, that has made you so zealous in the cause as you have been) how
can you read or but think upon the beginning of the 13 Chap. to the Romans
without horror, and secret wishes that S. Paul had had no ink to write words,
that will prove so fatal against you? Is that Chapter, Master Marshall, a part
of that Covenant by which you must be judged at the last day? And can you hope
to appear with any confidence when that Chapter shall be charged upon you?
Consider Sir, from whom has the King His power? is it not from God? Does not S.
Paul say expressly, he is the Minister of God, His Vicegerent to exercise
some Acts, which not the consent of all the men in the world have right to
invest him with? For he bears the sword, that is, the power of life and death.
Has any man power over his own life, to relinquish it at his pleasure? And it
being sure he has not, can he communicate to another the disposition of his
own life, (over which no man but God only, or they to whom God delegates his
power have Authority?) no certainly, Master Marshall. There is no power (at
least no such power) but of God, the powers that are, are ordained of God.
Insomuch that you will not find any example of Capital punishments in the
world exercised by any, till God gave that power to man, which to my
understanding he first gave, and then only in the case of murder, to Noah (Gen:
9. 4, 5, 6.) so that before it was under a dire punishment forbidden to kill
even that murderous wretch Cain himself. The people then, though they choose
the person of their King (which questionless they did by direction from God at
the first) yet not they but God only gives him this supereminent power over
life and death; with regard whereto doubtless he call's Kings and all supreme
Governors, especially Elohim, and says, By me Kings reign; whosoever
therefore, says S. Paul, resists, resists the Ordinance of God, and they
that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. These will prove sad words
Master Marshall to a dying man, that is guilty he has in so high a nature
resisted, and taught others to do so too: Especially considering, that these
precepts of obedience were by S. Paul given to us Christians, at a time when
the world was governed by such prodigious Tyrants, as no History mentions the
like either before or after them; as if God intended thereby to cut off all
imaginable pretenses of disobedience for ever.

Had not the Jews as great Civil Privileges as we, granted by God himself?
Deuteronomy. 17. 16.
had not they a command not to set a stranger over them? yet when a stranger
had violently usurped this power, does not Christ command us to give to Caesar
that tribute (a sign and acknowledgment of that Authority) which was Caesar's.
Then can zeal for Religion dispense with you, think you? Did Saint Paul say,
ye must needs be Subject not only for wrath but Conscience sake, and
whosoever resists receives to himself Damnation? and were not the persons
against whom resistance was thus strictly forbidden, Caligula, or Claudius, or
Nero's Persons, that abhorred, and as far as the whole power of mankind could
prevail, endeavored to destroy Christianity it self? And can settling a new
discipline, or rooting out some speculative errors, allow you to resist a good
Christian Protestant Prince? So true a Protestant according to the established
Religion of England, that I am persuaded he has scarce one Subject more hearty
and zealous, and constant in it, and more ready to sacrifice his life for it,
then himself.

But you have been taught of late, and have taught others to say, that His
Majesty is bound by promise and oath to such and such things, and with these
promises received his Crown, which is forfeited when these promises are broken.

Do you indeed think Sir, that any of your Masters believe themselves, when
they make such objections? was not His Majesty a King invested with his full
power before he made these promises at his Coronation? or does he tell you,
that he quits and releases unto you your allegiance when he fails in any of
these promises? He will be answerable to God for injustice and perjury if he
break his promises, and that will be punishment sufficient, without your
endeavors to dethrone him, and take away his life. The King of England, all
the world knows, is not a Duke of Brabant, or King of Arragon, that receives
his Crown conditionally, with power of revocation when the conditions are
broken. You know this well enough Sir, and therefore I advise you to prepare an
answer for Saint Paul.

The other ground, whereon the Articles of your accusation shall be laid, does
respect the causes or pretenses of this horrible un-Christian war; which are
either Civil viz. vindication of the Liberties of the Subject, and Privileges
of Parliament, etc. or Spiritual, namely, the purging of Innovations in the
Church and settling the Protestant Religion of this Kingdom in the purity
thereof. It may be, you will reckon among Spiritual grounds the dividing all
the revenues of Churchmen, amongst I know not yet whom.

For the first, If it did appear that His Majesty not only had in times past,
but for the future did resolve to entrench in the highest degree upon both
these, (notwithstanding trienniall Parliaments.) yet let me, speaking to you as
to a Clergyman, from a Clergyman, ask you whether the Gospel does warrant
us the ministers thereof, to incite and provoke Subjects to war and bloodshed
for any worldly causes whatsoever. For consider Master Marshall, are Christian
Subjects bound in Conscience not to suffer the effects of Tyranny? Cannot they
be saved under an oppressing cruel Governor? Is the patitient suffering ones
self to be defrauded and injured by a lawful Ruler become a sin? Truly Sir,
I am so far from thinking so, that I cannot find in mine heart to preach
against those patient Citizens in London, who without resistance suffer
themselves to be plundered, by these who certainly were not borne their
Princes, to whom they never took any oaths of allegiance; neither can I
condemn that man as out of the Gospel, who would rather deliver his purse
unto a theife, then endanger the wretches life, by resisting him and fighting
for it. This therefore being so that it may consist with a good conscience to
be wronged (and if it were not so, S. Paul would never have said, why do ye not
rather take wrong? why do ye not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded,
viz. then go to law etc.) I wonder what Text you could make use of to bring
this within a Sermon-businesse to persuade Subjects rather then suffer such
things, to endanger their own lives, and the life of their anointed King; (yea
and the souls of both too) though he had been a Tyrant! This was certainly a
great fault in you Sir, and your party; Though there had been not only
rational suspicions, but apparent proofs, that oppression and Slavery were
threatened to this Nation. You might have found Textes in the Gospel, wherein
in such cases mention was made, and advises given for the practice of certain
Christian virtues called meekness, and patience, and praying for enemies, and
resignation of our selves to Gods good providence, and acknowledging that our
sins have deserved, that for them, God should deliver us over into the hands
of Tyrannical Governors

These Textes (which every where offer themselves you should have studied, and
these virtues you should have commended to your hearers, as seasonable on such
occasions, (which I pray you not to interpret to be boasting, If I tell you,
that such is my practice in these days wherein there is so great occasions
given for the exercise of such Christian virtues, and given by persons in whose
innocence and Justice you do much confide,) and not resisting and rising up in
Arms against them, and revenging our selves of our sufferings upon the persons
and rights of those, whom we were borne to live under, and to whom we had taken
so many Oaths of Duty and Loyalty. For mine own part I assure you Sir, if it
should please God that you and your masters should in the end Legally become
our Governors, either in Civil or ecclesiastical matters, be as rigorous and
austere as you please I do promise you in the presence of God (who knows me
though you do not and will punish me if I lie,) that I will never exhort any
man to revenge and opposition against you, never will I solicit petitions to
threaten you, nor tumults to advise you. If you should command me to do things
unlawful, or enjoyne me to subscribe to doctrines which I think erroneous, I
will not do those things, nor profess such doctrines, but however I will never
resist you, but either by flying from you, or suffering as meekly as I can the
punishment and penalties that you shall inflict on me, and I do here engage my
self to procure you as many fellow-patients as possibly I can: these things I
take leave to tell you, upon supposition, that all pretended miseries were
indeed apparently coming on us, and inevitable, but only by these (to my
understanding) unlawful means.

But now Sir, since no such thing appears probable, or almost possible to any
man that has in him left one grain of Christian charity; since whatsoever
former pressures we groaned under, as Ship Money, and Monopolies, are not only
so absolutely taken away, as no suspicion can remain of their returning (for
which many thanks and acknowledgements are due and will be given to his
Majesty by all good Subjects, how insensible and unthankful soever you
resolve to be) since not only all the Delinquents in such cases are offered to
the trial and punishment of the Law (excepting only those whom new crimes of
unthankfulness and malice against the King, have rendered justified and
innocent, and unfit to be questioned, for all their former briberies and
extortions) but likewise the most earnest assurances by solemn and public
protestations and oaths, freely given us by his Majesty (joined with unusual
acknowledgements of errors past, and all reasonable offers of satisfaction for
them, as particularly; for his repair unto the House of Commons) and curses on
his own Person and his Children: if those Protestations be not sincere, that
surely they that believe not his Majesty (if there be any such, for I am
confident most of those that say they do not believe him, do blaspheme their
own faiths, and are anti-hypocrites of infidelity) they must confess a
renouncing of Christian charity, which believes all things; and they must
think his Majesty destitute of ordinary prudence, since it is apparent that
there is no possible way for him left to reign in splendor, or so much as
safety, unless he make good these promises by future actions, (the greatest
and most considerable part of that strength now about him, following him,
chiefly upon that assurance, and out of experience, that the Laws of the Land,
which they see unregarded and nullified by others, are either to be revived,
and justice executed by him, or not at all.) Sure Master Marshall, though his
Majesty be a mighty Prince, yet I may say, it is beyond his power to give us
greater security of making England the happiest Kingdom under the Sun in his
Government according to Law and Justice, than he has already done, unless he
should dethrone himself, and give up his power and protection of us, his
Subjects, from himself into other men's hands, which if he should attempt to
do, he should be perjured. Think with your selves of any other lawful
security (that he be not the only Person in the Kingdom unprotected) beyond
that which you have already received, and I am very confident you shall have
that granted too.

Where is then your Christian charity all this while, Master Marshall? you
that are commanded to forgive and receive into friendship your brother, seven
times in one day, though he should offend as many times in one day, what
dispensation do you find in the Gospel for this duty of charity to your
King, whom I am assured, you can never accuse of ever making any promise with a
resolution to break it? or if you will needs be so hard to be persuaded your
selves, where have you been taught to discourage and forbid others who are more
easy of belief to trust him? Remember Sir, when the last fatal hour comes,
if you have any sin lying on you not thoroughly mortified, you must then promise
unto Almighty God amendment (if it shall please him to lengthen your days,
and woe unto you, and more too, if God does not believe us, and take our words)
you must then say not only, Forgive me, as I forgave, etc. But, Believe and
accept of this resolution of mine, as I do, etc. This you must say, and the
only comfort of your soul will be, that God will content himself with
promises only, in stead of performances, notwithstanding an hundred promises
you did make in your life time against sin, and as many times you forgot and
neglected those promises: Do not therefore teach Almighty God an evil lesson
against your self.

Now besides this extreme and most unchristian uncharitableness, and judging
of your King, so as you dare not for all the world adventure to be judged your
self, you must expect to be accused of most intolerable disobedience and
disloyalty to his Majesty. You that are commanded to be subject out of
conscience to Nero, if he were your King, not to resist him, though he should
without Law murder you; yet you have and for ought appears, yet do not only
deny obedience to a most righteous Christian King, but you have appeared in the
Field among armed Forces against Him; and (as it is affirmed by Gentlemen of
quality, Officers in your Army that were your Auditors) whereas you promised
your Soldiers, that they should never fight against his Majesty, yet when
that fearful day of Edgehill came, you not only broke that promise with
them, but encouraged them especially to direct their shot toward that place
where his Majesty stood. The thought of this I am sure will sit near your soul
before you die; but how would it have entered like boiling oil into your bones,
if the shot which from other hands you aimed against his Person had not
swerved? I assure you, that you have greater cause to bless God for preserving
his Majesty against your self, that day, than either my self, or any other,
the most faithful Subject he has. It could not be but pleasure for us to
perish after so dismal a loss, but for you to die with his blood upon your
souls, who is Gods Anointed, methinkes the very thought of the possibility of
it should be sufficient to banish from your heart all manner of peace and
security as long as you live.

There is one aggravation more for this your disloyalty, which certainly will
make it a sin that I must accuse the poverty of our Language which will not
afford us a name to understand it by, a sin which the worst Lay-person in the
world could not be guilt^e of, that is (and if I remember well, his Majesty
has already in one of his writings charged you with it,) that you, not content
with all these expressions of the utmost kind of disobedience, should take upon
you to absolve certain soldiers, once his Prisoners, and graciously released
upon their oath, never to bear Arms against him more, of that their promise
and oath, making them twofold more the Children of Hell, then etc. I will not
make you blush, with asking, whether the Gospel will afford you textes to
justifye this. I pray you search the Alcoran, I am confident the Alcoran is not
a book professedly and impudently hellish enough to warrant this action. For
Gods sake, Sir, have so much regard to the honor of our nation, as to use some
means to wipe of this Scandal; let not the world think, that we Englishmen,
if we do not believe, yet at least have some suspicion that there is a God, an
avenger of perjury. Perjury you know was even by the Heathens accounted a
sin, not only destructive to the Authors, but to whole Cities, and
Kingdoms, which have the misfortune to have such persons living in them. Shall
Rebellion be reported to be accounted by any English Protestant, not only a
pardonable but a lawful act, yea a virtue, yea so eminent a virtue, that like
charity it will cover a multitude of sins, and so fit and necessary to be
practiced, that rather then omitted, perjury it self should be swallowed? I
hope Master Marshall; His Majesty has been misinformed, and that I am to
crave your pardon for laying to your charge this accusation.

Other things there are, which though I hope you did dislike, and had no Active
influence on them, yet when you think sadly on, I believe you will think must
prove part of your charge. As those bloody tumults from the City, whose
pretense indeed was Justice and Liberty, (but has been the bane of both:)
those printings and preachings of known lies and calumnies, those revilings and
proscribings of His Sacred Majesty, those shameless mocking and upbraidings of
Almighty God to his face and in his own ordinance, giving him thanks for
forged victories or confessed losses, the neglecting of all manner of Oaths,
even of that oath of your own invention, the Protestation, which alone if it
should rise up in Judgment against you what would become of you? In a word
whatsoever almost has been spoken or done in order to your great design, that
is, the whole business of your brethren especially of the separation, for
these two last years; I fear some share of the guilt of all this will cleave
to you, so that it will concern you, to advise how you may acquit your self
of it. For Mr Marshall, can any Christian deny that all these things have not
been done? And having been done, can any excuse be made for them? And this
being so, how could it consist with a good conscience in you, (although you had
no hand at all in any of these things,) to dissemble the taking notice of them?
Not once to preach publicly against them though you knew many of your chief
Auditors were guilty of them? Are you so tender hearted, that you cannot endure
such slight stains in the Church, as the Surplice, Letany, or a few new
postures etc. and can you over-looke such abominations as these? Can you find
nothing against which, to express your zeal but only peace, or are you of
that good opinion, who openly maintained, that for a holy end some evil things
might be tolerated, though S. Paul say of such as he, their damnation is sure?
Could you admit so much secret Atheism into your heart, as to expect from
designs, built upon such rotten grounds, and forwarded by such wicked arts,
that a good issue could follow? I assure you for my self, though I extremely
greived to see such things practiced so uncontrolably, yea so kindly and
thankfully received by Christians, and though I was a long time solicitous of
the ruin threatened to this Church; yet since I could not choose but see the^, I
began to be more secure both for Kingdom and Church, since by all that I had
either read or could inform my self concerning the course of Gods most wise
and holy providence, I could never find that in the end he ever crowned with
blessings the designs of persons that so shamefully dishonored him, how holy
and spiritual so ever their pretenses were.

The other great pretense for this war is Religion (Christian Religion, I
pray you think of that, Master Marshall,) Zeal for the maintaining of this,
has wrested from you your self many eager and loud exhortations, that men
would stand resolutely for Gods truth, that they would neither spare their
purses, nor lives in so holy a cause. Are not you, Sir, one of those Godly
Divines that have been consulted with, as the whole Kingdom, has been given
to understand? This is the almost only thing, which is said to make this war
to be, pium duellum.

But for the honor of our Blessed Savior and his Religions sake (Master
Marshall) I beseech you at least in this controversy, search the Gospel
diligently (for that sure must only determine this point, here needs no
conjuring up of Fundamental laws of nature or Nations nor new unheard of
Privileges*) I say once more search the Gospel, and if there appear one
word, that gives you warrant to provoke Christians to any kind of war for the
cause of Religion (which yet is the almost only Pulpit-cause) I will confess
my self a desertour of Christ, a betrayer of his Religion, for not daring to
flesh men's swords in this quarrel. But in the Gospel I find, that the weapons
of our warfare are not carnal, but spiritual; I find that the Tares which
grew among the wheat, that is, the Children of the wicked one, Heretics, are
forbidden to be plucked up and destroyed, before the time of Harvest. I find
that against the enemies and Persecutours of this Religion Christ Jesus has
furnished us with no other weapons, but defensive only, and those, patience or
flight at the most. I find that by such weapons, and such only, Christian
Religion prevailed against the power of the whole Roman Empire. I find not that
any one of the ancient Fathers taught, or that without their teaching the
primitive Christians made use of any other weapons, but these, or that they
thought any other weapons lawful. You know what Tertullian speaks in his
Apology, viz that the Christians then (though if they had thought the sword a
lawful instrument in this cause, they wanted neither numbers, nor power, yet)
durst not betray their Consciences to secure their lives. It is much to be
doubted, Sir, that it is not superstitions or other imputed vanities, which
make such ancient writers scorned or hated by your friends, both Separatists
and Anabaptists, so much as these virtues of patience, and Christian obedience,
for which they are so famous, and wherein you will not be their Scholars. Now
all this and a thousand arguments and reasons beside these, which might be
alleged, being apparent, whereto may we attribute this your certainly not
Christian Apostolical way of maintaining true Religion, but only to a
confessed distrust in Gods providence, or in his love unto his Church? that men
fearing lest God should not bless those indeed only blessed means of
suffering, which heretofore when they were used were always prospered by him,
have therefore cast aside this Spiritual armor, and have betaken themselves to
such as Mahomet and the Purple whore and the great master of both these, the
Devil, that Abaddon and (...) has and does make use of, for destroying true,
and introducing false Religion? If it were the truth of Christ that those of
the separation, or their new associates, (though indeed most mortal enemies,)
the Anabaptists have been so busy to advance: Is it possible that with all
their stratagems and dark counsels and prayers and fastings, they should not
to this day have obtained from God so much success as to become the masters of
one Kingdom, City, nor village? excepting only that which they will be ashamed
to brag of, the City of munster?

Oh Sir, How then will you answer it to Christ (who will certainly, in this
case especially be a very severe Judge) that you have made him who came not to
destroy men's lives but to save them, a pretense for the shedding of so much
blood as has been and probably will be spilled? If it should chance men's eyes
should be opened, and that this should be acknowledged an unlawful cause of
war, whom can you expect that those poor souls, who have died in the very
gall of bitterness and rancour of Rebellion should curse, but such Ministers
as you, who have told them (but most falsely) that such a way of exposing
themselves to death was not only acceptable, but absolutely commanded by
Christ himself? Sure, Sir, War is a business of so infinitely deep
concernment, that it ought not to be undertaken but upon grounds evidently
lawful and warrantable. A War therefore for Religion, and against a lawful
Superior, against whom the Gospel so apparently forbids resistance, must be
proved lawful at least by as many and evident Texts, as those are which seem
to discommand it. O Sir, where are those Texts? Why is not one Gospel
quotation produced for this purpose? Not one Master Marshall, not one single
one, that to any thinking, considering Christian will seem of any kind of
moment at all? Is it incogitancie or ignorance in you Ministers that there is
such want of the Gospel in these points? No certainly, it is mere guilt, or
rather a clear confession that you can find nothing in the Gospel whereby the
Professors thereof may be encouraged to defend it this way. However, let it be
supposed that the lawfulness hereof might be maintained in some possible
cases; yet it cannot be denied, but that patience (so often commanded and blessed
by Christ) is at least a lawful thing to be practiced too. Now that you say
Religion and Truth is persecuted, and if patience against any persecutours,
certainly, then against a lawful King when he turns persecutour. How then
comes it to pass, that neither you, nor any of your party should exhort men
to patience or martyrdom now? Is it out of conscience that you dare not? Will
not the Gospel warrant such exhortations, think you? For shame, Sir, let it
be confessed at last, that whatsoever other pretenses may seem specious and
popular, yet that this of Religion (which notwithstanding boulsters up all
other, and when the rest fail, recruites many of your decayed Regiments) yet
that this, I say, is so far from making this War lawful; that it self is
more unlawful, than the War.

But if Christian Religion might be thus defended, must Discipline therefore be
so defended? must no crossing, no kneeling, no ceremonies, no prescribed
prayers, be so defended? or at last speak out Plain English in this point too:
Is it indeed the English Protestant Religion of the Kingdom that you would thus
defend? why* did the King ever persecute the Religion of the Kingdom? Did he
ever, or any by his command burn the Liturgy, damn the Articles and Canons,
abominate the Homilies of the Church? Do his Soldiers tear Surplices, and
threaten to murder the wearers of them? For stark shame then say not that you
defend the established English Protestant Religion, against the King: that King
who scarce ever was once absent from his own solemn Prayers and Sermons. By
the way remember, Master Marshall, your uncharitable suspicions, your
unreasonable, groundless declamations against his Majesty in this point of
Religion, are yet far more unexcusable than before.

But to take the mask quite from off your faces, remember that this King whom
you know to be so constant a lover of the Religion wherein he was bred, yet
this King in a charitable, religious compliance with you, offers to yield to
any reasonable alterations, and to take away whatsoever doctrines or practices
may seemingly be offensive to tender consciences: only, I believe he would be
unwilling to have that exposed unto the world for the confessed Religion of the
Kingdom which shall be agreed upon by an Assembly over-voted, or overawed by
such as profess themselves at least strangers, if not enemies to this Church;
for let the effect of such a meeting be what it will, it cannot be called the
Religion of England, it is but at most A Religion for England. Therefore, for
Gods sake, let the King be styled in this War not an Invader, but only, as it
is apparent he indeed is* A Defender, rob Him not of the Title of his Crown*
for does He take up* Arms either for any new additions to his former
Prerogatives, for any new Laws to the prejudice of His Subjects liberties, or
for any new Articles of Religion which he has a mind to introduce by the
sword? Would he infringe any old Laws, or Privileges, or Articles? Have not
you forced him to unsheath his sword merely to prevent innovations in all
these? Which is then the invading and which is the defending side? If you be
sick enough, to be weaned from worldly respects, I shall not desire a fitter
person to answer this question.

Now these are Sir, the principal Heads or Articles of crimes, of most of
which I must needs confess I doubt (and I hope in Christ I shall not be found
uncharitable, though I should chance to be mistaken) that you M. Marshall are
guilty. For Christ his sake think sadly on them, and advise with some grave
and holy men of our Clergy, as well as your own, such as are M. Shute, D.
Oldsworth, etc. These are matters Sir, that certainly deserve all possible
examination. And you who I believe would not trust an ignorant Lawyer, though
your friend and fellow Sectarie about your estate, you should in reason at
least be as careful of your soul. And withal, I pray you take this also into
your consideration, that if you prove indeed guilty of these things, as I must
fear your are, then if it should happen that God should deal so mercifully with
you as to convince you of them, and to give you repentance for them, it will be
likewise most necessary that you should endeavor to satisfy Gods Chuch for
this extreme scandal given, by professing your repentance, and attempting to
undeceive others. And who knows, whether since those crimes, how fearful
soever in their own nature, yet were the effects chiefly of ill education and
prejudices in your judgment not Christ, or want of love to him, who knows I
say, whether Almighty God may not be pleased to accept of even a deathbed
repentance for them.

I hope Sir, you will be pleased to write or cause to be written some few words
in answer to this. For so much methinkes charity back again to me (who
profess my self contrary to you in all these points) will require from you.
For certainly, either these things which I call accusations, are extreme great
vices, or extraordinary virtues, they cannot possibly be things indifferent; so
that one of us, in the state we both are, must needs want some special
Christian Graces, without a concurrence of all which you know there is no
possible salvation. Now if you be so pleased to extend so much charity to me,
you shall make your own conditions either of secrecy, or what else you please,
only my desire and expectation is that I may hear some thing from you, if at
all, by the xvith. of this present month.

Now the God of mercy and comfort be with you, and repair all the breaches of
this poor Kingdom and Church, I am Sir,

Your Brother and Servant in Christ Jesus.
1o. Martii 1643.
FINIS.

