the ten Pleasures. of MARRIAGE.


Printed at London 1682.

THE TEN PLEASURES OF MARRIAGE, Relating All the delights and contentments that
are masked under the bands of Matrimony. Written by A. MARSH, Typogr.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1682.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader,

This small Treatise which I here present unto thee is the fruit of some spare
hours, that my cogitations, after they had been for a small time, between
whiles, hovering to and fro in the Air, came fluttring down again, still
pitching upon the subject of the Ten Pleasures of Marriage, in each of which I
hope thou will find something worthy of thy acceptance, because I am sure't is
matter of such nature as has never before been extant, and especially in such
a method; neither can thou well expect it to be dressed up in any thing of nice
and neat words, as other subjects may be, but only to be clad in plain habit
most fit for the humor of the Fancy. If I perceive that it please thee, and is
not roughly or unkindly dealt withal; nor brained in the Nativity, to spoil
its generation of a further product, it will encourage me to proceed upon a
second part, some say of the some Tune, but I mean to the same Purpose, and
apparelled very near the same dress: In the mean time, with hopes that thou will be kind to this, and give it a gentle reception, from him who is thine:
Farewell.

The Ten PLEASURES Of MARRIAGE.
THe Nuptial estate trailing along with it so many cares, troubles and
calamities, it is one of the greatest admirations, that people should be so
earnest and desirous to enter themselves into it. In the jounger sort who by
their sulphurous instinct, are subject to the tickling desires of nature, and
look upon that thing called Love through a multiplying-glass, it is somewhat
pardonable: But that those who are once com to the years of knowledge and true
understanding should be drawn into it, methinks is most vilely foolish, and
morris fools caps were much fitter for them, then wreaths of Laurel. Yet
stranger it is, that those who have been for the first time in that horrible
estate, do, by a decease, cast themselves in again to a second and third time.
Truly, if for once any one be through contrary imaginations misled, he may
expect some hopes of compassion, and allege some reasons to excuse himself:
but what comfort, or compassion can they look for, that have thrown themselves
in a second and third time? they were happy, if they could keep their lips from
speaking, and ty their tongues from complaining, that their miseries might not
be more and more burdened with scoffings which they truly merit.

And tho not only the real truth of this, but ten times more, is as well known
to every one, as the Sun shine at noon day; nevertheless we see them run into
it with such an earnestness; that they are not to be counseled, or kept back
from it, with the strength of Hercules; despising their golden liberty, for
chains of horrid slavery.

But we see the bravest sparks, in the very blossoming of their youth, how they
decay? First, Gentlemanlike, they take pleasure in all manner of noble
exercises, as in keeping time all dancing, singing of music, playing upon
instruments, speaking of several languages, studying at the best Universities,
and conversing with the learned Doctors, etc. or else we see them, before
they are half perfect in any exercise, like carl cats in March run mewing and
yawling at the doors of young Gentlewomen; and if any of those have but a small
matter of more then ordinary beauty, (which perhaps is gotten by the help of a
damned bewitched pot of paint) she is immediately adored like a Saint upon an
Altar. And in an instant there is as much beauty and perfection to be seen in
her, as ever Juno, Venus and Pallas possessed all together.

And herewith those Gentile Pleasures, that have cost their Parents so much
money, and them so much labor and time are kicked away, and totally abandoned
that they may keep company with a painted Jezebel. They are then hardly arrived
at this entitled happiness, but they must begin to chaw upon the bitter shel of
that nut, the kernel whereof, without sighing, they cannot taste; having no
sooner obtained access to the Lady, but are as suddenly possessed with thousands
of thoughts what they shall do to please the Sweet object. Being therewith so
tosticated, that all their other business is dispersed, and totally laid aside.
This is observable not only in youth of the first degree, but also in persons
that have received promotion.

For if he be a Theologue, his books drop out of his hands, and by straggling
about his study, even as his senses do, one among another. And if you hear him
preach, his whole Sermon is nothing but of Love, which he then turns and winds
to Divinity as far as possible it can be fitted.

If it be a Doctor of Physic, oh! he has so much work with his own sickness,
that he absolutely forgets all his Patients, though some of them were lying at
deaths door; and lets the Chyrurgian, whom he had appointed certainly to meet
there, tarry to no purpose, taking no more notice of his Patients misery, and
the peril of his wounds, then if it did not concern him. But if at last he does
come, it is when the wound's festered, the Ague in the blood, or that the body
is incurable. So far was he concerned in looking after that Love-apple, or
Nightshadow, for the cure of his own burning distemper.

If he be a Counselor, his whole brain is so much puzzel'd how to begin and
pursue the Process for the obtaining his Mistress in Marriage; that all other
suits tho they be to the great detriment of poor Widows and Orphans are laid
aside, and wholly rejected. Then being desired by his Clients to meet them at
any place, and to give his advice concerning the cause, he has had such
earnest business with his Mistress, that he comes an hour or two later then was
appointed. But coming at last, one half of the time that can be spent, is
little enough to make Mr. Counselor understand in what state the cause stood
ta the last meeting. And then having heard what the Plaintiff and Defendant do
say, he only tells them, I must have clearer evidences, the accounts better
adjusted, and your demand in writing, before I can make any decision of this
cause to both your satisfactions.

There they stand then, and look one upon another, not daring to say otherwise,
but it is very well Sir, we will make them all ready against the next meeting;
and are, with grief at heart, forced to see as much and sometimes more expenses
made at the meeting, as the whole concern of their debate amounted to. Then it
is, come let us now discourse of matters of state, and drink a glass about to
the health of the King and the prosperity of our Country and all the
inhabitants; which is done only to the purpose, that coming to his Mistress, he
may boastingly say, my dear, just now at a meeting we remembered you in a glass,
and I Will swear the least drop of it was so delicious to me, as ever Nectar and
Ambroso could be, that the Poets so highly commend.

If Counselors, and other learned men, that are in love, do thus; what can the
unlearned Notary's do less? Even nothing else, but when they are writing,
scribble up a multiplicity of several words un necessary clauses, and make long
periods; not so much as touching or mentioning the principal business; and if
he does, writes it clear contrary to the intent of the party concerned: By that
means making both Wills and other Deeds in such a manner, that the end agrees
not with the beginning, nor the middle with either. Which occasions between
friends, near relations, and neighbors, great differences, and an implacable
hatred; forcing thereby the moneys of innocent and self-necessitated people,
into the Pockets of Counselors and Attorneys.

And alas the diligent Merchant, when he has gotten the least smatch of this
frenzy, his head runs so much upon wheels, that he daily neglects his
Change-time; forgets his Bills of exchange; and is always a Post or two behind
hand with his Letters: So that he knows not what Merchandises rise or fall, or
what commodities are arrived or expected. And by this means buies in Wares, at
such rates, that in few days he loses 20. yea sometimes 30 per cent. by them.
Nay, this distemper is so hot in his head, that thereby he Ships his goods in a
Vessel, where the Master and his Mate are for the most part drunk, and who
hardly thrice in ten times make a good voyage.

And who knows not how miserable that City and Country is, when a military
person happens to ly sick in this Hospital. If he be in Garrison, he does
nothing but trick up himself, walk along the streets, flatter his Mistress, and
vaunt of his knowledge and Warlike deeds; though he scarce understands the
exercising of his Arms, I will not mention encamping in a Field, Fortification,
the forming of Batalions, and a great deal more that belongs to him.

And coming into Campaign; alas this wicked Love-ague continues with him; and
runs so through his blood, that both the open air, and wide fields are too
narrow for him. Yea and tho he formerly had (especially by his Mistress) the
name of behaving himself like a second Mars; yet now he will play the
sick-hearted, (I dare not say the faint-hearted) to the end he may, having put
on his fine knotted Scarf, and powdered Periwig, only go to show himself to
that adorable Babe, his Lady Venus, Leaving oftentimes a desperate siege, and
important State affairs, to accompany a lame, squintey'd, and crook-back'd
Jeronimo.

And if, by favor or recommandation, he happen to be entrusted with any strong
City or Fort that is besieged, he is presently in fear of his own Bom, and
practices all sorts of ways and means how he shall best make a capitulation,
that so leaving the place, he may go again to his fair one.

And alas, what does not the Master of a Ship, and his Mate hazard, when they
are sick of this malady? What terrible colds, and roaring seas does he not
undergo, through an intemperate desire that he has to be with his
nittebritch'd Peggy? How often does he hazard his Owners Ship, the Merchants
Goods, and his own life, for an inconstant draggletail; that perhaps before he
has been three days at Sea, has drawn her affection from him, and given
promise to another? Yet nevertheless, tho the raging Waves run upon the Ship,
and fly over his head, he withstands it all. Nor is the main Ocean, or
blustering Boreas, powerful enough, to cool his raging fire, and drive those
damps out of his brain. The tempestuousness of the weather, having driven him
far out of his course; his only wishes and prayer is, oh, that he might be so
happy, but for a moment to see his Beacon, those twinkling eyes of his dearly
beloved Margery Mussel! Then all things would be well enough! Tho he and all
that are with him, were immediately Shipwrackt, and made a prey for the Fishes.
And if, unexpectedly, fortune so favor him, that he happens to see the Coast,
oh, he cannot tarry for the Pilot! but tho it be misty weather, and he
hood-winked by Venus, still he sails forward, running all in danger, that
before was so far preserved.

And if the Shopkeeper once sets foot into this destructive Wilderness, he
does nothing less then look to his shop, and wait upon his Customers. Spending
most part of his time in finical dressing himself, to accompany his Mistress,
and with a Coach or Pair of Oars to do her all manner of caresses. Then his
whole discourse is, with what good custom he is blessed above others; but seldom
says, that with waiting upon his Lady, and by endeavoring to please her above
all things, how miserably he neglects it, by which means, shop's not only found
without a Master, but the servants without government. And at New-year, the
day-book is not written fair over; and if any body desires their reckoning, the
squire is so full of business, that he cannot spare half an hour to write it
out: For where he goes, where he stands, what he thinks, what he does, all his
cogitations are imploi'd to think how delicious it is to press those soft lips
of his beloved, and then out of an unfeigned heart to be loved again, sometimes
receiving a kiss. Thus he idles away all his time, and all his business with
his senses runs a wool-gatheving.

To be short, let it be what sort of person it will, they no sooner touch the
shel of this Marriage-nut, but before they can come to taste the kernel they
look for; they feel nothing else then thorns and briars of sorrow and misery.
If there be any one that thinks he is gotten a footstep further then another,
in the favor of his Mistress, and that in time he questions not th'obtaining
his desired happiness; immediately, that imagined joy, is crushed with an
ensuing despair; being presently molested with a fear, that Father, Mother,
Uncle, or Tutor will not like his person, or that he has not means enough; or
else either they, or the Gentlewoman, will make choice of another in his place.
Or, if he sees another have access to the Lady as well as himself, at the same
moment he is possessed with jealousy, and falls a pondering how he shall make
this Rival odious in the eyes of her. And if the other get any advantage of him;
then he challenges him to fight; hazarding in that manner his precious life,
for the getting of her, who when he had her, would perhaps, occasion him a
thousand torments of death and misery. Pray observe what pleasures this
introduction imparts unto us; alas, what may we then expect from the marriage
it self?

Really, those that will take this into due consideration, who would not but
curse the Gentlewoman that draws him into such a raging madness? yet Lovers go
forward, and please your selves with this imagined happiness; but know, that if
according to your hope, you obtain her for a Bride, that at the least you must
expect a sense and feeling of the Ten ensuing Pleasures.

THE FIRST PLEASURE.
The Consent is given, the Match concluded, and the Wedding kept.
NOw, O Lover, till this time you have been endeavoring, slaving, turmoiling,
sighing, groaning, hoping and begging to get from those slow and tardy lips,
that long-wish'd for word of Confent; you have also sent many messengers to
your Mistress, to her Parents and Tutors, who were as able to express themselves
as the best Orators, but could obtain nothing; yet at last that long desired
Word, is once descended by the Drawbridge of her lips, like a rich cordial
upon your languishing heart. You have vanquished all your Rivals. Oh who can
imagine your joy! What you think, or what you do, still your thoughts glance
upon your happiness! your Mistress now will be willing; denials are laid aside:
only there is a little shame and fear, which cannot of a sudden be so totally
forgotten, because the marriage is not yet concluded. Well, o Lover, who could
desire a greater happiness then you now possess! For what you will, she will
also: and what she desires, is all your pleasure. You may now tumble in a bed
of Lillies and Roses; for all sour looks, are turned to sweet smiles, and she
that used to thrust you from her, pulls you now every foot to her. Yea, those
snow-white breasts, which before you durst scarce touch with your little
finger; you may now, without asking leave, grasp by whole handfuls. And the
place which your thoughts durst hardly approach to, you may now take hold of
with your five-pointed fork. Certainly, they that at full view, consider all
this rightly; who can doubt but that you are the happiest man in the World? O
unspeakable pleasure!

But, o triumphant Lover, let not however your joyful mind run too much upon
these glistering things: be a little moderate in your desired pleasures, if it
might happen that there come some cross-grained obstructions; for I have
oftentimes seen, that all those suspected roses, come forth with many pricking
thorns; insomuch that the mouth which at first was saluted with so many
thousand kisses, and appeared as if it had been covered with the dew of heaven;
was compared to be the jaws of Cerberus. And those breasts, which before were
the curded Nacter-hills, and called the Banquet of the Gods, I have seen
despised to be like stinking Cows-Udders, I, and called worse names to boot. Be
therefore, (I say) somewhat moderate and prudent, for fear it might happen that
the prices of this market might fall very suddenly, though perhaps not so
horribly.

Nevertheless you have great reason to be merry, for this week, it is hoped
there'l be a meeting to close up the match; and it is requisite, that you
should go unto all the friends, that must be present at the meeting, to hear
when their occasions will permit them, and what day and hour they will appoint
to set upon the business, herewith you have work to traverse the City, and who
knows whether you will find half of them at home. And then those that you do find,
one is ready to day, another to morrow, a third next day, or in the next week.
So that by this first Pleasure, you have also a little feeling of the first
trouble. Which, if you rightly consider, is to your advantage, because you may
the better use your self to the following. And of how greater State and Quality
the person is whom you have chosen, so accordingly this trouble generally
happens to be more.

But the mirth increases abundantly; when, after your endeavors, troubles and
turmoils, you finally see all the friends met together, and you doubt not but
the match will be closed and agreed upon. But be here also a little moderate in
your mirth, because oftentimes the friends handle this matter like a
bargaining; and will lay the money bags of each side in a balance, as you may
see by the Plate.

In the mean while you may be kissing and slabbering of your Mistress in the
next room; or contriving what is to be done about the marriage, and keeping of
the Wedding; but perhaps. through the discord of the friends, it will not be
long before you are disturbed; the differences often rising so high, that the
sound thereof, clatters through the Walls, into the ears of the Lovers. For
many times the Portion of one is too great, and what is given with the other is
too little; or that the Parents of the Bridegroom, promise too little with
their Son; and the Brides Parents will give too little with their Daughter. Or
else that by some subtle Contract of Matrimony, they endeavor to make the
goods of each side disinheritable, etc. So that it appears among the friends,
as if there could be nothing don in the matter.

And in plain truth, the Parents and friends, who know very well that it is not
all honey in the married estate; see oftentimes that it were better for these
two to remain unmarried, then to bring each other into misery; and can find no
grounds or reasons, but rather to dissuade then persuade the young folks to a
marriage.

But tho, on each side, they use never such powerful arguments, to the young
people, it is to no purpose; for there is fire in the flax, and go how it will,
it must be quenched. For the maid thinks, if this match should be broke, who
knows but that all the freedom that we have had with one another, might come to
be spread abroad, and then I am ruined for ever. And the young man, seeing that
his Mistress is so constant to him, not harkening to the advice of her friends,
is so struck to the heart with such fiery flames of love, that he is resolved
never to leave her, tho he might feed upon bread and water, or go a begging
with her: So, that he says, Bargain by the Contract of Matrimony for what you
will, nay tho you would write Hell and Damnation, I am contented, and resolve
to sign it: but thinking by himself, with a Will all this may be broken, and
new made again: hardly believing, that this fair weather, should be darkened
with black clouds; or that this splendent Serenissimo, would be obstructed by
Eclipses.

But finally, there comes an appearance of the desired pleasure; for the knot
is tied, and the Public Notary does at large and very circumstantially write
the Contract of Matrimony, which is signed by both parties. Oh Heavens! this is
a burden from my heart, and a Millstone removed out of the way. Here Is now
right matter for more then ordinary mirth; all the friends wish the young
couple much joy; about goes a health, the good success of the marriage, and
every one wishing them tubs full of blessings, and houses full of prosperity,

If every one that wish, did half but give,
How richly this young couple, then might live.
Yet it even helps as much as it will; if they get nothing, they lose nothing
by it. And thinking by themselves, you will in time see what it produces. Then if
there be but one among them who is talkative, and that by drinking merrily the
good success of the approaching marriage, his tongue begins to run; he relates
what happened to him at the closing of his marriage, keeping of his wedding, and
in his married estate; and commonly the conclusion of his discourse is, that he
thought at first he had the World at will; but then there came this, and then
that, and a thousand other vexatious things, which continually, or for the most
part of the time with great grief and trouble had kept him so much backward,
that it was long before he could get forward in the World.

Well, Mr. Bridegroom, you may freely tickle your fancy to the top, and rejoice
superabundantly, that the Match is concluded; and you have now gotten your legs
into the stocks, and your arms into such desired for Fetters, that nothing, but
death it self can unloosen them.

And you, Mrs. Bride, who look so prettily, with such a smirking countenance;
be you merry, you are the Bride; yea the Bride that occasions all this tripping
and dansing; now you shall have a husband too, a Protector, who will hug and
embrace you, and sometimes tumble and rumble you, and oftimes approach to you
with a morning salutation, that will comfort the very cockles of your heart. He
will (if all falls out well) be your comforter, your company-keeper, your care
taker, your Gentleman Usher; nay all what your heart wish for, or the Heavens
grant unto you. He Will be your Doctor to cure your palefac'dness, your pains in
the reins of your back, and at your heart, and all other distempers whatsoever.
He will also wipe of all your tears with kisses; and you shall not dream of
that thing in the night, but he will let it be made for you by day. And may not
then your Bride-maids ask, why should not you be merry?

But alas you harmless Dove, that think you are going into Paradise; pray tell
me, when you were going to sign the Contract of marriage, what was the reason
that you altered so mightily, and that your hand shook so? Verily, though I am
no Astronomer, or caster of Figures; yet nevertheless me-thought it was none of
the best signs; and that one might already begin to make a strange
Prognostication from it; the events whereof would be more certain then any
thing that Lilly or any other Almanackmaker ever writ. But we will let that alone,
for in a short time it will discover it self.

Therefore, Mistress Bride, make you merry, and since you have gotten your
desire to be the Bride before any of your Bridemaids; it would be unreasonable
that you should be troubled now with any other business. And indeed here is work
enough for the ordering of things that you must trouble your head with; for the
Brides Apparel must be made, and the Stufs, laces, lining, cuffs, and many
other things are yet to be bought. Well, who can see an end of all your
business! There Is one piece of stuf is to light, and another to dark; the third
looks dull and has no gloss. And see here is three or four days gone, and
little or nothing bought yet.

And the worst of all is, that whilst you are thus busy in contriving,
ordering and looking upon things, you are every moment hindered, and taken off
from it, with a continual knocking at the door to solicit one to deliver all
sorts of Confits, another to deliver the ornaments for the Brides Garland,
Flowers, etc. a third to be Cook, and Pastryman, and so many more, which come
one after another thundering so at the door, that it is one bodies work to let
them in, and carry their messaget to the Bride.

Oh, call the Bride, time will deceive us! The Semstress, Gorgetmaker, and
Starcher, must be sent for, and the linen must be bought and ordered for the
Bridegrooms shirts, the Brides smocks, Cuffs, Bands, and handkerchifs; and do
but see, the day is at an end again: my brains are almost addle, and nothing
goes forward: For Mrs. Smug said she would bring linen, and Mrs. Smooth-laces,
but neither of them both are yet come. Run now men and maids as if the Devil
were in you; and comfort your selves, that the Bride will reward you liberally
for your pains.

Well, Mrs. Bride, how is your head so out of order! might not you now do (as
once a Schoolmaster did) hang out the sign of a troubled pate with a Crown upon
it? How glad you will be when this confusion is once over? could you ever have
thought that there was so much work to be found in it? But comfort your self
therewith, that for these few troublesome days, you will have many pleasant
nights. And it is not your case alone, to be in all this trouble, for the
Bridegroom is running up and down like a dog, in taking care that the Bains of
Matrimony may be proclaimed. And now he is a running too and again through the
City, to see if he can get Bridemen to his mind, that are capacitated to
entertain the Bridemaids and Gentlewomen with pretty discourses, waiting upon
them, and to make mirth and pleasure for them and the rest of the Company.
Besides that he is taking care for the getting of some good Canary, Rhenish and
French Wines, that those friends which come to wish the Bride and Bridegroom
much joy, may be presented with a delicate glass of Wine. And principally, that
those who are busy about the Brides adornments, may taste the Brides tears.

But really friends, if you come to taste the Brides tears now, it is a great
while too soon: But if you will have of the right and unfeigned ones, you must
come some months hence.

O Bridegroom, who can but pity you, that you must thus toil, moil, and run up
and down, and the Jeweller and you have just now mist one another; he is
doubtless chatting with the Bride, and showing of her some costly Jewels, which
perhaps dislike her never a whit the worse; and what she has then a mind to,
you will find work enough to dissuade her from, let them cast what they will; for
she will let you take care for that. And it is time enough to be considered on,
when the weddings over. For now you have as much work as you can turn your self
to, in getting all your things in a readiness from the Tailor, Semstress, and
Haberdasher. And herewith, alas, you will find that oftentimes two or three weeks
are consumed in this sort of business, with the greatest slavery imaginable.

Yet, Mr. Bridegroom, for all these troubles, you may expect this reward, to
have the pleasure of the best place in the Chancel, with a golden Tapistry laid
before you, and for your honor the Organs playing. The going with a Coach to
marry at a Country Town, has not half so much grace, and will not at all please
the Bride: it is therefore requisite to consult with the friends on both sides,
who shall be invited to the wedding, and who not. For it seldom happens, but
there is one broil or another about it; and that is no sooner don, but there
arises a new quarrel, to consider, how richly or frugally the Guests shall be
treated; for they would come off with credit and little charge. To this is
required the advice of a steward, because it is their daily work. And he for
favor of the Cook, Pasterer, and Poulterer (reaping oftentimes his own benefit
by it) orders all things so liberally as he can make the people believe that is
requisite. And the Bride thinks, the nobler it is, the better I like it, for I
am but once the Bride. But this matter being dispatched, there is another
consideration to be taken in hand, to know how the Bride and Bridegrooms
friends shall be placed at the Table, the ordering whereof, many times causes
such great disputes, that if they had known it before, they would rather have
kept no Wedding. In so much that the Bridegroom and the Bride, with sighing, say
to one another, alas, what a thick shel this marriage-nut has, before one can
come to the kernel of it. But Bridegroom to drive these damps out of your
brain, there is no better remedy then to go along with your Bridemen to taste the
Wedding wine; for there must be sure care taken that it may be of a delicate
taste and relish; Because that which was laid in before, was not so delicious as
is required for such a noble Wedding, where there will be so many curious
tasters. Ha! riva! Look to 't Bride and Bridemaids, you may now expect a jolly
Bridegroom and Bridemen, for the Wine-Merchant is such a noble blade, that none
of them all shall escape him, before they have drunk as many Glasses, as there
are hoops upon the Wine-cask that they tasted of.

A dieu all care! the Wedding is at hand, who thinks now of any thing but super
fluity of mirth? Away with all these whining, pining Carpers, who are
constantly talking and prating that the married estate brings nothing but care
and sorrow with it; here, to the contrary, they may see how all minds and
intentions are knit together, to consume and pass away these days with the
most superabounding pleasures. Away with sorrow. It Is not invited to be among
the Wedding guests. Now there is nothing else to be thought on, but to help
these Lovers that they may enjoy the kernel of the first pleasure of their
marriage.

But really, there is poor Mally the maid, is almost dead with longing, and
thinks her very heart in pieces, scarcely knowing when the first Wedding-night
will be ended, that she might carry up some water to the young couple, and have
a feeling of those liberal gifts that she shall receive from the Bridegroom and
the Bride, for all her attendance, running and turmoiling. And her thoughts
are, that no body has deserved it better, for by night and by day she waited
upon them, and was very diligent and faithful in conveyance of their
Love Letters; but all upon fair promises, having carried her self in the time
of their wooing almost like a Bawd to the Bride; for which she never had in all
the time but three gratuities from the Bridegroom,

And now the Bride is in the bed,
The former promises are dead.
Make your self merry amongst the rest of the Wedding guests, so far as is
becoming you: who knows, but that some brave Gentleman's man, Coachman, or
neighbors servant, may fall in love with you; for many times out of one Wedding
comes another, and then you might come to be a woman of good fashion. Udsbud
Mally! then you would know, as well as your Mistress, what delights are to be
had in the first Wedding night. Then you would also know how to discourse of
the first Pleasure of marriage, and with the Bride expect the second.

THE SECOND PLEASURE.
The Woman goes to buy household stuff. The unthankfulness of some of the
Wedding-guests, and thankfulness of others.
WEll, young married people, how glad you must needs be, now the Wedding's
over, and all that noise is at an end? You may nowly and sleep till the day be
far spent! And not only rest yourselves quietly; but, to your desires, in the
Art of Love, show one another the exercise and handling of Venus Weapons.

Now you may practice an hundred delicious things to please your appetites, and
do as many, Hocus Pocus tricks more. Now you may outdo Aretin, and all her
light Companions, in all their several postures. Now you may rejoice in the
sweet remembrance, how sumptuous that you were, in Apparel, meat and drink, and
all other ornaments that my Lady Bride, and Madam Spend-all, first invented and
brought in practice. Now you may tickle your fancies with the pleasures that
were used there, by dansing, maskerading, Fireworks, playing upon Instruments,
singing, leaping, and all other sort of gambals, that youth being backed with
Bacchus strength uses either for mirth or wantonness.

O how merry they were all of them! And how deliciously were all the dishes
drest'd and garnisht! What a credit this will be for the Cook and Steward!
Indeed there was nothing upon the Table but it was Noble, and the Wine was
commended by every one. They have all earen gallantly, and drunk deliciously.
Well, this is now a pleasant remembrance.

And you, O young Woman, you are now both Wife and Mistress your self; you are
now wrested out of the command of your grinning and snarling narrow-soul'd
Tutors (those hellish Curmugions) now you may freely, without control, do all
what you have a mind to; and receive therewith the friendly imbracings, and
kind salutes of your best beloved. Verily this must needs be a surpassing mirth.

And you, O new made husband, how tumble you now in wantonness! how willingly
does liberal Venus her self, open her fairest Orchard for you! Oh you have a
pleasure, that those which never tried, can in the least comprehend.

Well, make good use of your time, and take the full scope of your desires, in
the pleasant clasping and caressing of those tender limbs; for after some few
days, it may be hungry care will come and open the Curtains of your bed; and
at a distance show you what reckonings you are to expect from the Jeweller,
Goldsmiths, Silk-man, Linnen-Draper, Vinter, Cook and others.

But on the the other side again, you shall have the pleasure to hear your young
Wife every moment sweetly discoursing that she must go with her Sister and her
Aunt to buy housholdstuf, Down beds, dainty Plush and quilted Coverlets, with
costly Hangings must be bought: And then she will read to you, her now made
Husband, such a stately Register, that both your joy of heart, and jingling
purse shall have a fellouw-feeling of it*

For your Sweetest speaks of large Venetian Looking-glasses, Chinaware, Plush
Chairs, Turkish Tapistry, Golden Leather, rich Pictures, a Service of Plate, a
Sakerdan Press, an Ebbony Table, a curious Cabinet and childbed Linen
cupboard, several Webs for Napkins and Tabel-cloaths, fine and course linen,
Flanders laces, and a thousand other things must be bought, too long to be hoar
related: For other things also that concern the furnishing of the house, they
increase every day fresh in the brains of these loving and prudent Wives.

And when the Wife walks out, she must either have the Maid, or at least the
Semstress, along with her; then neigbour John, that good careful labourer,
must follow them softly with his wheel-barrow, that the things, which are
bought, may be carefully and immediately brought home.

And at all this, good Man, you must make no wry faces, but be pleasant and
merry; for they are needful in housekeeping, you cannot be without them; and
that money must always be certainly ready, get it where you will. Then, says
the Wife, all this, at least, there must needs be, if we will have any people
of fashion-come into our house.

You know your Beloved has also some Eggs to fry, and did bring you a good
Portion, though it consist in immovable Goods, as in Houses, Orchards, and
Lands that be oftentimes in another Shire. Thither you may go then, with your
Honey, twice a year, for the refreshing of your spirits, and taking your
pleasure to receive the House-rents, fruits of the Orchards, and revenues of
the Lands. Here every one salutes you with the name of Landlord; and, according
to their Country fashion, endeavor to receive you with all civilities and kind
entertainment. If, with their Hay-cart, you have a mind to go and look upon the
Land, and to be a participator of those sort of pleasures; or to eat some new
Curds, Cream, Gammon of Bacon, and ripe Fruits, all these things; in place of
money, shall be willingly and neatly disht up to you.

For here you will meet with complaints, that by the War the Houses are burnt, the
Orchards destroyed, and the growth of the Fields spoiled! therefore it is not
fit that you should trouble the poor people, but think, this is the use,
custom, and fruits of War. If the Impositions and Taxes run high, the Country
Farmer cannot help that; you know that the War costs money, and it must be given,
or else we should loose all.

At such a time as this, your only mirth must be; that, through this gallant
marriage, you are now Lord of so many acres of Land, so many Orchards, and of
so many dainty Houses and Land. If your money bags don't much increase by it at
present, but rather lessen, that must no ways cloud your mirth. Would you
trouble your self at such trivial things, you would have work enough daily. We
cannot have all things so to our minds in this World. For if you had your Wives
Portion down in ready money, you would have been at a stand again, where, without
danger, you should have put it out at interest; fearing that they might play
Bankrupt with it. Houses and Lands are always fast, and they will pay well,
when the War is done.

Therefore you must drive these vapors out of your head, and make your self
merry, with the hearing that your friends commend the entertaiment they have
had to the highest; and that two or three days hence; the merry Bridemen and
Bridemaids, with some of the nearest acquaintance, will come a la grandissimo
to give you thanks for all the respect and civilities that you have so
liberally bestowed upon them; which will be done then with such a friendly and
affectionate heart, that it will be impossible for you, but you must invite
them again to come and sup with you in the evening, and so make an addition to
the former Pleasure; by which means pleasantness, mirth, and friendship, is
planted and advanced among all the friends and acquaintance.

It Is true, you will be sure to hear that there were some at the Wedding who were
displeased, for not being entertained according to their expectations; and
because their Uncle, a new married Niece; and some other friends were not
seated in their right places; that Mrs. Leonora had a jolepate to wait upon
her; and Mr. Philip an old Beldam; Mr. Timothy was forced to wait upon a young
snotty-nose; and that Squire Neefer could not sit easily, and Mrs. Betty's
Gorget was rumbled; and that Mal, and Peg Stones, and Dol Dirty-buttocks, were
almost thronged in pieces; and could hardly yet any of the Sweetmeats; but you
must not at all be troubled with this, for it is is a hard matter to please
every body. It Is enough that you have been at such a vast charge, and presented
them with your Feast.

Truly, they ought to have been contented and thankful to the highest degree;
and what they are unsatisfied with needed not to have cost you so much money;
for if you had left them all at home, you could have had no worse reward, but a
great deal less charge. Comfort your self with this, that when it happens
again, you will not buy ingratitude at so high a rate. It Is much better to
invite them at two or three several times before hand, and entertain them with
a merry glass of Wine, up and away; and then invite a small company which are
better to govern and satisfied.

It Is a great deal more pleasure for you, to see your Wives friends animate one
another, to come, a fortnight after the Wedding, and surprise you; with showing
their thankfulness and satisfaction for the respect they have received from
you; and that they are always desirous to cultivate the friendship, by now and
then coming to give you a visit.

This is here again a new joy! and as long as you keep open Table and Cellar
for them, that reception will keep all discontent from growing among them. Yes,
and it will please your Wife too, extraordinary well.

And by thus doing, you will not be subject to (as many other men are) your
Wives maundring that you entertained her friends so hungrily and unhandsomly;
but, for this, you shall be both by her, and her friends, beloved and commended
in the highest degree: Yea it will be an encouragement that they in the same
manner, will entertain your friends like an Angel, and be always seeking to
keep a fair correspondence among them. So that in the Summer time, for an
afternoons collation you will see a Fruitdish of Grapes, Nuts, and Peaches
prepared for you; which cold Fruits must then be warmed with a good glass of
Wine. And in the Winter, to please your appetite, a dish of Pancakes, Fritters,
or a barrel of Oisters; but none of these neither will be agreeable without a
delicate glass of Wine. Oh quintessence of all mirth! Who could not but wish to
get such Aunts, such Cousins, such Bridemen and Bridemaids in their marriage?

Therefore, if you meet with one or the other of your Cousins, press him to go
home with you, to refresh himself with a glass of Wine; O it will be extremely
pleasing to your Wife, and a double respect paid to him; because you bring him
to a collation among other Cousins, and pretty Gentlewomen, where the knot of
friendship and familiarity is renewed and faster twisted. And who knows, if you
bring in a Bachelor, but there may perhaps arise a new marriage, which would
be extraordinarily pleasing to your Wife; for there is nothing more agreeable
to the female sex, then that they may be instrumental in helping their
Bridemaids to husbands. And thus you will see a double increase of your
Minions, and your Wife get more friends to accompany her, and drive fancies out
of her head.

If your Wife should fail in her choice of household stuff, and other sort of
those appurtenances; doubt not but these will be prudent School-Mistresses for
her, if she be unexperienced, to counsel and advise her to buy of the richest
and newest mode, and what will be neatest, and where to be bought. Oh these are
so skillful in the art of ordring things, that you need not difpute with your
Wife about the hanging of a Picture above the Chinmey-mantel! for they will
presently say, there is nothing better in that place then large China dishes;
and that Bed-stead must be taken down, and another set up in the place with
curious Curtains and Vallians, and Daslles: And thus, they will deliver
themselves, like a Court full of wise Counselors, for the pleasure and
instruction of your Beloved. Well, what could you wish for more? Do You talk of
money? Pish, that is stamped with hammers: give it liberally; the good Woman
knows how and where to lay it out. If there be but little money by the hand; be
silent of that, it might happen to disturb your Dear, and who knows wherein it
may do her harm. It is not the fashion that Women, especially young married
ones, should take care for that. It Is care enough for her, if she contrive and
consider what must be bought, and what things will be most suitable together.
For this care is so great, that she never wakens in the night, but she thinks
on it; yea it costs her many an hours rest; therefore ought not to be so lightly
esteemed.

And now, O young husband, since you are come to the first step of the School
to exercise your patience; it is not fit that you should already begin to
grumble and talk how needful it is to be sparing and thrifty; that
Merchandising and trading is mighty dead; that moneys is not to be got in; and
that here and there reckonings and bills must be paid: O no! you must be
silent, tho you should burst with discontent. For herewith, perhaps, the whole
house would be out of order; and you might get for an answer, How! have I
married then a pitiful poor Bridegroom? This would be sad to hear.

Go therefore to School by Pythagoras to learn silence; and to look upon all
things in the beginning with patience; to let your Wife do her own pleasure;
and to mix honey with your words. Then you shall possess the quintessence of
this Pleasure fully, and with joyfull-steps enter upon the following.

THE THIRD PLEASURE.
The young couple walk daily abroad, being entertained and treated by all their
friends and acquaintance; and then travel into the Country for their pleasure.
IF it be true that there is a Mountain of Mirth and pleasure for young married
people to ascend unto, these are certainly the finest and smoothest conductors
to it; that, because it was impossible to invite every one to the Wedding, this
sweet Venus must be led abroad, and showed to all her husbands friends and
acquaintance: yea, all the World must see what a pretty couple they are, and
how handsomely they agree together. To which end they trick and prick themselves
daily up in their best apparel; garnishing both the whole city and streets with
tatling and prattling; and staring into the houses of all their acquaintance to
see whether they are looked at.

Do but see what a mighty and surpassing mirth! for they hardly can go ten or
twelve furlongs but they constantly meet and are saluted by some of their
acquaintance, wishing them all health, happiness and prosperity; or by others
invited to come in, and are treated according as occasion presents, wishing
them also much joy in their married estate; Yea the great Bowl is rins'd, and
about goes a brimmer to the good prosperity of the young couple. Well, thinks
the young woman, what a vast difference there is between being a married woman
and a maid! How every one receives and treats you! What respect and honor
every one shows you! How you go daily in all your gallantry taking pleasure!
And how every where you are fawned upon, embraced and kissed, receiving all
manner of friendship! It is no wonder that all womankind are so desirous of
marriage, and no sooner loose their first husbands, but they think immediately
how to get a second? Oh, says she, what a fullness of joy there is in the
married estate, by Virginity! I resolve therefore to think also upon my
Bridemaids, and to recommend them where ever there is occasion.

And this is the least yet, do but see! what for greater pleasure! for every
foot you are invited out here and there to a new treat, that is oft-times as
noble and as gallant as! the Wedding was, and are placed always at the upper
end of the Table. If next day you be but a little drousie, or that the head
aches; the husband knows a present remedy to settle the brain; and the first
thing he says, is, Come lets go to see Master or Mistress such a one, and walk
out of Town to refresh our selves, or else go and take the air upon the Thames
with a Pair of Oars. Here is such a fresh mirth again that all Lambeth, the
Bankside, and Southwark shakes with it. Oh that Apollo would but drive his
horses slowly, that the day might be three hours longer; for it is too soon to
depart, and that for fear of a pocky setting of the Watch. So that its every
day Fair-time. Well, who is so blind that he cannot see the abundant pleasures
of marriage?

To this again, no sooner has the young couple been some few days at rest, and
begin to see that the invitements decline; but the young woman talks of going
out of Town together, and to take their pleasures in other Towns and Cities,
first in the next adjacent places, and then to others that ly remoter; for,
because she never was there, and having heard them commended to be such curious
and neat places, she has a great mind to see Oxford and Cambridge.

Yea, and then she says, my dear, we must go also to see York, Gloucester and
Bristol, and take our pleasures those ways; for I have heard my Fathers
Book-keeper often say, that it is very pleasant traveling thither, and all
things very cheap. And when he began to relate any thing of Kent, and its
multiplicity of fruit, my very heart leapt up for joy; thinking to my self, as
soon as I am married, I will immediately be pressing my husband that we may go
thither; because it seemed to me almost incredible. And then again he would
sometimes relate of Herefordshire what delicious Syder and Perry is made there,
which I am a great lover of; truly Honey, we must needs go that way once, that I
may say I have satiated my self with it, at the Fountainhead. Ah, my dearest,
let us go thither next week.

It is most certain that the Goodman has no mind at all to be thus much longer
out of his house, and from his vocation; by reason he is already so much behind
hand with his loss of time in Wooing, Wedding, Feasting and taking pleasure;
but alas, let him say what he will, he cannot dissuade her from it.

You may as soon retort the wind,
As make a woman change her mind.
In the night she dreams on it, and by day she talks on it, and always concludes
this to be her certain rule. The first year will not come again. If we don't take
some pleasure now, when shall we do it! Oh, my Dear, a year hence we may have a
child, then its impossible for me to go any where, but I shall be tied like a
Dog to a chain: And truly, why should not we do it as well as they and they
did; for they were out a month or two, and took their pleasures to the purpose?
my Mother, or my Cousin will look to our house; come let us go also out of
Town! For the first year will not come again.

Well, what shall the good man do? if he will have quietness with his wife, he
must let her have her will, or else she will be daily tormenting of him. And to
give her harsh language, he cannot do that, for he loves her too well. His
father also taught him this saying, for a marriage lesson, Have a care of
making the first difference. If he speak unkindly to her, his Love might be
angry, and then that would occasion the first difference, which he by no means
willingly would be guilty of; for then these Pleasures would not have their
full swing.

Well, away they go now out of Town: But, uds lid, what a weighty trunk they
send the Porter with to the Carriers! For they take all their best apparel with
them, that their friends in the Country, may see all their bravery. And besides
all this, there must be a riding Gown, and some other new accoutrements made
for the journey, or else it would have no grace.

Now then, away they go, every one wishing them all health and prosperity upon
their journey, and so do I.

But see! they are hardly ridden ten mile out of Town, before the young woman
begins to be so ill with the horses jolting, that she thinks the World turns
topsie-turvy with her. Oh she is so ill, that she fears she shall vomit her very
heart up: Then down lights her husband, to take her of, and hold her head, and
is in such a peck of troubles, that he knows not which way to turn or wind
himself. Wishing that he might give all that he is worth in the World to be at a
good Inn, And she poor creature falling into a swoon, makes him look as if he
had bepist himself, and though he sighs and laments excessively she hears him
not; which occasions him such an extremity of grief that he is ready to tear the
hair off of his head. But the quamishness of her stomach beginning to decline,
she recovers; and rising, they walk for a little space softly forwards; the
good man thinking with himself how he shall do to get his dearly beloved to an
Inn, that she may there rest her distempered body. And then getting her up
again, they ride very softly forwards, to get to the end of their journey.

Truly, I must confess, that amongst the rest of the Pleasures of marriage,
this is but a very sorry one. But stay a little, yonder me thinks I see the
Steeple, we shall be there presently; the little trouble and grief you have
had, will make the salutations you receive, and the situation of the place
seem so much the pleasanter. And these dainty green Meadows will be a delicate
refreshment. You Will find your stomach not only sharpened, but also curiously
cleansed of all sorts of filthy and slimy humors. And you light not sooner
from your horse then your appetite is ready to entertain what ever comes before
you: The good Man in the mean while is contriving at whose house he shall first
what his knife, and where he thinks his poor wearied wife will receive the best
entertainment and caresses, to drive out of her imaginations the troubles and
wearisomness of her journey; which will the easier be dispensed with, when she
walks out to see the rarities of the place, and to visit your Cousins and
relations. And so much the more, because every one will be wishing the new
married couple much joy, receiving them kindly, and doing them all manner of
pleasures and civilities: which I assure you is no small matter of mirth.

But every thing must have an end. It is therefore now very meet to speak of
removing to some other City. But let the husband say what he will of traveling
by horseback, she is struck on that ear with an incurable deafness.

They must have a Coach to themselves, and the great Trunk must go along with
them, or else the whole journey would have no grace. Neither would it be respect
enough for them in the presence of so many good friends and acquaintance,
unless the Coach come to take them up at the door. And it must be done to. Here
now one is returning thanks for th'entertainment, and the other for their kind
visit, and withal wish the young couple that all content, pleasure, and
delight may further attend them upon their journey, etc. Then it is Drive on
Coachman, and away fly the poor jades through the streets, striking fire out of
the liveless stones, as if Pluto just at the same time were upon the flight
with his Proserpina through the City.

But, O new married couple, what price do you little think this mirth will
stand you at? What man is there in the World, that has ever an eye in his
head, but must needs see, that if he tarry out long, this must be the ready way
to Brokers-Hall. Yet nevertheless I confess you must do it, if you intend to
have any peace or quietness with your new wife.

These are the first fruits and pleasures of marriage, therefore you must not
so much as consider, nay hardly think, of being so long from home, though in
the mean while all things there is going also the ready way to destruction; for
it is the fashion, at such times, that maid, man, and all that are in your
service, to act their own parts; and so merry they are that they possess their
own freedom, and keep open Table, that the whole neighborhood hears their
laughter. Ask the neighbors when you come home, and you will quickly hear,
that by them was no thought of care or sorrow; but that they have played,
ranted and domineered so that the whole neighborhood rung with it; and how
they have played their parts either with some dried Baker, pricklouse Tailor,
or smoaky Smith, they themselves know best.

Down goes the spit to the fire; the pudding pan prepared; and if there be
either Wine, Beer or any thing else wanting; though the Cellar be locked; yet,
by one means or another, they find out such pretty devices to juggle the Wine
out of the Cask, nay and Sugar to boot too; that their inventions surpass all
the stratagems that are quoted by the Author of the English Rogue; of which I
could insert a vast number, but fear that it would occasion an ill example to
the unlearned in that study. Howsoever they that have kept house long, and had
both men and maidservants, have undoubtedly found both the truth and
experience hereof sufficiently. And how many maids, in this manner, have been
eased of that heavy burther of their maidenheads, is well known to the whole
World.

These are also some of the first fruits and delights of marriage; but if they
were of the greatest sort, they might be esteemed and approved of to be
curable, or a remedy found for prevention. Yet let them be of what state and
condition they will, every one feels the damage and inconvenience thereof, ten
times more then it is outwardly visible unto him, or can comprehend. For if you
saw it you would by one or other means shun or prevent it. But now, let it be
who it will, whether Counselor, Doctor, Merchant; or Shopkeeper, the one
neglects his Clients Suit, the other his Patients, the third his Negotiation
and Trade, and the fourth his Customers; none of them all oft-times knowing
from whence it arises that their first years gain is so inconsiderable. For
above the continual running on of house-rent, the neglect and unnecessary
expensive charge of servants; you consume your self also much money in
traveling and pleasure; besides the peril and uneasiness that you suffer to
please and complaite your new married Mistress. O miserable pleasure!

But you will be sure to find the greatest calamity of this delight, as soon as
you return home again; if you only observe the motions of your wife, for whose
pleasure and felicity you have been so long from home. Alas she is so wearied
and tired with tumbling and traveling up and down, that she complains as if
her back were broke, and it is impossible for her to rise before it is about
dinner time; nay and then neither hardly unless she hear that there is
something prepared suitable to her appetite. If any thing either at noon or
night is to be prepared and made ready, the husband must take care and give
order for the doing of it; the good woman being yet so weary, that she cannot
settle her self to it; yea it is too much for her to walk about her chamber,
her very joints being as it were dislocated with the troublesomness of the
journey.

In the mean while the servants they ly simpring, giggling, and laughing at one
another, doing just what they list, and wishing that their Mistress might be
always in that temper, then they were sure to have the more freedom to
themselves: the which, though done by stealth, they make as bad as may be: and
yet hardly any man, tho he had the eyes of Argolus can atrrap them; for if by
chance you should perceive any thing, they will find one excuse or another to
delude you, and look as demure as a dog in a halter, whereby the good man is
easily pacified and satisfied for that time.

And these things are more predominant, when there is a cunning slut of a Maid,
that knows but how to serve and flatter her Mistress well, getting her by that
means upon her side: in such cases you will generally see two malds where one
might serve, or else a Chair-woman; the one to do all the course work, the
other to run of errands and lend a helping hand (if she has a mind to it) that
all things may the sooner be set in order; and she then with her Mistress may go
a gadding.

And because Peggy and her Mistress, do in this manner, as it were, like a Jack
in a box, jump into each others humor, the good woman may take her rest the
better; for she has caretakers enough about the house. And if the husband,
coming from the Change or other important affair, seems to be any ways
discontented, that all things lies straggling about the house, and are not set
in order, presently crafty Peggy finds a fit expedient for it with complaining
that her Mistress has had such an insufferable pain in her head and in her
belly, that it was beyond imagination; and also she could get no ease for her,
unless she had prepared her some buttered Ale, and a little mul'd Sack; and
this is the reason why all things were not so ready as they ought to have been.

Herewith the good man's mouth is stopped. If he begins afterward to speak with
his wife concerning th'unnecessary Chair-women; his answer is, prithee
Sweetheart, don't you trouble your self with those things, leave that to me,
J'l manage that to the best advantage; men have no understanding about
housekeeping, and it is most proper for a woman to have the governance of her
Maids. And also Sweetheart, if there be now and then occasion for a semstress
or a Chairwoman, they are things of so small importance, that they are not
worth the speaking of.

Now, if he will have peace and quietness at home, this reply must give him
full satisfaction; and tho he be never so patient, viewing all things at a
distance; yet the maids behind his back, that their Mistress may more then
over-hear it, dare call him, a Tom Peep in the pot, or Goodman busiebody. And
before dinner is fully done, he must hear Peg asking her Mistress; Mistress, wont
you please forsooth, to go by and by and give Mistress Moody a visit, or
discourse a little with Madam Elenor? As long as you have nothing to do, what
need you ty your self to any thing? Pray tell her that story that the North
Country Gentleman related, which you laughed at yesterday so heartily. Madam
Elenor will admire at it. And I Am sure she has something that she will relate
unto you. Herewith the good Mistress begins to get a drift, and away she goes
with Peg out of doors. Let it go then as it will with the house keeping.

This is also no small pleasure, when the Mistress and the Maid always agree so
lovingly together! then the husband need not go any more out of Town to please
his wives fancy; for she can now find pleasure enough by her old acquaintance
sweet Mistress Moody, and courteous Madam Elenor.

Do but see now, O Lovers, what multiplicity of roses, and thistles there are
in the very Porch of the Wilderness of Marriage; you may think then what the
middle and end must be.

THE FOURTH PLEASURE.
The Wife goes a prattling by her Neighbors; complaining of her barrenness, and
takes Physic sor it.
VErily it is a great pleasure for the new married couple, that they have been
up and down taking their pleasure, and have been feasted by all their
acquaintance.

Now they have traveled from place to place, and taken a full view of what
friends and relations each other has; and seen also the great difference there
is in the ornaments, neatness, manners and deportments of each place, and also
how pleasant the Hills, Dales and Meadows lie, with their silver streaming
Brooks; but most particularly, how neatly and completely one may, for their
money, be treated. Yet come finally to a consideration within themselves of the
weakness and vanity of his pleasure; perceiving that all those who possess it,
at last conclude it burthensom, and have a longing desire to be at home again
in a frugal management of housekeeping at their own Tables.

Verily, this is that happy hour of pleasure that the new married man has been
long seeking for; to the end he might once be freed from all such idle
expenses, and be again carefully looking after his affairs and vocation. Now he
begins to hope that all things will come into a handsome posture; also not
doubting, but that his wife will, having had her full swing and hearts content
of treats and all other sorts of pleasures, begin like a House-Wife, to order
her self to take some care for the concerns of the Family, which indeed
oft-times falls out so, to the great joy, profit, and tranquillity of the good
man.

But can it be possible that this sweet pleasure should be so disht up, without
some bitter sauce of discontent? O kind Husband, if you will believe that, then
you may well think the whole state and term of your marriage to be a Paradise
upon earth; and that you have already got footing in the highway to all
fullness of pleasures and contentments: Yet tarry a few days, and then
experience will give you a better understanding of further pleasures.

For the new Wife is no sooner come to be at quiet; but she begins to complain,
that she can hardly addict her self to this new way of life; that it appears
very strange and odly to her to converse with a new Maid, by reason she must be
telling her this thing, and commanding her the the other; and have a regard of
all what she does, which are things that she before never used to trouble her
self with; and that it is such a trouble to her to be out of her Parents house,
in a strange dwelling place: Nay, this oft-times surges so high, that the good
man has his hands full of work to comfort her, and to talk these foolish
fancies out of her noddle; and verily, unless he can bridle her frivolous
humor with some pleasant discourses, and dry up her tears with no small number
of kisses; oh then he will be sadly put to it. And if this all falls out well,
before six weeks are at an end, there'l appear another dark cloud again, to
eclipse this splendant Sunshine.

For behold, within a very small time the good woman begins to scrape
acquaintance, and get some familiarity with her neighbors, which increases
from day to day more and more; nay oftentimes it comes to that height, she is
better to be found among her neighbors, then at home in her own family. Here
she sees Mistress Wanton playing with her child that is a very pretty Babe.
There she sees Mistres Breedwell making ready her Childbed linnens and getting
of her Clouts together. Yonder Mistress Maudlen complains that she does not
prove with child; and then Mistres Young-at-it brags how nearly she could
reckon from the very bedside. Oh then she thinks I have been married this
three months, and know nothing at all of these things; it is with me still as
if I were yet a maid: What certainly should be the reason thereof?

This is the first occasion that begets a great disturbance in the brainpan and
imagination; and woe be to the good man, if he does not understand his Py-work
well! Then to the end she may hear. The better how things goes; she inquires
very earnestly amongst her acquaintance what caresses they receive from their
husbands; and most shamlesly relates what has passed between her and her
husband, twixt the curtains, or under the Rose; which she does to that purpose,
that she may hear whether her husband understands his work well, and whether he
does it well, and often enough; and also whether he be fully fit for the employ,
etc. for the verification whereof the Council of women bring so many complete
relations, that it is a shame to think, much more to speak of them.

Whosoever she speaks with every one pities her, and gives her their advice:
And the best sort will at the least say to her, I would oftentimes treat my
husband with such sort of spicesas were good for my self, viz. Oisters, Eggs,
Coxcombs, sweet breads, Lam-stones, Caveer, etc. and counsel him every morning
to go to the Coffe-house and drink some Chocolate; and above all things advise
him to desist from Tobacco and drying things, or any other things that are too
cooling for the kidneys. then I would many times my self by dallying with him,
and some other pretty Wanton postures, try to provoke him to it; whereby he
should surely know that it was neither your coolness, nor want of desire that
might be blamed in it; but rather always confess, that you had sufficiently
done your endeavor.

Who will doubt but that she puts this advice, in operation? O happy man, who
art now every foot treated with some new sorts of kickshaws at your Table; and
have free leave to frequent the Coffy-house, which other women grumble and
mumble at. And besides all this, you find that your dearest embraces you as if
you were an Angel, and shows you a thousand other friendly entertainments that
are beyond imagination to express: it is always in the evening, my Dear come
to bed: and in the morning, pray Love ly a little longer. These are most
certainly very great pleasures.

But if the Woman marks that this helps not, and that all things remain in the
old posture, then she begins to mump and maunder at her husband; vaunting much
of her own fitness, and not a little suspecting her husbands; oftentimes
calling him a Fumbler, a dry-boots, and a good man Dolittle, etc.

This makes him look as if he had beshit him self. And though he never so much
endeavors to vindicate himself; and also to persuade her from the reasons and
examples given by several learned Doctors; Culpepper; the Queens Midwife; and
some others of his friends and acquaintance that he demonstrates unto her; it
is all but wind. She still complains, I must have a Child, or else I shall run
distracted.

And this manner of frantickness has so vehemently struck into her brains,
that the very house seems to burn over her head: Insomuch that she is no sooner
risen from her bed or from the Table, but immedialy she goes a gadding amongst
the neighbors; and takes other peoples children in her arms, kissing and
slabbring of them so unmeasurably, as if she would almost devour them with
love; nay she useth-more simple and childish actions with them, then ever own
mothers have done. By which means the children have many times as great an
affection for their neighbor, as they have for their own Father and Mother.

This gadding out of doors does undoubtedly a little trouble her husband: Bat
when he begins to consider, that his wife by this means knows how to handle,
and make much of children; and then again, that she thus beforehand learns it
for nothing; it must of necessity be no less then a great pleasure for him. And
so much the more, whilst she is prattling with her neighbor, and playing with
her child; he is freed from the nurse of hearing her sighs and complaints to
have a child. For she is no sooner within the doors, but she talks of her
neighbors child, and wishes with the loss of all that shes world in the World
that she had such a one too; which continues always so long, that finally she
bursts out into the like former frenzy against her husband: see there I must
have a child also, or else I shall run distracted.

But what remedy? which way he turns or winds himself, he finds no means or way
how to pacify his wife. And therefore thinks it best himself to take the advice
of Doctor, and most especially with that French Doctor, who is so renowned for
his skill of making many men and women that before were barren and unfruitful
to conceive children: Insomuch that they do now every year precisely bear a
young son, or a daughter, yea sometimes two at a time: It is thereby also very
necessary that the good woman her self consult with some experienced Midwives,
and old Doctresses; to the end, that those distempers which are the occasion of
barrenness, might be the better removed and taken away.

To this end there are almost as many Boxes and Gally-pots brought together, as
would near upon furnish an Apothecaries shop: Then to work they go with
smearing, anointing, chafing, infusing, wherewith (as they term it) the good
woman is to be made fresh and fit; but they make the bed and whole house so
full of stink and vapors, that it may be said they rather stop the good and
wholesome pores and other parts of the body; then to open those that were stopped
and caused Distempers.

But in the conclusion we find it to be both fruitless and miserable, where the
good woman goes to seek it by the Apothecary; even as her husband does out of
the Oister and Eg-shels.

And if this will not do now; where shall the poor man hide his head next? What
shall he do more to please and pacify her? He thinks upon all the ways and
means possible to entertain her to content. If she will have costly things, he
will buy them for her; and and dissimulately says that all what she practices
for her content, is his only pleasure and delight: yea, although her pride and
ambition many times in several things flies too high, and oft-times also does
not happen to be very suitable with the constitution of the cash; he dares in
no wise contradict her, for he fears that she will presently be at variance
with him again: And thinks in the interim, whilst her mind hangs upon these
things, she forgets her maunding and mumbling for a child. Still hoping that
there will come one happy night, that may crown his earnest desires with
fructivity; this it is that makes him that he dares not anger her or give her a
sour countenance; fearing that if she might have conceived, that would be the
means of turning the tide.

To be short, it is his only and greatest delight to see that his wife is well
satisfied and receives her content and pleasure; which is very hard to be
practiced, so long as she is not with child.

But o what a joy there will be if he may be but once so happy as to hit that
mark! How will the first day of her reckoning to ly in stand in his Almanac,
as if it were printed with a red Letter! Well young people, be contented; Long
looked for comes at last to the satisfaction of the Master.

THE FIFTH PLEASURE.
The young Woman proves with Child, and longs.
THe old Proverb tells us, that after the sour comes the sweet; and I find,
jolly couple, that it is so with you also; for I hear finally that your wife is
big with child: Well what a Pleasure is that! Certainly, now you see that all
your Doctoring and medicining has been to some purpose, and now you feel also
that all herbs were made for some good effects.

How happy a thing it is that you have made use of a learned Doctor, and an
experienced Midwife. Now is the only time to be very careful, for fear the
least accident might turn the side with the young woman, and so she get a
mischance, or some other sad mishap; and a mischance is worse for her then a
true Childbearing; for that weakens nature abundantly, and oftentimes brings
with it several sad consequences, and Thus the women talk.

But you, o noble Champion, who have behaved your self so gallantly; continne
now to reap the further conquests of your honor. Look not at any small
matters; and most especially if you hope or desire to gain the principal prize
of your pleasure. For be assured, that you must suffer much, and see through a
perspective glass all things at a distance; because you never before saw your
wife in so gallant a state and condition as she now is in; and therefore you
must cherish and preserve her much more then formerly you have done. If you
hear her often grunt and groan, mumble and chide, either with the men or
maidservants; nay, though it were with your own self, you must pass it by, not
concerming your self at it; and imagine that you do it for the respect you bear
your wife, but not by constraint; for it is common with bigbellied women to do
so.

But most especially rejoice in your self, if this grunting and groaning happen
only by day time; because then you may sometimes avoid it, or divertise your
self with other company. Yet by night generally shall the good woman be worst
of all? therefore be sure to provide your self well with pure Aniseed, Clove,
Cniamon-waters, and good sack, that you may therewith be ready to strengthen
and assist her. For it will often happen that when you are in your best and
first Sleep, that your dearest will waken you and complain of pain at her heart,
of dizziness and great faintness; then all what is in the house must be
stirring, and you your self also, though it be never so cold, out to the bed
you must with all the speed possible. Comfort your self herewith, that this was
one of the pleasures which you got with your wife, though it was not set down
in the Contract of marriage.

Now for this again you always receive the honor, that when you are invited
with her to any place at a treat, the best that is upon the Table shall be
presented to the big-bellied woman: Yea if she long or have a desire to any
thing; immediately every one that observes it; are ready to serve her with it;
nay, though there were never so little in the Dish, her longing must be fully
satisfied, if no body else should so much as taste of it. And by this means
oftentimes the good woman is so ill and disturbed, that she is forced to rise
from the Table, and falls from one faintness into another; which for civilities
sake, is then baptized, that she has sat too high or been thronged, or that
the room being so full, the breath of the people offended her.

And though she perceives that this every foot makes her so ill; yet for the
most part she will be so choice and so dainty, that she seldom knows her self
what she will eat or has a mind to; but generally it tends to some thing or
other that is delicate: Upon this manner again, according to the former custom,
she tumbles it in till she is sick with it; and if any one looks but very
wishly at her; immediately another says to them; she must eat for two, nay
perhaps for three.

And not only that in this manner she grows so delicate and gluttonous; but is
thereby so easy and lazy, that she can hardly longer endure her sowing cushion
upon her lap. Also sitting is not good for her, for fear the child thereby
might receive some hindrance and an heartfufullness. Therefore she must often
walk abroad; and to that end an occasion is found to go every day a partling
and gossiping then to this and then to another place; in the mean while leaving
her husband without a wife, and the family without a mistress.

Then in conclusion this falls also burthensom to her, (as it is generally with
all things that are too frequently used) then she will be for spurring you up
to walk abroad with her, that she may get all sorts of fruits and other
fopperies that the season of the year affords; and at the first baiting-place
she is for some Cream with sugar, stewd prunes, and a bottle of sideror perry;
and thus abroad to spend much, and at home neglect more.

If she have then gone something far, she is so excessive weary with it, that if
her life must ly at stake, she cannot set one foot further. Herewith is the
poor man absolutely put to a stand: ride she may not, or all the fat would be
in the fire; and they are so deep in the Country that there is sometimes neither
Coach nor boat to be had.

And if you should happen to be where a River is, there is never a boat to be
had; but if there should be one, then you must be subject to humor the
churlish Ferry man, who seeing the necessity of the occasion, and that you are
able to pay for it, will have what price he pleases. And sometimes again you are
timorous your self to hazard it, because many women are very fearful upon the
water.

But indeed, if by this an happy occasion, a good expedient may be found to
please your dearly beloved, it is no small joy. Well then make your self jocund
herewith, to the end that other troubles may not so much molest and disturb you.

You may also be very well assured, that your wife no sooner comes to be a
little big-bellied, but she receives the privilege to have all what she has a
mind to and that is called Longing: And what husband can be so stern or
barbarous that he will deny his wife at such a time what she longs for?
especially if it be a true love of a woman, you must never hinder her of her
longing; for then certainly the child would have some hindrance by it.

For as much then as is necessary that you always seek to avoid and prevent
this, you must observe, that all women when they are with child, do fall
commonly from one longing to another: And then the providing and buying of that
for them, must be as great a pleasure to you as it is to them in the receiving
and use of it; and that not alone for theirs, but your child's sake also. And
truly he that will or cannot suit himself to this humor, will be very unhappy,
because he shall not then receive the full scope and freedom of this pleasure.

It is also most certain that these longing desires does transport their
imaginations from one finical thing to another: If it be in the summer, then
they long for China Oranges, Sivil Lemmons, the largest Asparagus, Strawberries
with wine and sugar, Cherries of all sorts, and in like manner of Plums, and
these they must have their fill of: And then when they have gotten through the
continuance their full satisfaction thereof; then be assured they begin to long
for some great Peaches and Apricocks; and though they be never so scarce and
dear, yet the woman must not lose her longing, for the child might get a
blemish by it.

If then Apples and Pears begin to grow ripe, you have the same tune to sing
again; for she is possessed with a new longing desire as bad, as if it were a
Quotidian Ague in all the joints of her body; and whatsoever comes new to her
sight, creates in her a fresh longing. If she gets one hour curious Catherine
Pears, Pippins, or Russetings, the next she has a mind to Filberds; and then
an hour or two later Wall-nuts and Grapes fall into her thoughts; do what you
will there is no help for it, her longing must be satisfied, let it go as it
will, or cost what it will.

And this her longing leads her from one thing to another, of all what the
richness of the summer, or liberality of the harvest, out of their
superstuities pour down upon us. Insomach that the good man wishes a thousand
times over that he might once be rid of these terrible charges and greatexpence.

But alas what helps it? there is no season of the year but gives us some or
other new fruits that the women have always a new longing desire to. And if it
be in the Winter, then they long for juicy Pomgranates, new Wine upon the must,
with Chestnuts; then for Colchester Oisters; then again for Pancakes and
Fritters; and indeed for a thousand several sorts of such toys and fancies as
do but appear before their longing imaginations. And oftentimes it is no real
longing, for that were then pardonable, but a liquorish delicate desire that
they are sick of; as may be seen by those who simply imagine themselves to be
with child, are always talking of this and to other dainty that they long
after. And that which is worst of all, is that both they and those that are
really with child, long commonly for that which is scarcest and hardest to be
gotten: Yea in the very middle of winter they oftentimes long to have a
Greengoose or young Chickens; which in some places are very hard to be got, and
not without paying ex excessive dear for-them.

This longing being so satisfied; immediately arises another, and nothing will
serve Meats, and several sorts of Comfits. Yea how often happens it, though it
rain, snow, and is very slippery, that both the husband and the maid, if never
so dark and late in the night, must trot out and fetch candied Ginger, dried
Pears, Gnigerbread, or some such sort of liquorish thing. And what is to be
imagined, that can be cried about in the streets by day time, but her longing
before has an appetite prepared for it?

Yea through an excessive eating of raw fruits, and feeding upon multiplicities
of sweetmeats; to fulfill their longing; it turns to a griping of the guts and
overflowing of the Gall, which again occasion Cholick, and manytimes other
lamentable pains. Here is is then another new work. There the Doctor must be
presently fetched, and according to what he pleases to order, either a Glister
must be set, or some other Physic taken for it.

But by reason these things are not so pleasant to the good woman as the
foregoing liquorish delicacies; she thinks it best that the Midwife be sent
for, because she has a great deal better knowledge touching the infirmities of
women then the Doctors: Then she is fetched, and having done the first part of
her office, she gives her good comfort; and orders her to take only some of the
best white Wine, simper'd up with a little Orangepeel, well sweetened with
sugar, and so warm drunk up; and then anoint your self here, and you know
where, with this salve; and for medicines [that are most to be found in
Confectionres or Pasterers shops] you must be sure to make use of those, then
your pain will quickly lessen. You must not neglect also ofttimes to eat a
piece of bread and butter with either Caroway or Aniseed Comfits; use also
Cinnamon; the first expels wind, and the second strengthens the heart; and they
are both good for the woman and the child. Be sure also to drink every morning
and every evening a glass of the best sack, for that strengthens the fruit of
the womb, and occasions you a good quickness, etc.

Who will doubt, but that she obeys the orders of the Midwife, much better then
that of the Doctors. And verily there is also a great deal of difference in the
suffering, of such or uneasy fumbling at the back part; or the receiving of
such pleasant and acceptable ingredients. And so much the more, when she begins
to remember that Doctor Drink-fast used to tell her, that Medicines never make
so good an operation, when they are at any time taken against the appetite, or
with an antipathy, by the Patient.

Thus you may see, approaching Father, how you are now climbed up to a higher
step of glory: Your manly deeds, make your name renowned; and your joy is so
much augmented that your wife looks always merrily and pleasantly upon you,
for giving her content; and she now also salutes you with the most sweetest and
kindest names imaginable; you must also now be her guest upon all sorts of
Summer and Winter fruits, and a thousand other kinds of liquorish and most
acceptable dainties. Insomuch that although you did not come into the streets
in six months, you may by the humor and actions of your wife know perfectly
when Strawberries, Cherries, Apples, Pears, Nuts and Grapes, are in season. And
there is no geater pleasure for your best beloved, then that she sees you eat
as heartily of them as she her self does.

Confess then unfeignedly, from the very bottom of your heart; are not these
great Pleasures of marriage? And be joyful; for this is only a beginning, the
best comes at last. Know likewise, that this is but as a forerunner of the
sixth Pleasure, and will both touch you at heart, and tickle your purse much
better: Yea, insomuch that the experience thereof will show you that there is a
whole mountain of pleasures to be found in the bands of Wedlock. Whereby I
fear, that you will, perhaps, make a lamentable complaint, of your no sooner
arriving at this hrppiness.

But comfort your felf herewith; that the medicaments of the Doctor and
Midwife, perhaps have done such a wished for operation, that you thereby may
obtain many Sons and Daughters, which you may then timely admonish and instruct
to that duty, so long by your self neglected, and in a manner too late to
repent of.

Doubt not, but assuredly believe, that now you are once gotten into the right
road, you may easily every year see a renovation of this unspeakable pleasure;
and beholding your wife oftentimes in this state; in like mannner you perceive
that not only your name and fame is spread abroad, but your generation also
grow formidable. And this all to the glory of your relations, and joy of your
dearly Beloved.

THE SIXTH PLEASURE.
Care is taking for the Child and Childbed linen; and to provide a Midwise and
Nurse.
IN good truth it is very pleasant to see how the good woman's Apron from day to
day, how longer the more it rises; now all the World may plainly see you have
behaved your self like a man, and every one acknowledge that you are both good
for the sport. Verily this is a great pleasure! And it increases abundantly,
when your wife comes to be so near her reckoning, that she feels her self
quick, and begins to provide and take care for the Child's and Childbed linen.
Then you need not fear the turning of the tide, or that a mischance will
happen; wherewith all people, seeing no other issue, laugh and scoff
unmeasurably; and think that the Midwife has been greased in the fist, (as it
oftentimes happens) because she should say, that it was a full created child,
and no collection of ill humors, or a wind-egg.

And the greatest joy is, that you have now so hoisted your top-sail, that your
wife cannot any more call you a Dry-boots, or a John Cannot; which were for you
such disrespectfull names, and yet for quietness sake you vere forced to
smother them in your breast, because you could have no witness for your
vindication.

You are now so far exalted, that you will very speedily be saluted with the
name of; Dad and Pappa which is as pleasing and acceptable for you now, as the
name of Bridegroom was before.

O how happy you are! and what pleasures does the married estate provide for
you! how glad must your wife be now! how strictly she reckons the months, nay
the very weeks and days! O what an unexpressible love has she for you now! and
with what embraces and kisses she entertains you, because you have furnished
her shop so well? Now you may perceive that the procreating of children, makes
the band of wedlock much stronger, and increases the affections.

Now were it well time, that by death either of the good woman or the Child,
that you did, by a will, seek the mortification of the disadvantagious Contract
of marriage; and by that means get all there is to your self, in place of going
back to her friends and relations; But, alas, she has so much in her head at
present, that there is no speaking to her about it, without bing a great
trouble to her: besides her senses cannot now bear it therefore you must let it
alone till another time.

Do you your self but observe, and you will quickly see that a lying-in requires
so much trimming, that she has really care enough upon her! the Childbed
linen alone, is a thing that would make ones head full of dizziness, it
consists of so many sorts of knick-knacks; I will not so much as name all the
other jinkombobs that are dependances to it. Therefore, ought you to be so
compassionate with her, as not to speak to her about any other thing; for all
her mind and senses are so employed upon that subject, that she can think upon
nothing else but her down-lying. Hear but deliberately to all her lying-in, and
of what belongs to it. It Is no wonder neither for there is not one of her
acquaintance comes to her, either woman or maid, but they presently ask her,
Well, Mistress, when do you reckon? And that is a Text then, so full of matter
that there is oftentimes three or four hours preached upon it, before any of the
Auditors be weary, O that all Ministers were so happy, as to have always such
earnest and serious hearers. In the mean while there is no body happier than
the maids, for they are then free from being the Town-talk; for at other times,
the first word is, How do you like your maid? which is another Text that the
women generally preach out of, and make longest sermons in.

But methinks, I should happen to fall here from the Mistress upon the Maid.

To go forward then. See how serious your dearest is, with Jane the Semstress,
contriving how much linen she must buy to make all her Childbed linen as it
ought to be! how diligently she measures the Beds, Bellibands, Navel clouts,
shirts, and all other trincom, trancoms! and she keeps as exact an account of
the else, half else, quarters, and lesser measures, as if she had gone seven
years to school to learn casting of an account.

Let this measuring and reckoning be pleasant to you, because the charge
thereof will fall costly enough for you. Tomorrow she goes to market, to buy
two or three pieces of linen, one whereof must be very fine, and the other a
little courser. And you need not take any notice what quantity of fine small
Laces she has occasion for, by reason it might perhaps overcloud this sixth
pleasure of marriage, which you now possess.

Why should you not be merry? you have now above all things a Wife to your
mind; who whatsoever she imagines, desires or does, it is always accompanied
with wishes. O, says she, how glad shall I be, when all things is bought that
there ought to be for the making of my Childbed linen. And no sooner is it
bought, but then she wishes that it were ma^e.

But this requires some time: and then you will have reason to rejoice; for it is
commonly the usual custom of the semstresses to let you go and run after them,
and fop you off with lies and stories, till the time be so nigh at hand, that
it will admit no longer delay.

Yet before you see that your wife has accomplished this desire, you will find her
very much troubled at two several causes, which will make you glad when she
has once obtained them. For these are things of importance, to wit, the making
choice of a Midwife and a Nurse, because upon one depends the health and
preservation of the life of the Woman; and on the other that of the Child.

Let it no ways molest or trouble you, but rather be pleasing and acceptable,
if she be continually chattering at you, and desiring your advice and council,
who she shall make choice of or not; hereby you may observe, that you have a
very careful wife; and if you listen a little more narrowly, you will hear
what a special care she has for all things; then she will every day be
relating to you that amongst the number of Midwives which have been recommendad
to her, there is not one that pleases her; for one is too young and
unexperienced, another is too old and doting; a third is too big handed; a
fourth has too much talk; and the fifth drinks too much wine. To be short
there is so many deficiencies in everly one of them, that the good woman has
need of a learned Counselors advice to help her to choose the best.

And the like trouble has she also concerning the taking of a Nurse having
already spent a above months time in examining among her kindred and relations,
and other good acquaintance, how such and such nurses have behaved themselves;
and she is informed that there are few to be found but have certainly some
faults or other, and sometimes very great ones, for one is too sluttish, another
saunters too a third too lazy; another too dainty: and then again, one eats too
much, and another drinks to much; one keeps company to much with the maid, and
another in like manner with the good man: And such a one or such a one are the
best, but they were not very handy about the hearth, to make ready some
liquorish dainty things for the good woman, which is a matter of no small
weight.

Behold! has she not very great cause to be troubled: and thereout you may
very well also observe how happy you are, seeing you have gotten a wife that
night and day is busy and taking care of all these concerns and other affairs.
Yes verily, although her big-belly be very cumbersom to her, yet she must be
abroad, every day from morning till evening, to take care and provide all these
important things, that nothing may be wanting. Well what a careful wife you
have! how mightily she is concerned for this above all other things whatsoever!

And scarcely has the good woman gotten these two main instruments; but she
finds her self still involved in so much other business, that she hardly can
tell how to do or turn her self in it; for now there wants a Groaning stool, a
Screen, and a Cradlewith what belongs to it; and heaven knows what more, which
have been so long neglected with the care that was taking to get a Midwife and
a Nurse. Then again there wants new Hangings, a Down-bed a Christeningcloath,
silver candle sticks, a Caudlecap, etc. that of necessity must be bought and
used at the lying-in, and Gossips feast; so that the good man need not fear
that his money will grow moldy for want of being turned too and again.

Oh were your dear wife so happy that she had once made an end of all these
ponderous affairs, then all would be well: For then she could begin to give
order for the making clean the house from top to bottom; and for the pressing
of some curtains, Vallians and Hangings; the rubbing of Stools, Chairs and
Cupboard; the scouring of the Warming-pan and Chamber Pot: And it is no wonder,
for when the good woman lies in, then come so many busy bodies that with their
glouring eyes are peeping into every hole and corner.

These things do so excessively trouble her brain; that she can hardly the
whole day think upon any thing else, yea goes so near her that it ostentimes
totally bereaves her of her nights rest insomuch that she is fain to ly very
long a bed in the morning. And if by night she happen but only to think often
Boobincjo, she has immediately such an alteration in her very intrals, that
she feels here or there some or other deficiency; which comes so vehement upon
her that the poor husband, though it be never so cold, must out of bed to fetch
some Cinnamon and Annis-seed water, or good sack; or else some other such sort
of those liquorish ingredients and then these are the principal keys of Music
that the whole night through are sung and played upon. O how happy is the good
man, that he has, from time to time, in her childbearing, learned all these
things with so much patience, which makes him now that he can the better bear
with all these finical humors;

But for this again, o compassionate Ninny-hammer, you shall have not only
great commendations for your patience; but the pleasure also that some of your
nearest relations will come and kiss your hands, and withal tell you how happy
you are that you are almost arrived at that noble degree of being entitled
Father. And then, with great respect and reverence, they desire to receive the
honor some of being your firstborn child's fathers, and others to be
Godmothers: Neither will they then be behind hand in presenting the Child with
several liberal gifts, as an acknowledgement of the honor they receive, above
others, in being favored with your Gossipship.

Well who would not, for so much honor and respect, but now and then suffer
the trouble of his wives quamish stomach with some charges to it? And more then
that, you have now the best opportunity in the World, to go with your new
chosen Gossips, (as you did before with your Birdemen) and choose and taste out
some of the most delicious Wine, for you must be sure to store your Cellar
well, because then both the Bridemen and Bride-maids will certainly come to eat
some of the long-look'd for Caudle; besides the great number of friends that
will come then also to give you a visit, and with all respect wish you much
joy: I will not so much as think any thing of those that will come also to the
Christning and Gossips Feast.

Be joyful with this, till such time as the the other Pleasure begins to appear,

THE SEVENTH PLEASURE.
The Woman falls in Labor.
BEhold, young couple, hitherto a considerable deal of time is spent and passed
over, with the aforesaid Mirth and Pleasures; do not you now perceive what a
vast difference is between the married or unmarried estate? You have, by
provision, made your self Master of these six Pleasures; nay oftentimes before
you have gotten the longd-for joy of the fourth Pleasure, appears that of the
seventh very unexpectedly; for the good woman begins to look so sour, grumble,
grunt and groan, that it seems as if she would go into the Garden and fetch a
Babe out of the Parsleybed.



But Uds-lid this is a great-surprizal; for a little while ago she said that
she was but seventh months gone of her reckoning. How then? should she have
jested upon it? or has the good woman lost her book, and so made a false
account? Yet this being the first time of her reckoning, ought the more
favorably to be passed by as long as the Trade goes forwards.

There Is now no small alarm in the Watch. Who is there that is but near or by
the hand that is not set a work! Oh, was Dorothy the Semstress, and Jane the
fuandress now here, what a helping hand we might have of them! Where are now
the two Chair-women also, they were commonly every day about the house, and now
we stand in such terrible need of them, they are not to be found? Herewith must
the poor Drone, very unexpectedly, get out of bed, almost stark naked, having
hardly time to put on his shoes and stockins; for the labor comes so pressing
upon her, that it is nothing but, have, have, have, fetch the Midwife with all
possible speed, and alas, there is so many several occasions for help, that she
cannot miss her maid the twinkling of an eye; neither dare she trust it to the
Maids fetching, for fear she should not find the Midwives house; and she has
not showed it her, because she made her reckoning that she had yet two months
more to go.

Therefore without denial away the good man himself must to fetch the Midwife;
for who knows whether or no she would come so quick if the maid went; nay it is
a question also, being so late in the night, whether she would come along with
the maid alone, because she dwells in a very solitary corner clearly at the
the other end of the City: (for after a ripe deliberation of the good woman, the
lot fell so that she made choice of this grave and experienced Midwife.)

Away runs the poor man without stop or stay, as if he were running for a wager
of some great concern. And though it be never so cold, the sweat trickles down
by the hair of his head, for fear he should not find the Midwife at home; or
that perhaps she might be fetched out to some other place, from whence she could
not come. And if it should happen so, we are all undone, for the good woman
must have this Midwife, or else she dies; neither can or dare she condescend to
take any of the other, for the reasons before mentioned.

But what remedy? if there must come another, then she will so alter, vex, and
fret her self at it, that all the provocations of pains in labor, turns
against her stomach, and there is no hopes further for that time.

But whilst you are running, and consider in this manner hope the best; rather
think with your self, what great joy is approaching unto you, if your wife,
thus soon, come to be safely delivered of a hopeful Son or Daughter: In the
first place, you will be freed from all that trouble of rising in the night,
and from the heaving of the grumbling and mumbling of your wife; two months
sooner then you your self did expect you should have been.

Be not discomforted although she does thus unexpectedly force you out of bed,
before you have hardly slept an hour, for you see there is great occasion for it;
and now is the time to show that you truly love your wife. This first time will
make it more accustomary, the first is also commonly the worst. And if you be
so fortunate that at the very first you happen to meet with this prudent and
grave Matron Midwife, and do bring her to your longing-for dearly beloved Wife;
yet nevertheless you may assure your self, that before you can arrive to have
the full scope and height of this Pleasure, you will find something more to do:
For the Midwife is not able alone to govern and take care of all things that
must be fetched, brought and carried to and again; therefore of necessity the
friends must be fetched with all the speed imaginable, viz. Sisters, wives,
Aunts, Cousins, and several familiar good acquaintances must have notice of it,
and be defraied to come to her quickly, quickly, without any delay; and if you
do not invite them very ceremonially every one according to their degrees and
qualities, it is taken to be no small affront.

It has happened more then a hundred times that the Sister afterward would not
come to the Christning Feast; because, by chance, she heard, that the Brothers
wife had notice given her of the Childbearing before her self; little
considering how few people the young people had in the night to assist them; or
that the confusion and unexperiencedness was the occasion that they did not
think of such a method or order. Nay oftentimes is this sort of jealousy
arisen between the Aunt and Cousin; whereby may most certainly observed the
intelligibility of the most prudent female sex.

It Is true this running seems both troublesome and tiresom but little does the
good man know that he is now first come into that noble School and herein his
patience shall be effectually exercised or that this is but the first year of
trying the same! O how happy are they that are well instructed in it.

Do but see how impatient the good expecting Father is. What is there not yet
wanting, before he has his lesson perfect! Behold the poor Drone, how he moves
too and fro! see what a loss and tostication he is in! he tramples his hat
under his feet, pulls the hair off head, not knowing what he would do, or which
way to help his dear Wife; and the Friends that were sent for do not come so
quick as he expected, because the most part of them must first trick and prick
themselves up before that they dare come; the one fearing the piercing view of
another, though they be all near relations and friends.

Here he stands trembling, not knowing which way to turn himself. Women's
assistance is at this present most requisite, and a good Stierman at Stern, or
the ship may rum upon a sand. She runs first backwards then forwards; seeks
here then there. And although he has the keys of all the Chests, and Trunks,
his head runs so much a Wool gathering, that, let him do what he will, he can
find no sort of those things he most stands in need of.

Alas all things is thus out of order, by reason the good woman did not think
to come so soon in Childbed, Oh what manner of Jinkinbobs are not here wanting
that are most useful at this occasion; and the Midwife cries and bawls for
them that she is hoarse again! here is both the groaning stool and the screen yet
to be made: And Mistress Perfect has them both, but they are lent out.

Yonder Peg the maid runs her anckle out of joint, and her self out of breath,
to desire to borrow them of Mistress Buy-all. And she is hardly gotten out of
doors, before they perceive that the warming pan is yet to be bought; and that
that is worst of all, is, that all the Childbed linen is not yet starched or
iron'd; oftentimes it happens that it is yet upon the the Bankside at bleach.
What a miserable condition is this!

Here the good man is at no small quandary, with all the women, oh were this
the greatest disappointment for him! but presently he sees all the women's
countenances looking very dole-fully and mournfully at each other, one
beginning to pray; another to cry in; there comes a great aleration in the
pange and pains of her Labor; nay they are sodesperate, that the fear is,
either the mother or the child, or perhaps both must go to pot. For all
whatsoever the Doctor has prescribed, or that has been fetched from the
Apothecaries; nay the very girdle of Saint Francis can work here no miracle.

Uds bud, this is but a sad spectacle. Oh, says Peg the maid, does this come by
marrying? I Will never venture it as long as I live. I do believe that it is very
pleasurable to ly with a Gentleman, but the Childbearing has no delight at
all in it. Oh I am afraid, if there come not a sudden change, that my good
Mistress will not be able to undergo it. Oh sweet pretty blossom as she is.

It Is most true, that here wants crumbs of comfort both for the husband and the
wife; yea for the Midwife and all the rest of the Women beside; for they all
cry that the tears run streaming down their cheeks; and neither their
Cinamon-water, nor burnt wine, can any ways refresh or strengthen her. Uds
lid: if there come no other tiding the sweetness of this pleasure will prove
but bitter to them.

But hark a little! there comes something of a tiding, that brings us five
pounds worth of courage with it. Two or thee more such, would make every one of
our hearts a hundred pound lighter, and the great Caudle Skellet would begin to
quake and tremble.

Pray have a little patience, tarry, and in the twinkling of an eye you shall
be presented with a Child, and saluted with the title of Father.

THE EIGHTH PLEASURE.
The Woman's brought to bed.
HA boys! after all the toiling, he happy hour is at last arrived, that the
good Woman, finally is delivered and brought to bed: well this is a mirth and
pleasure that far surpassesh all the other; for the good man is, by a whole
estate, richer then he was before.

Who can imagine or comprehend the jollity of this new Father? O he is so
overjoyed that it is inexpressible: Doll and Peg must out immediately to give
notice of it to all the friends and acquaintance; thing to himself that every
body else will be as jocund and merry at it as he is. Do but see how busy he
is! behold with what earnestness he runs up and down the house to give order
that the great Caudle Skillet may be in a readiness!

What a pleasure is it for him that he sees Mistress Do-all attending the
Midwife, and giving her all manner of warmed beds and other Clouts, the number
and names where of are without end; and that Mistress Swifthand and Mistress Fair
arse are tumblingall things to psie-turvy for sooth to seek and prepare in a
readiness all those things that are most necessary for the Child; but little
does he think that they do it more to be peeping into every hole and corner,
and to have a full view of all the Childbed linen, then out of needful
assistance? And woe be to the Child bed woman, if they do but find any where a
Clout, Napkin or Towel, that by chance has either a hole or a rent in it: for
one or another of them will with grinning and laughnig thrust her finger
through it, and then show it to the rest. taking also the first opportunity she
can lay hold of, when they are a little at liberty, to make a whole tittle
tattle about it, and very much admireth the carelessness and negligence of the
Childbed woman; as if she were a greater wast-all, and worse house-wife than
any of them else when to the contrary, if you should by accident come into any
of their Garrets, when the linen is just come home from washing you would
oftentimes find it in such a condition, that you might very well imagine your
self to be in Westminster Hall where the Colors that are Trophics of honor
are hung up, one full of holes, another tattered and torn, and a third full of
mildew.

Yet notwithstanding all this peeping and snuffling in to every nook and
corner, they finally get the Child swathled: And then to the great joy of the
Father, it must be presented him in state by the Midwife, with this golden
expression, a Proverb not above two hundred years old, Father, see there is
your Child, God give you much joy with it, or take it speedily into his bliss.

Uds bud how does this tickle him! what a new mirth and pleasure is this again!
see him now stand there and look like a Monky with a Cat in his arms. O
delicate what a pretty condition he is now in!

Well Midwife look to it, for this joy has taken such a tyrannical possession
of his heart, that doubt not but immediately there will be a good present for
you, when he gives it you back again. It Is no wonder, for if it be a Son, he is
at least a thousand pound richer then he was before: though hem ay look long
enough before he will find a Bankers Bond in his Chest for the ^um.

Now whilst the Child is swadled and dressed up, all the other trinkum trankums
are laid aside; and the Table is spread neatly to entertain the friends, who
not alone for novelties sake, but also out of a sweet toothed liquorish
appetite, long to see what is prepared for them. And I believe that although
the Kings Cook had dressed it, get there will be one or another of them that will
be discommending something, and brag that she could have made it much
delicater, if there be then any one that seems not fully to believe her,
immediately she cites two or three Ladies for her witnesses, who have given her
the greatest praise and commendations for her dressing of such dishes above all
others. And who can have better judgment then they? This is then a discourse
for at least three hours, for they are all of them so well verst in the Kitchen
affairs, that its hard for one to get a turn to speak before the other.

But this is an extraordinary Pleasure for this new Father to hear out of all
their prittle pratlings how sweetly they will commend the Quill that has
received all the Colchester Oisters, Cox-combs, Sweetbreads, Lam-stones, and
many other such like things, for they have found by experience that such sort
of ingredients occasion very much the kindness of men to their wives. Yes, yes,
says Mrs. Luxury it is very good for my husband, and not amiss for any palate
neither, and I Am sure the better I feed my Pig, the better it is for me in the
soucing out. And this discourse then is held up with such an earnestness, and
continues so long, that the Childbed woman almost, gets an Ague with it, or at
the least falls from one swooning into another, whilst there is not so much as
any one that thinks upon her.

Happy is the good man, if he can but act the part of a Ninny, and has busied
himself for the most part in the Kitchen; then he may be now and then admitted
to cast in his verdict; otherwise, let them talk as long as they will, he is
forced in great misery to afford them audience. But it is much better for him,
if, according as the occasion gives opportunity, there be now and then spoken
something concerning the Childbed woman, or about the shaking of the sheets,
which is seldom forgotten; because he is now already so far advanced in the
Cony-craft of that School, that he is gotten up to the Water Bucket.

In the mean while Peg runs too and again, almost like one out of her senses,
to hunt for the Nurse, who dwells in a little street upon a back-Chamber, or in
an Ally, or some other by-place; and she is just now no where else to be found
but at the other end of the City, there keeping another Gentle woman in Childbed.

Here is now again other fish to fry, for one will not be without her, and
the other must needs have her, each pretending to have an equal right to her. And
the Nurse, finding that each of them so much desires her, thinks no small
matter of her self, but that she is as wise as many a Ladies woman or Salomons
Cat, and that her fellow is hardly to be found. But before some few days are
past, there is a great trial to be made of the Nurses experience and
understanding; for, let them do what they will or can, the Child will not suck;
yea, and what is worse, it has gotten a lamentable Thrush. Alas a day what bad
work is here again, the Nurse is so quamish stomockt that she cannot suck her
Mistres, therefore care must be taken to find out some body or other that will
come and suck the young woman's breasts for twelve pence a time; or else her
breasts will grow hard with lumps and fester for want of being drawn. Or else
also with the sucking she gets in the tipples.

Now is the right time to fetch the Apothecary to make ready plasters, and
bring Fennel-water to raise the milk, that the lumps may be driven away; and
most espelially that the cloves in the tipples may be cured. Help now or never
good M. Doctor, for if this continue much longer, the young woman perhaps gets
an Ague that may then cost her her life.

Verily, in this state and condition of the woman is also some pleasure to be
found, for you may keep your wife now very cheap; she is not now so liquorish
and sweet-tooth'd, as when she was with Child; which in deed is very good at
all times, but most especially in thie pitiful time for there is now nothing
fitter for her to eat then a little good broth, stewed Prunes, Caudle,
Water Gruel, roasted Apples, or new laid Eggs.

But, now Father, your Pleasure will immediately be augmented, for it will not
be long before you will have some or other Gentlewomen come to give you a
visit, who will then also out of their Closets of understanding be very much
assistant to you with their advice and counsel for there are very few of them
that are not deeply experienced in Sir Thomas Browns Midwivery, and if any
thing do happen more then ordinary, they never want for remedies.

Now there is Doctor Needhams wife, who by her ownexperimenting, has knowledge
of several other things: But upon such an occasion as this, there is nothing
better then that the child must be glister'd; and for the lumps you must
endeavor through a continual chafing to get them out of the young woman's
breasts. But Mistress Rattle-pate relates, how miserably, she was troubled with
an humor in her breast, when she lay in; but that she had always cured her
self of it, by only taking a Sandwich Carrot, and scraping it hollow in the
inside, and then put like a hat upon the tipple, this drew out all ill humor,
without any pain, or the least fear of danger.

Yes truly, says Mrs Talk-enough, I do indeed forsooth believe that that is
very good, but here are very sore nipples, and they begin to be chopped; and
there must be a special care taken for that; therefore it will not be amiss to
strengthen the nipples with a little Aqua vitae, and then wash them with some
Rosewater that has kernels of Limons steeped in it, There' nothing like it, or
better, I have lain in of thirteen children, but never tried any thing that did
me so much good, or gave me half the ease. Pray, dear Mistress, be sure to make
ufe of that, you will never repent it.

But Mistress Know-all says, that she has made use of this also, and found
some ease by it; and that she has tried above an hundred other things, that
were approved to be good; yet of all things never found nothing under the Sun
that was more noble then Salvator Winter's Salve, for that cures immediately:
And you can have nothing better.

Yet Mistress Stand to it, begins to relate wonderful operations done with oil
of Myrrh; and of the plasters that are made by the Gentlewoman in Py-yard.

Now comes the sage Matron Experience, saying that she has learnt secret from
a prudent Doctor that is worth its weight in Gold, nor can the virtue thereof be
too much commended. And she has already communicated it unto several persons;
but there are none that tried it who do not praise it to be incomparable:
therefore she has been very vigilant to note it down in S. John Pain, and
Nic-Culpeppers Works; to the end that her posterity may not only make use of
it, but participate it to others: This is, Lapis Calaminaris prepared, mingled
with a small quantity of Maybutter, and then temper them to gether with the
point of a knife upon an earthen plate, just as the Picture Drawers do their
Colors upon their Pallet, which will bring it to be a delicate salve; and is
also very soft and supple for the chaps of the tipples; nay, though the child
should suck it in, yet it does it no harm; and it does not alone cure them, but
prevents the coming of any more.

Yes, says Mistress Consent to all. and my advice is then to take a little
horn, with a sheeps udder, and lay that upon the Tipples, for that defends
them, and occasions their curing much better and sooner.

O what a pleasure it is to hear all the pretty considerations of so many
prudent Doctresses! If Clement Marot might but revive, I am sure he would find
here as many Doctresses, as ever there were Doctors at Paris. But o how happy
will this fortunate new Father be, when he may but once see the back-sides of
all these grave and nice Doctresses! By my truth, this may very well be
registered for one of the most accomplished Pleasures.

But yet all this does not help the young woman. Perhaps all these remedies may
be good, says the Grandmother but they are not for our turns; for alas a day,
the very smell of salve makes her fall into a swoon; neither can she suffer the
least motion of sucking, for the very pain bereaves her of her senses. What
shall we do then? to keep a Wet-Nurse is both very damageable, and cruel
chargeable; for Wet-Nurses are generally very lazy and liquorish, and they are
ever chatting and chawing something or other with the Maids; and in their
manner they baptize it, with saying it is very necessary and wholesome for the
Child. And then again, to put the Child out to Nurse, has also several
considerations; first it estrangeth much from you, and who knows how ill they
may keep it. Therefore it is best to keep it at home, and endeavor the
bringing of it up with the Spoon, feeding it often with some pure and cordial
diets fit for the appetite, and now and then giving it the sucking bottle.

But what remedy now? this is all to no purpose: For though the Grandmother,
Nurse, and Ant do what they can, yet all their labor's lost. And the Child is
so froward and peevish, that the Nurse is ready to run away from it; nay,
though she dandle and play with it always till past midnight, it is but
washing the Black amore; in so much that a Wet-Nurse must be sought for, or
away goes the Child to Limbo. For this again is required good advice, and the
choosing of a good one has its consideration: But the tender heartedness and
kind love that the Mother has for her Child can no way suffer this, she will
rather suck it her self though the pain be never so great. Yet having tried it
again a second time, the pain is so vehement that it is impossible to withstand
it; therefore the new Father cannot be at quiet till there be a Wet-Nurse found
and brought to them. For it goes to the very heart of both Father and Mother to
put the Child out to Nurse.

And do but see after much seeking and diligent inquiring, the new made
Grandmother, has at last found one, who is a very neat cleanly and mighty
modest woman, her husband went a little while ago to the East Indies, and her
child died lately.

This no small joy but an extraordinary Pleasure, both for the new Father, and
Childbed woman. Oh now their hearts are at rest. And now all things will go
well; for as the Wet-Nurse takes care of the Child; the dry Nurse does of the
Mother, and all this pleases the good Father very well.

Now Child-bed-woman your time is come to make much of your self, that you may
recover strength. Now you wont be troubled with the pains of sucking, or
disturbed of your natural rest: now you must let the Wet-Nurse take care for
every thing, and look after or meddle with nothing your self. Now you must
sleep quietly, eat heartily, and groan lustily. And though you be very well and
hearty, yet you must seem to be weak and quamish stomackt; for first or last
the month of lying-in must be kept full out. Do but think now by your self what
you have a mind either to eat, or drink; the first and worst days are with the
tossing and turmoiling passed by; neither can you recover any strength with
eating of Water Gruel, sugar sops, roasted Apples, and new laid Eggs; you are not
only weary of them, but it is too weak a diet for you. The nine days are
almost past, and now you must have a more strengthunig diet; to wit, a dish of
fine white Perch, a roasted Pullet, half a dozen of young Pigeons, some
Wigeons or Teal, some Lams-stones, Sweet-breads, a piece of roast Veal, and a
delicate young Turkey, etc. And whilst you are eating, you must be sure to
drink two or three glasses of the best Rhenish wine, very well sweetened with
the finest loaf sugar, you must also be very careful of drinking any French
wine, for that will too much inflame you.

O new Father, what a Pleasure must all these things be for you; and
especially, because now you begin at the Bed side to eat and drink again with
your Childbed wife; and you begin also to perceive that if all things advance
as they hitherto have done, you may then again in few days make fresh assaults
of hugging and embracing her.

This is that jolly month or six weeks that all woman talk so pleasantly of;
because it learns them always such a curious remembrance. And really it is
almost impossible that the husband at these rates can grow lean with it;
because he as well as his wife sits to be crammed up too: And he can now with
his dearest daily contrive and practice what the Nurse shall make ready, that
his Child bed wife may eat with a better appetite, and recover new strength
again. I would therefore advise the careful Nurse as a friend, that she should
be sure to provide her self with the Complete Cook, that she might be the more
ready to help the Childbed woman to think upon what she has a mind to have
made ready, for her brains are but very weak yet; so that she cannot so quickly
and easily remember at first what is pleasantest and wholesomest to be eaten.

O thrice happy new Father that have gotten such a prudent diligent and
careful Nurse for your Childbed wife! what great Pleasure is this! And behold,
by this delicate eating and drinking, your Dearest begins from day to day to
grow stronger and stronger; insomuch that she begins to throw the Pillow at
you, to spur you up to be desirous of coming to bed to her: Yea, she promises
you, that before she is out of Childbed, she will make you possessor of
another principal and main Pleasure.

THE NINTH PLEASURE.
Of the Gossips Feast.
NOw, o new Father, you have had the possession of eight pleasures, which
undoubtedly have tickled you to some purpose.

But now there is a new one approaching, that will be as full of so many
joyful delights and wishings of prosperity, as ever the first and most famous
has been; for it seems as if your Childbed wife begins to be a weary of this
lazy liquorish life, and to leave off her grunting and groaning; because she
now longs to be gadding up and down the street, or standig at the door with her
Babe in her arms.

But before this can be done, you know that there ought to be a Gossips Feast
kept, To this end the Nurse must be sent abroad; and a serious Counsel held, as
if the Parliament of women were assembled, to consult who shall be invited, and
who not. 's Wounds, what a list of relations and strange acquaintance are here
sum'd up in a company together, to be invited to the Gossipping Feast. It Is
impossible, the Nurse can ever do this all in one day; because she would not
willingly miss any of them, out of the earnest hopes she has of the Presents
she expects. And then also she must give an account to every one of them that
are invited of the state and condition of the Childbed woman and her Child. I
wonder that there is no body that sollicites to have the Office of an Inviter
to all such sort of Gossippings, but the women understand these affairs and the
ordering of such sort of invitations much better then any one else, therefore
it is not necessary.

O, new Father, what a sweet Delight and Pleasure you must needs have in
reviewing this great List of your Gossips! What multiplicities of wishes of joy
and prosperity have you to expect! But if I were to be your Counselor, I
assure you I would order the Nurse to desire Doctor Toss-bowl, my Lord Drink
first and then the other Gentlemen, to wit, Master Cleardrinker, Dryliver,
Spillnot, Sup-up, Seldom-sober, and Shift-gut, to fetch home their Wives in
good time from the Gossipping; because you have other men's Wives, who are your
near relations, that you must entertain longer; and they otherwise will never
think of rising or going home though it were midnight: And by this means you
will have a fit opportunity, with a full Bowl and a Pipe, to wash away that
rammish sent of a Childbed out of your brains; and also after many hopes, once
arrive to the height of receiving your full delight and pleasure. And then you
may even clap it all together upon the account of a Lying-in.

Now Nurse, here you have work by whole hand-fulls: for you shall no sooner
have made an end of your other errands, but immediately there is so much
tricking and pricking of all things up in neat order against the coming of the
sharp-sighted guests; that it is a terror to think on it. Their eyes will fly into
every nook and corner; nay the very house of Office must be extraordinary neat
and clean; for Mistress Foul-arse, Gossip Orderall, and Goody Dirty-buttocks,
will be peeping into every crevise and cranny: And because they will do it
forsooth, according to their fashion, they make a show as if they must go to
the necessary Chamber, with a Letter to Gravesend, only to take an inspection
whether it be as cleanly there as it is upon the Gossipping Chamber where all
the Guests are. And it is a wonder if they do not look into the Seat, to see
whether there be no Spyders webs spun in it; or whether the Goldfinders
Merchandise be of a good color, equal-size and thickness.

But come let us pass all this by: for in the middle of these encumbrances, the
time will not only fly away; but we shall, at the hour appointed, be surprised
by our Guests. Uds life, how busy the Wet and Dry-Nurses are with dressing the
Babe neatly Now Father, look once upon yout Child! O pretty thing! O sweetfac'd
dainty darling! it is Fathers own picture! Well what would not one undergo to be
the Mother of so fine an Angel! And who can or dare doubt any thing of it, for
the Mother loves it, and the Father believes it, nay and all the friends that
come tumbling in one upon another to day, do confirm it: For behold, every one
looks earnestly at the Babe; and does not a little commend his prettiness. One
says it is as like the Father (alias Daddy) as one drop of Water is like
another. Another, that the upper part of the face, forehead, eyes and nose
incline very much to be like the mother; but down-wards it is every bit the
Father. And who forsooth should not believe it, if it be a son. Every one is in
an admiration. O me, what a pretty sweet Infant! Nurse, you have dressed it up
most curiously! And truly there is, no cost spared for the having very rich
laces.

Thus they ly and tamper upon this first string, till the Childbed woman
begins to enter upon the relating what great pain in travel she had to fetch
this Child out of the Parsly-bed, what a difference there was between her, and
others of her acquaintance, etc. Thereout every one has so much matter, as
would make a longwinded sermon; and the conclusion generally is the relating
how and when the good man crept to bed to her again; and how such a one had
been a fortnight with Child, before she went to receive her churching. Where
upon another comes with a fullmouth'd confession, that her husband was not half
so hot in the codpiece.

And a third again relates how her husband tarried above a fortnight from home,
after that she was out of Childbed; but coming then home, he did so claw her
off and tickle her fancy for her that very precisely upon the nine months end,
she was brought to bed of two children.

Do but tarry a little yet, till the Gossipping-bowl has gone once or twice
more about with old Hock; then you will hear these Parrots tell you other sorts of
tales.

In the mean while, do but see the poor Nicholas None-eys how he rejoices, that
his wife is so reasonable strong again; and that she is so neatly trickt up
sitting in state in the best furnished room, by the bedside! O what a pleasure
this is! O how he treats all the women with delicate Marget Ale, and Sack and
Sugar! [unless he begin to bethink himself, and for respects sake or frugality,
sets some bottles aside; because he perceives it to be nothing else but a vast
expense and women's Apish tricks] How busy he is in carving for them of his
Roast-beef, Capons, Turkey-py, Neats-tongue, or some other savoury bit to make
their mouths relish their liquor the better; and then stand fast Bowls and
glasses for they resolve not to flinch from it? And indeed why should he not?
for he is now a whole estate richer then he was before; and what need he care
for it then.

Well behold here! Now the women's mouths are a beginning to be first a little
warm; and none of them all can be silent, though they should speak of their own
Commodities.

O how happy would you be, O Goodman Cully, if you had but as many ears as
Argus had eyes, that you might hear every where, whilst you are carving and
serving of them, what pretty sweet stories and discourses, these sorts of
Parrats will be talking of? For Mistress Sharp-set relates, what a pleasure she
often times received in it, to keep School-time with her husband at noons, as
soon as they had feasted their carcasses well: but that conning of her lesson
had caused her several times to make a journey to the Parsly-bed.

Mistress Touch and Take relates, how that being once at her Neeces at a
Gossipping, where she and her husband were stayed and treated something more
then ordinary; as they were going home they were suddenly surprised with an
amorous storm; so that coming home, they would not tarry to undress themselves
but tumbling down upon the flore, they very furiously fell to 't, hand over
head; where she received such a benediction, that that very day nine months,
she lay-in Childbed of a young Betty; that was so like the child of the
aforenamed Mistress Touch and take, as ever any one thing in the world can be
like another. And she was more prosperous and healthy at this lying-in, then
ever she had been before, etc.

Where upon Mistress Current begins to relate for a most true story, how that a
certain Maid who sells Wine and Beer-glasses at this very time, had her Viol
so filled by a little pretty mean fellow of her acquaintance; that about nine
months afterward, when it begun to be griping upon her, she went in person her
self to the Town Midwife; where she immediately without further delay was
delivered; and about an hour afterward went home with the Child in her lap;
where she both swathed, and also washed out all the foul Linen her self; nay,
and the next day morning went her self with her child to have it Christened, and
then she went and sat the whole day again, as formerly, at her Stall to sell
glasses.

At this Mistress Sincere wonders extremely; saying how strangely these things
happen to one woman more then another. In our Parish there is a married woman
brought to bed, but she was so miserably handled by the Midwife, that no tongue
can express it. Insomuch that Master Peepin the Man Midwife, was fain to be
fetched, to assist with his Instrument; it was a very great wonder that the
woman ever escaped it; which is most lamentable indeed to be related; and too
sad indeed to be placed by me among the Pleasures of Marriage.

Oh, says Mistress What do you call'er, it is a very lamentable and sad
condition, when things run so contrary that we must go a whole journey about to
clear ones self of Pycorner; and resolve without much consideration, that a
Chyrurgion must be sent for: And nevertheless, although it be very shameless,
yet the necessity occasions and forces the doing of it: But when there is
talked of such things, it makes me think a thousand times over of a certain
passage that happened to one of my nearest friends and relations: When the good
woman, being at the very end of her reckoning, begun to be grieved and pained
very cruelly with the pangs and twangs of Childbearing, and it continued very
long. What remedy soever they used, it helped not, nor would go as they would
have it: nay it continued three whole days and nights; and then the woman
begun to cry out, Oh I cannot be delivered, unless I see that cut off before my
eyes, by which I did get it. Well I pray Mistress, (said Madam Scripture) what a
horrible strange desire is this? Never did any Wife ask this of a Husband!
Would you in such a manner destroy that which was created for good? there is no
Law nor rule for that, neither can it be admitted. He has done his duty, and
it was your duty to be helpful to him therein; but not that you should request
such mad and senceless things as those are.

But it was even as much as if Madam Scripture, had knocked at a deafmans door,
for she bawled a hundred times, Oh I neither can nor shall be delivered, unless
I see that cut off with which I have gotten it.

Here was great need of good counsel: for what ever they said or did, she was
like the Cucko, sung her old constant song; and her pains rather decreased then
increased as to the effect of a safe delivery; in so much that there was a fear
both Mother and Child would be lost. But to be short the business was very
earnestly related to the husband, who was not very well pleased to hear a song
sung of that tune; and indeed it was esteemed to be by the Doctor, Chyrurgion,
Midwife, and all the friends rather a fit of frenzy and pure madness than any
thing else. Notwithstanding, the love of the husband, and necessity of the
wife, made them cogitate upon some subtle cheat in the case; that the husband
using some mournful actions, by wringing of his hands kissing and embracing
her; should say to her; be of good comfort, my dearest; for since it is thy
desire, behold, I will hazard my life to save thine. Presently three Doctors
and four Chyrurgians were sent for; who did, in the presence and sight of his
wife, bind him fast to a great arm-stoel; and he feigned to cry lamentably; and
that most especially when he saw the Chyrurgians terrible instruments pulled
out and laid in order about him: whilst they on the other side comforted him
with many persuasive reasons, and saying that he doubted not, but through their
diligence and care to make a good cure of it, but still acting and busy to do
the operation, at which the woman looked cruel sharp-sighted; and as they were
fumbling about him, some blood was spilt; just at which moment this man gave a
horrible shriek; and as it seemed then the operation was very dexterously
finished. But one of the Chyrurgians having gotten a Cows Teat, and made it
bloody, did it with such an agility and quickness, the woman could no otherwise
perceive but that her husband had lost his farthing candle. For the poor man
lamented bitterly, and fell in a swoon; but the wound being curiously dressed,
they laid him in bed, and commanded all things to be very quiet, etc.

The man was hardly warm in his bed, before the woman begun to be in a
bitcondition; and all things advanced so well every moment that in a very short
time after she was sasely delivered of a brave boy.

But the man kept his bed; and rejoiced heartily at his seeming gain; yet
feigning himself very bad as before; for fear that if the cheat were in the
least manner perceived, it might be a hindrance to the health of his wife.

But when it had continued some few days, the Doctors advised him, that he
should get up; and walk about a little which he did, and coming into his wives
Chamber, feigns himself very weak, etc. yet begun from day to day to grow
better and stronger as well as his wife.

The woman having lain-in some time, and the husband being cured; he begain to
creep to bed to her. And after the month was very little more then past, she
having a huge mind to be doing, begins to put her hand to wards her husbands
farthing candle to play with it. Where-upon the man pushes her hand away, and
says, Well how sweetheart, am I not miserable enough to be brought by you
already into such a deplorable condition, but you must needs grieve me yet more
with your dallying.

And for that time she was fain to be contented therewith. But before many
nights were past the Jill would be groping again; and because she was denied so
before, begins to ask in this manner, well, sweetheart, prithee is it so
totally taken away? Is there not so much as a stump left? Oh my dearest says
he, you know very well what I have suffered for your sake.

But at last nature overpow'ring him, it was impossible for him to tarry any
longer out of Venus's Orchard: which pleased her so well, that embracing him in
her arms, she whispers him quietly in the ear; saying, Oh sweet heart, the
stump I vow is as good as the whole was.

Thus ended Mistres Whatd'ye callser' discourse: And the Nurse perceiving that
through the length of the Story her mouth was grown dry in the telling,
proffers her a bouncing glass of Sack and Sugar.

In the mean time, at the the other end of the Chamber, Mistress Fairtail relates
a pretty story how their Maid was very curiously stitcht up by their Tailor;
and how she was every foot running thither, then to have a hole finely drawn
that she had torn in her Petti-coat, another while to have her Bodice made a
little wider, and then again to have her stockins soled. Which continued so
long till at last she was brought to bed of a pair of young Bodice with a lace
and tag to it.

It is no wonder, (says, Mistres Paleface) that this should happen to a poor
innocent servant Maid; there was my husbands first wives niece Mrs. Young rose
that modest Virgin, she kept such a close conversation and daily communication
with Master Scure, that at last there appeared a little Cupid with little ears,
and short hair.

Nay then (says Mistress Look about) those two Sisters need not twit one
another in the teeth with it; for the the other kept such a sweet compliance and
converse with the Spanish Fruiterer, yonder at the cornerhouse, where she did
eat so many China Oranges, and other watrish fruits, that they caused her to
get an extraordinary swelling under her stomach; which Doctor Stultus judged to
proceed from some obstructions, wind, and other watrish humors; but it did not
continue so long before her Mother, beginning better to apprehend the nature of
her distemper, sent her away to her Countryhouse at Hackney, where she was
cured of her obstructions and watrish humors, by the arrival of a little
Wag-about; at last returning home again very pale-faced for a tried Maid.

Mistress Lookabout was going to begin again; but they heard such rapping and
knocking at the door, that one of them said I believe there are our husbands;
and indeed she guest very well. This augmented their mirth mightily. And
especially of the Nurse; for now she was sure that, if the good Cully her
Master treated his Gossips nobly and liberally, her presents would be doubled.
But Nurse do not cheat your self, for fear it might happen otherwise; I know
once a merry boon Companion, who being at a Gossipping Feast, called the Nurse
alone to him; and says to her, Nurse, I Will swear you are very vigilant and take
a great deal of pains, in serving both us and our wives with all things, and
also filling of us full glasses and bowls: hark hither, my wife is a little
covetous, and oft-times so narrowsoul'd that she does not keep her credit where
she ought to do, so that I believe her gift will not be very great, and truly
because you are such a good body, see there, that is for you, put it some where
privately away; and therewith thrusts her an indifferent great brass Counter,
wrapped up in a paper, into her hand. The Nurse certainly believing this to be at
the least a Crown-piece, thanks him very demurely, and puts it in her Pocket;
never opening it till they were every one of them gone, but then she saw that
she was basely cheated. But Nurse you are warned now by this, another time you
may look better to it. Yet methinks I Would fill about lustily, it is the good man
of the house his wine; and when the Wine begins to surge crown-high; the men
are much more generous than before.

And verily methinks I have a mind to take my portion of it also; but yet not
so as the Nurse did at my Neeces; who had tossed up her bowls so bravely upon
the good health of the Childbed woman her Mistress, that when she was going to
swathe and feed the Child, instead of putting the spoon into the mouth, she
thrust it under the chin, and sometimes against the breast; and then when she
was about swathing of it; as it is commonly the custom to lay a woollen blanket
and linen bed together, she wrapped the poor Infant with its little naked body
only in the blanket alone.

O thrice happy young Father, who have hitherto so nobly treated and
encertained all your She-Gossips, and had the audience of all their curious
relations! Now you will have the honor also of entertaining their husbands
your He-Gossips, who will not be backward in doing of you reason out of the
greatest bowl you will set before them, and talk as freely of a Py-corner
merchandise.

Who is there now that does not praise, and commend your manfull deeds to the
highest? Ha, ha, says Master Laugh-wel, that is a Child! who ever saw a braver!
there is not the fellow on it! O my dearest, I have such a delight in this Child,
that if we were but a little alone together, I Would cast you such another as if it
were of the same mould. Stay a little, stay a little, says Master Fillup, it
may be you would not run so strong a course. Yet I saw once two Soldiers who
were Batchelors, that were sitting in an evening drinking in an Alehouse, and
talking lustily of the Bobbinjo trade; whereupon one of them said; Cocksbobs
Jack if I had but a Wife, as well as another, I Would presently get her with Child
of a brave boy. Ho, ho, says the the other, it is an easy thing to get a Wife
if one seek it. If I would, I dare lay a wager on it, I would be the Bridegroom
within the space of two hours. The other not believing him, they laid a wager
between them for a pottle of Wine. Hereupon one of them went out of doors just
upon the striking of the clock; and hardly was gone a streets length, before he
met with a bonny bouncing girl, who was going of an errand for her Mistress, and
he presently lays her on board. But she seemed to be very much offended, that
an honest Maid going about her business in the evening, should be in this
manner so encountered by a strange fellow, with a sword by his side. Verily,
Sweetheart, said he, you have a great deal of reason in all what you say; but
you may certainly believe that it is an honest person who speaks to you, and
only seeks an occasion to be acquainted with a virtuous good conditioned Maid.
My wearing of a sword, is because I am a Soldier, and am very well known by
many honest people. And truly, if you please to admit me this favor, you shall
see and find me to be an honest man, and none of those that go about to ly and
deceive; any body; and indeed my intention and desire is to marry, to that end
seeking nothing but an honest Maid, and I doubt not but that I have at this
time found one to my mind. And went forward with his chat in these sort of
terms. But the Maid denied him, saying, that she had no mind at-all to a
Soldier, because it was one of the poorest and miserablest sort of
levelihoods; their pay being but very little, and they were seldom advanced,
etc. He on the other side commending and approving a Soldiers life to be the
merriest, resolutest, and absolute easiest of any that was under the Sun;
because that neither hungry care, nor finical pride did any ways take place
by them, but that they, on the contrary were always merry, never admitting
sorrow into their thoughts. It Is true, said he, our pay is but small; but then
again, all what the Country people have, is our own; for what we want our
selves, we get from them: we never take care for to morrow, having always
something fresh, and every day new mirth. Riches, Sweetheart, does not consist
in multiplicity of Goods, but in content; and there is no one better satisfied
then a Soldier, therefore you shall always see an honest Soldier look plump
and fat, just as I do: but Drunkards and Whoremasters fall away miserably, etc,

In short, the Maid begun a little to listen to him (and so much the more,
because that very morning she had a falling out with her Mistress) and told him,
she would take it into consideration, He answered her again, what a fidle
stick, why should we spend time in thinking? we are equally matched: a Soldier
never thinks long upon any thing, but takes hold of all present opportunities,
and it generally falls out well with him. But she drawing back a little, he
says, ah my dearest, you must take a quick resolution. Behold there, yonder
comes a Cloud driving toward the Moon: I Will give you so much time, till that be
past by; therefore be pleased to resolve quick, for otherwise I must go and
seek my fortune by another. For a Soldier neither woos nor threatens long.

Upon this she considered a little, but before the Cloud was past by the Moon,
she gave him her consent; and he gave her his Tobacco-box for a pledge of
marriage; and desired some thing of her in like manner for a pledge; but she
said she had nothing: howsoever he persisted so strongly, that in conclusion
she gave him her Garter for a pledge of marriage. He was contented with it, and
taking his leave, went unto his Comrades; and told them what had happened to him,
showing them the Garter. Whereupon he that had laid the wager with him, asked,
who it was, what her name was, and where she dwelt, etc. And being told by
another, that it was a handsome, neat, and very well complexion'd Maid. By my
troth, said he, I with I were to give four Cans of Wine that I could light upon
such another. Well, see there, says the first, if you will give four Cans of
Wine, I will both give you the Garter and the Maid too into the bargain: It was
done but by Moonlight; so that she will hardly know whether it be me or another.

Hereupon the agreement was concluded, the two first Cans of Wine were spent,
and the Garter was delivered to him, and every one charged to keep it secret.

This second Soldier goes to the Maid next day in the evening, at the hour and
place where they had appointed to meet. And there relating to her several
passages that were passed between them the day before, and showing her the
Garter, made her believe that he was the person that had contracted with her
the day before. To be short, the Maid leaves her service and marries him. And
that which is most to be observed, is, that that which the first Soldier
vaunted to have done, the second performed; for just nine months after they
were married, she was brought to bed of a gallant young boy, and they lived
very peaceably and quietly together.

Well, I Will vow, says Master Crossgrain, that is a very notable relation; it is
better a great deal that the business happen so, then like another, which is
just contrary, that I shall make mention of to you.

Barebeard and Mally, who by a sudden accident, without much wooing, were
gotten together, and their first Bane of matrimony was published; but falling
out, they called one another all the names that they could reap together; nay
it run so high, that they would discharge each other of their promises, and
resolved to go to the Bishop and crave that they might have liberty to forbid
the Banes themselves, which happened so.

Barebeard coming then with Mall before his Grace, complained that he did
already perceive his intended marriage would never come to a good event,
because he found perfectly that this Maid was a lumpish Jade, a nasty Slut, a
Scolding, bawling Carrion, and a restless piece of mortality. Therefore it
might go as it would, he did not care for the Maid, neither would he marry her,
and for those reasons, he desired his Grace to grant that the Banes might be
forbidden; as thinking it much better for him to quit her betimes, before it
was too late. She on the the other side said, that he was one that run gadding
along the streets at all hours of the night, a private drunken beast, a
Spend-thrift, etc. so that she did not care for him neither. Whereupon his
Grace smiling told them, well you fellow and wench; do you think that we do
here so give and take away the consent of marriage? perhaps when you are
married, it may be much better, for the marriage bed does for the most part
change the ten senses into five. But she answered, may it please your Grace, he
is no such man to do that, for all that he can do is only to follow his own
round-head-like stifneckedness, and even nothing else. Whereupon he again
answered, may it please your Grace, I have no mind ever to try it with such a
creature as she is; I should be then fast enough bound to her; neither would I
willingly go alive headlong to the Devil, to take my habitation in Hell.

The Bishop thus perceiving that no good thread could be spun of such sort of
Flax, caused the Banes to be forbidden. Then said Barebeard, may it please your
Grace, am I not a freeman, and may I not marry with whom I please, or have a
mind to? to which his Grace answered, yes. Presently Barebeard thrufting his
head out at the door, calls out aloud, Peg do you come hither now; and begged
that his Grace would be pleased to give him leave to marry with this person.
Which Mall seeing she cries out, you Rogue, you have been too coming for me in
this; if I had the least thoughts on it, I would have had my Hal to have tarried
for me at this door, in stead of tarrying for me at another place. Whereupon
his Grace, being in great ire, chid them most shrewdly, giving them such strong
reproofs, that at first it might very well be imagined that he would never have
admitted of a second consent; yet afterward upon considerations it was
granted. But Barebeard being now married with Peg, they got no children: And
Mall being married to Hal, they had both a Son and a Daughter at one birth. By
which its easy to be observed what acquaintance Mall had made with Barebeard
before hand, and why she would rather marry with Hall then with him.

To this again Mistress Sweetmouth relates, that she had been several times
invited to Mistress Braves labor; and that she had been twice brought to bed
very happily of two delicate twins. And in the last encounter, for a recompense
of the affection of her Beloved, she presented him with two lustly and gallant
boys; but because she would equally balance his great bounty; the Midwife takes
the same walk again for another, and finding in what condition things stood,
she calls for a basin of warm water, bringing out at last a most delicate
pretty daughter, that was yet poor thing wrapped up in the Cawl. Which she
immediately laid into the warm water, and showed unto them all the wonderful
works of nature; for there they could see it move and stir, as if it had been
in its Mothers glass Bottle; but the skin being just cut open with a small
hole, it begun presently to make a little noise like a weak childish voice,
which indeed was very rare and pleasant to be seen. In truth, such a Father,
who can cast every time such high doubblets, may very well be called by the
names of Brave.

But this Story was hardly told before Mistress Tittle-tattle pursued it with
another out of the same Textsaying, A little more then two years ago I was at a
Gossipping by Mistress Gay, who was then brought to bed both of a Son and a
Daughter, also at one birth; but indeed the Labor carne so violently upon her,
that as she was standing upon the stairs, not being able to set one foot
further; and having neither Midwife, nor any other women of her neighbors and
friends, only the assistance of her husband and the Maid; she was immediately
delivered of two gallant Children; but they did not live long.

Upon my word, said Mistress Bounce-about, it is an excellent help when men
understand their traveling upon such sort of roads. It happened to me once that
some Gentlewomen were merry with me somewhat late in the evening; and because I
had had several Symptoms of Labor, said this Mistress Bounce-about, if you
would now take a walk to the Parsley bed, we would help you very bravely; but
neither wind nor weather was serviceable at that time. But they had hardly been
gone an hour, and being in bed with my husband, and he very fast asleep; before
there begun such an alteration of the weather; that my husband must up with all
speed, who wakened the Maid, and sent her for the Midwife laying on fire
himself in all have; yet do all what they could, within less then a quarter of
an hour, and that without any bodies help but my husbands, my journey was
performed; but things were done with such a confusion; that he received the
child in the Christning cloth instead of the Blanket.

And a thousand more such stories as these are ripped up; that would burden the
strongest memory to bear them: and so much the more, because it is impossible
to distinguish one from the the other, when the men and the women that gabble so
one among another. And oft-times they spin such course threads of bawdery in
their talk, that are enough to spoil a whole web of linen. And who can tell
but that their tattling would last a whole night, for there is hardly one of
them who has not at the least a hundred in their Budgets; but because it is
high time that either the Dry or Wet-Nurse must go to swathe the child, they
begin to break off and shorten their prittle-prattle.

Now young Father, do but observe what fine airy complements will be presented
to you at their parting. Every one thanks you for your kind and cordial
entertainment, and not one of them forgets to wish that you may the next year
either have a Daughter to your Son, or a Son to your Daughter; imagining then
that all things is well, when you receive such a full crop: But I am most apt
to believe that all their wishes aim at the But of coming next year again to
the Gossips Feast, to toss up the Gossipsbowl, and in telling of a bobbinjo
story they peep into all nooks and corners.

Well, O new Father, this Pleasure begins to come to a conclusion; but prithee
tell me, would not a body wish for the getting of such another, that his Wife
might make a journey to the Parsly-bed twice a year?

Now Nurse have at you; you shall now reap the fruit of all your running and
going early and late to invite them. Oh thinks she by her self, would but every
shilling change it self into a crown-peece. But Nurse you will hardly be troubled
with a fit of that yellow Jaundies sickness, for there is no drug at the
Apothecaries, nor any lite among the Beggars that can cure you of it. And I
dare say Nurse, that you will go nigh to perceive that its a very hard time, and
money mighty scarce: because formerly the women used to put their hands more
liberally in their purses, and one gave a crown, another half a crown; but the
times are now so strangely altered, that they keep little mild-shillings only
for that use, nay some of them rub it off with a couple of their Grandams gray
groats. But howsoever I hope for your sake, it will not be here according as
often happens, fair promises but no performances; for if it should, I protest
ye ought to have made your bargain to have had a piece more at the least for
your Nurse keeping; or otherwise you must have had the full liberty to toss up
the remains of all that was left in the Gossipping Bowls, or else to have
carried the key of the Wine Cellar always in your pocket, and then after the
feeding and swathing the child, you might in the twinkling of an eye, swinge up
a lustly glass upon the good health of the Father, Childbed mother and the
Child; for the Wine was laid in to be made use of to that end and purpose; and
it is commonly known that the Nurses are not so mealy mouthed; for although
they don't do it that every one should see it, they will be sure with the Maid to
get their shares in one corner or other. But you must for this again think,
that the freer you let them take their swing herein, the more care they will
take for the Child.

Now Nurse, don't spare to make good use of your time, for it belongs amongst
other things to this Pleasure; and the new Father will nevertheless be turning
about to another mirth, and then you may be sure to expect to have a God be
w'ye. Therefore make much of your self, and toss up your glasses stoutly at the
Wine-Cask; who knows whether you may have the opportunity this twelve month
again to meet with such a good Nurse-keeping; a liquorish sweet-tooth'd
Childbed woman, and a plentiful housekeeping, is not every where. And you
may certainly believe, that the month will be no sooner ended, then that you will
begin to stink here; for the Mistress will begin to consider with her self, that
she can make a shift with the Maid and Wet-Nurse; so that then you must expect
to get your undesired Pass.

Then you must return back again to your own lodging, that dark, moist and
mournful Cell, and satisfy your self, if you can get it, with a mess of nilk
and brown George, or some such sort of lean fare: So that you will have time
enough to wast away that fulsomness and fogginess of body, that you have gotten
in your Nursekeeping. For there is no body that will give you any thing, or
thinks in the least upon your attendance, unless they want you again.

O new Father, pray for it to come again within a twelve month, that you may
have a renewing of this pleasure once more; for it is with the Nurse-taking its
leave, and will conduct you to a following.

THE TENTH PLEASURE,
A great Childbed Feast is kept, and the Child put in Clothes.
OH how pleasant is the estate of married people, above that of Batchelors and
Maids? how it distributes Mirths and Pleasures! Verily one may in some measure
recogitate or write something of it, but it is impossible to imprint so
Sun-like a splendour in Potters clay, or to display it with the most curious
Colors. Though the accomplishedst Painter might have drawn it very near the
life, yet it would be but a dead draught, in comparison of the reality and
experience that is found in it self. You have already seen here nine Parts or
Tables but it is not ninety Pictures that can sufficiently show you the fullness
of one of the nine Parts.

Be therefore cheerfully merry, O sweet Couple, because you are in so short a
time arisen to the height of being possessors of all these Pleasures: And so
much the more, the ninth being hardly past, before the tenth follows, as it
were treading upon the heels of the the other.

I hey have scarce wiped their mouths or digested the Childbed Wine in their
stomachs, before there starts up a new day of mirth and jollity; for now there
must be a Childbed feast kept and the child must be put in Clothes. O what two
yast Pleasures are these for the young Father! it is indeed too much joy for one
person alone to be possessor of.

At first you had the Pleasure for to treat the Women, those pretty pleasing
Creatures, and to hear all their sweet and amiable discourses. But now you
shall be honored with treating the Matron like Midwife, and those Men and
Women that are your kindest friends and nearest relations; Yea and the
Godfathers and Godmothers also who will all of them accompany you with
courteous discourses and pleasant countenances: They will begin a lusty Bowl or
thumping glass, super naculum drink it out, upon the health and prosperity of
you, your Bedfellow and young Son; and very heartily wish that you may increase
and multiply, at least every year with one new Babe; because that they then
might the better come to the Child bed Feast.

Here you will see now how smartly they will both lick your dishes, and toss your
Cups and Glasses off. Begin you only some good healths, as; pray God bless his
Majesty and all the Royal Family: the Prosperity of our Native Country; all the
Well-wishers of the Cities welfare, etc. And when you have done, they will begin;
and about it goes to invest you with the honor and name, in a full bowl to the
Father of the Family; Well is not that a noble title; such a Pleasure alone is
worth a thousand pounds at lest.

And whilst the Men are busy this way; the good woman with the other Women
are contriving on the other side how the Child ought to be put in Clothes upon
the best and modishest manner: For she is resolved to morrow morning to be
Church'd, and in the afternoon she will go to market.

She accomplishes the first well enough, but is at a damnable doubt in the
second part of her resolution; for by the way, in the Church, and in the
streets, she has continually observed several children, and the most part of
them dressed up in several sorts of fashions: Some of them she has a great
fancy for, but then she doubts whether that be the newest mode or not. One
seems too plain and common, which makes her imagine in her thoughts; that is too
Clownish. But others stand very neat and handsome. It Is rue, the Stuf and the
Lining is costly and very dear; but then again it is very comely and handsome.
And then again she thinks with her self, as long as I am at Market, I Would as good
go through stitch with it; and make but one paying for all; it is for our
first, and but for a little child, not for a great person; therefore it is
better to take that which is curious and neat, the price for making is all one;
besides it will be a great Pleasure for my husband when he sees how delicately
the child is dressed up, and his money so extraordinarily well husbanded.

Now, my dearest, pray be you merry: if the stuf has cost something much, you
have need but of little; and it is for your first. When it grows bigger, or
that you get more, you must part with much more money. Don't grudge at this for
once, because then you would spoil all your mirth and Pleasure with it. Rejoice
that you have a Wife, who is not only good to fetch children out of the Parsley
Bed; but is also very careful to see them well nourished, and neat and cleanly
clothed. You your self have the praise and commendation of it. Let her alone a
while, for women must have their wills; say but little to her, for her brains
are too much busied already; and it may be that in three hours time, you would
hardly get three words of answer from her; and suppose you should relate
something or other to her, this shall be your answer from her at last, that she
did not well understand you, because all her thoughts, nay her very senses do
as it were glide to and again, one among another continually, to order the
dressing up of her child.

I am very well assured, O new invested Husband, that your wits at present run
a Wool-gathering, because that both Merchandise and Trade are neither of them
so quick as you would fain see them; and by reason of this tedious and
destructive War, moneys is horrible scarle, nothing near so plentiful as you
could wish it to be: But comfort your self herewith, that it has happened
oft-times to others, and will yet also happen oftener to you. Yet this is one of
the least things; but stay a little, to morrow or next day the Nurse goes away.
This seems to be a merriment indeed; for then you will have an Eater, a
Stroy-good, a Stufgut, a Spoil-all, and Prittle-pratlen, less than you had
before.

You are yet so happy that you have a Wet-Nurse, that carefully looks after the
Child; by which means both you and your Wife are freed from tossing and
tumbling with it in the night: whilst others, on the contrary, that have no
Wet Nurses in their houses; begin first to taste, when the Dry-Nurse goes away,
what a Pleasure it is that the Child must be set by the Bedside, and the charge
thereof left unto both Father and Mother, when it oftentimes happens that the
good woman is yet so weak, she can neither lay the Child in, nor take it out of
the Cradle; insomuch that the Father here must put a helping hand to it, because
he is of a stronger constitution, and has the greatest share in it.

By my faith such as those are they who have the first and true taste of the
Kernel of the Tenth Pleasure; because the husband ought as then, out of a
tender affection for his wife to rock continually, that she might take her
rest; otherwise she would not get any suck in her breasts for the Child: And
happy they are sometimes, if they come often with but rocking the most part of the
night; for many times it happens, that the Child is so restless and unquiet,
that Father, Mother, and Maid; nay and all whatsoever is in the house must out
of their beds to quiet it; and though they use a thousand tricks and
stratagems, yet all is to no purpose.

And yet this is but a small matter for them neither; for before a few months
are past, the child begins to get teeth; and bawls and cries so night and day,
that they can tell the clock all the night long; wishing a thousand thousand
times over that they might see daybreak; and so by the comfortable assistance
of daylight receive a little solace for all their toiling and tumbling too and
again.

Yet I would advise such as these, that they must in no manner be discomforted
at this; if they intend to demonstrate that they have learnt something in the
School of Marriage, to exercise their patiences: But, on the contrary, to show
themselves contented with all things; being assured, that hereafter when all
this trouble is past, they shall receive the happiness, that the child will
return them thanks with its pretty smiles; and in time also will salute them
with a slabbering cocurring. And I believe now that they clearly find that all
things do not go so even in this World, as they well imagined: And that the
fairest Sunshine of Marriage, may be sometimes darkened with a Cloudy Storm.

You married people, that have the help of a Wet-Nurse, receive a much greater
advantage in participating of the Pleasures of Marriage, neither need you to be
troubled with tossing and dandling of the child in the night. But on the
contrary, you may challenge one another to encounter with all sorts of weapons
for venial pleasures; whereby you may most certainly be assured (by reason the
child does not suck its own Mother, that she is therefore touch and take the
sooner) that you will very speedily and unexpectedly receive the tiding, that
your beloved is proved with child, and begins to reckon again.

O, young House-Father, this is a most incomparable Pleasure for you! For now
you may most certainly see the approach of a Daughter to your Son; and by that
means reap the possession again of all those former Pleasures; and by every one
be saluted with the Title that you are an excellent good Artist at it.

If it be so, be careful that you do not gad up and down with your wife too
much on horseback, or in Coaches; for fear it might make her miscarry. But you
have learnt all these things well enough at the first, and without doubt have
kept them well in remembrance.

Do but behold, in the mean time, what an unexpressible Pleasure your dearly
Beloved has in the tricking up of her sweet Baby in the most neatest dresses.
What a World of pains she takes and spends her spirits, to make the Tailor
understand, according to what fashion she will have it made; and to hasten him
that all things may be ready and totally finished against Sunday next.

O new Father, now open your eyes! Behold what a pretty Son you have! How happy
you are in so loving and understanding a Wife that knows how to triek it so
curiously up in this manner! She was never better pleased! Undoubtedly the
Summer nights are too long, and the days too short for her to gad up and down
traversing the streets of the City, that she may fulfill her desire of showing
it to every body: never was any thing more neatly dressed. But the Nurse and the
Maid wish the Child in the mean while at Jericho; for their very backs and
sides seem to be absolutely broken with carrying it up and down from day to
day. And most especially when the Child is weaned, and the Wet-Nurse turned
away, the Maid cannot let it penetrate into her brain; that she now not only
the whole week must rock, sing, dandle, dress, and walk abroad with it; but
that she is upon Sundaies also bound to the Child, like a Dog to a halter; and
never can stir out; as she formerly did, to walk abroad with Giles the Baker,
or John True the Tailor; nor so much as go once to give a visit to her
Country-folks or kindred; which occasions no smail difference between the Maid
and the Mistress.

But good House Father, never trouble your self at it, for this belongs also to
the Pleasures of Marriage; nor do not seem discontented because your Dearest
walks abroad thus every day; but rather think with your self, she takes her
spinning Wheel and reel along with her. And if in her absence, you have not
that due attendance, nor find that in the house and Kitchen, things are not so
well taken care for why then, you must imagine to be satisfied with
the assistance of the Semstress, or some such sort of person, as well as you
were when you injoied the Eighth Pleasure: You must also observe, that if the
Child should sit much, it might get crooked legs, and then the sweet Babe were
ruined for ever. It is also too weak yet to be any ways roughly handled; but
it begins from day to day to grow stronger and stronger: Also with your
Dearests carrying it abroad continually to visit all your friends and
acquaintance, it learns by degrees to eat all things, and drinks not only Beer,
but some Wine too. And I assure you it is no small Pleasure for the Father and
Mother to see that this little young Gosling can so perfectly distinguish the
taste of the Wine, from the taste of the Beer: tho when it is come to some elder
years, perhaps they would give a hundred pound, if they could but wean it from
it. But that is too far to be looked into. And care too soon taken makes people
quickly gray headed.

Before you reach this length, yea perhaps before some few weeks are at an end;
you will see this sweet Babe afflicted with either the Measels or small Pox;
and then you will wish for a good sum of money that he might not be disfigured with
them, in having many pock-holes. And it is no wonder, for who knows whether he
may be past small-pocking and measeling when he is five and twenty years of
age? But on the contrary there may then perchance appear so many glimps of
marriage Pleasures from him, that such small things will not be once look at.

For if your Wife be now upon a new reckoning, and you come then, as I have
told you before, to get a Daughter; you will in time see what a pretty sweet
Gentlewoman she will grow to be; how modestly and orderly she goes to learn to
write and read; but most especially to prick samples; which perhaps she will be
wholly perfect in, before she has half learnt to sow: nay its probable that
she will be an Artist at the making of Bone-lace, though she was never taught it.

Otherwise both you and her Mother will reap an extraordinary Pleasure in
seeing your Daughter grow up in all manner of comely and civil deportments; and
that she begins to study in the book of French manners and behaviors; and
knows also how to dress up her self so finically with all manner of trinkum
trankums, that all the neighboring young Gentlewomen, and your rich Neeces
esteem themselves very much honored with the injoiment of her company; where
they, following the examples of their Predecessors, do, by degrees, instruct
one another in the newest fashions, finest Flanders Laces, the difference and
richness of Stuffs, the neatest cut Gorgets, and many more such lincombobs as
these. Nay, and what is more, they begin also to invite and treat each other
like grave persons, according as the opportunity will allow them, first with
some Cherries and Plums; then with some Filbuds and Small Nuts; or Wallnuts and
Figs; and afterward with some Chestnuts and new Wine; or to a game at Cards
with a dish of Tee, or else to eat some Pancakes and Fritters or a Tansie; nay,
if the Coast be clear to their minds to a good joint of meat and a Sallad. Till
at last it comes so far, that through these delicious conversations, they
happen to get a Sweetheart, and in good time a bedfellow to keep them from
slumbring and sleeping. And it is very pleasing to see that they do so observe
the making good of the old Proverb,

As old Birds did, the young ones sing,
Which is a very pleasant thing.
Happy are you, o you new Householders, who have already possessed your selves
of so many Pleasures in your marriage; and are now come just to the very
entrance to repossess your selves of them over again; and perchance they will
never depart from you as long as you see the one day follow the other. Be not
backward or negligent in relating your happiness to others; but if there be any
distaste or disaster that can happen in the married estate, lock it up in the
very Closet of your heart, and abhor everlastingly the thoughts of relating it;
then you will have many that will pursue your footsteps, and be Listed into
your Company, and then also will your estate and condition be famous through
the whole World.

Conclusion.
THus long you have seen, Courteous Reader, how that those married people, who
are but indifferently gifted with temporal means, endeavor to puff up each
other with vain and airy hopes and imaginations, persuading themselves that all
the troubles, vexations, and bondages of the married estate; are nothing else
but Mirths, Delights and Pleasures; perhaps to no other end but to mitigate
their own miserable condition, or else to draw others into the same unhappy
snare; as indeed oftentimes happens. But it is most sad and lamentable, that
the meaner sort of people, when they have thrown themselves into it, make their
condition a thoutimes worse then it was before: For they, who at first could
but very soberly and sparingly help themselves, do find when they are married,
that they must go through not only ten, but at least a thousand cares and
vexations. And all what has hitherto been said of the ten Pleasures, is only
spoken of the good and most agreeable matches; and not of any of those, which
many times are so different and contrary of humor, as the light is from
darkness; where there is a continual Hell of dissension, cursing, mumbling and
maundring; nay biting and scratching into the bargain, which for the most part
is occasioned by the quarrelsom, crabbed, lavish, proud, opinionated,
domineering, and unbridled nature of the female sex. Besides there are a great
number (which I will be silent of) who do all they can to please others, and
Cuckold their own husbands. And others there are that disguise themselves so
excessively with strong Waters, that a whole day long they can hardly close
their Floud-gates. So that you need not wonder much, if you see the greatest
part of women (tho they trick themselves never so finely up) can hardly get
husbands; and their Parents are fain at last to give a good sum of money with
them, that they may disburthen themselves of them. Insomuch that it is easy to
be seen that they are in effect of less value then old Iron, Boots and Shoes,
etc. for we find both Merchants and money ready always to buy those commodities.

Therefore o you that are yet so happy as to have kept your selves out of this
dreadful estate of marriage, have a horror for it. Shun a woman much more then
a Fish does the hook, Remember that Solomon amongst all womankind could not
find one good. Observe by what has befallen those that went before you, what
is approaching to your self, if you follow their footsteps. And be most
certainly assured that the acutest pens are not able to expound the light and
feasiblest troubles and disasters of marriage, set then aside the most
difficile and ponderous. Do but read with a special observation the ensuing
Letter of a Friends advice touching marriage; imprintit as with a Seal upon
yoar heart; and lay fast hold upon that golden expression of the glorious
Apostle, It is good for man not to touch a woman.

The End of the Ten Pleasures of Marriage.
A LETTER From one Friend to another, Desiring to know whether it be advisable
to marry.
SIR,
I Must acknowledge that the Letter which you have writ me has given me some
encumbrance, and made me more then three times to ruminate upon the question
you propounded to me concerning Marriage; for it is a matter of great
importance, that ought to be well pondered and considered of, before one should
adventure to solemnize and celebrate it. Several of my familiar friends have
troubled me touching the very same subject, and I gave them every one my advice
according as they were affected; but methinks I ought not to deal so loose and
unboundedly with you, by reason I dare speak unto you with more freedom and
truth. First, there are two things which bind me strictly to you, Nature and
the Affection; and moreover the great knowledge I have of this so necessary an
evil. I will tell you my opinion, then you may use your own discretion, whether
you will approve of my meaning for advice or not. For my part, I believe that
of all the disasters we are subject to in our life time, that of Marriage takes
preference from all the rest: But for as much as it is necessary for the
multiplying the World, it is sit it should be used by such as are not sensible
of it, and can hardly judge of the consequences thereof. Neither do I esteem
any man unhappy, let whatsoever disasters there will happen to him, if he does
not fall beyond his sense so far as to take a Wife. Those troubles that may
befall us otherwise, are always of so small a strength I that he who has but
the least magnanimity may easily overpower them. But the Tortures of Marriage
are such a burden, that I never saw no man, let him be as courageous as he
would, which it has not brought under the yoke of her Tyranny. Marry then, you
shall have a thousand vexations, a thousand torments, a thousand
dissatisfactions, a thousand plagues; and in a word, a thousand sort of
repentings, which will accompany you to your Grave. You may take or choose what
sort of a Wife you will, she will make you every day repent your taking of her.
What cares will come then to awake and disturb you in the middle of your rest!
and the fear of some mischance or other will feed your very spirit with a
continual trouble. For a morning-alarm you shall have the children to a waken
you out of sleep. Their lives shall hasten your death. You shall never be at
quiet till you are in your Grave. You will be pining at many insufferable
troubles, and a thousand several cogitations will be vexing your spirits at the
chargeable maintenance of your Family. Insomuch that your very Soul will be
tormented with incessant crosses, which always accompany this evil, in the
very happiest marriages. So that a Man ought in reality to confess, that he who
can pass away his days without a Wife is the most happiest. Verily a Wife is a
heavy burden; but especially a married one; for a Maid that is. Marriageable,
will do all that ever she can to hide her infirmities, till she be tied in
Wedlock to either one or other miserable wretch. She overpowers her very nature
and affections; changes her behavior, and covers all her evil and wicked
intentions. She dissembleth her hypocrisy, and hides her cunning subtleties.
She puts away all her bad actions, and masks all her deeds. She mollifies both
her speech and face; and to say all in one word, she puts on the face of an
Angel, till she has found one or other whom she thinks fit to deceive with her
base tricks and actions. But having caught him under the Slavery of this false
apparition; she then turns the the other side of the Meddal; and draws back the
curtain of her Vizards, to show the naked truth, which she so long had
palliate, and her modesty only forbad her to reveal: By degrees then vomiting
up the venom that she so long had harbored under her sweet hypocrisy. And
then is repenting, or the greatest understanding of no worth to you: Perhaps
you may tell me, that you have a Mistress, who is fair, rich, young, wise, airy,
and has the very majestical countenance of a Queen upon her forehead; and that
these are all reasons which oblige you to love her. But I pray, consider with
your self, that a fair Woman is oftentimes tempted; a young, perilous; a rich,
proud and haughty; a wise, hypocritical; an airy, full of folly; and if she be
eloquent, she is subject to speak evilly: If she be jocund and light-hearted,
she will leave you to go to her companions, and thinks that the care of her mind,
is with you in your solitariness; and by reason she can flatter you so well, it
never grieves you. If she be open-hearted, her freedom of spirit will appear
hypocritical to you: her airiness you will judge to be tricks that will be very
troublesome to you. If she love playing, she will ruin you. If she be liquorish
and sweet-tooth'd, she leads your children the ready road to an Hospital. If
she be a bad Housekeeper, she lets all things run to destruction, that has
cost you so much care and trouble to get together. If she be a finical one,
that will go rich in her apparel, she will fill the Shopkeepers Counters with your
money. And in this manner her lavishness, shall destroy all your estate. To be
short, let her be as she will, she shall never bring you much profit. In good
troth, I esteem very little those sort of things, which you imagine to have a
great delight in. It Is true, if you take a Wife, which is ugly, poor, innocent,
without either air or spirit; that is a continual burden to you all your life
time. The old are commonly despised; the ugly abhorred; the poor slighted; and
the innocent laughed at. They are called beasts that have no ingenuity: and
women without airiness, have generally but small sense of love. In these last
some body might say to you, that one ought to take of them that are
indifferently or reasonably well qualified. But I will surge a little higher,
and tell you plainly, that that will be just like one who fearing to drown
himself at the brinks of a River, goes into the middle, to be the higher above
water. You see now, why I cannot advise you to marry. Yet I would not have you
to believe, tho I so much discommend it, that it is no ways usefully
profitable. I esteem it to be a holy institution ordained by God Almighty. That
which makes it bad is the woman, in whom there is no good. If you will marry,
you must then conclude never to be any thing for your self again; but to
subject your self to the toilsom will and desires of a Wife, most difficult to
be born with; to pass by all her deficiences; to assist her infirmities; to
satisfy her insatiable desires; to approve of all her pleasures, and what
soever she also will you must condescend to. Now you have heard and understood
all my reasons and arguments, you may then tell me, that you have a fine
estate, and that you would willingly see an heir of your own that might possess
it; and that it would be one of your greatest delights, to see your own honor
and virtues survive in your children. But as to that I Will answer you, and say,
that your reward shall be greater in relieving the poor and needy; then to
leave rich remembrances to Heirs; and procure you an everlasting blessing, that
you might otherwise leave for a prey to your children; who it may be are so
bastardized in their birth, that they are both Spendthrifts and Vagabonds; for
it happens often that good trees do not always bring forth good fruit. If, when
you have seriously perused this my Letter, you are not affrighted at your
intention; marry: but if you take it indifferently; marry not. And believe me,
that a man who is free from the troubles and vexations of marriage, is much
happier and has more content to himself in one day, then another in the whole
scope of his Wedlock. And what is more, a single man may freely and resolutely
undertake all things, to Travel, go to battle, be solitary, and live according
to his own delight; without fearing that at his death he shall leave a Widow
and Fatherless children, who must be delivered over to the Fates, for their
friends will never look after them. Hitherto I have kept you up, concerning
your intention; and further I give you no other advice, then what by your self
you may take to your self. If you marry, you do well: but not marrying, you do
better. And if you will incline to me, rather then to marry, you shall always
find me to be

SIR Your very humble servant A. B.


