A SERMON OF THE BAPTIZING of INFANTS.

PREACHED In the Abbey-Church at Westminster, at the Morning Lecture, appointed
by the Honorable House of Commons.

By STEPHEN MARSHALL B D. Minister of the Gospel, at Finchingfield in Essex.

ACT. 2.39. The Promise is unto you and to your Children, and to all that are
afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

ROMANS 11.16. If the root be holy, so are the branches.

1 COR. 7.14. The unbeleeving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the
unbeleeving wife is sanctified by the husband, else were your children unclean,
but now they are holy.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes for Stephen Bowtell, at the sign of the
Bible in Popes-head-Alley. 1644.

TO The Reverend and Learned the Prolocutor, Assessors, the Commissioners of
the Church of Scotland, and the rest of the Assembly of Divines, now sitting in
Westminster.
SOme few of us who are of your number, freely bestowing our Labors in the
Abbey-Church, every Morning; we agreed among our selves to instruct our
Auditors in all the necessary Truths of that Doctrine, which is according to
godliness; One taking for his Subject, the Articles of Faith; Another the Ten
Commandments; Another the Lords Prayer, etc. My lot of late has been to
handle the Doctrine of the Sacraments, and coming in order to this Point, I
indevoured to clear it as fully as I could in one Sermon, and was thereby
compelled to borrow a little more time then is usually allotted to that
Exercise.

Importunity of many Friends, who conceived it might give some light to that
which is now made a great controversy, and might through the blessing of God,
be a means to reclaim some deceived Souls, or prevent the deceiving of
others, has brought it thus into Public view.

And although I know my self the unworthyest, and unablest of many, yet
because I am assured that it is Gods Truth which I have Preached, and which he
will bless, I was the more easily overcome by that importunity; if it may
contribute any thing to the helping forward of the great Work now under your
hands, and may ease you of any part of that Labor which so exceedingly
presses you, therein I shall rejoice; And in the opportunity I have by
Dedicating this to your Names, to testify that I am

Your unworthy Brother and Servant in the Lords Work, STEPHEN MARSHALL.

A SERMON OF THE BAPTIZING of INFANTS.
1 PET. 3.21. The like figure whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save us,
(not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God) by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.


IN this Morning Lecture, I have formerly in my course out of several
Scriptures handled the Doctrine of the Sacraments in General, and then
proceeded to speak of the Sacraments of the Old Testament, and therein their
number, their agreement and disagreement, with those of the New Testament; And
now lately have begun to open the Sacraments of the New Testament.

The first of them is now in hand; And I have already out of this Text, made
four or five Sermons, concerning the nature and use of the Sacrament of
Baptism, wherein I have cleared unto you: First, Who was the Author and
Institutour of it: Secondly, Who is to be the (...) of it: Thirdly, The
Essence of it, the matter and form of it; both the res terrena, and the res
Coelestis, the earthly, and the spiritual part: and now Fourthly, it remains,
that I treat of the subject of it, or the persons who are to be Baptized; and
they are of two sorts; either grown men, who being instructed in the Doctrine
of Christ, and professing their Faith in him, and their willingness and readiness
to live according to his will, and do desire to be partakers of this blessed
Sacrament; These whether Jews or Gentiles, Male or Female, bond or free, are to
be admitted to the participation of this Ordinance; of the Baptizing of such
as these there is no question. The other sort are Infants, of whose right to
this Sacrament, I shall (by Gods assistance) treat this day.

And concerning these, there are two sorts of questions:

First, Whether any Infants at all are to be Baptized?

Secondly, Supposing some have right to it, yet it is greatly disputed, The
Question stated.
whose Infants may be Baptized? viz. Whether the Infants of Excommunicate
persons, of Heretics, of Profane men, of merely civilly Righteous; whether
Bastards, whether the Infants of Heathens, who are to be brought up by
Christians; and whether these may not be Baptized, with some caution used,
thereby to make distinction betwixt the pure and the impure? I shall for the
present baulk all these latter questions, and handle only the former, viz.
(...) any at all are to be Baptized? or, as the Question uses to be stated.

Whether the Infants of believing Parents, the Infants of Saints, are to be
admitted to the Holy Sacrament? And here also arises another question, Who are
to be meant by Believers and Saints, whether only such as have the inward
virtue of faith and holiness, who are really believers and sanctified ones, or
whether by Believers and Saints, may be meant such a faith and sanctity as is
outwardly professed, although possibly the inward grace it self (which only
God can judge of) be altogether wanting?

Concerning which question, The Infants of Believers ought to be Baptized.
although for my own part I believe we are to understand it of that which man
may judge of, and that God has not made that the condition of his servants
applying his Ordinances, which can be infallibly known to none but himself,
and that therefore the profession of Faith and holiness, is sufficient to make
men pass for Believers, and Saints in the Churches judgment, yet I shall at
the present baulk the handling of this also, and will take it in the surest
sense, in the Apostles sense, what the Apostle means by Believers and Saints,
when he writes unto the Churches, that I will take to be the state of the
Question: if by Believers and Saints the Apostle mean visible professors of
faith and holiness; then the Question is, whether their Infants are to be
baptized; if the Apostle by believers and Saints, mean such only as are
inwardly holy, inwardly believers, then the question is, whether their Infants
are to be Baptized: in a word, whether the Infants of such as were or might
have been styled believers and Saints in the Apostles days and writings, are
to be admitted to the Sacrament of Baptism.

This privilege of the baptizing of such Infants the Christian Church has
been in possession of for the space of fifteen hundred years and upwards, The
Primitive Church owned it.
as is manifest out of most of the Records that we have of antiquity, both in
the Greek and Latin Church; which I the rather mention in the beginning,
because many of the Anabaptists blush not to say, that the Ancients, especially
the Greek Church, rejected it for many hundred years: Justine Martyr, who lived
about Anno 150 (in a Treatise which goes under his name) Question 56. disputes
the different condition of those children, who dye baptized, and of them who
dye unbaptized.

Ireneus, who lived in the same Century, lib. 2. cap. 29. says, Christus venit
per seipsum omnes salvare; omnes, (...), qui per eum renascuntur in Deum,
Infantes and parvulos and pueros, etc. Now it is well known, say the Glossers
upon that Text, renascentiae nomine, Dominica and Apostolica phrasi, Baptismum
intelligi.

Origin, who lived in the beginning of the third Century, in his Treatise upon
Romans 6. lib. 5. says, The Church received this tradition of Baptizing of
Infants from the Apostles: and Homily 8. upon Leviticus, Secundum Ecclesiae
observantiam, Baptismum parvulis dari concedit, Hom. 14. in Lucam, Parvuli
baptizantur in remissionem peccatorum: he calls it indeed a Tradition, according
to the expression of the Ancients, who ordinarily called the greatest points of
Faith, by the name of Traditions received from the Apostles. Traditions being
only such things as are delivered from one to another, whether written or
unwriten. And so did the Apostle himself, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. when he charged them
to hold the Traditions which they had been taught, either by word or Epistle.
However his calling it a Tradition received from the Apostles gives us a
sufficient proof, that time out of mind, it had been received in the Church,
that it was delivered over to the Church in his time, and was of ancient use in
the Church before his time.

Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. 40. in Baptismum, calls Baptism signaculum vitae
cursum ineuntibus, and commands children to be baptized, though afterward he
seemed to restrain it to the case of necessity.

Cyprian, one of the Antientest Writers amongst the Latins, handles it at
large, in Epist. 59. Ad Fidum, upon this occasion; Fidus denied not the
Baptism of Infants, but denied that they ought to be Baptized, before the
eighth day; Cyprian assures him that by the unanimous consent of 66. Bishops
gathered together in a Council, Baptism was to be administered to Infants, as
well as to grown men, and not to be restrained to any time, and proves it by
such Arguments as these: They are under original sin, they need pardon, are
capable of grace and mercy, God regards not age, etc. This testimony of
Cyprians is cited and approved by August. Epist. 28. and lib. 3. de Merit. and
Remiss. pecca. cap. 5. and lib. 3. contra Pelag. and by Hierom contra Pelag.
lib. 3. Of the same judgment was Ambrose, lib. 2. cap. 11. De Abraham
Patriarcha, and many other of the Ancients, which I relate not to prove the
truth of the thing, but only the practice of it: and indeed, although some in
those times questioned it, as August. grants in his Sermons, De Verbis Apostol.
yet the first that ever made a head against it, or a division in the Church
about it, When the Sect of the Anabaptists began.
was Baltazar Pacommitanus in Germany in Luthers time, about the year 1527.
and since that time multitudes in Germany have embraced his opinion, who
because they opposed Paedo-baptisme, were forced to reiterate their own
Baptism, and thence were called Anabaptists, and soon proved a dangerous and
turbulent Sect against that Reformation; not only working a world of mischief
about Munster and other parts of Germany, but have with this opinion, drunk in
abundance of other dangerous Heresies and Blasphemies, and quickly grew into
such divisions, and sub-divisions among themselves, Niceph. 12.35
that Bullenger notes that they were grown to no less then fourteen several
Sects in his time: Niceph. 12.30
which in truth is the common lot of all Sectaries; who when once they have
departed from the Church, upon every small occasion they come to be divided
again among themselves, and one from another: As the Ecclesiastical Story
lets us see in the Novatians, Macedonians, Eunomians, Arians, etc. which
divisions also opened a way to their total destruction in the end: their
mutual bickerings among themselves, being as the beating of the waves of the
Sea one against another, till all were changed, as the Historian notes of them.
And because this Opinion, and diverse others which depend upon it, begins
unhappily to take place and spread among our selves in this Kingdom; and so the
work of Reformation (without Gods mercy) likely to be much hindered by it; I
shall (God willing) handle this Question more largely, then I have done any
other in this place; and the rather because of three other great mischiefs
which go along with it.

And the danger of their opinions.
First, I see that all who reject the Baptizing of Infants, do and must upon
the same ground reject the Religious observation of the Lords day, or the
Christian Sabbath, viz. because there is not (say they) an express institution
or command in the New Testament. Verily, I have hardly either known, or read,
or heard of any one who has rejected this of Infants, but with it they reject
that of the Lords day: now God has so blessed the Religious observation of the
Lords day in this Kingdom above other Churches and Kingdoms, that such as
endeavor to overthrow it, deserve justly to be abhorred by us.

Secondly, the Teachers of this Opinion, where ever they prevail, take their
Proselytes wholly off from the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and all
other acts of Christian communion, both public and private; from any, but
those who are of their own opinion, condemning them all as Limbs of
Antichrist, worshippers and followers of the Beast: And so not only labor to
cast the godly Ministers out of the hearts of those people whom they have won
to Christ; but leave the people whom they ensnare without any hope of recovery,
whilst they impose upon their consciences to hear none but such as may
confirm them in their errors; An old trick of Satan which he taught the
Papists long agone, a mere politic device to keep their Disciples fast unto
themselves: which unchristian course, how prosperous soever it may seem to be
at the first, cannot be blessed by God, nor indeed is it, the Lord giving them
up almost every where, to other most dangerous, vile, and abominable opinions.
I deny not but some few who are of this opinion are otherwise minded, but all
our experience teaches us that the generality of them do run this way.

Thirdly, this opinion puts all the Infants of all Believers into the self-same
condition, with the Infants of Turks and Indians, which they all readily
acknowledge; and from thence unavoidably one of these three things must follow.
1. Either all of them are damned who die in their Infancy, being without the
Covenant of grace, having no part in Christ. Or, 2. All of them saved, as
having no original sin, and consequently needing no Savior; which most of
the Anabaptists in the world do own, and therewith bring in all Pelagianisme,
Universal grace, Free Will, etc. Or, 3. That although they be tainted with
original corruption, and so need a Savior, Christ does pro beneplacito, save
some of the Infants of Indians and Turks, dying in their Infancy, as well as
some of the Infants of Christians; and so carry salvation by Christ out of the
Church, beyond the Covenant of grace, where God never made any promise: That
God has made a promise to be the God of believers, and of their Seed, we all
know; but where the promise is to be found, that he will be the God of the
seed of such Parents who live and die his enemies, and their seed, not so much
as called by the preaching of the Gospel, I know not. These men say the
Covenant of grace made to the Jews, differs from the Covenant of grace made
with Us; but I desire to know, whether in the one, or in the other, they find
any promise of salvation by Christ to any Infants dying in their Infancy,
whose Parents no way belonged to the Family of GOD, or Covenant of Grace.

The matter then being of such consequence, and many amongst us in such danger
of being seduced, further then is easy to imagine, through the subtilty,
activity, and diligence of such as with a great show of Scriptures, and under a
pretense of zeal, do creep into Houses; yea, proclaim these things openly
in Pulpits: I take my self bound upon this occasion to show you upon what
grounds the Orthodox Church has hitherto retained this practice, and shall
bring all that I intend to speak of it under two Arguments, and under them
shall endeavor to Answer whatsoever I have found of any moment objected to the
contrary.

My first Argument is this, The Infants of believing Parents are foederati,
First Argument they are under the Covenant of grace, and therefore must have
the seal of the Covenant.
therefore they must be signati: they are within the Covenant of grace,
belonging to Christ's body, kingdom, family; therefore are to partake of the
seal of his Covenant, or the distinguishing badge between them who are under
the Covenant of grace, and them who are not.

The ordinary Answer to this Argument is, by denying that Infants are under the
Covenant of Grace; only some few deny the consequence, that although they were
within the Covenant, yet it follows not that they must be sealed, because
(say they) the Women among the Jews were under the Covenant, yet received not
Circumcision, which was the seal of the Covenant; but this receives an easy
answer, the Women were Circumcised in the Males, else could not God have said,
that the whole house of Israel were Circumcised in the flesh, else could not
the whole Nation of the Jews be called the Circumcision, in opposition to all
the World beside, who were called the Uncircumcision.

But for the better clearing of this whole Argument; I shall endeavor to make
good these five Conclusions. This Argument made good by five Conclusions.


First, that the Covenant of Grace has always for substance been one and the
same.

Secondly, God will have the Infants of such as enter into Covenant with him,
be counted his, as well as their Parents.

Thirdly, God has ever since Abraham's time, had a Seal to be applied to such
as enter into Covenant with him.

Fourthly, by Gods own order the Seed, or Infants of Covenanters before
Christ's time, were to be sealed with the seal of admission into his Covenant,
as well as their Parents.

Fifthly, the privilege of such as are in Covenant since Christ's time, are as
honorable, large, and comfortable, both to themselves and their children, as
they were before Christ's time: and these five Propositions made good, the
Argument will be strong and undeniable.

The first is, That the Covenant of grace, for substance, 1. Conclusion.
has always been one and the same, The Covenant of grace always the same for
substance.
both to the Jews and to the Gentiles. Which to understand, know, that the new
and living way to life was first revealed to Adam immediately after his fall,
and that blessed promise concerning the Seed of the woman was often renewed,
and the Patriarchs faith therein, and salvation thereby, recorded plentifully
in the Scripture: but the first time that ever it was revealed under the
express name of a League or Covenant was with Abraham; and therefore we shall
need look no higher then his days: who because he was the first explicit
Covenanter, is called the father of the faithful; and ever since clearly has
all the world been divided into two distinct bodies or families; the one called
the Kingdom, City, Household of God, to which all who own the way to life,
were to join themselves; and these were called the Children of God, the Sons
of Abraham, the Children of the Kingdom: all the rest of the World, the
Kingdom of the Devil, the Seed of the Serpent, Strangers from the Covenant of
Grace, without God in the world; Wherein lies the substance of the Covenant.
etc. Now I say that this Covenant of Grace has for substance been always the
same; for substance I say, for we must distinguish betwixt the Covenant it
self, and the manner of administration of this Covenant: The substance of the
Covenant on Gods part was, to be Abrabrahams God, Genesis 17.1 etc. Gal. 3.15.
Romans 4.3. John 8.56.
and the God of his Seed, to be an All-sufficient portion, an All-sufficient
reward for him, to give Jesus Christ to him, and Righteousness with him, both
of Justification and of Sanctification, and everlasting life. On Abraham's part
the substance of the Covenant was, Gal. 3.6. Genesis 17.1. Genesis 18.19. Gal 3.17.19.
to believe in the promised Messiah, to walk before God with a perfect heart,
to serve God according to his revealed will, to instruct his family, etc. The
manner of administration of this Covenant at the first was by types, Though not
the same for manner of administration.
and shadows, sacrifices, etc. And four hundred and thirty years after the
Law was added with great terror upon Mount Sinai, not as a part of this
Covenant, but as the Apostle says expressly, it was added because of
Transgressions, to be a Schoolmaster to whip to Christ; Plainly in that
giving of the Law, there was something of the Covenant of works made with Adam
in Paradise; yet in order to the Administration of the Covenant of grace, there
was a rehearsal of the Covenant of works, under which all men lie by nature,
until they be brought under the Covenant of grace: and this was delivered
with great terror, and under most dreadful penalties, that they who were prone
to seek justification in themselves, by finding the (...), the impossibility
of their keeping the Law, might be driven to seek for a better Mediator, even
the Lord Jesus Christ, as was excellently shadowed out, Exodus 20.18, 19, 20.
Deuteronomy. 5.24. when they cried out to Moses; that they might no more hear this
dreadful voice, which would kill them, but that they might be spoken unto by
a Mediator: and GOD said, they had well spoken, and presently accepted Moses
for their typical mediator, and by him gave them the Gospel in their
Tabernacle Ordinances. And there was also something of the administration of the
Covenant of grace; partly, because all the threatening and cursing part of it
was intended as a preparative and means to fit them for Christ; and partly
because the directing part of it, contains that very rule whereby Abraham, and
all his Seed were ordered to walk in obedience toward God.

To conclude this, All their external promises in case of obedience, all
outward blessings which were to be enjoyed by them, the Land of Canaan, and
all the good things in it, all outward punishments and threatenings, loss of
their Country, going into Captivity, all their Sacrifices* their Washings,
their Sprinklings, their holy Persons, holy Feasts, and holy things, were all
of them but so many Administrations of the Covenant of Grace; Earthly things
then, were not only promised or threatened more distinctly and fully, then now
they are to them who are in Covenant, but were figures, signs, types and
Sacraments of spiritual things, to be enjoyed both by them and by us; as
might be cleared by abundance of particulars: Take but that one instance of
the Land of Canaan, which albeit in it self it was but like other Lands* yet
was it by the Lord sanctified to spiritual ends, where he would have his
Tabernacle pitched, and Temple built, out of which Land, when the ten Tribes
were carried captive, he is said to have put them out of his sight: the very
Land being figuratively holy, and a sign of Gods presence, 2 King. 17.18.
the resting of Gods people there, a sign of their eternal rest in Heaven,
into which not Moses the Lawgiver, but Joshua, or Jesus, the type of their true
Jesus was to bring them: Heb. 3.11.4, 5, 8.
neither did the Lord promise them entrance into, or continuance in that Land,
but upon the same conditions upon which he promises eternal life, as true
Faith in the Gospel, Heb. 3.17, 18, 19. with 4.2.
with the love and fear of God, and obedience of his Commandments: Godliness
having then, as it has now and always, the promise of good things for this
life, Lev. 20.2 etc. 26.36. Deuteronomy. 10.12.13. with 11.1.8, 9, 22. etc. 1 Cor.
10.5, 6, 7.
and the life to come, of earthly things, then more distinctly, and fully, and
typically, but of heavenly things more generally and sparingly; whereas now on
the contrary, there is a more clear and full revelation and promise of
heavenly things, but the promise of things earthly, more general and sparing:
Now this external Administration of the Covenant is not the same with us, as
it was with them, but the Covenant is the same; they were under the same misery
by nature, had the same Christ, the Lamb slain from the beginning of the
World, the same conditions of Faith and repentance, to be made partakers of
the Covenant, had the same graces promised in the Covenant, Circumcising of
their heart, to love the Lord, etc. Theirs was dispensed in darker Prophecies,
and obscurer Sacrifices, types, and Sacraments, ours more gloriously and
clearly, and in a greater measure: the clothes indeed do differ, but the
body is the same in both.

As is apparent, if, First, you look but into the Prophecies that were made,
The Identis of the Covenant to Jews and Gentiles, proved.
Jer. 31.33. Isaiah 59.21. Joel 2.32. and many other places, where the same
things are promised to the Gentiles, when the Gospel should be preached unto
them, which were first promised to Abraham, and to his seed; but more fully,
Jerem. 31.33. Esa. 59.21 Joel 2.32. Luke 1 54. etc.
if you look into the New Testament, where you shall find, Luke 1.54, 55, 69,
70, 72, 73. Luke 2.31, 32. that Christ and the kingdom of grace by him, is
acknowledged to be the sum of the oath and Covenant, which God had promised
to Abraham, and to his seed: So Matthew. 21.41, 43. the same Vineyard that was
let to the Jews, should afterward be let to the Gentiles; the same kingdom of
God which was formerly given to the Jews, should be taken from them, and given
to the Gentiles: So Romans 11. the Gentiles were to be ingraffed into the same
stock in which formerly the Jews had grown, and from which they were now to
be cut off, Luke 2.31. Mat. 21.41.43. Romans 11. Gal. 3.8.14, 15, 16. Ephe. 2.13
etc.
and into which in the end they should be ingraffed again: So Gal. 3.8.14.16.
Abraham had the same Gospel preached to him, which is now preached to us, the
same blessing bestowed upon Abraham, comes on the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ, that they (as well as he) might receive the promise of the Spirit
through Faith; they who receive the promise of the Spirit through faith, have
the blessing of Abraham come upon them: as clear is that, Ephesians. 2.13. to the
end of the Chapter, the partition wall which severed us from the Jews, is now
broken down, and the Gentiles who formerly were afar off, are now taken in,
and made Inter-Commoners with the Jews; the Apostle alluding to the manner of
the Jewish worship, where beyond the Court wherein the Jews did worship, there
was another Court divided from it by a sept or wall, which was called, Atrium
gentium and immundorum, the Court of the Gentiles and of the unclean, nearer
then which none of them might approach unto the Temple; but now says he, The
partition wall is broken down, and we are no more Strangers and Forainers,
but made felow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God; and with
them grow up unto an holy Temple in the Lord; all which shows, that the very
self same privileges formerly made peculiar to the Jews, are now through
Christ communicated to the Gentiles. And this will yet more fully appear, if
we consider how St. Paul to the Galatians, shows that the same seed of
Abraham, so much spoken of in the Covenant made with him, is now found among
the Gentiles, as (...) was formerly among the Jews, there you shall find three
sorts of Abraham's seed: First, Christ, Gal. 3.16. the root and stock, the head,
and Elder brother of all the rest. Secondly, all true believers are Abraham's
seed, cap. 3.29. these only are made partakers of the spiritual part of the
Covenant. Thirdly, you shall find another seed of Abraham, who were only
circumcised in the flesh, and not in the heart, who though they were either
borne of Abraham's seed or professed Abraham's faith, and so were Jews facti,
though not nati, made though not borne Jews, becoming Proselytes, yet never
came to make Abraham's God their All-sufficient portion, but placed their
happiness in somewhat, which was not Christ, either by seeking justification
by the works of the Law, being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about
to establish their own righteousness did not submit themselves unto the
righteousness of God, Romans 10.3.
or placed their happiness, in satisfying the lusts of their flesh, going a
whoring after the creature; and so though they were Abraham's seed by profession
and outward cleaving to the Covenant, yet were to be cast off with the rest of
the uncircumcised, of whom Ishmael and Esau were Types, Gal. 4.22. etc. Even so
is it now in the times of the Gospel, we have now Jesus Christ, the Elder
brother, the firstborn of the Covenant, we have also true believers, who are
brethren and Co-heires with him, who are properly the heirs by promise, and
we have also some who are only a holy seed by external profession, Gal.
4.29. who either with the false Teachers, Gal. 4.29.
which Paul there speaks of, mingle justification by the Law and Gospel
together, or with others, 2 Timothy 3.5. though they have a form of godliness;
yet deny the power of it in their lives and conversations. So much for the
first Conclusion, that the Covenant of grace, for substance, was always one
and the same.

Ever since God gathered a distinct, select number out of the world, 2
Conclusion.
to be his Kingdom, City, Household, in opposition to the rest in the world,
Infants taken into Covenant with their Parents.
which is the kingdom, city, household of Satan, he would have The Infants of
all who are taken into Covenant with him, to be accounted his, to belong to
him, to his Church and Family, and not to the devils. As it is in other
Kingdoms, Corporations, and Families, the children of all Subjects borne in a
Kingdom, are borne that Princes Subjects, where the Father is a free man, the
child is not born a slave; where any are bought to be servants, their children
born in their Masters house, are born his servants. Thus it is by the Laws of
almost all Nations, and thus has the Lord ordained, it shall be in his
kingdom and family; the Children follow the Covenant-condition of their
Parents, if he take a Father into Covenant, he takes the Children in with him;
if he reject the Parents out of Covenant, the children are cast out with them;
Thus without all question it was in the time of the Jews, Hosea 2.2 Exodus 12
48, 49.
Genesis 17.9. etc. and when any of any other Nation, though a Canaanite or
Hittite, acknowledged Abraham's God to be their God, they and their children
came into covenant together.

And so it continues still, though the Anabaptists boldly deny it: Act. 2.38,
39. when Peter exhorted his hearers, Act. 2.38, 39. opened and cleared.
who were pricked in their hearts, to repent and be baptized for the remission
of sins, he uses an Argument to persuade them, taken from the benefit which
should come to their posterity, for the Promise (says he) is unto you and unto
your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call: if once they obey the call of God, as Abraham did, the promise was
made to them and to their children, whether they who obey this call were the
present Jews to whom he spoke, or were afar off: whether by afar off, you
will mean the Gentiles, who as yet worshipped afar off, or the Jews or any who
as yet were unborn, and so were afar off in time, or whether they dwelt in
the remotest parts of the world, and so were afar off in place, the Argument
holds good to the end of the world, Repent and be baptized for the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost; For the Promise is made to you and
to your children, they shall be made free of Gods City, according to Abraham's
Copy; I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. Let Zacheus the Publican once
receive Christ himself, be he a Gentile, as some think he was, be he a great
sinner, esteemed as a heathen, as we all know he was, let him profess the
faith of Christ, Luke 19.
and the Covenant of Salvation comes to his house; for now he is made a son
of Abraham: that is, Abraham's promise now reaches him.

Object. Answ.
Neither can the evidence of this place be eluded by saying, the promise here
meant, is of the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, to speak with tongues,
etc. For we all know that all who then believed and were baptized, did not
receive those extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, and beside this Argument
remains still in force to be used to the end of the world, Who ever believes
and is baptized, shall receive remission of sins, and the gift of the Holy
Ghost: Which was not true, if by the Holy Ghost was meant only those
extraordinary gifts.

Object. Answ. 3.
Nor, secondly, can it be avoided by that shift of others who interpret it thus,
To you and your children as many of them as the Lord shall call, that is (say
they) whether your selves or your children, or any other whom the Lord shall
call. if they repent and be baptized, they shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost, for it is plain that the strength of this Argument lies in this, That
if they did repent and were baptized, the promise should be made good to them
and to their children and what comfortable argument can this be taken from
respect to their children, if the Apostle must be interpreted as these men
would have him? viz. You and your ch^ldren have hitherto been an holy seed,
but now if you believe in Christ your selves, your children shall be in no
better condition then the rest of the Pagan world, strangers from the Covenant
of God* but if afterward any of them, or any of the Heathen shall for their
parts believe and be baptized, their particular persons shallbe took into
Covenant, but their children still left out: Had this think you been a
comfortable Argument to persuade them to come in, in relation to the good of
their children after them? The plain strength of the argument is, God has now
remembered his Covenant to Abraham, in sending that blessed seed, in whom he
promised to be the God of him and his seed; do not you by your unbelief
deprive your selves and your posterity of so excellent a gift. And except in
relation to the Covenant, there was no occasion to name their children, it had
been sufficient to have said, a promise is made to as many as the Lord shall
call.

As plain it is out of the 11. of the Romans 16. etc. where the Apostles scope
is to show that we Gentiles have now the same graffing into the true Olive
which the Jews formerly had, and our present graffing in, Romans 11.16 opened.
is answerable to their present casting out, and their taking in in the latter
end of the world shall be the same graffing in (though more gloriously) as ours
is now: Now all know that when they were taken in, they and their children were
taken in, when they were broken off, they and their children were broken off,
when they shall be taken in, in the latter end of the world, they and their
children shall be taken in, and that because the root is holy, that is, Gods
Covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, extends yet unto them when their
unbeleefe shall be taken away. The root being like Nebuchadnezzars tree, the
tree hewn down, and the root bound with a band of iron until seven times
were passed over it, and then the bands should be broken, and the root should
spring, and the tree should grow again: so their present Nation, like this
tree, is cut down, and this holy root the Covenant made with their
forefathers, is suspended, bound with an iron bar of unbelief, blindness
being come upon them, unt^ll the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and then
all Israel shall be saved. And mark that in all this discourse, the holiness
of the Branches there spoken of, is not meant of a personal inherent
holiness, but a derivative holiness, a holiness derived to them from their
Ancestors; the first fruit is holy, the lump holy, the root holy, the branches
holy, that is, the Fathers holy accepted in Covenant with God, the children
beloved for their fathers sake; and when the veil of unbelief shall be taken
away, the children and their posterity shall be taken in again, because
beloved for their fathers sakes. Now then if our graffing in, be answerable to
theirs in all, or any of these three particulars, we and our children are
graffed in together.

Ob. But here is no mention made of our Infants graffing in.

Answ. We must not teach the Lord to speak, but with reverence search out his
meaning, there is no mention made of casting out the Jew^sh Infants, neither
here nor elsewhere: when he speaks of taking away the kingdom of God from
them, and giving it to the Gentiles who would bring forth fruit, no mention of
the infants of the one, or of the other, but the one and the other for these
outward dispensations, are comprehended in their parents, as the branches in
the root, the infants of the godly in their parents, according to the tenor of
his mercy, the infants of the wicked in their parents, according to the tenor
of his justice.

And yet plainer (if plainer may be) is that speech of the Apostle in 1 Corinthians. 7.14. 1 Cor. 7.14. opened and vindicated.
The unbeleeving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbeleeving wife is
sanctified by the husband, else were your children unclean, but now they are
holy; the plain scope and meaning whereof is this; the believing Corinthians,
among other cases of conscience which they had sent to the Apostle for his
resolution of, had written this for one, whether it were lawful for them who
were converted, still to retain their infidel wives, or husbands: their doubt
seems to arise from the Law of God, which was in force to the Nation of the
Jews; God had not only forbidden such marriages to his people, but in Ezra's
time, they put away not only their wives, but all the children that were borne
of them, Ezra. 10.4.
as not belonging to the Commonwealth of Israel; and it was done according to
the Law, and that Law was not a particular Edict which they did agree upon, but
according to the standing Law of Moses, which that word there used signifies;
and in Nehemiahs time, (...)
the children who were borne of such marriages were accounted a Mungrell kind,
whom Nehemiah cursed. Nehem. 13.24. etc.
Now hereupon these Corinthians doubted whether their children, as well as
their wives, were not to be accounted unclean, and so to be put away according
to those examples; to which the Apostle answers, No, they were not to be put
away; Upon what special reason soever, that Law was in force to the Jews,
believing Christians were not in that condition, the unbeleeving wife was
sanctified in the believing husband, quoad hoc, so far, as to bring forth an
holy seed; were it with them as when both of them were unbeleevers, so that
neither of them had a prerogative to entitle their children to the Covenant of
grace, their children would be an unclean Progeny; or were the children to be
reckoned in the condition of the worser parent, so that the unbeleever could
contribute more to Paganism then the believer to Christianity, it were so
likewise; but the case is otherwise, the believing husband has by Gods
ordinance a sanctified use of his unbeleeving wife, so as by Gods special
promise made to believers and their seed, they were invested, in, Mal. 2.15.
and to the most spiritual end of Marriage, the continuance of a holy seed,
wherein the Church is to be propagated to the worlds end: and the case is here
in Relation to the posterity for spiritual privileges, as in other marriages,
for civil privileges, as suppose a Prince, or Nobleman marry with a woman of
base or mean birth, though in general it be true, that the children of those
that be base, are borne base, as well as the children of Nobles are borne
Noble, yet here the issue has honor from the Father, and is not accounted
base by the baseness of the Mother. This I take to be the plain meaning of
the Apostles answer: But because the Anabaptists do very much endeavor to
weaken the evidence of this Argument, I shall endeavor to clear it from their
exceptions. They utterly deny that this place is meant of any Federall
holiness, but of legitimation, which they call civil holiness, and so
interpret the Corinthians doubt to be, whether their marriage with Unbeleevers
were not now a nullity, and their children thereupon to be spurious,
illegitimate, or Bastards, and the Apostles answer to be, that because the
unbeleeving wife is sanctified to the believing husband, that is, their
marriage remains lawful, therefore their children are not spurious, but
lawfully begotten. But that this cannot be the meaning, I clearly prove by
these four Arguments.

First, uncleanness and holiness, when opposed one to the other, 1. Argument.
Because uncleanness and holiness no where taken for civilly lawful.
are never taken for civilly lawful; uncleanness indeed, when opposed to
cleanness, may be taken in several senses, an unclean vessel, an unclean
cloth, an unclean garment; when opposed to clean, may signify nothing but
dirty or spotted; but when uncleanness is opposed to holiness, it is always
taken in a sacred sense, referring to a Tabernacle use, to a right of admission
into, or use in, the Tabernacle or Temple, which were types to us of the
visible Church; and holiness is always taken for a separation of persons or
things from common to sacred uses* 1 Timothy 4.5.
Even the meats and drinks of believers sanctified to them, serve for a
religious end and use, even to refresh them, who are the Temples of the Holy
Ghost; so that they have not only a lawful, but an holy use of their meat and
drink, which Unbeleevers have not, to whom yet their meat and drink is
civilly lawful.

And whereas some say, Object.
1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4, 5. that chastity a moral virtue found among Heathens, is
called by the name of Sanctification; Let every one possess his vessel, not
in the lust of concupisence, but in sanctification and honor.

I Answer, Chastity among Heathens, Answ.
is never called Sanctification, but among Believers it may well be called so,
being a part of the new creation, a branch of their sanctification, wrought by
the Spirit of God, a part of the inward adorning of the Temple of the holy
Ghost. So that the meaning cannot be, your children are holy, that is, now they
are not Bastards; but rather, whereas before, both you and they were unclean,
and might have nothing to do with the Temple of God, now both you and your
Children are a holy seed, according as was showed to Peter in his vision, where
God showed him, that the Gentiles formerly no better then unclean beasts, and
creeping things, Acts 10.
should upon their conversion to Christ be no longer esteemed common or
defiled.

Secondly, this being so, had this been the meaning, 2. Argument. The Apostles
answer had not contained a truth.
else were your Children unclean, but now they are holy, else had your
children been Bastards, but now they are legitimate; the Apostles answer had
not been true, because then if one of the Parents had not been a Believer, and
so by his being a believer, sanctified his unbeleeving Wife, their children
must have been Bastards: whereas we know their children had been legitimate,
being born in lawful Wedlock, though neither of the Parents had been a
believer: Marriage being a second Table duty, is lawful, (though not
sanctified) to Pagans as well as to Christians, and the legitimation or
illegitimation of the issue depends not upon the Faith, but upon the marriage
of the Parents; let the marriage be lawful, and the issue is legitimate,
whether one, or both, or neither of the Parents be believers or infidels: take
but away lawful marriage, betwixt the Man and the Woman, and the issue is
legitimate, whether one, or both, or neither of the Parents are believers or
infidels: withal, if the children of Heathens be Bastards, and the marriage of
Heathens no marriage, then there is no adultery among heathens, and so the
seventh Commandment is altogether in vain in the words of it as to them.

Besides, St. Paul's reason had no strength in it, supposing the Text were to be
interpreted as these men would have it; 3. Argument. Nor had the Apostles
argument had any reason in it, if interpreted as they would have it.
Their doubt (say they) was, that their marriage was an unlawful wedlock, and
so consequently their children Bastards; now mark what kind of answer they make
the Apostle give, Were ye not lawful man and wife, your children were
Bastards, but because the unbeleeving wife is sanctified in the husband, etc.
because your marriage is a lawful marriage, your children are legitimate. What
strength of reason is in this? if this had been their doubt or question,
whether their marriage were not a nullity, the Apostle by his Apostolic
authority might have definitively answered, without giving a reason, your
marriage is good, and your children legitimate; but if Paul will go about to
satisfy them by reason, and prove them to be mistaken, it behoved him to give
such a reason which should have some weight in it, but this has none; set
their doubt (as these men frame it) and the Apostles answer (as these men
interpret him) together, and you will easily see the invalidity of it; We
doubt, say the Corinthians, we are not lawful man and wife; and that therefore
our children are bastards. No, says Paul, you are mistaken, and I prove it
thus, Were ye not lawful man and wife, your children were bastards; but
because ye are lawful man and wife, your children are not bastards. Is there
any Argument or proof in this?

Fourthly, according to this their interpretation, the Apostles answer could no
ways have reached to the quieting of their consciences; 4. Argument. Nor could
have satisfied their doubt.
there doubt was, whether according to the example in Ezra, they were not to
put away their wives and children, as not belonging to God, as being a Seed
whom God would not own among his people; now what kind of quiet would this have
given them, to tell them that their children were not Bastards? We know the
Jews did not put away their Bastards, as not belonging to the Covenant of God;
Phares, and Zarah, and Jepthah, and innumerable others, though bastards, were
circumcised, and not cut off from the people of God.

And whereas some object out of Deuteronomy. 23.2. Deuteronomy. 23.2.
That Bastards did not belong to the Covenant among the Jews, because God there
forbad a bastard to come into the Congregation of the Lord.

I Answer, that is meant only of bearing Office in the Church, or some such
like thing, and not of being under the Covenant, belonging to the Church: as is
manifest, not only by what has been now said of Jepthah and others, who were
circumcised, and offered Sacrifices, and drew nigh to God, as well as any
other; but the very text alleged gives sufficient light, that it cannot be
meant otherwise; because in that place who ever is an Eunuch, or wounded in
his stones, has the same exclusion from the Congregation of the Lord: and I
hope no man will dare to say, that none such are holy to the Lord; if they
should, Esa. 56.3, 4. Acts 8.27.
the Scripture is full enough against them: That putting away in Ezra was of an
higher nature then bare illegitimation; and therefore it behooved the Apostle
to give another manner of satisfaction to there doubtful consciences, then to
tell them their children were not bastards: Therefore I conclude, that this
holiness being the fruits of one of the Parents being a believer, must be
meant of some kind of holiness, which is not common to the seed of them whose
Parents are both Unbeleevers, and that is enough for our purpose.

Yet there remains two Objections to be answered, which are made against this
our interpretation.

Object.
First, The unbeleeving wife is here said to be sanctified, as well as the
child is said to be holy, and the Original word is the same for both, one the
verb, the other the noune: if then the child is holy, with a federall
holiness, then is also the unbeleeving wife sanctified with a federall
sanctification, and so the wife, although remaining a heathen, may be yet
counted to belong to the Covenant of Grace.

I answer; Indeed there would be weight in this objection if the Apostle had
said the unbeleeving Wife is sanctified, Answer.
(...) the Greek preposition signifying to as well as in. as Gal. 1.16. 2 Pet.
1.5. Act. 4.12 1 Cor. 7.15.
and no more, as he simply says, the children are holy; but that he does not
say, he says indeed the unbeleeving wife is sanctified in the believing
husband, or to the believing husband: that is, to his use, as all other
creatures are, as the bed he lies on, the meat he eats, the clothes he
wears, the beast he rides on, are sanctified to him, and so this
sanctifyednesse of the wife is not a sanctification of state, but only of use,
and of this use, to be sanctified to the believing husband; whereas the
holiness and sanctification that is spoken of the children, is a holiness of
state, and not only a sanctification to the Parents use.

2. Object.
That holiness of the Children is here meant, which could not be, unless one
of the Parents were sanctified to the other, which is the force of the Apostles
arguing, the unbeleever is sanctified to the believer, else were not the
children holy, but unclean: but federall holiness of children may be where the
Parents are not sanctified, one in or to the other, as in bastardy, David's
child by Bathsheba, Phares, and Zarah, Judahs children by Thamar, the
Israelites children by the Concubines, Abraham's son Ishmael by Hagar, etc. in
which cases the children were federally holy, and accordingly were circumcised,
and yet the Harlot not sanctified in or to the Adulterer or Fornicator, though
a believer.

I answer, we must attend the Apostles scope, which is to show that the children
would be unholy, Answ.
if the faith or beleever-ship of one of the Parents could not remove the
bar, which lies in the other, being an unbeleever, against the producing of
an holy seed, because one of them was a Pagan, or unbeleever, therefore the
child would not be a holy seed, unless the faith or beleevership of the other
Parent, could remove this bar. Now this can have no place of an Argument, in
any case, where one of the Parents is not an Infidel: but this was not the
case among the Jews; Hagar, and Thamar, and the Concubines, however sinful, in
those acts, yet themselves were believers, belonging to the Covenant of God,
and that bar lay not against their children, as did in the unbeleeving wife:
indeed if a believing man or woman should adulterously beget a child upon a
Pagan, a Heathen, or Unbeleever, there this objection deserves to be further
weighed, but here it comes not within the compass of the Apostles Argument.

Before I pass from this second conclusion, let me further show you why the
Lord will have the children of believing Parents reckoned even in their
Infancy, Reason why God will have such Infants accounted his.
to belong to him. First his own beneplacitum, his free grace and favor which
moves him to show mercy to whom he will, is a sufficient answer to all: But
secondly, he will have it for his own glory. It is the honor of other
Princes, that all who are born in their kingdom should be accounted borne
their Subjects; and the honor of great Masters, that the children of their
servants born in their houses should be born their servants: Eccles. 2*7.
Solomon counts it a piece of his glory, that he had servants born in his
house. And on the other side, it is a dis-honour to a King not to be able
legally to lay claim to those born in his kingdom, but that another King,
yea, an enemy might legally challenge them to be his Subjects. So is it with
the Lord, he having left all the rest of the world, to be visibly the devils
kingdom, will not for his own glories sake permit the devil to come and lay
visible claim to the sons and daughters, begotten by those who are the
children of the most High. And thirdly, he does it both for the comfort and
duty of those who are in Covenant with him, partly, I say, for their comfort
and privilege, while they may see their children visibly to be provided for by
a better Father, under a Covenant of Grace, to whose care, and under whose wing
they may leave them, when themselves shall fail; and partly to be an
obligation to bring them up for God, not to themselves, much less to the
devil, but ever to look upon themselves in the education of their children, to
be but nursing Fathers and Mothers to train them up in the nurture and fear of
the Lord, unto whose kingdom, family and Covenant they thus belong.

I have been the larger upon these two first Conclusions, because indeed the
proving of these, gains the whole cause, if the Covenant be the same and
children belong to it, then they are to be owned as Covenanters, and to be
admitted to the distinguishing or discriminating sign betwixt Gods people and
the devils, and this the most learned of the Anabaptists do profess, that if
they knew a child to be holy, they would baptize it. In the other Conclusions
I shall be more brief.

3. Conclusion.
The Lord has appointed and ordained a Sacrament or seal of initiation to be
administered unto them who enter into Covenant with him, Circumcision for the
time of that administration which was before Christ's incarnation, Baptism
since the time of his incarnation; both of them the same Sacrament for the
sp^rituall part, though differing in the outward Elements; both appointed to be
distinguishing signs, betwixt Gods people and the devils people; both of them
the way and means of solemn entrance and admission into the Church; both of
them to be administered but once, and none might be received into the Communion
of the Church of the Jews, until they were circumcised, nor into the
Communion of the Church of the Christians until they be Baptized; none but the
circumcised might eat of the Paschall Lamb, none may, but those who are
baptized, be admitted to eat the Lords Supper, which succeeds in the room of
the Passover, and this our Lord himself taught us by his own example, who was
circumcised, as a professed Member of the Church of the Jews, and when he set
up the new Christian Church, he would be initiated into it, by the Sacrament of
Baptism.

Of this Conclusion there is no great doubt, but because some of the
Anabaptists do deny the Sacrament of Baptism to succeed in the room, place,
Col. 2.11, 12. opened.
and use of Circumcision, be pleased to observe how plain the Apostle makes
it, Coloss. 2.8, 9; 10, 11, 12. where the Apostles scope is to dissuade the
believing Christians from the rudiments of the world and Jewish Ceremonies, and
observations upon this ground, that we are complete in Christ, and that in him
as in the head, the Church has all perfections, and because he would take them
wholly off from Circumcision, the use whereof engaged them to the use of the
rest of Jewish Ceremonies, he tells them, Gal. 5.3.
that in Christ we are circumcised with a Circumcision made without hands (a
better Circumcision then the Jews was) in putting off the body of the sins
of the flesh by the Circumsion of Christ. And whereas the Jewish teachers would
be ready to object that the receiving of the inward grace of Circumcision, did
not make them so complete as Abraham and his seed was, because they also had
an outward sensible sign whereby they might be farther persuaded, comforted
and confirmed; to this he answers, ver. 12. That neither is this privilege
wanting to Christians who have as excellent and express a Sacrament of it,
being buried with Christ in Baptism, the effect whereof he there sets down,
and therefore they needed not Circumcision, as their false Teachers insinuated,
thereby directly teaching that our Baptism is in stead of their Circumcision.
And the Analogy lies between two Sacramental types of the same substance [
regeneration] to both Jews and Gentiles. And in truth had not Baptism come in
the room of it, the Apostle could not have pitched upon a worse instance then
that of Circumcision, which was so much valued by them, and was so great and
useful a privilege unto them: Nor had there been any reason to have here
named Baptism, but that he meant to show Baptism to Christians was now in the
room of Circumcision to the Jews.

That by Gods own express order, infants as well as grown men were in the
time of the Jews to be initiated and sealed with the sign of Circumcision: 4
Conclusiun.
Whether Jews by nature, or Proselytes of the Gentiles, Genesis 17.
one Law was for them al, if they receive the Covenant, they and their children
receive Circumcision: and although, as I touched before, this sign was
actually applied only to the Males, yet the females were virtually circumcised
in them, as is apparent both because the whole Church of the Jews were called
the Circumcision, and because by Gods express order, no uncircumcised person
might eat of the Passover, Exodus 12.48.
which we are sure the women did as well as the men. And whereas some who see
which way the strength of this Conclusion bends, Object.
do allege, that though Circumcision was to be applied to their Infants, yet
it was not as a seal of the spiritual part of the Covenant of Grace, but as a
national badge, a seal of some temporal and earthly blessings and
proviledges, as of their right to the land of Canaan, etc. and that Ishmael
though he was circumcised for some temporal respects, yet he was not thereby
brought under the Covenant of Grace, which was expressly said to be made with
Abraham in relation to Isaac and his seed. Genesis 17.18, 19, 20, 21.


Answ.
I answer, there is nothing plainer then that the Covenant whereof Circumcision
was the sign, Rom* 4.11.
was the Covenant of Grace; Abraham received Circumcision a sign of the
righteousness of faith, and the Jews received it not as a Nation, but as a
Church, as a people separated from the world, and taken into Covenant with God:
It is true indeed, that Circumcision bound them who received it to conform to
that manner of administration of the Covenant which was carried, much, by a way
of Temporal blessings and punishments, they being types of spiritual things;
but no man can ever show that any were to receive the Sacrament of Circumcision
in relation to these outward things only, or to them at all, further then they
were administrations of the Covenant of grace; sure I am, the Prosolytes and
their children could not be circumcised in any relation at all to the Temporal
blessings of the Land of Canaan as they were temporal, because notwithstanding
their Circumcision they were not capable of receiving, or purchasing any
inheritance at all in that Land, sojourne there they might, as other strangers
also did, but the inheritance of the Land, no, not one foot of it could ever
be alienated from the several Tribes to whom it was distributed as their
possession by the most High: For all the land was divided unto twelve Tribes,
Deuteronomy. 32.8. Lev. 25.13. etc.
and they were not any one of them allowed to sell their lands longer then till
the year of Jubilee, Levit. 25.13, etc. Yea, I may boldly say that their
Circumcision was so far from sealing to them the outward good things of the
Land, that it occasioned and tied them to a greater expense of their temporal
blessings by their long, and frequent, and chargeable journeyes, to worship at
Jerusalem. And as for what was alleged concerning Ishmael; the answer is
easy, God indeed there declares that Isaac should be the type of Christ, and
that the Covenant of grace should be established and continue in his family;
yet both Ishmael and the rest of Abraham's family were really taken into
Covenant, until afterward by Apostasy they discovenanted themselves, as also
did Esau afterward, though he were the Son of Isaac, in whose family God had
promised the Covenant should continue.

5 Conclusion.
Fifthly and lastly, the privileges of believers under this last and best
administration of the Covenant of grace, are many ways enlarged, made more
honorable and comfortable, then ever they were in the time of the Jews
administration; many Scriptures speak of the enlargement of their privileges,
not one for the diminishing or depressing, or extenuating of them; that yoke,
that hard and costly way of administration, which neither they nor their
Fathers were able to bear, is taken off from our shoulders; our Covenant is
said to be established upon better promises, Heb. 8.6. 2 Cor. 3.10. Gal. 4.1.
etc.
the glory of theirs had no glory in respect of ours, they were under the
bondage of Infants under age, in comparison of our freedom, we as well as they
are called a holy Nation, a peculiar people, a chosen generation, separated to
him from all other people, to whom, as well as to them, belongs the adoption,
the Covenant, the promises; we as well as they enjoy him to be our Father, and
with his dearest Son our Lord, are made Co-heires of the Kingdom of glory; we
have all these things with advantage, not only in the clearness of the
administration, but in some sense in greater extent to persons with us, there
is neither male nor female.

Object.
Some indeed go about to show, that in some things the Jews had greater
privileges then We have, as that Abraham had the privilege to be called the
Father of the faithful, that Christ should be borne of his flesh; Mary had
the privilege to be the Mother of Christ, and the whole Nation this
privilege, that God will call in their seed again, after they had been cast
off for unbelief many hundred years, which privileges, say they, none of the
Gentiles have, or can have.

Answ. But these things have no weight: Answ.
we are inquiring for privileges which are branches of the Covenant of grace,
which every man who is in Covenant with God, may expect from God by virtue of
the Covenant, were he a Jew or a Proselyte, not for any particular or peculiar
favor to a particular man or woman, or family, or tribe: All these
forementioned things, and many other of the like kind (as the Ministry of the
Tabernacle and Temple to belong to one Tribe, the Kingly office to one family;
such and such men never to lack a man of their house to stand before God)
proceeded indeed from Free Grace, but were no parts of that Covenant of grace
which God made to Abraham, and all his Seed: For could every man in Covenant
challenge these things at Gods hand, and that by virtue of the Covenant? Could
every one of them promise to himself that Christ should be born of his flesh?
Or every one of their women that she should be the Mother of Christ? Could
every one whom God owned to be in Covenant with him, promise by virtue of the
Covenant, that their children, if cast off by unbeleefe, should after many
hundred years be again called in? We speak only of such privileges as were
universal, and common to all who were in Covenant, for which by virtue of the
Covenant they might rely upon God; Let any man show out of the Scripture where
our privileges under the Gospel are cut short in any of these things, and he
says somewhat; and in particular for the Case in hand, concerning our Infants
right to the Covenant of grace, and the seal of it, once we are sure the
Infant Children of all Covenanters were within the Covenant, and the seal also
belonged to them, and by virtue of the Covenant (which is still the same) we
plead their interest in it. Let any man show when and where this was taken
away, when the Infant-children of believers were expunged out of the Covenant
of grace; certainly whoever will go about to deprive them of it, to cut off
such a great part of the comfort of Believing parents, must produce clear
testimonies, before they can persuade believers to part with either of them,
either their right to the Covenant, or to the seal of the Covenant.

For, first, their Infants interest in the Covenant, next to glory of God, and
the salvation of their own souls, is the greatest benefit of the Covenant of
grace; even this (I say) to have their Children belong to Gods family and
kingdom, and not to the Devils: certainly, the greatest treasure of Parents is
their children, and in them the salvation of their souls: Now how uncomfortable
a thing were this to Parents, to take away the very ground of their hope, for
the salvation of their Children? and I dare affirm it, that we have no ground
of hope for any particular person, until he be brought under the Covenant of
grace. All the world, as I have formerly touched, is divided into two kingdoms,
the kingdom of Christ, which is his Church; and the kingdom of Satan, which is
the rest of the world; now so long as any person is visibly a member of the
kingdom of Christ* we have no cause to doubt their election and salvation,
until they visibly show the contrary, although we know that there are some
reprobate among them; so on the other side, although we know Christ has many
of his elect to be gathered out of the Devils kingdom, yet we have no cause or
ground to hope that any particular person is any other then a reprobate, being
a visible professed member of Satan's kingdom, until he give hope to the
contrary: now what a most uncomfortable abridgment were this of the Covenant of
grace, thus apparently to cut off the Seed of Believers from their visible
right in the Church of Christ, and to put them in the visible Kingdom of Satan?

And, Secondly, as really unwilling must they look to find Parents, to part
with their childrens right to the Seal of the Covenant; this their right to
the Covenant being all the ground of hope that believing Parents can have that
their Infants who die in their Infancy, are saved rather then the Infants of
Turks, had need be sealed, if they live until they are grown men, and give
other signs of grace, they may conceive good hopes of them, though they were
not sealed with a Sacramental seal: This therefore is apparent, that the
cutting off our privileges and comfort in these two were a great abridgment of
the privileges of the new Covenant, and would put the Seed of Abraham's faith
into a far worse condition in regard of their posterity, then the Seed of his
flesh were in: And the Jews in Acts 2.39. if this Doctrine had been preached to
them, might have replied unto St. Peter, when he exhorted them to be baptized
for their Childrens good; Nay, Peter, even therefore we will not be baptized,
for as yet we are sure our Children are in Conant with God, and reckoned to his
family; but if we receive your new way, our children must be counted to the
kingdom of the Devil; and so might they in Coloss. 2. when Paul told them they
need not be circumcised, because Baptism came in the room of it, they might
have replied, that though they need not be circumcised themselves, yet they
would still circumcise their children, because Bap^ism was not to be applied to
them according to these men's Doctrine.

Upon these five Conclusions, 1. That the Covenant of grace is always the
same. 2. That the Infants of those in Covenant are always reckoned Covenanters
with their Parents. 3. That our Baptism succeeds in the room and use of their
Circumcision. 4. That by Gods express order, their Infants were to be
Circumcised, as it was a seal of the Covenant. And 5. that our privileges for
our selves and our Children are at least as honorable, large, and comfortable
as theirs were: The Conclusion follows undeniably, that therefore the Infants of
believing Parents are to be baptized.

Against this Argument the Anabaptists object many things. They say the
Covenant was not the same; some of them say, the children of the Jews were not
under the Covenant in relation to spiritual things: They say, Circumcision and
baptism served not for the same ends and uses: They say Circumcision was
administered as a national badge, and properly sealed temporal blessings: They
say, whatever privileges Infants of Believers had before Christ's time, they
have now none at all; and many such like things: All which I have so fully
cleared in this former Discourse, that I suppose I need not add any more; the
main and only Objection remaining, which has any color of weight in it, is
this,

There is no command, no express institution, or clear example in all the New
Testament of baptizing of Infants: Object.
And in the administration of Sacraments, We want a command and example.
we are not to be led by our own reason or grounds of seeming probability, but
by the express order of Christ, and no otherwise.

If by institution, command and example, they mean an express syllabicall
command, Answer.
Though there be no express command or example.
etc. I grant that in so many words it is not found in the New Testament; no
express command in the New Testament that they should be baptized; no express
example where Children were Baptized; but I also add, that I deny the
consequence, that if in so many words it be not commanded in the New Testament,
it ought not to be done, Which is not necessary.
this is not true divinity, that Christians are not tied to observe that, which
is not expressly and in so many words set down in the New Testament; there is no
express reviving of the Laws concerning the forbidden degrees of marriage in
the New Testament, except of not having a man's fathers Wife 1 Cor. 8. no
express law against Polygamy, no express command for the celebration of a
weekly Sabbath; are therefore Christians free in all these cases? Yea, in the
Point of Sacraments there is no express command, no example in all the New
Testament, where Women received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; there is no
express command that the Children of Believers when they are grown, shoud be
instructed and Baptized, though instructed by their Parents; express command
there is, that they should teach the Heathen and the Jews, and make them
Disciples, and then baptize them, but no command that the Children of those
that are Believers should be baptized when they are grown men; nor any example
where ever that was done; will any man therefore say, that Christian women are
not to be partakers of the Lords Supper, nor the children of believers when
grown men be baptized? I think none will be so absurd as to affirm it. If it
be said, though these things be not expressly, and in terminis in the New
Testament, yet they are there v^rtually, and by undeniable consequence; I
confess it is true, Yet by good consequence we have command for it. Both in
the command given to Abraham which reaches us.
so have we vertually, and by undeniable consequence sufficient evidence for
the baptizing of children, both commands and examples; For first we have Gods
command to Abraham, as he was the Father of all Covenanters, that he should
seal his Children with the seal of the Covenant. Now this truth all our
Divines defend against the Papists, that all Gods commands and institutions
about the Sacraments of the Jews, bind us as much as they did them, in all
things which belong to the substance of the Covenant, and were not accidental
unto them: as because circumcision is called a seal of the Covenant, therefore
our Sacraments are seals of the Covenant* because circumcision might be
administered but once, being the seal of initiation; therefore Baptism being
also the seal of initiation, is also to be administered but once. But that
circumcision was to be administered upon the eighth day only, was an
accidental thing, and therefore binds not us; the Jewish Passover being to
be yearly repeated, binds us to have a repetition of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, which came in room of it, because this belongs to the substance
of the Covenant, both of them being Sacraments for spiritual nourishment,
growth and continuance in the Covenant; (as the other was for birth and
entrance) but that their Passover was to be eaten in an Evening, and upon one
set Evening in the year was accidental, and so binds not us. The like
instance I give in our Christian Sabbath: the fourth Commandment binds us for
the substance of it as much as ever it bound the Jews; There God once for all
separated one day of seven to be sacred to himself, and all the world stood
bound in all ages to give unto God that one day of seven, which should be of
his own choosing. Now until Christ's time God chose the last day of the seven
to be his Sabbath, and having by the death and resurrection of our Lord Jesus,
put an end to the Saturday Sabbath, and surrogated the first day of the week
in stead thereof to be the Lords day, we need no new Commandment for the
keeping of the Lords day, being tied by the fourth Commandment to keep that day
of seven which the Lord should choose, the Lord having chosen this, the fourth
Commandment binds us to this, as it did the Jews to the former: so in like
manner I say in the Sacrament of Baptism.

When God made the Covenant with Abraham, and promised for his part to be the
God of him and his seed, what God promised to Abraham, we claim our part in
it, as the children of Abraham's, and what God required on Abraham's part for the
substance of obedience, we all stand charged with, as well as Abraham; we as
Abraham are tied to believe, to love the Lord with all our heart, to have our
heart circumcised, to walk before God in uprightness, to instruct our
children, and bring them up for God and not for our selves, nor for the Devil,
to teach them to worship God according to his revealed will, to train them up
under the ordinances and institutions of Gods own appointment: all these
things Gods command to Abraham charges upon all the children of the Covenant,
though there were no express reviving these commands in any part of the New
Testament, and therefore consequently that command of God to Abraham which
bound his seed of the Jews, to train up their children in that manner of
worship which was then in force, binds the seed of Abraham, now to train up
their children in conformity to such ordinances as now are in force.

And the same command which enjoined Abraham to seal his children with the
seal of the Covenant, injoynes us as strongly to seal ours with the seal of
the Covenant, and that command of God which expressly bound Abraham to seal
his with the sign of Circumcision which was the Sacrament then in force, pro
tempore; does vertually bind us to seal ours with the sign of Baptism,
which is the Sacrament now in force, and succeeds in the room of the other by
his own appointment.

There is one command by clear consequence, another you shall find, And in
Mat. 28 19. opened and explained.
Matthew. 28. where our Savior bids them go and teach all Nations, Baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Sanne, and of the Holy Ghost. Where
you have two things: First, What they were to do; Secondly, To whom they were
to do it. They were to preach and teach all things which he had commanded
them, that is, they were to preach the whole Gospel, Mark. 16.15. The whole
Covenant of Grace, containing all the promises, whereof this is one, viz. that
God will be the God of believers, and of their seed, that the seed of believers
are taken into Covenant with their Parents. This is a part of the Gospel
preached unto Abraham, and they were to Baptize them, that is, to administer
Baptism as a Seal of the Covenant to all who received the Covenant. Secondly,
we have the persons to whom they were to do this, all Nations, whereas before
the Church was tied to one Nation, one Nation only were Disciples, now their
Commission was extended to make all Nations Disciples, every Nation which
should receive the faith should be to him now, as the peculiar Nation of the
Jews had been in time past. In a word, Nations here are opposed to the one
Nation before. Now we know when that one Nation of the Jews were made
Disciples, and circumcised their infants were made Disciples, (made to belong
to Gods School) and circumcised with them, when that nation was made Disciples
in Abraham's loins, and circumcised, their seed also was the same, when that
Nation was taken out of Egypt, and actually made Disciples, their children were
also with them; and we know that in every Nation the children make a great part
of the Nation, and are always included under every administration to the
Nation, whether promises or threatenings, privileges or burdens, mercies or
judgments, unless they be excepted; so are they in Cities, in Families, it
being the way of the Scripture, when speaking indefinitely of a People, Nation,
City or Family, to be either saved or damned, to receive mercies or
punishments, expressly to except Infants when they are to be excepted, as we see
in the judgment that befell Israel in the Wilderness, when all that
rebellious Company that came out of Egypt, was to perish by Gods righteous
doom, their little ones were expressly excepted, Number. 14.31. and in the
Covenant actually entered into by the body of the Nation, Fumb. 14.31 Nehem*
10.28.
Neh. 10. it is expressly limited to them who had knowledge and understanding.
And the Disciples who received this Commission knew well, that in all Gods
former administrations, when any Parents were made Disciples, their children
were taken in with them to appertain to the same school, and therefore it
behooved the Lord to give them a caution for the leaving out of Infants in this
new administration, that they might know his mind, if that he intends to have
them left out, which that ever he did in word or deed, cannot be found in the
Scriptures.

If it be said, they are not capable of being Disciples: Object.


I answer, even as capable as the Infants of Jews, Answ.
and Proselytes were, when they were made Disciples: and beside, they are
devoted to be Disciples, being to be trained up by the Parents, who are from
their infancy to teach them the knowledge of Christ, and at the present, they
are capable of his own teaching: and sure I am in Christ's own dialect, to
belong to Christ, and to be a Disciple of Christ, Math 10 42. Mark 9 41. Matthew.
18.5.
or to bear the name of Christ, is all one; and that such Infants do belong to
Christ, and bear the name of Christ, I have sufficiently proved already.

And I desire it may be seriously weighed whether that expression, Act. 10.15.
Now therefore why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the necks of the Disciples,
do not necessitate us, to give the name of Disciples to Infants, as well as to
grown men: for I reason thus, All they upon whose necks those false Teachers
would have put the yoke of circumcision are called Disciples, and to be called
Disciples: but they would have put the yoke of circumcision upon Infants, as
well as grown men: therefore Infants as well as grown men are called Disciples
and to be called so. The major is undeniable, the minor I prove thus: They who
pressed circumcision to be in force, according to the manner of Moses Law, and
would put it upon their necks after the manner of Moses his Law, they would put
it upon Infants of those who were in Covenant with God, as well as upon the
necks of those who were grown men, for so Moses Law required: but these falls
teachers pressed circumcision to be so in force, as is apparent, Act. 15.1.

Another command by good consequence for the baptizing of Infants, you shall
find in that forementioned place where the Apostle exhorted them to repent and
be baptized, Act 2.38, 39.
etc. Because the promise was made to them and to their children, which, as I
showed you, clearly proves that the Children of such who believe and are
baptized, are taken into Covenant, and therefore by good consequence they also
are to receive the seal of the Covenant. The Text not only showing that they
are within the Covenant, but also that a right to Baptism is a consequence of
being within the Covenant. Thus for Commands: for Examples, though there should
be none, there is no great argument in it, when the rule is so plain, yet we
have examples enough, by good consequence, for you shall find the Gospel took
place, just as the old administration, by bringing in whole families together;
when Abraham was taken in, his whole Family was taken in with him; when any of
the Gentiles turned Proselytes, ordinarily their Families came in with them: so
in this new Administration, usually if the Master of the House turned
Christian, his whole Family came in and were baptized with him; The whole
household of Cornelius, the first converted Gentile, Act. 11.14. the household
of Stephanus; the household of Aristobulus; the household of Narcissus; the
household of Lydia; the household of the Jailer; these are examples not to be
contemned.

And whereas some object against this Argument, taken from whole Families, that
the argument is at least as strong to prove that the Jewish Infants did eat the
Passover, because not only several Families might, but did, and that by Gods
appointment, eat the Passover.

I Answer, by denying the consequence, the argument is not so strong, for the
one as for the other, because no other Scripture shows that the Passover does
belong to Infants; but we have other plain Scriptures proving that Baptism is
in the room of Circumcision, which belongs therefore to Infants, as well as
grown men: If any can instance of any families of Gentiles who were
circumcised, the consequence were good, Therefore Infants were, if there were
any Infants, because other Scriptures show that circumcision belongs to Infants
as well as grown men, but in this case the argument is not good.

So much for my first and main Argument, they are foederati, and therefore must
be signati, they are under the Covenant of Grace, and therefore are to be
signed with the seal of admittance into the Covenant*

The second Argument, 2. Argument.
To whom the inward grace of Baptism does belong, to them belongs the outward
sign, they ought to have the sign, who have the thing signified; the earthly
part of the Sacrament must be granted to them who have the heavenly part: but
the Infants of believers, even while they are Infants are made partakers of the
inward grace of Baptism, of the heavenly and spiritual part, as well as grown
men: therefore they may, and ought to receive the outward sign of Baptism.

The major Proposition, that they who are made partakers of the inward grace,
may not be debarred of the outward sign, is undeniable, it is Peter's
argument, Act. 10.47. and 11.17.
Act. 10. Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized, who have
rece^ved the Holy Ghost as well as we? and again, Act. 11. For as much as God
gave them the like gift as he did unto us, what was I that I could withstand
God? And this is so clear, that the most learned of the Anabaptists do readily
grant, that if they knew any Infants to have received the inward grace, they
durst not deny them the outward sign, Mark. 10.
and that the particular Infants, whom Christ took up in his Arms and blessed,
might have been baptized. And for the assumption or m^nor, That the Infants of
Believers, even while they are Infants, do receive the inward grace, as well as
grown men, is as plain, not only by that speech of the Apostle, who says,
they are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14.
but our Savior says expressly, Mark. 10. That to such belongs the kingdom
of God, as well as to grown men: Mark. 10.14.
And whereas some would evade it, by saying that the Text says not, to them
belongs the Kingdom of God, but of such is the kingdom of Heaven, (...), of
such like, that is, Luke 18 17.
such as are graced with such like qualities, who are humble and meek, as
children are, and that Luke 18. is parallel to this, in the meaning of it,
Whosoever does not receive the kingdom of Heaven as a little child, he shall
not enter therein.

But I answer, though it be true that in other places this is one use that
Christ makes of an Infants age and condition, to show that such as receive the
Kingdom of Heaven, must be qualifyed with humility, etc. like unto children;
yet here it cannot be his meaning, because his argument is, suffer them to come
to me and forbid them not, because of such is the Kingdom of God, that is, my
Church and Kingdom is made up of these as well as of others. This was the very
cause why the Disciples rebuked those who brought the children to Christ,
because they were little, not fit to be instructed, and therefore not fit that
Christ should be troubled about them; this Christ rebukes in them, and tells
them that the littleness of children, is no argument why they should be kept
from him: Suffer them, said he, to come, and forbid them not, for of such is
the Kingdom of God: and what kind of argument had this been, if the Text
should be interpreted as these men would have it, Suffer little children to
come unto me, that I may touch them, take them up in mine arms, put my hands
upon them, and bless them, because the Kingdom of God belongs to them, who
have such like qualities, who resemble children in some select properties? By
the very same ground, if any had brought doves, and Sheep to Christ, to put his
hands upon them, and bless them, the Disciples had been liable to the same
reproof, because of such is the Kingdom of God, such as are partakers of the
Kingdom of God, must be endued with such like properties.

Beside, Matthew 3. 1 Cor. 12 13. Gal. 3.27. Tit. 3.5. Mark. 1.3.
what one thing can be named belonging to the initiation, and being of a
Christian, whereof Baptism is a seal, which Infants are not capable of, as
well as grown men? they are capable of receiving the Holy Ghost, of union with
Christ, of adoption, of forgiveness of sins, of regeneration, of everlasting
life, all which things are signified and sealed in the Sacrament o^ baptism.
And it is further considerable, that in the working of that inward grace, of
which baptism is the sign and seal, all who partake of that grace, are but
mere patients, and contribute no more to it, then a child does to its own
begetting, and therefore Infants as fit Subjects to have it wrought in them as
grown men, and the most grown men are in no more fitness to receive this grace
when it is given them, in respect either of any faith or repentance, which they
yet have, then a very little child, it being the primary intention of the
Covenant of Grace, in its first work, to show what Free Grace can and will do
to miserable nothing, to cut miserable man off from the wild Olive, and graffe
him into the true Olive, to take away the heart of stone, to create in them a
heart of flesh, to forgive their iniquities, to love them freely, what does the
most grown man in any of these, more then an Infant may do? being only passive
in them all; and of this first grace is the Sacrament of Baptism properly a
seal: and who ever will deny, that Infants are capable of these things as well
as grown men; must deny that any Infants dying in their Infancy are saved by
Christ.

Against this Argument several things are objected: which I shall endeavor to
remove out of the way.

First, It is said, Object. 1.
that although Infants are capable of these things, and they no doubt are by
Christ wrought in many Infants, yet may not we baptize them, because, according
to the Scripture pattern, both of Christ's command, Matthew. 28. in his
institution of Baptism, where this was enjoined; and John the Baptist, Christ's
Disciples, and Apostles, They always taught and made them Disciples by
teaching, before they baptized any.

Answ.
I answer, First, that of Matthew. 28. is not the institution of Baptism, it was
instituted long before, to be the Seal of the Covenant; it is only an
enlargement of their Commission, whereas before they were to go only to the
lost sheep of the House of Israel, now they were to go unto all the world. And
beside, it is no where said, that none were baptized, but such as were first
taught, and what reason we have to believe the contrary, you have before seen.

Secondly, It is said indeed, that they taught and baptized, and no express
mention made of any other: but the reason is plain, there was a new Church to
be constituted, all the Jews who should receive Christ, were to come under
another administration, and their Infants were to come in only in their right,
and the Heathen Nations who were to be converted to Christ, were yet wholly
without the Covenant of Grace, and their children could have no right until
themselves were brought in; and therefore no marvel, though both John, and
Christ's Disciples, and Apostles, did teach before they baptized, because then
no other were capable of baptism: but when once themselves were instructed and
baptized, then their children were capable of it, by virtue of the Covenant. If
any in the Jewish Church had received Commission, to go and make other Cities,
Proselytes to them, their Commission must have run thus, Go teach and
circumcise, would it therefore have followed, that none might be circumcised,
but such as were first taught?

Object. 2.
But it is expressly said, That he that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved; Faith in Christ is the Condition, upon which men may be baptized: and
this is the most common objection among the Anabaptists: Unbeleevers may not
be baptized, children are unbeleevers, therefore they may not be baptized. We
have, say they, clear evidence, that Faith is a condition required in those
that are to be baptized, no evidence of any other condition that makes them
capable of Baptism. Others of them add, that under an affirmative command, the
negative is to be included, believing is the affirmative, unbeleeving is the
negative, therefore where believers are commanded to be baptized, unbeleevers
are forbidden to be baptized: this objection they much glory in, and some of
them dare all the world to answer it.

I Answer first, Answer.
but if this argument have any strength at all against the Baptizing of
infants, it has much more strength against the salvation of infants; it is
said expressly, he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that
believes not, shall be damned: Mark. 16.16.
there ye have both the negative and affirmative set down, He that believes
shall be saved, he that believes not shall be damned; now I frame their own
argument thus against the salvation of infants, All unbeleevers shall be
damned, all infants are unbeleevers, therefore they shall be damned; now look
at what door they will go out, for the salvation of infants, at the same will
we go out, for the baptizing of infants; how ever they will evade the one, we
shall much more strongly evade the other, if they say this Text is meant of
grown men, of the way which God takes for the salvation of grown men, Infants
are saved another way, upon other conditions; the same say we of infants
baptism, the Text means of the condition of baptizing of grown men, infants
are baptized upon other conditions; if, they say, infants though they cannot
have actual Faith, they may have virtuall Faith, Faith in the seed and root,
the same say we; if they say, though infants have not Faith, yet they may have
that which is Analogous to faith, the same say we, they have somewhat which has
analogy to faith, and as effectual to make them capable of baptism, as of
salvation.

Secondly, I answer, it is no where said Unbeleevers, (or rather Non-beleevers
it should be said) may not be baptized; it is said indeed, he that believes
and is baptized, shall be saved; and it is said, that he that believes with
all his heart, may be baptized; it is no where said, that he that believes
not, may not be baptized: Therefore I deny the consequence, if all believers
must be baptized, then no Unbeleevers, or Non-beleevers may be baptized; these
two are not here intended by way of opposition, Christ excludes Infants neither
from baptism, nor from salvation for want of faith, but positive Unbeleevers,
and such as refuse the Gospel he excludes from both: The stone upon which these
men stumble, is the ignorance in the opposition in the Scripture they bring,
which is not between believers, and their Children, but between them, and
Unbeleeving and profane persons who are shut from the Lords Covenant, Baptism,
and Salvation.

Object. 3.
But suppose they are capable of the inward grace of baptism, and that God does
effectually work it in some of the Infants of believers, is that sufficient
warrant for us to baptize all the Infants of Believers? if we knew in what
Infants the Lord did work this, we might baptize those Infants, say some of
them, but that he does not make known to us, we cannot know of any one Infant
by any ordinary way of knowledge, that they are inwardly baptized with the holy
Ghost; and therefore we may not baptize any of them, but wait to see when and
in whom God will work the thing signified, and then apply the sign to them.

Answ.
Answ. Our knowledge that God has effectually wrought the thing signified, is
not the condition upon which we are to apply the sign, God no where requires
that we should know that they are inwardly and certainly converted, whom we
admit to the Sacrament of Baptism, the Apostles themselves were not required to
know this of those whom they baptized, if they were, they sinned in baptizing
Simon Magus, Alexander, Hymenaeus, Ananias and Saphira, with others: we are
indeed required to know that they have in them that condition which must
warrant us to administer the sign, not that which makes them possessed of the
thing signified; fallible conjectures are not to be our rule in administering of
Sacraments, either to Infants of grown men, but a known rule of the word, out
of which rule we must be able to make up such a judgment, that our
administration may be of faith, as well as out of charity: In baptizing or
grown men, the Apostles and Ministers of Christ administered the sign, not
because they conjectured that the parties were inwardly sanctified, but because
they made that profession of faith and holiness of which they were sure, that
whoever had the thing in truth, were received by Christ into inward Communion
with himself, and that whoever thus made it; that Christ would have them
received into the communion of his Church, though possibly for want of the
inward work they were never received into the inward communion with Jesus
Christ, indeed when such a confession was made, Christian charity which always
hops the best, and thinks no evil, bound them to receive them, and think
of them, and converse with them, as with men in whom the inward work was
wrought, until they gave signs to the contrary; but this their charity, or
charitable conjecture was not the ground of their admitting them to the
ordinance, but the profession and confession of the party, made according to
the Word, which they were bound to rest in; yea, I greatly question, whether in
case Peter or Paul could by the spirit of revelation have known that Ananias or
Alexander would have proved no better then hypocrites, whether they either
would, or ought to have refused them from Baptism, whilst they made that
public profession and confession, upon which others were admitted who in the
event proved no better then those were. So that I conclude, not our knowledge
of their inward Sanctification, is requisite to the admitting of any to
baptism, but our knowledge of the will of Christ, that such who are in such and
such condition, should by us be received into the communion of the Church: and
in this the rule to direct our knowledge, is as plain for Infants as for grown
men, the rule having been always this, That grown men who were strangers from
the Covenant of God, Unbeleevers, Pagans, Heathens, should upon their being
instructed, and upon profession of their faith and promise to walk according
to the rule of the Covenant; be received and added to the Church, and made
partakers of the seal of their entrance, and their Infants to come in with
them; both sorts upon their admission to be charitably hoped of, until they
give signs to the contrary, charity being bound from thinking of evil of
them, not tied to conclude certainly of any of them, because they ought to know
that in all ages, all are not Israel who are of Israel, and that many are
called, but few are chosen.

But all who enter into Covenant, and receive the seal of the Covenant,
Object. 4.
must stipulate for their parts, as well as God does for his, they must indent
with God to perform the believers part of the Covenant, as well as God does to
perform his part, as even this Text, 1 Pet. 3. requires, That Baptism which
saves us must have the answer of a good conscience to God; 1 Pet. 3.21.
now although it be granted, that Infants are capable of receiving the first
grace, if God be pleased to work it in them; yet what answer of a good
conscience can there be from Infants unto God? they having not the use of
reason, and not knowing what the Covenant means?

Answ. The Infants of the Jews were as much tied as the Infants of believers
under the Gospel, Answ.
every one who was circumcised was bound to keep the Law, Gal. 5. and these
men profess that Israelitish Infants were within the old Covenant, when yet
they knew not what it meant, nor could have the same use of it with their
Parents and others of discretion. Look what answer they will make for the
Jews infants, if true, will abundantly satisfy for the Infants of believers
under the Gospel.

Secondly, God seals to them presently, their name is put into the deed, and
when they come to years of discretion, to be adulti, then in their own persons
they stand obliged to the performance of it; in the mean time Jesus Christ,
Heb. 7.22.
who is the surety of the Covenant, and the surety of all the Covenanters, is
pleased to be their surety; we know when several parties stand obliged in the
same bond, they may seal at several times, and yet be in force afterward
together; or even a child sealing in infancy, may aguize and recognize that
sealing, when they come to yees of discretion; if then they will renounce it,
as done when they understood not, they may free themselves if they please, if
they find the former act an inconvenience or burden to them: so is it here, God
of his infinite mercy is pleased to seal to Infants while they are such, and
accepts of such a seal on their parts, as they are able to give in their
Infant age, expecting a further ratification on their part, when they are come
to riper years, in the mean time affording them the favor and privilege of
being in Covenant with him, of being reckoned unto his kingdom and family,
rather then of the Devils; if when they are grown men they refuse to stand to
this Covenant there is no hurt done on Gods part, let them serve another God,
and take their lot for time to come.

But what benefit comes to children by such kind of sealing as this is? it
seems then (say they) by your own confession, that this is but a conditional
sealing on Gods part, viz: that they own it, and ratify it when they come to
age, and if they then refuse to stand to it, all is then nullified, were it not
therefore better to defer it to their years of discretion, to see whether they
will then make it their own voluntary act, yea, or no?

Answ. 1. This objection lay as strongly against Gods widsome in requiring the
Jews Infants, even in their Infancy thus to seal; and therefore argues no
great wisdom or modesty in men, who would thus reason with God about his
administrations. 2. God has other ends and uses of applying the seal of the
Covenant to them who are in Covenant with him, then their present gain, it is a
Homage, Worship, and Honor to himself, and it behooves us even in that respect,
to fulfill all righteousness: when Christ was baptized and circumcised, he was
as unfit for the ordinance, through his perfection, as children through their
imperfection, being as much above them, as children are below them.

3. I Answer; The benefit and fruit of it at the present is very much, both to
the Parents and to the children; to the Parents first, whilst God does hereby
honor them to have their children counted to his Church, to his kingdom, and
family, to be under his wing and grace, whilst all the other Infants in the
world have their visible standing under the Prince, and in the kingdom of
darkness, and consequently whilst others have no hope of their childrens
spiritual welfare, until they be called out of that condition* these need not
have any doubt of their childrens welfare, if they die in their Infancy, nor if
they live until they show signs to the contrary: God having both reckoned
them unto his people, and given them all the means of salvation, which an
Infants age is capable of.

Secondly, here is much privilege and benefit to the children, when as (beside
what inward secret work God is pleased to work in them) they being Members of
the Church of Christ have their share in the Communion of Saints are remembered
at the throne of Grace, every day by those that pray for the welfare of the
Church, and perticularly in those prayers which are made for his blessing upon
his Ordinances.

And lastly, it is no small privilege to have that Seal bestowed upon them in
their Infancy, which may afterward plead when they are grown and come to fulfill
the condition.

But if their being capable of the spiritual part, Object. 6.
must entitle them to the outward sign, why then do we not also admit them to
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which is the seal of the Covenant of Grace,
as well as the Sacrament of Baptism? And this is urged, the rather, because
(say they) the Infants of the Jews did eat of the Passover, as well as were
circumcised; now if our Infants have every way as large a privilege as the
Infants of the Jews had, then can we not deny them the same privilege which
their Infants had, and consequently they must partake of the one Sacrament, as
well as the other.

I answer, Answ.
that Infants are capable of the grace of Baptism we are sure, not sure that
they are capable of the grace signed and sealed in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, for though both of them are seals of the new Covenant, yet it is with
some difference; Baptism properly seals the entrance into it, the Lords
Supper properly the growth, nourishment and augmentation of it; Baptism for
our birth, the Lords Supper for our food; now Infants may be borne again while
they are Infants, have their Original sin pardoned, be united to Christ,
have his Image stamped upon them, but concerning the exercise of these graces
and the augmentat^on of them in Infants, while they are Infants, the Scripture
is altogether silent, and for what is said concerning the Infants of the Jews
eating the Passover, to which our Sacrament of the Lords Supper does succeed,
there is no such thing mentioned in all the Book of God, it is said indeed
that the several families were to eat their Lamb, if the household were not
too little for it, and that when their children should ask them what that
service meant, they should instruct them about the meaning of it; but no word
injoyning, nor any example witnessing, that their little children did eat of
it. Exodus 12.3, 4*26, 27.
If they say (as some of them do) that those little ones, who were able to
enquire concerning the meaning of that service, and capable to receive
instruction about it, did eat of the Passover with their Parents; I answer,
(although the Scripture speaks nothing of their eating, yet if that be
granted) it is no prejudice to us, because the Gospel prohibites not such young
ones from the Lords Supper, who are able to examine themselves, and discern
the Lords Body.

1 Cor. 11.
Thus have I according to my poor ability made good this second argument also,
and vindicated it from all Objections of any weight which I have met with all to
the contrary, it remains that I wind up all, Application. First, for reproof
of the Anabaptists.
with a brief Application.

And first it serves for just reproof of the Anabaptists, and all such as by
their rash and bloody sentence condemn Infants, as out of the state of Grace;
it is a great sin to pass sentence upon any particular person for any one
act, as was that of Eli, concerning Hannah, how much more heinous is it to
condemn ail the Infants of the whole Church of Christ, 1 Samuel 1.
as having nothing to do with the Covenant of Grace, or the seal of it? We
read of Herod the Tyrant, Mat. 2 16.
that he destroyed all the children in Bethlehem, and the Coasts thereof from
two years old and under; is not this a far more cruel sentence, to set
these in no better state then Pagans and Infidels, Ephe. 2 1^.
Without Christ, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, as strangers from the
Covenant of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world? can any
sober Christian think this a small fault? Our blessed Savior says, It is not
lawful to take the childrens bread and give it to dogs, but these men take
Children, and in their judgment, conclude them for no better then dogs;
baptism is the bread of the Lord, which he would have given to his children,
and to deny it to them as none of their right, is to make them no better then
dogs. The Prophet Elisha wept when he looked upon Hazael, because he foresaw
that he would dash the infants of Israel against the wall, and even Hazael
thought himself worthy to be esteemed a dog if ever he should do such a thing.
But certainly, thus to dash all Infant children of believers out of the
Covenant of Grace (as much as in them lies) and to deprive them of the seal
of it, is in a spiritual sense far more heavy. And I dare appeal to the
tender bowels of any believing Parents, whether it were not easier for them to
think that their Infants should be dashed against the stones, and yet in the
mean time to die under Christ's wing, as visible Members of his Kingdom,
Church and Family, rather then to have them live, and behold them to have a
visible standing only in the Kingdom of the Devil: These men know not how
much they provoke Christ's displeasure against themselves; He was greatly
displeased with his own Disciples for forbidding little children to come unto
him; and one day such men will know, that he is much more displeased with them,
who with so great violence oppose the bringing of believers children unto his
holy Sacrament, that with unspeakable wrong, injury, and slander, they
prosecute all the Ministers of Christ, who give Infants this their due,
condemning them for Ministers of Antichrist, and limbs of the Beast; yea, some
of them proceeding so far, as condemning all the Churches of Christ, to be no
Churches, who cast not their children out of the Covenant of Grace, and the
seal of it, and do cry out upon the Baptizing of Infants, as one of those
great sins which bring and continue all our judgments upon us. The Apostate
Emperor Julian is justly cried out upon for his cruelty against the
Christians, for denying to their bodies humane Sepulture; how much more cruel
is it to deny to the souls of Infants the just privilege and benefit of the
Covenant of Grace? We know he did it out of hatred to Christianity, which I am
far from charging upon these men; but if we compare the sentence and fact of
the one with the other, we shall find the latter (be their principle what it
will) far more injurious to the Church of Christ then the other: The Lord in
mercy give them to see how unjust that sentence, and how heavy that doom is,
which they thus pass, not only upon Infant Children, but upon all the Churches
of Christ; and seriously to consider, whether the Lord, who once in his
displeasure threatened to dash their Infants against the Stones, who had dashed
the Infants of the children of Israel against the Stones, Psalm. 131.8, 9.
will endure it at the hands of any to expunge the Seed of the faithful out of
his Covenant, and to drive them from his City and Kingdom after this cruel
manner.

2. Use.
Secondly, how much may this comfort the Soul of every believing Parent, To
Parents. First for their comfort.
to behold this great love and goodness of God in his Covenant of Grace to
them and their posterity, that not only themselves, but even their Infants for
their sakes, should be reckoned to the household of God, put into the Arc,
wrapped up in a Covenant of love, brought under the wing of God? When God had
promised to David, that he should have a son to whom God would be a Father, and
that all his posterity, should after such a gracious manner be regarded, his
heart was even ravished with it, O Lord God (said he) what am I, and what is my
house, that thou have brought me hitherto? and this was yet a small thing in
thy sight, O Lord God, 2 Samuel 7.
but thou have spoken also of thy servants house for a great while to come, and
is this the manner of men, O Lord God? And even so should Christian Parents
break out into admiration of his goodness, in taking their children into that
gracious Covenant, which is not only the womb and vessel, but also the
wellhead of so many mercies, which are terminated, not in themselves, but flow
down to their posterity from generation to generation.

And this is yet more admirable in our eyes, when we seriously consider, how
unclean and filthy, how viperous a brood they are, as proceeding out of our
loins, empty of all goodness, full of all wickedness, an unclean leprosy
having bespread them from the crown of the Head to the sole of the Foot, fit
only to be cast into the open field, to the loathing of their persons, in the
day that they are born, Esa. 16. Ezekiel. 16.5.
as all the rest of the world are; and that God should set his heart upon such
as these, to take them thus near unto Himself, when he passes by both Parents
and Infants of all the world beside, now would our hearts melt in his praises,
if we could consider these things?

2. How should this engage all Christian Parents to look to the education of
their Children, 2. For their duty to provoke the^ to be ashamed* for their
carelessness, etc. in time past.
to bring them up in the nurture and fear of the Lord? It Is a woeful thing, to
consider the wretched carelessness of many Parents; yea, not only
carelessness, but ungodliness of many Parents; who prostitute their children
to the Devil and his service, after they have consecrated them to Christ by
baptism; Ezekiel. 16.20. Psalm. 106.37.
train them up in ignorance, profaneness, etc. To whom God may say, as he did
to that Harlot, Ezekiel. 16. Thou have taken my Son and my Daughter, whom thou
have born unto me, and these thou have sacrificed unto Devils. A generation of
wretched men, who take more care of their Hogs and Dogs, then they do of their
Infants immortal souls, nourishing the former, murdering the latter; that we
may say of them, as Augustus did of Herod, that it is better to be Herod's Dog
then his Son. I have often heard a sad Story of a wretched Woman, who persuaded
her Daughter to yield to the lust of a rich man, in hope he would marry her, as
he had promised to do; which she did, and presently after fell sick and died;
The wretched mother hereupon grew distracted, and in her madness cried out, O
my Daughters soul, my Daughters soul, I have damned my Daughters soul:
Verily, thus may many Parents cry out upon themselves for murdering their
childrens souls; and their children may wish that they had been either
dogs, or swine, rather then their Sons or Daughters; miserable children, of
miserable Parents; what will such Parents answer God, when he comes to demand
his children of them? Suppose a Prince or Noble man should put a Child to Nurse
unto some mean man, and pay them well for the education of it; or rather
suppose a Great man should adopt the child of a poor man to be his own, and
should say unto this poor man, as Pharaohs daughter said to Moses mother,
Bring up this Child for me, Exodus 2.19.
and I will give thee thy wages; and afterward coming to see this Child,
should find they had lamed the Child* and taught it nothing but to speak evil
of them, and to fight against them: And to nurse them up for Christ in time to
come.
think I pray you what they would say, or do to this wretched man. How much
more abominable is the sin of many Parents, who by their own carelessness, and
vile example, leaven their children with principles, and lead them in ways
quite contrary to the Covenant of grace, tending to nothing, but to dishonor
God, and to their own destruction. If any of you have been guilty of it in time
past, Praying for them.
be deeply humbled for it, crave mercy and pardon; and for time to come,
endeavor to do the part of a nursing Father or Mother for Christ, looking upon
thy children as being Christ's more then thine, yea, as not being thine, but
Christ's, to whom thou have consecrated them, and therefore (as wise and loving
Nurses use to do) carry them often to their father for his blessing, and he
will bless them, and reward thee also; we find in the second of Joel, that in
the day of their Fast, they were to bring their children and set them before
the Lord, Joel 2.16.
that he might be moved to compassion for the childrens sake whom he used to
call his own; set thou thy children often before him, entreat him as Joseph
did his father for his two sons, and as they did our Savior, Mark 10. that
he would put his hands upon them and bless them; Do it heartily, humbly,
frequently, tell him how dear they are to thee, and the dearer because he is
pleased to own them, tell him their wants, and thy own inability to supply
them in any thing, and how easy it is for him to do it by his Spirit and
Grace; Oh that Ishmael might live in thy sight, said Abraham; Say thou so also,
Lord let these children live before thee, thine they are, and thou gave them
me to bring up for thee, Oh bless my labor among them, and make them such as
thou would have them to be.

And do not only pray for them, 2 Timothy 1, 5.3.15.
but discipline them and instruct them, acquainting them with the Scriptures,
and Catechizing them in the Principles of Religion; as the Mother and
Grandmother of Timothy did him, training him up from his infancy, in the
knowledge of the holy Scripture; and be assured, if thy children may learn
from thee to know their heavenly Father, to believe in him, to love him, and
fear him betimes, that being taught the trade in their youth, they may not
forsake it when they are old, they will then more bless God for thee, then if
thou could leave them all the world for their inheritance; it was for this
that Solomon gloried in his father and mother, Prove. 4.2, 3.
Prove. 4.2, 3. and for this will thy children rise up and call thee blessed.
Thus shall thou approve thy self a true son of Abraham; Thus shall thy
children be blessed with faithful Abraham, Thus shall the Covenant, the
spiritual part and benefit of it, as well as the outward, rest upon thy
posterity from generation to generation.

To all baptitized ones, for comfort when they believe and repent.
Thirdly, and lastly, This serves for use to all children whom God honors so
far, as in their Infancy to bring thus near unto himself, and to use them
thus as his own, and that three several ways; First, to encourage and
comfort them to believe in him, and rest upon him, for all the good things
which he has promised in the Covenant of Grace. The Papists, as in some things
they give and ascribe too much to Baptism, making it to take away original
sin, ex opere operato: So in other things they rob Gods people of the
comfortable use of it, because they say that when once we commit actual sins
we make shipwreck of Baptism, and then Penance must be secunda tabula post
naufragium, a Cockbot after our shipwreck; but this blessed Sacrament seeks
for a more durable and comfortable use, even to be an Arc, as my Text calls it,
to carry to heaven. Know then that whenever thou find thy self at a
loss, sensible of thy undone condition, find thy guilt, and filth, and
bondage, through sin, and flyest unto Christ, and thy conscience witnesses
with thee, that thou would walk for time to come, according to the rule of
the Covenant, in uprightness, to make God in Christ thy portion, and his word
thy guide; So often I say as thou do this, may thou fly to thy Baptism,
and plead it for thy comfort, as we may plead the Rainbow in foul weather
against the worlds destruction by water. I have often heard a story of a great
Queen, who gave a Ring to a Nobleman, while he was her Favorite, and willed
him to send it to her when he should stand in greatest need of her favor; who
afterward falling into her displeasure, sent the Ring, which through the
treachery of the bearer was not delivered till it was too late: But it shall
never happen so to thee, do thou in all thy extremity, show or send by the
hand of faith thy Seal, which God has given thee, plead it confidently, and
to thy dying day, it may be an Arc unto thy soul in all cases of relapse,
desertion, temptation, or whatever else may betide thee, upon the renewing of
thy repentance and faith in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, To humble such as walk unworthy of this privilege.
This great love of God in taking us thus near into his own Family, as his own
Children, should make many of us blush, to remember our unworthy conversation,
in times past; yea, it might make our very hearts to bleed, and make us not
only wish we had been unbaptized, but even unborn, rather then to pollute the
holy Covenant, and the seal of it, as we have done with our unhallowed lives:
Can it seem a light thing in our eyes, that when God has left the greatest
part of the world, as strangers from his Family and Kingdom, to be under Satan's
kingdom, and taken us (no better by nature than they are) to be his peculiar
ones into Covenant with him, that he should swear unto us, to be our God, and
hitherto to train us up under such heavenly Ordinances, and we to walk in the
mean time as rebels and enemies unto him, like the unbaptized world? can we
think our condemnation not to be greater then theirs? Let me a little reason
the case with you, Do you know into what a Covenant the Lord has taken you?
what he has done for you, and expects from you? have not your Ministers and
Parents instructed you in it? Now tell me what is the reason of your
unanswerable conversation, is it because you renounce the Covenant, as being
made when you understood it not? if so, that you do indeed renounce it, Take
your course, serve the God you have chosen, yet tell me (I beseech you) what
iniquity is in the Lords Covenant? what hurt is there in it? what disadvantage
have you met withal? or where and how do you hope to find better things, then
God to be your Father, Christ Jesus to be your Savior, the Spirit to be your
Comforter? to have your sins pardoned and healed, to be adopted, justified,
sanctified, and every way comfortably provided for here, and saved for ever?
Do the Gods you have chosen to serve, provide better things then these, that
you renounce Christ for their sakes? If you say, God forbid you should renounce
Christ; No, you hope to be saved by Christ, as well as any other: Then tell me
in good sadness, do you expect that Christ should stand bound to perform his
part of the Covenant, and you left at liberty for your part? that he should
love you, and you hate him? that he should be your God, and you remain the
Devils servant? that he should provide Heaven for you, and you walk in the way
which leads to Hell? O how much are you deceived! I tell you he has sworn the
contrary, he has heaped up tribulation and wrath for every soul which does
evil, for the Jew first, for the baptized first; and you will one day find,
that it had been better you had never lived in his house, nor been trained up
under his Covenant, then thus to profane it, and make the blood of it as an
unholy thing.

Col. 2.12. To provoke to a holy life for time to come.
This great privilege should engage us all for time to come, to make our
Baptism a continual motive to an answerable conversation, to live as men who
are dead unto sin, and alive unto God; to account that it ought to be as
strange, to see a baptized man walk in a sinful course as to see a Spectrum a
walking Ghost: We are buried with Christ in Baptism; and how can we who are
dead to sin live any longer therein? We are planted into his family, made his
Children, have his Spirit dwelling in us; yea, thereby made one with Christ:
All this, we lay claim to, by our Baptism, shall not this enforce us to live
answerably? Luther tells a Story of a gracious Virgin, who used to get the
victory over Satan when he tempted her to any sin, Satan I may not do it,
Baptizata sum, I am Baptized, and must walk accordingly: So should we argue,
Let base persons live basely, noble and generous men must live nobly; let
Turks and Pagans live wickedly, the holy seed must live holily and
righteously: keep it daily in thy thoughts, what thy Baptism ingageth thee
unto, and that if thou walk otherwise, it will rise up extremely to aggravate
thy condemnation in the last day. It was a custom in the latter end of the
Primitive times, That such as were baptized, did wear a white Stole (a humane
Ceremony, to signify their purity of life which the baptized was to lead,
Fulgentes animas vestis quoque candida signat.) Now there was one Elpidophorus,
who after his baptism turned a persecutor; Muritta the Minister who baptized
him, brought forth in public the white Stole which Elpidophorus had worn at
his Baptism, and cried unto him; O Elpidophorus! this Stole do I keep against
thy coming to Judgment, to testify thy Apostasy from Christ; do thou in
like manner assure thy self the very Font wherein thou wast baptized, the
Register wherein thy Name is recorded, will rise up against thee, if thou lead
not a holy life: The Covenant is holy, the Seal is holy, let these provoke
thee to study to be holy, yea to draw holiness from them. Consider what I say,
And the Lord give you understanding in all things.

FJNIS.
ERRATA.
P. 22. l. 1. for legitimate, r. illegitimate, p. 39. l. 4. r. had he intended.


