The Waters of Marah Sweetened. A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mrs. CLARE
WITTEWRONGE, Eldest Daughter to Joseph Alston Esquire AND Late Wife to John
Wittewronge Esquire: Who was Interred at Stantonbury in the County of Bucks. October.
22. 1669.

By Mr. John Mason, Minister.

1 Cor. 15. 56, 57. The sting of death is sin, etc. But thanks be to God which
gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Col. 3. 4. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear
with him in glory.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock. 1671.

Hebr. IX. 27, 28. And* as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this
the Judgment; So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto
them that look for him shall he appear the second time, without sin, unto
salvation.
MAN is born to die, and he dies in order to his last Judgment. This is an hard
Sentence; but the latter part of the Text mollifies it; So Christ was once
offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him shall he
appear the second time, without sin, unto salvation.

The Proposition is terrible, but the Reddition is comfortable.

The Scope of the Apostle in this Chapter is to prove that the Sacrifice of
Christ exceeds in worth and merit all the Sacrifices of the Law. And one
Argument is this, That the Sacrifice of Christ was so perfect, that it needs
not to be repeated; But whereas the Sacrifices of the Law were offered by the
High Priest yearly, our Lord Jesus by one single oblation of himself has
obtained eternal Redemption for us. And this Argument is illustrated in the
words of my Text; As men die once, so Christ died once for men; for his death
was equivalent to many deaths: And as men after death must appear to be judged,
so Jesus Christ after his death shall appear to judge men. He shall die no
more, but whenever he appears again, it shall be to judge the world, and to
save his Elect. This proves the virtue and merit of his death; for if Christ by
his death had not wholly discharged himself from the imputation of sin, he must
have been a Prisoner, and not a Judge.

Now as the words show us the sufficiency of Christ's mediation, so in the
second place the suitableness thereof to those estates whereunto all mankind is
ordained. We must all die of necessity, we must all come to Judgment; but this
we have for our comfort, Jesus Christ is gone before us in Death, and will meet
us in the day of Judgment

And from hence we raise this Observation.

Those last, Doct.
inevitable, and dreadful estates of Death and Judgment are sanctified and
sweetened to all true Believers by the precious Death and glorious Appearance of
Jesus Christ.

Death and Judgment are the terrors of mankind, but they are consecrated into
blessings and comforts by the death of Christ, and the appearance of Christ.

The Doctrine falls into two Parts.





To begin with the first.



It is appointed unto men once to die.

1. In Gods secret and everlasting Decree.

2. In that express Decree, Genesis 3. 19. Dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou
return. God has said it, and has performed his word in all ages; So that we
must needs dye, and are as water spilt upon the ground.

Now seeing we cannot possibly avoid a dying condition, let us see how we can
digest it. And truly if we look back upon its first Institution, and the
occasion of it, we shall find it to be full of malignity and bitterness.

For what is death, but the curse of the great God upon rebellious man, the
bitter fruit of sin, a period to all earthly comforts, and the beginning of an
everlasting Hell? Death destroys vital union, dissolves the knot of natural
Relations, divorces the wife from her husband, pulls the child out of his
fathers bosom; it marrs the greatest beauties, stains the pride of earthly
glory; it degrades the Honorable, binds the strong, beggars* the rich; it
casts us out of our houses and possessions, disappoints our earthly
expectations; In a word, it rends a man asunder, and sends part of him into the
prison of the Grave; and the other part into the dungeon of Hell. And now what
will ye do in the day of Visitation? How will you save your selves? To whom
will ye flee for help, and where will you leave your glory? Can your hearts
endure, or your hands be made strong in the day that the great God shall deal
with you? O unhappy Mortals, that are born to such misery, who have no sooner
entered a single life, but are liable to a double death!

And surely if the Son of God had not died in our Nature, we should envy the
condition of Toads and Serpents; we should curse the day of our birth, and
tremble before the day of our death. But Christ was once offered to bear the
sins of many. This offering has mitigated our state of mortality. For as it is
appointed to men once to die, so Jesus Christ was appointed to die once for
men. He died once, Acts 20. 28.
that we might not die ever. The blood of God was an acceptable sacrifice to
the Justice of God. Infinite blood has satisfied infinite Justice. So that
wheresoever this blood is sprinkled, it redeems the soul to God, even from the
hand of all her enemies. Particularly death threatened us with Hell and
Damnation; But now the death of Christ is the plagues of our death, Hos. 13. 14.
and the peace of our souls. And what is it now for us to die, but to pass into
the bosom of a reconciled God, to leave the world, and to go to our Father?

We die still, yet it is upon a new account. As good Josiah, though he died in
blood, yet he went down into the grave in peace. The sentence of death, though
it be still passed upon us, yet its commission is altered through Christ.
Before it was a Sergeant to carry us to the dark and dreadful prison of Hell;
but now it is as it were a Porter to set open Heaven-gates for us. Death has a
new Commission, and a new aspect by virtue of the death of Christ.

It is 1. Innocent. 2. Useful.


Innocent. The death of a faithful Christian (for I am speaking now of sincere
Believers) I say, the death of a faithful Christian does him no hurt: What hurt
is there in putting off a suit of old clothes? I must shortly put off this
earthly Tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1. 14.
says the Apostle Peter, and it did not greatly trouble him. What hurt is it
for an imprisoned soul to be enlarged? Or for a wearied body to take a short
nap in the dust? Jesus Christ has sucked out all the venom of death. Christ's
death has swallowed up the bitterness of ours.

Christ has taken away 1. The Sting. 2. The Curse. 3. The Shame. 4. The
Terror. 5. The Enmity. of Death.


Cor. 15. 56. The sting of death is sin. Guilt is the vigor of death. Guilt
and sin makes death to be venomous and deadly; But a Child of God dies not upon
the account of sin, neither in his sin, nor for his sin. Christ was offered up
to bear our sins. That was the business of Christ's death, to be a sacrifice for
sin. But our death is a service, not a sacrifice. This is enough to make our
death tolerable; it is no punishment for our sins.

Gal. 3. 13.
But Jesus Christ by suffering the cursed death of the Cross, has taken away
the curse of our death. Here is more comfort for us, Christians; death is not
envenomed with the wrath of God; It is no blow in anger, no token of his
displeasure, no Curse, but only a rougher sort of love.



into a state of damnation. Now true Believers are delivered from the spirit of
bondage through the blood of Christ. Heb. 2. 13.
This also enables them to check their natural fear, as Hilarian did, when he
cried, Get thee out, my soul, get thee out; thou have served Christ these
seventy years, and art thou now afraid to die?

Esau) it is friendly in its address. It is an enemy to our nature, but it is
no enemy to our happiness. It divides us, but it does not destroy us. Nay this
last enemy is become one of our chiefest friends. For when the world disquiets
us, pains torment us, Friends and Physicians are of no value, Death proves our
Cure. When sin besets us, temptations assault us, the Devils buffet us, death
proves our deliverance.

You see, my Beloved, what an innocent thing death is; you may touch it, handle
it, converse with it, it will do you no hurt. It is but a necessary Ceremony
and Formality, through which we must pass into everlasting glory.

Innocent, so it is Useful; For it is a blessing of God, a blessing of the new
Covenant. 1 Cor. 3. 22.
Death is yours. Dear Christians, All are yours; And as the Ministers of the
Gospel are yours, and the world is yours, and life is yours, so death is yours;
yours in Covenant, yours to serve you. If ye are Christ's, death is yours; but
if you are not Christ's, you are Deaths, you are deaths prisoners; but in Christ
we are deaths Masters. For all true Believers, though they have not made a
Covenant with death, yet they have death in the Covenant. We call death a Debt
of Nature, but to us it is the gift of God; A Legacy rather than an Exaction, A
Privilege rather than a Burden. It is a conquered Enemy, and is become
Tributary to us.

Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, for they rest from
their labors. These are our working days, our dies profesti, the days of our
toil and pilgrimage; But there remains a rest for the people of God, Heb. 4. 9.
There remains a Sabbatism (as it is in the Original.) And death is the evening
of our everlasting Sabbath.

Here Gods people are laboring under sin, and against sin, under temptations,
and against temptations, in their heavenly Callings, and in their earthly
Callings. But then these weary Pilgrims shall be at rest, when their souls
shall be lodged in the bosom of Christ, and their bodies shall rest in a bed of
earth. Our souls shall rest in Heaven, and our flesh shall rest in Hope.

they hang their Harps upon the Willows, and how can they sing songs in a
strange land? But when once they come into their Lords presence, they shall
break forth into singing; Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, sorrow and
sighing shall fly away.

The Apostle tells us, We are but children, we think as children, 1 Cor. 13. 9,
11.
we discourse as children; but when we are grown up to a full stature in
Christ, when we are once got to Heaven, we shall put away these childish
things. Then we shall see God as he is, and know him as we are known, and shall
behold his face in righteousness, and shall be satisfied with his likeness.
Then our Faith shall end in vision, and our Hope in fruition, and our Graces
shall be perfected in glory. Our love shall burn, our zeal shall flame, our
holiness shall shine; Then our peace shall be as a river, and our righteousness
as the waves of the Sea. Then we shall have perfect, immediate, uninterrupted
Communion with God.

This it is to die in the Lord.

But after death comes Judgment. II. Part of the Doctr.
There is a vain Argument that Lactantius confutes; Epicurus slighted death
upon this account, because said he, Whilst we are, death is not; and when death
is, we are not; And therefore death is nothing to us. But this man erred, not
knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God: For after death comes Judgment,
wherein the souls and bodies of men being reunited, all Nations, Tribes, and
Languages shall appear before the living God to give an account of their lives,
and to receive their final sentence. Now it is the dreadfulness of the day of
Judgment, that makes the day of Death so terrible. And the poor guilty soul was
not more loath to part with her body in the day of Death, than she shall be to
re-enter it in the day of Judgment.

When the Lord Jesus shall appear from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming
fire, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8.
to take vengeance on all those that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of
Christ, where then will guilty sinners appear? Or where will you hide your
selves from the presence of the Lamb? Alas, there will be no possibility of
escaping his terrible presence; you shall see him coming in the Clouds, you
shall hear him pronouncing your dreadful Doom, you shall feel him pressing down
your souls with the power of his wrath.

But fear not, little flock; for your Enemies shall not sit in Judgment; when
you shall come upon trial for your lives, to have your everlasting estate
determined: It is your Friend, your Brother, your Advocate that shall be your
Judge: It Is he that led you by the hand through the valley of death, that shall
meet you in the day of Judgment. Then you shall say, Lo, this is our God, our
Jesus, we have waited for him, and he will save us. Then the object of our
Faith shall be the object of our Sight. Him whom our souls have loved, and
longed for, we shall see with these eyes of ours in that day; We shall see him
coming in the clouds with power and great glory, we shall see him not with
scorn, but with admiration, not with trembling, but with rejoicing.

Christ's first Appearance was very mean. He appeared as the Son of man, or
rather as a worm, Psa. 22. 6, 7.
a reproach of men; all that saw him laughed him to scorn. But hereafter he
shall appear as the God of all glory, and the Judge of quick and dead. In the
days of his flesh he appeared as a Prisoner at Pilates Bar, and as a Malefactor
on the Cross; then indeed he stood charged with the sins of all his people, but
in the day of Judgment he shall appear without sin unto their salvation.

The glorious presence of the Lord, that shall be as a devouring Fire to
consume his Enemies, shall be a warm Sun to refresh his Saints. And that day,
that shall be a day of terror to guilty sinners, shall be to us a day of
refreshing from the presence of the Lord.

It Is wonderful to think, what infinite honors and privileges shall be
conferred upon us (poor dust and ashes) in that day. How we shall be caught up
in a Chariot of clouds, and shall meet the Lord in the air, where we shall
receive kind salutations from him, and smiles, and blessings, and
acknowledgments of service, and Crowns of glory, and shall be made his
Assessors whiles he is judging the world, and after all this, shall attend him
into his glorious Palace, where we shall ever be with the Lord Let us comfort
one another with these words.

The very thought of Christ's last Appearance, how sweet is it to a believing
soul!

This day of Life, is a day of Trouble; but the day of Judgment, is a day of
Redemption.

This is a day of Confession, but that is a day of Absolution.

Here we are slain all the day long, but that is our Coronation-day.

Here in Man's day we are judged by the world, 1 Cor. 4. 3.
but in the Lords day we shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6. 3.
Angels, and men.

O most blessed day, that ever shone, being thus enlightened by the bright and
glorious Appearance of the Sun of Righteousness!

Now if Death and Judgment are thus sweetened, Use 1.
and blessedly altered through Christ, as you have heard; then O how happy are
the Saints departed. Rev. 1413. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord from
henceforth. They are Blessed from henceforth; Here their Blessedness commences,
even in this same point which puts a period to their sins and sorrows. And the
Spirit of God bid his Amanuensis write it down, as a remarkable note, that a
Christians Blessedness takes date from the time of his death. Till then he was
a wretched sufferer under a body of death, and a mass of corruption, but now he
is a blessed Triumpher. His sins have left him, his good works follow him, and
Heaven affords him Rest.

I confess, it is a common Error among the worst of men, that when they die,
they shall be at rest; and in their pains, they will wish to die, that they may
go to rest. But alas, it is only those that die in the Lord, that shall rest
from their labors. Cursed are they that die out of the Lord, that die in the
old Adam only, and upon the old score. I have spoke nothing all this while in
favor of the unregenerate; Let them not boast with Agag, surely the bitterness
of death is past, for death will hew them in pieces, as the unmerciful
Executioner of Divine Justice. Joh. 8. 24.
They that die out of Christ, die in all the sins that ever they have
committed. Those dreadful words which our Savior spoke to the Pharisees, Joh.
8. 21.
will reach them -- Ye shall die in your sins; and whither I go, ye cannot
come. Their dying, alas, what is it but a going to Hell?

As the rich Glutton, when he died, the next news that we hear of him is, that
he is in Hell; The Devil did not make him roar till he had him there. Death
stings a wicked man, and leaves its sting in him, and casts all its venom upon
him.

A wicked man is a great loser by his death; he loses all he is worth, he loses
his Heaven here, his Paradise, and his hearts delight; Death sends him into
another world begging. And he that had his Cups of Wine here, would there be
glad of Drops of Water. He is a great sufferer by his death; for it is the
Devils Trap, wherein he takes his soul; it is the Door of Hell, which lets him
into that abhorred place of everlasting Torments.

But, O how safe and quiet are those that are fallen asleep in Jesus* They are
resting securely, they are unconcerned in the troublesome affairs and changes of
this life: nothing disturbs their rest. Isa. 63. 16.
Abraham is ignorant of us, says the Church; but he is Acquainted with God and
Christ, and that is sufficient. He is ignorant of us and our Calamities, but he
is sensible of his own Mercies.

Alas, here can be no perfect happiness on this side death; for whiles we are
present with the body, we are absent from the Lord.

It was excellently spoke of Queen Elizabeth, Whiles I call things past to
mind, behold things present, and expect things to come, I hold them happiest
that go hence soonest.

Surely all the Faithful have cause to bless the Lord for a state of mortality.
Job loathed to think of a state of immortality upon earth, Job. 7. 16.
Chap. 7. 16. I loath it, I would not live always. The soul of this righteous
man was like a bird caged or pinioned, and if she had her freedom, she would
soon fly away, and be at rest. What delight could she take in such an unclean
cage, in such a rotten, ulcerous body, in such a base treacherous world? she
would fain be gone, and is waiting and requesting for leave. It was once the
speech of a good man, I have been seeking death these forty years, and cannot
find it. I care not when, nor where, nor how I die;And seeing our lives be so
miserable, it is our happiness that they be mortal. Truly our condition would
be very sad, if we should have immortal sins, immortal cares, immortal
miseries, but death proves mortal to them all. And whereas our bodies shall be
recovered from a state of death in the Resurrection, our sins and sorrows die
and rise no more.

I must needs say, It Is an happiness to be Christ's Soldier in the field of
this World, but O how happy are his Courtiers! They are resting in their beds,
whiles we are toiling in the house of bondage. They are singing on the Shore,
whiles we are floating on the Waves: we are sowing in tears, but they are
reaping in joy, and rejoicing as in the joy of harvest. We are wrestling with
Devils, but they are conversing with Angels.

But when the Lord Jesus shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice
of the Archangel, and the Trump of God, then shall these blessed souls attend
upon him; and they shall immediately recover their proper bodies after their
long separation; and then soul and body shall mutually comfort and welcome one
another, and rejoice together, being both dressed up into a conformity to the
glorious Image of God, the King of Glory, and arrayed suitably to the solemnity
of that day.

Imagine we two Travelers sweetly and sociably walking together, till night
overtakes them; one of them loses himself in the dark, and being tired with his
journey, lies down, and falls asleep; The other being more vigorous and lively,
walks on till he spies a light in a stately Lodge, there he knocks, and finds
good entertainment, and is kindly invited to stay. There he refreshes himself
after his travel, and enjoys himself: yet he wishes for the company of his
fellow-traveller to complete his felicity. When morning light appears, he goes
out, and seeks his Companion that had been sleeping upon the cold earth all
night; there he renews his acquaintance with him, and brings him into the
presence of his newfound friend, where they both share in his courtesy and
bounty.

These two Travelers are the soul and body of a Christian. Their days journey
is the twelve hours of their life; the night is death. Both walk friendly
together, till night parts them; the weary body falls asleep; the active soul
keeps on her way till she comes to the light of Heaven, where she is most
kindly treated by the Lord and his Angels. But yet in the midst of her
entertainment, she cannot forget her old mate, but is ready to say, Lord, I
have a body below, which used to pray with me, and to fast for me. Well, it is
not long e're morning-light appears, and then the soul looks abroad, and takes
acquaintance with her body, and carries it into the presence of her noble and
gracious Lord, where both are welcomed with his Smiles, and enriched with his
Favors. Such honor have all his Saints.

How happy is our Friend departed? She is with her Father above, with her
Husband above, and with her Children in Glory.

I shall not insist much on her praises: for though Solomon says, A virtuous
woman shall be praised: yet he says in another place, Her own works shall
praise her in the gate.

They that knew her most, loved her best. Among several good things that were
found in her, there are four which I would not have buried with her in the
Dust, but shall publish them as worthy of your Imitation.

1. Her private Conversings with God.

2. Her affectionate Hearing of Gods Word.

3. Her professed Esteem of the Merits of her Savior.

4. Her frequent, savoury Discourses of her own Mortality.

Her Infirmities she often bewailed, and they served but to enhance the price of
her Saviors Blood. She professed she was willing to die, that she might cease
from sin; And upon her Deathbed she rejoiced in hope of the Glory of God. She
has left us such Evidences of her Holiness, that we doubt not of her
Happiness. And how happy are the Saints departed!

Again, Use 2.
Learn from hence how to die, and how to prepare for Judgment. We all know, we
must die; but who knows how to die? Death is the way of all the Earth, but an
happy death is a way that few find out. Now seeing we cannot make a Covenant
with Death, let us labor to have Death in the Covenant. Would thou die and
go to the Grave in peace?

Then 1. Meditate on the Death of Christ. Some harden themselves against the
fear of death, because it is the general Lot of Mankind: All must die, say they.
It is appointed for all men once to die. But alas, what Comfort can it be to
them to be bound up in a Bundle of Tares, and to be cast into unquenchable
fire? But, poor Christian, let this be thy Comfort, that death was the Lot of
Jesus Christ, that he has consecrated a dying state for us in his own Body,
and that he poured forth his Soul unto death, that our Souls might be bound up
in the Bundle of Life. The Life of our Souls lies in the Blood of Christ. O my
Beloved, take heed of slighting a crucified Christ. They that are against
Christ, either in their Judgments or Hearts, that dispute against him, or live
against him, seem to hate their own Souls, and to be in love with Damnation, as
it is in Prove. 8. ult. How can such ever look death in the face, that hide
their faces from Christ, and esteem him not? Where will they find such another
Savior? In vain do you run from Mountain to Hill, Christ, Christ alone can
secure you from the Plagues and Hellish terrors of death. He is the Foundation
of an Holy life and Happy death. The readiest way to learn this long Art of
dying well, is to study the Death of Christ. Now the Intendment of the Death of
Christ, was not merely to teach us to die Patiently, but to enable us to die
Comfortably. And if thou would depart this Life in peace, then first possess
thy Soul with a right apprehension of the Death of Christ. Study the words of
the Apostle, Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and to them that
look for him shall he appear the second time, without sin, unto salvation. In
these words, you have four things touching the Death of Christ very
considerable.

1. The Death and Blood of Christ was Vicarious, instead of many. Many deaths
were summed up in his one death. He was offered upon the Cross, to bear the
sins of many. The Jews thought he died worthily for his own sins, for Blasphemy
and Treason: No, but it was our Blasphemies and Treasons, our sins against God
and Man, that he died for. Isa. 53. 4. -- We did esteem him stricken, smitten of
God, and afflicted (viz. for his own sins; that was their great mistake, which
the Church of God corrects in the next verse.) But he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him.

2. Observe, Christ's deaths was an Offering; He was offered in Sacrifice to God
upon the Altar of the Cross. He did not fall as a Sacrifice to the Rage of the
Jews (for he could easily have rescued himself out of their hands) but he was
offered up to the Justice of his Father. Ephesians. 5. 2 -- Christ has loved us, and
has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet
smelling savor.

3. In respect of sin, Christ's death was not only Penal, but also Expiatory. He
bore the sins of many, i. e. the punishment due to them, even what was
equivalent to a thousand Hells. There are not such Torments to be found in
Hell, as he suffered upon the Cross, where he bore the sins of his people. And
yet he did so fully discharge himself of sin, that at his second Coming, he
shall appear without sin.

4. In respect of his Enemies, the Death of Christ was Victorious. Once he was
devoted for his people, Cursed, Tortured by a bitter death: But in death he
overcame Death, and all the Powers of Hell. And therefore Death could not hold
him, the Grave could not detain him, the wicked One could not touch him, Heaven
could not refuse him. He died once for sin, but he shall die no more, for his
death was Triumphant over sin: And he shall shortly appear without sin, to the
terror of his Enemies, and the Salvation of his dear People.

We should treasure up such sweet Notions of a dying Jesus, to prepare us
against our dying day.

To die, my Friends, is a solemn Work; it is a loud Summons that calls the Soul
to appear before her Judge. We go from Funeral to Funeral, and may see death
riding through our Towns, but little do we think what it is to have Death come
home to our selves. O what strange thoughts of heart, what hurrying of passions
will the sight of death beget, when it lays close Siege to a man, and begins
to make its breaches upon the Body. Then the Soul views and reviews her self;
Mat. 25.
As all the Virgins looked into their vessels, when they were awakned by the
loud Cry at midnight, to see if they had Oil for their Lamps. Then all the
signs of Grace, and grounds of Hope must be brought to trial; then she examines
whether her matters be right and good, whether her condition be safe. But be it
safe or perilous, death comes in haste, Joh. 11. 29.
as Martha to her Sister, The Master is come, and calls for thee; and thou must
away: Then all the world could not redeem one hour for Repentance. Now how if
thou should be surprised, and taken away by a sudden stroke, and arrested by
death, before thou have well thought of it, what a sad blow would that be?

O therefore now be wise, be wise, for thy self; It is a great point of wisdom
to consider our latter end; Deuteronomy. 32. 28.
As the Lord says, O that they were wise to consider their latter end! I
beseech you therefore, familiarize death in your thoughts, make it near. What
think thou? Durst thou dye this night? Durst thou meet thy Judge this night?
Thy heart, it may be, trembles at the thoughts of this O spare me a little. But
then ask thy self, why thou would not dye, what art afraid of? Let me offer
some consolatory Meditations to a poor Soul that is trembling under the fears
of death. Art thou afraid of the wrath of God? Then meditate, But Christ died
as a propitiatory Sacrifice to satisfy the Justice of God. He drank off the
very dregs of Gods wrath in the Cup of his Death.

Art thou afraid of losing thy Soul for ever? O but Jesus Christ died for the
Redemption of poor Souls. His Soul went for our Souls, and his life for our
life. He gave his life a ransom for many, Mat. 20. 28. The price of Christ's
Blood is a Souls Ransom.

Art thou afraid of falling short of Heaven? But the Death of Christ opened our
passage to Heaven. Heb. 10. 19, 20.
The renting of the vail of his blessed Body made an open passage into the Holy
of Holies.

Art thou afraid thy sins should find thee out in another world? Then meditate,
The Lamb of God, Joh. 1. 19.
that great Sacrifice, takes away the sin of the world. Sin was condemned in
the Death of Christ, and receives its final execution in the death of a
Christian.

Art thou afraid the Law should condemn thee? Then remember, the Death of
Christ has rebated the edge of the Law, and has abolished the Curse of the
Law. Gal. 3. 13.


Art thou afraid the Devils should fetch away thy soul at death? Heb. 3. 14.
But the Lord Jesus has destroyed him that had the power of death, and has
bruised the Serpents head, by the power of his death.

Thus you should anoint your heads against your Funeral, with the precious
Ointment of the Name of Christ, and bathe your souls in such heavenly
comfortable Meditations.

2. It is not enough for us to meditate on the Death of Christ, but we must
apply it to our selves by a lively Faith, that it may have an influence upon
our death. Have Faith in the Blood of Christ. The Blood of Christ is the Wine
and Marrow of the Gospel-feast, the strength of our Sacraments, the foundation
of an everlasting Covenant. This Blood seasons all the mercies of a Believer,
sanctifies all his offerings; It makes his heart cheerful, his life
comfortable, his death precious, his grave sweet, his soul fit to enter into
the Holy of Holies. O derive the stream of it upon thy soul.

Thou can not instantly believe that Christ died for thee, yet labor to stay
thy heart upon the satisfaction, sufficiency, and worthiness of the Death of
Christ. Hide thy self in the clefts of the Rock, the Wounds of thy Savior.
Embrace a crucified Christ, and lay him in thy heart, as Joseph did in his
Garden. Why has the Righteous hope in his death, but because he has Faith in
the Death of Christ? A living Faith in a dying Christ is a sovereign remedy
against the plagues of death, and an infallible prevention of the pains of
Hell. Joh. 11. 26. Whosoever lives and believes in me, he shall never die, as
we read it. But yes, he shall die once by Gods appointment; but he shall not
die (...), (as in Original) He shall not die ever, Rev. 20. 14.
he shall not die to eternity. Death is cast into the lake of fire. They that
are thrown into the Lake of fire, meet with death there: In the Lake of fire
they are ever dying. But he that has faith in the Blood of Christ, passes
from death to life. What was it that gave the Israelites safe passage through
the Red Sea? Read Heb. 11. 29. By faith they passed through the Red Sea as by
dry land; which the Egyptians (through presumption) assaying to do, were
drowned. Even so death will drown us and sink us into Hell, if we have not
Faith to clear our passage for us.

Lastly, Would you hold up your heads in the day of Judgment, then look for the
Coming of Christ. Woe be to those souls to whom Christ shall come unlooked for.
O how sadly shall the drowsy world be surprised by the sudden Appearance of
Christ! But Christ shall appear to the Salvation of those faithful Servants,
that are watching and waiting for his second Coming. He shall come to them, not
as a Thief in the night, but as a Friend in the day. Faith and Love combine
together in an earnest expectation of Christ, and that is the reason, that it
is so kindly accepted, and so richly rewarded. And therefore, good Christians,
keep watching, if you have any affection for Christ. Cannot you watch one hour?
It is but yet a little while, Heb. 10. 37.
and he that shall come, will come and will not tarry. You have but two things
to do, and Christ will either meet you or send for you; and that is to finish
your work, and to fill up the measure of your Graces. God has something to do
for us, and something to do by us, and then he will take us to himself.

1. We must be careful to dispatch our business, Luke 13. 23.
and to finish our Task. Herod might threaten death, but our Savior could not
die till he had finished the work which God gave him to do. So neither shall a
Christian die, till his work be done. We read, Act. 13. 36. David after he had
served his own generation by the will of God, fell on sleep. Or, as others read
it, When David had served the will of God in his age and generation, etc. Both
are true; He was serviceable to God, and an useful Instrument in the Church;
and when all his work was ended, he fell on sleep, and sweetly rested in the
Lord.

2. Again, We must fill up the measure of our Graces. Ephesians. 4. 7.
There is a certain measure and proportion of Grace assigned to every Member of
the Body of Christ. Some have more, some less: Every one shall have his proper
sufficient measure. A Christian shall not enter into Glory, till he has
received his measure of Grace. Read the Parable of the seed growing secretly,
Mark 4. 26, 27, 28, 29. And observe that passage, After that the full corn is
in the ear, and the fruit is ripe, immediately he puts in the sickle. When
our Grace is like full Corn in the ear, when the fruit of Gods Spirit is ripe
in us, then immediately comes the sickle of Death; then we are meet to be
partakers of an inheritance with the Saints in light, O then we shall come and
appear before God.

Consider what has been said; 1 Pet. 1. 24, 25.
For, you see, all flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of
the grass; the grass withers, the flower thereof falls away; But the Word of
the Lord endures for ever.

FINIS.

