The Portraiture or Platform of the Humane Mind in its twofold State, or
Nature. Unconverted and converted.
(...) Man's Understanding in its Eclips, or Natural Darkness Unconverted. 1.
From Darkness and Ignorance of the Saving truth.

Man's Understanding Out of the Eclips, or Natural Darkness Converted. 1. Unto
Light and knowledge of the Saving truth

The Old W^^^ The Mount of Natural Hautinesse in the Heart of Man; Unconverted
2. From Pride and Greatness Luke 14.14.

De^ending

The Mount of Spiritual Holiness In the Heart of Man; Converted. 2. Unto Grace
and Goodness. Hebrews 12.22.23

Asending.

The Old Affections Man in his Unconverted Wrathful Nature; Armed. 3 From Wrath
and Lust.

The Old Adam: Condemnation

Man in his Converted Innocent Nature: Naked and Unarmed

To Peace and Love: diVine.

The New Adam Salvation

(...) And be not Conformed to this World: Rom: 12.2

(...) But be ye Transformed by the Renewing of your Mind



Iohannis Drapentier sculp^it.
Mentis Humanae Metamorphosis; sive Conversio.

THE HISTORY OF THE Young Converted Gallant. OR DIRECTIONS TO THE Readers of
that Divine Poem, WRITTEN By BENJAMIN KEACH; ENTITLED War with the Devil.
Here showing the Readers thereof, how to Read the same Poem aright, in these
four Respects; viz. I. In Reference to the Substance, or History thereof. II.
In Reference to the Intent, or Mystery thereof. III. In Reference to the
Consequent Doctrine thereof. IV. In Reference to Practical Application thereof.
Compiled in a Poem by J. Mason Gent. of Fordham in Cambridge-shire.

Licensed Sept. 27. 1675. Roger L'estrange.

London, Printed by F. L. for B. Harris at the Stationers Arms in
Sweethings-Rents by the Royal Exchange, 1676.

THE MORAL ARGUMENT of this BOOK.
Concerning the New Creature, or Regenerate Man; under the six Types foregoing.
DArk, Ignorant Creatures are we all by Birth,
Of Earth first formed; still lovers of the Earth:
Fools were we born, and so continue still,
Fools in our passions, Fools in our wit and will;
All Natural Fools (as to the Truth,) or Madmen;
Proud, poor and blind; and all by nature Bad-men.
Till Man's Viz. Men's Humana: the Humane Mind, or the Humanity.
eclipsed Soul from earth does rise
By a new Birth, enlightening his blind eyes;
For when his Pride sinks down, and wrathful Will,
And so his Mind Ascends the Holy Hill:
When once the Truth does shine within his heart,
Wrath, Pride and Ignorance must all depart:
For naked came we from our Mothers Womb,
And naked must return to our last home:
Yea, Naked we should live, as Babes newborn,
Or, like the harmless sheep, clean washed and shorn,
Robbed of his fleece, he envies not the wearer,
Nor opens he his mouth against the Shearer.
Unclothed, unarmed; no Weapon to defend him,
No Lordly Powers to favor or befriend him.
Thus on the Cross, Christ Jesus naked hung,
A Prezident of Life to old and young;
To show how Man should always naked stand,
Under Christ's Cross with open heart and hand;
Ever Resigned in his Makers sight,
And nothing claim as his peculiar Right.
For all Man has he ows to God alone,
Nothing but Sin and Death he calls his own!
O take it deep to heart, ye men of Wit,
Of Wealth, and Worth, though near so high you sit:
For such by right each Christian ought to be,
Of whatsoever Title, He or She.
THE DEDICATION TO THE Whole Universe, with the Princes, and People thereof.
TO the wide World I Dedicate this Glass,
To show a Wonder that must come to pass;
The World's New Birth, and Gallantry Refined,
To a more solid and substantial Kind.
And because much in few I would express,
I write my mind in plain an pithy Verse.
For lo, in my divining thoughts I see,
The last fulfilling of that Mystery,
Which sacred Scriptures have concealed long
Under a Vail, or dark Prophetic Song:
The Gentiles fullness with that wondrous news,
The Calling and Conversion of the Jews.
A promised truth, which few or none believes,
Though for that Day the whole Creation grieves.
But Time will cut each mystic knot in sunder,
That God may have the Honor of the Wonder:
For then Jew and Gentile both, shall know
There is a God can bring the Haughty Low.
Perhaps the sound may rouse some Prince or Peer,
Now to begin the Worlds Reforming Year,
To stop the stream of Vice, and turn the Tide,
Of Wrath and Lust, Debauchery and Pride;
And, as the Rising Sun, with Powerful Light
Dispel the darkness of the Worlds long Night;
That all the World Newborn may speak one Tongue,
Or no man think or do his Neighbor Wrong:
For such by right all Mankind ought to be,
And so make good this following History.
Art thou a Master of Israel, and know not these things? -- Namely, Thine
own New Birth, and the Worlds New Birth to come, John 3.10.

THE Young Converted Gallant. The First Part; OR First Direction General to the
Readers of the Divine Poem aforesaid, in Reference to the Substance, or
Personal History thereof.
GOod Readers see, who take that book in hand
You read aright; that is, to understand;
For else, I fear, that some Misapprehension
May judge that work at best, but Man's invention,
Some Pious Fancy, not a Real Truth,
Concerning this un-named Newborn Youth.
Had but the Author told this Convert's Name,
All might have given Credit to his Fame;
But since his Praise, and Virtue is so much,
Without a Name, he may be called Nonesuch.
For, in the compass of our Hemisphere,
No-such New-star, or Comet does appear;
There Is no such Figure in the Heavenly Plain,
Between Orion's Hilt, and Charles -- his Wain:
No such young Saint, which by just steps does clime
The Ladder of Conversion in his Prime;
Descending and Ascending by degrees,
Christ's Cross betimes, with humble heart and knees.
Yet to cut off all doubt, I Will here proceed,
And take for granted what I there do read,
And tell the progress of this Converts Way,
In his low state; and first Refining Day.
For such, by right, each Reader ought to be,
And so make good this following History.
Advertisement.
SIRS,
IN the Reading of this Convert's Story, observe aright the several Steps, or
Degrees of his Conversion; namily, six Descending, and six Ascending: the six
Descending show the Virtues and graces proper to Repentance, and Mortification,
in forsaking and eschewing of evil: the other six Ascending, show the Virtues
and Graces of Obedience, and Renovation in Practicing the Good.

I. The First Mortifying Grace, or Virtue, or First Step and Degree of his
Conversion, Descending, viz. Humility of Spirit.
VIew here a Viz. Men's Humana: Man's Understanding.
Princely Viz. Men's Humana: Man's Understanding.
Youth (the Sts. delight)
From the wrong way converted to the right.
Conscience, and Truth, as Witnesses appear
Against his Pride, and strike his Soul with Fear.
His Height and State, Astonishment soon dashes,
When he conceives himself but Dust and Ashes:
And thus Baptized in a new white Dress,
Begins to shine in Robes of Lowliness.
For like as Drossie Oar does change to Gold
When pure Refining Fire dossolves the Old;
So minds new changed, new Manners soon do take,
And hearts, by Grace refined, their Dross forsake;
Namely that Pride, which in the Soul does lie,
That first born Nature called Or Sublimity Selfehood.
Egoity.
Lo! thus this Gallant's changed, and all his wildness,
Is now dissolved to Meekness, and to Mildness:
All his unruly passions are made Tame,
And loose Affections wrought to sober Frame.
His Love, his Wrath, and Joy, Grief, Fear, and Hope,
All six move gentle in their bounded scope,
As calmed Seas when stormy blasts are stayed,
And swelling Billows in the deep are laid.
Or as the Humbled Prodigal returning
To his lost home, with blushing and with mourning,
For he is ashamed, and blushes to appear
Before the Just, whom he did scorn and jeer.
Thus Mortified, and changed, in deep Remorse
By free consent of Will; not Form, or Force:
He Is stripped of all, not by the hands of Thieves,
But by the power of Truth, which he believes.
For Truth has overpowered his belief,
And makes him think, of sinners he is chief.
And this his first Step is, in Degradation,
Leading the way to fuller Resignation.
The Reason of this first way in Conv^rsion.
For though high Honor God himself does give
To all his Saints, who here obedient live,
Yet Man must first descend from his own Glory,
And so come down unto the lowest story.
He must come down from that exalted Throne
In his proud heart, and his own self disown,
Before he can Ascend in perfect Love,
To Contemplation of the life above.
And e're to Sion-Hill he dares go on,
He first comes down from lofty Babylon;
That Babylon Great, where he was born an bred
He leaves and loathes, as to her joys quite dead:
And so falls down a prostrate Publican,
That God may have the Honor and not Man.
Lo! By this step this Gallant first Descends,
Before he climbs the Hill to which he tends;
For such a one each Gallant ought to be,
And so makes good this Converts History.
II. The Second Mortifying Grace, or Virtue; or the second Step and Degree in
his Conversion, Descending; Namely, Impartiality in Judgment, Concerning Sin,
and Error, Vice and Vanity, and every Evil.
THus, first brought low in Spirit, meek and mild,
Fit to receive Instruction as a Child;
He in his Youth a new Christ Cross does learn,
'Twixt Good and Ill, the difference to discern;
To choose the Good, and to refuse the Ill,
The next hard Cross unto a Gallant's Will:
For it is Death unto a Highborn Spirit,
To judge aright the sin he does inherit.
But now his Conscience is awaked from sleep,
And made alive; late risen from the deep;
And by that Light of Conscience, wondrous clear,
The Powers of Darkness he does see, and hear,
With open Eyes he sees how vain a King
Did rule his soul, and sense in every thing;
For it is a saying, and a Truth of Old,
All that does glister is not perfect Gold.
Yea, thus our Father first lost Paradise,
A False-appearance did delude his Eyes;
And since that day to this, a Glistering show
Deludes us all; we nothing rightly know,
'Till Conscience does consume man's vain Desire,
Like to a shining, and a burning Fire.
The Process follows.
Thus, this enlightened Convert does begin,
To judge aright of Vanity and Sin;
To pass a Righteous Sentence on Truth's side,
And not Prevaricate with Pomp, and Pride:
If Conscience should mistake, yet Truth cannot,
'Though that o're-see, yet this will hit the blot.
For now the Beam is pulled from his own eye,
That he the Mote in others may espy;
He sees that all is Vain this world commends,
For Honor, Pomp, or Pleasure; or like Ends.
He sees how Vice puts on a brave Disguise,
To make it pass for good before Men's eyes;
As Jugglers do, or Players on the Stage,
Who with a Cheat our wandering eyes engage.
But, above all, he does discern full well
That dark Abyss, which leads unto Hell,
Called Pride of Gallantry', and of gentile 'state,
In which he lived involved, deep of late;
He sees how Vain those Gentile Gloryes are,
Which in False shape, him and the World ensnare!
He sees, besides, the several Faults and Crimes,
And sinful fashions of these sensual Times:
And how base Flattery too does cover all,
'Till all at last to desperate Hardness fall.
O it is a Blessing to discern each Error,
Vice, and False Virtue, Scruple, and vain Terror!
The Election and Decree.
Thus having made a true Discovery
Of Sin, and Vice, and every Vanity,
He now proceeds unto Election next,
And to reject the Ill that him perplex't.
A Throne of Judgment now is set in Heaven,
(In his own Soul) and a true Sentence given,
That all is Vain, which Men call Gallantry,
Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity:
Whether in Sacred, or in Civil Things,
In Priests, or People; in Subjects or in Kings.
And thus condemning what he judges Ill,
Proceeds to Execution in his Will;
Which is the Third Degree of his Descending,
Step after step, his Life, and Faith amending.
The Increase of his Faith hereupon.
For in his Heart true Faith has taken place,
Panting still more and more for Saving Grace,
Of which he has a Taste, his Soul delighting,
And all his inward faculties inlightning.
So by that Grace Divine is brought about
To work with Fear his own Salvation out;
'Till by Obedience to that Light so Pure,
He make his Calling and Election sure;
And at all times and places bears his Cross
With constant Mind, whatever proves his Loss:
None can deter him with vain Words, or Fears,
Or laugh him out of Judgment with their Jeers.
And such a one each Gallant ought to be,
And so make good this Converts History.
The End of the Second Degree Descending; Called, Impartiality in Judgment,
Concerning Good and Evil.
3. The Third Mortifying Grace, or Virtue; being the third Step, or Degree of
Conversion, Descending: Namely, Execution of Judgment: OR THE Performance of
the Will, In forsaking Vanity, Gallantry, and Pride of Gentility.
THus, having well Decreed what he foresees,
He hast's to Execute his Just Decrees,
And to Perform what he Resolved before,
To set upon the Work, and Droll no more;
For many do Resolve, but few Obey
(Like this True Convert) what they think, or say:
So light, so loose, so empty and so dry
Are Man's best Thoughts in his vain Gallantry:
For all his Resolutions are a Jest,
And he a Gallant Hypocrite at best;
Like to a Barren Cloud that mounts on high,
Yet never yields a Shower from the Sky;
His Life's a Dream, and in a Dream he walks,
He Is fast asleep, and in his Sleep he talks:
Because his Will the first Birth does suprize,
And suffers not the Second Birth to rise;
Which should give Life and Vigor to the Will,
To Execute his Thoughts against the Ill.
Therefore I here will let my Readers see,
How these two Births do Differ or Agree.
The Difference of the two Births, Old, and New.
Many Degenerate Gentile Sparks there are,
But to find one Regenerate, is Rare;
Many Highborn, (and that is no News to hear)
But one Newborn, a Wonder does appear;
Of such a One our News-books never told,
Nor yet the Belgick's Mercury of old:
And therefore marvel not if I supply,
The Old Defect with this New History.
Two kinds of Birth the Scripture well explains,
Esau the First, Jacob the Last obtains.
These Names, two Natures do imply; and so
The Last supplants the First, and brings it low.
For a New Nature, does a New Name take,
And a New Birth does a New Christian make;
'Till now, this Gallant did Usurp that Name,
But his New Birth makes him to be the same.
And far more Noble is this Second Birth;
For this from Heaven comes, but that from Earth:
Yea, this is Born of God, but that of Man,
This calls God, Father; That, nor will, nor can.
This Noble Birth transcends each Coat of Arms.
All natural Extract, or the Field Alarms:
And for this Birth this Youth, himself bereaves
Of his First Birth, and its Vainglory leaves,
With all its tinckling Titles of Degrees,
To which men bow their heads, and bend their knees.
This was the third hard Cross to this poor soul,
For all the Powers of Hell this work control;
Old Satan's Kingdom cannot stand one hour,
In that poor heart, where Pomp has lost its power.
Nor can Gentility in its Pride agree
With Christianity in true sympathy:
For these to Princes are as opposite
As Light and Darkness, or as Black and White;
The Jew and Gentile don't more different seem,
Than Gentleman and Christian in esteem.
Dam me to Hell, the sinful Gallants cry,
Hell is their Portion; sin their property;
To whom this Convert stands a Pattern here,
Of True Repentance, and of Holy Fear,
Of true Nobility in the highest kind,
Born of Humility in the lowest mind.
Who to obtain a New-name, as Newborn,
Leaves all vain Trappings, which his Name adorn,
And here degrades himself of Gentile Pride,
So to be made for Christ his lowly Bride.
For such a one each Gallant ought to be,
And so make good this Gallant's History.
The End of the Third Degree in Conversion, Descending; and Third Mortifying
Virtue; Called Execution of Judgment, and Will. In forsakeng all Vain Gentility.
The Fourth Mortifying Grace, or Virtue; Being the Fourth Step or Degree in his
Conversion, Descending, Called, Rationality, or True Discretion. In Bridling of
the Wit, and Lordly Tongue.
THus now bereft of his Gentility,
For Conscience sake in deep Humility.
And of that Vain Imagination late,
Which Airie Titles bred in his first 'state,
Such as the Vulgar their Commanders give,
Though never so Vile, 'though never so Vain they live;
He now does wonder how he played the child*
With those fine Rattles which his Wits beguiled.
And next he strives with all the Power he can,
In all his Words to prove a Rational Man:
For Speech is given unto all, but few
Attain in Speech the Moderation due.
Therefore himself he now does Recollect,
And both his Tongue, and his wild Wit Correct.
He that can Rule his Wit, does Rule his Tongue,
Else it will prove oft-times too large, too long:
Thus a new work he now does undertake,
As well for Credit, as for Conscience Sake:
And so becomes a well composed Soul,
Whose Babbling Wit, true Reason does control.
His words are few, he in deep silence dwells,
And only to the Wise his Mind he tells;
Lest he be made at any time or season,
A scorn to Fools, that understand no Reason.
Reason's the Jewel which his Soul does prize,
As giving sight to his awak'ned Eyes;
Regenerate Reason now becomes his Guide,
In all his Words, and Works, and Thoughts beside;
A God-like Image, and a Light Divine,
When saving Faith its grossness does Refine;
But it is Preposterous Piety to make
Reason the Ground of Faith, and Truth mistake.
For God's the Lord of Reason, and of Sense,
Of Fancy, Judgment, and Intelligence;
Yea, he is Lord of Language, and does give
Reason to Man in Language pure to live;
And by that Light to Rule his vagrant Tongue,
Least he exceed in Talk, or speak what is wrong:
To guard his lips as with a flaming Sword,
For Man must give account of every Word,
Of every idle saying, jest or story,
Which he of vents for his own praise and glory.
The Tongue's a Brutish Member void of Wit,
And Man must keep perpetual War with it,
And stand upon his Watch to keep it in,
Lest it fly out, and fall to deadly Sin:
For all Man's talk is either good or evil,
So he an Angel Acts, or else a Devil.
Therefore, observe in each Particular,
How Reason leads this Convert, through this war,
Where he finds several Enemies at hand,
They against him, he against them does stand.
The several Particulars follow concerning Vanity in Discourse, and here
Forsaken, As the Enemies to Reason, Faith and Truth.

1. The First Particular Vanity in Speech; Namely, Lightness, Jesting and
Laughing. Forsaken by this Convert.
ANd now this Noble Princely Men's Humana*
Youth begins
To take account of all his Verbal Sins,
Which seemed before an Ornament, and Grace
To his High-Birth, his Quality and Place:
But now this Laughing Spirit he Corrects
With solid looks, and his light humor Checks;
For Manly Reason in his Sober School
Permits no Scholar there to act the Fool,
To vent his With, or laugh at his own jest,
Or to make Sport in vain for all the rest:
For nothing more corrupts the work of Grace,
Than a loose jesting Tongue, and laughing Face.
2. The Second Particular Forsaken in Vaniloquie; Viz. Complement.
ANd next he leaves his nimble tongues activity
In Complemental, Fine, and False Civility;
False Fla^ttering Titles now he gives no more,
Nor lends the Name of Madam to a Whore,
Nor Sir unto a Knave: All Gentile Oaths,
And Humble Service, he both leaves and loathes.
For all his Care is to serve God aright,
With Lips unfeigned, in all the Peoples sight.
3. The Third Particular in Vaniloqui forsaken; Viz. Amorous Discourse, Songs,
and Uerses.
ANd, to proceed, he now no more rehearses
To his Fine Miss, his Amorous Books and Verses;
Into the Fire he casts his Plays, and burns them,
For fume they are, and into fume he turns them.
Like unto like; from Wanton Flames they came,
And must again return into a Flame.
His Aerie Sonnets, and his wild Romances,
Tales, Fables, Fictions, and a thousand Chances
Of Wandering Knighthood, and brave Chivalrie,
Are now all mute, and in deep silence lie.
One Penitent Psalm 51.
Psalm does more his Soul delight,
Than all the Books of Mirth, that Wit can write;
Saying, O Lord, with Grace my Heart renew,
And fill my lips with language chaste and true.
4. The Fourth Particular Vanity in Talk Forsaken; Viz. Telling of Uulgar News.
NOr tells the News from any foreign Part,
For he finds News at home in his own heart:
There Is Civil Wars begun, and like to hold,
For Sense by Reason scorns to be controlled,
Because he long has reigned as Elder-Brother,
And frets to be supplanted by the other.
Nature and Custom would not yield to Grace,
Nor to the Spirit would the Flesh give place.
Pride still would be Supreme, and Carnal Lust
Would Reign and Rule, and be accounted Just.
His Wit, his Will, and Fancy, all cry Treason,
Against the Truth in his Anointed Reason.
Old Satan too, if possible, would fain,
The Castle he has lost, once more regain;
But in this Converts heart, Grace keeps the Field,
'Til all at last to Truth and Reason yield.
And this good News he to his Friends imparts,
Who feel and find these Wars in their own hearts.
O that the Gallants of this Age (as well
As Foreign News) this Home bred News could tell!
And fill our News Books with these Holy Wars,
In stead of Christians most Unchristian Jarrs.
5. The Fifth Particular Vanity in Talk, Forsaken; Namely, Religious Debate.
AS for the Sects, and Churches, and their ways
(His Heart's his Church!) he none of them gainsays
Though they gainsay each other, and opose
Each others Tenets, both in Verse and Prose.
Sect against Sect, Church against Church engage,
Swords against Swords, tongues against tongues do rage:
What some call truth some others hold for lies
What one Condemns, another Justisies;
And it is impossible to please them all,
'Till they have more of Honey, less of Gall.
Some Preach by Books, some Reason, some by Spirit;
Some Preach Free grace, and some Free Will; some Merit;
Some for the Churches Institution stand
And some against them rise throughout the Land:
Thus, Pro and Con, tossing the Ball about,
They fill the Land with wrangling and with doubt:
And wilst each Party strives to get the Ball,
Sometimes they give, and sometimes get a fall.
Reason's Advice in this Case.
But peaceful Reason, in his low Contrition,
Bids him sit still, and mind his own Condition,
Gentle to hear all sides with patient Ear,
But unto nooe, save Christ's own voice, adhere;
For as in life he is neither vain nor vicious,
So he is no wrangling Make bate, or Seditious:
A fit Companion for those Souls alone,
Who with the whole Creation sigh and groan.
For such a one each Gallant ought to be,
And so make good this Converts History.
The end of the Fourth Degree, Descending; Called, Rationality in Speech, and
Bridling the Gallant Tongue.
5. The Fifth Mortifying Grace or Virtue; being the Fifth Step or Degree in his
Conversion, Descending; Namely, Abstemiousness, or Continence, in Meats,
Drinks, and Clothes, and all Sensuality.
THus when his Reason into Light was brought,
And from its dark Eclipse to clearness wrought
Having first learned himself thus to deny
Of Gentile talk, and all Vaniloquie,
Lo! this Young Meus Humana.
Heir, born to a large possession,
Leaves all to follow Christ in strict Profession,
And in New-life, with daily Sin-denyal,
Bears his first Cross in many a tempting trial.
For now his Joys run a contrary way,
Quite cross to what they ran in his First Day.
His Hawks and Hounds he leaves; for all his care
Is to find out the Truth, not hunt the Hare:
His Fleet-Race Horses all are quite outrun,
For he has now a larger Rarce begun:
His Tables, Cards and Dice he flings away,
For he has now a harder Game to Play,
Whilst Tears do trickle from his mournful eyes,
With sad remembrance of his Vanities;
For he played wrong before: and does begin
A second Game, against each youthful Sin.
His costly Dishes, and delicious Fare,
And gaudy Dress, which he was wont to were,
He claims no more, For Pride, or Ornament,
But having Food and Raiment is content,
And with a Dish of Herbs, or Garden-sallet
Can Dine or Sup; and satisfy his Palate.
His Sword and Belt, his Periwigge and Plumes,
His whiting Powders, and his strong Perfumes,
All sent and smell like Adled Eggs quite rotten,
Or like good Cheer, long vented and forgotten.
To both the Exchanges he now bids farewell
With all the Modes and Fashions there they sell;
All the Attractive shooing horns of Vice
He hates as Vermin, and Egyptian Lice.
His Moderation and Gratitude.
Thus in his moderate Food, and comely Dress,
He keeps the mean, and balks all vain excess;
What e're he wears, what e're he eats or drinks,
Of Christ's last Supper, or his Cross he thinks;
And setting all his old Excess a part,
He keeps a daily Eucharist in his heart:
Perpetual Thanks do Transubstantiate,
And Change his Mind into a Heavenly state:
For that is the right Transubstantion,
Which most mistake in gross imagination;
Who in their blinded Superstition strange
(Themselves unchanged) think the Bread should change.
And this vain Error, for four hundred years,
Has filled the Christian world with doubts and fears;
But this wise Convert in his changed Sight,
Free from that Error, Ears and Drinks aright:
For he himself is changed, and his Food,
In his New-change, is by due Thanks made good:
And as a Nazarite thus he does endure
Both in his Diet, and his Habit, pure:
For such a one each Gallant ought to be,
And so make good this Converts Histerie.
Thend of the Fifth Degree, Descending; Called, Abstemuousness or Continency.
Touching Sensuality.
The Sixth Mortifying Grace, or Virtue; Being the Sixth Step or Degree in his
Conversion, Descending; Namely, Solitude, or Separation from all Uain and
Uicious Society.
WHo e're has learned to bridle in his tongue
No more to vain acquaintance does belong
And so remains the last and greatest Wonder,
The Heaviest Cross, and hardest to come Under,
As if the Soul from Body were Divided,
And with the Flesh no more the Spirit Sided.
For now his Old Aquaintance, and Sweet Friends
Whom as his Soul he loved he reprehends;
His Consorts, kindred, and Relations dear
He baulks, he Shunns, and Seldom does come near,
He keeps aloof from All; and does not dare
To eat or drink with those, who Lie, or Swear.
Vain Company he Loathes; Pure Grain from weeds
He now discerns, No more with Swine he feeds.
Yet if Occasion chance to draw him in
His Care is then to keep himself from Sin:
And as a Sheep feeding among the Beasts,
He Is all alone, though present at their Feasts:
For 'though among them, yet he is not of them
And rather does bewail, then scorn, or scoff them.
From Sin and Sinners both he turns away,
And their Allurements scorns though never so Gay.
For all his Joy is fixed on higher-Things,
A fit Companion for the best of Kings;
For now the King of Saints does not disdain
To sup with him, and in his heart to Reign.
Yea after all he leaves the glorious Court,
With all his Pomps, and Pleasures, Game and Sport,
And one day by his Cross had rather 'bide,
Than in the Court a thousand days beside.
The Painted Madams, and the Spotted Faces,
With Amorous Arms he now no more embraces,
And to his Tempting Miss dares boldly say,
I am not I, begone, away, away.
That Park he baulks where Gallants Sacrifice
To Venus and her Nymphs their Hearts and Eyes:
At the She-Bulls he laughs, and turns his Eyes
From the beholding of those Vanities:
For he is turned another Creature quite,
Nor Sin, nor Sinners can give him delight.
The Ignorant Vulgar Crew, both high and low,
Whether in Silks, or homely Weed they go,
He both declines, and will at no time dwell
With such as cannot their Right from left hand tell.
But yet those lowly-Souls, who are content
To leave their vulgar confidence and repent,
Those he bids welcome to his House and Table
Both Rich and Poor, the best that he is able.
For such a one each Gallant ought to be
And so make good this Converts History.
The end of the six Degrees Descending with the six Virtues and Vices therein
described as opposites.
The Uertues.
1. Humility of Spirit. 2. Impartiality in Judgment. 3. Contempt of Gallantry.
4. Rationality in Speech. 5. Sobriety and Continency. 6. Solitude or
Separation.
The Uices.
1. Haughtiness of Spirit. 2. Partiality in Judgment. 3. Pride of Birth, and
Gentility. 4. Vaniloquy and Multiloquy. 5. Sensuality and Excess. 6. Vain
Society.
The six Ascending Degrees follow.

The Entrance. To the six Degrees of Conversion Ascending and sailing through
the waves of this World.
THousands we see in their Preposterous Will
Boast of Good works before they leave their Ill.
Which is the cause of all Hypocrisy
To those who still in unconversion lie:
But sure the vessel first they should Refine,
Before they pour therein the good New Wine;
As this wise Convert here has well begun,
And so his first great cleansing work is done.
Who having learned the wrong way to descry
Where splitting Rocks, and swallowing Quicksands Lie.
Kept safe from Shipwreck, and the Sirens Baits,
By sailing wisely through the dangerous Streights,
He in his New-built Ark, well Pitched and Manned
Now shoots the Gulf * into the Newfound Land,
Where there are precious Stones and Gold that is good,
As in that place, where Paradise once stood;
And so begins a second Voyage here,
And in the right good way his Course to Steer.
For having First descended that high Hill
Of Pride and Greatness in his Wit and Will,
Unto that Holy Hill he next proceeds
Of Grace, and Goodness in his words and deeds.
Which none attain but those Newborn of God,
First Taught of him, and humbled by his Rod,
As this young Saint, who to the world about him
Stands a rare pattern, 'though most fleer and flout him.
Yet such a one each Gallant ought to be,
And so make good this following History.
Advertisement.
HAving finished the six Degrees Descending the Hill of Pride in the Heart of
Man, through the six Virtues of Mortification and Repentance in the work of
sin-denyal; now remain the six Degrees Ascending the Hill of Holiness, in the
heart of man, through the six graces of Obedience and Renovation in the work of
Self denial, as concerning this young Convert.

1. The First Grace or Degree of his Conversion Ascending, Namely, his
Resignation, Trust and Dependence upon Gods Good Will and Providence (not
relying on his wealth) with industry, Labor and Diligence in his Affairs and
Calling, which is Husbandry.
FIrst, his n^w Course of Goodness The humane mind or understanding converted.
he begins,
With leaving of the City, and her sins;
London he quits, and so himself does Solace
With lawful Joys in his own Country-Palace.
From Court to Cart he turns in Duty bound
To manage his Estate, with Judgment sound;
Wise to foresee, and wary to prevent
Each dangerous cross, least he too late repent.
Yet if Afflictions happen or sad loss,
As sent from God he gently bears his Cross;
And now begins to exercise his hands
In taking pains about his house and Lands,
To Plant and Set, to Lop, to Prune, and Graft,
With all the Mysteries of the Rural Craft:
To overlook his Cattle, great and small,
His Herds, and Flocks, at pasture or at stall;
To see his Lands well Tilled, and Closes fenced,
His grounds in season all well drained and trench'd.
And to avert the dregs of gentile sloth
(Which to the Soul's a Canker and a Moth)
He sometimes puts his hand unto the Plow,
And sometimes to the Forke or Spade does bow;
Sometimes perhaps he takes the Flayle in hand,
And with strong Nerves does well the same command.
For God to Man this privilege allows,
To eat his Bread with sweat of his own brows:
And it is an Ordinance for ever blessed
Six days to labor, and the seventh to rest.
Nor does this Convert Gallant here ^eny
His Grand-Sire NOAH'S Trade was Husbandry;
And he like him does plant and plow and sow
With his own hands, nor scorns to reap and mow;
Without disparagement to'his birth or name
His Honor, Worship, Credit, or his Fame.
For there is no Title (do what Heralds can)
Excell's the Primitive Name of Husbandman.
A Title, Great and Good. Knight, 'Squire, and Gent.
Are all but upstart terms of Ornament,
And to themselves no good at all can do
With their brave Swords, and Belts, and Feathers too*
It is the Plow that keeps them all alive,
Whilst they for Titles and Preferment strive.
And thus he spends his time in lawful pains,
Respecting more Gods Honor then his Gains;
To him alone he looks, on him doth' call,
For now he finds God's Blessin'gs all in all,
Gods favor and his blessing far surmount
The highest promotion in the World's account,
Therefore his Gold is not his God, or Treasure,
But only does depend on his good Pleasure:
And thus his lands and large revenues are
All sanctified and blessed with pains and care,
And such a one each Gallant ought to be,
And so make good this Converts History.
The end of this Degree Ascending in the First step, viz. Good Husbandry and
Industry.
2. The Second Degree in his Conversion, Ascending, Consisting of Sincerity,
Integrity, upright dealing* And the like Uirtues,
THe second step he takes up Sion hill
Is Upright dealing in his business still;
The same that good King David does commend
As a blessed Psalm. 15. ver. 2.
rule of life toward foe and friend:
To this new work he sets, to dignifie
His state and calling, with integrity.
And as a Lion all the Beasts does awe,
His Brutish Swains he orders by a Law,
That no poor Neighbor, may sustain oppression
By him or his in all his large possession.
For he still makes a Conscience of his ways,
And what is due for Hire, or work he pays,
Full Just and True; and harmless as the Dove,
He nothing owes to any one but Love.
All Force and Fraud he hates, all base extortion,
Ever content with his own Lot and Portion.
And rather suffers Wrong in any case,
Then do the least in his great power and place;
But yet the willful Trespasser he pays
In his own coin that he may mend his ways*
Yea if that ought was by his Sire ill got
He does restore all back and keep it not
Be It house or Land, Field, Fen or piece of Ground,
Here Ten, there Ten, perhaps an hundred pound,
What e're was wrong he makes all right and eve^
And by such Steps Psalm. 15. ver. 5.
Ascends into Heaven.
Lo! such a one each Gallant ought to be,
And so make good this Converts History.
The End of the Second Degree Ascending, viz. Upright Dealing, and Sincerity in
his place and calling.
The Third Degree in his Conversion, Ascending; consisting of Liberality,
Hospitality, Bounty, Charity. And the like Uertues proper to his Calling.
GO and sell all thou have, House, Land, and Store,
Says Christ unto the Rich, Mat. 19.21.
and give the Poor,
So come and follow me, and thou shall have
Treasure in Ver. 16.
Heaven, and thine own soul save.
This rich young man believing what Christ says,
Unto his Word submits and it obeys.
In love to him he visits often the poor,
And often does feed the hungry at his door,
Yea often he clothes the naked in compassion,
For Christ's own sake, not for vain praise or Fashion
Often does he aid the pious in distress,
And feeds the woman in the Wilderness;
Nor is he wanting to the Painful Preacher,
To every faithful Flock and faithful Teacher.
He frees the wronged and pleads the poor man's cause,
That is oppressed by violence of Laws.
And to the Prisners often his Bowels turn,
Who in their Bonds without all mercy (...).
All his delight is now in doing good
Unto the good with raiment and with food,
With Gold and Silver and with his best store
And only grieves that he can do no more.
For he counts nothing now his own, but Grace
And only is a Steward in his place:
Thus by his Love to Christ (most firmly wrought)
To perfect Self-denial he is brought.
Lo! such a one each Gallant ought to be,
And so make good this Converts History.
The end of the Third Degree Ascending; viz. Liberality in his place and
calling.
The Fourth Degree of his Conversion Ascending, Consisting of Verity,
Essentiality, and Reality in his Words, Belief, Prayer, etc. in his Calling.
IN his next step, he unto great and small
Now speaks the Truth (the hardest talk of all)
Without Excust, or Mental Reservation,
A double Tongue, or sly Equivocation;
For what to Gallants is more hard or rare,
Then to speak Truth, and neither lie nor Swear.
Nor yet to laugh and scoff, to jest and jeer,
To boast and brag, to dare and domineer!
A work which one of thousands cannot do,
So hard it is to Mankind to speak True!
In all men's trades or talk, we seldom find
The Man whose words hold current with his mind*
Yet truth he speaks, the mark of his Profession,
Sealed in his inwards by a deep impression,
His Promise is his Bond, his Word full sure
His Yea, and Nay, more firm then Law endure*
And next a true Belief (to all Intents)
He now does yield to Gods Commandments:
A Work full rare it is to believe indeed
The Word of God, and to obey our Creed.
O where is the Man that does believe aright.
What he believes and follows his own light?
Two kinds of Faith there are both known full well
One Saves, on Damns: one Heaven makes, one hell.
This saving Faith this Convert has obtained,
The other he has left and quite disclaimed.
Besides both these, a wonder strange to tell
He Prays aright; his words all ordered well.
A true Confession now he makes of sin,
And so a true remission follows in,
His new Devotion does his old surpass,
With real Prayer, not with verbal Mass,
And thus this Convert makes the truth his care,
Truth in his talk, in his Belief and Prayer.
Lo! such a one each Gallant ought to be,
And so make good this Converts History.
The End of the Fourth Degree Ascending, viz. Uerity and Reality in his words,
Belief and Prayer in his Calling.
The Fifth Degree of his Conversion, Ascending; Consisting of Equity, Justice,
Impartiality, Magnanimity, Wisdom, and the like Virtues in the Administration
of Justice, called thereto.
HAving well learned to rule himself aright,
He Is fit to rule the unruly by his light,
By truth's just light I say, not might alone,
For might never governs well when light is gone.
Thus armed with Christian Courage, Truth and Grace,
He next accepts a Ruling Elders place;
Resolved to serve his Country with his Sword,
Like Joshua dreading no man's look or word.
Adorned with every virtue, power, and state.
Essential to a true-made Magistrate;
To guide and judge, to Counsel and direct,
To curb the Proud, and lowly to protect,
For he keeps not his Courts of Law and Leet,
For Fees and Fines, but Justice due and meet.
His Sword and Belt are now no more his own,
But Consecrate to Justice and her Throne:
His two-edged Blade he wears no more in vain,
For Fancy, Fashion, Favor, Fear or Gain;
But as a needful Instrument of Power,
Virtue to serve when Vice would her deflowre.
For he that is just himself may others guide,
And wear the Sword of Justice by his side;
A Joy to good, and to the bad a Terror,
A Friend to Truth, a Foe to Vice and Error.
The Sword belongs unto the just and true
To give to Just and Unjust both their due;
And for no other end should it be worn
By any man, that to the Truth is sworn.
Lo! such a one each Gallant ought to be,
And so make good this Converts History.
The End of the Fifth Degree in Conversion, viz. Impartial Justice in his
Office, Place, and Calling.
The Sixth Degree in his Conversion, Ascending; Consisting of Sanctification,
Illumination, Divine Knowledge, Right Information and Instruction, with the
like Graces, proper to an Eminent Converted Person in his Calling.
RIghtly adorned with Robes of Sanctity
He takes his highest and his last Degree,
Which to the top of Syon Hill does reach,
Where he the true and living word does Preach.
For filled with Light Divine, free from all taint,
He of a Gallant ^urnes a Preaching Saint,
Not for base Lucre, Honor, or Renown,
A Golden Miter, or a Triple Crown,
Nor yet for high Preferment Tithes, or Hire,
But from an inward call, and free desire.
He to his birth accounts it no disgrace,
Well to perform a Teaching Elder's place*
To high and low he does Instruction give,
Exhorts, Reproves, and shows them how to live,
Confuting all the Atheists of the Land,
And all Apostates who the Truth withstand.
Yea in the Faith his Family he teaches,
His House a Temple is in which he Preaches.
Nor does he Preach by Notion or conceit*
From other hands, which often proves a cheat.
He needs no book; the book he preaches by
In his own soul does ever open lie.
For he that speaks the thing that he is not,
Is often hit, and often makes a Blot;
But he that writes or speaks the thing he is,
Can neither write or speak that thing amiss:
For he is taught of God, who well can teach
Both high and low his saving truth to preach.
And now he wears a Breast plate shining bright
With twelve rich Precious stones, all full of Light:
The Vrim and the Thummim he does wear,
Both his pure life and his pure Doctrine are,
For there is none too Great or Honorable,
To preach a Savior born within a Stable,
To Preach Christ Jesus in the open light
There Is none forbidden, neither Lord nor Knight
For he is Lord of all, the Lord of Lords,
Who laughs to scorn their bul-rush glit'ring swords
He wears a Sword bright shining on his thigh,
That soon cuts down all Pride, be it never so high.
And this our Convert Galiant here well knows
This saving truth too high and low he shows;
He tells how God by his own power and might,
Has brought his soul from darkness into light;
And shows by what degrees that light is wrought
Within the heart, and to perfection brought.
And let none murmur, at his Heavenly unction,
A gift Divine above each earthly function;
For he fears not the persecuting rage
Of Rome's conforming, and confining Cage,
Nor yet her bloody power, which ever acts
By Fire, and Sword, Imprisonment, and Wrack
But on he goes the Truth still to dispense,
'Though all the Fiends of Hell should take offenc^
Because his Faith on that firm rock is grounded,
In his New Birth, which cannot be confounded.
Lo! such by right each Christian ought to be,
Of whatsoever title, or degree.
The end of the Twelve Graces or Degrees in True and real Conversion. The Six
first Descending, and pointing to Repentance: The six last Ascending, and
pointing to Obedience in the Faith dying to sin, and living to Righteousness.
Objection to this Story.
SUre this rare Phaenix all would gladly see,
This Bird of Paradise, what ere he be;
Of whatsoever Family or Race.
Of whatsoever Quality or Place.
But some will say, he is not to be found
Within the Clymate of our English ground,
For what young Papist or young Protestant can
Subscribe himself this Newborn Gentleman?
Our Natural Groves and Forests cannot yield
This Bird of Wonder, nor yet Fen or Field
Parrats and Peacocks in our Land are many,
But such a Phaenix in our coasts scarce any
Who thus to death in his own Ashes burned,
To a New Creature is revived and turned.
The Answer to the Objection.
BUt well! who ere in mind is thus transformed,
And with these Graces in his life adorned;
He by these steps attains the Holy Hill,
On which the dewes of Heaven do distill,
Which Heavenly dewes the virtues are (here taught.)
By which his soul to peace and rest is brought.
For the receiving of the rest begun
Is earnest given for the rest to come;
And a perpetual Sabbath now he keeps,
whilst in his Saviors bosom safe he sleeps:
His yoke is easy and his cross made sweet
For now the Cross and Crown each other greet,
And he sits down a Conqueror in peace,
The Field is won, and all his labors cease:
The World, the Flesh, and Sin, all thus eschew'd,
Lo, Hell and death are vanquished and subdued!
Death is no Death to him, when his life ends,
It to Eternal Life forthwith extends.
And so concluding, here I Will fix my staff,
And end this Story with his EPITAPH.
The True Converts EPITAPH.
AFter a sharp and weary fight with sin,
And sinners both, in hope the Crown to win,
Lo! here I rest in this soft bed of dust,
Waiting the Resurrection of the Just.
Twice was I born, and so two births have seen,
Twice did I dye, two deaths to me have been;
I Phaenix-like have my first rising known,
And so on wings of Love am upwards flown;
My Heavenly part ascended is on high,
Whilst here in hope my earthly part does lie,
Till it shall rise again in Glory blessed,
(With all the Saints) in their eternal rest.
Ye Gallants all, who view my History,
So live, and dye, as you may rest with me.
The Conclusion to this First Part.
ANd thus some Readers may perhaps make bold,
^o argue and object as I have told,
^ouching the story of this Newborn youth,
Which most will doubt, and few receive for truth.
And yet perchance there may be such a one
Here and there found like some rare precious Stone;
Yea partly I believe and partly know,
^ome few there be who truth will not forego:
^uch as in Prim'tive Times, old Records say
from Gallants turned to Martyrs in their day.
Though the same cause of suffering is not now,
^s then, when Saints to Idols would not bow,
We for opinions suffer often headstrong,
and seldom suffer right, but often wrong:
He Is the True Martyr and the Sufferer too,
Who dies to sin as all true Converts do.
The Transition.
ANd so I pass from substance to intent,
And plainly show what by this youth is meant
Both in his Natural and Converted State,
Observe it well whilst I the truth relate,
That you may be enabled to apply
Both States unto your selves Impartially.
For though at first all cannot reform with speed,
Yet all may be informed by what they read:
And they that would true Reformation win,
With Information they must first begin.
Light before life was made 'ith first Creation,
And so is still in Man's Regeneration.
The End of the First Part of the Book. And of the first Direction General to
the Readers of the foresaid Divine Poem,
Written by B. K, In order to the substance of the Personal History thereof.
THE Second Part of this Book; And Second Direction. TO THE READER OF THE
Foresaid Divine Poem, touching the Young Converted Gallant.
In reference to the Intent, Moral, and Mystery thereof.
The Entrance thereto.
THus have you heard the story plainly told,
Touching the person of this Convert bold,
(Though here not named:) But now lets inward look,
Into the Mystery of that Sacred Book,
What that deep Allegory here implies,
And what that Mystic Story signifies.
Two kinds of men, this Youth here represents,
In his two Natures, and his two intents:
Worldly the one, and heavenly the other,
Which never can agree with one another,
One good, one bad; from which two properties
Two general flocks or parties do arise.
Readers observe them well, and you shall see
With which of these your lives and Faiths agree;
And by the marks distinct I will you show,
The one Tribe from the other you shall know:
For it is worth your knowing, that thereby
You may both them and your own selves descry.
The First of these is of this worlds vain ways,
The other her Hypocrisy gainsays;
And in Reality does still delight,
That his good life may shine in open sight.
Now with the first of these we will begin
And trace the world in each peculiar sin:
And having done with her we will proceed
To a more holy and more heavenly breed.
1. The First Mystery of Iniquity opened, viz. The Worlds Whoredom, and
Sorcery. See 1 John 2.15, 16.
WHo ere shall view our Authors work once more,
Shall hear it tell that this vain Worlds a Whore!
A Whore in Grain in Purple and in Scarlet,
Often stripped and whipped and branded for a Varlet,
A Tempting Bawd, and an Enticing Punck,
Who with her Wine makes all the Nations drunk.
And besides that, a most notorious Witch,
With her Enchantments charming, poor and rich,
All more or less are still bewitched by her,
And all admire this Whore, this Witch, this Liar.
Circe she is named of old, for to all shapes
She could transform them all, Hogs, Dogs, or Apes.
This is that Gorgon Witch whom Perseus slew,
For all to stones she turned that her did view.
Nay, besides this a Goddess of great Fame
She was and is, Diana called by Name;
A Temple large she has o'relaid with Gold,
Where thousand thousands Worship, young and old.
The Grave Divine, the Lawyer, and Physician,
The Poet, Player, Painter, and Musician:
The Tradesman rich, and Scholar in his Gown,
The Lord, the Lady, and the Country Clown;
All do fall down and worship at her Shrine,
If once they taste the Sweetness of her Wine,
Pleasant unto the Mouth, but yet alas!
A Serpent lies in the bottom of the Glass.
Line upon Line, Book after Book men write,
Yet still this Whore does Reign the Fools delight,
Christ and his Twelve Apostles all condemn her,
All did renounce, abhor her, and contemn her,
Yet the Proud Fools (her Mintons) all adore her,
All do her Service, and fall down before her:
And still exalt her Power and Dignity
Above Gods Laws, and God Himself on high.
And Solomon tells; how the young Prove. 7.8. And Prove. 5.3. etc.
fool she mocks
With her fair tongue, and brings him to the Stocks.
Where he becomes her Captive bound in Chains
Of Fettering Lusts; thus ore his heart she reigns:
Till through his Liver she conveighs a dart,
That strikes him dead. and wounds him to the heart;
Then he is her own, and she has made him sure,
He is her Servant; she his Queen, and Whore.
This Whorish Woman, Solomon means the World,
With her Perfumes and Amorous Tresses curled,
One hair whereof, when she is pleased to do it,
Can draw a world of Conquered Lovers to it.
And by this Youth he means the Humane mind,
In its first, foolish, unconverted kind;
Like to a wanton youth, or wild young Fool,
Or as a Treuant running from the School,
Or like a Vagrant Rogue, that scorns all Law,
And whom no Rod, nor Reason well can awe.
Though in a Mortar you this Fool should bray,
He still will be the same what ere you say,
For he does hate to be reformed and taught,
Or unto wisdom by instruction brought.
And such we all in our First Nature are*
Whom this vain world does with her sweets ensnare.
For all through Lust and Pride, do subject stand,
To her strong Charms, and live at her command:
All are this Fool, if not by Grace controlled,
The learned, and unlearned, young and old;
Both Turk, and Jew, and Christians Unconvert,
Who the true Faith and Cross of Christ desert.
Thus in the First place you perceive what is meant
By this brave Youth, and what is the first intent,
According to his First and Natural State,
Of which you all at First participate.
The Second Intent, and Second Mystery of Iniquity Opened. Touching the Worlds
two chief Temptations, or, Fruits of the Wild Nature.
NOw this Grand Whore two lovely Daughters has,
Like to her self, void of all Truth and Faith,
And with their Natures their two Names agree,
That all may know their Natural Pedigree:
For Sensuality the First is called,
Gentility the other is installed.
These are thy Imps O Antichrist thou man
Of Sin unjustly called a Christian.
These are thy Gods, false Christendom, and thou
Both these do worship, and to these do bow,
Thy two great Idols, like those Calves of Old,
Whico Israel did adore, both made of Gold;
And from Beersheba now as far as Dan,
Both are set up by each false Christian Man.
The one does savor more of Fleshly Lust,
The other more of Divelish Pride unjust,
Yet both of Wrath and Earthy Avarice,
Haters of Virtue, Lovers both of Vice.
And so as 'twere in two plain Looking-Glasses,
I Will show you these two Madams or brave Lasses.
The First I first must strip, and show you how
To her command you all do bend and bow;
A goodly Idol which you all adore,
As all your Sires, and Grandsires did before.
Observe it well with open ear and heart,
Lest for your sin through ignorance you smart.
The Third Mystery Opened. Wherein Sensuality is described.
THe hired Whore ten thousands may Eschew,
But this rich The Whore within you and without you.
Whore not one of thousand do,
I mean not such a Whore as does live by it,
But the allurement of the worlds delight.
Her golden Apples, and forbidden fruit
With humane Natures all so well do suit,
That all are drawn by her alluring eye,
With cords of Lust to every vanity:
View all degrees of men, all trades and see,
From highest to lowest, how few souls are free.
Unto themselves many seem chaste and good,
Whilst in a civil sense it is understood;
But if they look into themselves more nigh,
They soon will find a deeper Mystery;
A Mystery profound that will declare
How vile, how vain, and Whorish too they are.
Lightness of mind begets Lustful mirth,
The first wild fruit of the dark natural Birth;
From lightness of the mind you next proceed
To bold Presumption, in each word and deed;
And that begets a custom to be Evil,
Till you become fine actors of the Devil;
Last follows hardness, thinking all is well,
Whilst Whores you live and dye, and drop to Hell.
But if you think I falsely charge you here,
Conscience and I will make it yet more clear.
A further Demonstration hereof.
HOw can men boast of their civility,
As if from Vice and Whoredom they were free?
Alas! in every thing the Whore appears,
What e're man Feels, or Tastes, Smells, Sees or Hears.
For with her baits your senses she beguiles,
And like the Genesis 3.
Serpent takes you by her Wiles;
And as the Tinder with one spark of Fire,
So are you set a flaming in desire:
In every thing your sensual appetite*
Does take you napping in your vain delight.
In all you eat, or drink, wear, buy, or sell,
If you have not a care this, Whore will dwell:
The bed, the board, the belly and the back,
Will have their Whore if temperance you lack.
For all your Faith, your hope, and all your joys.
Are swallowed up in the deep gulf of toys.
The Sword and Belt, the Perewig and Muff,
Silk, Velvet, Satin, and imbroidered stuff,
Wine, and strong drink, tobacco and high fare,
Sweet powders, and perfumes to scent the hayr:
The Coach and Chariot, and the Horse for Race,
The Hawk and Hownd, the Forest and the Chase;
Pearls, Plates and Jewels, with a thousand more,
Are every one become a common Whore.
Yea I might tell how meanest creatures too
May soon turn Idols, and your souls undo,
The Plow, and Cart, the Ass and laboring jade,
The Cow, and Sheep may be an Idol made;
Life, wife, and children, husband house and land,
All do stand subject to this Whore's command.
From the First age she set her snares and ginns
To draw the senses into deadly sins.
Beauty's a snare she sets before the eye,
As a fair Bait to all Unchastity.
And so is Gold, and all brave Ornaments
Which gaudie Mammon to that sense presents:
Smells for the scent, and Music for the Ear,
And for the taste delicious fare and cheer;
And for the feeling she those snares does fit
As have drawn millions to the lowest pit.
And thus the seven deadly sins come in,
Where ere this Whore does set her snare or gin:
For like as tempting Dalilah did entrap
Strong Sampson, sleeping careless in her lap,
Whilst she his hair did shave where his strength lay,
And to his enemies did her Love betray,
Who in brass fetters did strong Judges 16.21.
Sampson bind,
Put out his eyes, and forced him to grind,
Even such are all who to this world consent,
All are betrayed, who take therein content;
This story to them all may well belong,
Both high and low, the valiant, wise, and strong.
For all they have, or know, or wish, or see,
Or love and like their Dalilah may be.
And whilst I write these things, I see what I
Am of my self, 'though to these things I dye,
I see sometimes I should the good reject,
Did not mere Grace the better part elect.
So quickly man is caught within the snare,
If he keep not his eyes awake with care.
An Apology for the Creatures, Good in their Kind, and blessed of the Creator.
YEt all the Creatures in themselves are good,
If rightly used for clothing, and for Food:
And this the Poets all and Sages old
(Amongst the Heathen) wisely taught and told,
With little man lives best; Nature does give
Blessings to all, if men knew how to live.
And without doubt a mortifyed soul,
That rightly drinks of the Communion Bowl,
Though he should deck himself in cloth of Gold,
Or richest Robes with Jewels manifold,
Would be as poor as Adam clothed in skins,
Whilst he remembers all his former sins:
Rich clothes, rich fare he safely can enjoy
(If cause require) yet not his soul annoy:
But where is the Man now lives, that can do this.
And not be tempted by a worldly bliss.
But what is the Tempter? Surely man's own will,
and lustful temper, choosing what is ill. Vivitur exiguo melius, etc.

The Creatures are no Whores; nor do I mean
That they are foul, but in themselves full clean
God has ordained them all for man's best use,
They of themselves cause not their fowl abuse
But man in Lust does offer violence
To all the Creatures through his whoring sense
Yea all the creatures groan, and all complain
Of that hard Bondage, which they still sustain.
The Fruit Forbidden did not play the Whore,
But man transgres'd in midst of all his Store;
Of all the Trees most freely he might eat
And only One excepted for his meat.
That was no meat for him, and to this day
That Law does hold and man must it obey.
The Creatures are no Whores, nor act a sin,
But the fowl Lust of Man conceived therein;
The sinful hankering appetite does long
To have its will fullfill'd, be it right or wrong.
And thus much of this First sense charming Strum^pet,
I next must sound the Second Ladies Trumpet,
And, because few or none do write thereof*
I Will tell the Truth, though all the world should laugh.
The Second Temptation General follows

The Fourth Intent, and Fourth Mystery of Iniquity. Touching the second
Daughter of Mammon; or, Second Temptation General.
THough Whores, and Whoredoms, both of various kind,
And various shape, throughout the world we find,
Yet the most Glorious and Brave Whore of all,
^s that which most Gentility do call.
As like unto her Sister every way
As like may be, but that she goes more gay.
And some suppose them Twins, both of a Birth,
So both one Mother have, and both from Earth.
From Earth this Harlot came, yet mounts on high,
And lifts her head up to the Starrie Sky;
But lifted up, anon she falls down right
Like to a Star-faln Gelly in the night,
A false appearance and deceivtng vapor,
An Ignis Fatuus, and a short-lived Taper,
A madness and a folly void of reason,
Or like dead Salt, when it has lost it is season.
The First did only catch the outward sense,
But this flies higher in a brave pretense;
A Spiritus Mundi.
Hellish Spirit risen from the Earth,
To fill the world with its Infectious Breath.
For it is not of God, nor of that Spirit,
By which our Lord did Man's Redemption merit.
An high conceit, and vain imagination,
Without an Ens, or Substance, Ground or Station.
In all the forms of Life there is no such feature
No such Created thing, such kind of creature:
And let the great'st or best Logician
With all his Art define it if he can.
Give me the Genus, or the Species to it,
Or an Essential Difference to know it.
For it is no real thing; no shape or sound
Nor such a name in all the Scripture found:
There Is no such being, such an uncooth Stature,
In all the works of God or forms of Nature.
Virtue it is not; nor that which we call Grace,
Nor is it beauty in Man's soul or face,
Many poor souls more virtuous far do live,
More beauteous shine, then some who Arms do give.
A Monster strange, composed of several shapes
Of Birds and Beasts, of Lions, Woolves, and Apes;
From Pride of life it had its first beginning,
And ever since has multiplied by sinning,
By Fraud, and Force, Ambition, Lust and Pride,
With bloody Wars and thousand sins beside.
A Gilded Outside, and an empty Bubble,
Yet full of splendid fears and cares and trouble;
The meanest Jewel in a Golden Crown,
And soon Eclipsed, when God for sin does frown.
What pen can write the several Fornications
Of this red Whore, and her abominations!
For she can seem an Angel pure in sight,
And yet can rob and steal, and kill and fight.
Thousands there are (I pity to relate)
By her quite lost; both body, soul, and state:
A dangerous Rock, where their fair Vessels Split,
And few there be who are aware of it.
Yet sad examples many we may see
Of shame and want in their posterity.
In every office, function, trade and art,
If you keep not a watch, she will win your heart,
For in the Heart, as in a 2 These. 2.3, 4, 5.
Temple gay,
She loves to sit, and rule and bear the sway.
And there is no heart that is free in Church, or Chancel,
Till God, and Grace, this inbred Pride do Cancel:
Till time does come that she must be revealed,
Who in the heart so closely lay concealed:
So natural is this kind of pride to all,
So deeply rooted and original:
And this original sin as close does stick
Unto the flesh, as Horse-leech, or as Tick
Sucking man's blood; so he in blood delights,
Of blood he brags for birth, and blood he fights:
For it is a general taint in each degree,
From which by birth no man or woman's free.
Examples hereof.
THe poorest Rogue that goes from door to door,
Bears in his breast this Gallant Gentile Whore:
Often have I seen a Beggar rent and torn,
Tell a brove tale, how highly he was born;
Sure were it possible, he would lay down
His Rags for Robes, his old Cap for a Crown;
Might pride prevail, there then would be no odds
'Twixt high and low, all would be Lords and Gods:
Yea, every Peasant strives, the best he can,
To be intit'led 'Squire, or Gentleman.
The Academick and Mechanic stout
In this agree in all things else fall out,
With Hair full long, and Bonnet vayl'd full low
Both would seem Gentlemen and be called so.
The Gown, the Cloak, the Tunick and the Vest,
The Cassock, and Buff Coat, with all the rest,
All in their Pride can complement and lie,
The two brave Badges of Gentility.
For Points and Tenets; whilst with false pretense
Most strive for glory and preeminence.
And so at last all such Gentile Religion
Becomes that Scarlet Whore called Babylon,
A Whore in State, that now reigns uncontrolled,
A Mystic Monster long ago foretold.
The Blessed Apostle wondered at the sight,
Whilst he beheld her in a vision bright,
Riding in Scarlet on a Scarlet beast,
And decked with Jewels on her back and breast,
Poisoning all Nations with her Golden Cup,
'Though in his days she was not yet come up.
But lo! I see her with an open eye,
As one full grown in her great Majesty;
And am amazed whilst I do behold
The Truth of that was Prophesied of old;
Gentility at last she now is named,
Not for her Virtues, but her Vices famed,
Drunk with the blood of Saints, and their sweet Goare,
Yet never filled, she is still a Thirst for more.
And now I Will tell you how she first began,
And so upstart a formal Christian,
An outside Virgin and an inside Whore,
Who turned the real Christian out of door.
The Fifth Mystery of Iniquity opened, Concerning the Original of Gentility
among Christians.
THe Ancient Gentiles first this game began,
So our Gentility from the Gentiles came:
The Heathens first the Coat of arms contrived;
And so from them to Christians was derived:
By Christians made far worse, and much augmented,
For easy it is to add to toys invented:
Rome caught it up, so we became Romes Daughter,
And in her steps we follow now close after.
Nay we have got before her, and outrun her,
And in her pride have here and there out done her,
Thus are the most bewitch't with this old trifle,
Whilst the true Christian cause they stab and stifle.
If thus we search the cause whence she begun*
And why a Whoring after her we run:
The Primitive Church she did at first defile,
And with brave shows their senses all beguile,
She from the Reign of Constantine the Great,
First brought up arms in her Imperial Seat
(Which Christ and his Apostles never knew,
Nor yet the Primitive Saints, all just and true)
And so has filled the World with arms ere since
Church against Church, and Prince against each Prince.
'Twas she first taught the Pride of Chivalry,
As Emblemes of her Magnanimity.
And thus that Cross which Primitive Christians knew,
Was turned to Crosses Argent, Red and Blew:
With Bends, Pales, Bars, and Cheverons in their Shields,
And rich Emblazures in their painted Fields:
Which might be good for mere distinction sake,
Did not vain pride these arms her Idols make.
And thus proud Rome became a Tyrant first,
Thirsting for blood in wars, and jars accursed:
And so continues till her time does come
That she for this must hear her final doom;
Except by Miracle she should Repent,
And so with tears her destiny prevent:
But she is too wise, too gallant, and too high,
And scorns to own her old impiety.
And so I Will show you still, if you will mind,
What vain examples she has left behind.
Further Examples of Vanity, proceeding, From Romes Pride and Gentility.
I Grieve, I grieve to write the Vanity
Of Romes Apostate Christianity,
How she from her simplicity first fell,
And so began with pomp and pride to swell.
'Twas Rome that first presumed to take upon her
High, Mighty Names and Titles of vain Honor,
Which Christ forbad, and his Apostles all,
In Special the last, and Principal:
Come out of Babylon says the Text; that is,
Leave your Gentility, and the Worlds brave bliss;
For she is condemned to the Fiery Lake,
As all those are who of her joys partake,
Sons of this Whore they are both more and less,
Who turn the Grace of God to wantonness.
'Twas Rome first taught the Protestants to fight,
Prancing on Horse back in their armor bright,
First against her, and then against each other,
'Though fair pretense sometime the cause may smother,
'Twas Rome first filled all Christendom with toys,
And so from Men they turned were to Boys;
She set them all to School to cringe and bow,
So they became fine Fools they knew not how.
Rome is the dam of Vanity and Vice,
Of Sports and Plays of Masking, Cards and Dice,
And Rome it was which first gave Toleration,
To Drink and Drab as lawful recreation,
From her we learned to swear, lie and protest,
To laugh and quaff, and make of sin a Jest:
All which is Popery Sirs; and so all they
Are Papists sure, who follow that vain way.
VI. The sixth Mystery of Iniquity opened. Concerning Moral Popery.
It Is not the Mass that does a Papist make,
But Modes and Garbs; which we from Papists take:
Where e're you view a Gallant, He or She,
The same's a Papist as to Gallantry;
Or a debauched person, he or she,
The same's a Papist in debauchery:
The Fashion does no difference allow
Between a Papist and a Protestant now.
Why do we fear that Popory may come in?
We Papists are already all in sin;
The Papists have their Frollicks, so have we,
And thus in every Folly we agree:
So like we are in pride to one another,
As if we had one Father and one Mother.
Yet if we mark, the Lutheran Reformation,
Consists in Life and perfect Conversation.
We to the Papists should example give
In a pure life, aad teach them how to live;
But Rome's the Miss, to whom our lives are thrall,
Both high and low in life are Papists all,
Except the Wise, which shall anon be told,
And in a whiter Catalogue enrolled.
The Seventh Mystery of Iniquity opened: Showing that Rome is Catholic and
Universal in point of Sin.
BUt why talk we of Rome, as if there were
But only one? Alas! Rome's every where!
Have you not heard the common Proverb tell ye,
There dwells a Pope in every man's own belly?
Ten thousand Romes there are, and Popes good store,
And in their hearts all keep the Scarlet Whore.
For now Religion's turned into a play,
The Mass and Mask keep equal Holy Day;
And every sin is turned into a jest,
Thus all are Catholic Sinners at the best.
Therefore let both expect when God shall strike,
Alike to fare; since both thus sin alike.
The Authors Apology.
BUt what I speak of Rome or any place,
I speak it not in malice to disgrace.
Nor place, nor person great do I offend,
The principle alone I here intend,
An Epidemick Plague, a general taint
My harmless Pensil thus in Love does paint.
O let no noble souls be here offended!
These Moral lines are for their good intended;
And O that Rome and we were both as one
In life and faith pleasing to God alone,
And ever strive each other to excel
In Grace and Peace where e're we live or dwell!
I unto Rome do bear that free respect
That Is due to her, and every Church or Sect,
And keep the Peace, what in me lies, with all,
Provided that by none I stand in thrall.
And let them all give thanks to God and me,
(His Servant bold) for this discovery.
Thus from the left hand turning to the right
From the Black House, I Will lead you to the White:
And having shown you both, (not to deceive you)
Unto your own Election I will leave you.
Thus much of the Unconverted Parties Principle and Property, in Reference to
the Gallant Youth in his Natural State.

The Converted State and Party follows.

The Exception, or Excepted Party under a True Conversion. Showing what is
meant by this Youth in his Converted State, namely, the Church Elect out of the
World, though in the World. As also the Men's Illuminata.
Mind of Men in its New Birth, and in its new essential Property, or Principle
of Divine Light and Grace.
THus having passed through Babylon the Great,
We now are come to Syons Holy Seat:
Where the true Church of Christ does firm abide,
The Church Select, that is called his faithful Bride,
Whom he has chose, and marked out for his own,
With his two Seals of Truth and Love well known.
And by those Marks as Sacred Scriptures tell
You well may know them all where ere they dwell,
Not who they be, but what they be I show,
How many or how few no man does know,
And having told the Mystery of sin,
The Mystery of Grace I here begin.
The First Mystery of Grace and Godlyness opened. Namely, Purity of Life. The
First Mark.
THough I, in general terms have spoken much
Of the Worlds way, I mean not all are such:
All are not caught with snares of Lust and Pride,
Some few there are who have themselves denied.
There are some thousands never bowed to Baal
And a few names in Sardis, righteous all,
Those Virgins chaste and pure; those few I mean,
Who like true Nazarites keep their Garments clean,
Such as are said to walk with Christ in Revel. 14.4, 5.
White,
And are accounted worthy in his sight.
Who from the World do keep themselves unspotted,
And now no more are with her Wine besotted;
And whom no Romish Gentry can defile,
Nor whom the Baits of Mammon can beguile,
Nor yet the Gloryes of the Scarlet Whore,
This Church Elect is not her Paramour:
Having their senses exercised to know
What Is good, what is ill, and what they should forego.
Who keep the faith and true belief in God,
Ever depending on his Staff and Rod;
For they are taught of him, and daily learn
'Twixt right and wrong the difference to discern.
The Second Mystery of Grace opened, being the Second Mark of the Church or
Mind Elect; Called, Lowliness of Spirit,
A Gallant's one who never knew the smart
Of a Converted, new created heart.
Nor ever felt the pangs and sharp affliction
Of the souls inward work, and true Conviction:
Nor ever found what a Desertion meant,
What Is right contrition, what, it is to repent,
His Tongue's his own, without control he talks,
His Sword's his own, without a check he walks.
But with these Virgin Saints it fares not so,
All walk in life and spirit wondrous low,
For often they pass the sharp and fiery trial,
And so remain in humble self-denial:
Yea they are Mourners all, in meek behavior,
Longing for him they rightly call their Savior,
O it is a comely and a glorious sight,
To see Saints walk lowly in the light,
A signal mark (like to the Red Cross sail)
Of the true Church, when all the rest do fail.
The Third Mystery of Grace opened, Or, the Third Mark of the Church Elect;
Namely, Soundness in Conversion.
LEt now some Gallant tell me if he can,
When from a Beast he turned to a man:
Or when from darkness he was brought to Light,
Or when with sin and Satan he did fight,
When he from Babel traveled to Sion,
When to a Lamb he turned from a Lion,
When he began to be a Christian first,
Or for Christ's blood did find himself a thirst,
When first from greatness he to goodness changed,
Though he long time in his wild course had ranged.
And so transformed in his inward mind,
Became thereby a creature new in kind.
For this the Holy newborn Church can do,
Throughout the world here and beyond seas too:
They can declare their several alterations
From ill to good, and several operations
Of Gods good spirit working by its grace
Their total change, they know both Time and Place.
And in their hearts an Altar do erect
Of Thanks, Remembrance and sincere respect,
On which they offer daily Sacrifice,
As Abel did, accepted in Gods eyes.
This is a Mystery of Grace I tell,
Which all that have found Grace, do know full well.
The Fourth Mystery of Grace, or Fourth Mark of the Church Elect; Namely, True
Wisdom, or the knowledge of the saving Truth.
THe World is full of knowledge in its kind,
And yet remains dark, ignorant and blind;
But sure one beam of true and heavenly light
More clears the soul then all that wits can write:
A mark infallible of this Church Elect,
Keeping it safe from error and defect.
For the false light dares all Gods laws withstand,
And all the Ten Commandments command:
But the true light does keep obedient still
To all his laws and to his written will:
False light can turn the truth into a lie,
But the true light does all its shifts descry
Such is this Church Elect, where all agree
In saving truth, and truth does make them free.
Blessed are those souls in whom the truth resides,
And as a living Principle abides:
A pure informing and reforming Spirit;
Working by Faith and Mercy, not by Merit,
For Truth's no notion, but a substance bright,
A Heavenly, real and essential light,
A firm Eternal and Immortal Being,
Which gives to all that have it, life and seeing.
O with what freedom will the earth be blessed!
When Truth shall spread its Wings from East to West:
When Wars and jars, laws and Religions all,
On bended knees before the truth shall fall:
When no false Leaders reign in any Sect,
Or Church or State, to bind, blind, or infect.
For sure the Badge of the true Church is truth
By whom is meant this New-converted Youth,
The Fifth Mystery of Grace opened, being the Fifth mark of the Church Elect;
Namely, Love Divine, or oneness of Spirit.
A Farther secret Readers here I tell,
They all are one though far remote they dwell:
All one in faith, in life, and spirit pure,
And Doctrine sound, infallible and sure;
An Homogeneous body of one breed,
Descended from one Father, and one Seed,
And as a thousand Needles (far asunder)
Point to the North in their Magnetic Wonder,
All with the Loadstone touched, and set betwixt
The Heavenly Poles, in the Compass rightly sixth,
All to the North-star look with one Aspect,
And there do meet all in a line Direct
East, West, North, South, in every Coast or Land.
All by Instinct fixed to the North point stand.
Such is this Church, of which I here do write,
Whose hearts all pant after the Heavenly light;
Magnetic Love unto the Truth does draw them,
Into one Center; where no force can awe them:
For where the Matthew. 24.28.
Carcass is, the Eagles gather,
Not to themselves but to the Carcass rather.
The New Birth is this Load Star, which does draw
Thousands of Hearts by its Magnetic Law:
And all that so do congregate are one,
All built together on the corner stone.
For without Love knowledge is but a sound,
Like babbling Echoes from an hollow ground;
It Is perfect Love that makes Conversion clear,
The Sealed Mark of these true Converts here.
With whom there are no Schisms, or Divisions,
No scofflng of each other, or derisions;
And thus united in a Spiritual Peace,
They persevere in Love, which cannot cease.
But yet I nominate no Church or Sect,
Person or People for a by-respect;
Yet such undoubted in this world there are,
Dispersed here and there, though few and rare.
Some in the farthest Indies, some near hand,
Some in each City, some in every Land:
All known to God, and to their Savior dear,
In whom they live united far and near.
Blessed are all who in this Church do dwell,
And so make good the Wonder which I tell.
The Sixth Mystery of Grace opened; Being the sixth Mark of the Church Elect,
viz. (...).
Reality of Mind and Spirit.
BUt yet what I have said of Piety,
Of Grace, of Virtue, or Society,
There still remains one Mark to perfect all,
Which some of late Real Appearance.
Reality do call:
An Ens Divine, a substance from on high,
A serious and a solid entity.
A strength of mind persisting in the good,
And making that its true Essential food;
Truth in the inward parts, without pretense,
Or a false show in its obedience,
From which no Church in all the world is free,
But the true Church in its Edentitie.
The Worlds Religion is a Frolic Queen,
Which loves of all both to be heard and seen:
But this alone serves God in real wise.
In Spirit and in Truth without disguise.
And where this Essence, this Elixar's sound,
Lo! there is a Church with high perfection crowned.
But if you think there is no such Church yet come,
Nor like to be before the day of doom,
Yet wonder not, for every faithful man,
Makes good this Church, that is truly Christian.
For as they are but one in general,
So one just man does represent them all.
The Conclusion hereof.
THough many Signals more I might relate
Of this pure Church, pure mind and heavenly State,
Yet having done with the two several kinds
Of men and manners in their several minds,
I leave you to your choice which you will follow,
The Sound Young Convert, or Apostate Hollow.
The End of the second Part, and second Direction General.
THE Third Part of this Book; And Third Direction. TO THE READER OF THE Book
aforesaid: Concerning the Consequence, or Doctrine, following the History and
Mystery thereof.
THus have you seen the Mystery, drift and end,
Which that vai'ld History closely did intend:
And now the consequence thereof we will view,
And try what Doctrine may from thence ensue.
The First Consequence or Doctrine, viz. Concerning the Wills Rejection of
Evil.
Whoever would be saved, or hopes to see
The face of Christ to all Eternity,
On this Foundation he must first begin,
That Conscience gives no Latitude to sin,
Neither to good nor bad, to Church nor State;
To high nor low, to Prince nor Potentate.
Nor Pope nor Priest can give Indulgence to it,
Nor Lord nor law can tolerate man to do it:
For Conscience is a Lord above all Lords,
A Law above all self-made laws or Swords,
A Judge Impartial, who cannot dispense
With any sin of pride or Negligence.
Man must renounce each sin in general,
In thought, in word, and deed, be it never so small:
His will must be a Virgin, not consent,
Or yield to sin, nor take therein content;
Be It never so noble, gallant, sweet and brave,
He must not be to his dear sin a slave,
Not to live freely in it, nor yet by it,
For wealth or want, but for Christ's sake deny it.
Job 26.21.
That man lives well, who e're does choose to dye
Rather then sin that he might live thereby.
The several kinds of Sin to be Rejected.
ALL Sensuality man must reject,
And never more on this worlds toys reflect,
In Meats and Drinks, brave Clothes or Fashions Fine,
Or the Temptations of the Golden Mine,
Or the large offers of her Gallantry,
With which the most commit Adultery,
For all who Christ do choose, must freely part
From their Gentility, both in Life and Heart;
Since it is an Idol that can never stand
With Christianity in a perfect band:
Because it is not real pure and sound,
Nor in the Role of Christian Graces found.
For in Christ's Kingdom there is no Lord nor Knight,
But all are Saints, and Children of the Light:
No Titles there of Honor, or Degrees,
But all in self-denial bend their knees:
There Is no respect of persons high or low,
All are accepted, who their sins forgo.
Other sins Rejected.
THerefore a just and Conscientious man
Does evermore his mind and actions scan,
Least he should lodge some sin of high ambition
In his vain heart; or else some superstition,
Setting the Creatures in his thoughts too high,
For that is False Worship, and Idolatry.
Nor does he wink at his Impediments,
Or in the least excuse his false intents,
Nor lay the fault upon his natural frame,
Thereby to salve his Conscience, and his fame:
And by that weak pretense to justify
His sin and self, in his Hypocrisy;
He does connive at no such weak defect,
But at all times, all vain excuse reject.
O let no Convert palliate his sin,
A thousand ill effects are lodged therein.
For then each Grace he stifles in the bud,
And so he daily feeds on strangled blood;
All his good motions unto death do bleed,
Whilst he with vain excuse his sin does feed,
Or is content in Ignorance to lie,
As a fair plea for his infirmity:
The Gospel does allow no such evasion;
Nor the sound conscience such prevarication.
Christ and the world no man can serve at once,
One of these two he must and will renounce.
Therefore take heed which of these two ye choose,
And which of these you do in heart refuse;
For this be sure, that on your own Election
Depends your own Salvation or Rejection.
The Second Consequence or Doctrine, viz. Concerning the Wills Election of the
good or better part.
WHatever God has made is wondrous good,
And in each thing the * Godheads understood,
So man must have a care by Scripture Light,
How to serve God in every Creature right;
In every thing of Nature and of art,
With Mary he must choose the better part.
For most we see, like Martha in the Text,
With many things are cumbered and perplexed,
With many cares for belly and for back,
With many lusts 'bout what they have or lack;
With many doubts, opinions points and books,
But wise is he that unto one thing looks;
And only one does choose, which free from pain,
Does to man's soul the sure salvation gain,
Called the New Birth, which who so seeks shall find,
Though never so young, so old, so poor and blind.
The Wonders of the new Birth.
WHere ere this Birth appears, all things give way,
The Sun and Moon, and Stars do it obey;
The Sun grows dark, the Moon is turned to blood,
Man's wit's confounded and his will withstood.
A When it appears the Nations all do woe it,
And Kings and Queens do bring their glory to it:
The Sword and Book, the Sheep-hook and the Plow,
The Crown and Scepter to the new birth bow,
And all the powers of Hell, of Sin and Grave,
Where it does rise, no force or power have.
All forms and Types to a substantial state
It does transform, and Transubstantiate;
Yea it makes all things new; for a New Earth,
And a New Heavens rise by this New Birth;
Where it gets up, darkness is turned to light,
Nature to Grace; and wrong is turned to right;
Mountains remove, and Islands from their place,
At the bright presence of this heavenly grace.
The Blind do see, the Lame upright do walk,
The Deaf do hear, the Dumb divinely talk;
Sins are forgiven, and Devils are cast out,
The Dead arise, and spread the news about:
The Conscience is appeased, the heart well willed.
Christ is revealed, and Scriptures are fullfil'd;
And all Christ's works so full of admiration,
Do all revive at the New-births Creation.
For it from Heaven comes, called Christ in us,
Which who so choose, are blessed for ever, thus;
They rise from Death, and Reign with him as Kings,
Over themselves, and All Soul tempting things.
This is the First and leading Resurrection,
Grounded aright on the New wills Election;
And this Election being pure and just,
Again shall raise the body from its dust.
The Third Consequence or Doctrine, viz. Concerning the Universal Evangelical
Call, to Real Conversion, and to the New Birth. The one thing Needful.
HArk how a crying voice aloud does sound
From East to West, and to the farthest bound!
Each sinner, Hypocrite, and backsliders all
To this one thing the Trumpet loud does call;
Which passing quick, like lightning through the Earth,
Invites all Nations to this heavenly birth.
All Churches, Sects, and each Religion too,
To this are called both Christian, Turk, and Jew;
All Trades and Callings too, in each degree,
Both high and low; both Sexes, He and She:
For now a day of Grace to all is shown,
If any make excuse the fault's their own,
For it is daily offered to be sold,
To all will buy it Esaiah 55.1. John 7, 37.
freely without Gold.
To this, and none but this the Trumpet sounds'
And tells that without this all prove false grounds.
All Forms and Figures, Customs, Laws and Rites
Often acted are by worst of Hypocrites:
But this one thing, this Birth none can attain,
Save they who first a free Election gain:
Because they hearken in their inward choice,
To John 10.5.
Truths safe Call, not the Deceivers voice.
The Fourth Consequence, Showing the Material cause of Salvation and Damnation;
in Accepting or Rejecting the Heavenly Call.
THus, who are damned are damned; who saved are saved
According as they have themselves behaved
In this short life, for better or for worse,
So they receive the Blessing or the Curse:
Go now ye Cursed, come ye Blessed all,
This is the final word to great and small:
For so the sentence will at last be given
To every soul concerning Hell, and Heaven:
Hell unto all who chose the way to hell;
Heaven to all who choose in Heaven to dwell;
Whose Conversation is in Heaven fixed,
Though here a while with earthly passions mi^t,
Yet are their best affections set above,
And still their Faith does work by constont love.
Thus every man does to himself create
A Heaven or Hell, by his own love or hate;
He that in Love does turn to every good,
Makes that his Joy, his nourishment and food;
But he that hates the good and turns to evil,
Makes his own Hell, and so becomes a Devil.
What though some man should give old Rome the Lurch,
And turn by chance to some Reformed Church,
What though he turn from Sect to Sect amain,
And so at last return to Rome again;
Yet if he turns not after all to Grace,
In vain he turns to this, or the other place.
Lo here, lo there; some this, some that Man follows,
Some stand for Paul, some Peter, some Apollos,
But he that seeks a Heaven in his Heart,
Observes no place, or person for his part.
Christ's Kingdom comes not by observation
Of men, or Place, but by a New Creation,
The Fifth Consequence. Concerning presumptuous Hope, and erroneous Faith. Not
Justified by God.
THy Kidgdome come, our Gallants use to pray
With Verbal Lips, but few know what they say;
For in their thoughts they look upon it so,
As on an earthly Kingdom here below;
And so their Pater noster, they run over,
Like an old Erra Pater kept in store.
As to their Creed, they do believe Salvation
To be some Boon, like to a free donation;
For they all hope the glorified State to see,
As Kings make Doctors of Divinity;
Or as by favor Masters of the Arts,
Without all art or Learning on their parts;
Or as by gift a Knight is made or Lord,
Who never in the Field drew Bow or Sword,
Alas, dark souls! Gods Grace is no such thing,
No such belief can unto glory bring,
Grace comes not so what ere the world believes,
As Kings make Nobles, or do pardon thieves.
But who so turns to grace, finds lasting rest;
Who never turns, he never can be blessed:
Therefore let none presume on false assurance,
Or a wrong hope, which has no lasting durance,
He does not work aright, in the New-Births wonder,
Time and despair will crack his hope in sunder.
The Hypocrites hope presuming on Christ's Merit
Without Repentance sound, cannot inherit
Christ's promised Kingdom, where the Blessing lies
Nothing but Grace can unto Glory rise.
Romans 2.13. James 2.24.
Christ no man justifies for faith alone,
But faith and works before his righteous Throne,
Only that saving faith which works by love,
Does justify; for Christ does it approve.
Some yet restraining, some refraining Grace,
And some in faith attain a higher place,
But who believes aright, does not make have,
We see untimely Births to nothing wast,
So run the race of hope as to attain,
Left whilst you run you run a race in vain.
For this be sure, 'though grievous it is to tell,
Presumptuous hope draws millions into Hell.
The Sixth Consequence, or Doctrine* Concerning Diffidence or despair in
Christ's Mercy. Changed into Resignation of the Will.
AGain let none despair when he is tried,
Christ is to none, that turn to Christ, denied:
The smallest grain of Faith, in time of need,
Prevails with him, and never fails to speed;
By whom the peace is made for ever sure
'Twixt God and Man, which can and will endure,
Through a Resigned Will to his good pleasure,
Taking what he will give, and wait his leisure;
Christ's will with man's united in man's heart,
Make that firm tie, which time can never part,
Grace, and free will set both their Seals thereto,
Which all the powers of hell cannot undo.
But the Seir'd heart, (whether men chide or praise it)
No Counsel can to Grace or free will raise it,
because it can no true Repentance find,
^or Faith, nor Conscience, nor least change of mind
Thus some attain that everlasting Bliss,
Which others by neglect for ever miss.
^he Saints above in several mansions reign,
and several Regions sure in Hell remain;
and thus according as our works shall be,
^ach man receives his Measure and Degree.
^is measure and degree in joy or pain,
and so shall rise in glory or in shame.
^he End of the Third Part of this Book, and of the Third Direction to the
Reader.
THE Fourth Part of this Book; And Fourth Direction. TO THE READER OF THE Book
aforesaid: Concerning the Application thereof, in general and in special.
The First Application General: Directed to all Real Converts, and real Readers
hereof, as lovers of the Truth, and as Legitimate and true Christians.
I Love that Reader who shall view this Book
With serious thought; and to himself does look:
Who learns to read his inward soul thereby,
And the whole matter to himself apply.
^or it is not made for vain applause or praise*
Or the vain glory of the Poets Bays,
But for a light to every one that reads,
To guide him right in all his words and Deeds.
and though some few should give it commendation
and thereto set their seal of Approbation,
Yet he is the Reader, whom my soul most loves,
Whom this small Book commends and approves.
To praise the Truth is but lip-labor vain,
Except the truth does him approve again.
Him do I love, whom these lines justify,
and so makes good this Converts History.
And blessed is he that rightly can apply
This story to himself without a lie;
^ea happy is that Convert, who can say,
My Friends it is I; I am this youth, this day;
This day I find, and tell what I have found,
That my Conversion's built upon sure ground:
^is no Fiction, which was told to you,
^y me this day the Story is made true;
because I hear, and fear, and do obey,
and murder not my Conscience any way.
And besides this, I clearly feel and find,
Christ's Kingdom ruling in my heart and mind;
and thereby know, I am his promised Wife
and that my Name stands in the book of Life,
With all those faithful Converts now at rest
(...) Abraham's Bosom and their Saviors Breast.
The Second Application General, directed to Apostate degenerate Christendom.
And all false Hypocritical Christians.
LEave Christian, leave thy old Hypocrisy,
And learn to own thy close Adultery,
Which thou do act, (as I before have told)
In the wrong use of Creatures manifold:
Leave, leave thy Church, and good books read no more,
Till thou for shame leave playing of the Whore.
Though to thy self thou may seem chaste and just,
The Holy Law will manifest thy Lust:
For all Gods laws and each Commandment
Were writ by his own hand, and so were sent
Into the World to teach man how to serve,
And Worship him, without a close reserve,
In spirit and in truth man must obey them
Without excuse, and in no wise betray them.
Watch therefore thy false Heart thine eye and ear,
And keep within the bounds of holy fear;
Have a suspicion and just jealousy.
Over thy best deeds thy zeal and piety;
^rove thy Conversion out, that it be right,
^east thou be found within the balance light,
When Law and Death before Christ's Throne shall cite thee,
and with a Cat'logue of thy sins Indite thee:
and tell thee how thy Conscience thou have slain,
and Crucified the Lord of Life again.
Thy light thou have extinguished often in Theft,
^o many Murders, and Adulteries left,
Which thou count'st good and lawful for thy part
because Gods Law's not written in thy heart.
But now be wise and just; why will thou dye,
^^ke to a fool in thy Hypocrisy?
Learn to escape O man, that secret snare
Of the Great Whore, by which most ruined are.
To the Female Sex in General, Gentry and others.
AN honest Wife, in some respects may be
Her Husbands Whore, when both in sin a^gree.
Yea, she that never knew Man, may be a Whore
To her own self, and to a thousand more.
When Woman of Man's Rib at first was made,
She was ordained for his meet help and aid;
But she became his Murderer in part,
A deadly wound she gave him to the heart;
For she soon Murder, Theft, Whoredom, and all manner of sin was committed in
this first act of their Diversion.
turned unfaithful and unjust,
And so upstart his Whore in Pride and Lust.
His Wife became his Genesis 3.6.
Whore and tempted him
To Whoredom first by acting unknown sin:
For till that time sin was as yet unknown,
Though now with men and women common grown
Thus in the sin the woman was the first,
And man the next; so both became accursed;
^et when to God their Whoredom they Their Conversion, Cen. 3, 12.13.
confessed
^^eir curse was taken off; their Marriage blessed.
And to this day most women act the woman,
Eve first did, by tempting to undo man,
(...) so to boot undo themselves for ever,
^hen death at last shall soul and body fever,
^^less they first turn Converts in their lives,
and so become true Virgins and true Wives.
For lo, this story does concern you all
^f that fair Sex, and sounds a General call
^oth to the Married and Unmarried lass,
(...) view themselves in this unspotted glass;
that e're is said of this young Gallant here
^^tends to every Female far and near.
For Lust, and Pride is their Inheritance,
(...) they run on within the Devil's dance;
^^om head to foot they put his livery on,
^all vain fashions by the vain begun,
(...) meats, and drinks, in clothes, and dresses brave,
which many damn, but never any save.
And thus they play the Whore with every creature
(...) several Fashion, and of several Feature;
^he very Church is now become a Stage
^f all She-Gallantry this wanton age,
^he poor do act the rich, the rich each evil,
(...) Eve, when first she hearkened to the Devil,
And so her Maydenhead she lost, though young,
Unto the Devil, by a Genesis 3.4, 5.
Serpents Tongue.
And thus the Serpent in you seems to dwell,
Of him you savor, and of him do smell;
Your wanton nimble Tongues so full of Tattle,
Within your lips incessantly do rattle,
Tale upon tale, and story upon story,
Boasting and telling of your own fine glory.
Thus on you go in Pride, in Lust, in Lying,
O that you went as fast in self-denying!
That in this worst, last age, you all might be
The First examples of Virginity.
And blessed are those she Saints amongst you all,
Who now will hearken to the Psalm 45.10, 11.
Scriptures call;
So to become these Converts here we see,
And recollect their lost Virginity,
Which thus is swallowed up in sin, and vice,
As a lost Pearl, deep drowned under Ice.
Ye Read 1 Timothy 2.9, 10.
Matrons, and young Maidens take to Heart
What here I tell you, e're you feel the smart,
Of your vain lives, when once the dreadful Rod
Shall See Esaias 3.16, 17, 18.
strike you all, by a just hand from God.
For the Virginity, which here I mean,
Is conscience pure, that salves and makes all clean,
and can restore you to a Rev. 14.4.
Virgin mind,
Virgins in soul and body, new refined:
Not Foolish Virgins, but Mat. 25.10.
Wise Virgins all,
Whom Christ will own, and his true Bride-maids call.
For such Bride maids you Females ought to be,
And so make good this Converts History.
The Third Application, directed to the Martial Gallants of the Time in
Special. To become real Fighters in this War.
YE Sworded Gallants, who in Wars delight,
Weak Mortal Creatures only strong to fight:
Who in your Pride, and your vain valor swell,
^s if there were no Heaven nor no Hell;
^hink not that you were born to fight and kill,
^ut humbly to obey your Makers Will.
Cease, cease from Wrath, and lay your weapons down,
And now begin on sin and self to frown,
Laugh at the Gilded Bullrush by your side,
Much like the wooden Horse that Children ride.
Be wise in time, and whilst time serves, relent,
A time may come when you cannot repent,
Now put new Armor on, new Weapons take,
To war with Devils, for your Saviors sake:
Your Baptism make good in the bloody Field
Of Christ's Red Cross, under his peaceful Shield:
D' of then your Sword and Belt and Martial Mode,
There is more beauty in a Snake or Toad.
Ye Gallants know your Lord and Master all,
For he your valor will to judgment call
E're it be long; Hark, hark your Passing Bell
(The Trumpet) rings, and your last Funeral Knell:
For dye you must; your Swords will do no good,
When Inquisition shall be made for blood:
O turn true Christians, all, on Christ's word fix,
For it is hard kicking, Sirs, against the Pricks.
The Fourth Application. To the Wilder sort of Gentry, and Commonalty in
General.
WHat joy has Truth unto those souls to write,
Who hate to be reformed, and scorn the right!
Tell them of Grace, or Truth, or Christ, or God?
Who laugh at Virtue and contemn the Rod?
Who justify their pride and vain excess
In all their dainty fare, and gaudy dress;
But 'though nor Plagues, nor Pox (both great and small)
Yet if Dame Conscience prick the Gallants heart,
He Is soon Crest fallen, and humbled with the smart.
Then let the Heralds come with all their train,
And try if they can cure him of his pain:
His Scutchion then will give no ease or rest,
His Glory's flown, and he is fallen dead in the nest:
He Is fallen, he is fallen, his Gallantry is gone,
And he is left in pain and shame alone,
And now by sad experience he may cry,
All Is loss, all is dross; all Pride is Vanity!
And thus perhaps brought low upon his knee,
He may make good this Converts History,
The Fifth Application. To the Gallant Wits of the Time, Poets and Players, as
Instruments of Uanity, without Truth or Reality.
BE silent now ye Law reats of the time,
And learn henceforth a New Refined Rhyme;
Change your old strains, and lay your Laurels down,
Your Pride of Wit, and all the Wits Renown.
That is no place to worship in or pray,
Was ever Soul Converted at a Play?
There is no room for Penance or Confession.
No Offering there for Sin, or for Transgression:
All Is but imposture, which your wits devise,
To cheat the Gallant with your Amorous lies.
(...) Totus Mundus agit Histrioniam.
Poets and Players rightly to descry,
The one does make, the other act a lie.
Nay the whole World our Ancient sages say,
In every Trade and Function, act a Play:
There Is Nothing real which this world affords,
All Is but a show, and full of empty words.
But lo, this Herald in his New: born youth,
Holds to you all a Looking-glass of Truth,
And brings Conscience too upon the Stage,
To teach reality to this Mimick age,
Which shining clear, with its impartial beams,
Does dazzle all the luster of your Scenes;
You all must yield to those convincing lays,
And blush for shame at your conceited Bays.
The Sixth Application. To Scholars in General. (...).
ANd you the Famous Scholars of the time,
Learned Composers both in Prose and rhyme,
Deep Students all, men of admired parts,
Through the large Circle of the seven Arts;
Make Conscience your best guide, what e're you write
What e're you read, or study, or indite.
Make not an Idol of your book or wit,
Self-admiration soon will poison it;
Be not with Wit, with Wine, or Women drunk,
Many fair Vessels in those Gulfs have sunk.
But in the midst of all your Volumes look
Into your Nosce teipsum.
selves, and read the inward book:
And that you may the better find the truth,
Scorn not to read this New-Converted Youth.
Where you may learn to take degrees in grace,
To which all Learning should of right give place.
And so invested in a New Degree,
You may make good this Converts History.
Application to the Plebian Party, and all inferior Ranks, Concerning vulgar
Pride and Gallantry.
ANd now in love, I Will write a line or two,
Unto the Vulgar, or Plebian crew;
And to the laughing, quaffing Multitude,
Composed of several humors proud and rude.
For they have all their share in Pride you know,
Equal with those who in their Silks do go,
Both from one root do spring, and from one Tree,
The Gentry stock; and vulgar Pedigree:
And both make up one body in the main,
Like an huge Army marching over a Plain:
The Front whereof I showed, with either side,
And now at last bring up the Rear of Pride.
Therefore to them in order after all,
To stir them up, I here must sound a Call.
The Call to the Rear of Pride.
THink not ye vulgar party here and there,
That you are safe and unconcerned here;
Nor that this Gallants History does belong
At all to you of the inferior throng;
Mistake it not it reaches to you all
Of the Mechanic Tribes in general,
In every Trade and calling, rich and poor,
None are excepted from this general score.
For all of them (though in a course degree)
Can act the Gallants part as brave as he,
They all can brag, and boast, and tell a story,
Of their own worth, or wit, for their own glory,
Yea they can swear, as the mad Gallants do;
And in their fury can out-sweare them too:
Their words and looks with madness often do swell,
As frantic furies broken loose from hell.
Nay to their power they will be in fashion,
What ere comes up, within our modish Nation:
And they can complement in their rude way,
With Hat, and Hand, and Foot, as well as they;
Your Humble Servant Sir, they all can cry,
Though often their Conscience tells them, that is a lie,
And thus there is no vanity or Pride,
That is not acted by the vulgar side,
Yea, view all Pride in Country, Court or Town,
There Is none like that, that is acted by the Clown.
There Is no Hectorian Gallant can compare,
In Pride with him, nor yet so boldly swear.
Perhaps some will not swear, yet at the least,
If they will not swear, they will lie and cheat at best:
For lying now is grown the Tongue in Fashion,
The Mother Language through the vulgar Nation:
The very Children act the Parents part,
For they can lie and swear as taught by art.
The Retreat to the Rear of Pride.
YE desperate Rebels who dare God defy,
And offer violence to his Majesty,
Who dare blaspheme and rend his sacred name,
With your proud tongues, void of all fear, or shame,
Who by your Maker swear in your loose sports,
^n your full Cups and all your vain resorts,
Who make of sin a Jest, and Jest no sin,
And scarce can speak without a lie therein,
Know of a certain not a word does fall,
From your loose lips without account for all:
All stand recorded in that dreadful book
Of dire Revenge, wherein you scorn to look:
The dreadful Book of Conscience in the soul,
Which all the Powers on Earth cannot control:
And when that opens, where will you appear?
^n vain it is then to swear, or ly, or jeer.
Your Tongues poor fools, will all be stopped, and stilled.
And your wide mouths with flames of Hell be filled.
O prize my words, and take them deep to heart,
Ere for your sins you feel the Hellish smart,
For Conscience is a Judge can tame you all,
When he your pride shall unto Judgment call.
You are this Gallant, Sirs, I here intend
Among the rest; O that you now could mend
Your sinful lives like him, and so become,
Repenting souls, before the final doom.
As thousands in this Nation have of late,
Changed from their Natural, to a Newborn State,
Who once were wild, and vain, nnd rude, like you,
But now are your examples just and true;
Sober and wise, from quarrels free, and strife,
In carriage low, in language chaste, and life:
And though you scorn and scoff them in disgrace,
They still remain True Converts to your face,
And so as newborn Creatures in behavior,
They plainly show that they have found a Savior;
For such by right the vulgar ought to be
And so make good this Converts History.
The Authors good wishes. With several Applications to several sorts of Persons
and People; Homebred and Foreign.
ANd now my Applications I will end,
With my best wishes unto foe and friend.
I wish to all, that mercy grace and stay,
Which I often found in my Afflicted day,
When in desertions humbled by the rod,
I sought and found a Savior and a God,
I wish that all may find the same Delight,
In every path of virtue, just and right;
I wish that peace to all, which I now find
Toward every Church in my enlightened mind.
I wish, that truth (in which I have my part)
Did shine as clear in every Christians heart;
That all might see what Bondage they are in;
To self and Satan Vanity and Sin:
And so convinced by a new wrought light,
Might shine true Converts all in * open sight.
O that one Convert might at least be made,
To prove the truth of all that I have said;
And if'mongst thousands one soul thus repents,
I shall rejoice over him with all the Saints.
A good wish to all, not yet entered into this Spiritual Warfare. And to those
who are entered.
1, Rank no Soldiers of Christ.
THree Ranks of Christians in the world I find,
The First a Coward is in his false kind:
To all therefore, that never yet durst enter,
I wish a good beginning, and to venture
Life, Soul, and Body in this holy war,
Till they both conquered and Conquerours are.
2, Rank New Soldiers of Christ.
But unto those who have this war begun,
I wish a Progress till the race be won:
And that they may so run as to obtain,
So Fight, as they the Victory may gain:
For they shall meet fresh on-sets every day,
Satan will not at first forgo his Prey.
3. Rank of Christians, old Soldiers of Christ.
Lastly, to those who have gained more perfection
I wish increase; and so by truths direction,
To number out the remnant of their days,
In contemplation of their Saviors praise:
By whom they are made conquerours, and rest
Under his Banner, here and ever blessed.
For he has set their feet upon a Rock,
Above each enemies reach, or Satan's stroke:
No Racks nor Prisons, nor a thousand harms
Can pull these Soldiers from their Saviors arms;
For these be none of those, who live as Psalm 49.20.
Hogs,
And dye at last in shame and pain as Dogs
But these be they and only they we see,
That thus make good this Converts History.
The Authors good Wishes.
Applied to Foreign Parts, and Churches; Grecian, Roman, and Reformed beyond
Seas.
UNto the Grecian Church, which now does lie
In Bondage to the Turkish Monarchy,
I wish a good deliverance in due time,
When they are made more knowing of that crime,
Which caused that heavy judgment to come down
With fire and sword upon that stately Crown.
Their pomp and Pride, their Gallantry in Wars,
Their Church Dissentions, and intestine jars,
Their frolic lives, their Luxury, and excess,
And sins in gross, which no pen can express,
These, these did cause their dire calamity,
A Vengeance just for their iniquity,
And still in bondage sad are like to live,
Till they repent, and God their crime forgive.
Yea, till they turn true Christians, such as were
When Paul first planted Primitive Churches there.
For such by right you Grecians ought to be,
And so make good our Converts History.
Good Wishes to the Roman Church.
UNto the Roman Church as now it stands
Supported by the Pope and Emperors hands,
By France and Spain, and House of Austria,
I scarce know what to wish, much less to pray:
Unless I wish confusion to her pride,
And a conclusion to her Lust beside,
If I should wish her Eye Salve it is in vain,
For she is supreme and counsel does disdain;
If I should wish Conversion unto Rome,
I fear I am prevented by her doom:
Only I wish Repentance to those Kings,
Which she still broods under her Eagles Wings,
Who in false zeal, obedient to her Laws,
Have shed much blood in her Apostate cause.
O that they could be wise, and now recall.
Their Slavish Scepters from their ancient thrall.
But of her Kings, and her, I Will say no more,
Because I know the Judge stands at the door,
Who soon will show them all what it is to Fight,
And persecute their brethren in despite.
Good wishes to the Reformed Churches.
BUt you Reformed Churches, here and there,
Swede, Dane, and Dutch, with all the rest elsewhere,
I wish I had no cause here to declare,
From your first Love how you declined are,
And with a panting Heart, I deeply wish
Some were not Neuters, neither Flesh nor Fish,
Lest when e're long the judge in clouds shall come,
You all be found Apostates like old Rome.
Therefore I wish that as you have begun
To mend Religion, and a new-course run.
So would to God you might your lives refine,
And unto Papists as pure Patterns shine:
For all Reformed Churches such should be,
And so make good this Converts History.
Application, and good wishes to the Modern Sects of Great Britain.
Concerning Religious Pride and Gallantry.
ANd now a fault of yours to you I Will tell,
Religious Sects, because I wish you well:
My words shall not be many, rude, or rough,
A word in Love is to the wise enough.
The Fault in General.
Of twenty several Sects well known by name,
I n'ere found two in judgment yet the same,
Nor yet in love, in kindness, and affection,
In sweet discourse, in counsel and direction;
But all as cross and different in their minds
To one another, as contrary winds:
So shy they look, and so with scornful eye
Upon each other glance; yet none know why;
And for my part as often as I have seen them,
I never yet could state the case between them:
For in the midst of such a different throng,
It Is hard to know, who is in the right or wrong.
Long have I been amongst them a Spectator;
In all their ways a faithful Observator;
And this I find that prejudice and pride,
Wanting true love has poisoned every side.
A deadly Weed that does the Sects besot,
Like th the Night shade in the Prophets pot:
A Scab it is infecting every fold,
And breeds ill blood with humors hot and cold;
This is that spot which does your light deface,
And all your sober carriage too disgrace;
Like to the Goat that fills the milking Payl,
And strikes all down again with heel or Tail.
Advice in this Case.
O Let no prejudice prevent the good
Of Mutual Love; which is the Saints sweet food,
Nor charge ye one another in despite,
With any error, till you have full sight
Of that you charge; then friendly write unto them,
And gently try unto the truth to woe them;
And so 'twixt right and wrong the truth discern
And gladly teach, and gladly also learn.
But for this End make Scriptures still your guide
Above all humane wit, or light beside.
Prize Love, ye Sects, above all self-fram'd sight,
Least you be found within the Balance light;
Though you the Tongues of Angels could surpass,
And yet want Love, all is but Sounding Brass.
It Is Holy Love that Crowns all with perfection,
The surest mark of free grace and election.
By this shall all men know (as Christ does tell)
That you are his, if you in Love excel.
That Love Divine, the very bond of peace,
Which ceasing not, makes all things else to cease;
All quarrels end, and all disputes must fall,
When Love, without dispute over comes them all,
For unto Love must all Religions yield,
And all men's high opinions quit the field.
Therefore on this young Gallant fix your eyes,
Whose Pride in your own way you equallize;
For Robes and Silks do not a Gallant make;
But the high thoughts, man of himself does take,
Come down a step or two, and you will see
You need Humility as well as he:
Mark well my Counsel, Sirs, to what it tends,
Not light but Love can make you perfect friends:
Yet light is good when guided well by Love
And Heavenly Grace descending from above.
And what I say to you I say to Rome,
And every Church throughout large Christendom:
That all should be Baptized as you see,
In the pure Fount of Peace and Amity;
Least, at the last they wither quite away,
Like Churches old of Greece, and Asia.
Therefore I wish that all who now be foes.
Might in the bond of Love united close.
For such by right all Christians ought to be,
And so make good this Converts History.
Application. To the Jews.
ENough to Christians, Now I Will change my style,
And to the scattered Tribes draw near a while.
Ye Without place of rest.
forlorn Jews; since unto Sion hill
You have a longing and a deep good will;
That you the better may attain your end,
Mark by what steps you thither must ascend:
For Scriptures yield a 2 Cor. 3.13, 14, 15, 16.
Promise and a call,
That when you turn to Christ, your Vayl shall fall.
You are not called to a veyl'd form or Letter,
But unto Jesus of Nazareth.
substance, and a light far better:
Not to an outward Temple made with hands,
Framed of stones, and built upon the sands;
For The true Messiah King of the Jews.
Christ is come; to him your service yield,
And on that corner stone your Temple build,
For your old Temple is consumed and gone,
And not a stone is left upon a stone.
Nor are you called to Sacrifices old,
Fetched from the wandering Herd or from the Fold,
A See Psalm 51.17.
Contrite Heart is the true Sacrifice
Required of all Jews with weeping eyes.
O Mourn Zech. 12.9, 10, 11, 12.
a part in tears and sorrow due,
Turn to your Lord, and he will turn to you:
For till you kiss his pierced feet and hands,
There Is no returning to your ancient Lands.
And then shall wandering Esaias 11.11, 12, 13. Hos. 3.4, 5.
Judah once more shine,
As newborn Christians in their Holy Shrine,
The Turk, the Tartar, will turn Christian Jews,
And India too Converted at the News:
Luke 2.
Peace then will be on Earth, both far and nigh
Good will to Men, Glory to God on high.
Amen.
The Address. Wherein the Author Appeals to the Judgment of the Conscientious,
Self-judging Readers, who have Judged the Whore within them.
JUdicious Friends, who by an inbred light
Can judge of truth beyond the vulgar sight,
To you I here appeal, for I am sure,
There Is none but you, can real truth endure.
And since to you an equal judgment's given
To weigh each word within the Balance even,
To your impartial eye I recommend
These few Directions for the Truth's sake penned.
Not, that you need Direction from my hand,
But that by you the Victory may stand
Against all those, who the true light control,
Though shining nere so bright in our North Pole.
For truth has many foes and friends but few,
Yet such it finds, and such dear friends are you;
To you I here submit in equity,
You shall be Judges 'twixt this Whore and me,
Against whose Pride I yet have more to say,
When God and time permit a Judgment day;
Then will the stout and lofty (like this youth)
Stand all as Mutes before the Throne of truth.
Learning and Valor, Honor and high blood,
When that day comes will do the Whore no good.
Yours, Veriloquus.
Dum relego, scripsisse juvat; quia Plurima Cerno
Digna legi Populo, principe digna legi.


THE Postscript:
INtelligent Readers, either Convertible, or Converted; for your sakes I begun
this small Book of Conversion, under the Title of a Young Converted Gallant; as
a new and rare subject; and now as you see, and read, I have ^lso finished the
whole matter throughout the four ^arts thereof; hoping that you have perused it
^ith a right Mind, in a right understanding, for ^se it will signify little,
and edify less: but remain dark letter to you all: For without a right
un^erstanding of the Truth there can be no true and ^^ght real Conversion in
any one: And here are many positive Fundamental Truths couched, and many doubts
and controversies briefly resolved; and if you diligently, and with serious eye
do observe them, they will be very helpful to you all, and so likewise very
acceptable without offense, but if any be offended they will turn to his damage.

The careless, scornful, slight Reader will profit nothing by this Book; who
reads here a little and there a little like some News Book, and so flings it
aside; in him the Fire is quite gone out, and all his fuel is turned to ashes,
there is no spark of conversion left in him; in vain it is to add the breath of
the Bellows, where there is not a spark of fire left to begin withal. But
wherever there is a spark of goodness left or lies hid in any heart, verily it
will receive life and light from this truth, and will revive, and grow up into
a holy flame, and desire after the Truth more and more: I say this writing will
certainly have an influence, and a good effect upon every one that reads it
night and morning, with serious meditation.

Therefore let none be offended at the Truth here written, either high or low,
Gentry or Commonalty, learned or unlearned, Roman Catholic or Protestant, the
sound reaches you all, and you hear it, that Pride and Lust may have a fall;
and many high and low will repent thereof, and become the Converts there
described; but many will not, till destruction overwhelm them in their
sensuality* sin and ignorance; as it is written, Many in the last Times Dan.
12.10.
shall be purified, whitened and tried, but the wicked shall do wickedly, and
none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand.

Therefore so read, as you may understand what you read distinctly; even to a
Conversion visible to all, that all who see your new carriage, new Life, new
looks, new habit and conversation, may reod a right Conversion in you, and
glorify God through your example. And be not ashamed of Jesus Christ and his
Cross, into which you say you were baptized, and vowed to fight under his
Banner, against the vanities and pomps of this world; be not found liars before
him, but make your vow and promise good, in laying down the Pride of your
Gentility, and the lust of your sensuality, the two Temptations here set before
you in this book, for a warning to you all in this last age.

See page 66.]
And for this end observe yet more punctually what I have set down in the 66
page hereof, for your better Intelligence concerning the three Ranks of
Christians in reference to the title of our Authors Book, on which I here
write, called, War with the Devil; craving his acceptance and yours of these my
labors seconding his; though he and you are altogether unknown to me, and I to
him and you.

The three Ranks of Christians, as to Christ's Cross.
1. The first Rank I call Cowards or Runagadoes in Christianity, and are as yet
no Soldiers of Christ, under his Cross and Banner. 2. The second are the
Beginners or new Soldiers of Christ, who have begun to fight under his Banner;
Listed Soldiers. 3. The third are called the old Soldiers of Christ: Veterani,
old standers in the Army, that have fought the good fight under the Cross of
Christ, nigh or even to the end.
And in these three Looking-glasses every man and woman may easily discern in
which of the 3 Ranks they are found.

1. By the first therefore understand loose Christendom in general, the formal
and verbal Professors of Christianity of Christ, and his daily Cross; living
still in their sensuality, and Pride of Gallantry, Unconverted, turning the
back in the Battle against the World, the Flesh, and the Depil, mere Hypocrites
as yet, that are ashamed to own the Cross of Christ in self denial, least they
should want a livelihood, or be laughed at for their Conversion. These are
called Christians secundum dici, not secundum esse.

By the second understand that Church of Christ, and those Christians, who are
as it were come out of Babylon, Travelers toward Jerusalem, and their Heavenly
rest; but are not yet fully come thither: Notwithstanding they have given up
their names to Christ their Captain, and are sworn, listed and enrolled
Soldiers, Converted to the real Profession of the truth, and pure life as it is
in the Leader Jesus, the Savior, Guide, and Governor of them, by his word and
spirit in the renewing of their Faith and Conscience; and these are Christians
Secundum esse.

By the third Rank understand that small Church of Christ, few and rare, and
hard to be seen; who not only are come out of Babylon (in this world) but have
traveled quite through from Babylon to Jerusalem, even to Mount Sion, the
place of See Heb^ 4.8, 9.
rest, and Peace in their Faith and Conscience; and this is the persevering
party, even to the end in this Holy War, or Spiritual War-fare; having put on
the whole Armor of God, and not put it off till they be Conquerours over
themselves, and all their spiritual enemies: These 2 Timothy 4.8.
follow the Lamb wherever he goes, clothed in white; The World knows them
not, for they are not of this World, though in it: for their Conversation is in
Heaven, and their love in Heavenly things; And thus The Rest from sin.
they rest from their sins; from Avarice, Pride, Lust, Ambition, Extortion,
Oppression, Drunkenness, Wantonness, and every iniquity; and at their death
they rest also from their labors, troubles, Rev. 14.15.
persecutions, and afflictions.

The Rest from their trouble.
And these I have typed forth by a similitude of the Magnetic Needle in the
Mariners Compass, ever Pointing to the North Star, where it Rests, and no
place else through a secret instinct in the inward hidden attractive love point.

The Portraicture of the Mariners Compass by Sea and Land in the 32 Points
thereof: wherein the Needle first touched with the Mag^es or Loadstone, never
rests till it come to the North-point, and there stands fixed. And here are
only 12 Figured instead of many thousands, pointing all to the same place,
though thousands of miles asunder, and so make a full Communion.



Behold in these 12 Figures a lively Type or Similitude of the True Church or
Communion of Saints throughout the world at this day; Whose Hearts all pant and
point one way; and so are already in Heaven, where their Conversation is,
looking to the true North Star there, Jesus Christ: their hearts all touched
with one and the same spirit, though far distant in place from each other, yet
there they fix and rest as one full body; all of one mind and one kind.

An Explanation of this Similitude.
INtentive, and Unanimous Readers, let us (for the Truth sake) contemplate yet
a little further this comparison, and see into the Height, Depth, Length, and
Breadth thereof; for it is worth the knowing, that by the natural Mystery we
may learn the Supernatural, and try our selves thereby.

For verily there is not a greater secret in nature or art, then this of the
Compass, if we rightly consider all the properties thereof.

And, therefore having given you the Pourtraicture thereof, I will also here in
the next place give you the Description of it, and so proceed to application
for Instruction sake in the work of Conversion.

The Pilots compass is a round box of Wood, hollow and plain: In the Verge of
it are set down the 32 Points of the Winds: and in the middle or Center stands
a sharp Pins point, whereon the Needle by a hollow Dent becomes Voluble, and
turns round thereon, tumbling and shaking 'till it leaves them all, and
fixes in the North point only, toward the Polar Star. And over it is a plate
of Glass or Crystal, to preserve it from all violent motion by the wind, and
to keep it from the Air, dust, or any foulness, least it lose its Magnetic
virtue: And so is placed in the Ship near the Helm, as a Directour to the
Pilot, how to Steer his course aright from place to place till he come to his
rest or wished Harbor.

But there yet remain two greater wonders; Namely, the Lodestone, or Magnet,
and also the Load Star or North-point. The Loadstone is the efficient cause of
the Needles Conversion; and the Load-star is as the final cause of its
conversion: for there it ends and terminateth in rest: and from both these the
Needle receives the power of Conversion, else it could have none.

And it must first receive virtue from the Lodestone before it can turn to the
Load Star, as I have said before: And then having been touched thereby, and
joined thereto, and as it were gendring together, it attracts to it self a
secret love or inclination to the North-Poynt, with eager desire. But why or
how, this can be in nature, no wit of man could ever yet find out: for it is
Digitus Dei, the Finger of God, a wonder in Nature for a lesson to Mankind.

Now in the next place observe the unparalled properties of these three; The
Stone, the Needle, and Star: For these three act as one in this work.

1. The Load stone draws, and attracts the Needles Point, figured as you see
like a Lilly, and as it were kisseth and embraces it, and anointeth, or
baptizeth it with a secret invisible virtue; and this is the first change.

2. Then the Needle rejoices in the virtue thereof, as made Convertible
thereby to its place of rest, and this the second change.

3. Lastly, the Star or Morth point stands fixed and cnmoveable to receive
the Aspect and Reflection of the Needle toward it in mutual Conjunction, and
this the third and last change in this great Mystery of nature.

Further observe, one Load stone (though there be many) can inspire, and new
inform a Million of Needles, and no Stone else can do it; Marble, Coral, Agate,
Diamond, Ruby, Saphyre, or Pearl, nor all the Stones in Aarons Breast Plate,
nor in the Royal Crown, nor yet the rare Elixar or Philosophers Stone, can give
it the virtue of Conversion to the Heavenly North-Star.

Neither can a Needle made of any Metal but firm Steel receive this virtuous
Tincture of Love, Gold, Silver, Copper, or Lead are not capable of this hidden
virtue, with all their Worldly Glory, and Splendor: they cannot receive a kiss
of Love from the Magnet; for they have not a Magnetic Principle in them; nor
any Heavenly inclination, nor are they capable of this Communion and Unity, as
to point all to one place in the Heavens; Earth is their Center, and there they
end in the grave of Corruption.

But these Love-touched-Brethren stand ever in Communion, though far asunder;
the place and object of rest, make them one in nature and in society;
inseparable companions in love and virtue, though differing in locality, remote
from each other.

The Spiritual Application.
A Little Application will serve to the Intelligent Reader. The Mystery is
written in Capital Letters, he that runs may read at first sight.

Behold all of you (young and old, men and women) the wonderful power of God in
the Creation, in this, and in all his works of wonder: and so let all fall down
and worship him, adore, admire, and be converted unto him, who has made Heaven
and Earth: O draw near unto him (as the Needle to the Magnet) and he will draw
near to you: Magnify him and glorify his Name, that his virtue, his power,
his Love, Fear, and Faith may touch your hearts and anoint them with his secret
spirit of Grace in Conversion; that you may become all Elect Vessels of Honor
in his sight; and so be renewed in soul and body, mind and spirit, ever looking
up to Heaven, and panting after your Savior, who is gone before to prepare a
rest for the blessed, that look toward him, above all the Profits, or
Pleasures, or Glories of this world.

For he is in Heaven looking down upon you, and after you, as waiting for you;
and I when I ascended says he, will draw up all men after me: Namely, all that
are capable to be drawn unto him in real Conversion from this world, and the
things thereof: Every Sinner, Swearer, Drunkard, Thief, Whore and Adulterer,
Extortioner, and vain glorious, or covetous soul, he waits for to come unto
him, to rest in him from sin, to take up his daily cross, and follow him; for
of such little Children is the Kingdom of Heaven; and all that be his already
thus do; he knows them, and they him: for they have already received many a
kind kiss from him; they are joined as the Needle and Magnet, mutually
together, and receive virtue of his virtue daily, and cannot be drawn from him.
their hearts are with him, though their bodies are here below; and thus they
all make one Assembly of Saints on Earth, fixed on him in Heaven.

For by this Needle of pure firm Steel, understand the Heart of Man; his Soul
and Mind: Men's Humana, the Humane understanding, mind, and spirit, sanctified,
and made Heavenly and Divine. Luke 12.19, 20.
The Lovers of Gold, and Silver, and Brass, and Precious Stones, Jewels, and
Glories of this World, Titles of Honor, and Gentility, pleasures of
Sensuality, attain not this Conversion; Those 32 points must all be left, when
the Word of God, and his Spirit, touch the True Mettled Heart, as prepared for
the Bosom of Jesus Christ, the True North-star, in whom is their Rest and
Peace, through a pure Lile, Faith, and Conscience; and in no other, but him.

Readers; Take it into deep consideration, for it is Truth here told you:
Hereby you may see, and know your selves, and your sins; your Salvation, or
your Damnation. -- Much more might here be said, but I bid you all farewell, and
wish you may live well, and so dye well; which you cannot do, except you first
bid the World farewell, and dye to that, whilst here you live. The whole Compass
of this Earth through all its round Circle of 32 points must be left for
Heaven-sake, in all its Longitudes, and Latitudes, and Degrees thereof: All
must be left for one Pearl, one only Treasure, for which the Merchant, or
Mariner, sold all he had, to purchase it: And where the Treasure is, there will
the Heart be, whether in Heaven, or in Earth: But on Earth the Needle (the
Heart, or Mind of Man) has no rest, it is a Pilgrim there, and travelleth to
its Resting Place above all Earthly Joys, State and Delight; which
Resting Place is Invisible: it is a Mystery above Nature; the Natural minded,
unconverted Man can have no propensity, or inclination to it: the Heavenly
converted Soul seeks, and finds it, and is fixed in it; as the Needle to the
North-point, its proper place of Rest. For, after all, Fixation crowns the
work: The Needle would be a cast away, were it not both Touched, and Fixed: For
otherwise it could give no Direction, no true Instruction; nor be of any use
and service for its maker or its master: but being Fixed after long Trembling
and Quaking, and seeking Rest, it secretly and silently rejoices with an
Allelujah to its Creator: Rejoicing that it is Fixed to-towards him; as all true
Saints do, and ever did.

Therefore said David, that sweet Singer of Israel, in the midst of all his
Troubles, and Trials; My Heart is fixed, O God my Heart is fixed, I will sing,
and give praise. Awake my Harp, etc. Psalm. 50.7. And again, Psalm. 59.16. I will
sing of thy Power, I will sing a loud of thy mercy, early in the morning; unto
thee, O my strength will I sing: For God is my Defense, says he, and the God
of my mercy. In him my Heart is fixed, He is the God of my salvation and
deliverance, the God that gives me Life, Strength, Health, Food and Raiment;
The God who has anointed me with the Spirit of Grace, and with the inward
light of his Countenance; who has pardoned my sin, and redeemed my Feet from
Death: Who has given me a New Heart, to love his Commandments, And his Law is
sweet to my Lips as the Honey and the Honeycomb, more delightsome than my
dayly-food; yea, than all the Glories of my Kingly-crown ^n him my heart
rests, to him will I sing and give praise.

But the Needle (the Heart or mind of Man) cannot come to this place of Rest,
and Perfection, till it first be Baptized and Anointed (like the Heart of
David) by the Holy Ghost. The Heart must become a Child in its Humility, taken
up into Christ's Arms and blessed. For the word of God; namely, the Prophets and
Apostles, bring the Heart as a Newborn Infant unto Christ, inwardly in Spirit,
that like the Needle touched with the Lodestone, it may be made Partaker of
this Heavenly-Nature, and so be made like unto him, conformed to his Image
(lost in the first Adam,) and then it is enabled to stand fixed, and at Rest,
in the midst of all this worlds Trials and Temptations, as converted unto him,
who is the Rest and resting place to all that be His.

Therefore great need is there to all mankind of this Conversion; of this
outward and inward unction, this divine Metamorphosis or change of the Mind,
this New Birth, for without it none can make war with the Devil, The world, and
the flesh; none can become Old Soldiers of Christ: Or Conquerours over Sin,
Hell and Death, without it; for this is the one thing necessary to everlasting
Joy, Rest, and Perfection here, and for evermore. For it is the Saints Jewel,
their white-stone, by which all are Purified, Sanctified, and Justified to all
eternity: Yea this is the sure infallible mark of the True Church on Earth, the
Lilley-hearted Church, the Lillies of the Valleys, the Lillies and Roses in
Solomon's Garden, here Typed forth by this lively similitude of the little
Needle.

Lo Readers, if all this be true, if the case thus stands, before the Throne
of Jesus Christ, where is then all Pride, Envy, Dispute, Wars, Jars and
Contention about Religions? All Religions, and Opinions, Institutions, Signs,
Services and Sacrament must be subordinate, and stoop to this one things
necessary; this Place of Rest and Fixation; which is an humble clean Heart
directed to God and Goodness, in Jesus Christ alone. And then farewell
Sensuality and Gentility, Riches and Honor for this one treasure, this
essential Principal of Rest and everlasting Happiness.

And thus much for the similitude, omitting all Curiosity of discourse
concerning Magnetic Bodies in general, as likewise the variation of the
Needle, on this, and that side the Equator; with all other abstrusities in
this matter; And only wish after all, that my writing here might beeome
magnetic to my beloved Readers, and might attract some at the least to true
Love of the Saints Jewel here described, and so become members of the universal
Lilly Church, with their Lillie-pointed Hearts, touched with the Lodestone of
divine Love and Grace.

And thus much of-this Book, written occasionly from the sight of that Divine
Poem aforementioned, in the beginning; written by the hand of One, altogether
unknown unto me, hoping it will prove acceptable to him, and to the Lovers and
Believers of the Truth, as it is in Christ Jesus, the fountain of all Truth;
Remaining to them all a Servant to my Power in the service of the said Truth.

John Mason.

The full Period.
An Advertisement.
WHereas His Majesty has been graciously pleased by his Letters Pattent, to
grant and confirm to Richard Hains, the sole cleansing, the Seed called
Trefoil, Nonsuch, or Hop clover, from its Husk, and course Grass (he being the
first that made the discovery) with prohibition to all others to cleanse the
same; which Seed, thus cleansed, is very profitable to many places of this
Kingdom, especially for dry Lands, as Chalkey, Rocky, and Hilly Grounds, etc.
which are Naturally barren, and will produce little, or no Pasture.

These are to certify all Gentlemen, Farmers, and others willing to improve
such barren Grounds so as with the expense of six shillings, to make Land,
which without it is dear of half a Crown an Acre by the Year, to be worth 15,
20, or 25, shillings per Acre: and for their farther information.

They may have a Printed account of the Nature, use, and advantage of the said
Seed, cleansed as aforesaid.

At Mr. Russels Coffee-house in Bartholomew-close, near West-Smith field.

The said Seed, so cleansed, is to be sold by Mr. Thomas Mottershed at the
Cross keys in Lumbard-street; and Mr. William Lucas at the naked Boy in the
Strand, and not elsewhere in London.

The way for sowing it, is with Oats, and Barley; and the first Weeks of
January, February, March, and April, the said Richard Hains himself will be in
London, and may be spoken with at the said Mr. Russels Coffee-house every day
in the forenoon, ready to give any Persons farther directions, and satisfaction.

Courteous Reader,
Be pleased to take notice, that these Books following are Printed for, and
sold by Benjamin Harris, at his Shop, at the Sign of the Stationers Arms in
Sweethings-Rents, at the East- end of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.

1. WAR with the Devil, or the Young Man's Conflict with the powers of darkness,
in a Dialogue, discovering the corruption and vanity of Youth, the horrible
nature of sin, and the deplorable condition of fallen Man, also a definition,
power, rule, and Conscience, and the nature of true conversion; to which is
added, an Appendix, and taining a Dialogue between an old Appostate, a young
Convert, by B. K. the third Impression.

2. Darkness vanquished, or Truth in its primitive purity; being a Treatise of
laying on of hands, in answer to Mr. Henry Danvers, by B. K.

3. The Grand Imposter discovered, or the Quakers Doctrine weighed in the
Balance, and found wanting, in a Dialogue between a young Convert, and a
Quaker, by the same Author, B. K.

4. Love to the life, or some Meditations of loving, and washing in the blood
of Christ; together with a taste of Gospel promises, as the Churches stock, or
Believers patrimony, by Richard Mayhew, Minister of the Gospel

5. The Parable of the Kingdom of Heaven expounded, or an Exposition upon the
first 13 Verses of the 25th. Chapter of Matthew, by Hanisor Knollis Minister of
the Gospel, in Octavo.

6. The accomplished Ladies delight, in Preserving, Physic, Beautifying, and
Cookery. 1. Containing the Art of Preserving, and Candying, Fruits and Flowers;
and the making of all sorts of Conserves, Syrups, and Jellies. 2. The physical
Cabinet, or excellent Receipts in Physic and Chyrurgery; together with some
rare beautifying Waters to adorn, and add loveliness to the Face, and Body; and
also new and excellent secrets, and experiment in the Art of Angling. 3. The
complete Cooks guide, or directions for dressing all sorts of Flesh, Fowl, and
Fish, both in the English, and French Mode, with all Sauces, and Sallets; and
the making Pyes, Pasties, Tarts, and, Custards, with the forms and shapes of
them, in Octavo.

7. Baptism discovered, plainly, and faithfully, according to the Word of God;
wherein is set forth the glorious Pattern of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ
the Pattern of all Believers in his subjection to Baptism; together with the
Example of thousands who were Baptized after they believed. By John Norcot, a
Servant of Jesus Christ, and of his Church.

8- Mentis Humanae, metamorphosis sive conversio, The History of the young
converted Gallant, or directions to the Readers of that Divine Poem, Entitled
War with the Devil. By John Mason of Fordham in Cambridge-shire.

9. Anima Astrologiae, or a guide to Astrologers; being the considerations of
Guido Bonatus, and the choicest Aphorisms of Cardan 7. Segments Englished; a
Piece long expected, and highly useful to all Artists in giving Judgments; and
recommended as such: By William Lilly, Student in Astrology.

ANY Person in the Country desirous to know the natural Fate of themselves or
Children, as far as the same depends on second Causes, sending the time of
their their Birth or substance of there desires, to Henry Care Student in
Physic and Astrology, at the Sign of the Duke of Monmouth in Fetter-Lane, near
Fleet Street, may have their Nativities Calculated or Questions resolved
according to Art, and Judgments thereupon, thereupon, As to the general
Accidents of Riches, Honor, Marriage, Diseases, Troubles, etc. To befall them
in their whole Lives paying (by the Carrier or any Friend here) 5 s. for a
Nativity, 2 s. for a Question, upon the Receipt of an Answer which they shall
receive with great Integrity and Satisfaction.


