THE CHARACTER OF HOLLAND.
HOlland, that scarce deserves the name of Land,
As but the Of-scowring of the British Sand;
And so much Earth as was contributed
By English Pilots, when they heaved the Lead;
Or what by the Oceans slow alluvion fell
Of Shipwrackt Cockle and the Mussle shell;
This Indigested Vomit of the Sea
Fell to the Dutch by just Propriety.
Glad then, as Miners that have found the Ore,
They with mad labor fished the Land to Shore;
And dived as desperately for each piece
Of Earth, as if 't had been of Ambergris;
Collecting anxiously small Loads of Clay,
Less then what building Swallows bear away;
Or then those Pills which sordid Beetles roll
Transfusing into them their Dunghill Soul.
How did they rivet with Gigantick Piles
Through the Center their new-catched Miles:
And to the Stake a struggling Country bound,
Where barking waves, still bait the forced ground;
Building their watery Babel far more high
To reach the Sea, then those to scale the Sky.
Yet still his claim the injured Ocean laid,
And often at Leap-Frog ore their Steeples played;
As if on purpose it on land had come
To show them what is their Mare Liberum.
A daily Deluge over them does boil:
The Earth and Water play at Level coil.
The Fish often times the Burger dispossessed,
And sat not as a Meat, but as a Guest:
And often the Tritons and the Sea-Nymphs saw
Whole sholes of Dutch served up for Cabillau.
Or as they over the new Level ranged,
For Pickled Herring, pickled Heeren changed.
Nature, it seemed, ashamed of her mistake,
Would throw their land away at Duck and Drake.
Therefore necessity, that first made Kings,
Something like Government among them brings.
For as with Pygmees, who best kills the Crane;
Among the hungry, he that treasures Grain;
Among the blind, the one-ey'd blinkard reigns;
So rules among the drowned, he that drains.
Not who first sees the rising Sun, commands,
But who could first discern the rising Lands.
Who best could know to pump an Earth so leak,
Him they their Lord and Countries Father speak.
To make a Bank was a great Plot of State,
Invent a Shovel and be Magistrate.
Hence some small Dyke-grave, unperceived invades
The power, and grows as it were a King of Spades:
But for less envy some joint States endures,
Who look like a Commission of the Sewers.
For these Half-anders, half wet, and half dry,
Nor bear strict Service nor pure Liberty.
It Is probable Religion after this
Came next in order, which they could not miss:
How could the Dutch but be converted, when
The Apostles were so many Fishermen?
Beside the Waters of themselves did rise,
And as their Land, so them did rebaptize.
Though Herring to be God few voices mist,
And Poore-Iohn to have been the Evangelist.
Faith, that could never Twins conceive before,
Never so fertile, Spavvn'd upon this Shore:
More pregnant then their Marg'et, that laid down
For Hans-in-Kelder of a whole Hans-Town.
Sure when Religion did it self Imbark,
And from the East would Westward steer its ark;
It struck, and splitting on this unknown ground,
Each one thence pillaged the first piece he found:
Hence Amsterdam Turk-Christian-Pagan-Iew,
Staple of Sects, and Mint of Schism grew.
That Bank of Conscience, where not one so strange
Opinion, but finds Credit and Exchange.
In vain for Catholics our selves we bear,
The Universal Church is only There.
Nor can Civility there want for Tillage,
Where wisely for their Court they chose a Village.
How fit a Title clothes their Governors;
Themselves the Hog's, as all their Subjects Bores.
Let it suffice to give their Country Fame,
That it had one Civilis called by Name;
Some Fifteen Hundred, and more Years ago,
But surely never any that was so.
See but their Mermaids, with their tails of fish,
Reeking at Church over the Chafing Dish.
A Vestal turf enshrined in Earthen ware,
Fumes through the loop-holes of a wooden square
Each to the Temple with these Altars tend,
(But still does place it at her Western end:)
While the fat steame of Female Sacrifice
Fills the Priests Nostrils, and puts out his Eyes.
Or what a spectacle the Skipper gross,
A Water- Hercules, Butter-Colosse,
Tunn'd up with all their several Towns of Beer;
When staggring upon some Land, Snick and Sneer,
They try, like Statuaryes, if they can
Cut out each others Athos to a Man;
And carve in their large bodies, where they please,
The Arms of the United Provinces:
Vainly did this Slap-Dragon fury hope,
With sober English valor ere to cope:
Not though they Primed their barbarous mornings-draught
With Powder, and with Pipes of Brandy fraught:
Yet Rupert, Sandwich, and of all, the Duke,
The Duke has made their Sea-sick courage puke.
Like the three Comets, sent from heaven down
With Fiery Flailes to swinge the ungrateful Clown.
FINIS.
London, Printed by T. Mabb for Robert Horn at the Angel in Pope's Head alley,
1665.


