A New and True Mercurius: OR, MERCVRIVS METRICVS.

A true Relation in Meeter (on the behalf of Scepter and Miter) comprising
sundry of the most sad and bad Transactions, Occurrences and Passages in
England, Scotland and Ireland, for the space of twelve years last past.

Ita subvertere seria
Regem, Legem, and gregem.
For the true information and reformation of the People.

OR, Sober Sadness, and Plain dealing, in a few plain, sober, and sad Country
Rhimes, concerning these sad and heavy times, conducing to a real, personal and
National Reformation in three sinful Lands.

To which is added the Authors Twelve years extreme Melancholy, with the woeful
effects thereof in him, and the best remedy which he used for the removal of
them all.

Also a joyful and thankful Commemoration of His Majesty's happy return to his
Three Kingdoms.

By WILLIAM MASCAL above forty years ago Fellow-Commoner of Clarehal in
Cambridge, now a poor Deacon according to the Canonical Ordination of the late
most famous Orthodoxal Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1661.

TO the Right Honorable and truly Noble Lady, and Ancient godly Matron, above
Fourscore years old (whose ancient days, the Ancient of days make more ancient
yet) Grandmother to the Right honorable Charles West Lord de Lawarr the Lady
Cicilie Lawar, Dowager: William Mascall a true honorer of her honor, and of
all that have relation unto that Ancient, Noble, and Religious Family, humbly
Dedicateth, this his sad Malancholy, Sober Sadness.

Upon the Pro Christa vis tolerata beat.
violent death of our late most gracious Soveraingne now made the most glorious
Proto-Monarch Martyr of England, Scotland and Ireland, Charles the first.
LAment; Lament, Lament that bloody stroke
Which God permitted, when his anger shook
Three Kingdoms all at once, whereby their who preferred the sufferings of
innocence pefore the spoils and triumphs of violence, and is now amongst the
noble Army of Martyr p^^ising God with his celestial TE DEVM.
King
Deprived was of Life, that precious thing
He now is free, but free among the dead
And three Realms want their gracious Sovereign; head;
His earthly body in the earth does rest,
His soul with God, which makes him truly blessed;
To change earth for heaven is a glorious thing,
Lo, thus King Charles is made a glorious King,
Renent, repent (O England) full of blood,
And make thine eyes an everflowing flood,
Of Penitential tears; for that horrid deed
Is flown to heaven with more then winged speed,
And cries for Gens luet est seclus, Parliament and nationa^ si^^^^ require,
Parliament and National punishments.
vengance to thy most just God,
Who suffered has a Covenant breaking rod
To scourge three nations thus, when they greatire
(Good Lord) is past, then cast it in the fire.
For truth and peace pray all true Christian men,
Till God the faithful AMEN say amen:
Lord say amen when thou shall see it fit,
And take away our sins that hinder it;
That truth may flourish and our wars may cease
Which thou (O God) command, thou Prince of peace,
And make us all true Hallelujahs sing,
To thee our Lord and our celestial King
Feburary: 14: 1648.
Taxes and Axes. Upon His Majesty's overthrow at Worcester, September. 3. 1651.
TAxes and axes still do make us groan
Yet we rejoice when we should rather moan,
To see three Kingdoms thus laid in the dust,
God giving way to man's outrageous lust.
Remove this cup of blood, Lord send us peace,
And truth; and make true Charity increase
In Christendom, Chiefly those Kingdoms three
Which to one Christian King belonging be;
Least that they Jeremiah. 25.27.
spue, and fall, and rise no more,
From those three Realms keep thou that judgment sore;
And grant them truthand, peace once more at last.
Before they be quite desolate and wast,
For this let all true hearted Christians pray,
Till God the AMEN please Amen to say.
Thanksgiving is the best thanksgiving St Math. 3.8. Bring forth fruits meet
for repentance.
TO turn from sin to God is true thanksgiving,
And not our Isaiah 1.15. Manus nostra caedibus plenae.
bloody and ungrateful living.
Then turn us Lord, and let us sin no more,
And us deliver from our bondage sore:
For thine own glory and the Churches good,
Stop thou the current of all Christian blood.
And us vouchsafe once more a King on earth.
And with him truth and peace Ba pacem domine usque quo domine usque q^o?
and Godly mirth;
So shall we sing and praise the evermore
Who for thy Church all blessings have in store.
October. 24. 1651.
A prayer made in the name and behalf of the Mart et atae Satana By martial
rights and by the Devil slights.
woefully torn divided, distressed and distracted nations, England, Scotland
and Ireland.
MAke us, O God, make us to seek thy face,
By true repentance, and renewing grace;
And show to us thy smiling face again.
As formerly thou did in Kingly reign.
For many calm and quiet years together,
Which now (alas) are turned to stormy weather,
Whereby thy Church sustained has great loss,
(Quakers cheat many with their Tim. 1.4.1. Doctrines of Devils whom many shall
believe in the last time. Demoinbus credent supremo tempore multi.
devilish dross)
For schisms, errors, yea blasphemies increase,
Through want of our late discipline and peace
That government again then Lord us send
Which peaceful was, and did thy faith defend,
In thy good time give us this Benefit multis a principe.
benefit,
And grant us all grace thereto submit;
That truth and peace may flourish in our lands
Again, by thy best all-disposing hands,
And make us all give the true thanks and praise
By holy living; all our future days
King Mary. Mary, and Army make an Anagram, for in both words the letters are
the same. OR Old Englands new German like Munster Monster. A Monster strange in
three Lands never seen, An Manent lites, dum regannt milite^; (...) remain,
while Soldiers reign.
Army reigns without a King or Queen, Upon the thirtieth day of January. 1648.
OLd Englands bloody January day,
When Church and State to spoil, some took the way.
The thirtieth day of January last,
Into a Model new three Realms were cast,
By a mad mode of modellizing things,
A King beheaded to make Subjects Kings,
Charles the Defender of the true Faith slain,
King Mary rules with its martial train,
Queen Mary lived a Quinquennie of years,
Yet never slew so many Lords, and Peers,
As have been slain within these fifty days
By Armed State-Grandees, thereby to raise
A Reformation from that They build up Sion with blood, Mich. 3.10.
bloody A most base basis, and most unchristian foundation of a Christian
reformation, never to be for gotten, no, not after all the bloody actors in
that Tragedy be dead, and rotten.
base,
A woeful, sad, and miserable case;
If three Kingdoms must be reformed thus,
From such Reformers, Lord, deliver us.
But now behold they I make us a free State,
Far from this freedom, full of strife and hate;
Where these things are there is every evil work,
Under which freedom thraldom great does Latet anguis in herba.
lurk,
Lord keep us from such States as bring confusion,
And send us Monarchy in the conclusion:
Restore to us our Truth, and Peace again,
By causing Charles the Second for to reign,
In these three Kingdo as, where his Father late,
Did govern peaceably both Church and State,
Till civil War, and a most factious fact,
(Not worth the name of House of Commons act)
Bereft him of his Sovereignty, and Power,
In a most dismal, and most fatal hour,
Contrary to a most Religious Oath
Of preserving him, and his, thus was troth
Violated by men of greatest trust,
And so his Kingly power was laid 'ith dust,
(Notwithstanding their good Kings great Voted to be satisfactory.
concessions,
His foes went on still with their great transgressions)
From whence arose a new light never seen
In Britains sphere, neither King nor Queen,
To govern us according to Gods Law,
But we are forced of such to stand in aw,
Who lately were our fellow Subjects sworn,
To preserve our King, and eke his freeborn
People all, free from slavery, and thrall,
Yet now behold we are their bondslaves all
Make Truth, and Peace Lord, once more kiss each other
That we may live in godly love together,
And for those blessings great, give thee true praise,
By striving thee to glorify always,
By living always in thy ways most just,
Till we shall all return unto our dust;
And our souls praise thee for eternity,
In heaven that place of true felicity.
March, 14. 1648.
Saint Hieroms judgment concerning Malignants. Upon the ejecting of the
sequestered (though neither ignorant, nor scandalons) but most Orthodox,
conscientious, and truly Religious Ministers of Gods most sacred word.
FRom the first of the first month fifty five,
Scarce any For Doctrine, and discipline, according to the Canonical
constitution of the late most famous Church of England.
Orthodox divines shall thrive;
For many of them (as In sore soli, non insoro ^^li.
Malignants) shall
Loose their As good almost lose their lively-heads, as their liveli-hoods.
livings Ecclesiastical,
They are protected well, liberty given
To make them poor, if not to beg are driven:
The ready way to cast Religion down,
Is to remove the Miter, and the Crown,
These two great evils in the January, 10.44. and the 30. of Ianu. 1648.
same month done,
Needs then to ruin must three Nations run;
When they are Moses and Aron, ita subertere serit.
down which stood up in the gap,
Expect no welfare but some great To Church and State.
mishap.
God of his Mercy great protect us all,
And free us from inward, and outward thral;
Malignant, be content with what thou have,
Till such Saint Hierom (the only Presbyterian of his time) calls them
Maligna^s which Malign and Oppugn their King. See his translation of the ^t.
Psalm and ab insurgentibus in me Maligs antibus audiet auris m^^.
Malignant storms be over-past;
God gives all, and he takes all away,
Then with his dealing be content I pray.
January, 14. 1655.
A prayer for the enlargement of Gods Kingdom.
LOrd let thy gracious Kingdom come,
Throughout thy specious Christendom;
Let none of those that bear the sway
In any Land, give any way
To an unlawful toleration
Of Nenes novae Dogmata sallant.
false Worships, in any Nation
Chiefly, of the most wicked Who contemn and condemn the two great Ordinances
of God (ordained, and commanded in the fifth precept) Magistracy, and Ministry;
without which their is no safety in this world, nor salvation in the world to
come.
Quakers,
The chief Mases, and Aaron-shakers:
Lord, hear thy Churches devout prayers,
And stop the mouths of all Gainsayers,
Grant Truth, and Peace, and Unity,
With perfect love, and charity,
That we may greatly Glorify,
Thy great name till we all shall dye,
And live with thee eternally,
In Heaven, where is true felicity.
Strena Parliaments, The Parliamens New-Years-gift. For the Glory of God, and
three Nations good. Sober, and plain dealing Counsel to the great Counsel of
the Land, the High Court of Parliament. A short exhortation tending to a real
Reformatio seria, and vera, nunquam sera.
reformation in three sinful Lands. Adjuvate Patriam. Take ye the Counsel that
is now in hand, And for the welfare of your Country stand.
ALL ye who in this Parliament do sit,
Hearken to what each member does befit;
Strive to heal the wounds given to Church and State,
By an intestine bloody War of late;
Give to them both what does to them belong,
Help them to their right who have suffered wrong;
And head a right three late beheaded Land,
Which for help implore your hearts, heads, and hands.
Rebuild our Sions strongest walls now down
The loyal Miter, and the Royal Crown:
These things if done by your more Yeas, then Nays,
God shall have glory great, and you much praise,
Consult, and act as Gods word does require,
That Church and State, may have what they desire,
Truth, and firm peace, for both which both do call;
So God be with you, and persuade you all
To do both these, and all such righteous things
As he allow's, who is the King of Kings
Hear then, and redress Church and State complaints.
And do Gods will, who is the Kings of Saints:
The Rightly so called, because it brought the blackness of death
(^orescoreserens) upon their own most gracious and dread Sovereigne, without
whose g^atious aspect, and ravour they could not have been a Parliament.
black Parliament much increased our crosses,
Let this prove white, and so repair our losses.
January, 1. 1654.
Three late famous Kingdoms depravated by being deprived of their Supreme
Magistrate and Minister. Sublato Episcope tollitur Rex, said King James.
OH, what will now become of three poor Nations,
When King and Priest removed are from their stations
When some unjustly did behead them ^oth,
And that against a most Religious Oath,
That Is a Not the good old cause, much less our good Gods cause, as it has
been too too long miscalled.
wrong cause which wronged Church and State,
And brought King and Priest to that deadly fate,
When such black deeds must needs make reformations,
And laymens Preachings. Gospel propagations;
When out Church festivals are laid aside,
As Christmas, Easter, and our Waitsontide,
When we are led astray by Satan's sleights,
Which cheateth many with Mechannick lights,
Who without call to Preach, and to baptize,
Often do breach their self conceits, and lies
The public meetings some will not abide,
But to the private will both run, and ride,
When Sacraments want due administrations,
And blasphemous sects obtain tolerations, Haec patiere Deus? will God suffer
such intolerable tolerations and abominations,

When Martial men do cause our Parliaments
To be dissolved; and their good intents
Of doing good to Church, and Commonweal,
Do null, this makes more wounds not any heal:
When Swordmen meet to make such meetings void,
It Is to be feared three Lands will be destroyed:
For these sins with their many aggravations
Do call, and cry for ruin to the Nations;
If we repent not but in sin proceed,
( The God of mis-rule who now three Lands does rule amiss.
Mars predominant) we afresh shall bleed.
Since topsie turvy all is turned upside down,
In Court, City, Country, and Market Town,
What then remains but sadly to lament,
Our sinful lives and truly to repent.
The Lord our God, who is the God of order,
Order all things aright in every border,
Of Church and State throughout all Christendom,
And so preserve them for the time to come.
May. 4. 1659.
The chief Fomentours of all our Martial blows and woes.
PRresbyterian and Independent bitings,
Have been the cause of many bloody fightings,
Whereby our late good Sovereign lost his head,
And a Protector rules in his stead;
Who came to reign not by the Not by his right hand of Commission, but by his
left hand of permission, Herbert, our Church, Poet, in his title of providence.
grace of God,
But conquering sword which is his angry rod:
Lord, burn this rod of thine in thy best season,
And Crown his head who ought by Divine and humane.
right, and reason
To sway the Scepner in those Kingdoms three,
Which to him only now pertaining be;
That truth, and peace may flourish in our Coasts,
To thine own glory, who art Lord of Hoasts;
And thy Churches good, for which good men pray
Till thou the AMEN, please Amen to say.
Englands Geneva, Scottish Innovation, Produced has a Sottish Exesa Dco and
santiis
Toleration.
When men may do what is right in their own eyes,
Creed, Gods command, Lords prayer they despise
Contrary to Gods express command Nahum. 1.15 O ludah keep thy solemn feasts,
and why not O England, Scotland, and Ireland.
Church Feltivals by some are laid aside,
As Christmas, Easter and our Whitsuntide:
These blessings great are counted now so small,
They be not worth their Lip-ful annual:
If with their mouths men will not give God praise,
Their hearts to such a work, how can they raise?
But tongue, and hear-thanks should go both together,
Chiefly, in stormy, and tempestuous weather;
Our Church and State both being now therein,
Not to give God both is an heinous sin.
No forms of Service now esteemed be,
Yea, Gods own word we much despised see,
For when some Preach the Bible they pass by,
And in the Pue let it unclasped lie;
Not a Chapter read nor Psalm for the day,
But to the Pulpit up in have away.
And there they speak sometimes above two hours,
Till tediousness the fruit of both devours.
Lord, turn our Church into the late pure veins,
Orthodox; free us from th'erroneous brains
Of lay-pulpiters; that yet once again,
Both truth and peace three poor lands may obtain:
These blessing grant us for thy dear sonssake,
Till thou thy whole Church shall triumphant make.
The right prevailing way of Which will indeed produce spiritual and corporal
gain.
regaining a King
Truth, sirme peace, and Godly discipline.
St. Mark 11.24. Therefore I say unto you, what thing soever ye desire when ye
Pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.

Ask, and ye shall have What in faith ye crave.
USe then this means (all All Royalists, and Loyallists, who long for their
King, and list to be Loyal to him;
well affected men)
For King, Truth, Peace, and Bishops once again,
Petition God, (and Courts of Parliament
Which for the good or Church, and State are sent)
That he in his time would have mercy on us,
And take away his smarting rod upon us:
As heretofore Against the Bishops, the highest office of Godssacred Ministry.
petition caused our crosses,
So let them now help to restore our Chiefly the Scepter and the Miter, those
two main Pillars of Church and State.
losses,
Repent, Pray, and Believe (as Christ has said)
And ye shall obtain; be not then dismayed,
Lord give Grace, Truth, Peace, In Church and Common wealth
settlement again,
And bless us once more with a And make him not only a citular, but also a
tutelar King (next to thy self who art King of Kings) unto his three Kingdoms.
The Royal Stuarts bear to God true heart.
Stuarts reign.
May 1. 1649.
Schismatic, and verbal reformations Produce, and bring forth real
desolations.
Oh, how three nations do to ruin run,
By errors broken and by Sects undon.
Behold the Presbyterian reformation,
In creasing sects, and Schisms throughout each nation;
Now seethe new lights in their It Is called by some, Generation-work, sure it is
not Regeneration work.
generation:
Acting all by their own new light, and fashion;
Not ruled nor guided by Gods holy word,
But all reforming with a conquering sword:
The sword, the sword alone is, their clear call,
Proceeding from our Armies Ensis Cromvelienss. Non voc at ensit, Ye tit is
better to be Cavalire, then a Cromwelliere, Exitus acts probes.
General
King, Queen, and Bishops with their lands are gone,
Yet taxes, and excises still go on;
Those who to pay them all are yet most willing,
For every penny let them pay a shilling.
These reformatours they want money too
And so they will till they us quite undo;
They will not from oppressions set us free,
To work this good effect no Act shall be,
Much less mean they for to break every Isa. 58.6.
yoke,
Or to make good those good laws which are broke,
But to make our burdens Graviora scremus.
more heavy still,
To bring to pass theirown designs, and will
Then God (in his time) truth and peace us send,
With power, and grace our ill lives to amend:
That time he hasten for his dear Sons sake,
And for those blessings great us thankful make.
June. 24. 1653.
Upon the inauguration of Oliver Cromwell, Who from a Martial Anti-regal Hector
Is now advanced to be June. 26. 1657. dic. Veneris.
Lord Protector.
AStrange new No Royal Exchange a gracious King the true faiths defendor
instead of a Tyrant Protect or
exchange, an unheard of thing,
His highness made much higher then a King;
Who never was Knight of the royal Garter,
Much less th'eldest son of a O dies quando vectris Charles the first.
Regal-Martyr:
He was attended with keen Signifying thereby the protecting of his mine une
Commonwealth, and yet no wealth in its Commons.
swords out drawn,
(No godly Bishop in his pure Signifying purity of Doctrine. and conversation
(the old Vrim and Thummim with the conservation of them both by the arm, and
power of their godly discipline which now alas is broken.
white Lawn)
Which presageth war, is no sign of peace,
Much less of Britains unities increase
Made by King James; some will with might and maine, Whose peaceful motto's
were these faciam eos in gentem unam, Quae Deus conjunxit nemo separet et beati
Pacifici, contra^iorum contraria est ratio meledicti bellifici; his jugantur
Sectifici, praesertins Quakerifici.

What they have got by force by Vict armis.
force maintain.
O Lord protect us by thy saving grace,
And make us all timely to seek thy face,
By true submission to thy holy laws,
And shedding blood no longer call thy cause:
Of which my thoughts are we have had too much;
God grant we never more have any such;
As touching that which is already spilt,
Forgive (good God) the sin and eke the guilt.
July. 6. 1657.
Upon the County troops
LO, now each County has 'its proper Some put their trust in Chariots and some
in H^rses, making flesh their arm. and so make their Gods their Gods.
Gad
The Protectours of no vice (shop^) in these reforming times.
Vice-Protectours of three nations sad,
Oppressed with Taxes and excises great,
Under the color of a zealous heat
Of perfecting a blessed reformation,
Whose product is a cursed toleration:
Thus are three Kingdoms made a most free state
When every one is bound to pay his rate;
Yea thus three lands must maintain their own The loss of King, and Bishops the
late true grand-defendors, and Champions of our late truth and Peace.
harms,
By new devices, and by force of arms:
Thus are we brought, and kept still in great thrall,
Till god show mercy, and release us all.
He makes us all of one mind, and agree,
In his true faith; and sincere piety,
He in his best time truth, and peace ussend,
With power of grace our ill lives to amend;
That time God hasten for his dear sons sake,
And for such blessings great us thankful make.
The grand troubles of our English, Scottish and Irish, Isreal's. Morsus
sacerdotales nunquam tales, The Priestly bitings never such, As have of late
prevailed too much.
Gal. 5.15. If ye bite and devour one another, Take heed that ye be not
consumed one of another.
THe Chiefly the disobedient and gain saving Presbyterial Cle^g^, gainsaying
the Episcopal for then own gain.
Presbyterians have such biters been,
That they have left us neither King nor Queen,
To rule three lands in godly quietness,
And them to save from such as them oppress;
Nor godly learned Seer in his diocese,
To guard the Pulpits always more or less,
From such erroneous and newfangled Teachers,
As were from time to time, contentious preachers,
Of Schisms, and War, which at the last beat down
The Loyal Myter, and the Royal Crown:
No Bishop, no King, said King James of old,
Too true we find it, Crown and Miter sold;
Both which main Pillars are of Church and State,
And their great use their a (...) ^egis quam finendo
want has showed of late;
For since their sad (pretending liberties)
Each man does what seems right in his own eyes,
Nor truth, nor peace established in our gates,
The God of (...) rule.
Mars ruling still our now new ruling States.
Lord, though we bite, and still devour each other,
Yet lets not be consumed one by another;
But grant that truth and peace may settled be,
That we from Taxes, and keen Axes free,
Thy great and holy name may glorify,
By giving thanks; until we all shall dye:
We all are causes of our most sad breaches,
By our By foll^wing too much the devices, and des^res of ^ur own hearts; by
leaving undone those things, which we ought to have done, and by doing those
things which we ought not to have done. Thus we Omitteemen, and Committee Men
are the workers of our own ruin, perditio tua exte (...).
devices, and Self interests neglecting the best interest, namely interest
Omnium recte agere.
self-ended reaches;
God then give true repentance to us all,
And us deliver from our Spiritual and corpotal.
armed thrall.
May 1. 1649.
Mala nova (Matter Ecclesia) mala novae. Ill news (O Mother Church) ill news.
MOst Orthodox Amos 5. Archbishops, Bishops, Peans, and Arc^deacons, according
to the Canonical ordination of the late most fan ous Orthodox Church of England.
Priests silenced: a sad story;
And Who if they were well sifted would not be found so well gifted.
gifted brethren they get all the glory
By their newfangled teaching; which yet (alas)
Is often times as brittle as the glass
They babble by, which must be twice run out,
Before they finish what they are about.
Two hours ith Pulpit not one in the text,
At which long speaking many men are vexed.
Some call them Gospel opportunities,
Yet often times Beelzebub that Prince of flies
Flies closely in and father of all lies,
By them does broach errors, yea blasphemies;
Yet these be such great Saints as do not need,
Gods ten Commands, Lords prayer, or the Creed.
Apostolic, the three fundamentals,
And of Gods Temple the Old Englands liturgy and Rubric is better then the
new-brick, wherewith the new-lights build their new Churches.
supporting walls;
Without which three no Ghostly house is built,
But all their labor lost, and vainly spilt,
Then all ye new lights take this light from me,
That ye out of the old way of Preaching be:
Then take St. Paul's a Master builders wise
Advise, first all your hearers Catechize
In those three above said Fundamentals,
Which (as is said) be the supporting walls
Of each Ghostly Edifice; strong and sure,
Which will them constant make and long endure,
All the strong blasts of all false doctrine winds,
Which else will shake much their unstable minds,
Thus are your meetings like to be in vain,
Since ye, and they receive much chaff, for grain;
Yea, by assembling you will 2 Timothy 3.13.
wax worse and worse,
For, for a blessing ye receive a curse.
Upon the sifting of a Parliament Without the Commonwealths due free consent.
STrange! dead is the head, yet some members live,
Which to their head a deadly blow did give,
Who sit and act in Parliament again,
Though dead and buried be their Sovereign?
Yea, this they do without the Countries choice,
Wherein each freeman is to give his voice.
Since then they sit with out a lawful call,
It Is like three Nations will to ruin fall;
How then will they effect that reformation,
Which has been promised Both in the long, and often since the long Parliament.
Heb. 12.12.
long unto the Nation?
How can that be a Reformation good?
Whose base base was Kingly and Priestly blood;
Then lets all repent, and make our Episcopal and presbyteriall.
paths straight,
Turn back toth' years forty four, forty eight,
Accept again of Scepter and of Miter,
And bid adien to Mars that bloody fighter.
That truth and peace may once more meet together,
And we at length be freed from stormy weather,
Which has continued above twenty years,
To the great loss of Peasant and of Peers,
Good God, in thy good time have mercy on us,
And throw away thy rod now long upon us,
Give true repentance and amend us all,
Free us from ghostly and corporeal thrall.
June 21. 1659.
Upon the dissolution of the long, and Too strong for Moses nd Aaron, the
Seepter and the Miter both broken by it. St ange Scepter; Scepter and Miter
broken, sad things to be spoken.
strong Parliament, Fit via vi, vi and armis. OR, Patience perforce.
IN April last a stormy Martial shower,
Stormed Corvintus dissolutus a^ssolutus est ^er dissoluti^rem con^ertum.
assembled men of their great power,
They then had: (calling it a Parliament)
Of enacting laws, with Saint like intent
To reform all things amiss in each Nation;
Yet still we see a daily Pejoration,
Then mend us, Lord, and send us better days,
Grant truth, and peace, and thine be all the praise.
June 24. 1653.
Upon the rising in Cheshire against this present self-Parliament called by
themselves; and is styled by some the restitution, restoration, Of Taxes
Excises, and her insupportable payments.
and resurrection of the long (long since dead in its head) black, and bloody
one; which God forbid, that so much innocent, and precious blood, of Kingly,
Priestly, Royal, and Loyal, should a fresh be shed; no more of that for the
Lords sake.
SOme country men can now no longer bear
Their heavy ^im vi repo^lere, and bellum bello debellare.
burdens; therefore do adhere,
To some, who Dum bellum geritur pax queritur.
by force will do what they can,
(Out of their duty unto God, and man)
To ease them; and to restore truth, and Pax quaeritur bello, said ^ur late
Protector Oliver, of cursed memory, for his cursed toleration, and for his
wicked Sequestrations and deprivations of many Orthodox, learned and godly
Ministers of Gods most sacred word.
peace
That love and Piety may yet increase:
God say Amen to this, even so be it,
By what means (and when) he himself thinks fit.
The Isreal's of England, Scotland, and Ireland, being indeed all three now the
Lands of Gods justire, for their most bloody, National, Parliamental,
unnatural, and unchristian sins, are yet in Martial Booths, Tents, and
Tabernacles, till it please God himself (who only is the Lord of Hosts) to
restore, and settle in them truth, and firm peace; which time he hasten (if it
be his blessed will) through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord Amen, Amen.

June 24. 1659.

Upon the reviving of the long dead black Parliament.
BLack will be still black, for this Parliament,
Sent for by Letters not legally sent
Is not white, nor right without the right summons,
Of choice Contrymen for an house of Commons;
Not in each country Whereby three Nations may be guld.
called one, two, or three,
Btu all in Without General or Major General.
general as they ought to be.
All that were long ago lawfully called in the long Parliament; as well the
unjustly secluded Members as those who were and are of the Anti-Episcopal and
Anti-Regal faction; which made a fraction, first of the Miter and then of the
Scepter.

A right good Parliament for the right good old cause, (which is really and not
verbally Gods cause) is that, whose members are right, and upright; right in
their opinions, or opinations, and upright in their conversations.

June 24. 1659.

A Deaths head. OR A short Memento mori for all sorts of people. Death comes
unawares, hasting like a Post, And will be seen before foreseen of most.
Sumus fumus, sumus cinis, Et cinis erit noster finis.
HIgh, and low, old, and new Potentates,
Remember death knocks daly at your gates;
We all are dust, end shall to dust return,
Then let us Vita repent fugit^ Therefore let us repent, sme mora in lac
gratiae hora.
repent, lest that in hell we burn
Lord, make us make our ways good, just, and even,
That after death we may inherit heaven.
WILLIAM MASCAL.
Ordained by Episcopal authority, to be a public Reader of Gods most sacred
word, of our godly Liturgy and holy Homilies of our Mother the Church of England
Who is a Such ill Lecturers (following Hugh Peter's not St. Peter's divining)
together with Soldiers, ^oblers, Tinkers, and several other mechanic,
hetrodox public and private Speakers, had almost cast down all the orthodox,
godly, learned Preachers and right dividers of the word of truth.
Lector at S. Marth'as-Hill
No Lecterer who often has lectur'd By their much abusing (in the late ^^^estine
wa^) two text of hole Scripture, Curse ye Meroz, etc. Judges 5.23. Cursed be he
that keepth back his sword from blood, I^. 8.10.
ill


Thus ends a metricall (though no poetical) true narration of things done in
three late famous Kinghoms, whereby they are (for the present) undone, and that
chiefly by the superfluous wealth of London, whose money and treasure was the
sinews of an intestine War, which caused many to commit many new sins: The good
Lord our God forgive us all, and in his due time send us all true Grace, Truth
and firm peace through the merits and mercies of Jesus Christ, Amen, Amen, Amen.

A Prayer for true piety the best remedy of extreme melancholy.
DEliver me, O God, from Satan's ginns,
And give me true repentance for my sins,
With power to forsake them all, and grace
Of new obedience, and to seek thy face,
By doing always what thou would have done,
And by beleiving in thine only son,
By doing good, and by eschewing evil,
By renouncing the world, the flesh, and devil,
As I did long ago in baptism Votum baptismale Ecclesiae Angl canae.
vow;
O make me, O my God, O make me now
That Covenant to keep, and not allow
My self in any bosom sin, but bow
Unto thy will revealing in thy word,
Which shall great joy, and gladness me afford:
Lord, bless the means against my melancholy,
Which I shall use, and make me truly holy;
The woeful effects of extreme melancholy, With a Prayer for the removal of
them.
TOo much melancholy produces folly,
And dead's men's heart to duties, chiefly holy;
It makes his spirits all so dull, and dead,
That he can neither speak, pray, write, or read
To any thing he has such small desire,
That he can neither make his bed, or blow his fire:
It makes a man to fear, where is no fear,
And angry often for naught; unfit to bear
Whatever God does send with patience,
It moves him often times his soul from hence
To send, and rid himself of vital breath,
Before the time God calls for it by death:
Yea, it incites a man to desper ation,
And hope which is the helmet of Salvation,
It strives to take from off a sinners head,
And him to leave amongst the Omne peceatum in se est mors animae, sed
desperare est in infernum descendere.
Ghostly dead;
It casts a man into the lowest hell,
Amongst the infernal spirits there do dwell,
Then heal thou me (soul Doctor) yet at length,
And in my weakness perfect thou thy strength;
If it may please thee after nine years space,
Send cheerfulness, but chiefly saving grace.
True faith by which all Satan's fiery darts
Are quenched quite, Christ dwelling in our hearts,
Lord humble me for sin by godly grief,
Then send the comforter with true relief,
To turn my sadness into holy mirth,
And make me praise thee whilst I live on earth;
In my great frailty show thy saving power,
And save me from my sins, my Savior. Amen.
Aug. 28. 1654.
Non est mortale quod opto.
IT is no mortal thing I crave,
But grace, and goodness I would have,
A sinners suit oppressed with melancholy,
Beseeching God to make him truly holy.
But one day well in four and twenty hours,
Sadness distracts my soul in all her powers,
Which does unman me for the time, and fit,
My spirits deads, and makes me silent fit,
Not fit to speak or to be spoken to;
Which sad case may both body and soul undo;
If God in mercy do not it prevent,
Give me, space, and grace too to repent;
For which I Will pray, and never give him rest,
Til he vouchsafe to grant me my request.
A Prayer for true Repentance, New Obedience, and perseverance.
GIve me, O God, what will thou give?
Give me repentance true
For all my sins which thee do grieve,
Do thou them all Mich. 7.19
subdue.
O Lord my God, show forth thy might,
Make me a Saint with speed,
Sincere and upright in thy sight,
In thought in word, in deed.
And let me not fall back again,
To any sinful crime;
But make me constant to remain,
For all my future time.
This grace, Lord, grant thou unto me,
For thy dear son his sake,
And let me Psalm. 119.80.
sound, and faithful be
Till thou to heaven me take.
August 24. 1645.
Maschals Maschil.

IN a few plain verses instructing himself, how (by Gods help) he may be cord,
ore, and opere, realty thankful for his undeserved and unexpected wonderful
deliverance from along continued (almost twelve years) most tedious and irksome
disease of melancholy causing ext. eam heaviness, dullness and deadness of his
spirits, even unto a very Cura leves loquuntur ingentesstupent.
stupifying of them as a learned Physician, Doctor Phypard told me when he felt
my pulse in the extremity of one of my fits.

Thanks-living is the best Thanksgiving.
SInce thou O God have set my mind in tune,
(On the eleventh day of this present June)
Distracted much by melancholy sadness,
And turned have that sad disease to gladness,
(Which me oppressed had almost twelve years,
As by the date of July 25. 1645.
forty five appears,
Upon which day it pleased God Percutit, and parcit cum libet ipse Deus.
to begin,
To visit me with that sad scourge of sin)
My soul praise returns, not my tongne alone,
But heart and hand, likewise conjoynd in one
Consort, shall hencefort, magnify thy name,
By striving so to live without all blame;
That I may render thee true thanks, and praise,
So long as thou shall here prolong my days:
That I may 1 Cor. 9, 24. Instadio curram, meant bra^^, subiiciam.
run For, non progredi. est regredi.
on in a godly race,
Assist me Lord, with thine enabling grace.
God grant that I may so run (as St. Paul did) to obtain, and in verity, and
sincerity say with him by the grace of God, I am what I am.

June 13. 1657.

A joyful and thankeful commemoration of the greatest mercy and blessing (that
by the most gracious and miraculous providence of God) was ever bestowed on
three distressed Nations.
Upon the twenty eight day of June 1660. the day of public thanksgiving, for
his Majesty's happy return to his three Kingdoms.
HAd it not been for God, and General Monck,
Our Church and State had in confusion sunck,
Since God has now restored them both again,
By causing Charles the second King to reign,
To him be Laus tibi magne De^^ Psalm. 115.1.
praise (not to us sinners then)
Who to his Churches Prayers has said Amen,
Let us rejoice and give him all the Gratiarum actio, not (...) d^ctio, which
is (...) gratiar^m fictio.
thanks,
By living ^ have lately observed two ^hristen name to be given to two persons
(the practice of them indeed extends to all true Christians,) Live well
Chapman, and Praise-god Barbone: let them and all of us strive to live well;
and so truly to praise God, (not barbone-like, who disliketh Kings, and
Bishops, and would make them all as bare as bare bones.) or his mavelous
undeserved blessings, and mercyes lately vouchsafed to three sinful Kingdoms,
in the Restoration of his most gracious, and therefore most excellent Majesty
to them all which the God of all grace grant us all grace to do, through the
merits, and mercyes of Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior, and Redeemer,
Amen, Amen.
well and shunning wicked prancks.
Gloria summa Dei, Gloria summa Deo. All the Glory be to the all Glorious God.
FINIS.

