A Marvelous Medicine to cure a great Pain,
if a Maidenhead be lost to get it again.



ONce busy in study betwixt night and day
With choice of inventions I had in my mind,
And many od matters my mind did assay,
But any to please me I could not well find,
Then suddenly casting my nose in the wind,
I smelt out a Medicine both precious and plain,
Now to help silly maidens that have bin somewhat kind
To get by good order their Maiden head again.
First the Maid must be brought into a sleep,
For seven days together before she awake.
And seven days after this diet must keep,
with these kind of compounds the which she must take
She must not eat neither roast meat Sod neither bake
But all kind of daintyes she must refrain,
Save only the Medicine which if she take.
then it will restore, etc.
The first day give her the slime of an Eale
Blown through a bag-pipe with the wind of a bladder
With two or three turnings of a Spinning wheel,
Boiled in an Egshell and strained through a Ladder,
The Tongue of an Vrchin the sting of an Adder,
Boyld in a blanket in a shower of Rain,
With seven notes of Music to make her the gladder
And it will, etc.
The second day give her the peeping of a Mouse,
With the drops of Thunder that falls from the sky,
And temper it with three leaps of a lowse,
And put thereon three skips of a fly.
With a gallon of water from a widows eye.
That weeps for her husband when death has him slain
Let her take this Medicine and drink by and by,
And it will etc.
The third day give her the chattering of a Sparrow
Roasted in a mitten of untan'd Leather,
Give it her with the rumbling of a wheel barrow,
And bast it with three yards of black Swans Feather
The juce of a whetstone therein put together,
With a fart of a Friar brought hither from Spain,
Let her lay all this in an ell of lowse Leather.
And lay warm to her belly to cure her great pain.
The fourth day give her the Song of a Swallow,
Well tempered with marrow wrung out of a Log
With three pound and better of stock fish Tallow,
Hard tried in the left horn of a blew butchers Dog.
With the gagling of a Goose and three frisks of a frog
The hill of a shovell and an humble Bees brain,
Give her this fasting with the grunting of a hog.
And it will, etc.
The fifth day give her twixt eight and nine,
Some gruel of grantham boiled for the nonce,
The brains of a bird bolt powdered very fine,
And beat in a Mortar of Genny Rens bones.
Boyld in a Nutshel betwixt two Milstones.
With the guts of a Gudgin before she be slain,
Let her be sure to take all this at once,
And it will, etc.
Now mark well the sixth day what must be her trade
She must have a woodcock a ship or a quail,
Bakt fine in an Oven before it be made.
And mingle it with the blood of a Snale.
With four or five inches of a Jack a napes tail,
What though for a while it put her to pain,
Yet let her take this without any fall
And it will. etc.
The seventh day give her a pound of maids mocks
Brayed in a basket of danger and blame
With conserves of colworts bound in a box.
To comfort her stomach with sirrop of shame
Although she be past all hope of good name.
And to her honesty a very great stain,
Let her take this to remedy the same
And it will, etc:
Lo these are our Medicines for Maidens each one
Which in their Virginity amiss somewhat fell:
Pray if ever you hear them make moan
And gladly would know the place where I dwell
At the sign of the whip and Eggshell
Near Pancake Alley on Salissbury plain
There shall they find remedy using this well
Or else never recover their Maiden head aga^^.

