One MITE more CAST INTO God's Treasury, IN SOME Prison-Meditations: OR,
OBSERVATIONS and BREATHINGS of an Honest Heart, touching Englands Condition now
at this day.

Published, to be seriously pondred and considered of, in a cool spirit, by
those in Authority, and all the Sober-minded People in the Nation.

London, Printed in the Year, 1665.

One MITE more cast into GOD'S TREASURY; IN Some Prison-Meditations, etc.
THat the Tenderhearted have yet a being in the Land of their Nativity, to
wrestle with Isreal's God on the behalf of Sion, now oppressed by a seed of
evildoers, is a mercy (in my eye) not of the least magnitude, considering how
strongly the Mystery of Iniquity has for a long time wrought, and still bends
its strength against Innocence, utterly to extinguish the very Life and Power
of Godliness out of the Nation: For, sounds not Iniquity her Trumpet in thy
streets, O England, with an impudent forehead? Is not Piety become a scorn, and
Sobriety and Temperance a reproach unto the People? even to the sons of Vanity,
who blush not to commit Iniquity, but vaunt themselves over the Seed of
Innocence, glorying in that which will assuredly be their shame; consuming
precious time in palpable profaneness, living as if they should never dye;
ranting it with abominable impudence, as if Iniquity should outlive Eternity,
and their Wickedness should never have an end.

Ah England, England! have thou but a handful of harmless ones, a little
remnant within thy borders, whose Innocence thy Cruelties could never conquer
yet, nor never shall: Have thou, I say, but a little Remnant of such an
Innocent People, who cannot bow the knee to Baal, nor purchase their external
security by defiling their Consciences, and sinning against their own Souls,
yet have ever loved thee, and their Prayers and Tears are not wanting to the
God of all thy Mercies for thee, even now when some of the Nations seem to
conspire and rise up against thee, and yet must thy Wrath (in such a juncture
of time as this) needs vent it self upon this harmless and helpless People?
Come let us reason together, and suffer my Innocence to expostulate the matter
a little with thee.

What is the main thing wherein this People do offend thee? Is it because the
Offspring of Mordeca, the true Seed of Abraham, cannot bow to Haman's brood?
Or, is it, because Innocence meets with an acceptance from God, when the
Sacrifice of the Wrathful is rejected? Or, is it, because the Lord is pleased
to preserve them from many of the Pollutions wherewith the generality of thy
Priests and People (O England) are defiled at this day? Would thou have all
to be equally guilty of the crying sins that are regnant in the Nation? What,
would thou have none to stand in the Gap to intercede to thy God for thee?
Art thou so heart-blind that thou can not see the hand of God to be against
thee? if so, then surely gross darkness has veiled thy understanding, and
thine eye is not in Him who should be thy Head: How does my Soul lament and
pity thee! O that Isreal's God might be entreated to show mercy to thee, and
deal more favorably with thee than thou have done unto his innocent People!

Oh England, England! have thou not had a large experience of their Innocence
toward thee? Which of them have thou found contriving any mischief against
thee? Or, were ever any of them, since they denied the Instruments of War,
proved guilty of plotting against thy Peace? Ah why then do thy Princes proceed
thus severely, and suffer some unreasonable men to act thus unworthily against
them? Will thou needs hasten the heavy Judgments of God upon thee? Can thou
think he will forget to plead his Controversy with thee? Have thou not sins
enough besides, that do highly provoke Him, but thou must needs add this to the
rest, that thou will be found fighting against the Mighty God that made thee,
by dealing thus cruelly with his innocent People, who were born within thy
borders, and have all-along been ready to show kindness unto thee, in the
secret of their hearts breathing to thy God for thee, that his fierce Anger (if
it were his holy Will) might be turned away from Thee, and thy People humbled,
and their Souls from the power of Sin and Satan ransomed, and so the Righteous
God be reconciled unto them?

Why will thou contend thus with the God of Sions Innocence? How long will thou
persist thus in thy spirit of Obstinacy? Will thou suffer thy sins to sound a
defiance to the God of all thy Mercies? Has Presumption lulled thee into such
a dangerous sleep of carnal security, that thou art past all sense of danger or
misery that may come upon thee? Can thou be so imprudent, as to apprehend or
imagine that thou shall prosper in this thy Persecution? Will that God who is
so jealous of his Honor, suffer thy ignorant dreaming Priests, and those
devouring Cormorants (the Bishops Courts) to intrude into his Throne, and not
give them a Rebuke? Will He not visit for this thing? Mark their latter end.

Which of you all, O ye Priests of the Nation, who preach for hire, and divine
for money; and you that are so willingly their Instruments of Cruelty, I say,
which of you all do deal with this Innocent People, as you would have them do
unto you? If God should ever suffer any of them to have Authority in the
Nation, whom now you seek to trample on, Would you be well contented, if they
should seek to lord it over your Consciences, as you do over theirs; and cage
your bodies up in Prisons, as you have done some of theirs; and endeavor to
banish you from your Wives and Children, because you could not banish the Fear
of God out of your hearts; and cast away the comfort (and make shipwreck) of
Faith and a good Conscience, and so come under the terror of a wounded spirit,
which who can bear? Tell me, I say, and let God's Witness in your Consciences
give an Answer to me; Would you not count it hard measure if such a yoke should
be laid upon you? Consider of this in a cool spirit, when passion is down: And
then tell me also, if every one must not answer to God for his own Soul? And
while people walk honestly and live peaceably in the Nation, is it the
Magistrates work or duty to imprison them, or endeavor to banish them out of
the Land of their nativity? Did ever any of the good Kings of Israel do as you
have done against an innocent People? Or, which of Isreal's Rulers or Judges,
who lived in the fear of God, can you produce for your President herein?

Oh England, England! is Innocence become such in unpardonable crime, that thou
thus presumest in thy blind zeal to persecute it with more venom or
bitterness of spirit than thou do the Common Vipers in the Nation, in whom
Iniquity abounds with an Impudent forehead? O that thou would well consider
of this, now in this thy day, before ^he signal Judgments of thy God do seize
upon thee! O that thou could bridle that furious spirit in thee, that is so
bitter against God's People! which if thou do not endeavor to do, and that
timely too, let me tell thee, God will give thee a bitter Cup to drink, and
then verily thou must drink the very dregs of it: If thou will stop thy ear to
the sound of his Voice, who in the secret of the heart lets thee see the evil
of thy doings, and would have thee cease from thy Iniquities, and turn unto the
Righteous God; I say, if thou will perversely go on in the frowardness of thy
heart, and wilfully persist in this thy Persecution, Know this from the LORD,
The Hand of God will be against thee, his Controversy, his great Controversy
He will plead with thee; and then, O England, England, what will become of
thee? A day of Misery will come upon thee: Sorrow and Pain will take bold of
the Persecuting Spirit, whose delight is in Cruelty. The Fire of the Lord will
be kindled against it, and will not be quenched until the Mystery of Iniquity
be utterly consumed, Root and Branch.

Thus have I once more (O England) cleared my Conscience concerning thee* O
that Repentance may not be hid from thy eyes, if it be the good will of God; O
that thy Rulers, Priests, and People, may no longer reject the Counsel of the
Lord in their own Consciences; But if they will not hearken and obey Him* yet I
shall be clear of them when they are judged.

Martin Mason.
Lincoln, the 20th day of the first month, (called March.) 1664/5.
THE END.

