A PARTICVLAR LIST OF DIVERSE Of the Commanders.

And Officers taken Prisoners at Marston Moore near York (otherwise called
Hesham Moore.)

ALSO A RELATION OF SOME Remarkable Passages, in the Fight: as it is sent up in
a Letter from Hull, dated the sixth of July, 1644.

Printed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Ralph Rounthwait 1644.

A RELATION OF SOME Remarkable Passages in the Fight near York.
HAving had you often in my thoughts since I came down, and remembering my
promise to write, I therefore waited an opportunity to give you an account of
the proceedings here, so nigh as I can exactly gather from the best
intelligencers. The siege you heard was close laid to the walls of the City of
York, and bravely maintained by the three Generals my Lord of Manchester, my
Lord Fairfax, and General Lasley, that all provision was intercepted and cut
off from the City; and none could go in or come out without the privitie of
our Forces, who lay close to the walls; which gave us great hopes that they
could not continue; but ere long would yield; yet the report of Prince Ruperts
coming into Lancashire and overcoming and taking many Forts therein, made them
in the City refuse very fair propositions condescended to by us, and still to
stand out, and make great resistance by several times issuing forth of the
City, but always to their cost, for many of them fell, and never returned to
tell who got the better; The Prince as soon as he had wrought his Power and
skill in Lancashire thinking to act his pleasure in Yorkshire advanced with a
great Army both of Horse and Foot to Skipton in Craven, where he hovered a
while; and after ma^ched as far as Leedes; the noise of whose coming made
many of the Country thereabouts fly as far as this Town with bag and
baggage for safety; and his Army being so nigh the Generals thought it was
best to raise the siege and gather all into a body, and give the Prince a
meeting, which was done upon Monday last; at which the Citizens much rejoiced
and sallyed forth and hunted about, and got in Provision; but many of the
Country people took it very heavily; yet private respects must not be named
before public and great concernements. Upon Tuesday the two great Armies met
at a place called Hessey Moore about some five miles from the City, facing one
another all the morning; and in the afternoon the Prince and his Troops came
desperately riding up to the Scotts, and my Lord Fairfax his Forces, and
charged them so hotly that he put them to a disorder; and then (having given a
watchword before) he and all his Soldiers cried aloud, They run in the
Reere; which those that were in the Front thinking it to be true, retreated,
and so disordered their own men; and thereupon the Prince fiercely pursued
them, made them fly, and took some of their carriages, and so promised
themselves the victory, and were taking the spoil, which they thought to have
enjoyed; But the Lord of Hosts did so stir up the hearts of the three Noble
Generals, eying the dealings of God, that oftentimes in man's extremity He takes
His own opportunity; that notwithstanding all that loss of Men and Arms, took
boldness and courage unto them, gathering up those Horse Forces that were left
into a body to assist those English and Scotts that stood to it, and set upon
them, as David with his small Army upon the numerous company of the Amalekites,
while they were rejoicing over their spoils, and smote them until the
evening; and recovered not only all their own that they had formerly lost; but
also took all their Carriages, and eighteen piece of Ordnance, (some say
more,) took two thousand Prisoners, and abundance of Arms, and some say much
Treasure; totally routed the Foot, and scattered all the Horse, save that the
Prince and some five hundred Horse fled to the walls of York, where they were
received for half an hour, and presently the Prince, and my Lord of
Newcastle, and those Horse that escaped, with what others they could rallie,
marched forth, some say to Scarbrough, others to Pomsret, but its uncertain
yet where he is; The Generals have determined, nay (I hear) have laid siege
again to the City, and sent it a summons, but no answer is returned as yet;
they think the City would yield but for the multitude of Papists that are
therein; we are still upon the guard for fear the Prince gather head again;
the Lord save us, and deliver us from the tyranny of them, for they are
mightily enraged; but he that is able to deliver us is also willing to
deliverus, and has saved us hitherto: These are such news and occurrents as
are with us. Thus with my love to you desiring to hear from you, I rest,

Your loving Friend T. M.
Hull, 6 Julij, 1644.
Officers taken by the Lord Fairfax and the Lord of Manchester.
Major General Porter. Colonel Tyllier. Col. Lamplough. Mr. Gooring. Lievt.
Col. Hamon. Lievt. Col. Maude. Major Cartwright. Major Lane. Major Wise.
Captains.
Capt. Dawson. Capt. Mucklow. Capt. Ewbauck. Capt. Disney. Capt. Birridge.
Capt. Fowler. Capt. Oil. Capt. Hen. Wren. Capt. Hodgson. Capt. Dikes. Capt.
Monday. Ogleby, Capt. Lievt. Capt. Lodam. Capt. Manwaring. Capt. Grines. Capt.
Win.
Lievtenants.
Lievt. Washington. Goodwin. Chambers. Poole. Dobson. Suddick. Osburne. Foster.
Blackman. Cooles. Plunckit.

Ensigns.
Wheeler. Hedworth. Foster. Dykes.

Mr. Coule servant to the Marquess. Edw. Errick Master Gunner to his Majesty.
Sir Charles Lucas and diverse others of quality were taken by the Scotts Forces,
whose Names as yet I have not got. I know not the certain number of the common
Soldiers that are prisoners, I hear they are about 2000.

6 July, 1644.
Mr. Hollis a Merchant of Hull is this day come from the Army at York, who
says, that Prince Rupert and the Earl of Newcastle is gone toward Scarbrough
or Northwards, and says all their Foot are lost, killed and taken, 19. pieces
of great Ordnance, besides Drakes and lesser Pieces, 57. Carriages, all their
bag and baggage, 10000. Arms, above 3000. slain, and 2000. taken prisoners.

That our Army sat down before York on Friday at night last, and drove away
60. Cattle close from under the wall; and further news is come for certain,
that York is this day to be delivered up for King and Parliament.

FINIS.

