THE DESCRIPTION Of a Plain INSTRUMENT, THAT With much ease and exactness will
discover the situation of any vertical Plane, howsoever inclining, reclining,
or declining, AND How to draw a DYAL upon any such Plane, or upon the face of
any vertical body, how irregular soever, TOGETHER With several other things
requisite to the ART of DYALING.

By A. M.

LONDON, Printed for J. Coniers at the Raven in 'Duck-Lane, 1668.

both elements of the dial instrument

The Description of a plain Instrument, that with much ease and exactness will
discover the situation of any vertical plane howsoever inclining, reclining, or
declining; and how to draw a Dyal upon any such plane, or upon the face of any
vertical body how irregular soever, together with several other things
requisite to the Art of Dyalling.
THe Instrument consists of two main parts, a Basis and a Dyal.

The Basis may be a plate of Brass, or a piece of wood smooth wrought, and of
one thickness throughout, perfectly square, and divided into 4 little squares,
by 2 right lines, cutting each other at right Angles in the precise middle, one
being marked with W. E. for West and East, and the other with N. S. for the
North and South; which latter line represents the Meridian when the Dyal
stands in its most natural position; but its more ordinary use will be to
represent the Axis of the plane.

Upon the intersection of these two lines, as upon a Center, must be described
one circle or more; two quadrants whereof from N. both ways are to be divided
into degrees (if not smaller parts) and distinguished by Figures, as the
degrees of quadrants usually are.

The edge of the Basis noted with N. I shall for distinctions sake, call the
fiducial edge.

So much for the Basis: The Dyal is a perfect horizontal one, fitted to the
latitude of the place where it is presumed it will be most used, The Plate of
the Dyal exactly circular, and having the same common Center with the Hour
circle, and the utmost edge of the Dyal-plate almost touching the circle of the
Basis, whereof 2 quadrants were divided, as aforesaid.

Through the Center of the Dyal is a small Pin driven, or screwed into the Basis
at the Center, fastening the Dyal to the Basis, yet so as it may turn about
somewhat straightly; and another Pin so contrived as to fix the Dyal at pleasure
in any position; from the former of which Pins a thread of of strong silk
issues at the Center of the Dyal.

Upon some convenient place of the Gnomon is a line drawn perpendicular to the
Dyal-plate, with a thread and plummet fitted to it, and falling upon a large
Arch of a Circle, divided both ways from the said line into degrees and parts,
for showing the inclination and reclination of Planes: And at the lower edge of
the Gnomon, the North end has a sharp point or Index, and another at the
opposite end of the Meridian line I shall call the Counter-Index, serving to
point out declinations.

It is convenient to have the uppe edge of the Gnomon long, and when the
instrument must be placed far from the plane (as in some cases it will fall
out) it is good to lengthen out the Gnomon and hour lines in the operation, by
applying thereunto a fine straight rule; and the same course will be convenient
when the Instrument is a very little one.

There is besides belonging to it a plate and a needle: The plate may be of
fine thin brass, or tin-plate smooth and purely flat, cut at right Angles, of
the form of an Octavo leaf, but somewhat longer, with a long notch toward the
middle cut out, about the length of the third part of the Diameter of the Dyal,
or scarce so much, and of what depth you please, provided it be deep enough to
give way, that the notched edge may touch the line of VI without disturbance
from the Pin in the Center of the Dyal.

The needle must be hafted and framed much after the fashion of a Shoemakers
small Awl, but longer and more bowed, with a little straight point, having an
eye in it like a Sadlexs bodkin.

The use of the aforesaid Instrument.
1. To draw an horizontal line,
Fix the Dial on the Basis with the Index upon either of the cross lines, then
turning the Instrument with the graduated side of the Gnomon toward you, set
the opposite edge to the plane, and holding it so as the thread playing at
liberty, fall directly on the perpendicular line: you may by the edge of the
Instrunent touching the plane, draw an horizontal, or level line.

2. To draw a perpendicular line
Draw first an Horizontal line, and laying the back side of the Instrument or
the plate close to the plane till the upper edge touch that line, all along you
shall have 2 edges to guide you at your choice, to draw a perpendicular line.

3. To draw a meridian line.
Fix the Instrument Horizontally, and set the Dial to the true hour of the
day, then will the thread laid upon the meridian line of the Dial, and extended
at pleasure, give you a meridian line upon any Horizontal plane that it can
touch, and by the help of a thread and plummet upon any plane above or below the
extended thread.

4. To find the Suns Azimuth.
Fix the Dial upon the Basis, with the Index standing over the line N. S. at
N. Then turning about the whole Instrument, till standing Horizontally, it give
you the true time of the day, (which you must first know by some good double
ring-diall or otherwise) fix the Basis also to some stable thing by nails
driven through holes made in the Angles thereof to that purpose, and drawing up
perpendicularly so much of your thread at the center of the Dial, as will
suffice to cast the shadow upon the circle of the Basis: the degree or part cut
by that shadow, is the Azimuth from the South, and its complement to a quadrant
the Azimuth from East or West: but if the shadow of the thread, fall not upon
either of the divided quadrants, but nearer toward the letter S. then turn
about the Dial (the basis remaining fixed till the Index stand upon the line
W. E. at E. or W. as occasion is: that is at E. in the morning, at W. in the
evening, then will the shadow give you the Sun's Azimuth from the East or West
point, and that added to 90 degrees is his Azimuth from the South, and
subducted from 90 degrees, it gives his Azimuth from the North.

5. To find the Suns altitude or Almicantar.
Let the Index be placed over one of the great cross lines of the Basis, and a
line drawn upon the Gnomon, meeting the perpendicular at right angles in the
Center or hole for the thread. Then holding that edge to which the Index
looks, horizontally, and erecting a pin perpendicularly in the said hole,
hold up or depress the opposite edge till the shadow of the said pin run along
the line, then will the thread, playing at liberty, fall upon the degrees and
parts of the Suns height above the horizon.

6. To find the unknown latitude of a place, the hour being given.
Draw a Meridian line by the rules of Art, as Mathematicians teach (which are
too long to be here recited) Then placing the Meridian of the Dyal upon the
Meridian so drawn, and lifting up the South or North end of the Dyal (Basis and
all, except you have taken the Dyal off from the Basis) till the shadow give
you the true time of the day, the thread will show how many degrees, and parts
the latitude of the place where your work is to be performed, is more or less
than the known latitude of that place for which the Dyal was projected; but for
this purpose the Dyal should be large, and the time of the day a great space
from noon.

7. To find the inclination or reclination of a plane.
Apply the plate to the plain flat side of the Gnomon, or style, so as the long
edge may rest upon the Dyal-plate, and the short edge reach just to the edge of
the Basis, toward which the Index points, standing upon one of the cross
lines of the Basis; Then having drawn an horizontal line upon the plane, apply
thereunto the edge of the Basis, with the plate so placed upon it in such sort,
as that the short edge of the plate may rest all along upon the plane. Then
will the thread playing at liberty, show upon the other side of the Style the
degrees and parts of Inclination or reclination, viz. of inclination when the
thread falls between the perpendicular line and center of the Dyal; of
reclination when the said thread falls between the perpendicular line and the
Index, The quantity of the Angle being ever reckoned from the perpendicular to
the place cut by the thread.

8, To find the declination of a Plane.
Apply the fiducial edge of the Basis, with the Index set toward it, upon the
line N. S. to an horizontal line drawn upon the plane, so as the Plummet
hanging at liberty, the thread will fall upon the perpendicular line (the Dyal
being fitted to the latitude of the place where it is to be used) then turning
about the Dyal, till (by the Sun shining upon it) it show the right time of the
day: and upon one of the divided quadrants you shall find either the Index
pointing out the declination of the Axis of the plane, from the South toward
the East or West; or the counter-Index showing the declination from North,
toward the East or West: always reckoning the degrees and parts from N. where
the degrees begin.

A caution.
If your Dial be for another latitude, considerably differing: you must both
in this, and the following cases, so hold your Instrument, that upon the Arch
on the Gnomon, so many degrees and parts may be cut by the thread, from the
perpendicular line toward the index, as the latitude of the place for which
the Dial was made, is greater then that where it is used: or contrarily so
many degrees and parts from the perpendicular line toward the center of the
Dial, as the latitude for which the Dial was drawn is less then of the place
where you make use of it; This caution is ever to be understood when I speak of
placing the Instrument Horizontally.

9. To draw a true Dial speedily, without skill in the Mathematics, upon any
erect plain, or irregular face of a body, being situate more Southerly, than
the East or West points, viz. when the Index shows the declination.
Place the Instrument Horizontally upon a Table, or some other stable thing:
and having fixed the Basis, turn about the Dial to the true time of the day,
and fix it also by the pin made for that purpose; then drawing out the thread at
the center of the Dyall straight along the upper edge of the Gnomon, till it
touch the place where the dyall must be made: the point so touched by the
thread, shall be the center of your Dyall, and the thread drawn out straight
shows the Angle and form of the Gnomon: then lay the thread upon all the hours,
half-hours and quarters, which the plane or other face, will receive, and
drawing the thread out straight, and perfectly even with the Dyall-plate, till
it touch the plain or other face, make points where it touches, by which and
the center of the Dyall, you may draw all the hour lines, and mark out the
half-hours and quarters.

Here once for all note these 3 things
1. That i'ts good to try, before you fix the Instrument, where the center of
the Dyall will be, removing the Instrument backward, and forward, till the
thread her where you would have it; and if by this means the Instrument stand
far off from your work, you may by a ruler or plate laid even, (so far as you
can apply it) with the edg of the style guide the thread more perfectly; The
same course is to be held, when the Instrment is very small.

2. If you draw out the thread at the center of the Dyall, along the meridian
line, straight over the Index till it touch the plane, it will give you a
point, by which and the center of the Dyall, you may draw a line which shall be
your substyle, where the foot of your style or Gnomon must stand.

3 If you apply the long edge of the plate to the substyle, and lay the flat
side to the thread drawn out straight from the center of the Dyall, along the
upper edge of the Gnomon, till it touch the plane in the center for the new
Dyall as aforesaid, you may by your pen, pencil, or the like, make 2 or more
points where the thread touches, and by the help thereof draw a line, which,
together with the edge applied to the substyle, gives you the perfect Angle
and form of the Gnomon upon a fixed thing, which will guide a Workman far
better than the thread to make the Gnomon; and by this means the pattern may be
sent any whither.

10. To draw a true Dyal speedily upon any erect plane situated more Northerly
than the East or West point, viz. when the Counter-Index shows the declination.
Turn the Index to the place where the Counter-Index stood when you took the
declination; then going to the other fide of the open wall or building, find a
place where that declination fits, that is, where the Dyal standing as
aforesaid, and the fiducial edge of the instrument applied to the plane
horizontally, the Gnomon shows the true time of the day, by the shadow; and if
that prove difficult, you may by a door moved upon its hinges, or reared up in
a due position, relieve your self: Upon the place found, pin a large sheet of
Past-board, or Paper-Royal, straight and even, and thereon draw a Dyal, as was
last directed, for a Southerly plane. Then take it down, and pricking it
through, draw so many of the lines as the Sun in the longest days will shine
on, upon the backside, which being placed on your Northerly plane, with the
Center downwards, in a perpendicular line directly under the point, which on
the other side would have stood for 12 of the clock, will be a perfect pattern
to draw a Dyal on it, whose lines you may extend or shorten at your pleasure,
as best fits your plane.

11. To draw a Meridian Dyal upon an East or West plane.
When you are taking the declination of a plane, if the Index and Counter-Index
stand upon the line E. W. It is a meridian plane, whose Axis is true East or
West, according to the letter pointed at by the Index. Now to draw a Dyal on
such a plane, place the instrument horizontally, the fidncial edge touching the
plane. Then laying the thread upon all the hour lines and half-hours that the
plane will receive, draw forth the thread straight to the plane, and mark the
points where the thread touches (which may be best done if the Dyal stand close
to the plane, by help of the needle before described) for if you put the thread
through the eye thereof, and hold it straight, the straight end will help you
to mark the points exactly, and the crooked part rising upward will give way to
your eye, to see whether the thread lie right upon the hour lines, etc. Then
laying your plate flat upon the upper edge of the Gnomon, the long edge of the
plate resting all along upon the line VI. the shorter touching the plane, will
be your guide to draw the substyle, which by a ruler you may extend at
pleasure; Then removing your instrument a little higher or lower (it matters
not whether, so that it stand again horizontally close to the plane, and so as
the plate will again fall into the substylar line) mark points for hours as
aforesaid, by which points and the former, lines may be drawn parallel to the
substyle, which must be marked with the same numbers with the hours on your
Dyal-plate, that guided you to them.

But here also it is good to note diverse things.
1. Your style must be a pin with a sharp point, or else a parallel plate set
up perpendicularly in the substyle, just so high as may reach the hour-line of
9 in an Eastern Dyal, and 3 in a Western.

2. If you have the Art of drawing parallel lines either Geometrically, or by
help of the plate (which will supply the place of a square) you may spare the
second application of the Instrument to the plane.

3. If the plane be high and inconvenient for the fixing of your Instrument
close to it, you may pin a Past-board or paper upon any Wall, as if that were a
true meridian Wall, and draw a Dyal upon it (having first observed in the
fixing of your Instrument, that the Index stand as it did when you took the
declination, and the fiducial edge be applied to the plane) Then striking a
perpendicular, or horizontal line quite through your paper, draw the like line
upon the plane where the Dyal should be drawn, and placing the perpendicular or
horizontal line, which is on the Past-board or paper, upon that which is drawn
on the plane, you may prick two points through every line in the paper, and
thereby draw them upon the plane.

4. If you would make a larger Dyal than the Instrument set close will give
you, you may do it by setting the Instrument further off; but then if you know
not how to draw parallel lines, without a second application of the Instrument,
you must be sure to set it just at the same distance from the plane at both
applications; to which purpose it will be convenient to interpose a parallel
piece of wood truly wrought; but to make a less Dyal of this sort, you must
have a less Instrument, or else by taking the Dyal off the Basis, you may apply
it closer, or make use of a small horizontal Dyal, which indeed will do this
work (and some of the other) as well as the Instrument.

5. The Line of VI. and the substyle are the same.

6. You may make the Dyal of what shape you please, as round, square, oval, or
in the form of an heart, etc. but a long square is most usual: Nor does it
matter how long or short the hour lines be, provided they run straight on so
far as they go.

12. To draw an Horizontal Dyal upon its own plane.
This is so easy that I thought to have omitted it, for if you place the
Instrument upon it, and turning the Dyal to the true hour of the day, there fix
it, the thread laid upon the several hours, half hours, and quarters, will
transfer them to the plane, and lines drawn from the opposite hours of the same
number, will meet in the center, and the Gnomon of the Dyal gives the pattern
of the Gnomon of the other which must be placed in the meridian line (which I
showed before how to draw) to the center of the new Dyal.

The Instrument may be made use of for drawing of reflecting Dyals, and many
other curiosities, but the performance presupposes more skill than I can
presume to be in them for whom this contrivance is principally intended.

IF any one desire to be furnished with the Instrument herein described, he may
make use of Mr. Edward Fage in Hosier-Lane, at the Sign of the Sugar Loaf,
Mathematical Instrument-Maker, or Mr. William Newton of Fulshaw, living in
Manchester, in Lancashire; who will make it either in Brass or Wood exactly,
and at a reasonable rate.

Any that has but so much (or rather little) skill in Geometry as to measure
Angles, he may make use of an horizontal Dyal only, with a thread at the Center.

FINIS.

