Go in Peace.

Containing some Brief DIRECTIONS For Young MINISTERS, In their Visitation of
the Sick.

USEFUL For the People, in their state both of Health, and Sickness.

Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end!

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Richard Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred
Majesty, at the Angel in Amen-Corner, 1674.

To the Right Worshipful Sr. George How, Baronet.
The Author prays the increase of Grace here, and Glory hereafter.
Honored Sir,
IT is received for a truth of the greater magnitude, (...) 12.19.
by One, whose Profession renders his conceptions unsuspected of any bias by
interest; That the Gospel it self, and the Ministers thereof are ever weighed
in the same balance of human judgment; and the estimate of both, whether of
honor, or contempt, always alike. The sincere esteem you have for the Duties
of the Gospel, does not only manifest the certainty of that Maxim; but also lay
open the Root, out of which, your pious regard for the Ministers thereof, does
grow and prosper. Both which, daily thriving by the Celestial showers of Divine
Grace falling on your heart, are become so conspicuous in the World, (like a
City set on an hill, that cannot be hid) that it has engaged my weak
endeavors to contribute something to the present imitation, and future memory
of your Virtues.

Sir, I am confident (whatever others may do, yet) you will not esteem your
self unconcerned, in the purpose, and benefit of this Collection: For who can
do so, that believes, That it is appointed to men once to dye, and after that,
the Judgment? Much less then, a Person, who dies daily: whose contemplation
minutely suggest unto him the memento's of mortality; and whose life is an
entire design to prepare for death. Did other foresee what kind of thoughts
would suprize them at that woeful day, (unless their spirits are congealed by
some narcotick stupidity) they would deem it as much beneath the sagacity of
men, as the wisdom of Christians, to leave the most important business of their
life, to be huddled up in a few tempestuous hours, encumbred with sorrow, pain,
anguish, horror and amazement in themselves, and others. And who is there that
can make a deathbed so well, that an Vlcerous Soul may lie easy on it, under
the throws and pangs of a wounded Conscience? It is to this (almost)
insuperable task, that I have adventured to set an helping hand; (rather indeed
endeavored to prevent the huge difficulty of that work) to bring out of the
Sepulcher of a crucified Jesus a precious Relic, as I may say; some part of
the Napkin, that was bound about his head (as an Handkerchief, or Apron from
the body of an Apostle) wherewith to stanch the blood; respite, and avert the
death of a sinner; yea, bring to him pardon, life, and immortality, instead of
it. And who is he, that dares reject a medicine (how desperate soever be the
state of the Patient) the ingredients whereof are gathered out of the Garden of
God; the Book of Scriptures? Who shall limit that mercy, that is above all his
works; the supreme effect of Divine Omnipotency?

And now, Sir, though I do not altogether despair of the prosperous success of
this charitable enterprise on others; yet thus much I can safely promise my
self (which will abundantly recompense the little trouble I shall give them)
that it will free my Brethren from all umbrage of ingratitude to so sincere a
Lover of the Clergy: and put the World in mind; how great a price is to be set
on Virtue, and Goodness, when set-out, and imbellish't with Greatness: This
being the Compass, whereby the inferior world of men do steer their course and
is the Anchor of Church, and State, under all the (...), and Vicissitudes of
Fortune.

THE Preface.
THere are some, I presume, amongst the Reverend Clergy of that Diocese, of
which I profess my self an unworthy member, who need not be put in mind of a
passage, touching the Concerns of their Function, that fell from the Blessed
lips of a late godly Prelate of our Church, in his Speech at his Primary (and
last) Visitation; in which he pressed them to a zealous, discreet, and sedulous
performance of their duty of Preaching. For which, amongst other, he gave these
two important Reasons. The one, from an observation himself had made, whilst he
lived in Exile, (for he was one of those Abiathar's, 1 King. 2.26. that was
afflicted in all wherein his Majesty was afflicted) of the gross and barbarous
ignorance of the common People, in those parts beyond the Seas, where himself
converst: which he imputed chiefly to the want of frequent Sermons amongst
them. And his other was taken from the state of things in this Church; which
though, by its Canons and Rubricks, it exacts from Ministers sincere, and
diligent Preaching to the People; yet has it not laid any coercive obligation
on the People themselves, to have private recourse to their Ministers.

It is the latter of these Reasons that I principally reflect on, as a very
importunate motive to all zealous, and pious Ministers of our Church, to lay
hold on every precious opportunity they can, for private Discourse with them,
whose souls are committed to their charge; thereby to facilitate a way to their
own comfort, and the salvation of their Brethren. Both which are so nearly
concerned in their Visitation of the sick; (that One later than the Eleventh
hour, for that sort of address) that I have taken the boldness to put them in
mind of their duty, 2 Pet. 1.12. though they know it already, by delivering
into their hand, sundry pertinent, and useful passages of Scripture, proper to
supply the unskilfulness of such, as are but newly entered on that sacred
Function.

The moment of which duty let me recommend to them in the words of Salvian, an
Ancient and Holy Bishop of the Church. It is, says he, Revocare ab inquisitione
ultimi Remedii, durum ac impium est. Spondere autem aliquid in tam sera
curatione, temerarium. Sed melius est nihil inexpertum relinquere, quam
morientem non curare. Maxim quia nescio an in extremis aliquid tentare
medicina sit, certe nihil tentare, perditio. Salv. ad Eccl. Cathol. l. 1.
an harsh and impious thing, to discourage any one, from slying to the last
Remedy: And no less rash is it, to promise any thing, in so late an undertaking
the spiritual cure. Yet better is it, to leave nothing untried, then not to
have regard to a departing Soul. Especially, seeing I know not, whether to
attempt something, may not prove successful; but it would certainly prove
destructive, to make trial of no remedy at all. But a greater than Salvian is
here: When I say unto the wicked, thou shall surely dye, and thou give him
not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way to save his
life; the same wicked man shall dye in his iniquity, but his blood will I
require at thy hand. Ezekiel. 3.19.

CONTENTS.
I. DIrections when a sick Person seems wholly insensible of his spiritual
state. p. 8. II. When he expresses some penitence for his sins. p. 21. III.
When he is under too great despondency p. 22. IV. When under suspicion of
ungrounded confidence. p. 41. V. Rules for the Trial of his State. p. 49. VI.
When the occasion or circumstances of his sickness trouble him. p. 60. VII.
When oppressed with fears of dying. p. 68. VIII. Application to several causes
that may make a person unwilling to dye. p. 76. IX. When the sick person seems
willing to dye. p. 94. X. When he complains of the want of sensible joy. p.
100. XI. When he doubts of the truth or seasonableness of his Repentance. p.
110. XII. Directions how to demean ones self in sickness. p. 117. XIII.
Exercise of Prayer in time of sickness. p. 135. XIV. A Prayer to be used in a
state of Health. p. 145. XV. A Prayer when one perceives himself to be sick. p.
148. XVI. Prayers to be used in a Family. p. 152.
GO in PEACE. Containing some brief Directions for Young Ministers, etc.
WHen the Minister is to deal with a Sick Person, he must prudently consider.

First of all, of what Quality and Condition the Person is, as well in natural,
as civil (or moral) respects; his Age, Sex, Education, Relations, Offices,
Profession, Poverty, Wealth, and the like. All know that there are peccata
diversorum statuum, as the Casuists speak, sins to which one State (or sort) of
men is obnoxious, and not another; and some, more than others; to which, good
heed must be taken. We must remember St. John Baptists method, in giving to
every one his due portion; of whom the Father says; that Singulis
generationibus hominum conveniens Baptista tribuit responsum; the answer the
Baptist gave to all that asked him, was such as was suitable to every ones
state and condition of Life.

Secondly, How the Sick Person, in the Ministers own knowledge, or in the esteem
of good men, has demeaned himself, in the common duties of Godliness,
Righteousness, and Sobriety; Tit. 2.12. the indispensable Rules of every ones
conversation.

Thirdly, What is the present frame, and temper of his mind? Whether insensible
of the guilt, and pollution of his sins; or perplexed, and troubled above
measure; or else in a middle, and seeming posture of safety, and quiet: And
lastly, what his present indisposition by sickness will not permit him to bear;
that the Minister opperss him, not with unnessasary Discourses, and
Prescriptions, much less with such as are impertinent.

2. If the Sick Person appear insensible of spiritual dangers, the Minister
must prudently consider; whether his insensibleness does arise, either, from

1. A stupid ignorance of such things, a Christian ought to know and believe to
his Souls health; or from

2. A presumptuous boldness, and regardlesness of his spiritual state; not
caring how it may go with his Soul in the other World: Or from

3. An ill-plac't confidence, and conceit of his own performances of some Acts
of common Justice, Temperance, or other moral Virtue; whereby many are deluded,
thinking themselves to be something when they are nothing, being in truth void
of all saving Faith, and other Spiritual Graces. Or from

4. Resting on external conformity, to the way of Worship, Order, and
Discipline of the Church, of which he is a member, and the profession of the
Doctrine it Teaches, without any conscionable obedience of Gods Laws. Or from

5. That common Error, namely, that true justifying Faith consists in
believing one shall be saved; and so, all further enquiry into his state deemed
impertinent, and superfluous. Or from

6. Present Distemper of sickness, depriving him, in some measure, of an
ability to understand, and reflect on the things that concern his spiritual
welfare: which many times happens to them, whom we ought to esteem good
Christians.

Thirdly, If the Sick Person be afflicted with the sight and sense of his Sins*
the Minister must with the same prudence and caution consider,

1. Whether the Sins, he complains of, be the whole, or no more but a partial
cause of his troubles; or, indeed, rather an effect, than a cause it self; as
it commonly happens upon discontents, arising from things of this World. And

2. Whether his sickness be not of that kind, that may dispose him to sadness
of Spirit, and Melancholic perturbations of mind: Which cannot be more surely
discovered, than by considering the nature of those sins, of which he
complains. Which if no other but common frailties, they seem to point out some
unusual tenderness of heart, or distemper of judgment, arising either from
natural constitution of body, reflection on former lapses, present infirmity,
or the suggestion of Satan: In which Case, without sincere confession, there is
no relief, or comfort to be given him; but by accident, a cure may be hit on;
advised it cannot be.

Fourthly, If the Sick Person seem to be in a Christian temper, and frame of
mind, in respect of his faith, hope, and charity, yet is there a portion to be
administered to him in this season: Either

1. Of Admonition, to search, and assure himself, of a firm and solid ground of
his hope; that that Anchor of his Soul deceive him not, in his greatest need. Or

2. Of Encouragement, and exhortation to enlarge the comfort, and rest of his
Soul by fit Applications of Gods Word, and constant Prayer, and vigilance over
his heart.

Fifthly, A Like Duty is incumbent on the Minister in some other respects; as
when the Sick Person expresses great willingness, or unwillingness to dye;
solicitude for Wife, and Children, payment of Debts, and the like. For all
which, and such like emergencies, it is necessary, that the spiritual Physician
be furnished with suitable passages, and Texts of Scripture; as being that
which is most powerful in converting the Soul, strengthening and refreshing the
Spirit, and supporting it against all difficulties: And has also a special
property in searching out, and ascertaining the heart: And we may assure our
selves, that there is no state or condition of men in this Life, for which
there is not in the Book of God a portion to be found, which its the Ministers
duty to give him in that season.

And therefore that the Man of God may be readily surnish'd for that work, with
choice of seasonable and powerful remedies for the more common diseases of his
Flock, these following directions may, by Gods blessing, become successful;
when discreetly and diligently applied to the several exigents of our Brethren:
Upon any of which the Minister may enlarge himself, as he sees cause, in the
opening and applying the same, on particular occasions.

First then, When the Sick Person appears wholly insensible of his spiritual
state, (the common danger of Christians, who either feel not, or pretend they
feel not any gripes, or mindings of their Consciences,) such passages of
Scripture are fittest, that may set before him;

1. The Majesty and Greatness of God; as Exodus 19.16. And it came to pass on
the third day in the Morning that there were Thunderings and Lightnings, and a
thick Cloud upon the Mount, and the voice of the Trumpet exceeding loud; so
that all the people, that was in the Camp, trembled.

Verse. 18. And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord
descended upon it in fire: And the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a
furnace, and the whole Mount quaked greatly.

Chapt 20.18. And all the People saw the Thunderings and the Lightnings, and
the noise of the Trumpet, and the Mountain smoking: And when the peope saw it,
they removed and stood afar off. And so terrible was the sight, that Moses
said, I exceedingly fear and quake. Heb. 12.21. Chap. 33.20. Thou [Moses] can
not see my face, for there shall no Man see me, and live.

Verse. 21. Behold there is a place by me, and thou shall stand upon a Rock.

Verse. 22. And it shall come to pass whilst my glory passes by, that I will
put thee in a clift of the Rock, and will cover thee with my hand, whilst I
pass by.

Verse. 23. And I will take away mine hand, and thou shall see my back parts,
but my face shall not be seen.

Isa. 40.22. It is he that sits upon the circle of the Earth, and the
Inhabitants thereof are as Grasshoppers: That stretches out the Heavens as a
Curtain, and spreads them out, as a Tent, to dwell in.

Verse. 23. That brings the Princes to nothing; and makes the Judges of the
Earth as vanity.

Heb. 12.28. -- Let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with
reverence and godly ear.

Verse. 29. For our God is a consuming fire.

Secondly, The Divine Attributes; especially of his. 1. Holiness, 2. Justice.
3. Power.

Holiness, Genesis 28.16, 17. And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said,
surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not. And he was afraid, and
said, how dreadful is this place? This is none other but the House of God, and
this is the Gate of Heaven.

Exodus 3.5. Draw not nigh hither: put off thy Shoes from off thy feet, for the
place whereon thou stand is holy ground.

Chap. 19.12. -- Take heed to your solves, that ye go not up into the Mount, or
touch the border of it: Whosoever touches the Mount shall be surely put to
death.

13. There shall not a hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot
through; whether it be beast or man, it shall not live.

1 Samuel 6.19. And he [the Lord] smote the men of Bethshemesh, because they had
looked into the Ark of the Lord, even he smote of the People Fifty thousand and
threescore and ten men. verse. 20. And the men of Bethshemesh said, Who is able
to stand before this holy Lord God?

2 Samuel 6.6. Uzzah put forth his hand to the Ark of God, and took hold of it,
for the Oxen shook it. Verse. 7. And God smote him there for his error, and
there he dyed by the Ark of God. verse. 9. And David was afraid of the Lord that
day, and said, how shall the Ark of the Lord come to me?

1 Pet. 1.15. As he, who has called you is Holy, so be ye Holy in all manner
of conversation. 16. Because it is written, be ye holy, for I am holy.

Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness; without which no man
shall see the Lord.

2. Justice. Genesis 18.25. -- Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right?

Exodus 20.5. -- I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of
the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of them
that hate me: verse. 26. And showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me,
and keep my Commandments.

Psalm. 89.15. Righteousness and equity are the habitation of thy seat. And
119.137. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and true are thy judgments.

Romans 2.2. We are sure, that the judgment of God is according to truth, against
them which commit such things. verse. 6. Who will render to every man according
to his deeds, verse. 7. To them, who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek
for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal life. verse. 8. But unto them,
that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness;
indignation, and wrath, verse. 9. Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man
that does evil: verse. 10. But glory, honor and peace, to every man, that
works good.

Rev. 22.12. Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every
man according as his work shall be.

3. Power. Genesis 18.14. Is any thing too hard for the Lord?

Jer. 5.22. Fear ye not me, says the Lord, will ye not tremble at my presence;
which have placed the sand for a bound of the sea, by a perpetual decree, that
it cannot pass, and though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not
prevail, though they roar, yet can they not pass over it? And Chap. 10.7. Who
would not fear thee, O King of Nations? For to thee does it appertain.

Dan. 2.20. Blessed be the Name of God for ever and ever? for wisdom and might
are his. verse. 21. He changes the times and the seasons; he removes Kings,
and sets up Kings.

Rev. 15.4. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorisie thy Name? for thou
only art holy; for all Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy
judgments are made manifest.

Acknowledged and feared by the enemies of Religion themselves;

Exodus 9.27. The Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked.

Dan. 3.29. Then Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said; Blessed be the God of Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego; who has sent his Angel, and delivered his Servants that
trusted in him, and have changed the Kings word, and yielded their bodies, that
they might not serve, nor worship any God, except their own God. verse. 29.
Therefore I make a Decree, that every People, Nation, and Language which speak
any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, shall be
cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill, because there is no
other God, that can deliver after this sort. Chap. 6.25. Then Darius wrote unto
all People, Nations, and Languages that dwelt in all the earth: verse. 26. I
make a decree, that in every Dominion of my Kingdom, men tremble and fear,
before the God of Daniel: for he is the living God and steadfast for ever, and
his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, and his Dominion shall be even
unto the end. Verse. 27. He delivers, and rescueth, and he works signs and
wonders in Heaven, and in Earth: Who has delivered Daniel from the Power of
the Lions.

Acts 24.25. And as Paul reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to
come, Felix trembled.

Rev. 6.15. And the Kings of the Earth, and the great men, and the Rich men,
and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every
freeman, hid themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains. Verse
16. And said to the Mountains and Rocks; fall on us, and hide us from the face
of him, that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. Verse 17.
For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?

Thirdly, The State of an Impenitent Sinner.

1. In respect of original corruption. Job. 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing
out of an unclean? Not one. Chap. 15.14. What is man that he should be clean?
and he that is born of a Woman, that he should be righteous? Verse 15. The
Heavens are not clean in his sight; verse 16. How much more abominable, and
filthy is Man, that drinks iniquity like water? Chap. 25.4. How then can Man
be justified with God? Or how can he be clean, that is born of a Woman?

Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my Mother
conceived me.

John 3.5. Except a Man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. Verse 6. That which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh;
and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit.

Romans 5.18. -- By the offense of one, judgment came upon all men unto
condemnation.

2. In respect of actual sin. Exodus 32.33. Whosoever has sinned against me,
him will I blot out of my Book.

2 Kings 17.18. Therefore the Lord was very angry with Israel, and removed them
out of his sight, there was none left but the Tribe of Judah only. Verse. 19
Also Judah kept not the Commandments of the Lord their God, but walked in the
statutes of Israel which they made. Verse 20. And the Lord rejected all the
seed of Israel, and afflicted them, and delivered them into the hand of
spoilers till he had cast them out of his sight.

Job 4.8. They that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same. Verse 9.
By the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils are they
consumed. Chap. 8.11. Can the Rush grow up without mire? can the Flag grow
without water? Verse. 12. Whilst it is yet in its greenness, and not cut down,
it withers before any other herb. Verse 13. So are the paths of all that
forget God, and the hypocrites hope shall perish.

Jer. 22.24. As I live says the Lord, though Coniah, the Son of Jehoiakim King
of Judah were the signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck thee thence.
Verse 25. And I will give thee into the hand of them, who seek thy life. Verse
26. And I will cast thee out, and thy Mother that bare thee, into another
Country, where ye were not born, and there shall ye dye.

Mat. 7.26. Every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not,
shall be likened unto a foolish Man, which built his house upon the sand. Verse
27. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat
upon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall of it.

Gal. 5.19. The works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witcheraft, hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders,
drunkenness, revellings, and such like; they which do such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God.

2 These. 1.7. The Lord Jesus Christ shall be revealed from Heaven, with his
mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power.

Rev. 14.9, 10, 11. If any man worship the Beast, and his image, and receive
his mark in his forehead, or in his hand; the same shall drink of the wine of
the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture, into the cup of his
indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence
of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, and the smoke of their
torment ascended up for ever, and ever.

Secondly, When the Minister finds not in the sick person a total hardness and
impenitency, he must wisely mingle Threatenings and Comforts together: To which
purpose suchlike passages of Scripture will be useful.

Deuteronomy. 7.9, 10. Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful
God, which keeps Covenant and Mercy, with them that love him, and keep his
Commandments to a Thousand generations. And repayeth them that hate him to
their face, to destroy them: He will not be slack to him that hates him, he
will repay him to his face.

Jer. 32.18, 19. Thou show loving kindness unto thousands, and recompensest
the iniquity of the Fathers into the bosom of their Children, after them; the
great, the mighty God, the Lord of Hosts is his Name. Great in Counsel, and
mighty in works; for thine eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men,
to give every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his
doings.

Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33. If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my
judgments; If they break my statutes, and keep not my Commandments; I will
visit their offense with rods, and their sin with scourges. Nevertheless, my
loving kindness will I not utterly take from him; nor suffer my truth to fail.

Rev. 2.4, 5. I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first
love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the
first works, or else I will come against thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.

Thirdly, When the Sick Person is fallen into the other extreme, and is
sensible of little, or no comfort, the passages of Scripture, relating to such
a condition, are those which set forth;

1. The excellency and goodness of the Divine Nature. Exodus 34.6, 7. The Lord
passed by before him, and proclaimed, The LORD, the LORD GOD, merciful and
gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth. Keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and sin.

Psalm 86.15, 16. Thou, O Lord God, art full of compassion, and mercy,
longsuffering, plenteous in goodness and truth. O turn thee then unto me, and
have mercy upon me: Give thy strength unto thy servant, and help the son of
thine handmaid.

Psalm 103.8, 9, etc. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy: Longsuffering,
and of great goodness. He will not always be chiding, neither keeps he his
anger for ever. He has not dealt with us after our sins; nor rewarded us
according to our wickedness. For look how high the Heaven is in comparison of
the Earth: So great is his mercy also toward them that fear him. Look how wide
also the East is from the West: So far has he set our sins from us. Yea, like
as a Father pittieth his own Children: Even so is the Lord merciful unto them
that fear him. For he knows whereof we are made; he remembers that we are
but dust.

Hos. 11.3, 4. I taught Ephraim to go, taking them by the Arms; but they knew
not that I healed them. I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love.

Jonah 4. Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish; for I knew that thou art a
gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness, and repentest
thee of the evil.

Mic. 7.18, 19. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? He retains not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. He will turn again, he will
have compassion upon us: he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all
their sins into the depth of the Sea.

Malac. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not
consumed.

Ephesians. 2.4, 5. God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love, wherewith he loved
us, even when we were dead in sins and trespasses, has quickened us together
with Christ (by grace ye are saved): And has raised us up together, and made
us sit together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, His incomprehensible love, declared in giving his Son to dye for the
sin of the World

Isa. 52.9, 10. Break forth into joy, sing together ye wast places of
Jerusalem: for the Lord has comforted his People, he has redeemed Jerusalem.
The Lord has made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all Nations; and all the
ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God. Chap. 53.4, 5, 6. Surely
he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows; yet we did esteem him
stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have
gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on
him the iniquity of us all. Chap. 55.1, 3. Ho, every one that thirsts, come
ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy and eat: yea, come
buy wine and milk, without money, and without price. Incline your ear, and come
unto me: hear, and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting
covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Chap. 61.1, 2, 3. The Spirit
of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good
tidings unto the meek; he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that
are bound. To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of
vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn. To appoint unto them that
mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning,
the garment of praise, for the spirit of heaviness, that they might be called
trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified.

Ezekiel. 34.22, 23, 24, 25. I will save my flock, and they shall be no more a
prey. And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my
servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd. And I the
Lord will be their God, and my servant David a Prince amongst them, I the Lord
have spoken it. And I will make with them a covenant of peace.

Malac. 4.2. Unto you that fear my Name shall the Son of righteousness arise
with healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth, and grow up as Calves of the
stall.

Luke 1.76, 77, 78, 79. Thou shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare
his ways. To give knowledge of salvation unto his people, by the remission of
their sins, through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the dayspring from on
high has visited us. To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace. Chap. 4.17, 18, 19,
21* And when he [Jesus] had opened the Book he found the place where i^ was
written, The Spirit of the Lord (...) upon me. And he began to sa^ unto them,
this day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears.

Joh 1.29. John sees Jesus comin^ unto him, and says, Behold the Lamb of God,
which takes awa^ the sin of the World. Chap. 3.16, 17. God so loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son; that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. Chap. 15.13. Greater love has no man than
this, that a man lay down his life for his Friends.

Act 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name,
whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins.

Romans 3.23, 24, 25. All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, being
justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ:
whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation, through faith in his blood.

Romans 5.8, 9. God commends his love toward us, in that whilst we were yet
sinners Christ dyed for us. Much more then being now justified by his blood, we
shall be saved from wrath through him.

1 John 2.1, 2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous: And he is the propitiation for our sins.

Rev. 5.9. And the Elders sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the
book, and to open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain and have redeemed us
to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and people, and tongue, and Nation.

Thirdly, His faithfulness in keeping his promise.

Isa. 49.15, 16. Can a woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget
thee. Behold, I have graven thee on the palms of my hands, thy walls are before
me continually.

Jer. 33.20, 21. Thus says the Lord, if you can break my covenant of the day,
and my covenant of the night, and that there should not be day, and night in
their season; Then may also my covenant be broken with David my servant, that
he should not have a son to reign upon his throne.

Joh. 10.28, 29. I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father which gave them me
is greater than all: And no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand.

1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his
son Jesus Christ our Lord.

2 Cor. 1.21, 22. He which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has
anointed, is God; Who has also sealed us, and given us the earnest of the
Spirit in our hearts.

2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord
knows them that are his.

Heb. 6.17, 18. God, willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise
the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an Oath. That by two immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us.

1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Fourthly, His encouragements and promises to the penitent;

1. In the Law. Levit. 26.40, 41, 42. If they shall confess their iniquity* and
the iniquity of their Fathers, with their trespass which they trespassed
against me, and that also they have walked contrary to me; And that I also have
walked contrary to them, and have brought them into the land of their enemies;
if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept of the
punishment of their iniquity; Then will I remember my covenant with Jacob, and
also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham, will I
remember, and will remember the land.

Deuteronomy. 4.27, 29, 30, 31. The Lord thy God shall scatter you among the Nations.
But if from thence thou shall seek the Lord thy God thou shall find him, if
thou seek him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul: When thou art in
Tribulation, and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter days,
if thou come to the Lord thy God, and shall be obedient unto his voice, (for
the Lord thy God is a merciful God) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy
thee, nor forget the Covenant of thy Fathers, which he swear unto them. Chap.
30.3. The Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, and have compassion upon thee,
and will return, and gather thee from all the Nations, whither the Lord thy God
has scattered thee. In

2. The Prophets. 1 Samuel 12.20, 22. Samuel said unto the People, fear not, (ye
have done all this wickedness, yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but
serve the Lord with all your heart) For the Lord will not forsake his people,
for his great Names sake, because it has pleased the Lord to make you his
People.

Isa. 1.18, 19. Though your sins be as red as scarlet, they shall be as white
as snow; though they be red as crimson, they shall be as wool. If ye be
willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land. Cha. 44.22. I have
blotted out as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins:
return unto me for I have redeemed thee. Chap. 57.16, 17, 18. I will not
contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail
before me, and the souls which I have made. For the iniquity of his
covetousness was I wroth, and smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went
on frowardly in the way of his heart. I have seen his ways, and will heal him,
I will lead him also and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners.

Jer. 3.1, 13, 14. Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return
again unto me says the Lord. Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have
transgrest against the Lord thy God. Turn, O backsliding children, says the
Lord, for I am married unto you. Chap. 31.19, 20. Surely after that I was
turned, I repented, and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh; I
was ashamed, yea even consounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.
Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against him,
I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him: I
will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. Chap. 33.8. I will cleanse
them from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me; and I will
pardon a^l their iniquities whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have
transgressed against me.

Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye
from your evil ways, for why will ye dye, O house of Israel! In

3. The Gospel. Mat. 1. 21. Thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save
his people from their sins. Chap. 18.11. The son of man is come to save that
which was lost.

Luke 15.10. There is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner
that repents.

John 6.37. Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out.

Heb. 4.15, 16. We have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet
without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Chap. 7.24, 25. This man
[Christ Jesus] because he continues for ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood.
Wherefore he is also able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. Chap. 8.12. I will be
merciful unto their unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities will I
remember no more.

Fifthly, The performance of those promises in several Instances of mercy.

Judge. 2.18. When the Lord raised them up Judges, then the Lord was with the
Judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the
Judge, for it repented the Lord, because of their groanings, by reason of them
that oppressed them, and vexed them. Chap. 10.15, 16. The children of Israel
said unto the Lord, we have sinned, do thou unto us whatsoever seems good
unto thee, deliver us only we pray thee this day. And they put away the strange
Gods from among them, and served the Lord: and his soul was grieved for the
misery of Israel.

2 Samuel 12.13. David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. And
Nathan said unto David, the Lord also has put away thy sin, thou shall not dye.

1 King. 21.29. See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? because he
humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days: but in his
sons days will I bring the evil upon his house.

2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13. And when he [Manasseh] was in affliction, he besought the
Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers. And
prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him, and heard his supplication, and
brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom.

Nehem. 9.31. Nevertheless, for thy great mercies sake, thou did not utterly
consume them, nor forsake them, for thou art a gracious and merciful God.

Jonah 3.10. And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way, and
God repented of the evil, that he had said, he would do unto them, and he did
it not.

Mat. 18.26, 27. The servant therefore fell down, and worshipped him saying,
Lord have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. Then the Lord of that
servant came moved with compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt.

Luke 7.47. Her sins, which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much. Chap.
23.42, 43. And he said unto Jesus, Lord remember me when thou come into thy
Kingdom: And Jesus said unto him, verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou be
with me in Paradise.

1 Timothy 1.15, 16. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance,
that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners of whom I am chief.
Howbeit, for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might
show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them who should hereafter
believe on him to everlastinglife.

Sixthly, Examples of fear, and desertion in holy men.

1 Samuel 27.1. And David said in his heart, I shall now one day perish by the
hand of Saul.

Job 7.13, 14, 15. When I say my bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my
complaint. Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions.
So that my soul chooses strangling, and death rather than my life. Chap.
14.16, 17. Thou numbrest my steps, do thou not watch over my sins? My
transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up mine iniquity. Chap.
30.20. I cry unto thee, and thou do not hear, I stand up, and thou regardest
me not. Thou art become cruel to me; with thy strong hand thou opposest thy
self against me.

Lam. 5.20, 21, 22. Wherefore do thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so
long time? Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned: renew our
days as of old. But thou have utterly rejected us, thou art very wroth against
us.

Mat. 27.46. Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, my God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me?

Fifthly, When the Minister does think there is cause to suspect the considence
of the sick person, as not safely grounded; for greater caution, and searching
out the truth thereof, those passages of Scripture are useful, that point at.

First, The deceitfulness of man's heart. Job. 18.5, 14. The light of the wicked
shall be put out, and the spark of his fire shall not shine. His confidence
shall be rooted out of his Tabernacle, and it shall bring him to the king of
terrors.

Isa. 5.21. Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their
own sight. Chap. 58.2. They seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a
Nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinance of their God: they
ask of me the Ordinances of Justice, and take delight in approaching unto God.
Chap. 59.6. There webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover
themselves with their works.

Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things; and desperately wicked:
who can know it?

Luke 16.15. Ye are they which justify your selves before men, but God knows
your hearts.

Romans 10.1, 2. My hearts desire, and prayer unto God for Israel is, that they
might be saved. For I bear them record, that they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge.

1 Cor. 3.3. Whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are
ye not carnal, and walk as men?

Gal. 6.3, 4, 7. If a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he
deceives himself. But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have
rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another. Be not decieved, God is not
mocked, for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap.

James 1.26, 27. If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not
his tongue, but deceives his own heart, that man's Religion is vain. Pure
Religion and undefiled before God, and the Father, is this, To visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from
the world.

Secondly, The subtilty of Satan. Genesis 3.1. The serpent was more subtle than
any beast of the field. And he said unto the woman, ye shall not surely dye;
For God does know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be
opened, and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil.

1 Chronicles. 21.1. And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number
Israel.

Job 1.7. The Lord said unto Satan, whence come thou? Then Satan answered the
Lord and said; from going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down
in it.

1 King. 22.22. I will go forth, and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his
Prophets.

Mat. 16.23. Get thee behind me Satan, for thou art an offense unto me, for
thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those things that be of men.

Acts 16.16, 17. And it came to pass, as we went to prayer, a certain damosel
possessed with a spirit of Divination, met us, which brought her Masters much
gain by soothsaying: The same followed Paul, and us, and cried saying These men
are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of salvation.

2 Cor. 2.8, 11. I beseech you that you would confirm your love toward him:
Lest Satan should get an advantage of us, for we are not ignorant of his
devices. Chap. 11.3, 14 I fear least by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve
through his subtilty: So your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity
that is in Christ. For Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light.

1 These. 3.5. For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know
your faith, lest by some means the tempter have tempted you, and our labor be
in vain.

Thirdly, Admonition to make a strict search into our hearts. Psalm. 77.6. In
the night, I commune with mine own heart, and search out my spirit.

Jer. 6.14. They have healed the hurt of the Daughter of my People slightly,
saying Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace.

Malac. 3.2, 3. Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when
he appears? for he is like a Refiners fire, and like Fullers soap. And he
shall sit as a Refiner, and purifyer of silver.

1 Cor. 3.13. Every man's work shall be made manifest; For the day shall declare
it, because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's
work of what sort it is. Chap. 4.4. I know nothing by my self, yet am I not
hereby justified: but he that judges me is the Lord. Chap. 11.28. Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.

2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith: prove your own
selves, know you not your own selves that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be
reprobates?

Phil. 4.8. Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, if there
be any praise, think on these things.

Heb. 4.12, 13. The word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any
two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and
of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight; but all
things are naked, and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do.

James 1.25. Whosoever looks into the perfect Law of liberty, and continues
therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man
shall be blessed in his deed.

Rev. 3.1, 2. I know thy works, that thou have a name that thou live, and art
dead. Be watchful, and strengthen the things that remain, that are ready to
dye: for I have not found thy works perfect before God. Verse 17. Thou say I
am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing: and know not
that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.

Fourthly, Calling upon God for assistance. 1 Samuel 16.7. The Lord sees not as
man sees; for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on
the heart.

Psalm. 139.23, 24. Try me, O God, and seek the ground of my heart: prove me,
and examine my thoughts. Look well if there be any way of wickedness in me; and
lead me in the way everlasting.

Jer. 10.23. O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself: it is not in
man that walks to direct his steps. Chap. 17.10. I the Lord search the heart,
I try the reins; even to give every man according to his ways, and according to
the fruit of his doings.

James 1.5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all
men liberally, and upbraideth not: and it shall be given him.

The examination, and Trial of his State must be governed by such rules of
Scripture, as relate to the consideration;

First, Of his life past, with respect

First, To the Law of God, as it is opened and expounded by our Blessed Savior
in the 5th. 6th. and 7th. Chap. of St. Matthew.

Secondly, The duty of furnishing his soul with Divine graces, and habits of
virtue. Psalm. 45.14. The Kings daughter is all glorious within; her clothing is
of wrought Gold.

Jer. 31.33, 34. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts. For they shall all know me, from the least of them, to the greatest of
them.

Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them.

Mat. 5.3, to 13. Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of
Heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are
the meek: for they shall inherit the Earth. Blessed are they which hunger and
thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful:
for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see
God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs is the
kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are you when men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Chap.
13.12. Whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance:
but whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away even that he has. Chap.
18.3. Verily I say unto you; except ye be converted, and become as little
children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven.

2 Pet. 1.5, to 11. Besides this, giving all diligence add to your faith
virtue; and to virtue knowledge; And to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance,
patience; and to patience, godliness; And to godliness, brotherly kindness; and
to brotherly kindness, charity. For if these things be in you, and abound, they
make you that ye shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ. But he that lacks these things, is blind, and cannot see
afar off, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. Wherefore
the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure:
for if ye do these things ye shall never fall.

Thirdly, The Performance of particular duties in his several Relations, and
Profession. Acts 13.36. David after he had served his own generation by the
will of God, fell on sleep, and was laid unto his fathers.

Romans 12.4, 5, 6, 7. As we have many members in one body, and all members have
not the same office; so we being many are one body in Christ, and every one
members one of another. Having then gifts, differing according to the grace
that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to the
proportion of faith. Or ministry, let us wait on our ministering. Or he that
teaches, on teaching.

Ephesians. 6.1, 4, 5, 6. Children obey your Parents in the Lord. Fathers provoke
not your children to wrath; but bring them up in the nurture, and admonition of
the Lord. Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters. Not with
eye-service, as menpleasures, but as the servants of Christ. Masters do the
same things to them.

1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake.
Chap. 3.1, 7. Wives, be in subjection unto your Husbands. Likewise Husbands
dwell with their Wives according to knowledge, giving them honor, as unto the
weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of life.

Secondly, His present condition, in reference to their duties

1. Of Restitution and Satisfaction. Genesis 43.12. Take double money in your
hand, and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks:
peradventure it was an oversight.

Exodus 22.5. If a man shall cause a field, or vineyard to be eaten, and shall
put in his beast, and shall feed in another man's field: of the best of his own
field, and the best of his own vineyard shall he make restitution.

Levit. 24.18. And he that kills a Beast, shall make it good, Beast for Beast.

Nehem. 5.9, 10, 11. It is not good that ye do. I likewise, and my brethren,
and my servants might exact of them money, and corn; I pray you let us leave
off this usury. Restore, I pray you, to them even this day, their lands, their
vineyards, their oliveyards, and their houses, also the hundred part of the
money, and of the corn, the wine, the oil, that you exact of them. Then said
they, we will restore it.

Isa. 61.8. I the Lord love judgment: I hate robbery for burntoffering.

Mich. 2.1, 2. Woe unto them that devise iniquity: They covet fields, and take
them by violence: and houses, and take them away: So they oppress a man, and
his house, even a man and his heritage.

Hab. 2.6. Woe unto him that increases that which is not his.

Zech. 5.1, 3, 4. I looked, and behold a flying Roll. This is the curse, that
goes forth over the face of the whole earth: and it shall enter into the house
of the thief, and into the house of him, that swears falsely by my Name: and
it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it, with the
timber thereof, and the stones thereof.

1 These. 4.3, 6. This is the will of God, That no man go beyond and defraud his
brother in any matter, because the Lord is the avenger of all such.

2. Remission of injuries suffered by him, and hearty reconciliation.

Mat. 5.23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that
thy brother has ought against thee; Leave there thy gift before the Altar, and
go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy
gift. Chap. 18.33. Should thou not also have had compassion on thy
fellow servants, even as I had pity on thee?

Mark 11. When ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any; that
your Father also, which is in Heaven, may forgive you your trespasses. But if
you do not forgive, neither will your Father, which is in Heaven, forgive your
trespasses.

Joh. 13.35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, that ye love
one another.

Acts 4.32. The multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of one
soul.

1 Cor. 12.27. Ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.

Col. 3.12, 13. Put on therefore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels
of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering, forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any: Even
as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

3 Almesgiving, if of ability.

Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8, 10, 11. If there be among you a poor man of one of thy
Brethren, thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor
brother. But thou shall open thy hand wide unto him, and shall surely lend him
sufficient for his need, in that which he wants. Thou shall surely give him,
and thy heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto him: because that for
this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that
thou put thine hand unto. For the poor shall never cease out of the land,
therefore I command thee saying, thou shall open thine hand wide unto thy
Brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy in the land.

Psalm. 41. Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy, the Lord shall
deliver him in the time of trouble. The Lord preserve him and keep him alive,
that he may be blessed upon earth; and deliver thou not him into the will of
his enemies. The Lord comfort him when he lies sick upon his bed: make thou
all his bed in his sickness.

Prove. 3.27. Withold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the
power of thine hand to do it. Chap. 11.24. There is that scatters, and yet
increases: and there is that withholdeth more then is meet, and it tends to
poverty.

Eccl. 11.1. Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shall find it after many
days.

Mat. 25.37. to 41. Then shall the righteous answer him saying, Lord, when saw
we thee an hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we
thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we
thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee; And the King shall answer, and say
unto them, verily I say unto you, in as much as ye have done it to one of the
least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me.

Acts 10.4. Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God.

1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives
us all things richly to enjoy. That they do good, that they be rich in good
works, ready to stribute, willing to communicate, Laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold
on eternal life.

4. Unfeigned Repentance for the Errors of his life past.

Psalm. 51.1, etc. Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness:
according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses: Wash me
thoroughly from my wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin. For I acknowledge my
faults: and my sin is ever before me. Turn thy face from my sins: and put out
all my misdeeds. Make me a clean heart, O God: and renew a right spirit within
me. Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy spirit from me.

Fourthly, If the sick person be troubled from the occasion, or by reason of
some circumstances relating to his sickness; the Scriptures proper for that
condition, are such as set forth,

1. The duty of reflecting on his former course of life. 2 Chronicles. 21.12, to the
16. And there came a writing to Jehoram from Elijah the Prophet, saying, thus
says the Lord God of David thy Father, Because thou have not walked in the
ways of Jehoshaphat thy Father, nor in the ways of Asa King of Judah: But have
walked in the ways of the Kings of Israel, and have made Judah and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring, like to the whoredoms of the house of
Ahab, and also have slain thy brethren of thy fathers house, which were better
than thy self: Behold with a great plague will the Lord smite thy People, and
thy Children, and thy Wives, and all thy Goods: And thou shall have great
sickness by disease of thy Bowels, until thy Bowels fall out by reason of thy
sickness day by day. And it came to pass, that in process of time, after the
end of two years, his bowels fell out by reason of his sickness; so he died of
sore diseases. Chap. 26.19. And whilst Vzziah was wroth with the Priests, the
Leprosy even rose up in his forehead, before the Priests in the house of the
Lord, from besides the incense-Altar.

Psalm. 25.6. O remember not the sins and offenses of my youth: But according to
thy mercy think thou upon me, O Lord, for thy goodness. Psalm. 25.6. O remember
not our old sins, but have mercy upon us, and that soon: for we are come to
great misery. Help us, O God, of our salvation, for the glory of thy Name: O
deliver us, and be merciful to our sins for thy Names sake.

Job 13.26. Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the
iniquities of my youth.

2. The promiscuous dispensing out these things, both to good and bad, in this
life. Genesis 35.16, 18, 19. And Rachel traveled, and she had hard labor. And
the midwife said unto her, fear not, thou shall have thy son also. And as her
soul was in departing she called his name Benoni: and Rachel died.

Lev. 10.1, 2. And Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron offered strange fire
before the Lord, which he commanded not. And there went out a fire from the
Lord, and devoured them.

Numb. 20.12. And the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, because ye believe me
not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall
not bring this congregation into the land which I have given you.

Judge. 20.21, 25. And the Children of Benjamin came forth out of Gibzah, and
destroyed down to the ground of the Israelites that day, twenty and two
thousand men. And the second day they destroyed down to the ground eighteen
thousand men.

I Sam. 4.18. And when he [the Messenger] made mention of the Ark of God, Eli
fell from off the seat backward by the side of the Gate, and his neck brake,
for he was an old man, and heavy; and he had judged Israel forty years.

2 Kings 23.29. And King Josiah went against him [Pharaoh Necho] and he slew
him at Megiddo.

Job 2.7. Satan went forth from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job with
sore biles, from the sole of his foot, unto his crown. Chap. 9.21, 22. Though I
were perfect yet would I not know my soul: I would despise my life. This is one
thing, therefore I said it, he destroys the perfect and the wicked.

Eccl. 8.14. There be just men unto whom it happens according to the work of
the wicked: again there be wicked men unto whom it happens according to the
work of the righteous. Chap. 9.2. All things come alike to all; there is one
event to the righteous, and unto the wicked, to the good, and to the clean, and
to the unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not; as is
the good, so is the sinner; and he that swears, as he that fears an oath.

Jer. 24.5. Like these good figs, so will I acknowledge them, that are carried
away captive of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land of the
Caldoeans for their good.

Acts 20.9. And there sat in a window a certain young man named Eutychus,
being fallen into a deep sleep, and as Paul was long preaching, he sunk down
with sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead.

2 Timothy 4.20. Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick.

3. The Divine Clemency, in preventing, by such chastisements, our eternal
destruction. Joh. 5.14. Jesus said unto him; Behold, thou art made whole; sin
no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.

I Cor. 11.32. When we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should
not be condemed with the world.

4. The Discrimination that shall one day be made, betwixt such as may suffer
alike in this world. Mal. 3.14. to the end. Ye have said, it is vain to serve
God, and what profit is it, that we have kept his Ordinance, and that we have
walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? And now we call the proud happy:
yea they that work wickedness are set up: yea they that tempt God are even
delivered. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the
Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him
for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name. And they shall
be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day, when I make up my Jewels, and I
will spare them, as a man spares his own son that serves him. Then shall ye
return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that
serves the Lord, and him that serves him not.

5. The Duty of searching after that which does provoke God to anger. Genesis
42.22. And they [ the Brethren of Joseph] said one to another, we are verily
guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the Anguish of his soul, when he
besought us, and we would not hear: therefore is this distress come upon us.

Jos. 7.13. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, there is an accursed thing in
the midst of thee, O Israel, thou can not stand before thine enemies, until
ye take away the accursed thing from among you.

Jon. 1.7. And the [Mariners] said every one to his fellow, come and let us
cast lots that we may know for whose cause this evil is come upon us.

1 Cor. 11.30, 31. For this cause many are weak and sickly amongst you, and
many are fallen asleep. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged.

Rev. 9.20. And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues, yet
repented not of the works of their hands.

Fifthly, When the sick Person is oppressed with the fear of death, such
Scriptures are useful; as set forth,

1. The like fear in holy men. Psalm. 18.3, 4. The sorrows of death compassed
me: and the overflowings of ungodliness made me afraid. The pains of Hell came
about me: the snares of death overtook me. Psalm. 55.4, 5. My heart is
disquieted within me: and the fear of death is fallen upon me. Fearfulness and
trembling are come upon me: and an horrible dread has overwhelmed me. Psalm.
102.23, 24. He brought down my strength in my journey: and shortened my days.
But I said, O my God take me not away in the midst of mine age: as for thy
years they endure throughout all generations.

Isa. 38.1, 2, 3. Isaiah the Prophet the son of Amos came unto him [Hezekiah,]
and said unto him, Thus says the Lord, set thine house in order: for thou
shall dye and not live. Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, and
prayed unto the Lord, And said; remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I
have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight: and Hezekiah wept sore.

2. Comforts against fear of death, from

1. The necessity of dying. 1 Samuel 12.23. Now he is dead, wherefore should I
fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not come to
me. Chap. 14.14. We must needs dye, and are as water spilt on the ground, which
cannot be gathered up again.

Job 7.1. Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are not his days
also like the days of an hireling?

Isa. 40.6, 7. The voice said; cry: And I said what shall I cry? All flesh is
grass, and all the goodliness thereof, is as a flower of the field. The grass
withers, the flower fades, because the spirit of the Lord blows upon it;
surely the People is grass.

Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto men once to dye.

2. Victory over death by Christ. Isa. 25.8. He will swallow up death in
victory.

Hos. 13.14. I will ransom them from the power of the grave: I will redeem them
from death: O death I will be thy plagues, O grave I will be thy destruction.

1 Cor. 15.25, 26. He must reign till he have put all enemies under his feet.
The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. Verse. 54.55. When this
corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on
immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, O death
where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory.

3. Blessed death of the righteous. 2 Chronicles. 34.28. I will gather thee to thy
Fathers, and thou shall be gathered unto thy grave in peace, neither shall
thine eyes see all the evil that I will bring upon this place, and upon the
inhabitants of the same.

Isa. 26.20. Come my People, enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors
about thee; hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the indignation
be overpast. Chap. 57.1, 2. The righteous perishes and no man lays it to
heart; and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is
taken away from the evil to come. He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in
their beds, each one walking in his uprightness.

Romans 14.8. Whether we live, we live unto the Lord; or whether we dye, we dye
unto the Lord: whether we live therefore, or dye, we are the Lords.

Rev. 14.13. I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write, blessed are
the dead which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the spirit, that
they may rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

4. The Joys to be revealed hereafter. Psalm. 16.9, 12. I have set God always
before me: for he is on my right hand, therefore I shall not fall. Thou shall
show me the path of life, in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy
right hand there is pleasure for evermore. Psalm. 36.8* 9. They shall be
satisfied with the plenteousness of thy house: and thou shall give them drink
of thy pleasures, as out of the river. For with thee is the well of life: and
in thy light shall we see light.

Isa. 51.11. The redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto
Zion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: they shall obtain gladness
and joy, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away. Chap. 64.4. Since the
beginning of the World men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither
has the eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he has prepared for him that
waits for him.

Dan. 12.1, 3. At that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall
be found written in the book. And they that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as the
stars for ever and ever.

Mat. 25.23. His Lord said unto him, well done, good and faithful servant: thou
have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things:
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

Luke 16.25. Abraham said, son remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst
thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and
thou art tormented.

Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am, that they may behold my glory, which thou have given me.

Phil. 1.21, 23. To me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain. I am in a strait
betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far
better.

Rev. 7.9. After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, which no man could
number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues stood before the
Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their
hands: And cried with a loud voice, saying, salvation to our God, which sits
upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb.

5. The presence of God with his hildren, in all conditions. Psalm. 41.3. The
Lord comfort him when he lies sick upon his bed: make thou all his bed in his
sickness.

Isa. 41.10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy
God: I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with
the right hand of my righteousness. Chap. 43.1, 2, 3. Fear not, I have redeemed
thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine. When thou passest through
the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not
overflow thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt;
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. For I am the Lord thy God, the holy
one of Israel, thy Savior.

Rev. 3.10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience: I will also keep
thee from the hour of temptation.

Sixthly, That such spiritual remedies may do good, the Minister must endeavor
to understand and consider from whence that unwillingness to die proceeds; and
to the several causes thereof his applications of Scripture must be suitable. If

1. It be from that aversation which every Creature naturally has to
dissolution, the best men have not been altogether free from that fear. Joh.
21.18, 19. When thou wast young thou girdest thy self, and walk whither thou
would: but when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and
another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou would not. This spoke
he, signifying by what death he should glorify God.

To this must be opposed, 1. The conquest of Death by Christ. Heb 2.14, 15.
Forasmuch as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood: he also himself
likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is the Devil: And deliver them who through fear of
death were all their lifetime subject to bondage.

1 Cor. 15.56, 57. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
Law. But thanks be to God, which gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Verse. 58. Therefore my beloved brethren be ye steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord.

2. The pattern of a true Christian temper of mind. 2 Cor. 5.1, etc. We know,
that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building
with God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. For in this we
groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from
Heaven. For we that are in this Tabernacle do groan being burdened, not for
that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed
up of life. Now he that has wrought us for the self-same thing is God, who
has also given unto us the earnest of the spirit. Therefore we are always
confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from
the Lord, (For we walk by faith, not by sight) we are confident I say, and
willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord.

Secondly, If from love of this World; The vanity of all earthly things, and
the danger of such love of the World must be considered.

Eccl. 2.4, etc. I made me great works, I builded me houses, I planted me
vineyards; I made me gardens, and orchards, and I planted trees in them of all
kind of fruits. I made me pools of water, to water therewith the wood that
brings forth trees. I got me servants, and maidens, and had servants born in
my house: also I had great possessions of great and small cattle, above all
that were in Jerusalem before me. I gathered me also silver and gold, and the
peculiar treasure of Kings, and of the Provinces: I got me mensingers, and
women-singers, and the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments, and
that of all sorts. And whatsoever mine eyes desired, I kept not from them; I
withheld not my heart from any joy: for my heart rejoiced in all my labors;
and this was my portion of all my labor: Then I looked on all the works that
my hand had wrought, and on the labor that I had labored to do: and behold
all was vanity, and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun.

1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. This I say, Brethren, the time is short, It remains
that both they that have Wives be as though they had none: And they that weep,
as though they wept not: and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not:
and they that buy, as though they possessed not: and they that use this World,
as not abusing it: for the fashion of this World passes away.

Rev. 18.16, 17. Alas, Alas, that great City, that was clothed in fine linen,
and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls:
For in one hour so great riches is come to naught.

2. The danger of it. Mat. 19.23, 24. Jesus said unto his Disciples: verily,
verily, I say unto you, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. And again I say unto you, It is easier for a Camel to go through the
eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God.

1 Timothy 6.9, 10. They that will be rich fall into temptation, and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and
perdition. For the love of money is the root of all evil.

1 John 2.15, 16, 17. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the
world: If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all
that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passes
away, and the lust thereof; but he that does the will of God abides for ever.

Luke 12.16, etc. Jesus spoke this Parable. The ground of a certain rich man
brought forth plentifully. And he thought within himself, saying, what shall I
do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? And he said, this will I
do, I will pull down my Barnes, and build greater, and there will I bestow my
fruits, and my goods. And I will say to my soul, soul thou have much goods laid
up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto
him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall
those things be which thou have provided? 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.

Thirdly, If from a Conscience burdened with the guilt of sin, to the former
Applications, p. 22, 23. may be added the tender regard of our Blessed Savior,
for penitent sinners, foretold by the Prophets

Isa. 40.11. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs
with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are
with young.

And proclaimed by himself. Mat. 11.28, 29. Come unto me all ye that labor,
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn
of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart; and and ye shall find rest unto your
souls. Verse. 30. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

Joh. 7.37. Jesus stood and cried saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto
me and drink. Chap. 11.25, 26. Jesus said [unto Martha] I am the resurrection
and the life; he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:
And whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never dye.

Fourthly, If from solicitude and overgreat care for Wife and Children; the
Scriptures pertinent, are such as set forth

1. The All Sufficiency of God. Genesis 17.1. And when Abraham was ninety years
old and nine, the Lord appeared to Abraham, and said unto him, I am the
Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou perfect. And I will make my Covenant
between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly. Chap. 18.14. Is any
thing too hard for the Lord? At the time appointed will I return unto thee, and
Sarah shall have a son.

2 Chronicles. 25.9. Amaziah said to the man of God, but what shall we do for the
hundred Talents, which I have given to the army of Israel? And the man of God
answered, the Lord is able to give thee much more than this.

Isa. 59.1. Behold, the Lord's hand is not shortened that it cannot save:
neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear.

2. His promises to his Children, and to their seed. Genesis 17.19. Sarah thy Wife
shall bear a son indeed, and thou shall call his name Isaac; and I will
establish my Covenant with him, for an everlasting Covenant, and with his seed
after him. Verse. 7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy
seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God
unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

Exodus 2.24, 25. God heard their groaning, and God remembered his Covenant with
Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob. And God looked upon the Children of
Israel, and God had respect unto them.

Jos. 21.25. There failed not ought of any good thing, which the Lord had
spoken unto the house of Israel; all came to pass.

2 Samuel 7.24. Thou have confirmed to thy self thy People Israel, to be a People
unto thee for ever; and thou Lord art become their God.

Psalm. 68.5. He is a Father of the fatherless, and defends the cause of the
Widows; even God in his holy habitation. Psalm. 112.1, 2. Blessed is the man
that fears the Lord; he has great delight in his commandments. His seed
shall be mighty upon earth; the generation of the faithful shall be blessed.

Rom 8.32, 38, 39. He that spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us
all; how shall he not with him also, freely give us all things? I am persuaded
that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord.

Heb. 13.5, 6. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content
with such things as ye have; for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not
fear, what man shall do unto me.

3. His performance of them, even by the mighty working of his Power. Genesis
31.29. It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt; but the God of your Father
spoke unto me yesternight, saying, take thou heed that thou speak not to Jacob
either good or bad. Chap. 50.20. Joseph said unto them; ye thought evil against
me, but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save
much People alive.

Exodus 1.12. The more they afflicted them, the more they grew; and they were
grieved because of the Children of Israel.

1 King. 17.3, 4, 6. Hide thy self by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan,
and I have commanded the Ravens to feed thee there. And the Ravens brought him
bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening, and he
drunk of the brook. Verse. 13.14, 15. Elijah said unto her, Thus says the Lord
God of Israel, the barrel of meal shall not wast, neither shall the cruse of
oil fail, until the day that the Lord sends rain upon the earth. And she, and
he, and her house did eat many days.

2 King. 4.1, to 8. Now there cried a certain woman of the wives of the sons of
the Prophets unto Elisha; saying, Thy servant my husband is dead, and thou
know that thy servant did fear the Lord: And the Creditor is come to take
unto him my two sons to be bondmen. And Elisha said unto her, what shall I do
for thee? tell me, what have thou in the house? and she said, thy handmaid has
not any thing in the house but a pot of oil. Then he said, go borrow thee
vessels abroad of all thy neighbors; even empty vessels, borrow not a few. And
when thou art come in thou shall shut the door upon thee, and upon thy sons,
and shall pour out into all those vessels, and thou shall set aside that which
is full. So she went from him, and did shut the door upon her, and upon her
sons; who brought the vessels to her and she poured out. And it came to pass,
when the vessels were full, that she said unto her son, bring me yet a vessel.
And he said unto her, there is not a vessel more. And the oil staid. And she
came and told the man of God; and he said, go sell the oil, and pay thy debt,
and live thou and thy children of the rest. So Dan. 3.17. Chap. 6.21, 22.

Joh. 6.5, 7, etc. When Jesus saw a great company come unto him, he says unto
Philip, whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat? Philip answered him. Two
hundred peny-worth of bread, is not sufficient for them, that every one of them
may take a little. Andrew says unto him, There is a lad here, that has five
barley loaves, and two small fishes, but what are they among so many? Jesus
said make the men sit down. So the men sat down in number about five thousand.
And when Jesus had given thanks, he distributed to the Disciples, and the
Disciples to them that were set down, and likewise of the fishes, as much as
they would. See Acts 5.19, 20. Chapter 12.6, 7, 8. Chap. 16.25, 26. Deuteronomy. 8.4.
Psalm. 78.14, to 30.

4. The danger of such solicitude. Mat. 13.22. He that received seed among the
thorns, is he that hears the word of God, and the care of this world and the
deceitfulness of riches choke the word, and he becomes unfruitful.

Luke 12.20. God said unto him, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be
required of thee: then whose shall these things be which thou have provided?
Chap. 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so
that day come upon you unawares.

1 Cor. 7.35. This I speak for your own profit, that you may attend upon the
Lord without distraction.

And the unprositableness of it. Psalm. 127.1, 2, 3. Except the Lord build the
house, their labor is but lost that build it. Except the Lord keep the city,
the watchman waketh but in vain. It is but lost labor that ye hap to rise up
early, and so late take rest, and eat the bread of carefulness.

Mat. 6.27. Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature?

Luke 10.39, etc. Martha had a sister called Mary which also sat at Jesus
feet, and heard his word: But Martha was cumbred about much serving, and came
to him and said, Lord, do thou not care that my sister has left me to serve
alone? bid her therefore that she help me. And Jesus answered, and said unto
her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things; But one
thing is needful, and Mary has chosen that one good part, which shall not be
taken away from her.

6. Weakness of Faith discovered thereby. Mat. 6.30. If God so cloth the grass
of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the Oven: shall he
not much more cloth you, O ye of little faith? Chap. 8.26. Why are ye fearful,
O ye of little faith? Chap. 14.31. Immediately, Jesus stretched forth his hand
and caught him, and said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou
doubt?

Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your request be made known unto God.

1 Pet. 5. Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you.

7. The duty of commanding them, we leave behind to serve God faithfully, that
they may be blessed. Genesis 18.19. I know Abraham that he will command his
children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord,
to do Justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham, that which he
has spoken of him.

Jos. 23.14. This day, I am going the way of all the earth, and ye know in all
your hearts, and in all your souls, that not one thing has failed of all the
good things which the Lord your God spoke concerning you, all are come to pass
unto you, and not one thing has failed thereof, Chap. 24. And if it seem evil
to you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you will serve, but as for me
and my house, we will serve the Lord.

1 Chronicles. 29.10. David blessed the Lord before all the congregation: and David
said, blessed be the Lord God of Israel our Fathers for ever and ever. Verse.
11. Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the
victory, and the majesty, for all that is in the Heaven and the earth is thine:
thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as a head above all. Verse.
12. Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in
thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand it is to make great, and to
give strength unto all. Verse. 17. I know also my God, that thou triest the
heart, and have pleasure in uprightness. Verse. 18. O Lord God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Israel our Fathers, keep this for ever in the imaginations of the
thoughts of the heart of thy People, and prepare their heart unto thee: Verse.
19. And give unto Solomon my son, a perfect heart to keep thy commandments,
thy testimonies and thy statutes.

2 Pet. 1.12, etc. I think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir
you up, by putting you in remembrance, knowing that shortly I must put off this
my Tabernacle. Moreover I will endeavor, that you may be able after my
decease, to have these things always in remembrance.

Seventhly, If the sick Person seem willing to dye, the Minister may prudently
endeavor to discover, whether his willingness to dye does proceed from some
good, and laudable motive, or no, for it may arise out of either: As

1. From a desire to be freed from the troubles and persecutions Men undergo in
this life Numb. 11.13, 14, 15. Whence should I have flesh to give unto all this
People? for they weep unto me saying, give us flesh that we may eat. I am not
able to bear all this People alone, because it is too heavy for me. And if thou
deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of hand, if I have found favor in
thy sight, and let me not see my wretchedness.

1 King. 19.4. But he [Elijah] himself went a days journey into the wilderness,
and came and sat down under a Juniper-tree, and he requested for himself that
he might dye, and said, it is enough now, O Lord, take away my life; for I am
not better than my Fathers. Or

2. To be freed from pain. Job. 3.11, etc. Why dyed I not from the womb? why
did I not give up the ghost, when I came out of the belly? Verse. 13. For now
should I have lien still, and been at quiet, I should have slept, then should I
have been at rest. Verse. 17, 18. There the wicked cease from troubling, there
the weary be at rest. There the Prisoners rest together; they hear not the
voice of the oppressor. Verse. 20, 21. Wherefore is light given to him that is
in misery; and life unto the bitter in soul? which long for death, but it
comes not; and dig for it more than for hid treasures? Chap. 6.8, 9. O that I
might have my request, and that God would grant me the thing that I long for!
Even that it would please God to destroy me; that he would let loose his hand,
and cut me off!

Jon. 4.8. It came to pass, when the sun did rise, that God prepared a vehement
eastwind, and the sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted, and wished
in himself to dye, and said, it is better for me to dye, than to live. Or.

3. Out of ignorance of man's estate after death, in respect of rewards, and
punishments. Eccl. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth, as it was;
and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it.

Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto men once to dye, but after this the judgment.

2 Cor. 5.10, 11. We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad. Knowing therefore the terrors of the Lord, we
persuade men.

Mat. 25.31, 32, 33, 46. When the son of man shall come in his glory, and all
the holy Angels with him, then shall he be set upon the Throne of his glory.
And before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one
from the other, as a shepherd divides his sheep from the goats. Then shall he
say unto them on his right hand, come ye blessed Children of my Father, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World. Then shall he
say to them on his left hand; depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And these shall go away into everlasting
punishment; but the righteous into life eternal.

Luke 16.22, etc. And it came to pass that the beggar dyed, and was carried by
the Angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man dyed also, and was buried. And in
Hell he lift up his eyes being in torments, and sees Abraham afar off, and
Lazarus in his bosom: And he cried, and said, Father Abraham have mercy on me,
and send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue, for I am tormented in this flame. Or

4. Patient submission to Gods will. 1 Samuel 3.18. And Eli said, it is the Lord,
let him do what seems him good.

Luke 22.42. Father, if thou be willing remove this cup from me: nevertheless,
not my will, but thine be done.

Acts 21.14: And when he [Paul] would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, the
will of the Lord be done.

Phil. 4.11. I have learned in what estate soever I am, therewith to be
content. Or,

5. Well-grounded hopes of Salvation. Job 8.20. God will not cast away a
perfect man.

Psalm. 37.38. Keep innocence, and take heed to the thing that is right, for
that shall bring a man peace at the last.

Romans 5.1, 2. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ. By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein
we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

2 Cor. 4.13, 14. We having the same spirit of faith, (according as it is
written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken: we also believe, and
therefore speak: knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up
us also by Jesus, and shall present us with you.

2 Timothy 7.8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which
the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only,
but unto them also which love his appearing.

Heb. 3.14. We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our
confidence steadfast unto the end.

To each of these, fit applications of these, or suchlike passages of
Scripture are to be made. For neither willingness, nor unwillingness to dye
simply considered, are tokens of good, or bad estate, but in relation t^ the
ground, (or cause) from whenc^ they proceed.

Eighthly, When the sick Person complains of the want of sensible joy and
inward comfort of the Spirit, such passages of Scripture are to be set before
him, as describe

1. The state of our spiritual warfare. Mat. 10.35, 38. I am come to set a man
at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
daughter in law against her mother in law. And a man's foes shall be they of his
own household. And he that takes not his cross, and follows after me, is not
worthy of me.

Joh. 16.33. In the world ye shall have tribulation.

Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot do the
things that ye would.

Ephesians. 5.11, 12, 13. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
stand against the wiles of the Devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and
blood, but against Principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Wherefore
take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the
evil day, and having done all to stand.

2 Timothy 3.12. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.

2. The complaints of holy men. Job 3.25, 26. The thing which I greatly feared
is fallen upon me, and that which I was afraid of is come unto me. I was not in
safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet, yet trouble came. Chap. 6.4.
The arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my
spirit: the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.

Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. Will the Lord absent himself for ever, and will he be no
more entreated? Is his mercy clean gone for ever: and is his promise come
utterly to an end for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious: and will he
shut up his loving kindness in displeasure? Psalm. 88.6. Thine indignation lies
hard upon me, and thou have vexed me with thy storms. Verse. 15. I am in
misery, and like unto him that is at the point to dye: even from my youth up
thy terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind.

Jer. 15.17, 18. I sat alone because of thy hand: for thou have filled me with
indignation. Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuses
to be healed?

2 Cor. 12.7, etc. Lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance
of the Revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger
of Satan to busset me, lest I should be exalted above measure. For this thing I
besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. And he said unto me, my
grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness.

3. The return of the light of Gods countennance. Psalm. 30.5. His wrath
endures but the twinkling of an eye, in his pleasure is life: heaviness may
endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Verse. 12. Thou have turned
my heaviness into joy: thou have put off my sackcloth, and girded me with
gladness. Psalm. 71 18. O what great troubles and adversities have thou showed
me? and yet did thou turn and refresh me: yea and broughtest me from the
depth of the earth again.

Jer. 29.11. I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord,
thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end.

Micah. 7.8. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, when I fall, I shall arise,
when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.

Job. 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world
gives, give I unto you: let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be
afraid.

4. The practice of Holy men in like Cases. Psalm. 42.6, 7. Why art thou so full
of heaviness, O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? Put thy
trust in God, for I will yet give him thanks for the help of his countenance.
Psalm. 119.52. I remembered thine everlasting judgments, O Lord, and received
comfort. Psalm. 14.3. Hear my Prayer, O Lord, etc.

Acts. 12.5. Peter therefore was kept in prison, but prayer was made without
ceasing of the Church unto God for him.

Jam. 5.13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray.

5. Promises of deliverance. Job 5.17, 18, 19. Happy is the man whom God
corrects: therefore despise not thou the chastning of the Almighty. For he
makes sore, and binds up; he wounds, and his hands make whole. He shall
deliver thee in six troubles; yea in seven there shall no evil touch thee.

Psalm. 34.18. Great are the troubles of the righteous: but the Lord delivers
them out of all.

Jer. 15.11. Verily I will cause the enemy to treat thee well in the time of
evil, and in the time of affliction. Chap. 39.16, 18. Go and speak to
Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, saying, I will surely deliver thee, and thou shall
not fall by the sword, but thy life shall be for a prey unto thee, because thou
have put thy trust in me, says the Lord.

Joel 2.32. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the Name of
the Lord shall be delivered: for in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem shall be
deliverance, as the Lord has said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.

Zeph. 3.14, 17. Sing, O daughter of Zion, shout, O Israel; be glad and
daughter of Jerusalem. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty: he
will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy: he will rest in his love, he
will joy over thee with singing. Verse. 19. Behold at that time I will undo all
that afflict thee: I will save her that halteth; and gather her that was driven
out; and I will get them praise and fame in every land where they have been put
to shame.

2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations.

5. Endeavors of strengthening our Faith. I Sam. 30.6. And David was greatly
distressed, for the people spoke of stoning him, because the soul of all the
people was grieved, every man for his sons, and for his daughters: but David
encouraged himself in the Lord his God.

Psalm. 56.2, 3. Mine enemies are daily in hand to swallow me up: for they be
many that fight against me, O thou most high. Nevertheless, though I am
sometimes afraid, yet put I my trust in thee. Psalm. 146.2, to the end. O put
not your trust in Princes, etc.

Prove. 3.5, 6. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine
own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him; and he shall direct thy path.

Isa. 12.2. Behold God is my salvation: I will trust, and not be afraid, for
the Lord Jehovah is my strength, and my song, he also is become my salvation.

Mic. 2.7. O thou that art named the house of Jacob, is the spirit of the Lord
straightened? are these his doings? do not my words do good to him that walks
uprightly?

Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by faith. Chap. 3.17, 18. Although the Fig Tree
shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vine; the labor of the Olive
shall fail, and the field shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from
the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls: Yet will I rejoice in the
Lord: I will joy in the God of my salvation.

Mark 5.25, 27, 28, 29. A certain woman, which had an issue of blood twelve
years; when she heard of Jesus, came in the press behind, and touched his
garment; For she said if I may but touch his clothes, I shall be whole. And
straitway the fountain of her blood was dried up, and she felt in her body,
that she was healed of that plague.

2 Timothy 1.12. For which cause I also suffer these things; nevertheless I am not
ashamed: for I know whom I have believed; and am persuaded that he is able to
keep, that which I have committed unto him against that day.

Heb. 12.11, 12. No chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous: Nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruits of
righteousness, unto them which are exercised thereby. Wherefore lift up the
hands which hang down, and the feeble knees.

Ninthly, When the sick person doubts of the Truth, or seasonableness of his
Repentance, these Scriptures are proper, that set forth

1. The Nature of true Repentance. 2 Samuel 24.10. David's heart smote him after
that he had numbered the People, and David said unto the Lord, I have sinned
greatly in that I have done; and now I beseech thee, O Lord, take away the
iniquity of thy servant for I have done very foolishly.

Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. If the wicked man will turn from all his sins that he has
committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right he
shall surely live, he shall not dye. All his transgressions that he has
committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him, in his righteousness that he
has done he shall live. Joh. 5.14. Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
thee.

2. Fruits of it. Hos. 14.1, 2. O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God, for
thou have fallen by thine iniquity. Take with you words, and turn to the Lord,
say unto him, take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, so will we
offer unto thee, the calves of our lips.

Luke 3.7, etc. O generation of Vipers, who has warned you to flee from the
wrath to come? Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance. And now also
the Axe is laid unto the root of the trees: Every tree therefore that brings
not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. And the People asked
him saying, what shall we do then? He answered and says unto them. He that
has two coats, let him impart to him that has none: and he that has meat,
let him do likewise.

Acts 3.26. God having raised up his son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in
turning away every one of you from his iniquities.

Romans 6.4. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father: even so we also
should walk in newness of life. Chap. 7.4. Wherefore, my Brethren, ye also are
become dead to the Law by the body of Christ, that ye should be married to
another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth
fruit unto God.

3. Gods acceptance and reward of them. 2 Chronicles. 12.7. When the Lord saw they
had humbled themselves, the word of the Lord came unto Shemajah, saying, they
have humbled themselves, therefore I will not destroy them, but I will grant
them some deliverance, and my wrath shall not be poured out upon Jernsalem, by
the hand of Shishak.

Psalm. 32.6. I said I will confess my sin unto the Lord, and so thou forgavest
the iniquity of my sin.

Neh. 1.9. If ye turn unto me, and keep my commandments, and do them; though
there were of you cast out unto the uttermost part of the Heaven, yet will I
gather them from thence, and will bring them unto the place that I have chosen
to set my Name there.

Ezekiel. 33.14, 15, 16. When I say unto the wicked, thou shall surely dye, if he
turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right; If the wicked restore
the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life without
committing iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall not dye. None of his sins
that he has committed shall be mentioned unto him: he has done that which is
lawful and right; he shall surely live.

Mat. 16.27. The son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his
Angels, and then he shall reward every man according to his works.

Romans 6.22. Being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your
fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.

Heb. 6.10. God is not unrighteous to forget your labor and work of love.

Rev. 14.13. Their works follow them. Chap. 20.13. Death and the grave
delivered up the dead which were in them, and they were judged every man
according to his works.

4. Diligent search into our state, and the truth and sincerity of our
repentance; then especially, when but a short time is likely to be afforded for
the trial thereof. 2 Chronicles. 25.2. Amaziah did that which was right in the sight
of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart.

Job 27.3, to 7. All the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in
my nostrils; My lips shall not speak wickedness, nor shall my tongue utter
deceit; till I dye, I will not remove my integrity from me. My righteousness I
hold fast, and will not let it go; my heart shall not reproach me so long as I
live.

Psalm. 26.2. Examine me, O Lord, and prove me: try out my reins and my heart.
Psalm. 78.34, etc. When he slew them, they sought him: and turned them early,
and enquired after God. And they remembered that God was their strength: and the
High God was their Redeemer. Nevertheless, they did but flatter him with their
mouth; and dissembled with him in their tongues. For their heart was not whole
with him: neither continued they steadfast in his covenant.

Isa. 58.1, 2. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet: and show
my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins. Yet they seek
me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did righteousness, and
forsook not the Ordinance of their God: they ask of me the Ordinances of
Justice, and take delight in approaching to God.

Ezekiel. 14.3. These men have set up their Idols in their heart, and put the
stumbling block of their iniquity before their face: should I be enquired of at
all by them?

Mat. 7.21, etc. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in
Heaven. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied
in thy Name? and in thy Name have cast out Devils? and in thy Name done many
wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you, depart
from me ye that work iniquity.

Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many I say unto you,
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

2 Cor. 7.9, 10, 11. I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye
sorrowed to repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly manner, that ye
might receive damage by us in nothing. For godly sorrow works repentance to
salvation not to be repented of; but the sorrow of the world works death. For
behold, this self-same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what
carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your selves, yea, what
indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea
what revenge; In all things ye have approved your selves to be clear in this
matter.

Tenthly, If the sick person needs, or desires instruction how to demean
himself in his sickness, such Scriptures will be useful, as direct us to

1. Contrition for sin. Job 42.2, 5, 6. I know that thou can do any thing,
and that no thought can be withheld from thee. I have heard of thee by the
hearing of the ear: but now mine eye sees thee. Wherefore I abhor my self, and
repent in dust and ashes.

Psalm. 19.12. Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret
faults. Psalm. 32.1, etc. Blessed is the man whose unrighteousness is forgiven:
and whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes no
sin: and in whose spirit there is no guile. I will acknowledge my sin unto thee:
and mine unrighteousnes have I not hid. Psalm. 34.17. The Lord is nigh unto them
that are of a contrite heart: and will save such as be of an humble spirit.
Psalm. 38.1, etc. Put me not to rebuke, O Lord, in thine anger: neither chasten
me in thy heavy displeasure. For thine arrows stick fast in me: and thy hand
presses me sore. There is no health in my flesh because of thy displeasure:
neither is there any rest in my bones by reason of my sin. For my wickednesses
are gone over my head: and are like a sore burden too heavy for me to bear. I
truly am set in the plague: and my heaviness is ever in my sight. For I will
confess my wickedness: and be sorry for my sin.

Hos. 7.2. They consider not in their hearts, that I remember all their
wickedness.

Jam. 3.2. In many things we offend all.

2. Humility and Patience in affliction. 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. And the King [David]
said unto Zadok, carry back the Ark of God into the City: if I shall find
favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it and
his habitation. But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee: behold, here am
I, let him do to me, as seems good unto him.

Job 2.10. What, shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not
receive evil? In all this did not Job sin with his lips. Chap. 34.31, 32.
Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not
offend any more. That, which I see not, teach thou me: If I have done iniquity,
I will do no more.

Psalm. 27.16. O tarry thou the Lords leisure: be strong, and he shall comfort
thy heart, and put thou thy trust in the Lord.

Lam. 3.25, 26. The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that
seeks him. It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the
salvation of the Lord.

Mic. 7.9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him.

Luke 21.19. In your patience possess your souls.

Heb. 12.7. If ye endure chastening, God deals with you as with sons.

Jam. 1.2, 3, 4. Count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations;
knowing this, that the trying of your faith works patience; But let patience
have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing.

1 Pet. 5.6. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt
you in due time.

3. Reliance upon God. Deuteronomy. 33.26. There is none like unto the God of Jesurun.
Verse. 27. The Eternal God is thy refuge. Verse. 29. Happy art thou, O Israel:
who is like unto thee, O People, saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and
who is the sword of thy excellency?

1 Samuel 12.22. The Lord will not forsake his People, for his great Names sake:
because it has pleased the Lord to make you his People.

2 Chronicles. 16.9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth,
to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him.

Job 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.

Psalm. 5.13. Thou Lord wilt give thy blessing unto the righteous: and with thy
favorable kindness will thou defend him as with a shield. Psalm. 9.10. They
that know thy Name will put their trust in thee: for thou Lord have never
failed them that seek thee. Psalm. 22.10. I have been left unto thee ever since
I was born: thou art my God even from my mothers womb. Psalm. 23.4. Though I
walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art
with me. Psalm. 33.17. Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him:
and upon them that put their trust in his mercy Psalm. 37.40. The salvation of
the righteous comes of the Lord: which is also their strength in the time of
trouble. Psalm. 62.1. My soul truly waits still upon God; for of him comes my
salvation.

Isa. 30.15. Thus says the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, In returning and
rest shall ye be saved, in quietness and confidence shall be your strength.

Lam. 3.25, 26. The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that
seeks him. It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the
salvation of the Lord.

4. The Benefit and Comfort of Prayer. Isa. 26.8, 9. In the way of thy
judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee: the desire of our soul is to thy
Name, and to the remembrance of thee. With my soul have I desired thee in the
night, yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee early: for when thy
judgments are in the earth; the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness.

Job. 42.10. The Lord turned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for his
friends.

Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the time of trouble: So will I hear thee, and
thou shall praise me. Psalm. 55.17, 18. As for me, I will call upon God: and the
Lord shall save me. In the evening and morning, and at noon day I will pray,
and that instantly: and he shall hear my voice. Psalm. 65.2, 3. Thou that
hear prayer: unto thee shall all flesh come. My misdeeds prevail against me:
O be thou merciful unto our sins. Psalm. 69.13, etc. Lord I make my prayer to
thee, in an acceptable time. Hear me, O God, in the multitude of thy mercy:
even in the truth of thy salvation. Take me out of the mire, that I sink not:
Oh let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the deep waters. Let
not the deep flood drown me, neither let the deep swallow me up: and let not
the Pit shut her mouth upon me. Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is
comfortable: turn thee unto me according to the multitude of thy mercies. And
hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble: Oh haste thee and hear
me! Draw nigh unto my soul, and save it: Oh deliver me because of mine enemies.
Psalm. 86.1, to 8. Bow down thine ear O Lord, and hear me; for I am poor, and in
misery. Preserve thou my soul, for I am holy: save thy servant, that puts
his trust in thee. Be merciful to me, O Lord: for I will call daily upon thee.
Comfort the soul of thy servant: for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.
For thou Lord art good and gracious: and of great mercy unto all them that call
upon thee. Give ear Lord unto my prayer: and ponder the voice of my humble
desires. In the time of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou hear me.

Jer. 17.13, 14. O Lord, the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall be
ashamed, and they that depart from thee shall be written in the earth, because
they have forsaken the Lord, the fountain of living waters. Heal me, O Lord,
and I shall be healed; save me and I shall be saved: for thou art my praise.

Luke 18.1. And he spoke a parable unto them, to this end, that men ought
always to pray, and not to faint.

Joh. 16.24. Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my Name; ask, and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full.

1 These. 5.17. Pray without ceasing.

5. Meditation upon spiritual, and heavenly things. Deuteronomy. 22.29. O that they
were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end!

Psalm. 15.1, 2, etc. Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? or who shall rest
upon thy holy Hill? Even he that leads an incorrupt life; and does the thing
which is right, and speaks the truth from his heart. He that has used, etc.
Whosoever does these things shall never fall. So Psalm. 24.3, 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 90.12.
So teach us to number our days; that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Psalm.
143.4, 5. My spirit is vexed within me; and my heart within me is desolate. Yet
do I remember the time past, I muse upon all thy works; yea, I exercise my self
in the works of thy hands.

2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. For which cause we faint not, but though our outward man
perish, yet the inward man, is renewed day by day. For our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. While we look not at the things that are seen, but at the
things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are eternal.

Col. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which
are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God. Set your affections
on things above, not on things on earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hid
with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye
also appear with him in glory.

Rev. 20.11, 12. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, from
whose face the earth, and the Heaven fled away, and there was found no place
for them. And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the Books
were opened; and another Book was opened, which is the Book of life: and the
dead were judged out of those things, which were written in the books,
according to their works.

6. Choice of company fit for that time. 1 Samuel 21.14, 15. Achish said unto his
servants, Lo, you see the man is mad; wherefore then have you brought him to
me? Have I need of madmen, that ye have brought this fellow to play the madman
in my presence? shall this fellow come into my house?

Job 13.4, 5. Ye are all Physicians of no value. O that you would altogether
hold your peace, and it should be your wisdom! Chap. 15.2. Should he [a wise
man] reason with unprofitable talk? or with speeches where with he can do no
good? Chap. 16.5. I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my
lips should assuage your grief. Chap. 33.23, 24. If there be a messenger with
him, one of a thousand, to show unto men his uprightness; Then he is gracious
unto him, and says, deliver him from going down into the pit, I have found a
Ransom.

Psalm. 26.4, 5. I have not dwelt with vain persons, neither have I had
fellowship with the deceitful. I have hated the Congregation of the wicked,
neither will I sit amongst the ungodly. Psalm. 101.8, etc. Mine eyes look unto
such as be faithful in the Land; that they may dwell with me. Whosoever leads a
godly life, he shall be my servant. There shall no deceitful person dwell in my
house; he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight.

2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? for ye
are the Temple of the Living God; as God has said, I will dwell in them, and
walk in them, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. Wherefore
come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the
unclean thing, and I will receive you. And will be a Father unto you, and ye
shall be my sons, and my daughters, says the Lord God Almighty.

Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that
which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the
hearers.

Jam. 5.14. Is any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church.
Verse. 16. Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye
may be healed; the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man, avails much.

7. Hearing and Reading the Scriptures. Psalm. 119.92, 93. If my delight had not
been in thy Law; I should have perished in my trouble. I will never forget thy
commandments; for with them have thou quickened me. Trouble and heaviness have
taken hold upon me; yet is my delight in thy Commandments.

Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life.

Acts 8.28. Who [the Eunuch] returning, and sitting in his Chariot, read Esaias
the Prophet.

Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope.

2 Timothy 3.15. From a Child thou have known the Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
Prophecy, and keep those things that are written therein.

The Portion of Holy Scripture that may be seasonably read to the sick, are the
penitential Psalms, (as they have been commonly called) that is to say, the
6th. 32, 38, 51, 102, 130, 143. The 15, 39, 90, 103. Job 14. Mit. 26, and 27.
Mark 14, and 15. Luke 22, and 23. Joh. from chap. 13, to 20.1 Cor. 15.

8. Ready and cheerful submission to the will and wisdom of God. Job 1.21. And
Job said, Naked came I out of my Mothers womb, and naked shall I return
thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the Name of
the Lord. Chap. 33.13. Why do thou strive against him? for he gives not
account of any of his matters.

Isa. 39.8. Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good is the word of the Lord which
thou have spoken; he said moreover, for there shall be peace and truth in my
days.

Jer. 18.6. O House of Israel, cannot I do with you, as this Potter, says the
Lord? behold, as the Clay is in the Potters hand, so are ye in mine hand, O
House of Israel.

Luke 1.38. And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me
according to thy word.

Phil. 1.20. As always, so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body,
whether it be by life, or by death.

Heb. 12.1, 2. Wherefore seeing we are also compassed about with so great a
cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so
easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us.
Looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our faith, who for the joy that
was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at
the right hand of the Throne of God.

9. Thankfulness for chastisement. Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the man whom thou
chastenest, O Lord; and teach him in thy Law. Psalm. 119.67. Before I was
afflicted I went astray; but now I have kept thy word.

Heb. 12.8. If ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are
ye bastards, and not sons.

Eleventhly, The exercise of the duty of prayer, as a special means to procure
for him, what is necessary for his present condition; As

1. Help against temptations. Psalm. 22.11, 14, 16. O go not from me, for
trouble is hard at hand; and there is none to help me. I am poured out like
water, and all my bones are out of joint; my heart also in the midst of my
body is even like melting wax. For many dogs are come about me; and the counsel
of the wicked lays siege against me.

Mat. 26.41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation. The spirit
indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

Luke 22.31, 32. Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat.
But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.

Joh. 17.20. Neither pray I for these alone; but for them also which shall
believe on me through their word.

Heb. 2.17, 18. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest, in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the People. For in
that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted.

1 Pet. 5.8, 9. Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the Devil, as a
roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist steadfast in
the faith.

Rev. 12.12. Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea; for the Devil
is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knows that he has but
a short time.

2. Ease and comfort under bodily pains, and anguish of mind. Job 7.20. I have
sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou Preserver of men? why have thou set
me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my self?

Psalm. 72.1. In thee, O Lord, have I put my trust, let me never be put to
confusion; but rid me, and deliver me in thy righteousness, incline thine ear
unto me, and save me. Verse. 2. Be thou my stronghold whereunto I may always
ways resort; thou have promised to help me, for thou art my house of defense,
and my castle. Verse. 5. Through thee have I been holden up ever since. I was
born; thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb, my praise shall be
always of thee. Verse. 8. Cast me not away in the time of age; forsake me not
when my strength fails me. Verse. 10. Go not far from me, O God; my God, haste
thee to help me. Psalm. 109.20. Deal thou with me, O Lord God, according to thy
Name: for sweet is thy mercy. Verse. 21. O Deliver me, for I am helpless and
poor: and my heart is wounded within me. Verse. 22. I go hence like the shadow
that departs: and an driven away like the Grasshopper. Verse. 23. My knees are
weak through fasting: my flesh is dried up for want of fatness. Psalm. 141. 1.
Lord I call upon thee, haste thee unto me: and consider my voice when I cry
unto thee. Verse. 2. Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as the incense: and
let the lifting up of my hands be an evening sacrifice. Verse. 9. Mine eyes look
unto thee, O Lord God; in thee is my trust, O cast not out my soul.

3. Perseverance. Psalm. 40.14. Withdraw not thou thy mercy from me, O Lord: let
thy loving kindness and thy truth always preserve me. Verse. 15. For innumerable
troubles are come about me, my sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am not
able to look up: yea they are more in number than the hairs of my head: and my
heart has failed me. Psalm. 145.14. The Lord upholdeth all such as fall: and
lifts up all such as be down. Verse. 17. The Lord is righteous in all his
ways: and holy in all his works. Verse. 18. The Lord is nigh unto all them that
call upon him: yea, all such as call upon him faithfully. Verse. 19. He will
fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry and will
help them. Verse. 20. The Lord preserves all them that love him: but scatters
abroad all the ungodly.

Mat. 24.13. He that endures unto the end, the same shall be saved.

Romans 11.20. Thou stand by faith. Be not high-minded but fear.

1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above
that you are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape that
ye may be able to bear it.

Phil. 1.3. I thank my God upon every remembrance of you. Verse. 4. Always in
every prayer of mine for you all, making request with joy. Verse. 5. For your
fellowship in the Gospel from the first day until now; Verse. 6. Being confident
of this very thing, that he, which has begun a good work in you, will perform
it until the day of Christ Jesus, Verse. 7. Even as it is meet for me to think
this of you all.

Ezekiel. 36.37. Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be inquired of by
the house of Israel, to do it for them.

4. A quiet departure out of this life. Genesis 49.33. When Jacob had made an end
of commanding his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up
the Ghost, and was gathered unto his People.

Job 5.26. Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn
comes in, in his season.

Luke 2.29. Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation. Chap. 23.46. When Jesus had cried with a loud voice,
he said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. And having thus said, he
gave up the ghost.

Acts 7.59. They stoned Steven, calling upon God and saying, Lord Jesus receive
my spirit. Verse. 60. And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord,
lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had said this, he fell asleep.

Rev. 22.20. He that testifies these things, says, surely, I come quickly.
Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus.

THe Minister must not fail to press the sick person to receive the Holy
Eucharist; and to open to him the comfortable Doctrine, the Scripture holds
forth, in that blessed Ordinance; this being the fittest close for the life of
him, whose constant business it has been (as of all good Christians) to labor
for pardon, and grace; the Benefits, sealed to Believers in that Sacrament by
Him, who purchased them for us with his most precious blood; as in that
Commemorative Sacrifice is most lively represented to us. The Institution
whereof, so nearly preceding the Passion of our Blessed Redeemer, does
recommend the use of these Holy Mysteries unto Christians, as very seasonable
at that time, when they are upon putting off their earthly Tabernacles, their
corruptible Bodies; in expectation of a joyful Resurection, and Exaltation unto
life Eternal; whereof this Holy Sacrament was, by the Primitive Fathers of the
Church, esteemed a sure, and sacred Pledge.

A most comfortable Preparative whereunto (if heartily desired, and cantiously
and reverently administered) is the Benefit of Absolution. Which deserves not to
be the less esteemed, or the more neglected, for whatsoever abuses it has
heretofore been liable unto; when both Priest, and People believed more of the
Sacerdotal Power, than was consistent with so great a Trust committed to the
one, and so strict a disquisition required from the other; lest the Minister
might be Partaker of other men's sins; 1 Timothy 5.22. and the People delude
themselves, with unsincere and fruitless Repentance; 2 Cor. 7.10, 11.

A Prayer to be used in a state of Health.
O Father of lights, from whom comes every good and perfect gift: Thou art he
who tookest me out of my Mothers womb, and by thee have I been holden up ever
since I was born. The blessings of health and strength, that I enjoy, are from
thy goodness and bounty. And for them, and all thy other mercies, I bless and
praise thy ever-great and glorious Name. Most humbly beseeching thee to add to
these, that blessing of blessings; the right use of all thy blessings: That
through the comfort and assistance of that health, and strength thou have given
me, I may become the more diligent and faithful, in the practice of those
several duties of piety, justice, and charity, which thou requirest at my hands.

And suffer me not, O Lord, to deceive my self by a false account of the time
of my Pilgrimage; but so teach me to number my days, that I may apply my heart
unto wisdom: that I may readily discern the vast difference between this span
of life, and the infinite spaces of eternity: between the pleasures of sin for
a season, and the everlasting fullness of joy in thy presence.

And for this end, remove far away from me all those vices, to which health and
ease are apt to betray me: especially all carnal security, lust, pride, anger,
want of compassion, misspending my time, forgetfulness of thee, and of thy ways
and works: And implant in my mind the daily remembrance of death, and judgment;
the necessity of working out my salvation with fear and trembling; and the
misery of being surpised by the coming of our Lord, in my sins, or fruitless
repentance. So that the health of my body may, through thy blessing, promote
the health of my Soul; and thy augmenting the number of my Talents, increase
both my labor, and reward. That passing the time of my sojourning here in
fear, I may treasure up for my self such spiritual strength and consolation, as
may stand me in stead, when I shall lie down on my bed of sickness and death;
administering comfort to my soul in the conscience of well doing; which thou
have promised us to accept and reward, through thy mercies in Jesus Christ, our
only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

A Prayer when one perceives himself to be sick.
O Lord my God, I have learned from thy Holy Word, and by daily experience in
this vale of misery, that dust I am, and unto dust I shall return; that I must
put off this earthly Tabernacle; and that thou will bring me to death, and the
house appointed for all living. And now, Lord, I feel in my self the usual
summons thy good providence does give us, to review our accounts, and to sit
our selves for death and judgment. Blessed be thy Name for this thy mercy! that
thou have not taken advantage of me, whilst I was thine enemy, to cut me off
suddenly in my sins, and hurry me hence in mine iniquity; but have given me the
time, means, and I trust, grace for repentance and amendment of life. And
though I have not improved (such has been my negligence and sloth!) these rich
favors, to that great advantage I might, and should have done; yet I beseech
thee; O Lord, for thine infinite mercies in thy son Christ Jesus, that thou will not be extreme to mark what I have done amiss, and to lay my sins to my
charge; but that thou will deal mercifully with me, thy most unworthy servant,
blotting out all my sins and transgressions, that none of mine iniquities may
be mentioned unto me, in that great and terrible day of Recompenses.

And forasmuch as thou alone, in whose hands our times are, do know, what
will be the issue of this my present distemper, and sickness; cause me to
reflect on it, as proceeding from thy Will, and Wisdom; and cheerfully and
thankfully to submit to this chastisement, as a means appointed by thee, for
the benefit and comfort of my Soul; and vouchsafe unto me that grace, which may
enable me to receive profit thereby; and from experience of thy goodness
toward me, to gain hope and confidence of thy love. And if thou have reserved
for me the blessing of restoring me to my former health, (which I beseech thee
to do) direct me to the use of such means, as thou will make effectual for that
end. But if the days of my warfare are accomplished; prepare me, O Lord, for a
safe, quiet, and comfortable departure out of this life; and fit me for thy
prefence, and glory. O Lord, strengthen me against all the malicious practices,
and devices of my subtle, and implacable enemy; against all errors, and
delusions of my understanding; the allurements of this World, inordinate love
of this miserable Life, and the terrors of Death; by filling my heart with
Divine comforts, by strengthening my Faith in thy mercies, through Christ
Jesus, by representing to my thoughts his victory over Death; and those
unconceiveable, and endless joys, which thou have prepared for them that love
thee. That neither life nor death, hight nor depth, things present nor things
to come, may be able to separate me from the Love of God which is in Christ
Jesus, our Lord and only Blessed Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Prayers to be used in a Family.
A Morning Prayer.
O Lord and heavenly Father, who renewest thy loving kindness unto us from day
to day, making the outgoings of the Morning and Evening to praise thee; We give
thee humble thanks for the dispensation of thy loving providence over us,
vouchsafed unto us in our preservation this night, and the comfortable rest
wherewith thou have refreshed our frail bodies. Humbly beseeching thee to
pardon unto us, whatsoever sins the subtilty and malice of Satan, or our own
corrupt nature, and vain imagination have made us guilty of this night, and all
the times, and days, and nights of our lives, until this present hour.

And we most humbly beseech thee to make this, and all other thy good mercies
bestowed upon us, serviceable to the advancement of thy glory, and the good of
thy Church: That we may not by wasting any of thy precious Talents vouchsafed
unto us, or by abusing, and misapplying the comforts thou give us, render our
selves accountable to thy dreadful Majesty, as well for the good we have
received, as for the evil we have committed. But let all the good things thou
have done unto us, (vile and miserable sinners) increase a love of thy Divine
Majesty in our hearts; and perfect the practice of true holiness, and
righteousness in our conversation, through the merits and intercession of Jesus
Christ, our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Almighty God, by whose Spirit the whole body of thy Church is governed and
sanctified, receive the Supplications and Prayers, which we humbly offer to thy
Divine Majesty, for all estates, and conditions of Men, in thy Holy
Congregation.

Particularly, for all Christian Kings, Princes, and Governors; more
especially for thy Servant Charles, our King, That they may be preserved from
all Treachery and Violence; and that they may use their Power for the
encouragement of them that do well, and for a terror unto evil doers. For
Subjects, that they may submit unto the higher Powers for conscience sake, as
being ordained of God. For the Nobility and Gentry, that they may give good
examples, as they are great in Place. For the Clergy, that their holiness may
be according to the Shekel of the Sanctuary, and that they may be able to
divide the Word of truth aright, giving unto every one his portion in due
season. For the Rich, that they may be ready to give, and glad to distribute,
laying up for themselves treasures in Heaven. For the Poor, that they may be
diligent, honest, and contented; and that there be never wanting those, who
will strengthen the hands of the Poor and Needy. For the Fatherless and Widows,
that thou would be a Father to the one, and an Husband to the other. For the
Labouring-Man, that thou would give him an healthful body, a patient mind,
and that thou would prosper unto him the work of his hands. For those who are
at ease, that they may beware of the sins of Sodom, Pride, abundance of
Idleness, and fullness of Bread. For the Prisoners and Captives, that their
bread may not fail, and that the hearts of their Brethren may not be hardened
against them. For the sick in Body, that they may cheerfully submit to Gods
afflicting hand, and that their patience may have its perfect work. For those
who are in health, that they may not remove far from them the evil day, but may
show themselves wise in considering their latter end. For those who are
afflicted in mind, that thou would help them to put on the Breast Plate of
Faith, and for an Helmet, the hope of Salvation, and that thou would make
them to see thy faithfulness, in not permitting them to be tempted above what
they are able to bear. For Parents, that they may be careful to provide for the
welfare of their Childrens Souls and Bodies, bringing them up in the nurture of
the Lord. For Children, that they may love, honor, and reverence their
Parents, obeying them in all things. For Husbands, that they may love their
Wives as their own bodies, not being bitter against them; but giving them
honor, as to the weaker vessels, and being heirs together of the grace of
life. For Wives, that they may reverence and be in subjection to their
Husbands, laboring to be adorned with a meek, and quiet spirit. For the
Unmarried, that they may not spend their precious Talents in the pleasures of
sin, and vanity of life; but that they may be pure and spotless, attending upon
the Lord without distraction. For the Ancient, that they may be sober, grave,
temperate, sound in Faith, in Charity, in Patience. For the Young, that they
may be sober-minded, reverencing the Aged as Fathers, being ready to be taught
by their wisdom, and experience, and to follow good counsels, and examples. For
Masters, that they may behave themselves prudently, justly, and gently toward
their Servants, as considering that they also have a Master in Heaven. For
Servants, that they may be subject to their Masters with all fear, not with
eye-service, as men-pleasers; but willingly, and from the heart, showing all
good fidelity. For Teachers, that they may watch over the Souls of them who are
committed to their charge, as they that must give an account, that they may do
it with joy, and not with grief. For Learners, that they may esteem highly of
their Teachers for their works sake, improving all opportunities of being
benefited by them. For true Converts, that they may daily grow in grace, being
strengthened with might by the spirit in the inner man. For bare Professors of
Religion, that they may leave off to deny him in their works whom they profess
with their mouths, and that they may have the power, as well as the form of
godliness. For our Friends and Kinsfolks according to the flesh, that being
graffed together in the same common faith, we may together attain unto the
perfection of Charity in the World to come. For our Enemies, that they may not
be rewarded themselves, as they have dealt with us; but that we may melt them
into an affection of us, by returning to them good for evil. For all that have
done good unto us, that thou would remember them, O our God, for their good,
recompensing them with thy Blessings in this life, and eternal glory in the
world to come.

And we most humbly beseech thee, the infinitely wise and all-seeing God, that
thou will of thy great mercy grant all those things, that we have now prayed
for; and all other things, which thou know to be needful both for our
selves, and for others, and for thy whole Church; for the merits and
intercession of Jesus Christ, our only Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

For a Family.
BLessed Lord God, the Father of all the Families of the Earth, who art no
respecter of Persons, but requirest every one to walk faithfully in that
vocation wherein thou have placed him, we humbly beseech thee for thy blessing
on every member of this Family; that each of us may perform his duty, in that
integrity and uprightness of heart, as becomes them, who profess the same
Gospel of thy son Christ Jesus. O drive away, and keep off from hence, as all
other, so especially the sins of this corrupt Age. Let not Atheism,
Drunkenness, Swearing, Pride, Idleness, Hypocrisy, Unclean Lusts, Covetousness,
Lying, or any other sin whatsoever, become a fretting Leprosy in the walls of
this House. But as thou have given us a Blessing above many other our Brethren,
so give us grace to express a more special performance of duty in
acknowledgment thereof. Let the hand of thy good providence be stretched forth
to defend us, in all dangers of Soul, and Body: give us wisdom to discern, and
courage to withstand all assaults of the Flesh, the World, and the Devil: Let
thy Fatherly corrections of us be always an advantage to our Religious
Conversation: Give us thankful hearts for all thy Blessings: And so guide us in
all things with thy merciful hand, that finally we may be brought to the land
of everlasting Life, there to reign with thee World without end, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

An Evening Prayer.
O Most Powerful God and Merciful Father, to whom the light discovers
nothing, and from whom the Night cannot conceal us, but the darkness and the
light to thee are both alike; leave us not, we pray thee, to the dangers and
discomforts of this Night; but let thine eye, which slumbereth and sleeps
not, watch over us for the good, both of our Souls and Bodies. O let not the
darkness of the night, nor the privacy of our retirements betray us to do any
thing unworthy of our Christian calling, and that inaccessible light, in the
presence, and by the power of which, we live, and move, and have our being: But
sit, and prepare each of our hearts, by the inspiration of thy Holy Spirit, to
a constant, and sincere obedience of thy Holy Will; that both in public, and
in private, we may do as becomes an holy seed, and a People zealous of good
works; endeavoring in all things to show our selves mindful of that
inestimable price, which our Lord Jesus Christ has paid for us, vile and
miserable sinners. And we humbly pray thee, O Lord, to pardon, as all other, so
the sins and imperfections of which we have been guilty this day: That if any
of us shall be summoned from the bed of our rest, to that of our death; we may
through thy mercy, have a comfortable, and cheerful passage, from this life of
misery and mortality, unto a life of everlasting happiness, and glory; through
Jesus Christ our Lord, and only Savior. Amen.

FINIS.
A Brief Catalogue of Books newly Printed and Reprinted for R. Royston,
Bookseller to his Most Sacred Majesty.
THE works of the Reverend and Learned Henry Hammond, D. D. containing a
Collection of Discourses chiefly Practical, with many Additions and Corrections
from the Author's own hand; together with the Life of the Author, enlarged by
the Reverend Dr. Fell Dean of Christ-Church in Oxford. In large Folio.

S Y'MBOLON THEOLOGIKO'N.

Or, a Collection of Polemical Discourses addressed against the Enemies of the
Church of England, both Papists and Fanatics, in large Folio, by Jeremiah
Tailor, Chaplain in Ordinary to King Charles the First of Blessed Memory, and
late Lord Bishop of Down and Conner.

Animadversions upon a Book, Entitled, Fanaticism Fanatically imputed to the
Catholic Church, by Dr. Stillingfleet, and the Imputation Refuted and Retorted
by S. C. The Second Edition. By a Person of Honor. In Octavo.

A Serious and compassionate Inquiry into the Causes of the present Neglect and
Contempt of the Protestant Religion and Church of England. In Octavo.

Reflections upon the Devotions of the Roman Church. With the Prayers, Hymns and
Lessons themselves, taken out of their Authentic Authors. In Three Parts. In
Octavo, New.

The Christian Sacrifice, and the Devout Christian, and Advice to a Friend,
these last three Books written by the Reverend S. P. D. D. in 12.


