M. VAL. MARTIALIS.

LONDON. Printed for Henry Bonwicke.



EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL, ENGLISHED. With some Other Pieces, Ancient and Modern.

Dicitur and nostros cantare Britannia versus.

Mart. Lib. IX. Ep. 4. On the Frontispiece.
Whose chance it is, to take in hand this Book,
In the Satyric-Mirror let him look;
Wherein, if Wise, with much delight he will see,
From what fond Vice his Nobler Soul is free:
If Foolish, he will astonished be to find,
A Stranger better knew, than he, his Mind:
And if he flys from so severe a School,
To wink, boots not, when others see the Fool.
LONDON, Printed for Henry Bonwicke at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1695.

TO THE READER.
On Translation in General.
HE that Translates, than he that Writes, does more;
For he must please upon a double Score;
That of his Author first, then on his own,
Hold out compared, be Good when read alone.
When he that from his Brain does first endite,
Has paid all Debts, if well he does but write.
Translation then a Comment ought to be,
Not only change the Tongue, but Author free
From Darkness; clear his Sense, sometimes improve:
For if the Second Pen soar not above
His lowest Stoops, 'twill never that Grace repay,
Which in the Work, too often, will slip away.
But then, who will translate to this Degree,
Be held the Author's Second Self to be,
Must not cleave servilely to every Phrase,
And think, therein, he has deserved the Bays:
Sometimes, it is true, a Word's an Epigram,
There he must Sweat, till he express the same
With like Felicity: But on each Word
Who equal Pains and Travel shall afford,
And thinks't a Mastery the same to hit,
Will often spend Cost on Weakness 'stead of Wit;
Make his Verse strut, and pride it in that part,
Which was the Author's Shift, perhaps, not Art.
Some things will bear, some will require a Change
And the chief Purpose will appear less strange
I^ new Terms, than its own. A nobler Aim
He will pursue, if he shall seek a Name,
By keeping of the Force, not Words; the Wit
And Grace, and evermore the Genius hit,
That powerful Thing so hard it is to expound,
But in whatever is well Writ, is found.
But then no Law with them will e're dispense,
Who wildly ramble from the Author's sense;
Not only shift his Phrase, but leave his way;
Follow not his, but their own Phancies sway;
Little regarding what they undertook,
Namely, to English, not to write a Book.
To such we say, Martial we hoped to see,
His Epigrams, not those were writ by Thee.
Obj. But the Author seems sometimes to droop and drowz.
Ans. If there a brisk but wary Touch do rowz
His Vein, the well-plac'd judgment all will praise,
And with his Worth your Own you will jointly raise.
But when he is exc'llent, if you balk or range,
Write what you will, none will accept the change,
But rigidly the Author's Sense require.
As he that of a Painter shall desire
To copy some much-loved or honored Face,
Unlikeness will not please with better grace.
Although, alas, what some more graceful deem,
Mere Blunders, and not Master-strokes do seem.
How Rash must he be then, who nothing fears,
To change a Work approved a thousand Years?
But, when he faithfully should the Text express,
Preferrs to show himself a Beau in Verse;
And with such confidence does act this part,
As if his Error were a Rule of Art.
Others there are, who to this Work address,
With more pretense, but with as small success:
Who, when it is their Province to explain
The Author's Excellence and noble Vein,
His beaut'ous Schemes to best advantage show,
Their Pains in searching Manuscripts bestow;
To criticize upon the Text affect,
The Poet not to illustrate, but correct;
Think if their Toil retrieve from Mould and Rust,
Some Various Reading long obscured in Dust,
They Have reached the highest Point, though naught it tend
TO improve the Sense, or any grace to lend.
What boots it, how the words are understood,
If the exchange produces nothing good?
These Men's Abilities their Margents speak,
Their Notes are learned, their Version dull and weak.
Do ask, If I have all these Laws obeyed?
They Have been my aim, however I have strayed.
TO THE READER.
On the Present Translation.
WHo, for the Public View, employs his Pen,
Writes to as many Judges, as to Men;
To those know more than he, to those know less;
To those are skilled, to those can only guess;
He must submit (although he lose his Cause)
To trifling Phancies, as to equal Laws:
Nay, and as if the Objections were too few,
Himself, against Himself, must find out new
And curious ones, such as much Pains have taught,
And great Experience only could have brought:
And answ'ring all, he is yet not freed from Fear:
For when thus armed at every Point, even where
He least does think of Wounds, the fatal Steel
(Though like Achilles dipped) will find his Heel.
Thus I am charged --
Cens. -- From the Author thou do range,
His Sense abridge, enlarge, and sometimes change.

Trans. If, as thou say, I did not sometimes stray,
I often should lose the End, to keep the Way;
And though the Author, to Translate, might boast,
His Wit would vanish, and his Drift be lost.
Again, where he does blaze, though tax, that Sin,
The Heathen World was so engulphed in,
If any escaped the knowledge often before,
I like'd not that my Pen should teach them more.

Cens. But while this Sin thou fondly do detest,
Thou slight'st his smartest Epigrams and best.

Trans. Who shall translate Martial's licentious Rage,
Unless he also could translate the Age
In which he lived, with Vice 'twould him oppress,
Who never against Decorum did transgress.
But this so little we observed do find,
Men speak the Author's Words without his Mind:
For whereas he with Gall the Vice did press,
They set it forth exalted in their Verse;
No scruple make to bring it into Vogue,
Brand not and lash, but glorify the Rogue;
Bold Nomenclators they delight to show
Themselves of Vice, but little Good to know;
And if we rightly their Performance state,
It Is their Lewd Selves, not others, they translate.

Cens. Yet with some looser Touches you dispense.


Trans. Conclude not that I break my Rule from thence:
But as a Painter, that will likeness take,
Must not refuse in the Face a Scarr to make,
If such he finds: So I engaged to draw
Martial's Resemblance, fettered by this Law,
Some Tracts must take, which not so comely be,
That those who see the Piece, may say, It Is He;
And though I his Obsceneness do omit,
Have merry, though not wanton, Martial hit.

Cens. You might have let the Work wholly alone.


Trans. O candid Censor! in amends for one
Default, how many Noble Precepts shine,
How many sharp Reproofs enrich each Line?
When the flat Preacher does exhort in vain,
A thousand Vices by his Verse are slain,
And Virtues taught; Men rather would be dead,
Than in his Poem branded and ill-read.

Cens. Often thou insertest Verses of thine own,
Ambitious that the Author them should own.

Trans If in some parts I have the Text enlarged,
My Margent's fair, and with few Notes is charged:
Nor do I rove from the prescribed Intent,
But plainer show what 'twas the Poet meant:
Which Glosses, though not Children of his Brain,
Yet for his Childrens Children may be taken.
And who the Latin, vainly shall contend,
In as few English words to comprehend;
Against this Evil he will never fence,
But render often a cramped abortive sense;
And when his Author and himself h'as vexed,
His Version shall be dark, though clear the Text.
Heaps of dry Names, in part too, I omit,
When more they clog, than they advance the Wit;
Customs, again, I change, when exolete,
Coins, Names of Fishes, Fowls, and various Meat,
Of which best Critics doubt, although they treat:
For in those times, though these were known to all,
Now for a tedious Comment they do call;
Which no more grateful way I could prevent,
Than by a Modern pat Equivalent.
Censure not then the Changes that I make,
If they illustrate, from the Sense not take;
In Zeal to Martial load me with Dispraise,
Where he himself, alive, would give me Bays.
When to speak English, is imposed my Task;
It Is foolish to affect a Roman Mask.
And, learned Censor, thou were not my Care
In this, who can the Original compare,
But who their Mother Tongue do only know,
And further than I lead them, cannot go.

Cens. Epigrams thou disorderd'st without cause.

Trans. Nor for their Order know I any Laws:
If Fancy place a few, Reason can none;
Beside, of Fifteen Books, I make but The first Design was so.
One.

Cens. Thy Verse is rough and harsh --

Trans. -- With this dispense,
I forfeit Number often, to give thee Sense,
And Meter too, it fuller to impart,
Though I poclaim thereby my want of Art.
And often the Craggy Epigramick Strain
Will not allow a smooth Maronian Vein:
And who a flowing Verse shall here affect,
The Sting, the Force, the Genius, must neglect.

Cens. Then to this Paradox we must agree,
Epigrammatist and Poet none can be.

Trans. No; but this Truth, by whomsoever spoke,
Martial and Virgil it is in vain to yoke.

Cens. All who this Work have hitherto essayed,
Martial have not translated, but betrayed;
Debased his Muse, and all the Good they have done,
They Have forestalled others, and no Glory won.

Trans. The vain Attempts of such as go before,
The Generous and Brave encourage more;
And more Illustrious still is his Renown,
Who takes, when many are repulsed, the Town.
But here is no forestalling in the Case,
Every new Pen may start, and show, new Grace.
The Wits of Old would share among a Score
One Epigram, and thought their Pains so poor,
That Trial yet was left for Hundreds more.
And if thou wilt show the Age, by doing better,
Naught yet is done, it will be still thy Debtor.

Cens. Thou but few Epigrams, and not chosen well,
Do to the World present --

Trans. -- Those that Excel
To nobler Pens I leave; which I wish may
Far outdo mine, and every weak Essay
The World has known. Nor shall I grieve to see,
On this Account, my Leaves condemned to be
Mantles for Soap and Spice, Carpets for Pyes,
While in the Desk the Illustrious Version lies,
Adorned with Art and Cost, rich Gilt and Strung,
The Applause and Joy of every Ear and Tongue.

TO THE Judicious READER.
THat with no Verses I come ushered forth,
Proceeds not from Opinion of my VVorth:
But for such Grace I did forbear to sue,
'Cause Friends write all they can, not what is due;
And in these Cases it is always known,
They show not the Author's Merit, but their own.
But if that Thou, on prospect of my Book,
Shall Martial take, and on the Latin look,
And say, A just Translation I have made,
Diluted not the Force, nor Grace betrayed.
Such Words, without Hyperbole of Praise,
Will heap upon me a whole Grove of Bays.
EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL ENGLISHED.
LIB. SPECTAC.
Epigr. 1. On Caesar's Amphitheatre.
EGYPT, forbear thy Pyramids to praise,
A barbarous Work up to a Wonder raise;
Let Babylon cease the incessant Toil to prize,
Which made her Walls to such immensness rise;
Nor let the Ephesians boast the curious Art,
Which Wonder to their Temple does impart.
Delos dissemble too the high Renown,
Which did thy Horn-fram'd Altar lately crown;
Caria to vaunt thy Mausoleum spare,
Sumptuous for Cost, and yet for Art more rare,
As not borne up, but pendulous in the Air:
All Works to Caesar's Theater give place,
This Wonder Fame above the rest does grace.
Ep. 2. On the Public Works.
Where the Etherial Coloss does appear,
The towering Machin to the Stars draw near,
The hated Court, which so much Blood did spill,
Late stood; one House the City seemed to fill!
Where the stupendous Theatre's vast Pile
Is reared, there Nero's Fish Ponds were e'er-while.
Here, where the Baths, a great, yet speedy, Gift,
All Men admire, (the People left to shift
For Dwellings) late was a proud ample Space,
Reserved to boast an insolent State and Grace.
Where now a goodly Tarras does extend,
The City both with Shade and Walks befriend,
Was but the Courts Fagg and expiring End.
Rome's to it self restored; in Caesar's Reign,
The Prince's Pleasures now the People gain.
Ep. 3. To Caesar, exhibiting Shows.
What Land's so barbarous, Caesar, so remote,
Whose Natives come not to admire thy Court?
Rough Thracians hither from Mount Hemus speed,
Fierce Tartars, who on Flesh of Horses feed;
Who the Nile drink at the first Spring and Head,
Britains from utmost Thule hither led;
Arabs make haste, Cilicians posting come,
And in their Saffron Showers are drenched at Rome;
Germans with rolling Locks in knots up furled,
Ethiops after a different manner curled.
Various their Voices sound, but Hearts, we see,
And the whole Jargon, does in One agree,
When Father of thy Country All style thee.
Ep. 4. To Caesar, upon his banishing Informers.
The hateful Crew to Peace and sweet Repose,
Informers, anxious Wealth's molesting Foes,
(The Lions not sufficing to destroy
The Numerous Caitives, that did all annoy)
To the Isles, and furthest Africa are sent,
And those that caused, now suffer, Banishment.
Thus while from Rome, sad Exiles, they do stray,
Even Life, among Caesar's Boons, we reckon may.
Ep. 6. To Caesar, on a Woman's fighting with a Lion.
It Is not enough, in this our Martial Age,
That Men, but Women in fierce Combat gage.
Among the noblest Acts Fame does resound,
Alcides laid a Lion on the Ground.
Let Fables cease: Caesar, at thy Command,
This has been acted by a Female Hand.
Ep. 10. On a Lion that hurt his Keeper.
A traitorous Lion on his Keeper flew,
In him that fed him, durst his Teeth embrew:
But Vengeance worthy of his Crime, he found,
Who bore not Stripes, was forced to bear Condemned to be killed in the Theater.
a Wound.
To such a Prince what Manners ought Men show,
Who Beasts commands a Gratitude to know?
Ep. 12. On a Sow that farrow'd through a Wound she received.
IN the public Huntings Caesar did allow,
A Javelin swift transfixt a pregnant Sow.
Straight from the wounded Dam the Litter sprung.
Lucina, call'st thou this, to bring forth Young?
The dying Sow wished that her wounds were more,
That Issues had been made for all her Store.
Who denies Bacchus from the Womb was torn?
A God might well, when Beasts were this way born.
Ep. 13. On the same.
A Pregnant Sow, pierced with a deadly Blow,
Her Life at once did lose, and Life bestow.
How sure an Aim did the dire Steel command!
Lucina, 'twas believed to be thy Hand:
For dying both thy Deities she found,
The Huntress, and the Midwife, in her Wound.
Ep. 14. On the same.
A Sow, her Litter ready to have laid,
Was by a fatal Stroke a Mother made;
The Young, not staying Birth, ran forth the Wound.
How quick a Wit in sudden Streights is found!
Ep. 15. On Carpophorus.
A Boar Meleager which gave thee a Name,
Adds little to Carpophorus his Fame;
Who a vast Bear, rushing upon him, flew,
The Northern Clime a fiercer never knew;
A Lion, which became Alcides hand,
Of immense Bulk he laid upon the Sand;
Also a Pard: And when the Prize was won,
He still was fresh, and could yet more have done.
Ep. 16. To Caesar, On Hercules carried to the Clouds upon a Bull.
That from the Stage a Bull toward Heaven did fly,
Was not the Exploit of Art, but Deity.
A Bull Europa through the Surges bore,
But with Alcides now 'bove Clouds does soar.
The Fact of Caesar, and of Jove compare,
Which of the two shall we pronounce most rare?
Suppose the Burdens even; were that true,
The Lighter loaded swam, the heavier flew.
Ep. 17. On an Elephant's kneeling to Caesar.
That thee an Elephant suppliant did adore,
Who stroke with Terror a fierce Bull before,
To's Keeper's Art, cannot imputed be;
We must ascribe it to thy Deity.
Ep. 18. On a Tyger's killing a Lion.
The rare-seen Glory of the Hircanian Land,
A Tiger, wont to lick his Master's Hand,
In Pieces tore a Lion in his Rage,
A thing not known before in any Age.
He durst not this attempt in Forests high,
Beasts among Men learn greater Cruelty.
Ep. 21. On the Fable of Orpheus acted in the Theater.
What in the Thracian Mount's of Orpheus told,
Thy Theater, Great Caesar, did unfold,
The Rocks were seen to move, the Woods to run,
When to his Harp the wondrous Minstrel sung;
Together with the Trees the Beasts were led,
And hovering Birds circled his Sacred Head.
At last a Bear the Prophet piecemeal tore,
Acted in truth, what fabled was before.
Ep. 25. On Leander.
Leander, cease t'admire the Seas did spare
Thy last-nights Passage, Caesar's Seas they were.
While to enjoy Loves Sweets thou did address,
And boisterous Waves thee threatened to oppress,
Thus, Wretch, the raging Seas thou did implore,
Drown me returning, waft me safely over.
Ep. 26. On the Representation of the Sea and Sea-Gods.
The feigned Sea-Gods sport in the Waves with ease,
Figuring with various Forms the yielding Seas;
One shakes a Trident, while another rides
A Fish, or in a Fish-drawn Chariot Glides.
Barks moved with Oars, Sails swelled with Wind, we see,
Castor and Pollux there appeared to be.
Not real Seas so gratify the Sense,
Thetis taught here, or framed her Realm from hence.
Ep. 27. On Carpophorus.
If former Ages had Carpoph'rus known,
Beside himself, there would have needed none,
The Monsters through the World to have subdued,
Being, in truth, with all that Might endu'd,
Which to the Fab'lous Heroes gave a Name,
Raised Iasons, Perseus, Meleager's Fame.
Theseus, for the Minotaur, had never been crowned;
For the Nemean Lion Hercules renowned;
The Hydra, which so often renewed the Fight,
At first Assault he would have slain outright;
Chimaera, of such various Figures formed,
His powerful Hand would all at Once have stormed;
The Bulls, which from their Nostrils breathed a Flame,
Without a Charm, his Courage knew to tame;
Hesiones devouring Orke to quail,
Andromeda to rescue from the Whale.
Let Poets then their specious Lies relate,
How Jove, a Matchless Hero to create,
Two Nights did turn to one; to him allow
A Term of Life, twelve Labors to go through.
Carpoph'rus Glory yet does his excel,
By whom, in one day, twenty Monsters fell.
Ep. 29. On two Gladiators.
Priscus and Verus, while with equal Might,
Prolonged an obstinate and doubtful Fight,
The People, often, their Mission did desire;
But Caesar from the Law would not retire,
Which did the Prize and Victory unite,
Yet gave them what Encouragement he might;
Largess of Meat and Money did bestow,
Which also among the People he did throw.
In The end, however, the Strife was equal found,
Both fought alike, and both alike gave ground:
So that the Palm was upon each conferred,
Their undecided Valor this deserved.
Under no Prince before we ever did see,
That two should fight, and both should Victors be.
Ep. 30. To Caesar.
My Haste, though faulty, ought thee to appease,
Pardon his Haste, who hasted thee to please.
LIB. I.
Epigr. 1. To Cato.
WHen thou the Wanton Rites of Flora's Feast
Did know, the Peoples License then expressed
Why came thou in, four Cato, among the Rout?
Did enter only, that thou might go out?
Ep. 2. Martial to the Reader.
He whom thou read'st, is he by thee desired,
Martial, throughout the World known and admir'^
For his keen Epigrams: And unto whom
The Indulgent Reader did the Laurel doom,
While yet he lived, and could enjoy his Fame;
When others after Death scarce get a Name.
Ep. 4. To his Book.
In public Hands thy self thou would rather see,
Adventurous Book, than longer stay with me,
Thou know not, ah, the Pride great Rome will show,
Trust me, the Sons of Mars too much do know:
No where both Young and Old so practice Scorn,
Even Children show A proverbial Expression for Censoriousness.
Rhinoceros's Horn.
While loud Applauses, and Reception fair,
Thou hope'st, they will Scoffing, toss thee in the Air.
But thou impatient Blots to undergo,
And my Pen's sharp Corrections still to know,
Thou seek'st through the wide World, Wanton, to rome:
Go then, but safer 'twere to stay at Home.
Ep. 5. To Caesar.
If my Book, Caesar, comes into thy Hand,
Lay by those Looks, which do the World command.
When thou in Triumph rid'st, thou do submit,
To be the Subject of the Soldier's Wit.
My Verses read with so serene a Face,
As Two famous Mimicks.
Thymele and Two famous Mimicks.
Latin thou do Grace.
The Censor does with harmless Pastime bear,
My Leaves are wanton, but my Life's severe.
Ep. 9. To Decian.
Consummate Cato's, and great Thrasea's Strain,
As far as Prudence goes, thou do maintain,
And not thy Breast on naked Swords do run;
What Men judge best, that Decian, thou have done.
He Is not approved, who cheaply dies for Fame;
But without Death, who gets a glorious Name.
Ep. 10. On Cotta.
A pretty, and a great Man, thou would be deemed;
But Prettiness is Littleness esteemed.
Ep. 11. On Gemellus and Maronilla.
Gemellus, Maronilla fain would wed,
Aspires by Prayers, by Gifts, unto her Bed,
By Friends, by Tears: So wondrous fair is she?
Nothing that lives can more deformed be.
What is it that pleases then, and takes his Eye?
She Is rich, and coughs, and gives good hopes she will dye.
Ep. 13. On Regulus.
Near Hercules Fane, and Tibur's cooling Streams,
Where Alba Vapors forth pale sulphurous Steams.
Meadows, and Lands, are seen, a sacred Grove,
Four Miles from Rome, the Muses Care and Love:
A rude old Portico, near to these high raised,
For grateful Shade, in Heats of Summer, praised,
A monstrous Fact committed had well nigh,
As Regulus in's Chariot passed by;
The ponderous Fabric rusht unto the Ground,
And him, and's Train did, only not, confound;
But Fortune did our Plaints, and Curses fear,
Nor equal was the odious Crime to bear.
The Ruin pleases now; which did not prove
While yet it stood, what Care the Gods above
Have of good Men, their Guardianship and Love.
Ep. 14. On Arria and Petus.
When Arria to her Petus gave the Sword,
With which her chaste and faithful Breast sh'ad gored,
Trust me, said she, that I my self have slain,
I do not grieve, it is thy Death gives me Pain.
Ep. 16. To Julius.
Julius, who come not my best Friends behind,
If constant Faith avail, a sincere Mind;
The Term of threescore Years thou have past almost,
And but few happy Days thou yet can boast.
Ill thou deferr'st those Joys may never come,
And which, when past, thou only thine can sum.
Evils on Evils cease not us to ply,
But Joys return not, though they swiftly fly.
Use all thy Force to hold them, yet you will find,
You may as well embrace the Waves or Wind.
That he will live, a wise Man should not say,
To Morrow's late, he ought to live to Day.
Ep. 17. To Avitus.
Some things are good, indiff'rent some, some naught
You read: A Book cannot otherwise be wrote.
Ep. 18. To Titus.
Thou urgest me to plead, do often repeat,
How great it is, a wrong Cause to defeat?
That which the Ploughman does, is also great.
Ep. 19. To Tucca.
Tucca, what strange Delight is this of thine,
To mix the Noblest with the Vilest Wine?
What so great Good, from Bad, did ever receive?
Or of what Good did thee the Good bereave?
Our Throats to cut, may no great Matter be:
To slay Falernum is a high Degree
Of Murder, rich Campanian Wine to abuse,
In The Generous Grape rank Poison to infuse.
Thy Guests may possibly deserve their Bane:
Such Precious Liquor, cannot, to be Slain.
Ep. 20. On AElia.
Four Teeth, as I remember, were thy Store,
One Cough spit-out two, and one Cough two more.
Now safely thou may Cough thy whole Life through,
For the third Cough has nothing lest to do.
Ep. 21. To Caecilian.
What Brutishness is this? when Friends you treat,
They looking on, alone you Mushroms eat.
What on such Gluttony shall I implore?
May Claudiu's Mushroms eat, and never eat more.
Ep. 22. On Mucius Scevola.
When, for the King, his Scribe bold Mucius slew,
In Flames, instead of Blood, he did embrew
His erring Hand. The Foe, not steeled to see(...)
A Prodigy so fell, bad him Go free.
What Mucius, in contempt of Pain, was bold
To act, Porsena fainted to behold.
His Failing Hand thus Greater Glory found,
Had he not Erred, he had been less Renowned.
Ep. 26. On Faustinus.
At length, Faustinus, let the World obtain,
The polished Pieces of thy learned Brain:
Which the Athenian Schools would highly praise,
And our old Sages to the Stars will raise!
Do doubt, t'admit Fame standing at thy Gate?
Thy Labors just Reward to bear, do hate?
That which will After, In thy Time let live;
Too late Men Praise unto our Ashes give.
Ep. 28. To Procillus.
To Sup with me, to thee I did propound,
But 'twas when our full Cups had often gone round.
The thing thou straight concluded'st to be done,
Merry and Sober words counting all one:
Th'Example's dangerous at the highest rate,
A Memorative Drunkard all Men hate.
Ep. 30. To Fidentinus.
It Is said, my Books thou do abroad recite,
As if my Verses thou thy self did write.
Verses I Will Gratis send, let them be mine,
Otherwise buy them, that they may be thine.
Ep. 33. To Sabidius.
I love thee not, but why, I cannot display,
I love thee not, is all that I can say.
Ep. 34. On Galla.
Galla, alone, her Father's Death never weeps,
When any come, in Tears her Cheeks she steeps.
That, Galla, is not Grief, for Praise is shown;
She truly grieves, that grieves when she is alone.
Ep. 36. To Cornelius.
Cornelius, thou complain'st, I Verses write
So loose and wanton, Masters they affright
From reading in the Schools. But these my Books,
Please, if not wanton, none who on them looks,
More than the Marriage Bed, without due Rites,
The Sob'rest Man, or Chastest Wife delights.
Thou may say too, A Nuptial Song endite,
But in the Nuptial Language do not write.
Who ever did Flora gravely dress before?
Or put a Matron's Stole upon a Whore?
To Epigrams much License is allowed,
Nor please they, speaking always in a Cloud.
Wherefore lay by thy Grave and Sourer Mind,
And judge my Sportive Muse in her own Kind;
Geld not my Verse, for foul is his Mistake,
Who a Priapus, Cybel's Priest, would make.
Ep. 37 To Lucanus and Tullius.
If to thee Tullius, or to, Lucan, thee,
Castor and Pollux Fate allowed might be,
Your Pious Strife both mutually would show,
Each before other unto Death would go:
And He whose lot it was to lead the Way,
Live my Time, Brother, and your own, would say.
Ep. 39. On Fidentinus.
The Book, Fidentine, which thou read'st, is mine;
But while thou read'st it Ill, thou make it thine.
Ep. 40. To Decianus.
If a rare Friend I would essay to show,
So faithful, Ages past did only know;
If one imbew'd with Greek and Latin lore,
Whom single Goodness through all Dangers bore;
Guardian, and Friend of Truth, who would not fear;
That Men, of what he asks the Gods, should hear;
Who leans alone on's Virtue great and sound,
Decian is he, in whom all these are found.
Ep. 41. To the Envious.
Who read'st these Lines, from ranc'rous Spleen not free,
May Envy all, and none ever Envy thee.
Ep. 42. On Cecilius.
Thou seem Facetious, to thy self, to be,
But others no such thing, in thee, can see.
What then? Brutish Buffoonery and Rank,
Such as the Cryers show on Tibur's Bank.
That which for Wit among some People passes,
Chaffering for Brimstone, Matches, broken Glasses.
Such as the Sellers of warm Pulse and Meat,
Delight those with, who in the Streets do eat;
Such as from Boys and Butchers you shall hear,
When Pug goes by, the Bag-pipe, and the Bear;
From Ballad-singers of the meanest Strain,
When People make a Ring, to applaud their Vein;
Such as old Bauds do undertake to make,
Whose shameless Impudence, for Wit, some take.
Cease then, at length, fondly thy self to deem,
What none, beside thy self, do thee esteem:
That from Two famous Jessers in those Days.
Caballus thou do bear the Bell,
In Drollery, famed Two famous Jessers in those Days.
Galba, far excel.
It is not given to all, to have a Wit,
True Ralliery in the right Vein to hit:
Who utters sottish Jests, and scurrilous Dross,
Sextus Caballus acts not, but the Horse.
Ep. 43. On Porcia.
When Brutus death Fame unto Porcia brought,
And Friends withheld the Arms, her Sorrow sought.
I thought, said she, my Cato
Father when he died,
Taught ye, that Death to none can be denied.
She spoke, and greedily devoured the Fire:
Go now, officious Throng, vainly conspire
The Weapons to deny, my Grief desire.
Ep. 45. To Stella.
If twice the Hares and Lions sporting be
A Subject, Stella, trivial unto thee,
Revenge thy self upon me with like Fare,
Invite me twice, and set before me Hare.
Ep. 54. To Fidentine.
In The Book thou have filcht from me, one Page alone
Is thine, and to be thine is so well known,
It all the rest proclaims to be purloin'd.
So greasy homespun Cloth to Scarlet joined,
Its Luster, as it wrongs, and does defile
It self, it also renders the more vile:
So Earthen Cups, with Crystal set in place,
The worse they suit, the more themselves disgrace:
In Consort thus ridiculous does show,
Among the Milk-white Swans a Rascal Crow:
A chattring Pies harsh Notes in Groves so sound,
Where Quires of charming Nightingales abound.
I need no Critick's Aid for my Relief,
Thy own vile Verse rights me, and calls thee Thief.
Ep. 55. To Fuscus.
If thou have room to admit a Friend yet more,
Fuscus on all sides thronged with Friends before,
I beg the place: And do not me refuse,
Because I Am new, into the List to choose.
Those that now boast, thy oldest Friends they are,
Had once a time, when they but new ones were.
Look only thou, if he that now does sue
To be thy Friend, may prove an Old and True.
Ep. 56. To Fronto.
Would thou know what my highest Wishes are,
Fronto, the Glory both of Peace and War?
They are, to plough my own, though little, Field;
Small Means to have, which may much Leisure yield.
Will any wise, the Morning Ave pay
To frozen Marbles, ever the break of Day,
Who may unfold, before his Fire, and warm,
Nets loaded from his small, but fruitful, Farm?
Or with his Line may take the Fish alive?
Fetch Amber Honey from the dropping Hive?
Whose propt-up Table by his Hind is pressed
With his own Cates, which unbought Fuel dressed?
May they not love this Life, that love not me,
But aged grow in City-drudgery.
Ep. 58. To Flaccus.
Would know what Temper I to love would choose?
What Maid I like, and what I would refuse;
I neither like the facile, nor the coy;
The Over-hard, nor easy to enjoy.
A mean, 'twixt both, I rather do approve,
She that nor Racks, nor Cloys, the Sweets of Love.
Ep. 63. On Levina.
Levina chaste as Sabins were of old,
Than her strict Husband yet more strict and cold:
While in the common Baths she did descend,
And in those Freedoms many Hours did spend,
She fell in Love; in the cold Streams took Fire;
And burning with a Youth in loose Desire,
She left her Husband, and her virtuous Name,
Helen went thence, Penelope that came.
Ep. 64. On Celer.
Celer, to read my Epigrams, does crave:
But to recite his own's the thing he would have.
Ep. 65. To Fabulla.
Thou Art fair and young, Fabulla, it is true,
And also rich, to give thee but thy Due:
But when of these thou do so often vaunt,
Wealth, Youth, and Beauty, none so much does want
Ep. 67. To one that stole his Verses.
Thou sordid Felon of my Verse and Fame,
So cheap do hope to get a Poet's Name,
As by the Purchase barely of my Book
For ten vile Pence Eternal Glory rook?
Find out some Virgin Poem never saw Day,
Which wary Writers in their Desks do lay
Locked up, and known unto themselves alone;
Not one with Using torn, and sordid grown.
A Published Work can never the Author change,
Like one never passed the Press, that never did range
The World trimly bound up: And such I Will sell,
Give me my Price, nor will the Secret tell.
He that another's Wit and Fame will own,
Must Silence buy, and not a Book that is known.
Ep. 68. To Choerilus.
Thou blam'st me often, that I write too free;
I seem to do so when I write of Thee. Who art so notoriously Vicious.

Ep. 69. On Rufus.
All Rufus Thoughts and Actions Nevia fills,
His Grief, Joy, Silence, all speak Nevia still;
Wherever he feasts, Nevia's in^'s Speech alone,
He wants all Powers, if Nevia makes not one.
Meaning to wish his Father the Good Day,
Nevia my Light, Ave, his Tongue did say!
Nevia read this, and closely smiled thereon,
Why Fool do rave, Nevia's not thine alone.
Ep. 71. To his Book.
Go Book, to Proculus splendid Seat resort,
And, in my Stead, make thy officious Court.
Let not his State and Grandeur thee dismay,
To the Learned no Gate affords an op'ner way,
To Phoebus and the Muses is more dear;
If he shall ask, Why is himself not here?
Reply, I could not (were my Verses slight)
Attend the great, and even such mean ones write.
Ep. 73. On Fidentine.
For Verses, Fidentine, thou stealst from me,
A Poet fain thou would reputed be;
Old AEgle so, well-tooth'd would yet be thought,
When she a Set of Ivory Teeth has bought;
Painted Lycoris to her self seems fair,
Who only with a Gypsy can compare,
On like Account, a Poet thou art named,
And may, though bald, for youthful Locks be famed.
Ep. 77. To Flaccus.
Among my Noblest Friends, thou who have place,
Flaccus, the Offspring of Antenor's Race;
Renounce the Muses Songs, and charming Quire,
Not one of them Enrich those they inspire.
Court not Apollo, Pallas has the Gold,
She Is wise, and does the Gods in Mortgage hold.
What Profit is there in an Ivy Wreath?
Its Fruits the laden Olive sinks beneath,
In Helicon there is naught but Springs and Bays,
The Muses Harps, loud-sounding empty Praise.
What with Parnassus's Streams have thou to do?
The Roman Forum's rich, and nearer too;
There the Cash chinks: But 'bout the Poet's Chai^
The Smacks of Kisses only fill the Air.
Ep. 79. On Festus.
When a foul Gangren seized on Festus Face,
And the Black Venom spread over all the Place;
With unwet Eyes, his weeping Friends he told,
The infernal Shades he purposed to behold.
But then his pious Throat he did not stain
With Poison, nor choose Famin's lingering Pain:
But by a Roman Death he did decree,
(The noblest way) to set his Spirit free.
Far more Renoun'd was his, than Cato's End;
Cato was Cesar's Foe, but he his Friend.
Ep. 84. On Manneja.
That thy Dog loves to lick thy Lips, thou art pleased
He Will lick that too, of which thy Belly's eased;
And not to flatter, and the Truth to smother,
I do believe, he knows not one from to other.
Ep. 85. On Quirinus, a Roman Knight.
Quirinus likes by no Means to be wed,
Yet Fruit desires, and has, of the Marriage Bed.
How can this be? His Maids can solve the Doubt,
By whom he has of Young Slave-Knights a rout
To stock his Farm and Fields. Truly may he
Be styled, the Father of his Family.
Ep. 87. On Novius.
Novius so very near my Neighbor is,
That from my Window my Hand reaches his.
Who does not envy me, that in my Power,
Have thus a Friend to enjoy at every Hour?
But Rufus is not more remote to me,
Who now in Egypt does command, than he.
We never meet; nor in the Town there are,
(However near) yet any Two so far.
It Is requisite, that either he, or I,
Further remove, but so to bring us nigh.
For he that wishes Novius never to see,
Let him his Neighbor, or his Inmate, be.
Ep. 88. To Fescennia.
Lest thy o'er-nights Debauch thy Breath disclose
Thou seek'st, Fescennia, on us to impose,
By eating rich Pasteels, and Amber Plums,
These fur thy Teeth: But when the foul Belch comes
From thy crude Maw, they help thee in no wise,
But the Stink's stronger made by this Disguise,
Doubled, and trebl'd, and does further go.
When thus, thy Tricks discovered, all do know,
Henceforth, to free us from this compound Stink,
Be Sober, otherwise avow'dly Drink.
Ep. 89. An Epitaph on Alcimus.
Alcime, who did in Years yet blooming die,
And, by a light Turf covered, here do lie.
I rear no towering Tombs of massy Stone,
A vain Expense, that Fame confers on None:
But plant frail Box and Palms, whose verdant shade.
Drenched by my Tears, shall be immortal made.
Receive thou then the Monument I give,
A Verse that will unto all Ages live:
And when my Life is spun, and Days expire,
No nobler Monument I my self Desire.
Ep. 90. To Cinna.
Cinna, the art ever wisp'ring in the Ear,
And wisp'ring that which all the World may hear.
Thou laugh'st in the Ear, weepst, quarrel'st, do disput^,
Thou sigh'st in the Ear, do hollow, and art mute:
So far the art gone in this Disease, I swear,
Thou praisest Caesar often in the Ear.
Ep. 92. To Laetius.
Thou blam'st my Verses, and conceal'st thine own,
Or publish thine, or else let mine alone.
Ep. 98. On Nevolus.
When all a Clamor make, at once contend,
Then thou art loudest too, do most pretend
To Have much to say: For this would learned seem.
Have all, a powerful Patron, thee to deem.
Behold, the Court is hushed, now speak you may,
But for thy Client now the ast naught to say.
Ep. 99. On Diodorus.
Thou Have Gouty Feet, yet stoutly do withstand
At Law, and pay'st no Fees the Courts demand.
Is not the Gout, Diodore, in thy Hand?
Ep. 100. To one that grew sordid upon obtaining great Riches.
When yet thou were not worth an Hundred Pound,
So Generous, so Noble, thou were found,
So Sumptuous, that it was the Wish of all,
Calenus, an Estate might thee befall,
Suiting thy Mind. The Gods our Prayers did hear,
And less than in the Compass of a Year,
Vast Wealth, by four dead Friends, was to thee left:
But thou (as if of thousands now bereft,
And not enriched) so sordid strait do grow,
That in a solemn Feast thou did bestow
(Which Annual was, and seven old Friends did treat)
A pound of Leaden Coin, for all thy Meat.
What does this Baseness bid us next to pray?
The Gods would snatch their Ill-plac'd Wealth away?
No; But to give thee many thousands more.
That starve thou may outright in so much Store.
Ep. 104. On the like.
Thou said, when yet thou had not a Knights-Fee,
If Heaven would grant four thousand Pounds to me,
Oh, in what Ease, what Splendour, I would live!
The easy Gods smiled, and the Sum did give.
But then thy Gown was sordid, Cloak threadbare,
Shoes, thrice and four-times clouted, thou did wear;
Of poor ten Olives, some were still set up;
On the same Meat thou used'st twice to Sup;
Lees of Wine served thee, which Vientus bore;
A peny-worth of Pulse, a Penny Whore.
We'll sue the Cheat: Live better, or refund
Unto the Gods; the ast mocked, four thousand Pound.
Ep. 108. To Lucius Julius.
Often, Noble Lucius, thou do this repeat,
The art Idle, Martial, something write that is Great.
Then give me Ease, such as Mecenas gave,
When the like Work from Virgil he would have;
I Will frame a Verse with such immortal Flame,
As to all Ages shall preserve my Name.
The Yoke does pinch that is born in Barren Soil,
The Rich Ground tires, but Sweeter is the Toil.
Ep. 109. To Gallus.
May thy fair Farm (tho beyond Tibur site)
As it does now, thee more and more delight:
My Rooms V^psanian Laurels do behold,
In the which Region I am now grown Old;
A Journey it is, to give thee the Good-Morn,
But such thou art, tho further, to be born:
One Gown-man more, yet were not much to thee,
Tho to detain this One, is much to me.
My Book shall the Early Ave for me pay,
And I Will attend when ended is the Day.
Ep. 110. On Issa, a little Bitch.
Issa's Toyings wittier are,
Than those of Lesbia's Sparrow were.
Issa's Caresses, and her Loves,
Are purer than the Billing Doves.
Than Virgins she is more Soft and Nice,
Than richest Gems of higher Price.
Bitch Issa is to Publius dear,
Bitch Issa has no where her Peer.
Her Whining you would Speaking deem,
She, her Lord's Cares to know, does seem.
Though in his Neck, close to his Ear
She Sleeps, no Breathing he can hear.
When she has need her self to Ease,
Her Lord she courts, that he would please
To set her down, and gently scrapes;
Be sure, no Drop from her escapes.
To Venus she was never inclined,
And hard a Husband 'twere to find
So soft a Bride. Least Death's sad Day
Should wholly ravish her away,
Publius caused her drawn to be,
And Issa you so like may see,
(Do but the Piece with Her compare)
Issa her self you would think were there:
So rare is Arts and Natures Strife,
Both Pictures seem, and both seem Life.
Ep. 111. To Velox.
Too long my Epigrams, thou think are;
Thine, who writ'st none, Velox, are shorter far.
Ep. 113. On Priscus
I styled thee, Lord, and King, while yet unknown,
Plain Priscus, now is the most that thou can own.
Ep. 118. On Lupercus.
As often as I, Lupercus, thee do meet,
With the same Words thou me do always greet.
Thy Epigrams, dear Martial, to me lend,
When for them shall my Boy on thee attend?
But to divert me, I shall read them over,
And speedily again the Book restore.
Out of the Road, remote, three Stories high,
I, near the Pidg'ons in a Garret lie;
Whither to send your Boy, were him to tire,
When nearer you may have, what you desire.
In Forum Iulii is your daily Way,
Where you will see Atrectus Shop display
All Poets Names, your Eye may run them over,
Inscribed, or pasted on his Posts and Door.
My Book, from's Shelves he will hand you at first word,
And for three Shillings, bound and gilt afford.
The Price Three Shillings? muttering low, do say.
The Purchase will not, such my Cost, repay.
Although thy sordid Nature I despise,
I Am forced to say, Lupercus, thou art Wise.
Ep. 119. To the Reader.
He who an hundred Epigrams reads over,
No Ill's enough for him, if he wants more.
LIB. II.
Ep. 1. To his Book.
THree Hundred Epigrams thou might contain,
But who, to read so many, can sustain?
Hear what in Praise of Brevity is said.
First, less Expense, and Wast of Paper's made;
The Printer's Labor, next, does sooner end,
And to more serious Works he may attend;
Thirdly, to whomsoe'er thou shall be read,
Tho naught, not tedious yet thou can be said;
Again, in Length, while thou do not abound,
Thou may be heard, while yet the Cups go-round.
And when this Caution's used, alas, I fear,
To many, yet, thou will too long appear.
Ep. 3. To Sextus.
Sextus says, Naught he owes, and so I say.
He only Owes, who knows which way to Pay.
Ep. 5. To Decian.
O Decian, may I never happy be,
If Night and Day I could not spend with thee:
But two long Miles unto thy House do lead,
Which are made four, when them I backward tread:
Often thou art not at Home, and often denied;
To thy self vacant, or to Business tied.
To walk two Miles, to see thee, is not much,
But not to see thee, and walk four, I grutch.
Ep. 8. To the Reader.
If in my Leaves ought, Reader, to thee seem
Obscure, or which less Latin thou do deem.
To the Printer these impute, not me: Who while
More Books he hasts to vend, cares not how vile.
If yet thou think not him, but me to blame,
Thou fear not Want of Candor to proclaim.
But still my Verse, for naught, thou do decry,
As if what is manifest I would deny.
Naught be they then: But them for good Ones take,
Till thou do show, that thou can better make.
Ep. 10. On Posthumus.
That but with half a Lip thou me do kiss,
I like; and yet can spare the half of this:
And would thou unexpressible Kindness show?
Thy Half-kiss keep, or elsewhere it bestow.
Ep. 11. To Selius.
That such a Cloud you see in Selius Face,
Him treading late, alone, a mournful Pace;
His pensive Looks concealing Grief profound,
That bows him, till his Nose even rakes the Ground;
Makes him often beat his Breast, and his Locks tear:
No Death of Friends has caused this sad Despair,
His Wife's in Health, his Sons are both alive,
And longer than he would, like to survive;
By Bailiff, Tenant, he has had no Loss,
Nor any Way that is known, received a Cross.
Why droops he then, and makes so sad a Moan?
Alas! he, uninvited, Sups at Home,
Ep. 12. On Posthumus.
Why does thy Breath always of Amber smell?
And without Foreign Scents thou art never well.
It justly, Posthumus, may be presumed,
He ever stinks, who ever is perfumed.
Ep. 13. On Sextus.
While Sextus did refuse his Debts to pay,
Both Judge and Advocate bore Bribes away.
Now to discharge all Scores, he makes no stay.
Ep. 14. On Selius.
Nothing does Selius unattempted leave,
When, he is to sup at home, he does conceive.
He trots to the These were all places of great Resort in Rome.
Race; where, Paulus, he will swear,
Thy Feet are swifter than Achilles were.
Nothing here got, the Place of Votes These were all places of great Resort in
Rome.
he tryes,
If Ought will come from the AEsonides.
Where failing too; to the Memphian These were all places of great Resort in
Rome.
Temple next,
Near the sad Heifer, Calves-Head sits perplexed.
Thence runs to the Porch a hundred Props sustain,
To Pompey's Arch and Groves: Nor does disdain
The vulgar Baths, which Gryllus, Lupus, keep,
One on the Hill, the other low and deep:
Where having bathed in all, and all in vain,
No pity'ng God favoring his glutt'nous Pain,
Back to the Race he flies, to see, if there
Some Friend be yet, taking the Evening Air.
The adjoining Porch of various Paintings full,
Shows fair Europa bor'n upon a Bull.
Jove, I adjure thee, by the Virgn bright,
Make forlorn Selius thy That is, kill him: To Sup with the Gods was a Phrase
among the He* then, to be Dead.
own Guest this Night.
Ep. 15. On one that had a sore Mouth.
That when thou have drunk, thou offer'st none thy Glass*
Ought not for Pride, but for good Breeding pass.
Ep. 16. On Zoilus.
Zoilus is sick; His rich Stuff makes him so:
If he were well, what should his Scarlets do?
His Bed from Nile, his Hangings died at Tire?
He Is sick, we may his Sottish Wealth admire.
Dismiss the Doctors, the A Name used proverbially for any Physician.
Machaons all,
To make him well, for my Rug only call.
Ep. 20. To Paullus.
Poems thou buy'st, and read'st them for thine own.
What Is bought, is thine, can be denied by none.
Ep. 21. On Posthumus.
Some thou do kiss, to some extend thy Hand.
Which Grace seek I? The last I do demand.
Ep. 22. On the same.
Phoebus farewell, farewell my merry Muse
Your Poet who adores ye, ye abuse.
Posthume with one Kiss used to let me go,
Pleased with my Verse, now many does bestow.
Ep. 23. On the same.
No; though thou begg'st a thousand times to know,
Who it is by Name of Posthumus does go,
I will not tell. What need I to offend
Such Kisses, and their Fury against me bend?
Ep. 24. To Candidus.
By unjust Verdict were thou guilty found,
To thy Misfortune I Would be strictly bound.
Were thou condemned thy Native Soil to leave,
Through Seas, through Rocks, I Would to the Banished cleave.
But thy Lot's Wealth: Here shall I also share?
Will thou give half? It Is much, if ought thou spare.
In Suffering, I may be admitted One,
But happy, Candidus, thou wilt be Alone.
Ep. 25. On Galla.
Galla to none makes good, to all says, I,
If thou speak always False, to me deny.
Ep. 26. To Bithynicus.
That Nevia coughs, and groans, and finds no Rest,
Letting the Slaver fall upon her Breast;
Thou hop'st, Bithynicus, her Hour is nigh:
Nevia but flatters, she do'nt mean to Dye.
Ep. 27. On Selius, to Rufus.
Whether you plead, or any Work recite,
Hoping to Supper you will him invite,
Selius, your Praises thus like Nets does spread;
``Nothing can weightier, or more learned be said,
``More home, more smart, or yet with greater Grace,
``So would I wish to speak, set in your Place.
Such Words alone can make his Flatteries cease,
You Have gained your Point, for this time hold your Peace.
Ep. 29. To Rufus.
See thou him, Rufus, that does so frequent
The Nobles Seat? from whose bright Gems are sent
Rays to this Place, in twice-dipt Purple goes,
Or Garments whiter than the driven Snows.
Costly Amomum, from whose Locks does flow,
Whose sleek blanched Arms no Hair upon them show?
The Lunar-Buckles were not his of old,
Nor Sandals pinched his Feet, garnished with Gold.
No secret Pain his numerous Patches need;
Look underneath, and him, a Slave, you will read.
Ep. 30. On Caius.
To borrow of a Friend, I did entreat
A Sum, which had he given, had not been great.
'Twas one, whose Chests brim-full of unbag'd Cash,
Being clapped to, do Echo with the Lash.
But he replied, Would plead, Enough thou would have.
Spare Counsel, Caius, give me what I crave.
Ep. 31. On Ponticus.
With Balbus I Am at Law, thou naught dare do.
Licinius next; but he is a great Man too.
Patrobas often trespasses on my Field:
He Is Caesar's Freeman, it is best here to yield.
Laronia my Servant does deny:
She Is rich, old, childless, every Hour may dye.
His Patronage, it little boots, to crave.
Who to so many is himself a Slave.
Ep. 37. On Cecilianus.
Whatever was served of Souce, thou did purloin,
A young Sow's Unctuous Paps, a Porker's Chine,
A fat Heath-Poult, for two designed a Dish,
A Pike, a Mullet, half another Fish,
Tame Pigeons dropping Fat, a Hen with Egg,
A piece of Lampry, and a Capon's Leg.
All which, sto'd in a Clout, committed were
Unto thy Boy, that Home he them should bear.
We, in mean Time, the idle Guests do sit,
And of a costly Feast scarce taste a bit.
If any Shame thou have, restore our Meat:
To Morrow I designed not thee to treat.
Ep. 38. To Linus.
What my Farm yields me, do thou urge to know?
This, that I see not thee, when there I go.
Ep. 40 On Tongelinus.
That Tongelin is feav'rish many think:
I know the Man, he wants choice Meat and Drink.
Strait, for fat Thrush and Cocks, Springes are set,
For Pike and Carp's employed the Casting-Net;
Purveyance for old Caecubum is made,
Such as the sound drink sparing and allayed;
Bathing, Physicians, with one Voice prescribe.
To cure his Fever, Fools, his Belly bribe.
Ep. 41. On an old Woman.
Laugh, lovely Maid, laugh often, if thou art wise.
As I remember, Ovid does advise:
But this to every Maid he never said,
Or if he did, 'twas always to a Maid;
'Twas never spoke to wretched-aged-Thee,
To whom remains, of all thy Teeth, but three,
And those cole-black: Therefore if this do pass
For Truth, informed the same by thine own Glass,
A Smile thou ought to avoid with no less Dread,
Than Gallants fear the Wind for their curled Head;
Than painted Madams fear a dashing Shower,
Or when Pomatum'd, the Sun's Raging Power:
Rather old Hecuba's sad Mood put on,
When Troy was burnt, and all her Glory gone.
Mimicks, and Droles, a Laughter-moving Jest,
What ever makes thee Gern or Gape, detest.
Mourn by your Mother's side, your equal Cross,
Your Father's and your pious Brother's Loss;
Your Hours, in what is sad and serious, spend,
An Ear to Tragic Stories only lend.
The Counsel's good, if to it you can keep.
Weep, if you're prudent, Old Mumps, often weep.
Ep. 44. On Sextus.
Having some small Commodity to buy,
I'th^ 'Change (the Usurer Sextus standing nigh,
My old Cam'rade, you know) lest I should pray
To borrow, for Prevention thus does say,
Softly Computing with himself, but so
As I may hear him. I to Secundus owe
Seven thousand, four to Phoebus, eleven more
To Philet; and I Wretch, have not in Store
One Doit, should now these Men for Money send:
O wondrous Fetch of an old Cankered Friend!
It Is hard, when one is asked, not to supply:
But harder far, when not asked, to deny.
Ep. 46. On Nevolus.
As various Flowers in Spring paint Hyblas Field,
Which to the rifling Bees much Honey yield:
So do thy various colored Garments show,
Which thou, heaped up in Wardrobes, do bestow.
The Woolthou, from more Flocks than one, do sheer,
Would a whole Tribeclothe sumptuously each Year.
Thy thin-clad Friend, unmoved, yet can behold
(O Sin!) tattered, his Sides pierced through with Cold.
Unhappy Wretch, how little would it be,
To givetwo Garments, from Moths, not from thee.
Ep. 48. To Rufus.
Afford me but the Requisites of Life,
Plain Food, and wholesome Air, a pleasing Wife,
Not many Books, but such as I shall choose,
A Friend not wholly rude, my Thoughts t'unloose,
And let my Station in a Village be,
All Rome's Magnificence I Will leave to thee.
Ep. 50. On Lesbia.
Lesbia talks Baudy, and does Water drink,
Thou do well, Lesbia, so to wash the Sink.
Ep. 53. To Maximus.
Thou but feign'st, Maximus, thou would not be Free:
Or if thou would, by these Means thou may be.
Thou shall be Free; if thou at Home can Dine;
If thou can quench thy Thirst with common Wine;
If Rich Men thou can Miserable deem,
And such a threadbare Coat, as mine, esteem;
If in a cheap and vulgar Form delight,
A Room, in which thou scarce can stand upright;
If thy Desires, to this Lure, thou can bring,
Thou may live Freer than the Parthian King.
Ep. 55. To Sextus.
Sextus, thou seek'st Observance, when I Would love;
I shall do that which thou do most approve:
But where I must observe, I cannot Love.
Ep. 56. To Gallus.
Gallus, thy Wife is taxed for the Vice
(Among the Lybians) of foul Avarice:
But she is wronged, and all are Lies they tell,
None cheaper does her self both give and sell,
Ep. 57. On one that acted the great Man.
He, whom you see to walk in so much State,
Waving, and slow, with a Majestic Gate;
In Purple clad, passing the Nobles Seat,
My Publius not in Garments more complete;
Whose new rich Coach, with gilt and studded Reins,
Fair Boys and Gown-men follow in great Trains,
Lately his very Ring in Pawn did lay,
For four poor Crowns, his Supper to defray.
Ep. 58. On Zoilus.
Zoilus, in's Nappy, scoffs my Threadbare, Gown,
It Is Threadbare, Zoilus, but it is yet my own.
Ep. 60. On Hyllus.
You Are o'er-familiar with a Soldiers Wife,
While a Boy's mulct you fear, and not your Life.
Woe to thee! But, you say, Upon what Score?
The Law forbids to castrate any more,
Allows it then to make a Wife thy Whore?
Ep. 64. On Taurus.
While now to Law, to Rhetoric then thou wilt take,
And know not what Profession thine to make;
Thou Peleus, Priams, Nestors, Years do lose,
And when thou should give off, art still to Choose.
Begin; if either Heart thou have, or Skill;
Three Rhetors Chairs are void, one thou may fill:
Or if the Schools dislike, the pleading-Bars
Reek with the Fervor of Litigious Wars;
So much, that Marsya's Statue that is nigh,
May Vocal plead, through the obstrep'rous Cry.
Courage, break-off Delays, when shall we see?
Thou will Demur, till Nothing thou can be.
Ep. 65. To Saleitanus.
Thouseem'st, Saleitane, much to hang thy Head.
Have I not Cause? Thou say, my Wife is dead.
O heavy Chance! O sad Decree of Fate!
She, she! The rich Nicostrata so late
Deceased, who twenty thousand brought in Dowre?
I wish thou had never known this Evil Hour.
Ep. 67. On Posthumus.
Who ever thee, Posthumus, does chance to meet,
Thou say, What do thou? Thus thou all do greet
Ten times an Hour, if met: by which do show,
That thou thy self but little have to do.
Ep. 68. To Olus.
That I salute thee by thy Name, no more
Style thee my Lord and King, as heretofore,
It is not Pride. My Chains and Cap I have
Redeemed, with all the Badges of a Slave.
A Lord and Master he should have alone,
Who, not being Master of Himself, does groan,
Like great Men, after Riches not his own.
Who can, without a Servant, Olus, be,
May also from a King, Olus, be free.
Ep. 69. On a Smell-Feast.
Unwillingly, thou Supp'st abroad. I Will die,
If what thou say be not a splendid Lie.
In others Treats Apicius did Delight,
And, with Regret, at Home did pass the Night.
If thou unwilling art, why do thou go?
Thou Art forced, thou say. All Smell-Feasts are forced so.
Melior invites thee to a Sumptuous Feast:
Where are thy Braggs? Deny: Now is the Test.
Ep. 71. To Cecilianus.
There Is none, than thee, more Candid can be said,
Who when some Parcels in my Book thou'ast read,
From Marsus or Catullus do recite
The like, to show how much I better write,
Compared with them. Thy Good-will's to me known,
But would, thou would read some Verses of thine own.
Ep. 75. On a Lion.
A Lion wont his Keeper's Stripes to bear,
Into whose Mouth, his Hand, without all Fear,
He used to thrust, such Tameness he was taught:
But suddenly so high his Fury wrought,
'Twas 'bove what from the Lybian Clime he brought.
For while two Boys did rake the sandy Floor,
With Savage Rage he both in Pieces tore,
The Theater like Crime never knew before.
Romans may well say, Treacherous Beast forbear;
Of Romulus Wolf young Children learn to spare.
Ep. 77. To Cosconius.
Thou think my Epigrams in length exceed,
To grease the Charret-Wheels, to make them speed.
You Are only fit: Who Poems Lengths do rate
By the Foot-Rule, not Reason, Wit, and Weight.
By the same Law, Colossus, thou may call
Too long, the Figure of a Child too small.
Of Marsus, Pedo, learn what you don't know,
Two Pages, on one Subject, they would bestow.
That is not long, from which thou naught can take,
But, Coscon, thou can long a Distick make.
Ep. 80. On Fannius.
When Fannius from his Foe did fly,
Himself, with his own Hands, he slew.
Who ever a greater Madness knew;
Life to destroy, for fear to Dye.
Ep. 82. On Ponticus.
What vails it thee to make thy Slave a Mute?
Of thy foul Crimes much louder's now the Bruit.
Ep. 85. To a Friend.
A Summer Gift that I in Winter make,
In evil part I would not have thee take;
Or, for my Present hold me for a Clown;
But, while it is Cold, send me a Summer Gown,
Ep. 86. To Classicus.
That I Acrostick's Glory not to write,
In Verses, backwards read, take no Delight;
Make not the Echo in my Verses play,
After the Grecian Poetastring way:
Nor yet soft melting Numbers so respect,
As more the Chime, than even the Sense to affect.
So bad a Poet, as these ways to take,
I am not, Classicus. What Hire would make
Lada for Swiftness famed, so meanly stoop,
To leave the Race, and tumble through a Hoop?
Disgraceful it is unto a Poet's Name,
Difficult Toys to make his highest Aim;
The ^^bours foolish, that does rack the Brains,
For Things have nothing in them, but much pains.
Let Gallus chant, while the Rout make a Ring:
To choicest Ears I only joy to sing.
Ep. 88. On Mamercus.
Thou would a Poet be, yet naught do write,
Be what thou will, so naught thou do indite.
Ep. 89. To Gaurus.
In Profuse Drinking, that thy Nights are spent,
Gaurus, thou Cato have for President;
Tully, for barbarous Verses thou do write,
As if the Muses bore to thee a Spite.
Antony, Apicius, Vomitings did use;
Thy horrid Lust no Patron can excuse.
Ep. 90. To Quintilianus.
Of Giddy Youth, thou Guide of high Renown,
Quintilian, Glory of the Roman Gown,
That I do haste, though Poor, thy License give,
TO enjoy my Life; None haste enough to live.
Who aim t'encrease their Father's Wealth, to throng
Their Courts with Statues, this deferr too long.
I only to these easy things aspire,
A Spring with Natural Turf, a shining Fire,
Servants well fed, a plain unlearned Wife,
Nights passed away in Sleep, Days without Strife.
Ep. 91. To Caesar.
Welfare and Glory of the Earth, while thee
We safe behold, we Gods believe to be:
If my slight Books did ever thee entertain,
And often to read them, thou did not disdain:
What Nature does deny, do Thou bestow,
For Father of three Children make me go.
When my Verse takes not, this will be an Ease,
A high Reward, in case they thee do please.
Ep. 92. To his Wife.
He, Father of three Children, me has made,
And all my Muses Labors richly paid,
Who only could: thee, Wife, I Will not retain,
Least I the Prince's Bounty render vain.
LIB. III.
Ep. 1. To the Reader.
THis third Book, good or bad, what ever it be,
Gallia Togata sends from far to thee.
If, reading this, my former thou do praise,
Both yet are mine, that which least claims the Bays*
Those must excel, born, Rome, within thy Wall,
A Slave of thine, above a freeborn Gaul.
Ep. 2. To his Book.
To whom shall I a Present make thee, Book?
Speedily, for a Patron, round thee look;
Least Cooks, as if waste-Paper or astray,
To wrap up Spices ravish thee away.
Shall Faustine thee protect, do say? Thou Art wise,
Now, richly bound, Contempt thou may despise;
Twisted with Silk and Gold thy Head-bands show
Luxuriously, all gilded over go.
For if Faustinus shall approve of thee,
No Critic fear, tho Probus self he be.
Ep. 3. On an ill Shaped Woman.
Thy Face, that is fair, thou vailst when thou do go
To Bathe, an ugly Body naked show,
Believe the Water Nymph, thee thus does pray,
Bath in thy Clothes, or cast thy Vail away.
Ep. 4. To his Book
Book haste to Rome. Whence come thou? If men say:
Reply, From the Track of the Emilian way.
If they demand the City where I dwell:
Imola or Cornelii Forum tell.
If for what Cause I Am Absent, they enquire:
The Follies of the City me did Tire.
If when I do return: A Poet, say,
I went; when on a Fiddle I can play.
Ep. 5. To his Book.
My Book, while thee to Rome alone I send,
Shall I to many Friends, or one, commend?
One's enough, where no Stranger thou wilt be found,
Julius, whose Name my Tongue so often does sound.
The House, once Daphnis, him does Master call,
You Will find him strait in the first Court of all:
His Wife will thee into her Bosom Store,
Although, with Highway-Dust, all covered over,
If them together, or apart, you meet,
Say only thus, you, Marcus, bids me greet.
This is enough. Who Letters brings, offends;
Thinking he Commendations needs to Friends.
Ep. 8. On Quintus.
Quintus loves Thais. Which? Thais the blind.
As she wants one Eye, he wants both, I find.
Ep. 9. On Cinna.
Cinna, it is said, does Verses write against me.
He does not write, whose Verse none cares to see.
Ep. 10. On Philomusus.
Thy Father knowing thy Luxurious way,
Assigned thee an Allowance for each Day,
Such as thy Table might both stint, and serve,
That neither thou might riot, nor yet starve.
But when he died, he left thee Heir of All.
What greater Mischief could to thee befall?
Thy Disinheriting, thou this may call.
Ep. 11. On Quintus.
If she thou love, nor blind, nor Thais be,
What makes thee think last Distich writ on thee?
If Lais 'twere, and her I Would Thais named,
For such Resemblance I might well be blamed:
But what Similitude do these two bear?
How do Hermione and Thais pair?
But thou art Quintus, and that Name I choose*
Be It so: I always feigned Names do use.
I Will change the Lover's Name if that please more,
Sextus, not Quintus, Thais loves, the Whore.
Ep. 12. On Fabullus.
Thy Odours, I confess, were last Night rare:
But naught to Feast thy Guests thou did prepare,
Of Wit or Folly call'st thou this a Cast?
To give thy Friends Perfumes, and make them fast?
Who are anointed only, and not fed,
No treated like the Living are, but Dead.
Ep. 13. On Nevia.
While Boar to carve, and Mullets thou do spare,
Will It sooner cut thy Father up, than Hare:
But, as if all were crude, thy Cook do beat,
No Crudities they will find, whom thou do treat.
Ep. 14. On Tuccius.
Starved Tuccius from remotest Spain did come,
Full of great Hopes, Plenty to find in Rome:
But at the very Port being told the hard
Duty of Clients, and their lean Reward,
He turned straight his Horses Head again,
With Switch and Spur posted him back to Spain.
Ep. 15. On Codrus.
None trusts so much as Codrus, I do find,
In The Town. How so? He Is Poor. He loves, tho blind.
Ep. 16. On a Cobbler.
An haughty enriched Cobbler durst bestow,
A most profuse, and princely Fencer's-show:
What in his Life he earned by the Awl,
At Sword and Buckler-Fight he made fly all.
Sure thou were drunk; thou could not, Cobbler, play
In any Sober Mood, thy Hide away.
Enough of Shows; now to thy Skins abide:
Fear what befell the Ass in the Lion's Hide.
Ep. 17. On Sabidius.
At second Course, where lately I did Dine,
Hot Tarts were served, so hot, no Hand but thine,
Scaevola.
Mutius, could touch: Sabidius yet, than they,
More hot in Appetite, brooking no stay,
Blew often on them with his poisonous Breath,
Blasts of worse Stench than Rottenness and Death.
After the which, no Man to touch them stirred:
He cooled the Tarts, but turned them to a T --
Ep. 19. On a Boy stung to Death.
In a sweet Grove, where many Shapes were made
Of Savage Beasts, to adorn the pleasant Shade,
A carved Bear with gaping Jaws did stand,
Into whose Mouth young Hylas thrust his Hand;
And, Childish wise, provoked the Bear to bite.
A Viper, lurking in that secret Night,
Quickened the Stone with more than Natural Rage,
And bit the Lad, that fearless did engage.
O heinous Fact! That a dead Bear should do,
What one alive could not be wrought unto.
Ep. 20. On Canius.
Tell me my Muse, how Canius spends his Time
In lasting Leaves, and in immortal Rhyme,
Does he the Facts of Nero rightly state,
From Malice and from Flattery free, relate?
Light Elegies, or grave Heroicks write?
IN the Comic, or the Tragic Strain Delight?
Or in the Poets School does Canius sit,
Regaling all with his choice Attick Wit?
Or else, being free from Study, does he talk
IN the Temples, and the Shady Porches walk?
Bathes he? Or from the City Toil retired,
Are Fields and Rivers more by him admired,
Baias or Lucrins Sweet Recess desired?
Muse. How Canius spends his Time, would have me show?
He laughs at all which most Men, serious, do.

Ep. 21. On a Cruel Master.
A branded Slave unto his proscribed Lord,
In's highest Danger, Safety did afford.
While thus his Goodness did the Cruel save,
Envy with Life unto his Lord he gave.
Ep. 25. To Faustus.
If thy hot Bath, Faustus, thou seek'st to cure,
'Bove what a Paralitick can endure:
Let Orator, Sabinus, enter in
Nero's hot Baths, he will make a cooling Spring.
Ep. 26. On Candidus.
Thy pleasant Farm thou do enjoy alone,
Thy Money, Plate, communicates to none.
Alone, thou, aged Massick Wine do drink,
Alone thy self both wise and witty think:
That all thou have alone, I yet deny,
Thy Wife is Common, or the People ly.
Ep. 27. On Gallus.
That often I thee, thou me do never call
To Sup, I could forgive, if none at all
Tho did invite: But, Churl, thou do afford
To other Guests a frequent well-serv'd Board.
W' are faulty Both. In what, do bid me name?
I for the want of Wit, and thou of Shame.
Ep. 30. To Gargilianus.
Money no more, but Meat the Great bestow,
For what thou stay'st at Rome, I fain would know.
How will thou buy a Gown? Hire a dark Cell?
Pay for thy Bath? A Thais keep, can tell?
Garg. To make a little serve, great Head I Will give.


Mar. Scarce, as things stand, it is worth the Care to Live.


Ep. 31. To Rufus.
Thy Land, I yield, seems boundless to the Eye,
And near the Town thy pleasant Farms do lie.
Numbers of Debtors to thy Lordly Chest,
Croutch, with Choice Fare thy gilded Table's pressed:
Disdain not, Rufus, yet, all that are poor;
There Is greater Rogues than thou that yet have more.
Ep. 32. To Matrinia.
Do ask, if an old Woman I could wed?
An Old I could, Matrinia, not a Dead,
As thou art. Even Niobe I could take,
And Mother Hecuba a Mistress make:
But then before they were transformed so fur.
One to a Stone, the other to a Cur.
Ep. 33. What Wife he would choose.
A Wife of high Descent I first would wed,
For want of such, One Freed should share my Bed,
A Slave the last, yet if she Noble be
In Form; I Would choose her first, of all the Three.
Ep. 34. On Chione, or Madam Snow.
Fit and unfit thy Name to thee does show,
For Black and Cold thou art, Snow and not Snow.
Ep. 36. On Fabianus.
I would not have thee pleat or curl thy Hair,
Through slovenly Neglect, nor Elf-locks wear;
Let not thy Skin with Scurf be over run,
Nicely to blanch and sleek it, no less shun;
An Eunuch's Chin affect not, smooth and bare,
Nor such a horrid Beard as Prisoners wear;
By a Wise Mean avoid the best you can,
To appear less, or yet too much, a Man.
But while thy Limbs we rough and brisly find,
Effeminate and wanton is thy Mind.
Ep. 38. To Sextus.
Mart. What Cause, what Confidence, Sextus, does invite
Thee unto Rome? What Hope, what Aim? Recite.

Sext. Than Tully's self more pow'rfully I Will plead,
And none like Me, shall the whole Forum lead.

Mart. Caius and Atestinus (both you know)
Do plead, but pay not a poor House-rent so.

Sext. If nothing this way come, I Will Verses frame,
You Will say, that Virgil did compose the same.

Mart. Thou Art mad: That cold and tattered Crew you see,
No less than Ovid's all, and Virgil's be.

Sext. Great Men I Will court.


Mart. Scarce two or three do speed
That way, the rest are pale, and starve through need.

Sext. Say, what then? Counsel to a Friend advance,
Men live at Rome.

Mart. The Honest do by chance.


Ep. 39. On Lycoris.
One-ey'd Lycoris Love's more fair than He
Kept Flocks on Ida. How the Blind can see!
Ep. 40. On Telesinus.
For having lent, forsooth, an hundred pound,
From full-cram'd Chests, and Wealth that does abound,
Thou think that thou much Greatness have displayed:
But that the Grandeur's mine, it may be said:
Who being Poor, so great a Sum repaid.
Ep. 42. On Polla.
Thou seek'st with Fard to smooth thy wrinkl'd Skin,
Bedaub'st thy self, and do no Lover win.
Simple Decays Men easily pass by,
But hid, suspect some great Deformity.
Ep. 43. On Lentin.
False-hair thou wear'st to make thee youthful show,
A Swan were yesterday, to day a Crow.
Thou cheats not all, Proserpine knows thee Gray,
Nor will thy Term of Death one Hour delay,
But when it comes, snatch Wig and thee away.
Ep. 44. To Ligurinus.
That every one, to meet thee, is afraid,
And where thou come, a Solitude is made.
Would, Ligurinus, know the Reason why?
Too much a Poet, Men do from thee fly.
And this, I tell thee, is a dangerous Crime,
A Scorpion is not feared, like ceaseless Rhyme;
^n Adder, in the scorching Sun, fresh sprung,
Tiger newly robbed of her young.
^or, Prithee, who such Tediousness can bear?
^hou read'st to those that sit, that Standing are;
^o them that Run, to them that are at Stool;
To those are in the Bath, at the Fish Pool;
that here they cannot Swim, nor wash them there;
^or thee reciting Verses in their Ear.
They haste to Sup, the Goers thou do stay;
Who'd Sup with thee, thou read them away;
Weary, and Sick, they lay them down to Sleep,
Thy Verses rouse them, and then waking keep.
Would know what Mischief this to thee has bred?
Thee, a good Man, Learned, Just, all do Dread.
Ep. 45. To the same.
Whether the Sun Thyestes Table fled,
I know not; but all Men thy Table dread:
And yet it is Sumpt'ous, served with Costly Fare,
But what can Relish, thou Reciting there;
Had thou no Turbut, were thy Mullets less,
Bate Oysters, Mushroms, do but hold thy Peace.
Ep. 46. To Candidus.
Thou do exact, that always I attend:
Though I go not, my Freeman I do send.
Thou say, That Is not the same. But I think, more
When I scarce followed, he thy Litter bore.
You Are thronged: His boisterous Bulk o'erturneth (...)
My Strength's ingenuous, and my Force but sma(...)
Causes thou plead'st: I silently stand by,
He roars redoubled Euge's to the Sky.
Thou quarrel'st: Shame forbids loud Speech to (...)
But he will not stick to Spend his Mouth for thee.
Cand. There Is naught a Friend then should be called(...)


Mart. Yes, what a Slave, Candidus, cannot do.


Ep. 50. On Ligurinus.
But for one Cause thou do thy Friends invite*
That thou thy Verses may to them recite.
We are but set when with the Sallet's brought,
A huge vast Tome, full with thy Poems fraught;
A second's read, while yet the first Course stays,
A third and fourth the second Course delays;
Before we rise, a fifth Book we do see;
Wild Boar, so often served, would nauseous be.
Thy wicked Verse condemn to wrap-up Fish,
^r when thou supp'st alone, make 'em thy Dish.
Ep. 52. To Tongelinus.
Thy House was lately, Tongeline, burnt down,
Chance too freequent in a Populous Town.
^hrice over thy Loss has been repaired by Friends:
^id'st thou not fire thy House, to get Amends?
Ep. 55. On Gellia.
That Shops of Odours seem with thee to go,
And rich Perfumes thou do around thee throw:
Think not this much, it is not thy Natural Smell,
A Dog, like thee, embalmed, would scent as well.
Ep. 58. To Bassus, on Faustinus Farm
Faustinus Farm, O Bassus! is not fraught
With Idle Myrtles, into Order brought;
There no trimmed Box, or barren Plane Tree's found,
To fill a vast unprofitable Ground:
But happy it is in rude and fertile Fields,
Which Ceres Gifts in every Corner yield;
There Vessels fragrant smell with Autumn Fruit;
And when November's past, and Time does suit.
The rough hewed Hind late Grapes does homeward bring,
While Valleys round with lowing Kine do ring,
And Lust, the yet unhorned Herd, does sting.
The straggling Cohorts of the sordid Pens
IN the Yards are seen, Cocks treading Rhodian He(...)
Partridges speckled, Peacocks gay and fair,
Who in their Trains do seeming Jewels bear;
Phesants, which first from impious Colchos came,
The Birds which to Red Feathers owe their Name
Streaked Turkies, Geese loud cackling and shrill,
All with their Noise and grateful Numbers fill;
While the Doves greeting from the Towers you he(...)
Sleek Culvers mourning here, soft Turtles there.
The greedy Swine pursue the Housewife's Pal(...)
And full bagg'd Ews, the expecting Lambs never (...)
Children surround the large Fire shining brigh(...)
Which on the Lares casts a cheerful Light.
None here to Labor, backward are, and ^oth,
None pallid and unhealthy seen through Sloth:
But Gins for Birds, and Lines for Fish prepare,
Pitch Toyls to catch the light-foot Deer, or Hare.
The Orchards plain the merry Maids employ;
Even Boys of the best Rank their Tasks enjoy,
Obey the Bailiff, not constrained by Fear,
But they Delight some Rural-Work to share.
The Rustic there brings not a vain Salute,
But Gifts his Ave speak, while he is mute:
Presents Ambrosian Honey from the Bees,
A Dormouse from the Woods, or a Cream-Cheese;
Ta'n from the Shaggy Goats a bleating Kid,
Or else a Capon, Venus Sports forbid.
The homely Country Maids in Baskets bear
Their Mothers Gifts, something that is choice and rare.
And when the Day is past, and his Work done,
The welcome Neighbor, a glad Guest, does come,
To the frank Board, from which no Meat's set by,
The next day's Scant Provision to supply.
Servants, well fed themselves, from Envy free,
Grudge not, when they the Guests full gorged see.
But, Bassus, thy trim Villa joins the Town,
And for its Paint and Spruceness seeks Renown:
No Country useful Sordures thee annoy,
But Neat and splendid Want thou do enjoy:
From stately Rooms, fair Laurels strike thy Eye,
Which fear not Thieves, were no Priapus by.
And when to see thy Farm, thou Time can find,
With City Meal thou feed'st thy Country Hind:
And Herbs, Eggs, Apples, Cheese, from Rome do bear,
All which thou ought, in reason, to find there.
Call not this Toy thy Country House for shame,
Let the Remote Forlorn House be its Name.
Ep. 60. On Ponticus.
When now a Guest, no Hireling, as of yore,
Me, the same Cheer, why sets thou not before,
Thou do thy self? Oysters are served to thee,
Fatted in Lucrine Lake, but unto me
Muscles, which in Vileness as much excel,
That cut my Lips with their accursed Shell;
And while the Choicest Mushroms are thy fare,
For me thou poisonous Toadstools do prepare;
With a large Trout, or Turbut thou do deal,
But I, on Sprats or Pilchards, make my Meal;
A well crammed Fowl regalios thee again,
But me some Carion-thing starved in the Pen.
When with thee, why not with thee do I eat?
My The Emperor ordered that instead of the Sportula (which was a kind of
Dole) Clients should be invited to Supper, but the Rich Men were so sordid,
that they eat of one sort of Meat themselves, and gave another to their Clients.
Dole is lost, not mended by thy Meat.
Ep. 61. On Cinna.
What ever thou begg'st, It Is Nothing, thou do cry,
If it be Nothing, Nothing I deny.
Ep. 62. On Quinctus.
That with vast Sums, Boys in their Beauty's prime
Thou buy'st, drink'st only Wine of Numas time,
Thy Stuff, of daily Use, did Hundreds cost,
Common with thee, but what a Prince might boast.
That thy gilt Coach was purchased at the Rate
Of a fair House; One Mule of an Estate.
Think thou, a larger Mind thou show from hence?
They Are Little Souls delight in Great Expense,
Ep. 63. On Cotilus
Men, Cotilus, a Gallant do proclaim:
But say, who is he deserves a Gallant's Name?
A Gallants one can order well his Hair,
And scatter round him a perfumed Air,
Warble soft Tunes of Italy and France,
With various Graces move him in the Dance;
Of Ladies Chat sit Umpier all the Day,
And still have something in their Ear to say;
Love Letters read to one, to others, write;
Whom naught, like Ruffling of his Clothes affright;
Runs to all Feasts, can, who loves whom, arread;
Tell Pedigrees of Horses, and their Breed.
Is this, Is this, a Gallant then to be?
A Gallant's then a Trifling Thing, I see.
Ep. 64. On Canius.
The Seamen's merry Ruin, killing Joy,
The Sirens, who with Melody destroy,
That sly Ulysses had the Power to leave,
When all besides, with Charms, they did deceive.
I wonder not: But this I should admire,
From Canius fett'ring Tongue could he retire.
Ep. 65. On the Kisses of a fair Maid.
As Smells the fragrant Fruit, when bit by thee,
The Flowring Grapes first blooming on the Tree,
Spring Meadows, when fresh crop'd by Cows they be
The Air, rich Saffron Beds, do from them yield;
A Myrtile Grove, Arabian spicy Field;
The Flavor, Musk and Amber chafed respire:
Sabean Gums, when they make pale the Fire;
The fresh Glebe sprinkled with a Sumers Shower;
Thy Locks when on them thou choice Nard do pour:
So redolent, coy Maid, thy Kisses are!
If freely given, what with them might compare?
Ep. 66. On Mark Anthony.
Photin and Anthony like Crimes do stain,
Pompey by one, by the other Tully slain.
Tully, Rome's Tongue, deserv'dly might be said;
Pompey, as justly, her triumphant Head.
Yet Antony of the Two, thy Guilt was more,
He sinned on's Lords, thou sinn'st on thine own Score.
Ep. 68. To his modest Matron Reader.
To thee, Grave Matron, hitherto my Book
I write. Toward whom, do ask, the rest does look?
My Self, the Race, the Baths; retire thou then,
We strip, forbear to look on Naked Men.
Well-soak'd, Terpsichore weighs not what she says,
Niceness, among Cups and Roses down she lays;
And though, without Disguise, she plainly names,
In broadest Terms, what yearly Roman Dames
To Venus offer, cares not who her blames;
It Is that, I mean, our Hinds in Gardens place,
And Maids peep at, with Hands before their Face.
If now I know thee, though my Book before
Tired thee, thou wilt eager be to read it over.
Ep. 69. To Cosconius.
That all thy Epigrams thou do indite
In cleanest Terms, not one broad Word do write,
I praise, admire; how Chaste alone thou art;
Such Crimes my Pages show in every Part,
The which, the waggish Youth and Maids approve,
The Older too, who feel the Sting of Love.
But yet, I must confess, thy Holy Verse
Deserves much more with Children to converse.
LIB. IV.
Ep. 1. On Caesar's Birthday.
Caesar's bright Birth-Day's to be honored more
Than Jove's, on Ida's Top by Rhea bore.
May Rome this Days Return more often see,
Than aged Nestor, thine was seen by thee.
And, than the Present, still more glorious be.
May he on Earth (his Head adorned with Gold)
Keep Pallas Feast; as President behold
The Poets and the Rhetors Strife, and Crown
With His mighty Hand the highest in renown.
May he the Secular Games, none twice ever saw,
Behold; be privileged beyond Natures Law.
Great things I ask, but which from Heaven are due,
For such a Prince too much we cannot sue.
Ep. 5. To Fabianus.
Mar. Poor, and Upright, whose Tongue and Heart agree,
What do Propose, in coming Rome to see?
Can act the Baud, or boon-Companions Part?
Know thou the Criers or Informers Art?
Can thou debauch the Wife of thy best Friend?
Thy Strength on Lustful Aged Madams spend;
Can sell Court Air? Flatter the Upstart Great?
Canus and Glaphyrus in the right-way treat?
How, wretch, wilt live?
Fab. By Faith's true Square I Will go.


Mar. Thou dream'st, thoult never be Rich as a Fiddler of that Name.
Philomelus so.


Ep. 8. To Euphemus.
The two first Hours of the Great consumed are,
The third in Lawyers Pleadings at the Bar;
The Trades of Rome the fourth and fifth employ,
The sixth some Rest, the seventh all Rest enjoy:
From eight to Nine in Exercise is spent,
The ninth on Feasting all Men are intent:
The Tenth hour's proper for my Book and me.
And Euphem thou who do the Board o'er-see,
And order our Great Lords Ambrosian Fare,
When Nectar has dissolved his public Care,
His mighty Hand the sober Cup does hold,
To introduce my Mirth, thou may be bold.
My Muse forbears licentiously to rove,
In The Morn, when serious, to importune Jove.
Ep. 10. To Faustinus.
While yet my Book is new, its Leaves scarce dry,
But even the chary'st Touch they fear and fly;
To Faustin, Boy, this little Gift present,
He first deserves my Toys should him be sent:
But furnished with a Sponge be sure to go;
My Book, it is fit, should be attended so.
That if my Verse Faustinus cannot tend
To Purge, One Blot may all my Failings mend.
Ep. 11. On Ant. Saturninus.
While thou were proud to bear Antonio's name,
And that of Saturninus did disclaim;
Thou Arms in Germany against Caesar bore,
As Anthony in Egypt did before.
What Fate attends that Name did thou not fear?
Of his Disgrace at Actium never hear?
Or did the Rhene promise Success to thee,
Though Nile to him denied the Victory?
That famous Anthony, by Rome's Sword, did fall;
Compared to thee, who Caesar we might call.
Ep. 13. Upon the Marriage of Pudens and Claudia Peregrina.
This Day my Pudens to fair Claudia's wed,
Swell the Joys, Hymen, of their Nuptial Bed.
So Musk with Amber Men do fitly join,
So Attick Honey mix with Massick Wine,
So Elms, embraced by Vines, do beauteous stand;
So Reeds do Waters grace; so Myrtles Land!
Concord, keep all between them ever fair,
And equal Love unite the equal Pair;
Let them not find their Flame grows ever Cold,
Or think each other, when they are so, Old.
Ep. 14. To Silius Italicus.
Silius, the Muses Glory and Renown
Whose weighty Verse pow'rfully presses down
The Punique Falsehood, makes their barbarous Rage
Stoop to Rome's Valor, which it durst engage;
Their Elephants, to our Eagles, quit the Field;
Hannibal's Wiles, to Scipio's Honor yield.
The time commands thou serious Thoughts lay-by,
Now in December that the rattling Die.
In every place does make a loud Report,
And the most sage indulge unto the Sport.
My Book, deep drenched in Mirth, thou may allow
This Month to read with a relaxed Brow.
Catullus now may his slight A Poem so called.
Sparrow send
To mighty Maro, and the Act defend.
Ep. 15. To Cecilianus.
Ten pound thou begg'dst to borrow the other Day,
Which speedily, thou promised, to repay.
I had it not (as civil) I did say.
But thou, by a Friends Visit, much surpised,
To borrow of me silver Plate devised.
Art thou a Fool? or me do one suppose?
When ten I would not, fifty Pound I Would lose:
Ep. 18. On a Boy killed by an Icicle.
At Fountain-gate, whose Stones do always drop,
Near to the Porch an hundred Columns prop;
A ponderous Stream, by Cold, congealed to Glass;
Fell on a Lad, as he the Arch did pass:
Soon as the Wretch the fatal Blow had felt,
The sharpened Ice in the warm Wound did melt.
What can restrain thee, Death? Where art not found?
When Water, like a Sword, can cut and wound?
Ep. 20. On Gellia and Cerellia.
Cerellia, Young, affects to say, she is Old.
Old Gellia, among the Girls, would be enrolled.
What either does, Colinus, can digest?
The Young One plays the Fool, the Old the Beast.
Ep. 21. On Selius.
Selius affirms, in Heaven no Gods there are,
And while he thrives, and they their Thunder spare,
His daring Tenet to the World seems fair.
Ep. 24. On Lycoris.
Lycoris Friends are rarely of long Life,
I wish she were acquainted with my Wife.
Ep. 26. On Posthumus.
For not attending on thee a whole Year,
What I have lost thereby, Posthumus, hear.
Five hundred Pence, at least, upon this Score.
It Is much: a Gown would yet have cost me more.
Ep. 27. To Domitian.
My Books thou often gracest with thy Praise,
Though Malice it denies, thou often give Bays;
Nor only by thy Words, this Truth is known,
But Honors too, which thou, can give, alone;
Envy to black my Fame, yet goes on still,
Caesar give more, till thou the Envious kill.
Ep. 29. To Pudens.
The Number of my Books does them much Wrong,
The Reader's tired and glutted with their Throng;
Scarce things take most, first Fruits please those are nice,
Roses in Winter bear the highest Price:
Reserv'dness recommends a beauteous Whore,
Her opening, not to all that come, her Door.
Perseus One Book's more celebrated far,
Than Marsus bulky Amazonian War.
Reading a Book of mine, feign there is no more;
Thus of my Wit thou't make the greater Store.
Ep. 31. On Hippodamus.
That in my Book thou art named, thou would have it said,
And think it there an Honor to be read.
May I not live, but grateful it is to me,
And in my Verse, most gladly, `thou should'st' be;
But that on thee a Name Men did impose,
So harsh, that will with no soft Numbers close.
Which Phoebus, and the whole Pierian Quire,
Could not in Music sing, should all conspire.
Assume some Name more sweetly then that sounds,
Hippodamus the Muses all confounds.
Ep. 32. On a Be enclosed in Amber.
A Drop of Amber did a Be enclose
Hid from the Touch but to the Eye expose.
Thus it deserved, and thus desired to die,
After much Labor so entombed to lie.
Ep. 33. On Sosibianus.
Thou say, thou have Poems by thee of great Worth.
Why do thou not, Sosibian, bring them forth;
Thy Heirs, thou say, will cause them to be read,
It Is pity it is not done, and thy self dead.
Ep. 35. On Deer fighting.
The timorous Deer against themselves make Head,
The Fight forsake not, till they both lie Dead:
The Dogs looked on, Huntsmen amazed appear,
No Prey, Employment found for either here.
In softest Breasts what moved a Rage so high?
Bulls rush on Bulls, and stoutest Men so die.
Ep. 37. On Afer.
Coranus does a hundred to me owe;
Mancinus three; Albinus twice this; so
Sabinus does; Serranus Ten; I know
A sixth, ten more: Then from my Lands do come,
My Flocks, and City Rents, a vaster Sum.
This thou, whole Days, relatest, and I retain
With that Exactness, as I do my Name.
Say not, to what thy Income does amount,
But something tell, which turns to my Account:
I cannot hear thee, Gratis, thus excite,
Be thy Tales true or false, my needy Appetite.
Ep. 39. On Charinus.
Charinus, Thou'st a rare Collection made
Of Silver Works, both massy and o'er-laid;
Alone do Mirons, Scopus pieces show,
What Mentor and Praxetiles could do;
Alone do Phidias noble Gravings vaunt,
Alone the true Grantianas do not want;
Enchased Goblets of Pure Spanish Oar,
All double gilt, thy Fathers Table bore.
What in these Wonder's to be wondered most,
A Penny Current-Coyn thou can not boast.
Ep. 40. On Posthumus.
Tho Pisos Stem speaks great Nobility,
Seneca shows a threefold* Pedigree,
And both their Courts to my Access are free;
Yet my Salutes to thee I first did bring,
Poor, and a Knight, but unto me a King:
Ten Years, twice told, in Amity we led,
One Table served us, and One common Bed.
You Are noble now and Rich, can throw away;
What to our Ancient Friendship will thou Pay?
I may expect: but thou have Naught to say.
Grown old a Patron I cannot seek, though Poor.
On me, or Faith, have thou imposed more?
Ep. 41. On a bad Poet.
When thou thy Poems do recite, for Fear
Of catching Cold, Furr 'bout thy Neck do wear.
This fitter were for the Ears of them that hear.
Ep. 42. To Flaccus.
If I could such obtain, as I desire,
Hear then what Beauty, Flaccus, I admire.
One born in Egypt, in the first place I Would choose;
Such artificial Charms none else do use;
I Would have her Skin white as the driven Snow,
From that swarth Clime the fair do fairest show;
Her Eyes with Stars should vie, her flowing Hair
Fall on her Neck, which I to Curls prefer.
Her Forehead should be smooth, well shaped her Nose,
Her lovely Lips a Rosy red disclose;
Sometimes I Would have her kind, and sometimes coy,
In no Man's Courtship, but mine own, to joy;
Young Men to hate, even her own Sex to fear,
To others Ice, to me a Maid appear.
Now, Flaccus, I foreknow, what thou will say.
Caelia, my Caelia, thou do here display,
Ep. 44 On Vesuvius.
Behold Vesuvius green ever while, and stored
With Vines which did the noblest Juice afford.
Bacchus, this Hill, *bove Nysas did advance,
His Satyrs, here, did most delight to dance.
Venus no Seat, like this, did hold so dear,
The Herculian Fane shon here without a Peer.
All now in Cinders lies, and Gods resent
The Loss; their Power, they had to hurt repent.
Ep. 49. To Flaccus.
Rightly of Epigrams thou do not deem,
ho Toys and Sport, Flaccus do them esteem.
He toys and trifles more, who does declare
Thyestes Board, and Tereus impious Fare;
Dedalus fitting waxen Wings to fly;
And Monster Polyphemus with one Eye.
All Tragic Themes I banish from my Muse,
Nor huffing Buskin-Language do I use.
But these, thou say, Men praise, admire, adore.
Praise these they may, but yet they read mine more.
Ep. 53. On a counterfeit Cynick.
He who in the Temples, you so often meet,
In public Porches, Cosmus, and the street,
With Bag and Staff, nasty, and antique dressed,
His Hair an End, Beard hanging down his Breast;
Who for a Cloak, a Coverlet does use,
Barks for his Meat, the Givers of to abuse;
A Cynick to be thought, does make this Stir*
But he no Cynick is. What then? A Cur.
Ep. 54. On Colinus.
As thou Colinus to thy high Renown
From all Contenders, bor'st the Oaken Crown;
If wife, thy Days in genial Pleasures spend,
As if each Day determined were thy End.
None with the Parcae ever could prevail,
Their Lives, one Hour beyond their Time, to bail;
Although more rich than Crispus; Thrasea, bold;
Than Melior they a nobler Port did hold;
The Sisters Web unchangeable does run,
And one still cuts, what to other two have spun.
Ep. 56. On Gargilianus.
That thou large Presents send'st the Rich and Old,
Would have it for thy Glory to be told?
There Is none, like thee, deserves a Sordid Fame,
Who, thy vile Snares, dare generous Presents name.
Call too a Hook, by which the Fish are taken,
A Gift; the Train by which wild Beasts are slain.
What it is to give, do thou desire to know?
On me, can naught return, thy Wealth bestow.
Ep. 59. On a Viper enclosed in Amber.
As among the Poplar Boughs a Viper crawls,
The Liquid Gum upon him struggling falls:
With Drops alone, while wondering, to be held,
He straight within the Amber was congealed.
Then of thy Tomb, proud Cleopatra.
Queen think not too high.
A Worm far nobler here entombed does lie.
Ep. 60. On Death.
When Leo rages with the Summers Sun,
From pestilential Climates never run;
Since, in the wholesom'st, and the purest Air,
The Destines Croatius did not spare.
When thy Time's come, Death from no place is bound,
Wholesome and unwholesome Places are alike.
Sardinia, in the midst of Wholesome and unwholesome Places are alike.
Tybur's found.
Ep. 61. On Mancinus.
Two Thousand Pound lately to thee befell,
Thou with a fleering vaunting Face did tell.
Scarce four Days passed, while thou and I did walk
IN the Poets School, of hundreds thou did talk
In Robes which rich Pompilla to thee sent;
Thou swor'st that Bassa did to thee present
A true Sardonix, with it is triple Lines;
And Caelia gave thee two fair Agmarines.
IN the Theater, as we did hear the Song,
More yet thou told'st, that did to thee belong;
Even hasting, and in Motion to depart,
Of a late Heirship News thou did impart.
What have thy Friends deserved of thee so ill,
That them, with Envy, thou delight'st to kill?
If pleasing things to blab, thou can not hold;
Some Good to us, Ill to thy self, unfold.
Ep. 66. On Linus.
A country Life, Linus, thou'ast ever led,
More mean, more homely, nothing can be said;
A curtail Gown, on Festivals alone,
Thou wor'st, and wor'st but every ten Years one;
Thy Forest, unbought Hare and Boar, did yield,
Fat Thrush, thy beaten Woods and neighboring Field;
Thy River, Fish afforded, being sought;
Thy Wine was all, from thine own Vineyard, brought:
No lovely Boys from Egypt did adorn
Thy Board, but rustic, at thine own Farm born:
And if thy lust inflamed was with Wine,
The foulest Drab thou never did decline;
No Loss thou have received by Sea or Land,
By gaming deep, and an unlucky Hand;
When so thou were disposed to pass the Day,
Nuts thou did stake, or else with Nuts did play
Say where is the vast Estate, the immoderate Sum
Thy Mother left? What is of all become?
All Is gone. It Is a hard thing that thou have done.
Ep. 67. On a Praetor.
Gaurus, in's Need, did of the Praetor pray
A hundred Pound, grown in his Friendship gray:
And said, that Sum would give him a just Right
To all the Honors of a Roman Knight.
But he replied: An hundred Pound I use
IN the Race to spend, nor this will me excuse:
Ah, shames it not, ingrate thy Friend to slight!
To give a Horse, what thou deny'st a Knight?
Ep. 68. To Sextus.
My Mess cost cheap, thine the profusest Sum;
To Sup, not envy, Sextus, I did come.
Ep. 69. To Papilus.
Pure Massick Wine thou do not only drink,
But giv'st thy Guests: tho some this do not think.
Four Wives, it is said, thy Flaggon caused to die;
This I believe not, yet not thirst to try.
Ep. 70. On Ammianus.
Naught to Ammianus did his Father leave
But a dry Halter. Who can now conceive,
His Fathers Life he gladly would revive;
Who wished him often Dead, when yet alive?
Ep. 72. To Quintus.
To give my Books to thee, thou do implore:
But I have none; the Bookseller has Store.
Thou say, none sober will such Trifles buy,
Thou art not yet so Mad. No more am I.
Ep. 73. On Vestinus.
Vestinus drawing now his latest Breath,
And ready to resign his Soul to Death,
The fatal Sisters he did humbly pray,
Of his near End to make a little stay;
That Dead to Himself, to Others he might Live.
Way to such Pious Vows the Fates did give.
Then parting his vast Wealth, he left the Light,
Seeming now full of Years to take his Flight.
Ep. 74. Upon Deer fighting.
See how the timorous Herd in Fight engage!
How fearful Deer express the fiercest Rage!
Death from themselves they are not seen to fear!
Caesar, set on the Dogs, to save the Deer.
Ep. 75. On Nigrina.
Thou highest Glory of a Latian Wife,
Blessed in thy Spouse, blessed, Nigrine, in thy Life.
Him Master of thy Birthright thou did make,
Joying, in all thou had, he should partake.
Evadne perished in the Funeral Flame,
Nor cheaper did Alceste purchase Fame.
But thou thy Faith, by surer ways do prove,
And need'st not Death to testify thy Love.
Ep. 76. On a niggard Friend
Ten pound I begged, with half thou did me speed;
Next time I Will ask thee, twice what I have need.
Ep. 77. On Zoilus.
I never begged Riches from the Gods before,
Well pleased with what I had and to be poor:
But, Want, now get thee hence, Heaven grant me Store.
Whence comes this sudden new Desire of Pelf?
I Would fain see envious Zoilus hang himself.
Ep. 78. On Varus.
Varus, did lately me to Supper call,
The Table Sumptuous was, the Supper small;
Laden it was with weight of Gold, not Meat;
Much to be Seen was served, little to Eat;
Varus, our Mouths, not Eyes, to feast we are here;
Take hence thy Plate, or fill't with better Cheer.
Ep. 79. On Afer.
When thou no less than sixty Years have told,
Thy silver Hairs and wan Face spoke thee Old:
Yet thou art seen, through all the Town to run
Restless, no youthful Offices to shun;
At early Morn thou great Men's Chairs do meet,
And them, with thy Officious Aves greet;
A Tribune comes not forth, but thou attend^st;
Thy Service, unto both the Consuls, lend'st.
Ten times a Day thou climb'st the Palace Hill,
None but The Emperors two Favorites.
Sigerios and The Emperors two Favorites.
Parthenios fill
Thy Mouth; those Favorite Names, which while thou vaunt'st
Thou think, that thou thy self no greatness want.
This Youth may do: But what so wretched Tool,
As a decrepid and Ambitious Fool?
Ep. 80. To Matho.
Thou'ast bought my Farm, where thou were ever more
My Guest. Thou Art plainly cheated, on the Score
I'ave sold thee that, which was thine own before.
Ep. 81. On Matho.
Tho in a Fever, Matho, thou do plead:
If this not Madness seems, the more thou'st need
Of Hellebore: thou pleadest in a Fit,
Had thou no other way to sweat, 'twere Wit.
But Great thou think it, feav'rish not to cease:
See not, it is greater then to hold thy Peace.
Ep. 84. On Nevolus.
In prosperous State, none's so ill-natured found;
In Adverse, none in Good does more abound;
When thou art safe, Respect, Regard, to none
Thou pay'st, none worthy of thy self thou wilt own:
But in Distress, to stoop thou can endure,
TO oblige. It Is pity thou should be secure.
Ep. 86. On Ponticus.
Thy Cup's of China, ours of Glass. Why so?
That we thy Sordid Usage may not know,
One Glass two Sorts of Wine, would plainly show.
Ep. 88. On Bassa.
Bassa, a Little Child has ever near,
Which she does call her Play-fellow and Dear:
For such yet cares not, if you will Credit Fame.
How then? She soists, and the Child bears the blame.
Ep. 89. On his Country Life.
When to my Farm retired, how I do live
If any ask, this short account I give.
The Gods at the first Light, I do adore;
And place this Care, all other Cares before.
My Grounds I visit then, and Servants call,
And their just Tasks I do impose on all.
I Study next, rouse my Poetic Vein,
My Body then anoint, and gently strain
With some meet Exercise; exult in Mind
At every Turn, my self both free to find
From Crimes and Debts. Last, I bath, sup, laugh, drink,
Jest, sing, rest, and on all that passes, think.
A little Lamp, the while sends, forth a Ray,
Which to my Nightly Studies makes a Day.
LIB. V.
Ep. 1. To Caesar.
WHether in the Alban Mount thy Station be,
Where thou the Prospect have, on one side, Sea,
Diana's Grove on the other; or before,
This, if Caietas Bay delight thee more,
The Hill named from the Daughter of the Sun,
Or where the Anxurs wholesome Streams do run.
O Health and Safety of the public State!
Whose Evils as our own, we deprecate;
And whom, when prosp*rous and we happy see,
Grateful we then believe the Gods to be.
Receive this little Book, I to thee send,
Only a gracious Hand vouchsafe to extend;
I Will think thou read'st it, though thou cast it by,
Pleas`d with a As it is said in these Days with a Teagish Simplicity.
Gallick, rude Credulity.
Ep. 2. To his Readers.
To Matrons, Virgins, and unriper Boys,
I dedicate these Leaves of chaster Toys;
Those whom obscene, and wanton Verse delight,
And Wit, not broadly Bawdy, wholly slight;
My first four Books, for them, I did indite.
In this my fifth, so with Rome's Lord I drole,
As he may read, and Pallas not control.
Ep. 6. To the Muses.
If what I ask, appears to you not great,
O Muses! your Parthenius thus entreat.
May thy Old Age come late, and happy End:
Caesar be safe, and, to the last, your Friend;
So above Envy may you ever be,
Your Son a Scheme of all your Virtues see.
As you this tim*rous bashful Book shall grace
When in the sacred Presence it is in place.
To you the Princes Gracious Moods are known,
When with serenest Looks, and most his own,
He shines on all, who to his Throne address,
And measures Bounty out to each Distress.
Nor apprehend, this trifling gilded Book,
Aims at High things, does for great Matters look;
You need not offer't, hold it in your Hand,
As one designing nothing to demand:
If the Nine Sisters Patron I do know,
Himself will you command the Book to show.
Ep. 7. To Vulcan.
The Phoenix, when a thousand Years expire,
Renews a glorious Youth again by Fire:
So Rome decayed through Age, a new does shine,
And shows a Countenance, like her Lords, Divine.
Digest old Grudges, Vulcan, we do pray,
Though Mars's Nation, we do also say
We Are Venus Offspring, so may she forget,
The Shame thou brought her by the Lemnian Net.
With beauteous and with patient Arms embrace,
Thy limping Carcass, and thy sooty Face.
Ep. 8. On Phasis.
While Phasis in the Theater of late,
Phasis in Purple shining did dilate
On the Empe'ror's Edict, which each Order graced,
And 'cording to their Dignity them placed.
These swelling Words, big with Conceit, he spoke.
At length we Nobles here our Ease may take,
Regard's had of us, and our Seat's set out,
W' are neither pressed, nor dirty'd, by the Rout.
While, lolling, thus he did the Rout despise,
The Lictor bids his Saucy Purple rise.
Ep. 9. On Symmachus.
I drooped; straight Symmachus to me does hie,
An hundred Quacks bearing him Company;
An hundred frozen Hands my Pulse did crave,
Before I had no Ague, now I have.
Ep. 10. On the Fame of Poets.
What shall I says the Cause, that few do give
Honor to those, who in their Days do live.?
From too much Envy this proceeds alone,
That we Times-past extol above our own
Ingrate Oldmen Catulus Temple praise,
And Pompey's simple Porch admire, and raise
'Bove more stupendous Fabrics of these Days.
Ennius Men read, when Virgil did survive;
And Homer was despised, while yet alive;
The Stage, Menander, seldom Grace did show,
But one Corinna, divine Naso, know.
My Books then patient be in the Desk to lie,
There needs no Haste, for Fame, if I must die.
Ep. 11. On Stella.
My Stella does upon his Fingers wear,
Em'ralds and Diamonds, Saphirs, Rubies fair;
Many bright Gems upon his Hands we see,
More, and more Radiant, in his Verses be.
The brillant Fancies in his Lines which stand,
Seem to proceed from his adorned Hand.
Ep. 13. On Calistratus.
I Am poor, Calistratus, was ever so,
But neither yet, in Fame or Title, low:
I through the World am read, to all am shown,
The Praise, few Urns receive, my Life has known,
But thy Majestic Roofs, which Gold adorn,
Are by an hundred stately Columns born;
Thy Chests are crammed brim-full of unbagg'd Cash,
The Lot of Slaves that underwent the Lash;
In Egypt rich Possessions thou do hold,
And shear'st vast Flocks of the choice Gallick Fold.
This is thy State and mine: Wealth is thy share,
Glory and Poverty my Portions are.
But what I am, thou never can rise to be,
When any of the Rout may equal thee.
Ep. 14. On Nanneus.
Nanneus used in the first Rank to sit,
While so the sleeping Edict did permit:
But, that revived, thrice routed, up he truss't
His Camp, and to the lowest Seat was thrust,
Even behind Caius, Lucius, straightly pent:
Where wrapping up his Head, and there content
Illfavour'dly to see, but with one Eye,
The Lictor did the Wretch no sooner spy,
But thence he chased him to the farthest Space,
Between the Cells; were taking up his Place,
Half standing, and half leaning against the End
Of the Knight's Form, which did his Stress befriend.
Free from Exceptions here on every Hand,
To some he boasts, to sit; to some, to stand.
Ep. 15. To Domitian.
This is the fifth Book of my drolling Muse,
Yet none complain my Verses them abuse;
But many given they have a noble Name;
Who by my Pen enjoy immortal Fame.
What profits this, some say, tho so it be?
If none it profits, yet it pleases me.
Ep. 16. To his Reader.
When I could serious useful things endite,
That I do only, what is pleasant, write,
Thou, Reader, art the Cause, who chant'st my Prnise,
But weigh'st not at what rate I buy thy Bays.
If to the Law I did my Study bend,
And sell my Words, the Guilty to defend;
Many a Ship would bring me Wares from Spain,
My Lap would sordid be with frequent Gain.
Whereas my Book and I, trim Guests, are now
At Feasts, and Glory's all that Men allow.
Poets of old such Pay did not content,
When bright Alexis was the least was sent.
But well, thou cry'st, thou'st writ, none can it mend.
Think this enough, to praise me without end.
O'erseest my Wants, forbear'st thy Purse to draw.
Thou Wilt praise me out of Poetry, to Law.
Ep. 18. On Quinctianus.
Now in December that the Napkins fly
About, Spoons, Candles, Paper, Plums, that I
Only my Home-born Books a Present make,
For Rude or Covetous thou may me take.
But, know, I hate the vile insnaring Trade,
By which a Gift a baited Hook is made;
Which is not cast, to feed the hungry Fish,
But for a Prey to fill the Fisher's Dish.
Then, Quinctianus, to his wealthy Friend,
A Poor Man's liberal, when he naught does send.
Ep. 20. To Julius Martialis.
If, my dear Martial, 'twere allowed to me,
An undisturbed Life to spend with thee;
Our Quiet, to what liked us best, to give,
And both at leisu^e were truly to live:
We'd never know the Powerful in the State,
Within their Courts, as do their Statues, wait;
At the vexatious Pleading-Bar attend,
But all our Time, in Books and Converse spend,
Taking in shady Groves or Fields the Air,
In Baths, in Feasts, courting some gentle Fair.
These, our dear Haunts and Business, should be still,
And both our spare and serious Hours should fill.
That now we live, alas, we cannot say,
Only we find the good Suns post away,
And that, though lost, imputed is each Day.
Can those that know to live, to live delay?
Ep. 22. On Apollonius.
Instead of Decimus thou did Quintus greet,
And Macrus name, when thou did Crassus meet;
What Wonders we to Labor may impute!
Writing, and Conning, thou can both salute!
Ep. 24. On Hermes.
Hermes, the Martial Glory of the Age,
Skilful in all the Combats of the Stage;
Hermes, Master of Fence, and Fencer too;
The Cock and Terror of the Sword-men's Crew;
Hermes, whom Helius fears, but fears alone,
Avolans yields to, yet to him but one;
Hermes, that knows to conquer without Blows,
The Second to himself against all Foes;
Hermes, the Stages Mint, and endless Gain,
The Love and Strife of all their Female Train;
Hermes, that proudly shakes the Warlike Spear,
And fiercely threatening does the Trident bear;
Hermes, when casked for the blindfold Fight,
When mope'd and drooping seems, does then affright;
Hermes engrosses all Men's Gifts in one,
And Trismegistus Name deserves alone.
Ep. 26. On Cherestratus.
Wanting a Knight's Estate, you want the Style;
The Lictor comes: Stand up, void, stay a while.
Does any the Degraded Knight call back?
O noble Deed! Is any Friend not slack,
Out of vast Wealth his Title to restore,
Not lost by any Vice, but being Poor?
His Generous Name we will commit to Verse,
Which all succeding Ages shall rehearse!
Who Is thus resolved his better part to save,
And not descend Entire into the Grave.
And were not nobler so great Wealth bestow,
Than on a vain, ambitious, public Show?
On brass unfeeling Statues it expend,
Although the Artifice the Charge commend?
O rich in vain! O Falsely seeming Wise!
Who read, approve, and yet true Fame despise.
Ep. 28. On a counterfeit Knight.
For Garb, for Parts, all thee would Noble rate,
If thou, Plebean, were it not in Estate.
To sit amongst Knights it is not a Grace so high,
To make thee pale, whenever the Lictor's nigh.
Ep. 29. On Mamercus.
Mamercus good Conceit, or Word, to gain,
The best Endeavors, Aulus, are in vain.
Excel the Curii in a Pious Fame,
'Bove Nerva, Rufus, get a Courteous Name,
In Justice Macrus, Mauricus outdo;
Renowned Regulus and Paulus too
For Mirth and Eloquence: Yet all he bites
With cankered Teeth, and to asperse, delights.
You judge, perhaps, that Envy's his Disease.
I think, Unhappiness, whom none does please.
Ep. 32. On Gellia.
When thou present'st me, Gellia, with an Hare,
Marcus, thou say, 'twill make the seven Days fair.
If Hare be such a beautifying Meat,
Thou never of one in all thy Life did eat.
Ep. 32. On Children Sporting upon the Bulls.
See how the adventurous Boys insult secure,
While the mild Bulls their Weight and Sport endure:
One hangs upon a Horn, while others run
Over their broad Backs, skirmish, assault, and shun
Each other's Blows: The Bulls, as frozen, stand;
Combat they could not firmer on the Land.
The Children, strive for the Palm, without all fear,
The Bulls, alone, solicitous appear.
Ep. 33. On Crispus a Glutton.
Crispus, one Doit of's Wealth to none did leave.
What came often then? Who did his Land receive?
Alive, to 's Belly, he did all bequeath.
Ep. 35. On Erotion.
Fronto, Bothdead before Erotion.
Flaccilla, who the Parents were,
Of young Erotion, to your tender Care
My Darling I commit; that no grim Ghost,
Or three-mouth'd Dog, that guards the Stygian Coast,
The gentle Soul affright; but six Years old,
And those by six days had not fully told.
With her old Patron she would sport, and game,
When scarce her lisping tongue could speak my name.
Now Earth to her a Light interment give,
To thee no Burden when she here did live.
Ep. 36. On Euclid.
While Euclid, clad in Purple, loud did brawl,
And near together by the Ears did fall
With Lectius, bidding him his Seat to leave.
Protesting proudly, that he did receive
Two thousand yearly Patrimonial Rent,
And more, which his Corinthian Manor sent;
Produced an ancient goodly Pedigree,
Derived from Leda, by which, all might see
He was in truth a Knight, rich, potent, great:
An huge foul Key, the Badge of Slaves, in the Heat
Unfortunately from his Bosom fell.
Did y' ever, of such a spightful Key, hear tell?
Ep. 38. On Erotion.
Than Swans, O sweetest Girl! thou were more white*
Than driven Snow, than untouched Lillies, bright*
Than a Galesian Lamb more soft; more smooth
Than sea-wash'd Shells, th'Elephants pollish'd Tooth*
Gems, with thy sparkling Eyes, might not compare*
The Baetick Wool rival thy glist'ring Hair;
Nor Germans yellow Locks in Curls up*roll'd,
Or radiant Fileings of the burnished Gold;
Thy Breath, than Roses, did more fragrant smell,
The Virgin Wax, and Amber chafed, excel;
The Peacoak, had no Beauty, set by thee,
The Phoenix self but vulgar seemed to be.
Such my Erotion was at six Years old,
Snatched hence by Fates, scarce in her Tomb yet cold;
My Joy she was, my whole Delight and Love:
Yet Petus, that I mourn, does not approve.
He says, unmanly it is to tare my Hair,
My Breast to beat, for a young Slave, though fair:
He lost a Wife rich, and of high Renown,
No Heroine, like her, in all the Town
So stately great: Yet he holds up his Head,
His whole Content interrs not with the Dead.
Of a great Mind, so high a Proof, who gives?
Petus, by's Loss, has thousands gained, yet lives!
Ep. 39. On Calliodorus.
Calliador has a Knights Estate all know,
The Mischief is, he has a Brother too,
Who claims one half, the Fig in twain does split,
And on one Horse two Knights are fain to sit.
How can thy Brother's Aim and thine agree?
No Pollux had thou, thou might Castor be;
But being One, as Two, if you take place,
A Soloecism's plainly in the Case.
Leda's kind Offspring imitate you may,
Sit Knights by Turns, not both on the same Day.
Ep. 40. On Carinus.
'Bove thirty Wills a Year thou do subscribe,
Oftener I send thee Junkets for a Bribe:
I am exhaust, Carinus, pity me,
The Bottom of the Chest and Purse I see.
Delude no more, make thy Will once, and die,
To show thy Cough was real, not a Lie.
Tho I in Wealth, like Croesus, did abound,
Than Irus, I should yet be poorer found,
Should thou, I say not Tarts, daily devour,
But of vile Beans and Pompions such a Power.
Ep. 41. To Artemidorus.
Do thou admire, when Pallas is thy Saint,
That but a sorry Venus thou do paint?
When rigid Virtue has thy Study been,
For wanton Verse would thou the Laurel win?
Ep. 42. What Is given, never perishes.
A Thief may force thy Chests, and rob thy Gold;
A Fire thy House may level with the Mold;
A Debtor, Principle and Use, deny;
The Corn that is sowed, without an Harvest, die;
A crafty Whore, thy Casheer may surprise;
The Sea overwhelm thy precious Merchandise;
But what thou giv'st, no Chance does undergo;
That Wealth is always thine, thou do bestow.
Ep. 45. On Dento
What is the Cause? What new thing's fallen out?
That Dento often invited, is so stout
(Beyond Belief) my Table to refuse?
He, who through all the Portico's did use,
The Baths, the Theaters, to hunt me out,
Flies, when I call, and will not turn about.
The Mystery is, h' as found a fatter Treat,
Like Dogs, is drawn by strongest Scent of Meat.
But soon as known, the Great, he will disgust;
Then for my Scraps he will leap, and for a Crust.
Ep. 48. On Philo.
Thou say, thou never Supp'st at Home. It Is right,
That is, thou fast'st, when none does thee invite.
Ep. 50. On Rufus.
He whose left Arm, laden with Books, you see,
And throng*d with busy Clerks to that Degree;
Whose Face composed attentively does hear
Causes and Suits poured in at either Ear,
Most like a Cato, Tully, or a Brute,
If put upon the Rack, could not salute
In Latin, Ave, or (...) in the Greek:
And if thou doubt the Truth, let us to him speak.
Ep. 52. To Labienus.
I saw thee lately sitting all alone,
And, that thou had been Three, I durst have sworn,
Thy seeming numerous Heads so me deceived,
Thy Pate here locked, and there of Hair bereaved;
Not with Love-Locks, which beaut'ous Boys do wear,
But some Parts tufted were, much broader bare.
Thy various Baldness stood thee late in stead,
When Caesar dol'd the People Meat and Bread;
For thou bor'st Home what did belong to Three*
The famed Gerion sure was such as Thee.
Where was a Statue of Hercules.
Philippus Portico, I advise thee fly:
If Hercules spy thee, thou art sure to die.
Ep. 53. On Posthumus.
Thy Gifts I bear in Mind, and ever will.
Why don't I speak them then? 'Cause thou do still:
I can to none relate them, but they say,
He told us all himself the other Day.
Some things are never done well by two: If I
Must celebrate thy Deeds, make Thou no cry.
Should, Posthumus, the vastest Gifts bestow,
Thy after boasting would them all o'erthrow.
Ep. 54. To Bassus.
Why do thou, Bassus, of Thyestes write?
Niobe's Tears, or of Medea's Flight?
A fitter Subject of thy Verse by far,
Phaeton's burning, or the Deluge, were.
Ep. 55. On Apollonius.
Extemporist you are now, and of Renown,
Calpurnius can salute, not writing down.
Ep. 57. On Cinna.
Thou Lord and Master called, thy self do prize,
Slaves I often term so, when I them chastise.
Ep. 58. To Posthumus.
To Morrow Still, to Morrow, thou do say,
That thou will live. When will arrive the Day?
How far's this Morrow off? Or where? Can tell?
With Parthians or Armenians does it dwell?
Old Nestor's Years it has already told;
Say, May we purchase it for any Gold?
Thou Wilt live to Morrow: It Is too late to day.
He, Posthumus, was wise, lived Yesterday.
Ep. 60. To Stella.
That I, nor Gold nor Silver, to thee send,
I this forbear, for thy sake, learned Friend.
Who gives Great Gifts, expects Great Gifts again,
My Cheap Ones to return will cause no Pain.
Ep. 61. On a Detractor.
Although thou bark'st at me yet more and more,
And such thy Currish Snarlings never giv'st over,
Decreed it is, thou never shall acquire
The Fame, to which thou do so much aspire,
Within my Books, tho ill, but to be read:
That once thou were, why should it ever be said;
No, Wretch, thy Fate it is, to Die unknown.
And yet, perhaps, there may be found some one
Or two, or more, about the Town, who may
In thy Dog's Hide fasten their Teeth, and bay.
But from such base Engagements I Will contain;
My Nails, to Scratch thy Mange, does much disdain*
Ep. 62. On Marianus.
Who is this Crispus, I so often see
Close to thy Wife? This Crispus, who is he?
He leans his Elbow nicely on her Chair,
And always wispers something in her Ear,
His slender Fingers many Jewels grace,
Not all his Body for one Hair has place.
Will thou not answer me? Thou say, it is he
Does thy Wife's Buisness, and such must be free.
In sooth, a sober Man, of a sage Mien,
The grave Solicitor in his Face is seen;
An Infamous Pimp.
Chius Aufidius looked not more Austere.
To be the sport of Mimicks, do not fear?
Deserve to be the Fable of the Stage;
The noted Wit-all of the present Age?
He thy Wife's Business do? That Thing so fine?
He does not thy Wife's Business, but does thine.
Ep. 63. To Ponticus.
How I thy Book, Ponticus, do approve,
To say, thou anxiously do often move.
Amazed, astonished, naught I read so rare!
The best of Wits cannot with thee compare!
Pon. Caesar and Jove propitious to thee be, As thus thou think.


Mart. Or rather unto thee.


Ep. 64. To his Waiters.
Pour lusty Wine, Catistus, fill it up;
With Summer Snow, Alcime, dilute the Cup;
Let my locks drop, with rich Amomum spread,
And with a Wreath of Roses crown my Head.
I Am bid to live, by Caesar's Tomb that is nigh,
While it proclaim's, the Gods themselves do die.
Ep. 69. On Mark Anthony.
So black, Mark Anthony, so foul's thy Name,
That, even Photinus Guilt, thou dare not blame:
In Tully's Gore alone more deeply died,
Than all the Sea of Blood thou shedd'st beside.
How durst thou, Madman, sheath thy impious Blade
In Rome's own Throat? In Tully's Life invade
The Commonwealths? A Crime, that put a stand
To Cat'lin's Soul, and damped his daring Hand.
Thou Hir'dst a Villain with accursed Gold,
To gagg the Tongue that did thy Life unfold;
What boots it thee, to silence, at such Price,
One divine Tongue? Think so to hide thy Vice?
For Virtue now, and Murdered Tully's sake,
All Tongues inveigh, and all Philippicks make.
Ep. 70. On Syriscus, a Slave.
In rambling only through base Booths and Huts,
Vile Tap-Houses, and Cellars among Sluts,
Syriscus full five hundred Pound made fly,
(His Lord's vain Gift) in the twinkling of an Eye.
Strange Luxury, to consume all this deal,
Nor sitting for it the Time allowed a Meal!
Ep. 73. To Theodorus.
That I may Books do not to thee impart,
Although thou su'st, and Instant for them art,
Do wonder? For good Cause I this decline,
For fear, lest, Theodore, thou give me thine.
Ep. 74. On Pompey, and his Sons.
Europe, and Asia, Pompey's Sons intomb;
Africa, himself, if he finds any Room.
No wonder, thus the World they Quarter, slain*
What Soil so great a Ruin could contain?
Ep. 77. On Cinna.
By the often Use of Poison he did make,
The Pontick King, unhurt, could Poison take,
And, Cinna, thou, by eating ill, take care,
Neither to die by scant, or evil, Fare.
Ep. 79. On Zoilus.
IN the Meal ten times thou from the Board do range
And every time thou do thy Vestment change,
For fear, lest, Sweating, harm thy Body get,
Between the Air, and Garments that are wet.
Why sweat not I, who Sup with thee, thou Fool?
Who has no Change of Clothes, is strangely cool.
Ep. 81. To Emilianus.
If thou art Poor, thou shall be ever so.
The Rich do only on the Rich bestow.
LIB. VI.
Ep. 1. To Julius Martialis.
THis my sixth Book, Julius, to thee I send,
Dear among the first, and my judicious Friend*
If it shall pass approved thy learned Ear,
When it is in Caesar's Hand, I less shall fear.
Ep. 4. To Domitian.
Censor of Manners is thy Glory more,
Than Prince of Princes which thou had before.
Though for so many Triumphs Rome does owe,
Which, thy Heroic Valor did bestow,
So many Temples new, so many old,
So many Shows, and Gods by thee enrolled,
So many Cities won, or else laid Waste;
Yet more she owes, that thou have made her By reviving an old Law against
Adultery.
Chaste.
Ep. 5. To Cecilianus.
I lately purchased have a Piece of Ground.
Cecilian, lend me, pray, a hundred Pound.
Do say, I never will pay? And thereon pause?
To speak the Truth, I borrow for that cause.
Ep. 7. On Thelesina.
Since the Law against Adultery took place,
And all are forced Chastity to embrace:
In less than thirty Days, thou have been wed
Ten times, ten Men admitted to thy Bed.
Who weds so often, not weds, but plays the Whore:
And than Adultery offends more.
Ep. 8. To Severus.
No less than Pretors two, and Tribunes four,
Seven Advocates, and Poets half a Score,
Were Suitors lately to a certain Maid;
Her Father of them all small Reckoning made,
But on a Crier did the Girl bestow.
Wherein he played the Fool, I do not know.
Ep. 10. To Domitian.
I late of Jove a Thousand Crowns did crave,
He Will giv't, says he, who me a Temple gave.
That he, it is true, a Temple gave to thee,
But yet no thousand Crowns bestows on me.
I backward was our Jove this way to engage:
But how serene! How free from cloudy Rage
He read my Suit! With such a placid Brow,
To conquered Kings their Crowns he does allow;
And from the Capitol returns and goes.
O Virgin! Who alone our great Lord knows;
If with such Looks, he does our Suits reject,
Say, with what Mien he does them then accept.
I prayed. Pallas (her Shield reversed) replied:
What is not given yet, think thou Fool, denied?
Ep. 11. On Marcus.
Thou wonder'st, Friendship now is no more renowned,
That no Orestes, Pylades, are found!
Pylades ever, Marcus drank of the same,
Nor fatter Thrushes to Orestes came;
Each, better than himself, did the other treat,
No difference made in Beverage, or in Meat.
On Lucrine Oysters thou do gormondize,
While flashy of Peloris me suffice:
And yet my Palat's as refined as thine,
As skild in the best Meats, and noblest Wine.
Rich Tyrian Wool, to make thy Garment's, sought,
But mine the coursest which from Gallia's brought:
Would have me love thee in a Purple Gown,
While I am clad like some poor rustic Clown?
If you expect I Pylades should be,
Orestes you must show your self to me.
Friendship by Deeds, not Words, must be approved,
The Man must Love, that seeks to be Beloved.
Ep. 13. On the Statue of Julia.
Who would not think this Piece by Phidias wrought?
Or to Perfection by Minerva brought?
The Snow white Marble seems even to speak,
Such Life and Grace does from the Countenance break
It sporting holds Loves Girdle in its Hand,
And 'bove the God of Love does Love command.
When Venus would in Mars lost Flames renew,
Here for the charming Cestus she must Sue.
Ep. 14. On Laberius.
Thou can write exc'llent Verse, as thou do say,
Why then to write, Laberius, do delay?
Who can do ought that is excellent, and withold,
Among the greatest Men may be enrolled.
Ep. 15. On an Emmet.
Under a Poplar while an Emmet goes,
An Amber Drop did the small Beast enclose.
Thus that which worthless was while it did live.
It Is Funeral now does a high Value give.
Ep. 17. On Cinnamus.
Thou Would be called Cinna, Cinnamus is thy Name
Such barbarous Practice many would defame.
To be named Theseus, say it thee befell,
And Men should call thee Thief, wou'd'st take it well*
Ep. 18. On Solinus.
Solinus sacred Relics rest in Spain,
Few Ghosts so noble among the Dead remain.
'Twere Sin to mourn for him, that is yet alive,
Whose Body's dead, but Glory does survive.
Ep. 19. To his Advocate.
Of Murder, Poison, War, thou have naught to say,
But of three Goats, my Neighbor stole away;
The Judge requires, I this should make appear;
To the Pontick War thou make Excursions here,
Canna's Fight, Punick Falsehood; thou, with might
Of Hand and Voice, do roaring out recite
Of Syllas, Marius, Mutius, various Story.
Speak now to three Goats, lost in so much Glory.
Ep. 20. To Phoebus.
Thou saying often, Will It naught of me command?
To borrow a small Sum I did demand.
But then thou humm'st, demurr'dst, thy self and me
With long Doubts vexed. I nothing ask, thou art free.
Ep. 22. On Proculina.
That Proculina's married to her Knave,
And will her Gallant, for her Husband, have,
Fearing the Julian Law: She does not wed,
But now proclaims what Life before she led.
Ep. 24. On Charisianus.
Charisianus's vainer far than all the Town.
When others Ma^querade, he is seen in's Gown*
Ep. 25. To Marcellinus.
Thou generous Offspring of a Noble Race,
Bold Marcellinus, who now holds the Place,
Where horrid Winter wars, no less than Foes;
Accept the Vows thy Father's Friend bestows.
Thy Courage still, be prudent; Brav'ry, wise;
Who on affected Danger runs, despise:
Delight in Wounds, only in Fools take place;
Be thou thy Countrey's Bulwark, and her Grace.
Ep. 28. An Epitaph on Glaucia.
Melior's Freeman far renowned,
Who dying Rome in Sorrow drowned,
The short Delight of's Patron dear,
Glaucia beneath this Marble here,
Near the Flaminian way's interred.
Though from Chaste Laws he never erred,
A modest Blush his Face overspread.
Quick of Wit, of wondrous Grace,
Scarce thirteen Years in him took place.
Who mourn'st such sad untimely Loss,
May never weep for thine own Cross.
Ep. 29. On the same.
None of the abject, prostrate, Crew,
Which greedy Bauds in Cages mew,
But fixed all Vices far above,
And worthy of an Honest Love.
When not yet sensible to know,
What Boon his Patron did bestow,
Glaucia was Melior's Freeman made,
To his Endowments this was paid.
For who more charming, who more fair?
More with Apollo might compare?
The Graces which in him did dwell,
Did those of the youthful God excel.
Immod'rate Virtue, it is thy Doom,
But seldom to Old Age to come.
To prevent Sorrow's sharp Disease,
Pray naught thou love may too much please.
Ep. 30. On Petus.
If when ten Pound you promised, you had paid,
And given it home with me, and not delayed,
I had your Debtor for an Hundred been:
But Petus, sending it, so tardy in,
After seven Months, I guess, or nine Months time,
I know not which to called, a Gift, or Crime.
Shall I what is truer, even than Truth, expound,
Instead of giving, thou have lost, ten Pound.
Ep. 31. On Charidemus.
Often with thy Wife does the Physician lie,
Thou knowing, Charidem, and standing by.
I see, thou will not of a Fever dye.
Ep. 32. On the Death of Otho.
When yet the chance of War did doubtful stand,
And Otho might have had the upper Hand;
War he renounced, maintained by Seas of Blood,
And with his own, restrained the Public Flood.
Tho Cato's Life, than Caesar's, greater were;
Otho, in's Death, exceeded Cato far.
Ep. 39. On Cinna.
Of thy Marulla's sevenfold Births, not one,
Cinna, is thine, or yet a freeborn Son:
For not thy self, thy Neighbor, or thy Friend,
To their begetting can at all pretend:
But their Dams Stealths are shown by every Head,
To be the Work of the Straw, and Trundle-Bed.
He, who, Moor-like, with woolly Hair we see,
Of the Cook Santer does confess to be.
But he with strutting Lips, and a flat Nose,
The Image of the Wrestler does disclose,
Pannicus. The third, who is ignorant to be
The Baker Dama's, who does Dama see,
And know a bleer Eye? The fourth, fair to sight,
Showing a wanton Brow, thy Catamite
Lygdus begot. He with a Copped Crown,
And Ears, like Asses, bangling up and down,
Who can deny to Gyrrah, the Buffoon?
Two Girls, of Fox this, that of Blackbird Hue,
Their Sires, the Piper Crote, and Carpus show
The Hind. Complete were now thy Mungrel Race,
Could thy two Eunuchs gen'rate, as embrace.
Ep. 41. On a Hoarse Poet.
Verse to recite, tho Hoarse, thou do not cease:
Which shows that thou can speak, not hold thy Peace.
Ep. 50. On Thelesinus.
When Thelesinus did Observance pay
To honest Men, he went in poor Array:
But when to Pimp he did himself apply,
Houses and Land, he had wherewith, to buy.
Would thou be Rich? Be Factor to some Sin:
Honest Employment brings but little in.
Ep. 55. On Coracinus.
Of richest Spices thou do ever scent,
Nor is the Phoenix Nest more redolent.
Despisest us, who don't in Sweets excel:
Of naught it is better, than of Odours smell.
Ep. 59. On Baccara.
Thy Chests, such store of Winter-garments, hold,
Thou griev'st, and often complain'st, for want of Cold;
Wishest dark Days and short, sharp Winds, and Snow,
And hates the Season, if it milder grow.
Did thou the worse for my thin Gown ever fare,
Borne from my Back by every puff of Air?
How much more Humane, more Sincere, 'twere done,
Should thou in August Winter-Clothes put on?
Ep. 60. On Pompillus.
Peop. Pompillus Name is up, his Work is done,
His Fame throughout the Universe does run.

Mart. So may our German Foes successful be,
And all, O Italy! that love not thee.

Peop. Pompillus Lines, for Wit, yet have the Name.


Mart. But trust me, that is not enough for Fame.
How many witty, learned, Books do come
To serve the Kitchen, and to feed the Worm?
It Is something else Eternity does give,
It Is not the Wit, but i. e. A Vital Quality, or kind of Immortal Soul in the
Compages of it, like that in the Body of a Man.
Genius, makes Books live.

Ep. 62. On an Envious Person.
Rome hugs my Verse, and cries it up for Rare,
My Books each Hand and every Bosom bear;
There Is one yet lowres, disdains, is ill at Ease:
I Am glad; my Verses now my self do please.
Ep. 63. To Marianus.
You know you are flattered, know the greedy Knave,
You know what it is such Flatterers would have:
And yet you write him Heir in your Last Deed,
And will, that he, in all you have, succeed.
What tho he sends great Gifts? It Is with an Hook;
And do the Fish the Angler ever brook?
Will this Man mourn, when thou no more shall live?
Would have him Mourn? Then nothing to him give.
Ep. 64. On a Detractor.
When sprung of Fabius Race you no way are,
Nor Curious, who himself to's Plow-men bare
Their Dinner; whose rough Wife her Childbed made,
Under the Covert of an Oak's thick shade:
But of a Father born, trimmed by a Glass,
A Mother, for a Courtesan, does pass;
And so effeminate you your self withal,
Your Wife, tho nice she be, you Wife may call.
For you to dare my much-fam'd Verse detract!
The Momus, on my approved Toys, to act!
My Toys, I say, all Rome attentive hear,
To which both Learned and Noble lend an Ear;
Which deathless Silius with Regard does treat;
And Regulus fluent Tongue deigns to repeat;
Which to revolve, Caesar a time does spare,
Amidst the weight of all the Public Care.
But you know more, your wise discerning Heart
Pallas has framed by the Athenian Art.
May I not live, if The Heart and Paunch we meet
The Garbage, Guts, and the great dangling Feet,
Which loaded Butchers carry through the Street,
With no small Terror unto every Nose,
Do not a sharper Wit than thine disclose.
Yet, with the waste of Paper, against me
Verses you write, such as none read, or see:
But if my chafed Choler thee shall brand,
The Work will live, be read in every Land;
It Is not thy Barber's Soap can cleanse the Stain.
Take heed the Outrage be not thine own Bane,
To urge a living Bear, cease to presume,
Until his Rage forth at his Nostrils fume.
Tho calm, he will lick the Hand, and Strokings bear;
Roused and provoked, you will find him still a Bear.
Thy Teeth then fasten in some empty Hide,
Or Beast that is dead, and will the Wrong abide.
Ep. 66. On a Crier and a Wench.
Gellian, the Crier, sought a Wench to sell,
Of their Repute, who in The Courtesans lived there.
Saburra dwell.
And when he saw his Chapmen offer low
Her Modesty to praise, and better show,
He near him pulled the struggling Wench and nice,
And forceably did Kiss her twice or thrice.
D' ye ask, what such his Kisses did avail?
They cut off half was offered for her Sale.
Ep. 70. On Cotta.
Cotta has passed his threescore Years and two,
And never remembers that he had to do
With Sickness, or yet once laid down his Head;
For a Distemper felt a tedious Bed:
But at Physicians he durst point with Scorn,
At Two Physicians.
Dasius and Two Physicians.
Alcontus make a Horn.
If, like wise Men, we do our Years compute,
Raze or substract the Days that did not suit
With happy Life, such as in Pain are spent,
Gouts, Fevers sharp, and the Mind's Discontent.
We should but Children be, that Aged seem,
And hugely they are imposed upon, who do deem,
Priam and Nestor many Years have told:
Not who live long, but happily, are Old.
Ep. 72. On Telethusa.
When Telethusa had been taught to express
To the Timbrel each lascivious Address;
The high Levalto, brisk Morisco dance,
Whatever Wanton Baetis does advance;
Able Old Pelias, to Loves Sports to draw,
His Strength renew, and frozen Palsy thaw;
To make sad Priam know a loose Desire,
Even while he wep't at Hector's Funeral Fire.
Her Lord, who sold her lately for a Slave,
By these her Charms besotted so does rave,
That all he will give, his Mistress, her to have.
Ep. 77. On Afrus.
When poorer yet than Irus thou art deemed,
Than Parthenopaeus younger much esteemed,
Stronger than Wrestlers in their Prime and Might,
Why to be borne by Six do thou delight?
'Twere a less Jest, should thou in Public go
Naked, a-foot, than with this Pageant Show.
The State thou take does more absurd appear,
Than if six Slaves, a seventh, in Pomp should bear;
A Moor upon an Elephant of like hue,
Would move less Laughter among the Vulgar Crew;
So on a Mule as little as himself,
Mounted, we see, some Pigmy little Elf.
Would know what Scorn thy Pride to thee has bred?
Men grudge that six should bear thee, were thou dead.
Ep. 78. On Phrix.
Phrix, a stout Drinker, who no Goblet feared,
Tho one Eye he had lost, and the other bleer'd:
Who (when Physicians bid of Wine beware,
And threatened Blindness, if he had not Care,)
Deriding, said, Farewell my other Eye;
And ten large Cups bid fill him by and by,
And more than once. Would know the end of the Prank?
Phrix soaked good Wine, but his Eye Poison drank.
Ep. 79. To Lupus.
Thou Art Rich and Sad; take heed lest Fortune see,
And, as Ungrateful, do proceed with thee.
Ep. 80. On Winter Roses.
Egypt did proudly Winter Roses boast,
As the sole Product of her fertile Coast:
But now at Rome her Merchants are surpised,
To see such Store, the Memphian are despised:
Where ever they look, where ever they take their way
Hedges of blushing Roses do display.
So does this Glory of the Spring excel,
Not Pestan Rosaries more fragrant smell
Even Goddess Flora seems in Rome to dwell.
Let not thy Winters, Nile, then vie with ours,
Go plow, and send us Corn, we'll send thee Flowers.
Ep. 82. To Rufus.
One, very strictly, me of late did eye,
As those that Slaves or Fencers use to buy:
And when he had surveyed me over and over
With Eye and Finger too, behind, before.
Art thou, art thou, (says then astonished he)
The famous Merry Martial, that I see?
Whose Wit not only duller Climes admire,
But those, who to the noblest Arts aspire?
I, blushing, smiled; and, with a light Assent,
Did not deny, I was the Man he meant.
How come thou then, says he, so meanly Clad?
I did reply, Because my Verse are Bad.
Lest, Rufus, often I Am drove to say the same,
Send Garments, suit not with my State, but Fame.
Ep. 84. On Philippus.
Philip, in Health, eight Men to bear him had.
Who thinks him in good Health, himself is Mad.
Ep. 93. On Thais.
Thais stinks worse than a stale Fuller's Vat
New broken in the way; than a dead Rat;
A Lion's Mouth; a Rutting Goat's less Rank,
A Carr'on Dog cast upon Tiber's Bank;
A putrid Chick that is addl'd in the Egg,
Stale pickled Fish corrupted in the Kegg.
But then the Drab (her Hautgout to disguise,
When to the Bath she goes,) deals in this wise;
Her self she husks under thick Pastes, and guards
With Oils, thrice and four times repeated Fards.
But when she, by these Arts, hopes all is well,
Predominant Thais does of Thais smell.
LIB. VII.
Ep. 1. To Domitian.
CAEsar thy dread Palladian Breast Plate wear,
Which even the Gorgon seems it self to fear:
When on thee buckled, all the AEgis know;
But when unarmed, it does plain Armor show.
Ep. 4. To Caesar.
If with thee, Caesar, the Desires take place
Of People, Senate, all the Roman Race:
Thy Presence graciously to them afford,
At their impatient Suit, return their Lord.
Rome her Foes envies, that they Thee detain,
Tho many Laurels she thereby does gain;
That barbarous Nations see her Prince so near,
Enjoy that Face, which they do so much fear.
Ep. 8. On Cascelius.
If thou at Sixty but Ingenious be,
When shall we thee, Cascelius, Learned see?
Ep. 11. To Faustinus.
May Caesar still with the same gracious Ear,
And serene Brow, my Sportive Verses hear,
As they wrong none, not those I justly hate;
As Fame I love not at the odious rate
Of others Blushes. But what does't avail?
If in Blood-fetching Lines others do rail,
And vomit Vip'rous Poison in my Name;
Such as the Sun, themselves, to own, do shame?
Who know me, know, my Verses harmless are:
And by the Muses sacred Quire I swear,
By the Genius of my prevailing Fame,
By thy Ears, candid Reader, and thy Name,
Which hold the place of Deities to me,
From all Malignant Envy I am free.
Ep. 18. On a Fragment of the Ship Argus.
This piece thou see of rotten useless Wood,
Was the first Ship that ever plowed the Flood:
Which not the Billows of Cyanean Seas
Of old could wreck, or Scythian worse than these.
Age conquered it; but in Time's Gulf thus drowned,
One Plank's more Sacred, than the Vessel sound.
Ep. 24. On a soft Poet.
When all the Epigrams are sweet, you write,
More candid, than a Face that is painted white;
No grain of Salt throughout them all is seen,
Or drop of Gall? Fool, to be read, do mean?
The choicest Meat will not down without all Sauce,
Nor finds the Face, that has no Mole, applause.
To Children give Fruits, that are luscious sweet,
For Men, what is quick and poinant's only meet.
Ep. 26. To Dexter, on a Wild Boar he sent him.
A huge unweildy Boar with much Mast fed,
That had laid waste the Fields where he was bred,
A Monster, like to that Meleager slew,
In's Blood, bold Dexter did his Spear embrew.
Th'Invidious Prey before my Fire does lie,
And with its cheerful Steam, my Lares by
Bedews: While of much kindled Wood the Light
My Kitchen makes all Festival and bright.
The ranting Cook demands a power of Spice,
Choice Wines for Pickle, of the highest Price.
Back to thy Lord return, thou blustering Boar,
My Range, to entertain thee, is too poor.
Dreadful alive, Destructive even when slain,
No less the Treaters, than the Huntsman's, Bain.
Mean Food, and scant, I rather choose to bear,
Than such Confounding, tho'Voluptuous, Fare.
Ep. 30. To Regulus.
The Chian Figs, the Eggs, and Laying Hens,
The hoarse-voic'd Fowl, fat Prisoners of the Pens,
The shaggy Kid, the Dam lamented, lost,
Olives preserved from Injury of Frost;
The hoary Herbs bearing the Morning Dew,
In my own Farm, thou think, all bred, or grew.
A pompous Error; there is no such store,
But a starved Owner naught it ever bore.
Whatever thy Umbrian Hind to thee does bring,
Or in thy Tusculan or Tuscan Spring,
Markets afford, all I on Friends bestow,
Suburra's the rich Soil in which they grow.
Ep. 32. On Cinna.
When in a sordid Gown thou love to go,
But shows as white, as the new fallen Snow;
Why 'bout thy Feet, thy Gown to wear, do use?
Fool, tuck it up, or it will foul thy Shoes.
Ep. 3^. To Stella.
When my crazed House Heavens Showers could not sustain,
But floated with vast Deluges of Rain;
Thou shingles, Stella, seasonably did send,
Which from the impetuous Storms did me defend:
Now fierce loud sounding Boreas, Rocks does cleave,
Do clothe the Farm, and Farmer naked leave?
Ep. 38. On Caelius.
Caelius, impatient longer to abide
The Morning Aves, and the Great Men's Pride,
From vagrant Jants, and dirty toilsom Pain,
To free himself, began the Gout to feign;
Which while too much he sought, should true appear,
And swathed his Feet, and did with Ointments smear,
Walked as in Pain, the more his Grief to show,
See what great Art and Industry can do!
He feigns not now the Gout, his Gout is true.
Ep. 41. To Castricus.
If any in Rich Gifts with thee dare vie,
His Skill with thee, in verse too, let him try:
I, poor in both, prepared am to yield,
And find much Ease, by quitting of the Field.
Why then Ill Verses do I thee present?
Do think, none ever Alcinous Apples sent?
Ep. 42. To Cinna.
The best, when thou art asked, is to say, ay:
The next is, Cinna, quickly to deny.
I love him Gives; him, that Denies, not hate;
But thou both give and deny'st too late.
Ep. 43. To Q. Ovidius, on the Statue of Cesonius.
See thy Cesonius lively figured here,
Who unto thee, Ovidius, was so dear;
Whom Nero did condemn, but thou did dare
Nero condemn, while thou his Fate durst share,
Despising of thine own, and went along
Through Seas, through Rocks, Great Partner of his Wrong.
An Exile, him to follow, thou did choose,
Though this, when Consul, thou did him refuse.
If Names shall live, commended by my Verse,
This Fact to future Ages they will rehearse,
That the like Faith from thee Cesonius found,
For which to Seneca, himself was so renowned.
Ep. 45. To Priscus.
While Verses thou will have thy Gift attend,
Which thou desir'st, like Homer's, may be penned,
Thy self and me thou vexest day and night,
And, to my Grief, thy Muse takes her Delight.
Lofty and chiming Verse to th'Rich present,
Course useful Gifts best to the Poor are sent.
Ep. 46. To Licinius Sura.
Thou most Illustrious of our Learned Men,
Whose Style the Ancients does retrieve again;
How great a Gift did Fates on us bestow,
When, ready now to taste the Waves below,
They sent thee back; when all gave way to Tears,
And had deposed both their Hopes and Fears.
Hells Regent could not so much Envy bear,
But did himself thy Thread of Life repair.
Thou ^eest what Grief, were Dead, would all annoy;
And may, thy After-life, in Life, enjoy.
Live like one snatched from Death, crop Joy's brief Flower,
Who from the Grave's returned, should lose no hour.
Ep. 50. To Urbicus.
If you desire my Sportive Books to know,
Yet care not for them Money to bestow;
Pompeius Auctus (unknown) from me greet,
In Mars Revenger's Temple him you will meet;
Skilled in all Law and Courts: On him I look,
Not as my Reader, but my very Book.
By heart he has so perfect every Line,
That not a Title can be lost that is mine.
So that the Author he might claim to be,
Did he not favor both my Fame and Me.
You may your self to him (at ten) invite,
From Business he is never free till night.
His little Supper will admit of two,
He Will Read; to Eat, is all you have to do:
And when you say, Enough; he will still go on;
Nay, tho* you're tired, he will not yet have done.
Ep. 51. To Auctus.
Reading my Books to Celer, pleases me,
If what thou read'st, to him, as pleasing be.
Over Spain, my Native Soil, he does preside,
Such Justice in that World did never reside.
So Great a Man my Reverence does excite,
Not to a Reader, but a Judge, I write.
Ep. 52. On Umber.
All the Saturnal five days to thee sent,
In one vast Gift, thou did to me present;
Twelve Table-books, seven Tooth-picks, and a Cup,
Olives and Beans in Bull-rush Frails made up;
Even pace with these a Spoon and Napkin bore,
A Flaggon stained with Wine, as black as Gore;
Dried Plums, Prunello's of the oldest date,
A Jarr of Libyan Figs, of massy weight.
The Price of all did of four Shillings lack,
Which eight strong Slaves yet bore upon their Back.
How easy, more commodious had it been,
By a little Boy to have sent four Guinea's in?
Ep. 53. To Nasidienus.
There Is not a Morn, that me thou do not vex
With idle Dreams, that may my Thoughts perplex:
Which, while to expiate, thou do pretend,
The Wine of two years Vintage to an end
Is brought; Salt, Meal, whole heaps of Gums are spent;
And from my dwindling Flocks my Lambs are sent:
A Pig, an Hen, an Egg, I cannot keep,
Watch, with a Pox, or, at thine own Charge, sleep.
Ep. 55. On Rabirius, Domitian's Principal Architect.
When with such Art, Rabirius did design
Th'Emperial Palace, Models all Divine
His Soul conceived, his soreing Thoughts did fly
Up to the starry Pole, and arched Sky.
Phidias his Jove were Pisa now t'inshrine,
No Structure they would approve, but what were thine.
Ep. 58. On Cecilianus.
Cecilian, without Boar, did never eat.
How well the Eater's suited, and his Meat.
Ep. 59. To Jove.
Great Rome, dread Jove, and Heaven, obey thy Nod,
And all believe, when Caesar's safe, a God.
While others, for themselves, do thee adore,
Whatever a Deity can give, implore:
That I alone do naught of thee desire,
As Pride in me, let it not move thine Ire.
That thou to Caesar would propitious be,
I only pray, and Caesar unto me.
Ep. 60. To Domitian.
Presumptuous Traders did all Rome possess,
No bounds did set to such their mad Excess:
Caesar the pestered Streets did open lay,
Where only was a Path, he made a Way;
Ground for their Huts, or Vessels none might hire,
To cause the Praetor t^ead over Shoes in the Mire:
And Rogues encouraged secret Arms to bear;
Cooks, Barbers, Vict'allers, all restrained are:
Thy Edict, Caesar, their Encroachments stop;
Rome's Rome again, 'twas lately one great Shop.
Ep. 63. On a Barber.
When but a Barber thou were known to be,
Thy wanton Dame raised thee to Knights degree:
But for thy Crimes obnoxious to the Law,
To Sicily thou thought fit to withdraw.
In thy now useless Age what Art wilt court,
Thy wretched Life how, saved by flight, support?
Rhet'rick or Grammar Skill thou do not own;
Philosophy is more to thee unknown;
T'a foreign Stage thy self thou can not hire;
Sir Knight, to Barb again, thou must retire.
Ep. 64. To Gargilianus.
Ten Winters, Gargilianus, twice over told,
Thy single Lawsuit in three Courts did hold.
Ah, Wretch and Madman! Twenty Years to brawl,
When in thy Power it was, to give up all.
Ep. 65. On Labienus.
Fabius sole Heir did Labienus leave;
He yet complains, he did his Hopes deceive.
Ep. 67. To Rufus.
My Book, to show thy Father, Friend, forbear;
Perhaps he only likes those Serious are;
My wanton Verse, if they with him succeed,
I dare to Curious and Fabricius read.
Ep. 68. On Theophila.
This is Theophila, that Learned She,
The Gods, my Canius, have reserved for thee.
Whom, his Disciple, Plato's proud to name,
The Sto^ does as emulously claim.
The Works will live, that pass her Learned Test,
So Wise, so above Woman, is her Breast.
Not fair Pantenis can to her aspire,
Though so Illustrious in the Muses Quire.
Amorous Sappho may admire her Verse,
Greater in Virtue, not in Po'sie less.
Ep. 72. To Maximus.
Houses in Dian's Mount, in Esquilin,
More in the Patrician Street of thine are seen;
Hence Cybel's Fane, from thence thou may behold
Vesta's; here Jove's new Temple, there his old.
Where may we find thee? Say, in what place? Tell.
Who every where resides, does no where dwell.
Ep. 75. To Philomusus.
Our Great ones strive, who first shall catch thee up,
Who carry thee to Plays, to Walk, to Sup;
Take high Delight, as often as they may,
To bathe with thee, to have thee on the way.
Do not for this, thy self too much admire,
They do not love thee, but to Laugh, desire.
Ep. 80. To Lausus.
Thou thirty Epigrams do note for bad;
Call my Book Good, if thirty Good it had.
Ep. 82. On Eutrapelus.
Eutrapelus, the Barber, works so slow,
That while he shaves, the Beard anew does grow.
Ep. 83. To his Book.
While my Cecilius to the World would leave
My Picture; and the rare Piece seems to breath;
My Book to Peuce, and still Ister go,
Held by Secundus from the conquered Foe.
To him a small, but pleasing, Gift thou wilt be,
And in my Verse, my perfect Face he will see:
Which neither Chance, nor power of Time, can raze,
Even when Apelles Works they shall deface.
Ep. 84. To Sabellus.
That thou Tetrastichs writes, not without Wit,
And Distichs also prettily do hit,
I praise, but not admire: It Is no hard Task
Verses to write; a Book more Skill does ask.
Ep. 85. On Sextus.
When but a Stranger, to thy Birthday Feast,
I ever, Sextus, was a constant Guest.
What Is fallen out? What did thy Anger move,
After so many Years and Proofs of Love,
That I, thy ancient Friend, am passed by?
But I my self can tell the Reason why.
I sent no Plate, no Gift to thee I made;
For thou call'st that a Treat, in truth's a Trade;
Profit thou seek'st, thou seek'st not, Sextus, Friends.
My Man forgot, thou say, his Stripes shall make amends.
Ep. 86. On Himself.
If Flaccus in an horned Owl delight,
And Canius in an Ethiope, black as Night;
If Publius much a little Bitch does love,
And Cronius does an Ape no less approve;
If Marius a vile Indian Mouse affects,
If, Lausus, thou a prattling Pie respect'st;
Glacilla wreaths about her Neck a Snake,
Another for her Bird a Tomb does make;
Why may not I admire a lovely Face,
When Monsters, like to these, the others grace?
Ep. 89. To Creticus.
Matho objects, my Books unequal are,
If he says true, he praises ever aware,
Calvin and Umber write an equal Strain,
Naught is the Book that is free from heights, and plain.
Ep. 91. On Baccara.
If need thou have, thou need'st not me entreat,
Baccar, these Words thou often do repeat.
My Creditor's Rage thou in his Look do read,
Thou see, but know not, Baccar, what I need.
My Rent, thou by, is called for in with speed,
Thou hear'st, but know not, Baccar, what I need.
I shiver in a tattered threadbare Weed,
Thou see, yet know not, Baccar, what I need.
I need, that thou were Planet-struck with speed,
No more that thou may say, What do thou need?
Ep. 94. On Linus.
It Is Winter, and December's horrid Cold,
Makes all things stark; yet, Linus, thou lay'st hold
On all thou meet'st, none can thy Clutches miss,
But with thy frozen Mouth all Rome do kiss.
What could more spightful do, or more severe,
Had thou a Blow of the Face, or Box of the Ear?
My Wife, this time, to kiss me does forbear,
My Daughter too, however debonaire.
But thou more Trim and Sweeter art. No doubt,
Th'Icicles, hanging at thy Dog-like Snout,
The congealed Snivle dangling on thy Beard,
Ranker than the oldest Goat of all the Herd.
The nasty'st Mouth in the Town I Would rather greet,
Than with thy flowing frozen Nostrils meet.
If therefore thou have either Shame or Sense,
Till April comes no Kisses more dispense.
Ep. 95. An Epitaph on Urbicus.
I Infant Urbicus here buried lie,
My Name and Birth Great Rome did dignifie.
Three Years I had not full attained unto,
When rigid Fates my Thread did cut in two.
What served my Childhood, Beauty, early Speech?
To drop a Tear, is all they can beseech.
Which if thou do, may like Chance from thee fly,
And all thou love, as aged as Nestor dye.
Ep. 96. To his Book.
If Book, Cesius Sabinus, (the Renown
Of hilly Umbria, and of the Town
Of my Friend Aulus Pudens) thou do know,
However employed, yet boldly to him go;
Though many urgent Cares oppress his Mind,
A vacant Time to read thee, he will find.
For me he loves; and deigns my Verse the Grace,
Next Turnus Noble Works to hold the Place.
O, what great Trophies are for thee prepared!
What numerous Friends! what Glories to be shared!
There Is not a Mart, in which thou wilt not be found,
A Feast, a Street, but will with thee refound,
The Baths, the Portico's, even every Stall,
To One you are sent, but wilt be read by All.
Ep. 97. On Castor.
While all things thou did buy, it thee befell,
That all things, Castor, thou do likewise sell.
Ep. 98. To Crispus.
May thou the Prince still Gracious to thee find,
And Rome, no less than Egypt, ever kind:
If, when in Court, my Verses thou do hear,
(For sometimes Caesar deigns to them an Ear)
Thou me afford'st this free and candid Praise,
This Man's a Glory, Caesar, to thy days,
Yields not to Marsus, Pedo, or the best.
This is enough; to Caesar leave the rest.
Ep. 101. On Milo.
While Milo Travels, Fallow lies his Field,
His Wife, however, a yearly Crop does yield.
How comes she Fruitful, and that Barren? Say.
His Wife was plowed, his Land neglected lay.
LIB. VIII.
Ep. 1. To his Book.
TO the Princes laurell'd Court, seeing you are to go,
Learn, Book, a chaste and modest Speech to know.
No place is left for wanton Venus there,
Pallas, Caesarian Pallas, rule does bear.
Ep. 2. To Janus.
When Ianus, Lord of Times, beheld of late
The Emperial Victor in triumphant State,
Though Faces he had two, he thought them few,
And wished that yet more Eyes he had to view.
With both his Tongues he said unto our Lord,
Nestor' s four Ages I Will to thee afford.
O Father Ianus! thine own also give,
That he not long, but may for ever live.
Ep. 3. To his Muses.
Five had sufficed, six Books or seven do cloy,
Why do as yet delight, my Muse, to toy?
Give over for shame: Fame has not more to grace
My Verse, the Business made in every place.
And when proud Tombs, in which for Fame Men trust,
Overthrown and broken lie reduced to Dust,
I shall be read, Strangers will make it their care,
Unto their several Soils my Works to bear.
She of the Sacred Nine, (when I had spoke)
Whose Locks with Odours drop, thus Silence broke.
And will thou then thy pleasant Verse forsake?
What better Choice, Ungrateful, can thou make?
Exchange thy Mirthful for a Tragic Vein;
Thunder harsh Wars in an Heroic Strain;
Which strutting Pedants, till they are hoarse, may rant,
While the Ripe Youth detest to hear the Cant:
Let the o'er-sowre and dull that way delight,
Whose Lamps at Midnight see the Wretches write.
But season thou thy Lines with sharpest Wit,
That all may read their Vices smartly hit.
Although thou seem to play but on a Reed,
Thy slender Pipe the Trumpet does exceed.
Ep. 6. On* Euctus.
Than Euctus antic Plate, nothing can be
More hateful; Earthen Pots I wish to see,
When he their raving Ped'grees to relate,
Deadens the Wine with his old rusty Prate.
This Cup, Laomedon' s own Table graced;
This was Apollo' s, when Troy' s Walls he placed;
This, against the Lapithes, did Rhecus throw,
See how it is crazed, and battered with the blow!
This, of odd Make, was Nestor' s high Delight,
Nestor' s own Thumb did wear this Dove so bright.
Achilles, in this Scyff, large Draughts did pour
To's Friends, having carous'd it off before.
This Bowl to Bitias Dido quass'd, that Night
She entertained ber loved Dardanian Knight!
While thus he boasts Goblets of Priam's Age,
Wines of That is, Infant Wine, new, and naught.
Astyanax our Thirsts assuage.
We'd rather of thy Wine thou'd'st crack the Odds,
Give us the Liquor, not the Plate, of the Gods.
Ep. 7. On Cinna.
Is this to plead, the Learned Lawyer play,
In ten Hours, Cinna, but nine Words to say?
Yet thou this Time, four Glasses did increase.
It Is a vast while that thou can hold thy Peace.
Ep. 10. On Bassus.
Bassus a Gown of richest Purple Die,
But lately, for an hundred Crowns did buy.
O mighty Bargain! Why? So Cheap do you say?
Yes, unto him, who never means to pay.
Ep. 11. To Domitian.
That Caesar's come to Rome, the Rhine does know,
So far, so fast, the Peoples Voices go;
Their iterated Shouts the Scythians fright,
All Nations, whom their Joy does not delight.
While in the Cirque their Salve's welcome thee,
The Races they regard not, though they see.
No Prince, Thy self, was ever so loved before,
Rome if she would, she could not love thee more.
Ep. 12. On Priscus.
Do ask, Why a Rich Wi^e I would not wed?
Because I would be Lord in the Marr^'ge Bed.
Priscus, the Wife, should the Inferior be:
But Wealth on her part, makes a Parity.
Ep. 13. On a Fool.
I bought a Fool, I thought, for twenty Pound,
Restore my Coin, the Fool his Wit has found.
Ep. 14. On his Cruel Friend.
Least Winter Blasts should the choice Fruitannoy,
And keener Air thy tender Plants destroy,
Fences enclose them of transparent Stone,
Which, without cold, admit the Sun alone.
But unto me thou giv'st an open Cell,
Where Boreas even himself would fear to dwell.
With Friendship, Cruel, how does this agree?
Than be thy Friend, 'twere better be thy Tree.
Ep. 18. To Cirinius.
Such Epigrams, Cirinius, thou do frame,
As with, or before, mine, might get a Name:
But such Regard to thy old Friend thou'ast shown,
That my Fame's dearer to thee, than thine own.
Thus Odes, for Horace sake, Virgil forbore,
Although he Pindar could have gone before.
To Varus left the proud Cothurnal Vein,
Though himself mightier was in the Tragic Strain.
Many will give their Goods, their Gold, their Ground.
But, that give place in Wit, there is few are found.
Ep. 19. On Cinna.
To pretend Want, like Rich Men, thou art vain,
Poorer in Truth, than thou thy self can feign.
Ep. 20. On Varus.
Thou heaps of Verses daily do devise,
Yet none recite; both Fool thou art, and Wise.
Ep. 21. On the coming of Caesar.
Phosphor, bring Light; why do our Joys delay?
Caesar's to come; Phosphor, bring on the Day.
Rome begs it. Art drawn in Boots Teem,
Thou mov'st so slowly with a lazy Beam?
Castor will not refuse that thou should mount
His swift foot Cillaron on this account.
Impatient Titan why do thou detain?
Xanthus and Ethon both desire the Rein;
Aurora waits: Yet lingering Stars there be,
As if the Moon the Ausonian King would see!
Come, Caesar, though in Night, let Stars delay:
When thou art here, we shall not want a Day.
Ep. 24. To Domitian.
If in this little Book of modest Brow,
I ought do beg, and not too Great, allow:
Or if thou grant'st not, Caesar, let me sue;
Incense and Prayers never Jove's Displeasure drew.
Not he that carves the Form, in Stone and Oar,
Does make a God, but he that does Adore.
Ep. 29.
Who Disticks writes, to Brevity does look:
But where is the Brevity, if it fills a Book?
Ep. 30. On the Story of M. Scaevola acted.
In Brutus time, what was Rome's highest Praise
Is as a Pastime showed, in Caesar's days:
The Presentation, the true Story shames,
His Valiant Hand so bravely grasps the Flames,
Enjoys its Torment, and derides their Ire,
Frolicks and Reigns in the astonished Fire!
His own Spectator he appears to stand,
T'Applaud, not Feel, the Funeral of his Hand!
The Altars gluts, and if not torn away,
Fleshed only, and unwilling to obey,
His other Hand h'ad thrust into the Flame,
Fresh, when that fainted; Fierce, when that was Tame!
After so brave a Deed, invidious 'twere,
To search his Life, or Stock, or to impair
His Fame, by urging what he was before.
What he has done's enough, I need no more.
Ep. 31. On Dento.
Thou know not, Dento, what thou do give leave
To Men, pleasantly of thee to conceive:
Who begg'st that The Benefit given to such as had Three Children, which the
Emperor sometimes in favor gave to those that had none.
Grace, as soon as thou art wed,
Which should be given thee from the Marri'ge Bed.
But with Requests, to tire the Prince, forbear,
And to thy long-left Wife and Home repair;
Who, while at Rome you are suing on the Score
Of having Three Sons, will have brought thee Four.
Ep. 33. On a Cup presented to him.
A Leaf of gilded Bays your Gift does seem,
But named a Cup, to gain it more Esteem.
Sure it was Lacker, Pageants does adorn,
Whereon the Images of Gods are borne,
Or else some Bed-post, this rich Plate, did yield,
Which, by thy Knavish Boy, from thence was peeled.
So light it is, the Wind, that every Fly
Makes with its Wings, o'er-turn'd it passing by;
The Vapor of a Candle bore it up,
One drop of Wine abolished quite the Cup.
March-pains are spatter'd with such Massy Gold,
When they for Childrens New-years-Gifts are sold;
Sunbeams, that make blown Lillies bow the head,
More solid are; the Gossomer that is spread
Upon the Grass; Paint on a Ladies Face,
Which thinest laid, is held the greater Grace.
To Jars and Goblets, why do thou pretend,
When but a Spoon or Bodkin thou might send?
A Spoon or Bodkin? I too much do say;
When to give Nothing, in thy power it lay.
Ep. 35. On an Evil Couple.
When you so well agree in course of Life,
The vilest Husband, and the vilest Wife,
It Is strange, that ever you should live in Strife.
Ep. 37. To Domitian.
Smile, Caesar, at the Pyramids loud Fame;
Memphis no more thy barbarous Wonders name;
The Egyptian Works reach not the smallest part,
Of the Parrhasian Courts Majestic Art:
No such Illustrious Piece the day does show;
Nor Sol in's Universal Travels know.
Seven vast Pavilions, like seven Mountains, rise,
Pelion on Ossa scaled not so the Skies;
Thunder and Clouds beneath, the aspiring Top
Enters the Heavens, and against the Stars does knock
The Sun salutes it with his early'st Ray,
On highest Hills it is Night, when here it is Day.
Thy Palace, 'bove the Olympian, though renoun'd,
Unto its Lord is not yet equal found.
Ep. 39. To Domitian.
For those that eat the Courts Ambrosian Fare,
Spacious enough the Rooms not lately were.
The Structure now adds to the Wine a Grace,
Which Ganymedes pour forth in every place.
Rome does implore, Jove's Guest thou late wou'd'st be
Or if Impatient, that he would Sup with thee.
Ep. 40. To Priapus.
Priapus, (not my Vines or Fruit to save,
But a thin Wood) thy Patronage I crave;
From whence thou came, and may a new be made.
Let me advise thee, spoil the Stealers Trade,
And for the Owners Fire reserve the Stock;
If that shall fail, thy self art but a Block.
Ep. 43. On Fabius and Chrestilla.
Fabius all Wives, Chrestilla Husbands sped,
Torches triumphant shook, when they were dead.
Their Fortune, Venus, let these Victors try,
And on one Bier doubtless they both will lie.
Ep. 44. To Titullus.
Though late, enjoy thy Life, thy short time rate;
Had thou begun a Boy, it had been late:
But, Wretch, even Old, thou know not yet to live,
TO attend the Great, do thy last Periods give;
Through all the Law-Courts thou do swetting run,
No kind of Duty, Hardship, Slavery shun.
Scrape, heap, possess, thou all behind must leave;
Thee, of thy present Cash, Death will bereave,
Of all in Bank, or Bond, that is to thee due;
Nor will thy flattering Heir to thee be true:
But when he has confum'd thy mighty Store,
Swear, after all, that thou did die but Poor:
Nor will his Leudness that short time forbear,
He does the Fun'ra^ Bites for thee prepare;
But, in's false Tears, will with thy Relick lie,
The very day in which he saw thee die.
Ep. 46. On a Chaste Boy.
How great's thy Virtue, and thy Form how rare!
Theseus Chaste Son cannot with thee compare.
For all the Glory of her Virgin Name,
To bathe with thee, Diana would not shame.
And whom, might Cybele alone enjoy,
She would prefer before her Phrygian Boy.
Ganymede's Place did thou to Jove supply,
Juno thou would redeem from Jealousy.
Happy's the Maid, shall thy soft Breast inflame,
And give thee first a Man's and Husband's Name.
Ep. 48. On Crispinus's Robe.
When at the Bath Crispinus did undress,
To whom he gave his Robe, he cannot guess.
Restore the Spoil, whoever has it, pray.
Not this Crispinus, but the Robe does say.
A Scarlet Gown is not for all Men's wear,
Who are not Noble, this rich Die forbear.
If Theft delights thee, a dishonest Prize,
Avoid what will betray thee, if ^^ou*rt Wise.
Ep. 50. To Domitian.
As was that Ovant Feast, Night swelled with Joy,
After that Jove the Giants did destroy;
And vulgar Gods, together with the Great,
Benignly at his Heavenly Table treat;
And Fauns and Satyrs were allowed to call
Freely for Nectar in the Olympian Hall.
Such was that Genial Feast, triumphant State,
When Caesar did his Laurel confecrate,
And Gods, as well as Men, exhilerate.
Patricians, People, Knights, all Rome did eat
With their Great Lord of his Ambrosian Meat,
Great things thou promised, greater did bestow,
Not for a Dole, but Royal Feast we owe.
Ep. 55. To Domitian.
Like the amazing Terrors which resound
In Libyan Pastures, and adjoining Ground,
When Herds of Lions rage in Forests nigh,
And make the fiercest Bulls and Shepherds fly
Home to their Holds, ready through Fear to die:
Such was the Roaring late in the place of Game,
A Troop of Lions seemed to make the same;
It was but One, but One all else did dread,
And paid Subjection to his Crowned Head.
O, what a horrid Grace his Neck did show!
Down to his Feet his curled Main did flow:
His large spread Breast, for largest Spears did call;
Great was the Fear, and Triumph, at his Fall.
Like Glory Libyan Coasts never sent before,
Nor Ida ever saw in all her Store:
Was It not the same to Alcides gave Renown,
And by thy Father from the The Constellation Leo.
Stars sent down?
Ep. 56. To Flaccus.
When former Ages Glory stoops to ours,
And Rome is greater with her Emperors,
That Maro's Sacred Vein is no where found,
And none so deep the Trump of War does sound,
Thou wonder'st, Flaccus: Whereas do but grant
Mecenas's, and thou wilt not Maro's want:
Nay, if thy Farm alone thou will bestow,
The World shall to thee for a Virgil owe.
The Lands which near to sacked Cremona lay,
The Soldier shared, and drove the Flocks away:
Virgil.
Tityrus, alas, involved in the Wrong,
Wept forth his Losses in a feeble Song.
The Mecenas,
Tuscan Knight smiled, when his Fortune frowned,
And all the Poets Care in Plenty drowned.
Malignant Want, Parent of Mean Conceit.
(He, God-like, cried) Make hence thy swift Retreat,
And take thou Wealth, and best of Poets be,
'Bove what the World ever saw, or ever shall see.
My fair Alexis too, (you understand)
Without a Rival is at your Command.
The lovely Boy, at his new Master's Board,
With snowy Hands the black A rich Wine.
Falernum poured;
So bright a Fountain, and so rich a Stream,
Was never Poet's Love, or Poet's Theme!
Then with his Rosy Lips he took the Say,
Had Jove looked on, h'ad snatched the Boy away.
Straight from the astonished Poet's ravished Heart,
All former Thoughts of his low Rural Art
Quite vanished, each course, Rude spun Idea,
His Sunburned Thestilis and Galate^;
And in his lofty high inspired Mind,
Bright Schemes of War, Heroes, and Nations, shined:
Who, late a Gnat, could scarcely well inhearse,
In the weak Numbers of his Ill-wrought Verse.
He drank Heroic Fancy with his Wine,
Riches and Love turned all his Thoughts Divine.
What boots it me, to count the enriched Store
Of Noble Poets? Marsus, Varus, more?
Whose Names, a Burden 'twere, but to repeat.
Thou ask then, If Me thou also treat
Mecenas way, should thou a Virgil see?
If not a Virgil, I Will a That is, Equal the best Epigrammatist.
Marsus be.
Ep. 58. To Caesar.
Though thou great Gifts have given, and wilt give more;
Victor of Kings, and thine own Deeds before;
Thou art not loved, 'cause thy Rewards are free;
But thy Rewards are loved, Caesar, for thee.
Ep. 59. On a One-ey'd Thief.
See him, who shifts so well with his one Eye,
Under whose bold and brazen Brow does lie
The others gaping Socket? The Man forbear
To scorn, there no where lives a Snap so rare.
Autolycus's Fingers never were
Such Lime-twigs, nor might they with his compare.
If he is your Guest, cautious you would need to be,
For then he lays about him, and does see
With both his Eyes: And let the Waiters watch
With never such Circumspection, yet he will catch
A Cup, a Spoon, ever they are aware entrap
The vagrant Napkins, hoarding all in's Lap:
If from the Back a Cloak a little stray,
It Is his, and double Cloak'd he goes away.
The Lacquies Flamboes, though on a light flame,
He dares attempt, nor does he fear the Shame.
And if he lights upon no other Prey,
He Will chouse his Boy, steal his own Shoes away.
Ep. 61. On Carinus.
Vipers never cease to gnaw Carinus Breast,
Anguish and Grief his Quiet to molest;
His Envy rages to that high degree,
To hang himself he only wants a Tree.
Not 'cause my Book's now richly gilt and bound,
My self and Verse through all the World renowned:
But I'ave a House near Rome, and on the Score,
I Am drawn with Mules, not hired, as heretofore.
What shall I wish, th'Envious to repay?
I wish, on him that Fortune also may
A Farm bestow near Town, and Men may tell,
That Mules he drives, and Roots and Herbs does sell.
Ep. 64. On Clytus.
That many Presents Friends to thee may send,
Eight Birth-days in one Year thou do pretend.
Though fresher were thy Looks and brighter shined,
Than the smooth Stones upon Sea-shores we find;
Thy Hair yet blacker than the blackest Jet,
And all that Youth proclaims, in thee were met;
Older than Priam, Nestor, thee I Would hold,
For they so many Birth-days never told:
For shame thy Rapines then at length forbear,
And let one Day suffice thee in a Year;
Least Men deny to thee a Humane Birth,
Believe thee some vile Product of the Earth.
Ep. 65. To Domitian.
Were this refulgent Temple we behold,
The Name of the Temple.
Fortune Returned, her Altar stood of old.
Great Caesar made a stand first in this Place,
Showing, through Dust of War, Majestic Grace,
And darting Beams of Glory from his Face.
Here Rome, with Laurels crowned, with Hand and Voice
Honored their Prince, and highly did rejoice.
The Place an Ovant Arch does also show,
And that, the Dacians double Overthrow:
Two Char'ots, drawn by Elephants, there stands
Upon the Top, his Hand their Reins command;
His Figure, carved in Gold, 's seen both to ride,
Able, alone, two such vast Teams to guide.
Caesar, this Arch comports with Rome's Renown,
The Entrance should be such to Mars's Town.
Ep. 67. On Cecilianus.
When the fifth hour not yet is told by thee,
Thou come, Cecilian, to Sup with me;
The Courts of Law yet sit, the Play's not done.
Calistus, ho, to Grillus bathes straight run,
Although unwash'd, my Servant's bid return,
And lay the Cloth. Cecilianus, sit;
Call'st for warm Water? Cold's not brought in yet,
The Kitchin-door is locked, the Fire not li't.
Why did thou stay so long, as five, to Sup?
In The Morning came not, when thou first were up?
Or why not at an hour, that was too late?
Come when thou will, it must be out of date.
Ep. 68. To Entellus.
Those who so high Alcinous Orchards raise,
With greater reason may thy Villa praise.
That Winter's rage may not thy Fruit lay waste,
No chilling Cold Bacchus rich Clusters blast;
Transparent Stone thy rarer Plants enclose,
Guard from the Frost, and to the Eye expose:
So Virgins Limbs their silken Vestments show,
And Crystal Streams, the Stones, over which they flow.
Nature, by help of Art, will naught refuse,
Autumn, in depth of Winter, she will produce.
Ep. 69. On Vacerra.
Vacerra does the Ancients only praise,
Thinks Poets dead alone deserve the Bays.
Forgive me, wise Vacerra, if that I
To have thy Praise, do make no haste to dye.
Ep. 76. On Gallicus.
Speak the Truth, Martial; of all Love, be bold;
There Is nothing I so gladly would be told.
So, Gallicus, thou urgently do say,
When thou recit'st thy Books, and on the day
Thou publicly have pleaded at the Bar.
It Is hard to hide, what thou do press so far.
Then, Gallicus, if thou the Truth wou'd'st hear,
There Is nothing, like the Truth, that thou do fear.
Ep. 79. On Fabulla.
All thy Companions aged Beldams are,
Or more deformed, than Age makes any, far:
These Cattle at thy heels thou trail'st always
To public Walks, to Suppers, and to Plays.
'Cause when with such alone we thee compare,
Thou can be said, Fabulla, Young or Fair.
Ep. 80. To Caesar.
Our Fathers Deeds, Caesar, thou do revive,
Preserve the grayest Ages still alive;
The antiquated Latian Games renew,
The Fight with simple Fists, thy Sands do show;
Temples, though old, their Honor thou maintain'st,
The mean, for the sake of richer, not disdain'st.
Thus while thou new do build, the old restore,
We owe thee for thy own, and all before.
Ep. 81. On Gellia.
In Gellia's Vows no God or Goddess share,
She by their Names, nor Sacred Rites, does swear,
But by her Pearls, which do so rarely pair.
These she does hug and kiss, and often call
Her Brothers and her Sisters, even her All;
Her dearest Children rates them far above,
And to them shows a far more ardent Love:
And should the Wretch by any Chance these lose,
To live a Minute longer she would refuse.
Oh, for a dext'rous Cheat what would I give?
To 'reave a Life, so ill deserves to live.
LIB. IX.
Ep. 1. To Avitus.
Though thy learned Breast, Great Poet, 's to me known,
And that thy Verse will raise me 'bove mine own;
Yet this short Title on my Statue place,
Which among no common Authors thou do grace.
I Am He, in Sportive Verse, none is above,
Who none astonish, yet all Readers love;
In vaster Works i. e. The old monstrous Poetic Fable of Gorgons, Centaurs,
etc.
vast uncouth things are said,
My Glory is, that I am often read.
Ep. 2. To Domitian, on the Temple built in Honor of the Flavian Family.
While Summers, Autumns, Winters shall abide,
Emperial Names shall over the Months preside;
While great December's bright and glorious day,
Shall boast Domitian made the Rhene obey;
While the Tarpejan Rock shall fixed remain,
And Jove within the Capitol shall reign;
While Roman Matrons Iulia shall adore,
With Frankincense the Goddess mild implore;
The lofty Temple of the Flavian Race,
Shall flourish with Divine Immortal Grace;
Like Sun and Moon, even like Rome's Empire, stand,
A Heaven is built by a Victorious Hand.
Ep. 6. On Paulla.
That, Paulla, thou would Priscus wed, you are wise;
And he is no Fool, that he does thee despise.
Ep. 8. On Afer.
Thee home returned, from Africa, I heard say,
And five days Aves did design to pay:
But twice and thrice attending, it was said,
Thou were employed, or else, thou were in Bed.
Enough; thou like not, that I wish thee well,
It Is easier too for me to say, Farewell.
Ep. 9. To Bithinicus.
Fabius, (to whom thy Presents yearly brought,
Six thousand) as I hear, has left thee naught.
Complain not; he has bequeathed more to none:
Six thousand's left thee yearly of thine own.
Ep. 11. On Cantharus.
When, Cantharus, you are a Slave to others Meat*
Men with Reproofs and Railings do thou treat?
Forbear the Sharpness of a Mind that is Free;
Cynick and Glutton both thou can not be.
Ep. 14. On Earinus.
Thy Name the sweetest Season in does bring,
(Joy of the plund'ring Bees) the flowery Spring;
Which to decypher Venus may delight,
Or Cupid, with a Plume from's own Wing, write;
Which those, that Amber chafe, should only note,
Or be upon, or with a Jewel wrote;
A Name the Cranes do figure as they fly,
And boast to Jove, as they approach the Sky:
A Name that does with no place else comport,
But where it is fixed, only in Caesar's Court.
Ep. 15. On a Parasite.
He on thy Cheer and Table does attend,
Can thou believe to be a Faithful Friend?
The Boar, the Mullet, Souce he loves, not thee;
If I as richly fared, my Friend he would be.
Ep. 16. On Cloe.
Cloe this Tomb, upon seven Husbands dead,
Caused to be raised, What can be truer said?
Ep. 20. On Sabellus.
Ponticus Baths, who frankly thee did treat,
Thou praised'st in three hundred Verse complete:
Thy business was not here to Bathe, but Eat.
Ep. 23. To Pastor.
Pastor, thou may suppose I Wealth require,
On like Accounts the Vulgar it desire:
That in my Setin or rich Tuscan ground,
The Chains of many working Slaves may sound;
That Libyan Teeth my Tables may adorn,
In-laid with Ivory, and with Ivory borne;
My Beds may creek with Plates of purest Gold,
Falernian Wine my large bright Christals hold;
M' attendant Maids may be of such a frame,
As may the Hearts of all my Guests inflame,
With Hebes self contest a beaut'ous Name;
That Slaves in Purple me a loft may bear,
While numerous Clients throng about my Chair.
None of all these (the Gods I do attest)
Have the least place within my temperate Breast.
Do ask, Why Riches I do wish for then?
To build, not Houses, but deserving Men.
Ep. 25. To Carus, on the Emperor's Statue.
What Noble Artist has such Glory won?
In taking Caesar's Face, Phidias outdone?
Whose polished Ivory is no way so fair,
As with the Latia^ Marble to compare.
Such with delight, we see Heavens Face, and wonder,
When, without Clouds serene, we hear it thunder.
Pallas not only gave thee the Olive Wreath,
But her own Work, this Statue, did bequeath.
Ep. 26. On Afer.
If we thy Maid, presenting Wine, behold,
Thy muddy Looks thy Jealousy unfold.
What is the Crime on a fair Face to look,
When this the Stars, the Sun, the Gods do brook?
Must we avert our Eyes, if Beauty shine,
As if a Gorgon skink'd to us the Wine?
Stern was Alcides, yet he did permit
Hylas to open View: No Jealous Fit
Possesses Jove, or does his Peace annoy*
When Mercury with Ganymede does toy.
If thou would, none thy Beauteous Maid should see,
Thy Guests must Blind Men.
Oedipus and Phineas be.
Ep. 27. To Nerva.
Who Verses dares to inspired Nerva send,
To Cosmus too may some vile Drug commend;
Violets, where Roses in their Glory be,
Course Corsick Honey to the Hyblan Be:
Yet in my slighter Verse some Grace is found,
As Olives p^ease, where choicest Cates abound.
Nor wonder that my conscious Muse does fear
My Weakness, and thy Judgment does revere;
When Nero, of no mean Poetic strain,
In 's youthful Flights, dreaded thy stronger Vein.
Ep. 29. An Epitaph on Latinus.
The charming Grace, the Glory of the Stage,
The Applause, the Darling, Pastime of the Age;
Latin lies here, who Cato would have made
His fixed Spectator, sourness have allayed
In rough Fabritius. His strict Life never drew
The Stages Vice, its Arts he only knew.
Dear to his Lord he must, by Virtue, be,
His Lord, whose Eyes, the inward Mind, do see.
Him, Stage Players were so called.
Phoebus Parasite, cease, Rome, to name,
To be thy Jove's Domestic, he did claim.
Ep. 30. An Epitaph on Philenis.
When Nestor's years thou could but barely tell,
Poor Hagg, so early, were thou snatched to Hell?
Sibylla's Age, all out, thou did not see,
Her years thou sum'd'st, but Months thou wanted st three.
Oh, what a Voice is stilled! a hundred Scolds,
When all a Right pretend, when all their Holds
Fasten at once, and yell, make not that Din;
A Pack of Hounds, when all their Throats set in,
Together with the Huntsmen, and their Horn;
A School of Boys, conning at early Morn.
Who now shall charm the Moon down from her Sphere?
So sagely who, the Adulterers Letters bear?
Oh sad Mischance! Oh heavy fatal Cross!
Mischief was never before at such a Loss.
Lie lightly on her, Earth, no weighty Stones,
That, with more ease, Dogs may scrape up her Bones.
Ep. 31. On Nigrina.
Antistus fell in Asia's cruel Clime,
Which Land does bear the Odium of this Crime.
His Bones Nigrina in her Bosom brought,
And the dear Burden made the way seem short.
Which when within the Envied Tomb she laid,
Twice she appeared to be a Widow made.
Ep. 35. On the Flavian Temple.
When Jove the Flavian Temple did behold,
Like Heaven refulgent, darting Beams of Gold,
He scorned his Tomb in Ida feigned of old:
And drenched with Nectar, (which is plenteous found
At his free Board, where Goblets often go round)
He reached a Bowl to Mars, but with his Eye
Regarding Phoebus and his Sister by,
Together with Alcides, and the Son of May,
And to 's immortal Offspring thus did say.
My Tomb you raised in Cre^t; but see the odds,
Of Caesar's, and of being Father of the Gods.
Ep. 36. On Philomusus.
By these your Arts you many a Supper gain,
Telling such things for Truths, you merely feign:
You know the Counsels of the Parthian Court,
And can the Forces on the Rhine report;
With the Dacian General pretend to hold
Intelligence; nay, beforehand, are bold
To tell the Chance of War, who will Victor be,
When 't Rains in Egypt, at this distance see;
The Fleet that Carthage will this year equip,
You can relate, the Rate of every Ship;
Upon whose Head the Emperor will bestow
The Olive Wreath; all this, and more you know.
Your Arts, this night, within your Breast lock up,
On which Condition, you with me shall Sup;
For my good Cheer my Ears do not abuse,
With grossest Lies, in other Terms, your News.
Ep. 40. On Caesonia's Birthday.
This was our Earthly Jove's first happy Morn,
Rhea often wished her Jove upon it born,
Which day first light did to Caesonia show,
No Daughter ever to a Mother more did owe;
Two mighty Joys the day in Rufus moves,
Which for his Prince, and for his Wife, he loves.
Ep. 43. To Apollo.
So may thy Temples, Phoebus, honored be,
Prophetic Swans held Sacred unto thee;
The Muses glory to make up thy Train,
The Delphick Oracles prove never vain,
The Palace Divine Worship to thee pay
As Caesar (thou inspiring him) shall say,
The Grace thou ask'st, to Stella I will show,
Consular Ensigns upon him bestow.
Thy happy Debtor then, a steer I Will bring,
With gilded Horns for my glad Offering;
This Vow upon my rural Altar pay;
The Victim's ready, Phoebus, why do stay?
Ep. 44. On the Statue of Hercules.
He, with the Lion's Skin beneath him spread
On the hard Stone, to make a softer Bed;
Whose left Hand holds a Club, whose right a Cup,
S^pine the Posture, Face to Heaven cast up,
To Heaven himself once bore; is, though you see
In Figure small, a Mighty Deity!
No modern Master glories in this Piece,
It boasts Lysippus hand, and Art of Greece.
First, Alexander's Beard the God did show,
By whom, while Young, the World he did subdue;
Upon his Altar too, while yet a Boy,
The Hannibal.
Carthaginian vowed Rome to destroy;
Sylla, at his Command, the Empire eased
Of his own bloody Reign. At length displeased
With the Pride of various Courts, he chose to be
A private Man's domestic Deity:
And as he once was Guest to the Nemean Swain,
Learned Vindex God hereafter to remain.
Ep. 46. To Marcellinus.
Now thou bear Arms under the Northern Pole,
Near which the Constellations slowly roll;
With thy approaching Eyes thou may behold
Prometheus Rock, the fabulous Scene of old,
Where the Aged Hero filled both Earth and Skies
With hideous Exclamations and loud Cries,
The Tortures proving, which he there sustained,
The Rock less hard, to which his Limbs were chained.
Who can Men's Hardships or Hard Hearts admire,
When they the Offspring are of such a Sire?
Ep. 48. On Pannicus.
Thy words the deep recondite Lore resound
Of Plato, Zeno, what is severest found;
Among those whose horrid Images affect
To doom all Vice, by their austere Aspect;
Speak thee Pythag'ras Successor and Heir,
Nor 'bates thou him in B^sh of Beard an Hair.
Thou'ast yet, what is shameful, and should never be said
A wanton Groin to this thy awful Head.
Say thou, who the Axioms of all Sects do know,
Whose Dogma it is, the Scars of Lust to show.
Ep. 49. On Gallicus.
By what is most Sacred, and your Head you Swear,
Of part of your Estate you would make me Heir;
Which I believed, (for who is that Foolish He,
To his own Wishes will a hind'rance be.)
These Hopes to Cherish, I did send you store
Of noble Gifts, among the rest, a Boar,
So vast, so fat, might be preferred before
That famed of Calydon. You did decree
Forthwith to treat Numbers of each Degree,
People, Patricians, Knights, the Rich, the Poor,
Through every Ward Rome belches yet my Boar.
But (strange!) thou to make me a Guest did fail,
Affordedst not a Rib, not even the Tail.
In hope to be thy Heir wou'd'st have me live,
Who not a Legacy of mine own Boar did give?
Ep. 50. On the Gown given him by Parthenius.
This is the Gown so honored in my Verse,
Which Readers often with delight rehearse;
Parthenius Gift, a noble and a bright,
Which set me forth a most Illustrious Knight;
When it first new and glossy to me came,
It worthy was to bear the Donors Name:
But now it is old and soiled, worn to the thread,
No more can White, but Cold as Snow, be said.
What, with much Use and Age, will not decline?
It Was the Parthenian Gown, but now Poor Mine.
Ep. 51. On Gaurus.
Thou prov'st my Wit, Gaurus, but small to be,
Because my Pieces please through Brevity.
But thou, who can the Trojan War enlarge
With various Fights, till twenty Books thou charge,
Art a great Man. My Poem's smart and curt,
Thine is a Giant, but it is one of Dirt.
Ep. 54. To Q. Ovidius.
A Gift I did design for your Birthday;
But you forbad it, and I must obey.
You are a most Imperious Man, I see,
What I Would have done to you, do you to me.
Ep. 56. To Flaccus.
In The Feast, in which Friends do their Friends present,
While I to Stella, and thee, Flaccus, meant,
My Gifts to send; a numerous throng of Friends,
And each of which to the first place pretends,
Beset me. Two t'oblige I did design,
But dangerous it is, so many to decline,
And more, by costly Gifts, to keep them mine.
No way to free my self, but this, I see,
To Stella naught to send, nor, Flaccus, yet to thee.
Ep. 57. On the Emperor's Page.
To Africa, Hylas, our Lord's Shield does bear,
Cupid, do thou the Lad fit Arms prepare,
Such as with which thou softest Breasts do wound.
Yet in his Hand let a light Spear be found;
But Shield and Helm far from him see thou throw,
Into the Fight he will safelier Naked go.
No Sword or Dart Parthenopeus harmed,
While the fair Boy did range the Field unarmed.
Whoever's struck by thee, shall dye with Love,
And happy's he, that such a Fate may prove.
Return while young, and while thy Beauty's bright;
And grow a Man in Rome's, not Lybia's, sight.
Ep. 60. On Mamurra.
Mamurra many Hours does Vagrant tell
In The Shops, where Rome her richest Ware does sell.
Beholds fair Boys, devours them with his Eyes,
Not those of common Note, one first espies;
But which in inner Rooms they closely mew,
Removed from mine, and from the Peoples view.
Glutted with these, choice Tables he uncases,
Others of Ivory, set high, displaces.
Rich Tortois Beds he measures four times over,
Sighs, they fit not, and leaves them on that score.
Consults the Statues of Corinthian Brass
By the Scent; and not without blame lets pass
Thy Pieces, Polyclet. He next complains
Of Chrystals mixed with Glass, and them disdains.
Marks Porce'lan Cups, sets ten of them apart:
Weighs Antic Plate (of Mentor's noble Art,
If any be) counts, in the Enameled Gold,
The Gems that stand. Rich Pendants does behold:
For the Sardonix makes a search most nice,
And of the biggest Jaspers beats the Price.
Tired now at last, after eleven Hours stay,
Two Farthing Pots he bought, and himself bore away
Ep. 69. On a Schoolmaster.
Despiteful Pedant, why do me pursue,
Thou hated Head by all the younger Crew?
Before the Cock proclaims the day is near,
Thy direful Threats and Lashes stun mine Ear;
The Anvil rings not out a shriller sound,
When massy Hammers the hot Irons pound;
Statues of Brass with lesser Din are made,
Than thou do carry on the Grammar Trade;
Shouts in the Race and Theater are less,
When Factions, for their Parties, Zeal express.
Whole Nights, I ask not, in Repose to keep,
To Wake's not grievous, but it is, never to sleep.
Wilt leave thy School, thy bawling Lectures cease?
Thy Gain shall greater be, to hold thy Peace.
Ep. 71. On Cecilianus.
O Times! O Manners! Tully did declame,
When Cat'line put the State into a flame:
When Son and Father furious Arms did take,
And the whole World one Scene of Blood did make.
Why now, O Times! O Manners! do thou cry?
What is it, Severe One, that thou do descry?
No Wars we hear, no Treasons hateful Sound,
But Joy and Peace circle the Empire round.
It Is not our Vices makes thee loath the Times,
But, Cecilianus, thine own Secret Crimes.
Ep. 74. On a Cobbler.
A Cobbler wont the putrid Soles to retch
Of dirty Shoes, and with his Teeth to stretch:
Now of his Patron's Lordship is possessed,
Where had he but a Stall, one would detest.
Drunk, he bright Chrystals, with rich Wine, o'erturn^
With his Lord's Paramour in Dalliance burns.
My Simple Parents taught to me the while
Bawbling Letters, to know a Verse, and Style.
Gag thy Pen, Muse, and thy Books tare them all,
When such a Fortune's purchased by the Awl.
Ep. 78. On Priscus.
Priscus with Art in many Leaves disputes,
What Requisites a Sumptuous Feast best suits;
Many sublime and witty Things he brings,
All from a Learned and Noble Art which springs.
What makes a Feast, shall I in one Line say?
Absence of Scurrilous Jests, and Fiddlers Play.
Ep. 82. To Avitus.
Reader and Hearer both my Books delight:
But there is a Poet says, They are not right.
I weigh it not: No more than they make Feasts,
Study to please the Cook's Taste, but the Guests.
Ep. 83. On Munna.
That thou should Perish Early, 'twas foretold.
And the Prediction, methinks, well does hold:
For while thou made much haste to spend thy 'State,
That nothing might remain after thy Fate,
But in one Year, five Thousand threw'st away,
Did thou not Perish Early, Munna? Say.
Ep. 84. To Caesar.
Among the many Wonders of the Stage,
With which thou have adorned the present Age
Bove former Princes, Caesar: As we owe
Much for the Cost and Gallantry of Show,
Nothing does yet advance thy Glory more,
Than that the Nobles now, however Poor,
Spectators sit, that Players were before.
Ep. 89. To Rufus.
You first to gain me, many Gifts did send,
But when once gained, all Gifts you did suspend.
To hold the Prey, you must still Baits supply.
The ill-bred Boar from th'empty Trough will fly.
Ep. 93. On a Slave and his Lord.
Thou thy Lord's Evils, nor own Good, do know
Who so bewail'st thy State, because it is low.
On thy torn Mattress thou sound Sleeps do take,
While Caius upon Down whole Nights does wake;
Caius to many Lords performs ever day
Duties, which to thy One thou do not pay;
Caius, discharge thy Debt, in Court appear,
Says Phoebus: Thou no such harsh words do hear;
Thou feel'st the Lash, Him less the Gout does spare,
And to change Griess, a thousand Stripes would bea^
Foul Vices Caius brand, and hourly tempt,
From which thy low Condition is exempt.
Better it is thy self a Slave to see,
Than many rich, lewd Caius's to be.
Ep. 95. On a Physician.
My Doctor for a Wormwood Draught (O strange!)
Demands of me Frontiniac in exchange.
Glaucus I never took for such an Ass,
Who truck'd away his Golden Arms for Brass.
Did any Sweet for Bitter ask before?
Well, take it; so thou wilt mix with it Confess, thou art Mad.
Hellebore.
Ep. 97. On a Quack.
A Quack attempting late to steal away
His Patient's Cup, and taken in the Play.
Why against my Orders do thou drink? Did say.
Ep. 102. On Bassus.
For Drams three thou offerd'st to expend,
Thou requir'st gown'd, I early thee attend,
Make up thy Train, and trot before thy Chair,
When thou Old Ladies court'st to be their Heir.
My Gown is Threadbare, mean, I not deny,
Yet such I cannot for three Drams buy.
Ep. 104. To Phoebus.
My Bond made to thee for an hundred Pound,
Thou Wilt give me up; for Thanks my Debt compound.
Kinder thou wilt be, to lend me fifty more,
To show thy Bounty to me on this Score.
And elsewhere place the other Gift of thine;
What I can never Pay, 's already mine.
LIB. X.
Ep. 1. The Book to the Reader.
IF I too large, Reader, appear to thee,
But little read, and I shall little be:
Often in each Page I end: Then, for thy ease,
Make me as long, or short, as thou do please.
Ep. 2. To the Reader.
This my Tenth Book gone forth, I did remand,
Having too hastily escaped my hand:
Some things thou wilt find, Reader, that were before,
But more correct, with much that is added more;
Favor both Pains. Reader, my Wealth thou art,
And Rome could naught, like thee, so Rich impart.
By Praise, said she, thou shall be kept alive,
And after Death, thy Nobler Part survive.
Wild Shrubs Messalan Marbles pierce and cleave,
And Rusticks mock the Half-Images they leave.
Books fear not Age, nor at Times Mercy lie,
These Monuments, alone, do never dye.
Ep. 4. To Mamurra.
Who Tales of Colchos, Scylla, Tereus, read,
What do they, but their Minds with Monsters feed?
For what are Atys, Hylas Rapes to thee?
Endymion's Sleep, from Cynthia's Charms, never free?
The Boy that in himself took such delight?
Icarus's lofty unadvised Flight?
What is there, in these wretched Lies, to please?
Read that may show thee, what is thy Minds Disease:
No Gorgons, Centaurs, Harpies, stuff my Pen,
My Pages relish of the Acts of Men.
Mamurra, if thy self thou fear to know,
On Callimachus's Dreams thy time bestow.
Ep. 5. On a railing Poet.
Who wounds, of either Sex, the Noble Name,
Those he should Honor, with his Verse defame,
May he, a Vagrant, on the Bridges rome,
Descent of Hills, and know no other Home;
In The lowest Rank of Beggars, may he crave
Scraps fit for Dogs, and those but hardly have;
And such his Misery more yet to increase,
Long be his Winters Rains that seldom cease;
Stretched on cold Earth, and Fireless may he lie,
Proclaim those Happy, who do early dye:
And when his own Last Hour approaches near,
Dogs, for his Bones that quarrel, may he fear;
And with a feeble Arm his patched Coat wave,
His Carcass from the Birds of Prey to save:
Nor let his Sufferings with his Breath expire,
But let him prove The Infernal Judges Ire;
Roll with false Sisyphus the mount'nous Stone,
His Thirst, in Waves, with Tantalus, bemoan;
Tire all the Fables which the Poets feign,
The Furies Lashes, and their Snakes, sustain;
Conscience, and ceaseless Torments, urging still,
Till he does own the Venom of his Quill.
Ep. 8. On Paula.
Paula me often to marry her does pray;
But she is so old, I cannot her obey;
Yet were she older, I Would not say her nay.
Ep. 9. On Himself.
Why do thou envy Martial's being known
For his smart Verse, abusive yet to none?
That Rome, the Provinces, extol his Name?
Celer, the Race-Horse, has a louder Fame.
Ep. 10. To Paulus.
When thou of Consular Rank think it no scorn
An hundred to salute by early Morn;
What Office, Paulus, leave thou unto me,
And to Rome's numerous Throng of low Degree?
Who stoops himself, shall I call Lord and King?
Crutch to one acts the sawning Underling?
Shall I attend his Chair, who does not shun
Others to bear, through thick and thin to run?
To praise Men's Verse, what boots it often to rise,
When thou, to show Applause, do not despise
Always to stand, with hands stretched to the Skies.
What shall mean Men do, Clients when no more?
If those are Great share Duties with the Poor?
Ep. 11. On Calliodorus.
Of Theseus and Perithous thou do prate,
And dare thy self, with Pylades, to mate.
May I not live, if Pylade's Hogs to keep
Thou do deserve, or Theseus Stable sweep.
Yet a round Sum, thou say, ( to name no more,)
And several Gowns I Have given to Friends were Poor.
Mart. But naught did Pylades to Orestes give,
For both, in Common, did in all things live.
Know that, thy narrow Soul never knew before,
Who gives, though much, does yet deny much more.

Ep. 13. On Tucca.
When none, like thee, in Riches does overflow,
So much for Use, so much for Pride, can show,
Such stately Houses, built for more Delight
On the adjoining Sea; which thou make white,
When in the Waves, to bathe, thou do descend,
And Floods of Odours, in the Floods, do spend.
When Venus sleeps not on a softer Bed,
Nor choicer Wines do steep God Bacchus head,
Than crown thy Cup, and sparkle in thy Glass:
Yet thou, forlorn, whole Days and Nights do pass
At a proud Strumpets Gate, know Sighs and Fears
More than the Wretched, and do weep more Tears,
Why it is so Ill with thee, would have me tell?
Because, fond Tucca, all things are so well.
Ep. 14. On Crispus.
Thou say, among all my Friends, there is not thy Peer.
But how, that this is so, does it appear?
When I desired to borrow fifty Pound,
Thou did refuse, though Gold did so abound,
Thy Chests could not contain it. When did send
A Present from thy Farm? Or yet pretend
T'impart a piece of Plate? Or to bestow
A Gown, to guard me from the Frost and Snow?
I cannot see in what my Friend thou art,
But that, before me, thou do freely F --
Ep. 16. To Caius.
If Promises, for Gifts, thou do account,
See, Caius, how in Gifts I thee surmount.
Take all the Gold delv'd in Asturian Fields,
The Wealthy Sand the Strand of Tagus yields,
What ever the Indians find of Yellow Oar,
The Spices which the Phoenix Nest do store.
Tyre's richest Purple, All that All Men have,
I give you, Caius, just as you me gave.
Ep. 18. On Marius.
Marius not Treats, nor yet does Presents send;
Surety will be for none, to none will lend:
Crowds yet of Clients court this worthless Lord;
O Rome, what Fools do thy long Gowns afford!
Ep. 19. To Pliny.
My Book not learned enough, enough severe,
But yet not Rude, to fluent Pliny bear,
Sportive Thalia. The Saburran way
Passed, with short labor the next Hill you may
Ascend: From whence, thou ( Orpheus set on high,
Dashed by the Theater) plainly shall descry
The wondering Beasts, the King of Birds and Air,
Which the young Phrygian to the Thunder bears:
There thy Friend Pedo's House stands also by,
Showing a lesser Eagle carved on high.
But to learned Pliny, make not thy Address
Wanton, but when Time suits for thy Access,
He in severer Studies spends the Day,
How he the Hundred Judges best may sway:
Studies, which ours, nor no Age, will forbear,
With Tully's noblest Labors to compare.
Thou Wilt safeli'st go, when it is Candlelight,
This is the Hour, when Bacchus mads the Night;
When Odours reign, when Roses crown the Head,
By rigid Cato then thou may be read.
Ep. 20. To Marius.
That in my Native Soil I long to be,
The golden Sands of Spanish Salo see;
Thou, to whom Love from tender Years I bore,
Honored, while yet thou the Praetexta wore,
Art the chief cause: And yet a sweeter Air
No Country yields, or may with Spain compare.
But, were with thee, I Scythia could enjoy,
Nor would the Sands of Africa me annoy.
If mutual Love thou bear, and a like Mind,
Rome we shall both in every Climate find.
Ep. 21. To Sextus.
To write so darkly, what delight do take,
That the most Learned naught of it can make?
Thy Book Two great Critics.
Claranus, nor Two great Critics.
Modestus, can
Expound, it needs Apollo, not a Man.
But, thou being Judge, Cinna's obscurer Strain
Excels the Sunshine found in Maro's Vein.
May so be praised; whilst I am read with Ease,
And both the Critics, and no Critics, please.
Ep. 23. On Antonius Primus.
Antonius, happy in a Calm Old Age,
Of threescore Years complete, has passed the Rage.
Ponders the Times h'as lived, his secured Years;
And Death, that is marching on, he no way fears.
There Is no Day grieves, or shames, him, that is gone;
None which with Gladness he reflects not on.
A good Man's Age is doubled, Time twice over,
He lives, who thus Enjoys his Life before.
Ep. 25. On Scaevola, acted by a Criminal.
Who Mutius acted on the Stages Sand,
So promptly thrust into the Flame his Hand;
If brave and bold, for this thou him do deem,
Thy self, of some dull Clime, I must esteem:
To save his Life by this means, was his case,
'Twas braver far, to have refused the Grace.
Ep. 27. On Diodorus.
The Senate did thy Birthday celebrate,
Many Knights also at thy Table sat:
Largess thou gav'st; yet still you are all Men's Scorn
None will believe, that ever thou were A base upstart Person of an unknown
Descent, was styled, A Son of th(...) Earth.
born.
Ep. 30. To Apollinaris.
O Bay of Formia, temperate and fair!
Which, when Apollinaris tired with Care,
Flies from the toilsom Business of the Town,
Than pleasant Tybur holds in more Renown,
His chaste Wife's Soil: Prefers to the sweet Recess
Of Tusculane, Praeneste, Lucrine; less
Esteems Cajeta, or what Men more admire,
Raised by their Fancy, or by Fiction, higher.
A gentle Air here glides over Thetis Face,
Such as the Fans of Virgins make, to chase
Summers ungrateful Heat. The Sea is smooth,
Not torpid dead, but a soft Gale does sooth
The active Calm; and painted Galleys move.
For Fish you need not lanch into the Deep,
These you may take, and yet your Chamber keep,
Out at your Window cast your Line and Lead,
And draw the dangling Prey up to your Bed.
And when the Waves by Winter Winds arise,
From your safe Board you may the Storm despise.
Gardens no less, and fresh Springs Formia grace,
Fountains are seen to flow in every place;
Fish Ponds the Stranger Trout and Mullet feed,
The homebred Pike, which called, does come wi(...) spe(...)
Fat Carps here know their Names, and to you ma(...)
And all a Pastime is, no pains, to take.
But to the Owners when does Rome give leave,
But a few days these Pleasures to receive?
Fruition's lost, while they to Business cleave.
These Sweets, (O Hinds and Gardners, happy Crew(...)
Were for your Lords prepared, but are enjoyed by yo(...)
Ep. 31. On Calliodorus.
Thy Servant thou for a great Sum did sell,
That but once, Callidore, thou might Fare well.
Nor far'd'st thou well: A Mullet of four Pound
Was the head Dish, which the whole Table crown'(...)
May we not, Wretch, exclaim against this thy Treat
Say, 'Twas a Man, not Fish, that thou did eat.
Ep. 33. To Munatius Gallus.
Munatius Gallus more sincere by far
(...)an Socrates, or ancient Sabins were:
(...) may thy Wife's chaste Love inflame thy Heart,
(...)nd from her Noble Stock may never depart;
(...) when Black Rhimes defame the Age, or Men,
(...)nd Malice would ascribe them to my Pen,
(...)ou me acquit, and stoutly do contend,
(...)at way none write, who Wit and Fame befriend.
ever in my Book have had the Care,
ho' Vice I tax, the Persons still to spare.
Ep. 35. On Sulpicia.
All Virgins chaste Sulpicia read,
(...)ho but in one Love wish to speed;
(...)ll Husbands chaste Sulpicia read,
(...)ho hold one Wife the happi'st Meed.
Medea's Rage she does not write,
(...)estes horrid Feast recite;
(...) Scylla, or of Biblis, tell,
(...)hat Transformations them befell*
Such Tales she seeks not to retrieve,
Nor did she ever them believe.
Her Verse of Pious Love does treat,
Fraught with quick Wit, and choice Conceit.
Who rightly of her Poems deem,
Nothing more Sportive to them seem,
Or which more Holy they esteem!
Such were the Joys, Divine and Sweet,
When Numa did Egeria meet,
And him the Goddess did inspire,
To institute the Vestal Fire.
Her School had she been trained in,
Sappho more Chaste and Learned had been.
Phaon, who Womankind did fly,
Could not Sulpicia Love deny;
Her Graces known, he must be taken,
And love her, though he loved in vain.
For were she from Calenus free,
Calenus the Beloved He,
Apollo's Wife, nor Jove's, she would be.
Ep. 39. On Lesbia.
Old Lesbia swears, and to be borne, would fain
Be thought, in Brutus Days, or Numa's Reign;
But lies in both: Her Era we must fetch
From Elder Times, unto Prometheus stretch.
Who sees her foul cadav'rous Face, will say,
Lo, the first Mortal that was made of Clay!
Ep. 43. On Philo.
Thy Seventh Wife, Philo, 's buried in thy Field.
No Land, than thine, a Richer Crop does yield.
Ep. 44. To Q. Ovidius.
Quinctus Ovidius now resolved to see
The Northern Britains, and the Ocean Sea,
Charming Nomentum cannot him withold,
His House and sweet Repose, although he is Old.
All do thy Faith deservedly commend,
Which, in contempt of Life, thou show thy Friend,
While on his exiled Steps thou do attend.
But though the Joys of Life thou thus delay,
Thy Thread of Life the Parcae will not stay,
But rig'rously impute to thee each day.
Return at length, and at thy Home remain;
Nor among thy Friends, to count thy self, disdain.
Ep. 45. On his Malignant Reader.
If in my Books ought sweet and gentle sound,
Ought celebrating famous Acts is found,
Witless thou deem'st, a dry Bone valu'st more,
Than such choice Morsels of the noblest Boar.
If Ranc'rous Spleen be thy beloved Disease,
My Candid Vein shall never thy Malice please.
Ep. 47. To Julius Martialis.
What our Lives render most at ease,
My dearest Martial, they are these:
A'State that is left, not got with Toil;
A constant Fire, a fruitful Soil;
A quiet Life, from Lawsuits free;
But seldom that the Gown does see;
Ingenuous Strength, a Body sound;
Prudent Plainness, Friends equal found;
An artless Board, with easy Fare;
A Night not Drunk, yet void of Care;
A Bed not sour, and yet that is Chaste;
Sound Sleep, that makes Night seem to haste;
Naught else, but what thou art, to wish to be,
The last Hour not to fear, or haste to see.
Ep. 49. On Cotta.
When rich Opimian Wine thy self do quaff,
Turn th'Amethystin Glasses often off,
Thou vile Sabinum offer'st unto me,
And say, Wilt drink in Gold? To show you are free.
Who cares (thy Sordid Nature to unfold,)
For Leaden Wine, though in a Cup of Gold?
Ep. 51. To Faustinus.
Now that the Vernal Constellations chase
The Winters Rage, and Earth renews her Face;
Now the Fields smile, and Trees fresh Verdures take,
And Philomel her charming 'Plaints does make;
What Days, what Joys, does Rome from thee withold?
What Ease from City Toil, not to be told?
O Woods! O Founts! O Anxur's pleasant Strand!
Where rolling Waves wash over the glittering Sand;
Where even from Bed you diverse Waters see,
Here Boats on Rivers glide, there on the Sea.
But some will urge, You do not here behold
The Capitol, the Temples rich with Gold
Embellished, which in Gorgeousness draw nigh,
The Heavens they represent, and with them vye;
Rome's august Bathes, nor Theaters, are here,
Her Grandeur does not in the least appear.
Before you, both Advantages, I lay,
And now, I fancy, I do hear you say,
As Men, when with Ill Wives they cannot agree,
Rome, These were the form of Words used in Divorces.
Take what is thine, render what is mine to me.
Ep. 53. An Epitaph on Scorpus.
I am that Scorpus, Glory of the Race,
Rome's admired Joy, but Joy for a short space.
Among the Dead, Fates early me enrolled,
Numb'ring my Conquests, they did think me old.
Ep. 56. On Gallus.
Gallus, thou'd'st have me thee attend always,
To pass the Aventine three, four times a day.
Cascellius Remedies to the Teeth applies,
Heginus to all Evils of the Eyes,
Fannius Defluctions of all sorts can stay,
Eros the Scars of Branding clear away;
Hermes inveterate Ruptures will insure,
Have thou the Skill a broken State to cure?
Ep. 57. To Sextus.
You Would wont to send a Pound of Plate each Year,
But half a Pound does now from you appear,
And that of Spice. I buy not Spice so dear.
Ep. 58. To Frontinianus.
When I with thee near Baia was retired,
Where all was easy, all to be admired;
And nothing did the sweet Recess annoy,
O, how the Muses we did both enjoy!
Imperious Rome does my whole Life consume,
To say a Day is mine, I cannot presume.
In The City, as in a rough Sea, I Am tossed,
In fruitless Duties all my Time is lost.
My barren Fields near Rome should give me Bread,
Themselves in greater need are to be fed.
But not alone those Love, who never spare,
Both day and night, the Great ones Gates to wear
(A Toil unworthy of a Poets care)
By Sacred Muses, and the Gods above,
When least Officious, I do truly Love.
Ep. 59. On his Lazy and Nice Reader.
If one sole Epigram takes up a Page,
You turn it over, and will not there engage;
Consulting not its Worth, but your dear Ease;
And not what is Good, but what is Short, does please.
I serve a Feast with all the richest Fare
The Market yields, for Tarts you only care.
My Books not framed such liq'rish Guests to treat,
But such as relish Bread, and solid Meat.
Ep. 61. An Epitaph on Erotion.
Erotion's early Ghost reposeth here,
By Crime of Fates extinct in her sixth Year.
Who after me is Owner of this Field,
Grudge not the Dead the annual Rites to yield:
On all thou have, so may good Fortune shine,
And naught, beside this Stone, be sad that is thi^e.
Ep. 62. To Schoolmasters.
Masters of Schools, your tender Scholars spare,
So may you many Noble have and Fair;
And the choice Crew, that crowns your Table round,
In Numbers and in Love to you abound;
That no Professors, whosoe'er they be,
A Circle, like to yours, may round them see.
While burning Suns, the lengthened days, engage,
The flaming Lion and the Dog Star rage,
Your Scepters fierce, the Ferula and Rod,
(Feared more by Children, than the rivaled God
By Marsyas was so scourged by Apollo, that he was fabled to be flayed alive
Marsyas was) till Autumn comes, lay by;
The Season's Scourge enough, let all else dye.
Children, in Summer Months, when fierce Heats reign,
Is Health they keep, Learning enough obtain.
Ep. 65. To Carmenion.
When thou do boast thy self of Corinth free,
And none can this Pretense deny to thee;
Carmenion, unriddle by what Claim
Thou call'st me Brother, that was born in Spain.
So much do we resemble one the other,
That it is for Likeness thou may call me Brother?
Thou always combed and curled do trimly go,
My harsh unruly Hair no Laws will know;
Thy Skin with Oyntment's ever soft and sleek,
Mine is o'ergrown with Bristles rough and thick;
In Lisping Speech thou greatly do rejoice,
My Daughter speaks with a more Manly Voice;
A Dove more like an Eagle does appear,
Than thou to me; a Lion to a Deer.
The name of Brother, prithee, then let fall,
Unless thou would, I should thee Sister call.
Ep. 66. On Theopompus.
Who could so Cruel, who so Brutish be,
For a Cook, Theopomp, to destine thee?
Could any Soil that Face so sweetly Fair?
Condemn to Soot and Grease that lovely Hair?
None worthier with the Crystal Glass to stand,
And praise the Wine with his more Crystal Hand.
For such a Fate, if beauteous Boys must look,
Next News we hear; Jove doats upon a Cook.
Ep. 70. To Potitus.
That scarce one Book I publish in a Year,
Potitus, slothful I to thee appear:
But more, that One I write, thou may admire,
Considering how much Time does, lost, expire.
At early Morn I give, the Great, Good day;
Next, to my own Affairs, some time I pay;
To Dian's Temple often I Am made to sp(...)
To witness to a Will, or sign a Deed;
Then in the Courts of Law I Am forced to attend,
In The Worship of the Gods some Time to spend;
And when a Poet does his Works recite,
To give a day, is held a thing but light;
Nor can I this deny to those that Plead,
To those on Rhetoric, and on Grammar read;
Congratulate I must each Friend's Success,
Though I, on like account, never knew Address;
Now harras'd out, at Even, it is time to think
Of my Sportula.
Days Hire, to purchase Meat and Drink,
To tend my self, toward the Bathes to look.
What Time is here, Potitus, for a Book?
Ep. 72. On the Emperor Trajan.
With worn-out Lips, in vain thou importun'st me,
Miserable and discarded Flattery;
The Style of Lord and God none dare abuse,
Among the Romans now no more in use.
To Parthian Kings, from whence you came, repair,
Where Kissings of the Feet exacted are.
An Emperor we have, no God nor Lord;
A Senator, whose Justice, all accord
None equals; who plain Truth from Death has raised,
(...)d for her Rustic Dress and Mein is praised.
Rome, if you are wise, under this Prince forbear
Words, which in former Reigns so grateful were.
Ep. 74. To Rome.
Spare a tired Client, now at length, proud Rome:
How long must I submit unto the Doom,
To trot among the Daggled-Ushering-Train
Of poorer Gown-men, Leaden Coin to gain?
While A Chariot-driver.
Scorpus, in one Hour alone of the day?
Whole Bags of radiant Gold can bear away?
I do not ask the Merit of my Book,
For Flocks in rich Apulian Pastures look;
For Glebes of Nile, or Hybla's Honey Fields,
Or yet the Generous Wines Setinus yields.
What is it, do then require, which me would please?
To sleep my fill, and pass my days in Ease.
Ep. 75. On Galla.
Galla, times past, asked me an hundred Pound:
And 'twas not much, where such a Form was found.
After one Year, Fifty was her Demand:
Methought, she now was at a dearer hand.
Some time lapsed: Says she, Twenty you will bestow?
Ten I shall gladly: But she answered, No.
Two or three Months, I know not which, passed more:
Then she asked Nobles, and of them, but four,
And I refused. Well, send a hundred Pence:
But this seemed then too much, and I went thence,
She next, my poor dry Sportula did crave.
Good truth, said I, that to my Boy I gave.
Was It possible, that she should lower go?
Yes: Gratis she offered, and I said, No.
Ep. 76. On Mevius.
Does this thing, Fortune, equal seem to thee,
That one not from a Syrian late set free,
Or from a Slave, hoist to a Knight's Degree,
But of Rome born, of Romulus own Race,
Just, Friendly, Good, in Wit to none gives place,
Learned in both Tongues, whose Crime is only this,
(But it is a great One) He a Poet is;
Should shiver in a Garment poor and old,
While a vile Jocky branches it in Gold?
Ep. 79. On Torquatus and Otacilius.
Torquatus goodly Mansion strikes the Eye
Four Miles from Rome; just to the Town as nigh,
A petty Farm did Otacilius buy.
A Bath, of various Marbles, rarely wrought,
Torquatus built; straight Otacilius bought,
For like employ, a Tub and Kettle. When
Torquatus Ranks of Laurels set: Thou then
A hundred Nuts did Otacilius sow,
Supposing like Magnificence to show.
Torquatus Consul; Beadle of his Ward,
The other thought himself as great a Lord.
What Fables of the Ox and Frog relate,
At last will prove poor Otacilius Fate.
Ep. 80. On Eros.
Eros drops Tears, when-e'er he does behold,
Fair Jewels, Pictures, Antic Works of Gold;
Sighs from his Heart, that home he cannot bear,
What ever the Shops expose of glorious Ware.
How many do the same, but make no show?
Laugh at such Tears, and yet the same Grief know.
Ep. 82. To Gallus.
If my Vexation could thy State amend,
Morning, nay Midnight, gown'd, I Would thee attend;
The shrill and piercing North Winds blasts I Would bear,
Break through deep Snows, no stormy Season fear:
But when these Toiles make thee not one Doit more
Happy, which to the Ingenious are so sore;
To a tired Friend remit such Labors vain,
Which thee no Profit bring, but me much Pain.
Ep. 89. On the Statue of Juno.
Thy Juno, Polyclet, (most matchless Piece!)
May well contest the proudest Hand of Greece.
Had but the Goddess shone with such a Grace
In Ida, both her Rivals had given place.
Though his own Juno, Jove did never approve,
Before his brightest Strumpets thine he would love.
Ep. 96. To Avitus.
That I so often talk of Remote Lands,
My native Salo Thirst, and Tagus Sands;
The Plenty of a homely Farm desire,
And yet grow Old in Rome, thou do admire.
That Place, Avitus, most does please, in which
A little Wealth both Riots, and makes Rich.
The barren Field must here be ever fed,
Which there, Untilled, will give the Owner Bread.
The Niggard Fire scarce warms the Chimny here,
The bounteous Blaze there the whole House does cheer.
Here Hunger's dear, the Shambles all confound,
Thy Table's laden there from thine own Ground.
Four Gowns a Year are here consumed, and more,
There one will serve, to rub out the whole four.
Go then, the Great adore: What they deny,
Thy Field alone, Avitus, will supply.
Ep. 100. To the Stealer of his Verses.
Why do thou mix my Verses, Fool, with thine;
What has thy jarring Strain to do with mine?
Why do thou yoke the Lion, and the Ass?
Seek to make Owls, for noble Eagles, pass?
Had thou, fond Sot, swift Ladas Foot, for one,
The other Wood, in vain it were to run.
LIB. XI.
Ep. 4. To his Book.
NOT only those at Ease my Verses love,
And the more Civilized my Muse approve:
But the rough Soldier does my Leaves o'erlook,
Amongst Snows and Martial Ensigns reads my Book.
The Britains too are said, my Verse to sing.
But what does this unto my Coffers bring?
What living Numbers from my Quill would flow!
What Blasts would my Pierian Trumpet blow!
If as Augustus now again does reign.
I also a Mecenas could obtain.
Ep. 5. To Nerva.
The Phrygian Gods and Sacred Rites to save,
Up to the Flames the Trojan Hero gave
Troy's Wealth; Jove, Juno, whom we now behold,
With Pallas, first engraved in purest Gold,
And Ianus, who records the happy day
Of Numa's Reign. To all I Pious pray,
The Senate may be safe, the Princes Throne,
By his Example all may live, he by his own.
Ep. 6. In praise of Nerva.
Thy love of Right and Justice, Caesar, 's more
Than Numa's was, and Numa yet was poor.
It Is rare, when Riches cannot taint the Mind,
In Croesus Wealth, a Numa's Soul to find.
If our old Romans of Renowned Name,
(Dispensed with in Elysium) hither came,
Camillus, thee to obey, would think it free;
Fabricius would take Gold, if given by thee;
In such a King, Brutus would take delight;
Sylla, to thee, resign the Imperial Right;
Caesar and Pompey, private Men would live;
And Crassus his loved Treasure to thee give;
Cato himself, if Fates would set him free,
Returned to Earth, would a Caesarean be.
Ep. 7. To Rome.
While Saturn's Feast and jovial days remain,
In which good Cheer, Mirth, and Dice only reign;
To sport in looser Verse, I do presume
Thou do permit, Sacred Indulgent Rome.
The Goddess smiled, which spoke her free Consent.
Be far removed from hence pale Discontent,
My Muse produce Verse of a sprightly Air,
Which flow without Solicitude and Care;
Crown both my Head and Cups Attendant Boy,
As Nero's were, when he would himself enjoy:
But fill them oft'ner, fill them to the Brim,
I can do naught, unless in Wine I swim:
The Wit of many will in me be found,
If I with their Enjoyments do abound.
Rome, if Catullus Plenty thou wilt bestow,
I Will frame a Verse his Sparrow shall out-go.
Ep. 14. An Epitaph on Paris the Player.
Who passes the Flaminian way,
At this Innobled Marble stay.
The City's Darling, Egypt's Wit,
Who Art and Grace the best did hit,
And Mirth unto all Humors fit.
The Grief, the Glory, of Rome's Stage,
The Love, the Beauty, of the Age,
Do here entombed with Paris lie,
And did with him together dye.
Ep. 18. To Sabinus.
Not all my Verse for Nights loose Hours are writ,
Many you will find the sober Morning fit.
Ep. 19. To Lupus.
A Farm thou gav'st me joining to the Town,
My Window holds one of much more renown.
This a Farm call you? Is It a Farm do you say?
A Tuft of Rue, Diana's Grove you may
As well suppose. For what you will it may pass;
Spice it assords, as much as Herbs or Grass.
A Pismire in one day would eat it bare,
An Earwig starve outright for want of Fare:
In it a Violet cannot blow and spread,
Much less a Mushrome raise his spacious head;
A Cucumber lie straight upon the ground,
A Snake conceal it self from being found.
A single Mole both digs and plows the Soil,
A wretched Mouse does all lay waste and spoil;
And by my Hind it is apprehended more,
Than Calydonia feared the enraged Boar.
All that the yearly Harvest does afford,
A Swallow in her little Nest may hoard,
Bear the whole Income in her Claw or Bill,
Nor will my Vintage a pitched Nut-shell fill.
Mistaken words thy deed of Gift do frame,
What Is but a Molehill, Mounts and Meadows name.
Ep. 25. To Labullus.
While I attend thy steps early and late,
Afford an Ear unto thy idle Prate,
Applaud what-e'er by thee is done, or said,
How many Exc'lent Verses might be made?
This thou account'st no Loss; although that Rome
Reads them with Joy, far Nations bear them home;
Knights and Patricians make them their Delight,
Lawyers admire, and Poets also spite.
And can I this digest? That for thy sake,
Only thy Train more Numerous to make,
My Books should fewer be? So to engage,
That scarce in thirty days I write one Page?
But thus it is, for Cheer, when Poets rome,
And will not be content to Sup at home.
Ep. 28. To Flaccus.
You Are Iron, Flaccus, if to such a Dame,
Who begs vile Gifts, thou can keep up a Flame;
Cow-heels does ask, Tripes, Sprats, and Scraps of Fish,
And a whole Pompion, holds too much, to wish:
To whom her Maid, joyful to have got, does pour
Cheap Pulse, which greedily she does devour:
And when she is bold, and will all shame depose,
Begs Yarn enough to knit a pair of Hos^.
My Wench Perfumes exacts, both Rich and Rare,
Rubies and Pearls, and those must also Pair;
Choice Naples Silk, with her, will only pass,
An hundred Crowns in Gold, she begs, like Brass.
Give I such Gifts, do say, a Miss to please?
No: But I Would have her Merit such as these.
Ep. 30. On an old wanton Lady.
When with Caresses thou would me excite,
All Virile Power thou do extinguish quite:
For when thou call'st me Love, thy Life, and Dear,
The Surfeit I digest not in a Year.
These were due Arts, when thou were Young and Fair,
Thou do not know what aged Toyings are.
I give thee Martial, say, Ten thousand Pound,
My Manor House, with all the Fertile Ground;
I give thee Jewels, Plate, whole Caves of Wine.
These, without Love tricks, do to Love incline.
Ep. 33. On Nestor.
When not a Pan of Coals, a rotten Bed,
A Mat thou have, whereon to lay thy Head,
A Coat, a Boy, a Child, a bare-bon'd Jade,
A Dog, a Dish, toward the Beggars Trade:
Yet Nestor thou affect'st, Poor to be said,
And among the People taxed, and have a Head.
The aspir'st in vain unto such high Esteem.
Who Nothing has, a Rogue, not Poor, we deem.
Ep. 35. On Aper.
In The House thou'st bought, none but an Owl will dwell,
So dark, so straight, so ruinous, the Cell.
But Maro's splendid Villa is hard by,
Here trimly thou will eat, though sordid lie.
Ep. 36. On Fabullus.
When thou invit'st a Crowd, and Strangers all,
Wonder'st I come not also at thy Call?
A Crowd to me, and Solitude, are one,
And I, Fabullus, never Sup alone.
Ep. 38. On Zoilus.
Why Zoilus do thou bury, not enfold,
A Di'mond spark in a whole pound of Gold?
When late a Slave, this Ring thy Leg might wear,
But such a weight thy Finger cannot bear.
Ep. 40. On Charidemus.
Thou rock'd'st my Cradle, when I was a Child,
My Tutor were it in my young Years and wild:
But now my Beard the Barbers Cloth does stain,
And all I Kiss of my rough Beard complain,
To thee alone I yet a Boy appear,
Whose soureness my whole Family do fear;
To Love, or Game, are not allowed to me,
Tied up in all, but all to thee are free;
Thou chid'st, thou griev'st, thou fiercely do complain,
From using of a Rod can scarce refrain,
If I anoint my Head, in Purple go,
But cry'st aloud, His Father never did so;
Frowning thou counts my Cups, as if the Wine
Came not from my own Sellar, but from thine.
Thus to be Slave, and Cato too, forbear,
That I write Man, thy Daughter can declare.
Ep. 45. On one Old and Childless.
Now thou art Childless, Rich, 'bove measure Old,
The Love professed to thee, sincere do hold?
True Love I have found. Yes, when Young and Poor;
Who love thee now, do love thy Death much more.
Ep. 53. To Julius.
Trimly to Sup, Julius, I thee invite:
If better be not offered, come to Night.
We'll bathe together, at six a Clock be here,
Nero's Baths, to my House, you know, are near.
Melons and Figs, for Ante-past, I Will serve,
Other Regalio's, which are deemed to have
The grateful Properties Health to preserve,
And quicken Appetite. If you ask, What more?
I Will lie, to make you come. Oysters, Wild Boar,
Choice fatted Fowl taken from the Coop or Pens,
Those nobler yet, that range the Woods and Fens:
Such as even Stella rarely does afford,
Though altogether Princely is his Board.
I Will promise more, no Verses I Will recite,
To hear yours read, I Will dedicate the Night,
Your Giants War, your Art of Tilling Fields,
Which not in Worth to immortal Virgil's yields.
Ep. 54. On Claudia Rufina.
Claudia Rufina's Birth while Britain claims,
Her frame of Mind excels the Latian Dames;
So Graceful Fair, her, Roman Matrons deem,
Their Lucrece; Greeks, their Helen, her esteem.
And such a fruitful Offspring she has brought,
When married, will a Colony be thought.
His Faith may Pudens to no other plight,
And in his Children she alone delight.
Ep. 56. To Urbicus.
Lupus, to be a Father, counsels thee;
Believe him not, there is naught he less would see.
One Art of Cheating's to persuade Men to
What they detest of all things they should do.
To say she is big, but with thy Wife prevail,
Lupus, like one that breeds, will look more pale.
Take my advice, if me a Friend you deem;
Die so to him, you may a That is, Give him nothing.
Father seem.
Ep. 57. On Cheremon.
That Death thou so immod'rately do praise,
Thou hop'st in all Astonishment to raise.
This Courage a cracked Pitcher does inspire,
A Chimny cold, without a spark of Fire;
A Couch, with Straw and Vermin, only dight,
A curtal threadbare Coat, for Day and Night.
How Great a Man art thou, can bid farewell
To Brown-bread Crusts, Wine Lees, a nasty Cell?
Go to: Let now thy Bed be strutting full
Of softest Down, thy Blankets Scarlet Wool;
Let her lie by thee, Graces so the Feasts,
And more than all the Wine, inflames the Guests.
Oh, how thou would wish, thou might live Nestor's years!
How every Minute lost, thou would count with Tears!
In a Poor State, their Lives, Men easily give;
He Is held the Bravest then, that dares to live.
Ep. 58. To Severus.
That I invite, and Verses to thee send,
Wonder'st, Severus, Rich and Learned Friend?
Jove, sated with Ambrosia still does live;
Yet Wine and Frankincense to Jove we give.
If, with Abundance full, thou do reject,
Such as thou have, there is naught thou can accept.
Ep. 60. On Charinus.
Charinus Fingers with Rings laden are,
Which in the very Bath he still does wear,
Nor puts them off at night: Do You wonder why?
They Are borrowed, and he dares not lay them by.
Ep. 66. On Justinus.
Justin, upon thy Solemn Birthday Feast,
No fewer than six hundred were thy Guest:
Among the which, times past, I had the Grace,
To hold, unenvied, no inferior place:
But now, to the Relics of the second day,
If so I like, to be thy Guest I may.
Unto six hundred born, to day, then be,
To morrow first thou shall be born to me. That is, Never either to present, or
own thee.

Ep. 67. On Vacerra.
Thou art a Slanderer and Delator,
False Dealer, Pimp, and Fornicator:
Where such rare Parts and Trades are Found,
I wonder much, thy Purse does not abound.
Ep. 68. On Maro.
Thou naught on me, while living, wilt bestow,
But All, when thou descend'st to Shades below.
Thou dot'st, if, what I wish, thou do not know.
Ep. 69. To Matho.
From greatest Men thou do small things require,
Who yet comply not with thy Low Desire.
The less to blush, to greater things aspire.
Ep. 70. On the Bitch Lydia.
I trained was, by Masters of the Game,
IN the Field no Hound more fierce, in the House more tame;
Lydia my Name, my Owner's right Hand held,
Erigones Dog, not me, in Faith excelled,
Nor Lelaps yet, for whose great Truth it is told,
By Jove, among the Stars, he was enrolled.
Like Ulysses Dog.
Argus a long Life I did not spend
In Sloth, by useless Age brought to my End:
But the fierce Tusks of an enraged Boar,
Like that of Calydon, my Entrails tore.
Nor of my early Death do I complain,
A nobler Fate I could no way sustain.
Ep. 72. On Leda.
To her old Husband Leda made her moan,
That her Hysteric Fits were helpless grown:
And that her Life, no hope there was, to save,
Unless her Honor, for her Life, she gave.
But Sighing then, and drowned in Tears, she said,
Than that way cured, 'twere better to be dead.
The old Man begged, that she her Life would spare,
And of her youthful Years have tender Care:
Said, He Would give leave that others might supply,
What Age in him did to her help deny.
Straight young and able Doctors Leda knew,
Were sent for; and the Women all withdrew*
They laid her gently on her Bed, for cure.
Ah Cruel Help, says she, that I endure.
Ep. 77. To Petus.
To pay ten Pound I owe, you press me sore,
'Cause other ways you have lost two hundred more*
Let not the Crimes, hurt me, of other Men:
If thou can lose two Hundred, Pardon Ten.
Ep. 85. On Antiochus.
Who loves his Life, and seeks not yet to dye,
Antiochus, the Barber, let him fly.
The Phrygian Priests not so remorseless lance
Their Flesh, as he, in their inspired Dance;
Surgeons, their Patients, less in Blood embrue,
When from them Limbs, like Carpenters, they hew,
He Is only fit to trim a Horses Mane,
Or else some Stoic, who contemns all Pain.
Prometheus, the Rock, would choose to have,
The Vulture gnaw his Heart, than feel him shave;
Pentheus would sooner to Agave fly,
Orpheus to the Menades, though sure to dye,
Than twice Antiochus's Razor try.
The Scars you see upon my martyred Face,
Which worse than Wrinkles of Old Age disgrace;
Not one my froward Wife's cursed Nails did tear,
But he whose Hands, less than his Irons, spare.
The Goat, of all the Creatures, is most wise,
Who wearing's Beard, Antiochus may despise.
Ep. 87. On Parthenopeus.
To ease thy Throat, and thy rough Cough assuage,
Honey's prescribed, against its impetuous Rage,
Pasteels, Marchpanes, and all such Knacks, whereby
Children are stilled, when they do fiercely cry:
But yet these, day or night, thy Cough appease.
Have thou a Cold, or Liquorish Disease?
Ep. 92. An Epitaph on Canace.
AEolian Canace here entombed does lie,
Who, in her early Flower of Age, did dye.
O Sad and Cruel Chance! Thy Tears restrain,
Of her Untimely Death we don't complain;
But what is more Tragic yet, our Eyes deplore;
The Manner of her Death, than Death was more,
An horrid Cancer seized her lovely Face,
Devoured and poisoned all her youthful Grace;
Spared not her rosy Mouth, Love's Seat of Bliss,
But eat the Lips, that ravished with each Kiss.
This dire Disease we justly curse and blame,
That left but half her Face to th'Fun'ral Flame.
If with such winged speed Fate needs must come,
Why yet so barbarous and severe the Doom?
Her charming Speech Death hasted to suspend,
Left rigid Gods, moved by her Words, should bend.
Ep. 93. On Zoilus.
Zoilus, he ly'd, who said, Thou Vicious were:
When not Vicious, but Vice it self, thou art.
Ep. 94. On Theodore, an ill Poet.
Flames, Theodore's Pierian Roofs, did seize.
Can this Apollo, this the Muses, please?
O oversight of Gods! O dire Disaster!
To burn the harmless House, and spare the Master.
Ep. 99. To Bassus.
Those Kiss in Rome, no means there is to shun,
They meet you, stop you, after you they run,
Press you before, behind, to each side cleave,
No Place, no Time, no Men, exempted leave;
A dropping Nose, salv'd Lips, can none reprieve,
Gangrenes, foul running Sores, any relieve;
They Kiss those Sweat, and those that shake with Cold,
Lovers, their Mistress last Kiss, cannot hold;
A Chair is no defense, with Curtains guarded,
With Door and Windows shut, and closely warded,
The Kissers, through a Chink, will find a way,
Presume the Tribune, Consul's self to stay;
Nor can the awful Rods, or Lictor's Mace,
His stounding Voice away these Kissers chase,
But they will ascend the Rostra, Curule Chair,
The Judges kiss, while they give Sentence there.
Those Laugh they kiss, and those that Sigh and Weep;
Those that do Yawn, and those that are asleep;
Those who do bathe, and recreate at the Pool,
Who are withdrawn, to ease themselves at Stool.
Against this Plague, I know no Fence, but this,
Make him thy Friend, whom thou abhorr'st to kiss.
Ep. 101. To Flaccus.
Her, I by no means fancy, who does bring
A Body, to b'encompass'd with my Ring;
Who, when she is naked, grates; whose Rump's a Spear;
Hipps, Saws; whose Knees, as Gaul-traps, I may fear.
Corpulence, as much the other way, annoys:
Flesh I approve, but Fat my Stomach cloys.
Ep. 103. On Lydia.
He ly'd not, Lydia, who pronounced thee Fair,
For Flesh and Blood, none may with thee compare.
This is most true, while thou do Silent stand,
Like some Rare Piece of a great Master's Hand.
But when thou speak, even such thy Beauty's gone,
And their own Tongue none ever so did wrong.
Let not the AEdile hear thee Silence break:
It is a Portent, if an Image speak.
Ep. 109. To his Reader.
With my long Book, thou well may glutted be,
Yet thou more Epigrams exact'st of me:
But Lupus calls for Use, Servants for Pay,
Discharge them Reader. Now thou'st naught to say,
Dissemblest, as my words thou cou'd'st not spell.
No Riddle you are to me, Reader, Farewell.
LIB. XII.
Ep. 4. To Priscus.
WHAT unto Flaccus, and to Maro thee
Mecenas was of Royal Pedigree;
Most Noble Priscus, That thou art to me.
Which loudest Fame, and my long-living Verse,
Unto all Times and Nations shall rehearse.
For th'Name I have, and Wit, I owe thee both,
Whose Bounty does maintain my Learned Sloth.
EP. 6. On Nerva.
Now God's mild Nerva to the Empire give,
Unto the Muses we may wholly live.
Clemency, wary Power, and Faith upright,
Possess the Throne, and put all Fear to flight;
Thus pray the Nations, Rome, and Pious Throng,
Their Prince may still be such, and this Prince long.
Enlarge those Virtues we so rare do see,
Which Numa's, or else Cato's pleased might be.
Bestow, enrich, the poor Man's Stock extend,
What Gods scarce give, let thy free Bounty send.
It Is lawful now, and safe; but then thou durst,
Even in a wicked Reign and Age, be Just.
Ep. 8. In praise of Trajan.
Queen of the Nations, Rome, that has no Peer,
(Whom none does equal, none approaches near)
Lately with Joy computing Trajan's Years,
The Ages she should pass, and know no Fears;
As she so famed a Captain did behold,
And yet a Soldier Stout, Young, Martial, Bold,
Proud of her Prince, thus vauntingly she spoke,
Parthians, Britains, submit unto my Yoke;
Thracians, Scythians, I Have a Caesar now,
Come pay your Tribute, to my Eagles bow.
Ep. 9. On the same.
Now Gracious Caesar, Palma rules our Spain,
Peace, long a Stranger, has restored again:
We Thanks return thee for so great a Grace,
That thine own Virtues thou amongst us do place.
Ep. 10. On Affricanus.
Affrican Millions has, and yet does groan,
Fortune can give too much, enough to none.
Ep. 11. To Parthenius.
All Health to my and thy Parthenius bring,
My Muse; for who in the Aonian Spring
Ever deeper drank? From the Pimplean Cave,
Whose Harp a sweeter nobler Sound ever gave?
Who of th'inspired and immortal Quire,
Does Phoebus self more love or more admire?
Request when he the Prince does vacant know,
(which hardly can be hoped) my Book to show,
With these few words my humble Verse to speed,
This Man, dread Caesar, all thy Rome does read.
Ep. 13. To Auctus.
To make a Gain of Anger, rich Men know.
It Is cheaper to be Angry, than bestow.
Ep. 14. To Priscus.
To ride so rashly, I advise, forbear,
In pursuit, Priscus, of a paultry Hare;
The Hunter by his Game has often been flain,
Cast from his Horse, his Back could never re-gain;
The Fields are treacherous, though no Hedge or Stone,
No Ditch appear, plain Ground destroys alone.
Examples want not of the thing I say,
Less Causes have produced a fatal Day.
If generous Dangers only thee delight,
'Twere nobler to engage the Boar in fight.
With running speed thou love to venture wreck,
Likelier than catch the Hare, to break thy Horse's neck.
Ep. 15. To Trajan the Emperor.
What-e'er the Palace late did splendid show,
Now to the Gods is given, and public view.
Jove, in his Temple, does the Cups admire,
Whose Gold and Jewels flash like Flames of Fire:
Astonished, former Princes Pride, to see,
Such their stupendous matchless Luxury!
To Jove alone belong Vessels so rare,
The Phrygian Boy, such radiant Cups to bear.
With Gods we now do all in Wealth abound,
Poverty scarce, among the Mean, is found:
I shame, I shame to say, how heretofore,
Together with the Gods, we all were Poor.
Ep. 17. On Lentinus.
Lentinus, that thy Fever does remain
So many days, thou sadly do complain.
It bathes with thee, it is carried in thy Chair,
Eats Oysters with thee, Mushroms, Ven'son, Hare;
And drunk with noblest Wines it is often made,
Nor do these please, if not with Snow allayed;
With Roses crowned, it sumptuously does feast,
And in a purple downy Bed takes rest.
While it with thee does fare so rich and well,
Think thou, with poor starved Dama it will dwell?
Ep. 18. To Juvenal.
While restless thou Saburras noisy Street
Do tread, or passing often with weary Feet,
Make even a Path up to Diana's Hill,
A Clients toilsome Duties to fulfill;
Or Sweating in thy waving Gown, the less
And greater Coelius puts thee to distress;
My native Biblis, rich in Steel and Gold,
A Rustic of her Town has me enrolled:
Here with sweet Labor, causes no annoy,
I Platea and Boterdus both enjoy.
These are the course rude names of Towns in Spain,
Where after thirty Winters spent in pain,
And waking Morns in Rome, I rest regain.
Such stintless and profound Repose I take,
That the ninth hour can hardly me awake.
A Gown is here unknown; some tattered Weed,
On my demand, is given me in its stead.
A blazing Fire receives me, when I rise,
Which neighboring Woods abundantly supplies;
The which my Country Maid with Pots besets,
Against my Huntsman comes with loaded Nets;
^o trim a Youth, and 'bove the common strain,
As may seduce Diana's Virgin Train.
My Bailiff begs the Boys may cut their Hair,
That in some useful Labor they may share,
Their pains, as under growth, not still deny.
Thus I delight to live, and thus to die.
Ep. 21. On Marcella.
Who can, Marcella, thee suppose to be
Of Spanish Birth, and our rough Salo free?
So choice, so sweetly graced, that at first sight,
The Palace challenge may in thee a Right.
Not one in the Suburra can compare
With thee, or who boasts yet a courtlier Air.
Were other Beauties from the Nations sought,
None would a Latian Dame, like thee, be thought.
Thou make the City's loss easy to be:
For thou alone art Rome, and more to me.
Ep. 25. On Thelesinus.
Money thou'st none, without Pawn; but at hand,
If for Security I Will 'gage my Land.
What thou wilt not trust to me, thy ancient Friend,
To Trees and Mole-hills you are content to lend.
Lo, the Delator, Wretch, impeaches thee,
Call now unto thy Patronage a Tree:
Exiled, thou want a Friend with thee to go,
Can make a Field Companion of thy Woe?
Ep. 26. On an Unjust Friend.
*Cause thou, at early Morn, the Great do see,
And tread their Courts, thy self of Lords Degree,
(...), but a Knight, seem slothful unto thee,
That, at first day, abroad I do not roam,
To bring, when tired, a thousand Kisses home.
What thou do do, 's a Consulship to gain,
Or else some wealthy Province to obtain.
(...) whom, to break my Sleep, thou do require,
And patiently to brook the Mornings Mire,
What get I, when my Toes break out a Door
Through my torn Shoe, and Clouds fierce Showers down pour,
And not a Servant have, dry Clothes to bring,
^ut while benumbed and drowned you may me wring,
^etorius sends to call me to a Treat?
^e't never so Rich, 'twere better never eat.
A Province is thy Lot, a Meal is mine,
My Toyl's the same, but not my Gain, with thine.
Ep. 30. On Aper.
Aper's a Sober Man. What Is this to me?
A Slave I so commend, a Friend that is free.
Ep. 32. On Vacerra.
O Jest and Shame of such as Households move,
When July comes, and do new Dwellings prove!
I saw thy Stuff, Vacer, thy Stuff I saw,
Which, for thy Rent, not seized on by Law,
Thy Landlord rather glad, such Trash to spare,
Thy red-fac'd Wife, with sev'n red Hairs, did bear,
Helped by thy Giant Sister, and thy Mother;
Men thought the Furies there were got together;
For such their Number was, and such their Faces,
That Pluto seemed to have lent thee his three Graces.
The Irus of thy Age, thou these did follow,
Thy Skin, like seasoned Box, distained and yellow;
With Cold and Hunger, also dried and parched:
All Beggars-Bush, the People thought, had marched.
A two-legg'd Table, and a three-legg'd Bed
There went; a Pan with Fire, on thine own Head.
A Sconce and Goblet all of massy Horn,
A Jordan, it self Pissing, as 'twas bor'n;
Stale Sprats and Pilchards could not be concealed,
Their obscene Scent, their Presence there revealed.
Nor did there want to go in State with these,
A Cantle of unsav'ry Tholose Cheese;
A Wisp of Penyroyal, four Years old;
A Rope, which Onions had, but picked, and bald;
A Pot of Turpentine, thy Mother's Care,
The Brothel Dames with such, fetch off their Hair.
Why mock'st thou Landlords, and do Houses see,
When Gratis, Vacer* may thy Dwelling be?
Such Pomp of Goods, such Household Stuff pertains
To Highways, Hedges, Bridges, and to Lanes.
Ep. 34. To Julius Martialis.
Thirty four Years, I take it, thou and I,
Julius, have kept each other company,
In which some Jars, with much content, did meet;
But yet the greatest part was ever sweet;
And should I mark the days with black and white
Stones, most would be the Number of the bright.
If in thy Life much Anguish thou would avoid,
With griping Pangs not have thy Heart annoyed,
Wed thy self too much to the love of none,
Less thou will Joy, but less thou wilt also Groan.
Ep. 35. On Callistratus.
That thou may seem more freely to converse,
Some past Venerial Crimes thou do confess:
But yet in this thou do not clearly deal,
Who tells such Faults, yet fouler does conceal.
Ep. 36. On Labullus.
That none, but thou, does in these days extend
A pinching Gift, unto a needy Friend,
Think not for this, you are Noble. No? How then?
Only the Best, among the Worst of Men.
In bounteous Acts the Seneca's restore,
The Piso's; but then, those of heretofore;
Else among the Good, thou wilt hold the Lowest Place.
Would thou contend in swiftness of the Race?
Two Famous Race-Horses.
Passerin, and fleet Two Famous Race-Horses.
Tiger, then o'erpass,
It is no Glory to outrun an Ass.
Ep. 40. On Pontilianus.
Ill Verses do thou make? I them admire.
Do drink? I the Debauch do carry higher.
Do lie? Assent I give. Do Fart? I Am mum.
Gam'st thou? I am content to be overcome.
One thing thou do alone, I must confess,
Which not to name, my Kindness does express,
Will It naught for all return? Thou answer'st, Ay,
In my last Will. I ask no more, but dye.
Ep. 44. To Marcus Ubicus.
We both in Name and Blood allied are,
And to like Studies, like Affection bear:
Thy Brothers Verse when, thine, thou set'st before,
Thy Art's not less, but Piety is more:
When thee Corinna, Lesbia would admire,
Equal to those they did themselves inspire:
When, if thou'd'st spread thy Wings, a brisker Air,
And loftier Numbers none ever higher bear:
Thou flag'st thy Plumes, restrain'st thy soaring Vein,
And show thy self a Brother here again.
Ep. 46. To Classicus.
Zoilus and Gallus for their Poems had
Great Sums. Who says, That Poets now are Mad?
Ep. 48. To a Sumptuous Treater.
If Thrush and Boar you serve, as common Meat,
Not as my Highest Wish, I take your Treat:
But if you think me Blessed, would have me write
You down my Heir, for Oysters; then good Night.
Treat. The Supper yet is rare.


Mart. No doubt most rare,
But what, to morrow, will be this day's Fare?
Nay, within one hour? The unhappy Broom
And Mop can best declare, whose wretched Doom
It is to know; or else some Jakes or Sink,
Or hungry Dog, that ridd away the Stink.
And then, with your high Meats we are sure to meet
A Jaundice Color, and Gout-torturing Feet.
Minerva's Feast I weigh not at that rate,
Nor Jove's set out with greater Pomp and State.
Should Gods impute their Nectar unto me,
Vile, as the Lees of Vinegar, 'twould be.
For your Choice Meats some other Guest then find,
Who suits a proud Board with a servile Mind:
TO extemp'ry Meals let a Friend me invite,
That Treat does like me best, I can requite.

Ep. 50. On one that had a Gay Horse.
Thou Have Groves of Choicest Trees, Bathes more than one,
But, for more State, which serve to thee alone;
Thy Portico's, on Columns high, do soar,
The trampled Onyx glisters on thy Floor;
The winged Chariots praise thy sandy Race;
The murmuring Founts run waste in every place;
Large are thy Courts, and Spacious is thy Hall;
But Place, to eat or sleep, thou have none at all,
Of useful Rooms I can no Story tell.
How rarely, we may say, thou do not Dwell!
Ep. 51. On Fabullus.
Wonder'st, Fabullus often deceived, to see?
A Good Man will, a Novice, ever be.
Ep. 53. To Sparsus.
Why to the Country I so often retire,
A rude and barren Farm, if you enquire?
The Town, no place for Rest, or Thoughts, does leave
The Mean; Schoolboys in the Morn our Sleeps bereave,
The Bakers Mills at Night, and the whole Day
The Braziers and the Coyners Hammers play;
Hemp beaters their dull Thumpings never cease,
Nor Mars's raving Priests ever hold their peace;
Pity to move, the Wrecked, forced Voices use,
As, by their Mothers taught, do begging Jews;
The loud Vociferations not to tell,
Of those that Brooms and Brimstone-matches sell;
The clamorous Factors of such viler Ware,
Care to be heard, but not whose Ears they tare.
When that the Moon's eclipsed, you may as well
The Tinklings of the Pans and Kettles tell,
The Tintamars, when Witches her molest,
As count the various Dins the Town infest.
Sparsus, you know not this, nor can it know,
So much you to your Princely Manor owe,
Which seated on a sweet and pleasant Plain,
Even Solitude of Mountains does disdain;
Where you the Country, in the Town, enjoy,
Vinerons in the depth of Rome, employ;
Nor in Campania does the noblest Hill
Yield richer Wines, than those your Vessels fill.
What is there Useful or Delightful found,
But in your Lordly Precinct does abound?
Your profound Sleeps, troubles from naught, receive,
The Day is not admitted, without leave.
But wretched we, those through the Streets that walk,
Awake, while they but only Laugh or Talk.
All Rome is by our Couch: When Rest I Would take,
To Bed I go not, but a Journey make.
Ep. 54. On Zoilus.
Thy Eyes squint, Foot's short, Beard's black, and Hair's red,
It Is strange, if also Good, Zoilus, thou can be said.
Ep. 56. On Polycarmus.
Thou Art ten times sick, or oft'ner, in a Year,
Which makes thy Friends, not thee, of a sad Cheer;
Who, for thy new Health, still new Gifts must send.
Sicken, for shame at last, and make an end.
Ep. 61. On Sabellus.
Upon thy Birthday pale and sad thou art,
For fear the Cooks should fail to play their Part;
Or that the Ladies want Snow for their Wine,
Or rightly in the Glass it should not shine;
Thou Art mostly from the Board, the Guests to cheer,
Or whisper fond Excuses in their Ear;
And find'st not, thou art Starved, (which is the Jest)
At thine own Splendid and Voluptuous Feast.
What Frenzy's this, of thine own Choice to do,
What even a Slave would not submit unto?
All else, but thee, partake the Day's Delight;
But thou do need, the Invited thee invite.
Sit down, indulge thy Soul, the Guests all pray.
Is this thy Birth, or Execution, Day?
Ep. 62. On Ligurra.
Least my never Dying Verse against thee I bend,
Thou much, Ligurra, seem to apprehend;
And worthy of this Danger would appear:
In vain thou actest this Vainglorious Fear.
Lybian Lions with fierce Bulls engage,
Spend not on Butterflies their Nobler Rage.
If thou would be Talked of, which to thee is Fame,
From some Red-lattice Poet seek a Name.
Such who on Walls with Chalk and Charcoal write,
Fit Verses to be read, by those that Sh --
Thy Forehead is too base for me to brand,
I Will Stigmatize, by holding of my Hand.
Ep. 64. To Corduba.
Corduba, for rare Oil, so much renowned,
Thy Jarrs, 'bove the Venufrian may be crowned;
Whose Wool, the soft Galesian does excel,
And of it, greater Glories we can tell:
By Nature, of a glittering Red, it is died,
It Is shining Tincture's not by Art belied.
A Poet too thou have (as all things Rare)
Whose Impudence with any may compare,
To steal my Verse, bid him, for shame, forbear.
Unless himself did boast a Nobler Vein,
And I, by stealing too, might Glory gain.
A barren Poet, that does naught bring forth,
Or what is the same, that which is Nothing worth:
Like him, puts out your Eye, whose own are blind,
Requital never can make you in like kind.
A needy Thief, to rob all bare, is sure.
A bad Poet, from being robbed, 's secure.
Ep. 66. On Phyllis.
When I with love of lovely Phyllis burned,
And she with mutual flames, my flames returned;
To make the Fair a Present I resolved,
Odours, and Jewels, in my thoughts revolved;
She me prevented with an amorous Kiss,
Such as soft Doves, when mated, make their Bliss,
And said, my Dear, Much for my Love you owe,
A Cask of richest Wine on me bestow.
Ep. 69. To his Clients.
For thy sake, early Client, I did fly
The City; the Ambitious with Visits ply:
I am no Advocate, nor made for Strife,
But, old and slow, love a Poetic Life;
Seek Sleep and Leisure, which great Towns deny,
And here not found, back unto Rome I Will hie.
Ep. 70. On Paullus.
Thy Friends, Paullus, just unto thee relate,
Like to some famous Works in Paint or Plate:
Thy Honor it is, such Pieces to retain,
But in Return they receive naught again.
Ep. 71. On Aper.
Aper yet Poor, served by a Stump-foot Slave,
A One-Ey'd Trot, who sat his Clothes to save
While in the Bath he stayed; anointed by
A bursten Wretch, with cheap Oil, sparingly;
Against those debauched in the Bath, none was heard there
So loud in their Reproofs, and so severe.
The Cups, he said, of the Rich that went about,
Ought to be broke, and their choice Wine poured out*
But after greater Wealth to him did flow,
He from the Bath did never Sober go.
O, how boss'd Cups, and Plenty can avail!
Aper, who never did thirst, now never to thirst does fail.
Ep. 73. On a Lawyer turned Farmer.
Some Acres, and a House ready to fall,
You purchased have, joining the Tombs of the Gaul;
Deserted your rich Fields, the Courts of Law,
The certain Gains a tattered Gown did draw;
While yet a Pleader, Corn and Pulse you sold,
But buy all these, since you a Farm did hold.
Ep. 78. On Ethon.
While Ethon, in's Fane, Bacchus did salute
Erect on tip-toe, his Tail was not mute
Amidst his Orisons: which, tho the rest
There present, laughed at, Bacchus made no Jest:
But his irrev'rent Votary did doom,
Three Nights, without Reprieve, to Sup at home.
After this Mulct, poor Ethon did not dare,
To the Temple, for Devotion, to repair;
But first to Cloacinas Shrine he went,
To give his slatulent Bowels frequent Vent.
Which Caution tho he ever did retain,
With Buttocks hard comprest, he entered still the Fane.
Ep. 81. To his Maid.
I Have given you many things, on your desire,
Much more than I agreed for in your Hire:
And yet you never cease to ask me more:
Should I grant all, you would be thought my Whore.
Ep. 82. On Callistratus.
Thou praisest All, to make thy Candor known:
But who All praises, truly praises None.
Ep. 84. On Menogenes.
In and about the Bath, shift-off none can
Menogenes, by any Art of Man.
Both with the right and left Hand he can take
The swetted Trigon, and resemblance make,
As caught by you; take up, when it does fall,
(Though bathed and dressed) the dusty Batoon-ball.
Your Towels, he will with driven Snow compare,
Though sordider than Infants Clouts they are:
And when a Comb does your few Hairs compose,
Achilles, swear, his Locks did so dispose.
Himself will wipe the Sweat from off your Face,
Esteem no Servile Office a disgrace:
All things admire or praise, till overcome
With Flatteries, you say, To Supper come.
Ep. 89. On Cotta.
Twice to have lost thy Shoes, thou do complain,
While that a negligent Slave thou did retain,
And he thy whole Retinue, and thy Train.
Wise on thy Loss, and Crafty thou did grow,
And to avoid being often choused so,
Thou after barefoot did to Supper go.
Ep. 92. On Maro.
Maro, for's aged Friend, sorely oppressed
With Sickness, thus in's hearing did protest.
If the Sick Man escapes the Shades below,
On Jove a thankful Off ring I Will bestow.
Good hopes, from thence, the Doctors 'gan to have,
Maro new Vows now makes, his first to save.
Ep. 94. To Priscus.
What Man I Would be, thou often do demand,
^ere I made Rich and Potent out of hand?
^hink'st thou Men know their Minds in every State?
that Lion then, were one, would b^? Relate.
Ep. 96. On Tucca.
Heroicks, tho begun, I did decline,
^nwilling that my Verse should clash with thine;
^ut did my Muse in the Tragick-strain engage,
^ere, buskined strait, thou met'st me on the Stage;
Next place, I tuned the Strings upon the Lyre,
^hen to Pindaric-Odes thou did aspire;
^n this, I Satyrs did betake me to,
^hou labour'dst then Lucilius to outdo;
^weet flowing Elegies, I proved to write,
^ut these, 'bove all the rest, were thy Delight;
^ower to stoop, I Epigrams did frame,
Nor stuck'st thou here to emulate my Fame.
Pitch on some Way, with One to me dispense,
^o grasp at All, 's not Wit, but Impudence.
Ep. 100. He wishes Jnst. Rufus an Happ^ Government.
Betis, with Olive Garlands deck thy Hair,
Who makes the Flocks all Golden Fleeces bear;
To Bacchus, Pallas, and to Neptune dear,
For Wine, for Oil, for Traffic without Peer.
May Rufus, in his Charge, successful be,
His Year, like that is passed, be loved by thee.
That Macer he succeeds, he is well aware,
Who knows his Burden, best the Weight can bear.
Ep. 102. To Mattus.
Who, when thou knock'st, denies at Home to be
Says this, I am not now at Home to thee.
Ep. 103. To Milo.
Milo, thou various Goods do set to Sale,
Which those that buy, to bear away, never fail;
Thy Wife is better Ware, who often sold,
Stays with the Seller, and is still good Gold.
LIB. IV.
Epigr. 91. To his Book.
OH, it is enough, it is enough, my Book,
Upon the utmost Page thou now do look;
^ould'st thou swell further yet? Yet larger be?
^ot leave thy Paragraphs and Margins free?
(...) if to some known Period thou did tend,
^hen every Epigram may be thy End.
^^eader and Printer tired, no more can brook,
(...)is time thy Self pronounce the Last Line struck,
(...) it is Enough, Oh, it is Enough, my Book.
Dido's Speech on the Funeral Pile, after Virg
THe Queen on dire Resolves now furious be(...)
Rolling her Blood-shot Eyes, her Tresses re(...)
Ghastly, and wan her Face, from Death foreseen,
Rushed forth into the Court with Frantic Mien,
Mounted the Pile, AEneas Fauchion drew,
(Not lest, alas, for that which did ensue)
Surveyed the Illian Robes, the well-known Bed.
Over whelmed then with Tears, she couched her Hea^
And laboring Thoughts; rose, and these last word said
Taking up the Sword.
Sweet Pledge, while Jove and Destines gave leave,
At once of Life me and of Love bereave.
I Have lived; absolved the Course Gods did assign,
The Illustrious Figure, I here made, resign.
This goodly Town, from the first Stone, I laid;
Punished the Traitor that my Lord betrayed;
My Justice, Prudence, have to all approved,
Feared by my Neighbors, by my Subjects loved.
Oh happy! and thrice happy had I been,
Had the Dardanian Prince my Coasts never seen!
Here stopped again with Grief a little space,
Upon the Bed she grovell'd on her Face,
Then big with high Disdain, she thus did cry,
Must I then scorned and unrevenged dye?
Yes, dye I must, she said, even so, even so,
Submit unto the Shades beneath to go:
And let the Funeral Flames of me thus slain,
Glut the false Trojans Eyes upon the Main;
Pursue his Ships, and a Sad Omen be,
Wherever he sails, of a worse Destiny.
Having thus spoke, those that attended stood,
Beheld her Fall, and all o'erflow'd with Blood.
A sudden shreik they sent up to the Sky,
Straight, to th'appaled Town, the News did fly,
Outcries and Wailings there did all confound,
The Air, the Earth, the dismal Notes resound,
As Carthage had been Sacked, or ancient Tire,
The Houses, Temples, Walls, involved in Fire.
Hor. l. 1. Ode 19. Paraphrased.
BEauty, Wine, and Leisure,
Sway my Heart to Pleasure;
And Loves laid aside,
Are by these again revived.
Glycera, more dazzling bright,
Than Parian Marbles glittering white,
So pure, so sleek, no mortal wight,
Upon her Face can stay his sight.
Her charming Coyness blows my Flame
And mads the Fire, which it would tame.
All that Venus is, and Fair,
In her Form presented are;
Cyprus naked, dispossessed,
The Goddess rages in my Breast;
My Soul over powers with Love and Wonder,
As Jove did Semele with Flames and Thunder!
Distracted with such wondrous Glory,
I cannot sing the Scythians Story;
Nor in accustomed numbers write,
The Parthians, who when flying fight;
No, nor sing ought, but Great Loves Might.
Haste then, a fresh and springing Turf prepare,
Here scatter Vervins, Boys and Odours there,
Pour out the Goblet of the two years Wine,
The Queen of Love propitious to incline,
And Radiant Glycera more gentle shall be mine.
Lib. 1. Ode 28. Paraphrased.
CLOE, bashful, timorous, shy,
Like the strayed Fawn, away does fly,
Wildly hasting to recover,
Through pathless ways, its lost Mother.
Starts at every Leaf and Bush,
If but a Lizard through them rush;
The Wind, the Air, the smallest thing,
The soft approaches of the Spring,
Scare and affright, as they come on,
And she alarmed, strait is gone:
When nothing's near her to surprise,
She trembles at her own surmise.
As The Heart and Knees do pant and go,
Of this little frighted Do;
Such is Cloes great Distress,
At the gentlest Love Address.
Why, Fair One, not thy Life to take,
Such eager Pursuit do I make:
Then cast aside thy Causeless Pain,
Thou only kill'st, and I am slain.
Grown now to Age, exchange thy Childish Shame,
A Mothers Dandlings, for a Lovers Flame.
Hor. l. 3. Ode 9.
Hor. WHile lovely I appeared to thee,
Nor more wished Arms, whatever He,
About thy Snowy Neck could fling,
I flourished more than Persias King.

Lyd. While more thou burn'd'st not with another Dame,
Nor Lydia, prized after Cloe came,
I Peerless Lydia then, and of Great Name,
Out-shon the Roman Ilia in my Fame.

Hor. Now Thracian Cloe my Heart sways,
Deep skilled in Musicks charming Lays;
For whom I would not fear to die,
Might I prevent her Destiny.

Lyd. Mutual Love in equal Bonds does ty,
Calis, Ornithus beauteous Son and I,
For whom, without Regret, even twice I Would die,
So Gods would spare my Loved Boy's Destiny.

Hor. But say again thy Beautys wound,
And in Eternal Chains I am bound;
If fair-tress'd Cloe I forsake,
And Lydia my sole Goddess make?

Lyd. Tho brighter than a Star my Calis be,
And than a Cork, more floating, I know thee;
Storming beside, and raging like the Seas,
With thee no Life, no Death would me displease.

An Ep. out of Catullus.
MY Farm is not exposed to Northern Winds,
Nor yet annoiance from the Eastern finds;
The scortching Blasts of the South do not molest,
Or the impetuous Tempests of the West:
But it is exposed to a more boisterous Rage,
More than a Thousand Pounds my Land engage.
Oh, ruffling Winds, destructive pest'lent Air!
Both Farm and Farmer up by the Roots you tare.
Seven Epigrams after Ausonius.
On Venus armed.
WHen Venus clad in Arms, Pallas did see,
Now to contend, she said, I challenge thee,
And let thy minion Paris Umpire be.
Venus replied, Armed dare thou me despise,
Who from thee naked bore away the Prize?
Pall. Nor of the Victory wilt tho ever fail,
If thou can winn't, by showing of thy Ta --

On Diogenes.
A Scrip, a Staff, a Mantle, and a Cup,
Summed all the Richs of the Cynic up:
But when from's Hand he saw One Water sup;
Avaunt, he cried, henceforth superfluous Cup.
On Niobe.
WHat now you see a Rock, a Queen was late,
Who, when I prosperous was, dirt violate
Latonas Sacred Deity and Race,
My self above her, in her Temple place:
Of twice seven Goodly Offspring being proved,
I would by all a Goddess be allowed.
My numerous Issu in one hour she slew,
All I brought-forth, I on the Beer did view:
Nor thus appeased, (Of Humane shape bereft)
She me incrusted in cold Marble left;
And though my Vitals lost, my Grief I keep,
My Childrens death eternally I weep.
Ah, ceasless Rage, which Heavenly Breasts retain!
The Mother's dead, and yet her Griefs remain.
On the Statue of Niobe.
THOUGH Marble now, I formerly did live;
This seeming Life Praxiteles did give;
My Form, my Limbs, my Majesty restore,
Excepting Sense, all that I was before!
Yet 'twixt these Beings little is the Odds,
Small Sense I showed, when I defied the Gods.
On the Statue of Rufus the Rhetoritian.
THIS Piece does Rufus rarely hit,
It Is Speechless, Brainless, void of Wit:
The Stone yet one thing does not show,
His Wanton Softness make us know.
On Faustulus the Dwarf.
FAust'us presumed a Grasshopper to ride,
And thought he did an Elephant bestride;
The skittish Insect cast the Over-bold,
Which laughter moved in all that did behold.
The Gallant Elf, sprung from the ground, and cried,
What is it, Env'ous, that you thus deride?
What in my brave Adventure do you see,
But's common both to Phaeton, and Me?
Echo.
FOND Painter, Why to me a Face do lend?
To make me subject to the Eye contend?
None my Myster'ous Deity er'e saw,
Much less my Figure durst attempt to draw.
Daughter of Tongue and Air, a Voice, I am,
Speeches that utter, from no Mind that came
But others Words I catch, as they decline,
And mocking them rehearse with' like of mine.
My sole Existence in the Ear is found,
Who will my Likeness paint, must paint the Sound.
After Sannazarius, preferring Venice before Rome
WHen Neptune, in the Adriatic, Venice saw
Amid'st the Waves, giving to Seas the Law*
Now Jove, says he, bost thy Tarpeian Towers,
The Walls of Rome, its other Martial Powers:
As Seas of Tyber, Venice has the odds
Of Rome; Rome work of Men; but Venice of the Gods!
On St. Peter's being at Rome; after Owen.
THat Peter ever saw Rome, some do decry,
That Simon did, there is no Man does deny.
Why the Husband wears Horns; after Owen.
WHen it is the Wife that wrongs the Marri'ge-Bed,
Why wears the Husband Horns? 'Cause he is the Head.
Ep. 1. By Dr. Tho. Locky.
In filium Reginae natum post alterius abortum.
QUOD Lucina t^os prius est frustrata labores,
Nec fortunante^ praebuit illa manus,
Regina ignoscas: uno m^^imine ventris
Non potuit Princeps a^ tria regna dare.
Englished.
That thy first Labor unsuccessful proved,
And by thy Vows Lucina was not moved,
Great Queen forgive; thy Womb could not bestow,
A Prince to rule three Kingdoms with one throw.
Ep. 2. By Dr. Tho. Locky.
In Caroli primi Regis filium quinto-genitum.
O Quam densa tuo surgunt fulcimina sceptro!
Sic gignunt inopes, sic peperere casae:
Rara sub augustis, numerosa puerpera, plumis,
Flere hae, stantem uterum and sceptra caduca, solent.
Ante Deus dederat dotes tibi Principis omnes,
Dat tibi nunc etiam, quae bona Plebis erant.
Englished.
How thick the Props to thy blessed Scepter grow!
So Poor Men get, Cottages bring forth so:
A numerous Issu's rare to the Royal Bed,
A failing Line's here mourned, a Womb that 's dead.
All to a Prince belonged, Heaven gave before,
And now it gives the Blessings of the Poor.
Ep. 3. By Dr. Tho. Locky.
Carolus primo Variolis, sed leviter, tinctus.
QUAE toties orbasque domos vicosque reliquit,
Innumeras laetho stravit and exequias:
Quae parcens, pejus saevit; pro corpore, linquens
Ulcus; quae toties abstulit Ora lues.
En tibi furtivos, a tergo, vix dedit ictus;
Et sacra vix lambit pectora plaga levis.
O quantum placuisti! ut Coelo es, Carole, cordi!
Si dum caedit, amat; si tibi ira savet.
Englished.
That dire Disease* which on the Bier does lay
Corpse without number, sweeps whole Towns away
Where 't spares, is most severe; the Form bereaves,
And the whole Body but one Ulcer leaves:
Scarce, on the Back of the King, by stealth one sore
Did fix, passing his Sacred Body over.
O Charles! you are dear to Heaven, you are much its care
Whom, when it strikes, it loves; when wounds, doe^ spare
Ep. 4. By Dr. Tho. Locky.
(...) honoratissimi Domini Gulielmi Killigraei. Regiae Vi-Camerarii praeclarum
and inculpatissimum Drama, Selindra, praeconium.
QUOD prudens tua, quod modesta Musa
Vitavit petulantiora Scenae,
^ec lenocinium joci procacis
Quod falso Ingenium student vocari)
^um risum movet, exuit pudorem;
(...)culpata tua at sonant Theatra,
Quod Virgo proba, quod stolata Matter,
Quod purus, posita severitate,
(...)m post pulpita perlegat Sacerdos;
Quod jurat tibi nullus Histrionum, aut,
(...)so Numine, quaeritur venustas;
(...)ec constat Populo tuum Poema
(...)pensis animae suae, and crumenae;
Quod (sermon humili urbium relicto
(...)rnis sordidulis and Institori)
(...)nam nobilis aulicumque spiras,
^ignum Caesaris aure, cum requirens
(...)mmas Imperii levare curas;
Vult ut desipiat duabus horis.
Has Dotes reputo tuas secundas;
Sed, quod cum veniunt ad Implicat^,
Cum Scaena haereat, and quod impeditae
Desperant animi Exitum Fabellae,
Qua Vates veteres Iovem vocabant
Ad parts, poterit Throno ut crepante
Narrare ambigui dolos Theatri,
Atque (ut Vincula Gordiana quondam
Pellaeus Iuvenis) molesta tollunt
Insulso gladio. Undique plaga,
Tu, per nescio quam modo citatam
Ex nota tibi Plebe passionum
(Ut quodam noviter reflante Vento)
Convertes alio, novisque tota
Compages Operis rotis movetur,
Neglectis Superisque Inferisque,
Per curam facilem domesticamque
Affectum proprio e sinu petitum
Salvas attonitos and haesitantes!
Hanc Artem tibi, Killigraei, solus
Tu posces, dubii hanc Strophen Theatri.
The foregoing Verses Englished.
THat thy wise and modest Muse
Flys the Stages looser Use,
Not Baudry, Wit, does falsely name,
And to move Laughter; puts off shame;
That thy Theaters loud Noise,
May be Virgins chaste Applause;
And the stol'd Matron, grave Divine,
Their Lectures done, may tend to thine;
That no Actor's made profane,
To debase God, to raise thy Strain;
And People forced, that hear thy Play,
They Money and their Souls to pay;
That thou leave affected Phrase,
To the Shops to use and praise,
And breathe a Noble Courtly Vein,
Such as may Caesar entertain,
When he, weari'd, would lay down,
The Burdens that attend a Crown,
Disband his Soul's severer Powers,
In Mirth and Ease dissolve two Hours.
These are thy inferior Arts,
These I call thy Second Parts:
But when thou carry'st on the Plot,
And all are lost in the subtle Knot,
When the Scene sticks to every Thought,
And can to no Event be brought;
When thus of old, the Plot betrayed,
Poets called God's unto their aid,
Who, by Power, might do the thing,
Art could to no Issue bring:
As the Pelean Prince, that broke
With a rude and boisterous stroke.
The prophetic Gordian Noose,
Which his Skill could not unloose.
Thou do a Nobler Art profess,
And the coyl'd Serpent can no less
Stretch out from every twisted fold,
In which he lay inwove and rolled*
Induce a Night, and then a Day;
Wrap all in Clouds, and then display
Th'easie and the even Design,
A Plot, without a God, Divine.
^et others bold pretending Pens
Write Acts of Gods, that know not Men's:
In this to thee all must resign,
The Intrigue of the Scene is wholly thine.
In Regem.
TRes olim Insignes cicrum tria munera belli,
Praereliquis valunt, tollere Fama, Duces.
^yrrhus castra locat; Fabius cunctator; and Audax
Hostem Marcellus cominus ense ferit;
^u Scis castra locare; Morari; hostemque ferire
Rex Gilielme; Trium quod fuit Unus habes.
On King William.
FAme does exalt, above all others far,
Three Great Commanders, for three Arts in War;
^yrrhus for'th' Camp; Fabius for wise Delay;
^arcellus brave in the Charge and bloody Fray.
^illiam, thou know to incamp, to Fight, forbear,
^xcell'st in what, these three Great Men did share.
In Mortem Reginae.
DUm Regina subit, Constanti pectore, Mortem,
Opprimit immodicus Te Gulielme, Dolor.
Foemina, Virque animos, jam, commutasse videntur,
Cor habet hic tenerae Conjugis, illa Ducis.
On the Queens Death.
THE Queen, her Death, with Constancy received;
Her Loss the King well-nigh of Life bereaved;
How Nature each exchanged, 'twas rare to see;
She seemed the Hero, the Soft Lady He.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 7. Verse 5. r* ad Giving to each impartially their due. p. 29. v 8. for
And r. Thou. p. 51. v. 5 r. It chanced, etc. p. 52. v. 8. r. from the Moths,
not thee. p. 62. v. 9. r. or a stray. p. 70. v. 15. for Head r. heed. p. 78. v.
14. r. fat Geese. p. 109. v. 10. for bids r. bade. p. 121. v. 8. for Aim r.
claim. p. 157. v. 8. for shows r. Shoes. p. 163. v. 13. for did r. does. p.
165. v. 8. for thou r. you. p. 175. v. r. to his Muse. p. 181. v. 11. for
Altars r. Altar. p. 192. v. 6. for the r. a. p. 193. v. 13. for were r. where.
p. 218. v. 4. for ill bred r. ill fed. p. 225. v. 5. for If r. And. p. 253. v.
7. r. Verses of sprightly. p. 267. v. 11. for or r. nor. p. 287. v. 16. dele
also. p. 293. v. 14. for ^atoon r. Balloon. p. 299. v. 11. for attended r.
attending.


