Imprimatur.

Ex aed. Land. Oct. 3. 1664. Tho. Grigg, R.P.D. Episc. Land. a sacris
domesticis.

Lex Pacifica: OR GODS OWN LAW OF Determining Controversies Explained and
asserted, in A SERMON Preached at Dorchester, at the Assizes holden there for
the County of Dorset, August 5. 1664.

By JOHN MARTIN, Rector of Horsey's Melcombe.

James 3.18. -- The fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make
peace.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Royston, and are to be sold by John
Courtney Bookseller in Salisbury. 1664.

To the Honorable, Sir Matthew Hale Knight, Lord Chief Justice of His
Majesty's Court of Exchequer; and Sir John Archer Knight, one of His Majesty's
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas; Judges for the Western Circuit: And To
the Right Worshipful, Thomas Freke Esquire, High Sheriff of the County of
Dorset; together with the Right Worshipful, His Majesty's Justices of the Peace
in that County.
My Lords and Honorable Gentlemen,
It Is not any fond Conceit (bred and encouraged from your acceptance of this
Discourse) that has made me entitle the Respect of it to so Honorable and
numerous a Partage. The public Address of it (had I esteemed my self wholly
free) must have directed it self ( the duty of a Chaplain obliging me) only to
Master Sheriff; whose noble and prudent Deportment in the face of his Country,
cannot but justify as well as challenge a property of Homage from others,
besides his known Dependents. But as by Master Sheriffs command ( the only
Person, I think, that could have set me that task) I became (at first) engaged
to the Pulpit; so can I not think my self acquitted from that obligation, by
preaching a maimed Sermon to so Reverend and Judicious an Auditory.

We read of Mephibosheth, that When tidings came of Saul and Jonathan out of
Jezreel, that his Nurse took him up, 2 Samuel 4.4.
and making haste to flee, he fell, and became lame. The like misfortune ( a
truth which every one then observed not) happened unto this Discourse, by the
haste I made upon strict commands to shorten your trouble, ( though the tongues
of Gainsayers may (sometimes) as hastily be fled from, as the swords of
Philistines) this Discourse became lame; and I knew no better remedy for its
halting, ( at least no other satisfaction of Master Sheriffs last Injunction)
than to present it to my Honorable and Learned Auditors upon its legs: which,
if not so clean and becoming as Orators may expect, nor so firm and sinewed as
Divines may require; yet may they be fit enough to go of an errand of Charity
to my Christian Brethren, and to bring home your pardon for this (but)
necessary piece of boldness in,

My Lords and Honorable Gentlemen, Your meanest and humblest Servant, JOHN
MARTIN.

Lex Pacifica: Or Gods own Law of Determining Controversies explained and a
sserted.
Deuteronomy. 17.12. -- And that man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken
unto the Priest (that stands to minister there before the Lord thy God) or
unto the Judges; even that man shall dye, and thou shall put away the evil
from Israel.


THat there might be (for this time) some alliance betwixt the Bench and the
Pulpit, I have read for my Text this recapitulatorie branch of one of Moses
Laws; of that kind, Divines have commonly styled, the Judicial Laws: The
Scripture by a Metonymy calls them Judgments, because they are such Laws as
God himself appointed unto the Jews, to be dispensed out in Acts of legal
Justice; for Judgment is the Act of justice in particular cases, De Justit. and
Jure, lib. 2. c. 29. Dubit. ^^ n. 4. Idem Aut quin. and Sot. and al i.
per modum causae praecipientis and obligantis, says a Lessius: as flowing from
a cause, commanding and obliging to the exercise of such Acts.

Reduceable they are unto four heads. First, such as instructed the Magistrates
in their duty toward the People. Secondly, such as taught the People their
duty toward the Magistrates, and of one man toward another. A third sort
informed them, how to demean themselves toward Strangers. And a fourth kind
directed them in the Domestic duties of their private Families. The Division
duly considered, shows the excellency of the Jewish Policy, in that the body
of their Laws extended to all the Eminent parts, and orders of Society.

The Obligation of these Laws (as delivered by Moses) is by Divines usually
affirmed, not to reach unto us Christians: the reason is, because they are
Positive Laws; and Positive Laws, though given by God himself, oblige only that
People unto whom they are given; it being the sole prerogative of Innate Law,
(that is, of the Law of Nature) to lay a common Obligation upon all Mankind.

But forasmuch as that same is an undoubted truth which Tertullian speaks in
his book of Single marriage, De unis nuptiu, c. 7.
[qua adjustitiam spectant, non tantum reservata permaneant, verum and
ampliata;] Christians are not only bound to equal, but to exceed, all others in
matters of justice and honesty, (agreeable to our Saviors [(...)] in Mat.
5.17.)

And being these Laws have ever been had in great veneration in the Church of
Christ, wise and virtuous Princes having made them their Pattern for Laws, as
appears by the Preamble to our own King Alured's. Saxon Laws: S H. Spelman,
circa an. Chr. 887. in Council. Britan.


And forasmuch as Divines have recourse unto these Laws, in debates, and for
resolution of many weighty points, as of Marriage within prohibited degrees,
payment of Tithes, Usury, and some others; there be these three Corollaries
that depend thereon.

First, that many of these Judicial Laws are Conclusions, evidently deduced
from the Law of Nature; and are very apposit and suitable to Ecclesiastical and
Civil Government, as well now amongst Christians, as formerly amongst the
People of the Jews; and

Secondly, that for that reason, such of them as shall be by Supreme Authority
judged fit, may be assumed, either among the (...), (as In praesat. ad Collect.
Canon.
Antiochenus styles them) the Divine Canons of the Church, or the Decreta
Comitiorum (as we term them) the Statute-laws of Civil Government.

And thirdly, that such of them as shall be so re-invested with the force of
Law, will be reducible to that kind of Laws, which some Divines have rightly
styled Suarez de leg. l. 3. c. 14. n. 4.
[leges partim declarativae, and partim constitutivae] laws partly declarative,
and partly constitutive: declarative, in respect of the matter of them, as
having been the subject of some former Law; and constitutive in regard of their
present power to oblige, imprinted on them by the Authority and will of the
Lawgiver. The Obligation of which Laws, that it is in the conscience of the
Subject (and by consequence a sin not to obey) no man without affronting Nature
and Religion can deny.

And upon this foundation, I shall by Gods assistance superstruct a
disquisition of these three Particulars, as the heads of my following discourse.

First, what the tenor and purport of this Judicial Law is, of which we treat.

Secondly, whether this Law may be revived by supreme Authority. And

Thirdly, whether there be not either formally or equivalently, the like Law in
this Church and State in which we live.

In the prosecution of these, I shall crave leave to follow the Counsel of
Epicurus in Diog. Laert. lib. 10.
Laertius [(...),] not to present you with the Flowers of Rhetoric; to be more
careful to garnish the Dish, than to season the meat; especially for such an
Auditory, whose parts and callings must needs furnish them with abilities, to
concoct far more solid matter and learning than can be expected from my very
Ordinary skill and capacity.

First then, concerning the tenor and purport of this Judicial Law.

Obligation to discourse of this particular Law, would permit me to speak of
Laws in general, amongst many other things, that might be said, I should not
omit to take notice of the opinion the Heathens themselves had of the
Sacredness, and of the Necessity of Laws. Of the Sacredness of Laws, in that
the prime Heathen Lawgivers endeavored to persuade the people that their Laws
were of Divine extraction; Amongst the Greeks, Minos feigned to have received
his Laws from Jupiter; Lycurgus, his from Apollo; and Zaleuchus, his from
Minerva; as Strom. lib. 1^ p. 352.
Clemens Alexandrinus tells us: and for the Romans, Numa Pompilius his famed
addresses to the Goddess Egeria for instructions in making of Laws, are
notorious to all; Foreseeing belike the importance of that truth, the Curtius
l. 8.
Historian acutely observes, as the reason why the Persians were wont to deify
their Kings; Majestatem imperii salutis esse tutelam; their opinion of the
Necessity of Laws is inferred from their conceit, that Eusebius (...). vid. Sca.
Animad. p. 19.
Phoroneus, whom they fancied to be the first Lawgiver, was likewise the first
man; (...), and (...), (as Lib. 32. 1. Phoron^us Moist Antiquior 300. an. Sic
Eusebius. and Aug. docent; cum tamen proecess^^unt regna Assy^. Argyv. Egypt. sed
Regna legibus priore. Live. l. 3. Just. l. 1, etc.
Nonnus calls him) as if all that lived before him had not been men for want of
Laws; (what think you would they have thought of them, who will not live like
men under just Law?)

But the due regard of method having confined me within narrower bounds, I
shall in as few words as conveniently I may, endeavor fully to explain this
Law, by insisting on these four particulars, or integrant parts of Law. 1.
Interdictum. 2. Censura. 3. Sanctio. 4. Ratio finalis legis.

The 1. Interdict. 2. Censure. 3. Sanction, and 4. Final Reason of this Law.


1. The Interdict of this Law is this, That if it happened, either through the
ambiguity of words, or exception of cases, that there arose any doubt of the
extent, or meaning of any Judicial, or Ceremonial Law, in inferior or local
Courts of Judicature, the Question was to be brought before the great
Sanhedrin, or Council of Jerusalem: and there a definitive Sentence being made,
all both Judges and Litigants were bound under pain of death, not to reject and
contradict the same; but it was to be put upon Record, as a Rule in such cases
for the future.

To make this more plain, we will suppose a Case that may be easily conceived
to arise, out of the Law of their (...), or second Tithing, Deuteronomy. 14.22. The
words of the Law are these, [Thou shall truly tithe all the increase of thy
seed, that thy field brings forth year by year.] Upon this Law it might be
doubted, whether by a direct consequence drawn from this Law, the Jews were not
bound to pay unto the Levites, in their first tithing, the tenths of all such
things as grew in their Gardens. The reasons of which doubt may be, First, for
that prudent men might conceive, that the Law intended no more, but a fit
maintenance for the Priests and Levites; unto which such small things would but
little conduce; and therefore that they were not included in the Law for
Payment of Tithes. And secondly, because by the uncertainty of their
estimation, they might raise contentions betwixt the Priests and the People; or
occasion unnecessary scruples in men's consciences, and thereby introduce that
post humous way of expiating involuntary Sacrilege by Mortuaries, as amongst
us. And thirdly, because the word (...) in the Law, which is rendered a field,
is sometimes (though but seldom) found to signify a Garden.

Now if the great Sanhedrin at Jerusalem should determine, that the Jews were
bound to pay Tithes of those minute things which grew in their Gardens, the
People were obliged by virtue of this Law in the Text, to submit their practice
unto that Decree; and if upon pretense of error therein, some (...) some
contumacious Doctor (as the Grot. ad Loc.
Jews called him) the same with the (...), in the Can. 16.
Apostles Canons, should factiously oppose the same, such a one was (by this
Law) to be put to death.

This Council at Jerusalem was the same with that the Text styles [ the Priest,
or the Judge] for in the ancient state of that Government (as Lib. de Prin.
constit.
Philo and Advers. Ap. lib. 2.
Josephus tell us) (...), the Priests had the hearing and determining of all
controversies, in the ordinary way of Judicature; which course (as In Chron. O
(...), idem Baron. ex Phil. l. 2. de Temp. De hujus libri authoritate vid.
Baron. ad An. Chapter 1. p. 83. n. 20 Plant. and ad An. Chr. 32. p. 143.
Eusebius notes) was observed among them, (though not without some mixture of
the Laity) till the reign of Herod the Great: in whose time the Scepter being
about to depart from Judah, (the authority whereof had been till then preserved
in this Sanhedrin, and the Assamonaei; and p. 10. n. 15.
Baronius in his Apparatus shows you how) Herod, I say, upon reasons of State
slew them all but one, and substituted a Council of Proselytes in their stead.

Let no man think that the Tribe of Levi, either took too much upon them, or
had too much conferred upon them, by this honor of Judicature; it was no more
than the Heathen-world bestowed upon their ignorant and Idolatrous Priests; for
the Ethiopians, Lib. 17.
Strabo; for the Egyptians, lib. 14.
Aelian; for the Persians, In chron.
Eusebius; for the Athenians, Lib. 14. Ant.
Josephus; for the Gauls and Britains, Lib. 6
Caesar; for the Romans, Lib. 2 d legib.
Cicero, are authentic witnesses.

Nor was the Impostor Mahomet wanting to the reputation and advantages of his
Religion by the like design: whose Priests always sit with the secular
Magistrates; their Alcoran or Scripture (after the manner of the ancient
Councils) lying before them; as if all were done by an infallible rule, and the
judgment were Gods.

But it almost exceeds belief, in what veneration and power that Order of men
was in this Land, for some hundreds of years after this Nation had received the
Faith; and that not by any precarious favor of Princes, or by an ignorant
fondness of the People; but established their honor was by Law; by which every
Priest was accounted Thani rectitudine dignus, as appears by the Can ult. de
Wer^gildis, i. e. cap tum aestimati^nibus. Vid. S. H. Spelman in epist. ad Reg.
Jac. ib.
Laws of King Ethelstan; (a respect, which I shall neither arrogantly, nor
unseasonably communicate unto vulgar ears.) The reason whereof is not only that
which our learned Antiquarie gives us in his English Councils [ Quippe sub his
saeculis apud ipsos solum esset literarum clavis, etc.] because the learning of
that age was wholly ignorss'd by some of the Clergy; the Priest being the
Oracle of the People, as the Bishops were of the King and Kingdom: but there is
another, and (perhaps) a stronger reason to be collected out of those words, in
one of King Si quis arrogans pro Episcopi justitia e^^ndare noluerit, Episcopu^
Regi notum faciat. Rex au^e constringat mal^facto e^, ut emendat, cui soris
secerit, scil. pr^mum Episcopo, deind sibi, and sic erunt ibi duo gladii, and
gladius gladium juv^b^t. H^veden. Annal. par. post. Hen. 2. p 6^^. n. 50. Edit.
Savil.
Edwards Laws [and gladius gladium juvabit] from the reciprocate assistances of
the temporal and spiritual swords: Christians then believing, that there was as
much credit to be given unto those, as to any other words of our Savior, Mat.
18.18. [Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in Heaven, and
whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven.] But this honor
and power, together with the immunities of the Church, sub Normannicis Regibus
nutare coepit, says that Sir H. S. ib.
Author; and in the Council of Clarendon under Henry the second, they received
a grievous wound: which has more or less continued bleeding ever since: and
it is to be feared would have done so, till the spirits of all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction had been clean exhausted, if Experience (which is sometimes the
Mistress of wise men, as well as of fools) had not bound up the wound with a
probatum est, No Bishop, No King.

I speak not this, as if I thought it either convenient, or necessary, that the
Clergy should concern themselves in matters of civil Judicature: (Pity it were
that so active and learned a Gentry as this Nation is wont to produce, should
betwixt doing nothing, and doing ill (which would be the certain consequent of
that other design) degenerate from the worth and luster of their Ancestors!)
that (...) or power of self-Government, which the Primitive Church did exercise
(and for which, some men of late did so much struggle and contend,) though it
cannot be denied to be lawful, yet was it cumbersome, and in many cases
uneffectual.

It could not stand with the Reputation of the Church of Christ to make appeals
unto the Heathen Emperors, as the B^ls. [ex Eu seb.] Synod Antioch. in P^^^^. n.
Council of Antioch was fain to do, under the affronts they received from
Samosatenus the Heretic, after they had deprived him. Nor have the Popes
themselves been wholly exempt from the like exigents, as appears by one
instance for all, by the supplicatory Epistle of Pope, Voel. tom. r. p. 213 and
B^^. ad A^. Chr. 419.
Boniface to the Emperor Honorius; in the case of Schism, between the Popes
themselves. So unuseful, if not unsafe, will be St. Peter's Keys, (though
hanging at the Pope's own girdle) if they should lock up Caesar's sword.

The sober and learned Clergy of this Church must needs know, that the
Spiritual Jurisdiction stands in need of the temporal power: and that the Miter
is only safe, under the shadow of the Crown. Happy then it is for us, that
Ecclesiastical Dominion can derive it self into the same fountain from whence
descends the temporal authority: and that (like Ps. 85.10.
Righteousness and Peace) the two Jurisdictions, can kiss each other in the
Arms of Sovereignty: that among us, it is all one to be our King, and to be the
Defender of the Faith: that the Sword is joined to the Word, and the Judge to
the Priest.

This Constellation of Power, as it is a Prognostic of security and happiness,
to men of temperate spirits; so will it prove a terrible Omen, to such as
despise Dominion, and leave their heady practices to the Censure of just Laws,
which are the true Standard whereby to measure the crimes of Offenders; and not
the Opinions of Ignorant and prejudicate men; which leads me to the second
integrant part of this Law, Censura Legis.

2. Such has been the policy of Satan, that taking advantage of the ignorance,
prejudice, interest, and vices of men, he has sent some sins up and down the
world like spies, with false names, that might not cause men to distrust and
avoid them; they were not only carnal but spiritual wickednesses, which have
wandered about in this disguise, compassing the world like him whose emissaries
they are: not only pravae, but Piae frauds have on all hands cheated men of
their precious souls; stellicidia mellis de Lebacunculo venenato, as Tertullian
speaks, the Devil having poisoned the Limbecks from whence men hoped to have
sucked most sovereign Elixars: and dealt with the world as Praxiteles the
Statuary in Clem. Alex^d (...). p. 29.
Posidippus did with the foolish Heathen, made his own Darlings to be worshipped
by men's fancies, instead of a Deity.

But as the judgment of God is according to truth in punishing sinners; so are
the sins of men exactly recorded by Him in his Doomsday-book, at the approach
of those everlasting burnings. Drunkenness will not then be called good
fellowshp; nor uncleanness a trick of youth; nor cheating a trick of wit; nor
pride, decency, nor oppression, self-preservation; nor Rebellion, honesty; nor
faction, Godliness; nor Sedition, standing for the truth; nor superstition,
devotion; nor Sacrilege, reformation.

How light soever it may seem to some in these days to reject the just commands
of our Lawful Superiors in Church and State, yet ab initio non fuit sic: and
how it came to pass, that that which was so g^ievous a crime among the Jews
(Gods own people too) should be transformed into an heroic Virtue among
Christians, will want some Oedipus to unty the knot.

The Scripture it self bears witness of the hainousness of this Sin, allotting
it a place among sins of the first magnitude, (...)
sins of presumption: [Qui autem superbierit nolens obedire] So the vulgar
reads the Text, and before that the Septuagint (after the * original) [(...).]
and therefore 22. q. 86.9.3.
Aquinas does rightly define contempt to be [nolle subjici legi] not to submit
ones self to just Law, and so Suar de legib. c. 28. n. 13.
peccare ex contemptu, est peccare ex voluntate non se subjiciendi alteri, to
be guilty of the sin of contempt is wilfully to refuse to submit our selves to
them that have a just and lawful authority over us.

This sin is first brooded and hatched in the understanding; when that person,
or his authority to whom we ought to submit, is less esteemed than he, or that
ought to be: next it descends into the inward affections and passions of the
mind; and there grows and strengthens it self, from a desire and contrivance of
opportunities to express it, and to invite others to the same attempts: and
lastly, it comes out, and shows it self to be a fiery flying Serpent, ready
fledged and prepared for action; and discovers as much by Overt acts, as the
Law calls them; whereby this pride and malice of the heart becomes discernible
to all.

A Sin it is, that of all others, carries with it the greatest provocation both
with God and Man; it is not (always) so much the thing that is done, as the mind
Tunc non peccati species, sed peccantis intentio pensat. D. Bern. l. 1. de
praecept. and disp. c. 14. v. 27.
wherewith it is done, that gives unto this sin its true estimate and size.
When God made Saul King, there were some that brought him no presents, 1 Samuel
10. the Exchequer it is like complained not for want of them; yet the Holy Ghost
calls those men, sons of Belial; as having an eye upon the venom that lay in
their hearts; they did it not, because they despised him. We read of one that
not long after the commandment for observing the Sabbath was given, had
gathered sticks upon that day; and was therefore, by Gods especial appointment,
stoned to death, Number. 15. the fact was but small, but his pride was great; he
did it (...) too, out of presumption, and so fell under their Caninius disquis.
c. 7.
(...) their judicium animarum (as the Jews called it) for he that despised
Moses Law was to die without Mercy, as the Apostle tells us, Heb. 10.28. and
it is the Sanction of this Law [even that man shall die] which is our third
particular.

3. Laws have generally in them a double power; directive and coercive: the
first describes and appoints the duty, the second determines the punishment to
be suffered, if the duty be not performed. Upon this follows a Dr. Sanderson
praelect. 6.
double obligation of the Subject by Law: the first is (...), Obedience; the
second is (...), Subjection: the former we commonly style active, the later,
passive obedience: active obedience is doing the duty; passive obedience is
submitting to the punishment, if we do it not.

The first Positive Law that ever was made in the world had these two, the
directive and coercive parts. Genesis 2.17. [Of the Tree of the knowledge of good
and evil thou shall not eat] there is the directive part: [for in the day that
thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death] there is the coercive part.

These two parts of Law, have respect to that twofold Power, which is in every
man's soul; the Understanding, and the Will: the Understanding is the Card and
Compass, the Will holds the Rudder, and steers the course of men's actions: that
directs, this executes. Now because the Will is a free power, and may choose to
do or not do; therefore the coercive part of Law is added, to restrain the
Will from evil, in doing contrary to the rule of Law; for if the Will had no
freedom in her actions, all the Laws of God and men, were (at best)
impertinent. (...), etc. as Origin truly speaks, and with him two great Fathers
of the Church in his Chapter ^1.
Philocalia: and St. Cyril of Alexandria, of as good authority as any, says as
much in his sixth Book de Adoratione in Spiritu and veritate.

If this were not true, with Reverence to your Lordships be it spoken, you
would return from your Circuit with sins upon your consciences, of the same
color with your Robes; I mean sins of blood, Scarlet sins, as the Isa. 1.18.
Prophet calls them: it being utterly unreasonable, and therefore unlawful, to
punish any man for doing that which he had no power to avoid. A consequence so
inevitable; that some Phanatiques in the close of the late troubles, foreseeing
the force of it, refused to assist in their Councils of War, because they would
not concur in that man's punishment, whose actions (as they conceived) were no
more contingent and free, than the motion of a stone, tending to the center of
gravity. The effect of which pernicious error, was most acutely foreseen by a
great Statesman of ours, for almost an age since; as the late Reverend and
learned Part. 1. c. 6. s. 12.
Author of the Quinque-Articular History will inform you.

This coercive part of Law belongs to vindicative justice, and appoints the
punishment due to the breach of each particular Law; which is not always to
take its measure from the fact materially considered, but in conjunction with
the will, and other faculties of the soul. Intentio est quae dat praecipuam
formalitatem in actibus moralibus, (say the Aquin. 12 a. q 72 1.8. c. 3 a. q.
88.4: 1 m.
Schoolmen;) the intention gives the formality to the sin; and so creates that
difference the c. quu a. Did 10.
Gloss observes, betwixt non parere and contemnere; of great importance with
Casuists, in stating the nature and kinds of offenses against Law, in foro
interiori, or in the conscience: for in foro exteriori, or the public
tribunal, there the Law judges of the intention by the fact, and not of the
fact by the intention.

The formality of the sin we speak of, stands in the [nolle obedire] in the
Text; enough to exact the greatest punishment, especially from such a Lawgiver,
who has absolute Sovereignty over men's lives. Ego o^cidam, and ego vivere
faciam, says God, Deuteronomy. 32.39. I kill, and I make alive; that is, say V. Soto.
de just. and jur. l. 4. q 2. a. 3.
Expositors, I have the sole original right and authority of taking away man's
life; and therefore Magistrates cannot take away the lives of Malefactors; or
expose the lives of their Subjects to the hazard of just wars; as having
absolute Dominion over men's lives; but as conservators of the Peace, and
public good. And upon this ground it is, that it is injustice in them, to make
Laws, that have punishments annexed unto them disproportionate to the offense
committed, especially in the excess; and from hence it is, that we account it
but Quoties poenam mortis imponebat transgressoribus alicujus legis, materiam
ill^us legis suisse gravem, and de se susficientem ad peccatum mortale,
significat. Scot. in 4. d. 1. q 6. Sic Aug l. 2. de Bapt c 6.
reasonable, to conjecture what is the quality of the crime, by the nature of
the punishment inflicted upon offenders; the crime here is contempt, the
punishment's death: gravis poena, sed ad vitandum periculum omnium gravissimum,
says the learned and experienced ad locum.
Grotius; a great punishment, but it is inflicted for prevention of the greatest
mischief in the world: you will believe him, if you please to reflect upon the
fourth and last integrant part of this Law; the Ratio finalis legis; the end
why God made this Law, and secured it from the approches of the foot of pride,
by so severe a punishment; and that was, for prevention of Schism; expressed here
Antonomasticus, [the evil;] and thou shall put away the evil from Israel.

4. Schism in the proper notion of it seems to me to be a thing not known to
the Heathen world. Sermon 11. de verb. Domini.
S. Augustine (indeed) and Lib. cont. Gent. (...), etc.
S. Athanasius tells us of many bloody quarrels that happened amongst them
concerning their Idolatrous worship, but methinks there should be no Schism,
(at least not properly any) where there is neither truth nor Church. But with
Sedition, the younger Sister of Schism, (for Schism seems to be as old as that
bloody quarrel betwixt Cain and Abel) the Heathen were so well acquainted, that
Thucydides gives this true Character of the Monster, (...), that she it is that
has brought forth mischiefs of all shapes and sizes in the World. And Schism
cannot but be thought so much the more Superior to Sedition, in the production
of mischiefs; by how much the more fierce all quarrels and contentions are,
that spring out of different opinions in Religion: and further, dissentions of
this kind have, above all others, the strongest appetite of propagation.
Agressours in factions of religion, laboring to have their names and opinions
serve to that same end as Zisca, when he died, appointed for his skin; who
being Leader of the Taberites (a faction in Bohemia) commanded that a Drum
should be made therewith, (as Dubravius and others tell us) that something of
Zisca might still be heard to sound, in the Ears of his followers, and their
enemies.

I shall not burden your patience by prosecuting the common place of Schism
with infinite authorities out of the Fathers, setting forth the grievousness of
this sin: it was the due consideration hereof, that made 22 e q 39.2.3 m.
Aquinas to affirm Schism to be the greatest of all sins against our Neighbor;
and that not only respectu circumstantiarum, in respect of the many
circumstances and accidents that attend it; but likewise respectu speciei, in
regard of its own nature; because it is the most contrary to Charity, and the
love of our Neighbor; for it is contra spirituale bonum multitudinis, as he
speaks; it is against the spiritual good of a multitude: so that we may say of
Schism, as the 1 Samuel 18.7.
Women of Israel sang of David; if other sins (like Saul) kill by thousands;
Schism (like David) kills by ten thousands at a time. The Apostle in his
Epistles calls it Heresy; and if noscitur ex sociis be a good Topic, you may
judge what kind of sin it is, by the company amongst which you will find it,
Gal. 5.19. D Praescrip^. adv. Haret. l. 1 c 6.
Tertullian says, that word comes from a Greek Verb signifying [to choose] so
that he makes Schismatics and Heretics to be such as will choose for
themselves. The true definition is, it is a voluntary departure from the
government of our lawful Superiors, and a refusal to communicate with our
fellow members, with a design of drawing followers after us. This is that
poisoned Arrow which the Romanists would fain dart into the sides of the Church
of England, and therefore make the formal reason of Schism to consist in a
voluntary departure from the Pope, as being Christ's Bell. lib. 2. de To Pont.
c. 12
Vicar here on earth: but non haeret lateri lethalis arundo; we are yet to be
convinced that the Pope is Christ's Vicar here on Earth, though we will not deny
him to be St. Peter's successor in Rome. And as for our voluntary departure
from a dependency on that Church, we have done no more, but asserted that just
right we had to govern (and by consequence to reform) our selves, by the 28.
Canon of the fourth General Council: wherein (...), equal privileges with Rome,
were granted unto Constantinople, (...), (for so O (...). Alex. Arist. in
Synops. Can. 28.
Alexius Aristinus truly abbreviates that canon) because the seat of the Empire
was transferred from Rome to Constantinople: how much rather do the like equal
privileges belong to us, who have not only translated the seat, but the Empire
too, (I mean of our selves) from that City, of whose vast Dominion this Island
was sometimes a part? But I return.

This is that sin which God designed this Law to prevent, as a most intolerable
evil: for without a power to determine Controversies, that should arise amongst
a seeking and scrupulous party, it is not in the power of man to do it. And
being therefore that it is Gods manner, Grot. ad lo^.
res humanas conservare modis humanae naturae congruentibus, to conserve the
affairs of men, by ways and means agreeable to man's nature; and being that
others besides the State and Church of the Jews, are liable to the like
distempers and confusions; we may reasonably conceive it, not unfit to be
examined, whether this Law may not be revived by Supreme Authority; which is my
second Disquisition.

2. The Respect of the directive part of this Law, is all that we inquire
after; for, as for the coercive part thereof, we reinforce it not; hoc nunc
agit in Ecclesia Excommunicatio, quod agebat tunc interfectio: Excommunication
among Christians (says Quaest. sup. D ut. lib. 5. c. 38.
S. Augustine) in many cases commutes for temporal death under the Law; and let
this be one of them.

But for the directive part of this Law, why it may be revived by Supreme
Authority, there be these Reasons producible, and fit to be soberly weighed by
all that have a true Christian temper of mind in them.

1. First, because the same thing was put in practice by the Apostles
themselves, for prevention of the same evil, Acts. 15. for certain men which
come down to Antioch from Judaea, having taught the Brethren and said, except
ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses ye cannot be saved; the Apostles
and Elders came together for to consider of this matter, v. 6. And having made
a Decree concerning the point in controversy; how religiously it was observed,
not only by Christians of that Age, but for more then 300 years after, In
Apolog. c. 9.
Tertullian in his Apology, Contr. Cells. lib. 8.
Origin against Celsus, Eccle. Hist. l. 5. c. 1.
Eusebius, Catech. 4.
Cyril of Jerusalem, Epist. 154. ad Public:
St. Austin, and Ep. 79. ad Nic.
Leo will inform such as please to enquire.

2. Secondly, because the following Councils did never doubt of the like power
in themselves, as often as they came together, for determining questions of
faith, or practice. I shall only instance in the 6. Apud Balsam.
Canon of the third General Council; which pronounces an Anathema on
whomsoever should (...) (which In Synop. Can. conc. Ephesians. c. 4.
Aristinus reads by (...) and (...), ib. (...).
Balsamon expounds by (...)) should but hesitate or doubt of, as well as oppose
the Decrees of that Council.

Now the Council of Ephesus we all know, met for determining a dispute about
the person of Christ: for Vide Cyril. Alex. (...).
Nestorius had affirmed and taught, that the blessed Virgin was not the Mother
of God, but of Christ: from whence a duality of persons must needs be inferred
to be in the Son of God; and by consequence, that there was not a Trinity, but
a Quaternity of Persons in the Divine nature. The Council did (as they needs
must) determine against Nestorius; which determination though undoubtedly true,
yet because it was a consequence drawn from Scripture, by the mediation of
humane understanding, and the Council did so severely oblige all the Church to
receive it, it must follow, that the Council had a full assurance of her power
to define matters in controversy; and to oblige the members of the Catholic
Church not to reject her determinations, under the pain of Anathema. The
argument is of such weight in the judgment of the great Bell de Conc. lib. 2.6.4.
Cardinal, that he sticks not to conclude an Infallibility of the Church from
thence. I stretch it no further than to infer a majori ad minus, that, if there
were a power in the Church, that under so grievous a punishment, could exact
the reception of her Decrees in points of Faith; much more may the same
Authority require obedience to her determinations in smaller (because
practical) things.

3. A third reason is; because it is absolutely necessary, that all public
Societies, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, be furnished with all necessary
means to preserve themselves from those evils, which are apparently destructive
of all governments: which evils are such as do inevitably produce discord,
divisions and separations amongst the members of the same community; the only
Remedy whereof, is an Authority and Power in the Governors, to hear and to
determine all Controversies, and to bind the contending parties to acquiesce in
their determinations.

Not as if I thought, that a man were bound to believe every thing to be true,
or best, that should be so determined: for this great Council of the Jews were
not infallible, nor needed so to be; as appears by that Offering which God
appointed to be offered, when the Congregation had trespassed through
ignorance, Lev. 4.13. But, that the members of Church or State may be bound non
contra agere; not to do that which is contrary to a definitive sentence.

It is sufficient that in materia probabili (the common subject of humane Laws)
there be a moral certainty in our Superiors, of the truth or goodness of what
is thus defined: which is enough to oblige Inferiors to obedience; the Casuists
rule holding good in this point [Sires sit dubia, praesumendum est pro
Legislatore;] reason, modesty and humility, nothing dubie (and that must be
demonstratively) appearing to the contrary, will (at least) admonish us, to
think the judgment of the Lawgiver the best and truest.

4. A fourth Argument is; because it is a thing unreasonable to affirm or
imply, that Government under he Gospel should be left in a worse, and inferior
condition to the state of it under the Law; 2 Cor. 3.8.
St. Paul having advanced the ministration of the Spirit, above that of the
letter; that is, the Oeconomic of things under the Gospel, above that they had
under the Law; of which things Government cannot be understood to be so
inconsiderable a part, as to be excluded from having any share in that
Evangelical Prelation; which yet must inevitably follow; if the same diseases
remaining in the body politic, the Governors thereof should be debarred the
use of the like Remedies: I mean, if Christians shall be (at least) as liable
to faction and Schism, as any Jews whatever; and yet the highest authority
amongst them, be not allowed sufficient means to prevent, and restrain men from
Innovations.

Add hereto, how ridiculous a thing it must needs appear to be, that men
concerned in Government, should frequently meet, and consult about making of
Laws, for such as had armed themselves against all force of Authority with this
Principle, viz. that they were bound to receive no Laws, further than should
stand with their own good liking and approbation. By which means it must come
to pass, that it would be the task of the Magistrate, not so much to contrive
Laws that might promote Truth, Peace, Justice and Virtue amongst men, as so to
model his Laws, as might best secure, both himself and them from contempt.

Ob. It may (perhaps) be objected, that there is a wide difference betwixt that
God imposes, and what men enjoin.

Sol. To this I answer first, That it is to be observed, that God does in this
Law bind the Jews to follow, not what he himself, but what their lawful
Superiors (the Priest or Judge) should define; to whom likewise he had not
promised any infallible assistance, but on the contrary, had left them to the
best use of their reason, which at best may err: and when actually it did
err, yet were the Jews bound to follow, and not to dispute, the (but)
erroneous determinations of that Council that sat in Moses Chair.

And secondly, That the Law of God does not exceed the just Law of the Church
or State, in respect of the obligation, though it does so in respect of its
stability; the reason is, because the obligative force of Law, is from the
essence or nature of Law, and is the necessary effect of Law. The Lawgiver
does not give to Law its essence, but its existence; he may choose to make this
or that particular Law, but when he has made a Law, that Law has its force
from its own specifical nature; for, that Law should bind, is quid aeternum and
immutabile, it is an eternal and immutable, because it is an essential property
of Law.

5. Lastly, The revival of this Law is not opposite to Scripture, nor is the
Scripture an adequate rule for all such things as are to be done by us in our
several places and callings; from whence it must needs follow; that the
multitude must stand in need of direction and determination, either from
themselves, or from others, in many particular cases.

Let no man think much that I have said, that the Scripture is no adequate rule
for particular actions; for if this were not true, it must follow (as the late
Dr. Sanderson Praelect. 4. Sect. 14.
Reverend and Learned Bishop of Lincoln observes) that such as never had the
Scriptures, never had any rule for particular actions; which is not only
contrary to experience, but to that of the Apostle, Romans 2.15. where he tells
you, that the Heathens who had not that Law which God gave unto the Jews, did
govern themselves in particular moral actions, by that Law which was written in
their hearts.

A principal but not an adequate rule of moral actions, we must acknowledge the
Scripture to be; and therefore, as the Law of nature (by reason of its
generality) does stand in need of a supply, which it has from the
determination thereof, by particular humane Laws; so the Scripture, by reason
of its generality (though not for that reason only) does stand in need of a
supply, from particular rules of particular actions.

For in moral actions these two things are to be considered; First, The
principal rule by which they are to be governed; together with the principal
end unto which they are to be directed; and so the Scripture is a rule of all
our moral actions, directing us to do all that we do in Charity, for
edification of our Brethren, and for the Glory of God. The second thing, is
that immediate and adequate rule, whereby the action we are about to do, is to
be governed; and this (as it is not necessary that it should, so) the Scripture
does not prescribe; but, as in things left unto our own choice, we govern our
selves by that rule we esteem best, or good: so, as we are members of the
Church or State, Reason cannot but tell us, that in particular actions, our
understanding as well as our will, may stand in subordination to such as have a
right and authority to govern us.

Dissenters will easily be convinced by an instance in both. These Reverend and
Honorable Persons (my Lords the Judges) have for performance of their duty,
this rule of doing it from Scripture, Deuteronomy. 1.16. [Hear the causes between your
Brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his Brother] this is the
Principal rule of that action their Lordships are now upon; but the form,
manner, time, place, yea the very rule of judging righteously between every man
and his brother, is not prescribed in Scripture, but by the Laws of this Land,
unto which their Lordships hold themselves bound to conform, as the adequate
and immediate rule of their consciences, in administering justice in this Nation.

The like instance I shall crave leave to give in a matter of exceeding great
concernment to us, as we are members of this Church, and owe obedience unto his
Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws. It is the command of our dear Savior, our Lord
and Master Jesus Christ, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper be received
often, in remembrance of his most precious death and passion, and for the
actual application of the benefits thereof unto the worthy Receiver; and that
this be done with such reverence and preparation, as becomes so holy and
dreadful a mystery; but the gesture, time, place, manner, and other
circumstances, are not prescribed by Scripture, but left in the power of the
Church to determine ( who has the standart and rule of decency in her hands)
nisi forte tantum Sacramentum minus deceat ordo, quam confusio; unless that
Sacrament be the only thing that is best set out by disorder and confusion, as
de Romans Pont. l. 4. o. ^^.
Bellarmine smartly (if justly) replies upon the Centuriators; and the Apostle
himself has confuted with Judgments from Heaven, 1 Cor. 11.30.

Ob. But here it will be objected, That if this be granted, Christian liberty
would be no more but an empty name; and thousands of good Christians must hold
themselves bound to submit unto such Laws, as are not agreeable to their
particular consciences, which were to lose the sairest Jewel in the Crown of
Reformation.

Sol. To this I say, God forbid but that every good Christian should have a due
regard unto such things, as lie in common unto the whole profession, as Liberty
and Conscience do; but we must remember, that non plus nomini, quam veritati
tribuendum, that we do not sacrisice truths to titles, and things to names.

Liberty is a word that the whole world (in a manner) first learnt from Luther,
as that which dropped from Heaven into his arms; though many of his words and
actions (applauded and imitated both then and since) could not be warranted by
his very large Commission. I mean it not so much of his burning the Corpus Jur
is Canonici in the public Marketplace, in token that he had set all the
world free from Laws (which he did thereby as truly, as Xerxes bound the
Hellespont, when he cast a chain therein), but rather of his contemning and
reviling the Civil Magistracy, on whom in his book de potestate seculari, he
bestows this Character, sunt communiter maxim fatui, and pessimi Nebulones
super terram; which amongst other worse (if there could be worse) expressions,
rendered him obnoxious amongst his enemies, to that sharp invective in the Diet
at Worms [ Exlex homo, leges ipsas omnes damnat, etc.] and made his friend Con.
Gesn. in universal. biblioth.
Gesner doubt what would become of that prodigious liberty; faxit Deus, says
he, ne contentione and impudentia oris, obsit Ecclesiae suae. Yoaks of unjust
servitude may sometimes be broken, but Christians must not fling the Pieces of
them in the face of supreme authority.

But as for Christian liberty, I shall say in one word, that it is best known
by its contrary, and that is, by that Spirit of bondage which was in the
unconverted Jews; so that Christian liberty is no more but a freedom from the
burden of the Ceremonial, and the curse and rigor of the Moral Law; from the
guilt and from the Law of Sin; from the fear, and from the power of Death. This
I take to be all that can be found in the Scripture, which is the Christians
Magna Charta, the great conservatress of his Liberty. Laws therefore that
preserve Order and Decency, and keep men from falling into sin (the only
vassallage of a Christian) can by no means infringe, but rather advance
Christian Liberty.

As to the later part of the Objection that concerns private conscience,
supposed in some to be oppressed by such Laws, to which others may as
innocently as willingly submit, I answer, that it may justly cause all sober
men to suspect, that there is some error and fascination in that opinion;
Conscience of late, having justified the Jews miraculous Fable of their Manna,
namely, that it had the taste of that which every one best liked; flesh to one,
fish to another, and fruit to a third.

Certainly men ought to be very jealous over the importunities of their
Consciences against public Laws, when they shall reflect upon the miserable
delusions of those Miscreants amongst us, who having besmeared themselves with
the blood of their King, should dare publicly to justify (in the very face of
Death and Judgment) so grievous a Crime, from the dictates of their private
Conscience, and their following of God, as they termed it. Which last
blasphemous expression will not suffer me to leave you unacquainted with that
remarkable Caution for all in Authority, which fell many years since, from the
Divine Pen of that incomparable In praefat. Sect. 8.
Hooker, Impossible (says he) it is, that ever the wit of man should imagine,
what will grow out of such errors, as go masked under the Cloak of divine
Authority, till time have brought forth the fruits of them: for which cause it
behooves Wisdom to fear the sequels thereof, even beyond all apparent cause of
fear.

But to speak something that may comport with the remainder of my time
concerning this Objection.

This maxim must first be laid down, as an unquestionable Truth, viz. Suar. de
Leg. l. 1.
Contra omnem rectitudinem est, bonum commune ad privatum ordinare, seu totum
ad partem propter ipsam refer. Lawgivers judge what is fit for the common
good; and unreasonable it were to stoop that unto private interests and
respects. Supposing then that some Laws may appear contrary to some particular
men's Consciences; What shall be done? obey contrary to their judgments, or
disobey those Laws for conscience sake?

For answer hereto, give me leave to say, first, That there is no contrariety
betwixt a Soto de Just. and Jur. l. 1. q. 6. art. 4.
just Law, and a good Conscience. That Law is undoubtedly a just Law, in which
there is a concurrence of the justice of these four causes of Law, wherein the
whole of it does consist; That is to say, the justice of the final, efficient,
formal, and material causes of Law. 1. It must be for the common good. 2. The
Lawmakers must have a true legislative power. 3. The matter of the Law must be
good, at least indifferent. And 4. lastly, It must have the right form of Law,
i. e. it must be a rule of rectitude for humane actions. Such a Law does
necessarily oblige them to whom it is given; nor can it possibly be contrary to
a good Conscience; because such a Law is conform to right reason, as right
reason is conform to the Law of Nature; and the Law of Nature to that eternal
Law in the mind of the Divine Essence.

Let me give an instance or two. This is the Law of Nature, and to this right
reason is conform, viz. That men live temperately. This Principle considered by
the Lawmakers, they judge it fit to make a Law, prohibiting the eating some
kinds of meats, as of flesh in the Spring or Lent, that thereby (amongst other
reasons) Christians might show their temperance; which is not only an
abstinence from excess in the Quantity of all; but, in regard of the Quality of
some meats, as appears by Daniel's fast, in the 10. of that Prophecy, verse. 3.
Such a Law as this, cannot be contrary to a good conscience, because it is
appointed for the practice of a noble Virtue, to wit, Temperance.

Again, as to the case in hand. This is a rule in the Law of Nature, That such
as are Governors of others, use all prudent means to prevent Sedition and
Schism in the Church and State. Now if Lawgivers are morally assured, that
this cannot be done, without defining some things under dispute amongst their
Subjects, and exacting from all a submission unto that rule, which they shall
prescribe by Law, and shall thereupon enjoin an uniformity of practice unto all
the community, such a Law cannot be contrary to a good conscience; the reason
is, because the submission thereunto is an actual exercise of the Virtues of
humility, obedience, charity and sobriety. So, that unless to practice even
Cardinal Virtues, be contrary to a good conscience, There is no contrariety
betwixt a just Law, and a good conscience.

2. I answer secondly, That it is the opinion of many learned men both
Halensis, Ant. Henr. Carthus. Vasq, etc.
Divines and Canonists, That he that submits unto a just Law, though contrary
to his own judgment, is not thereby guilty of sin. The reason I conceive to be,
because no man is guilty of sin, in doing of that, which God expressly commands
him to do. Now it is Gods express command, that Subjects obey their lawful
Governors, not only for fear of wrath, i. e. punishment, but likewise for
conscience sake, i. e. that by their obedience they might avoid the guilt of
sin, Romans 13.5. which obedience of Magistrates, it is impertinent for any one
to say he performs, that refuses to obey the just Laws of such as God has
placed in authority over him.

Some (indeed) have thought, that there is a middle course to be taken in this
case, and that willingly to submit to the penalty of the Law, is sufficient to
discharge charge the conscience from all guilt of disobedience. The reason of
this assertion is, because there is this rule in the Law [Et si non potest
infligi poena sine causa, potest tamen sine culpa] there may be no fault for
which a punishment may be inflicted, but there must be some cause.

This I acknowledge to be the judgment of some excellent Divines; but withal,
it is to be observed, that they confess it holds true, only in that sort of
Laws which the Canonists term [Leges pure poenales] Laws purely penal; but it
extends not unto [Leges mixtae poenales] Laws of a mixed nature.

But, as those Laws which are purely penal, are very few, as appears by that
Character of them which Quoties per verba legis poenalis non declaratur
sufficienter proprium praeceptum obligans ad actum, vel omissionem ejus,
praesumendum est, esse legem pure poenalem. Suar. de Leg. l. 5. c. 4 n. 9.
Suarez gives us; so are they not such Laws of which we now treat; for these
are both moral and penal; and in this case, to undergo the punishment, does not
discharge the Conscience from the guilt of sin: the reason is, because there is
a double obligation in every such Law; it binds either to do, or to omit some
moral act; and it binds likewise to undergo the punishment, if that act be not
done, or omitted, according to the appointment of Law. For it is a true rule,
that omnis praeceptio obligat ad culpam; every just command of our lawful
Superior, leaves a guilt upon the conscience of him that refuses to obey.

Now this is an hard case you will say. So hard indeed, that I solemnly profess,
that it cannot sink into my understanding, that our merciful God ever intended,
that men should be reduced into such horrible perplexities, as this case
imports: for nulla est necessitas delinquendi, quibus una est necessitas non
delinquendi, says De Coron. Mil. c. 11.
Tertullian; and the case may be such, that a man may not be able to suspend
his action; and then, sin he must whether he do, or not do as he is commanded.

However I shall not be peremptory and Magisterial in a point of such infinite
importance (as by the erroneous doctrines and imaginative practices of men, the
same is now become) veris nitimur and verisimilibus non contradicimus, as the
great Historian speaks. Reliance I would have only on Truth; but things so
likely to be true, as that first opinion is, I shall not contradict. If
obedience unto Gods command, be a good Warrant against all; methinks it should
be so, against our selves; and that upon these two or three considerations,
which I shall humbly offer unto all such Christians, who, as themselves
complain that they have tender consciences; so their brethren have not had
cause given them to complain, that they have had hard hearts.

1. First I shall desire every such Christian to consider, whether it seems not
unreasonable to affirm, That there is in the soul of man a power, invested with
a capacity of binding the Will, from obedience of just Laws, because the end of
all Government is hereby wholly frustrated and taken away; which is the
preservation of peace, virtue, and love in the whole community (whether of
Church or State) by an uniform obedience of the same Laws, from the obligation
whereof, conscience is supposed to set all men equally free; and thereby to
become the great Palladium of Sedition, Heresy, Treason, and what not; whereof
I wish there were no argument to be summoned against the Gainsayers, from
fresh experience of these evils.

2. Secondly, there must needs follow from thence, an odium not only upon all
such Laws, as such men shall esteem unjust (how just soever they be) but also,
upon the very persons of Princes, and of all inferior Magistrates, that shall
put such Laws in execution. And what think you will become of that Prince (if
means and opportunity should offer themselves) who shall be esteemed a
Persecutor of his People for conscience sake?

3. Lastly, I shall leave it to the consideration of the learned, whether the
opinion of In Pra^egom. ad P. Soto.
Brentius, viz. That the Magistrate has power to bind the conscience in cases
that concern Religion; and yet that his subjects must not submit thereto,
without approbation of their own judgment; whether this opinion (I say) does
not interfere, and is of most dangerous consequence to the Peace and prosperity
of Church and State; which yet is that same opinion, which has taken (by what
means I know not) too strong and deep rooting in the minds of many men,
otherwise good and virtuous persons.

For conclusion of this point. Seeing therefore that 1. The Apostles themselves
have defined matters in debate and controversy in the Church, for prevention
of Schism; And 2. That National and General Councils have done the like, as
conceiving themselves duly empowered and obliged thereto. 3. That it is
necessary unto all Governments whatsoever, to be furnished with all means that
may preserve them from certain ruin and destruction. 4. That things that
concern humane Affairs, are not under the Gospel, in a condition inferior to
that which they had under the Law. 5. That the revival of this Law is not
contrary to Scripture, nor the Scripture an adequate rule for particular
actions. And lastly, That liberty and conscience duly considered, receive no
prejudice by this Law of defining points under debate, and thereby imposing an
end unto controversies:

I conclude, That this Judicial Law (as to the directive part of it) may be
revived by Supreme Authority; and in the

Third and last place, I humbly conceive it to be of force in this Government,
as a fundamental thereof; and that for these two or three reasons, which I
shall mention in a word, and so disburden your patience.

1. First, because the state of this Church and Commonwealth ought no more to
want any of those means, which are necessary to her preservation, than any
other Church of Commonwealth in the world; and therefore God having declared,
that a power of defining matters in debate, was necessary to the being and
flourishing of his own Church, and Kingdom amongst the Jews; the Government of
this Church and State, cannot be reasonably thought to be divested of that
power.

2. Secondly, because the Crown of this Realm is an Imperial Crown; the same
which Vulcatius Gallicanus calls See Casaubon. not. in Vul^. Gall. n. ^0. p.
199.
Imperium justum; which implies, that as it is independent from any other but
God alone; So it cannot be conceived to want any thing that belongs to an
absolute and independent Government; and therefore is inseparable from such a
power we speak of; there being inherent in this Crown, not only a temporal,
but an Ecclesiastical Dominion, such as our At. 37.
Church affirms to have been in the Kings of Judah; and which was likewise in
the Roman Emperors, as appears by that title of Pontifex Maximus derived unto
them, together with the Empire; and which was retained by Constantine and his
successors, until Z^sim. l. 4.
Gratian's time, who first of all divested the Imperial Crown of that title,
and thereby opened a way for Maximus to bereave him of his life. Let Princes
think on that bloody but witty conceit of Baron. ad an. Christ. 383.
Symmachus (the Heathen Praetor of Rome) and then consider, what it is to part
with Ecclesiastical Dominion [Si Gratianus nolit esse Pontifex Maximus, brevi
erit Maximus Pontifex.]

3. My third and last reason is founded in equity; because the subjects of this
Realm have not only an interest in making those Laws whereby they are
governed, but likewise a right to interpret those Laws when made; if becoming
doubtful, by reason of some ambiguous clauses, or expressions therein: For
although interpretatio Legum ordinary Reverendos Judices Regnique sapientes
spectat, etc. (as says Judge I^ Praesat. ad lib. 4.
Cook) though the expounding of the Laws does ordinarily belong to the Reverend
Judges and Sages of this Realm, yet in case of greatest difficulty and
importance, to the high Court of Parliament. In which Court of Parliament, the
people of this Nation having their Representatives, it must follow; that Equity
will oblige them to stand to their own Act; as being done in that Great
Council, wherein are both the Priest and the Judge; and from which lies no
Appeal. A doctrine (surely) which now deserves a better regard, than when it
was (for many years together) the Palpit-aphorism of three Nations.

I shall conclude with a special direction of a few words to all, as their
Places, Callings and Opinions, may be duly thought to concern them, in the
design of this Discourse; which the Searcher of all hearts knows, to be the
product of that sincere love, which I have unto all my Christian Brethren, and
unto the peace and welfare of that Church and State in which we live.

And the words shall not be mine, but they shall be the words of the wise,
which (I trust) will be as goads, and as nails fastened by the Masters of
assemblies. Eccl. 12.11.


1. And first for such as are Dissenters from this point; I shall leave upon
their thoughts that mild and pious exhortation of the judicious Hooker, in his
Preface to his unanswerable Treatise of Ecclesiastical Policy.

The best and safest way for you my dear Brethren (says he) is, to re-examine
the cause you have taken in hand, and to try it even point by point, argument
by argument, with all the diligent exactness you can, to lay aside all gall of
bitterness, and with meekness to search the truth. Think you are men, deem it
not impossible for you to err: sift impartially your own hearts, whether it be
force of reason, which has bred and still does feed these opinions in you. If
truth does any where appear, seek not to smother it by glosing delusions,
acknowledge the greatness thereof, and think it the best victory when it does
prevail over you. Far more comfort it were for us (so small is the comfort we
take in these strifes) to labor under the same yoke, as men that look for the
same eternal reward of their Labors; to be joined with you in indissolvable
bonds of love and amity. To live as if our persons being many, our souls were
but one; rather than in such dismembered sort, to spend our few and wretched
days, in a tedious prosecution of wearisom contentions, the end whereof (if
they have not some speedy end) will be heavy on both sides. Experience has
made the Prophecy observable.

2. For these honorable Gentlemen whose concernment in Church and State are now
allied, and twisted by his Majesty's favor, unto one and the same common end,
to be procured and advanced by the same common trust of power; of which I may
say as Alexander in L. 10.
Curtius did of his marriage with Darius his Daughter; that it was done by him,
ut hoc sacro foedere omne discrimen victi and victoris excluderet; I shall only
mind you of that advise the late Wise and Pious EIK. AS. p. 238.
King gave unto his Son, his Majesty that now reigns. Let nothing seem little
or despicable to you in matters which concern Religion and the Churches Peace,
so as to neglect a speedy reforming and effual suppression of Error and
Schisms; which seem at first but an hand-breadth, by Seditious Spirits, as by
strong winds, are soon made to cover, and darken the whole Heaven. I press you
not to extremities: God forbid! Neither prudence nor Charity allow such
courses; the State of this Church resembles that in St. Austin's time; and
therefore we may all say as Lib. cont. Donat. c. 20.
he did; Non tamen ideo Ecclesiam negligimus; sed toleramus quae nolum us, ut
perveniamus quo volumus.

To you (my Lords the Judges) I shall conclude, with an humble desire that your
Lordships will be pleased to reflect upon a few words of the Oracle of the Law;
I shall give you them in his own language out of that excellent Ib in Prafat. A
Prince ought not to suffer his Laws to become a laughing stock: And woeful
experience has often taught (which I my self have sometimes observed) that
many of those men that have strained their wits, and stretched their tongues to
scandalize or caluminate these Laws, had either practiced or plotted some
heinous crimes; and therefore hated because they feared the just sentence and
heavy stroke.
Preface, to the fourth Book of his Reports. Non debet Princeps far suarum
legum ludibrium. Quin and saepius docuit misera and luctuosa experientia (quod
aliquando ipse etiam observavi) multos qui in id, ingenii nervos omnes
intenderunt, linguasque exacuerunt, ut legibus hisce scandalum aut calumniam
imponerent, nefarium aliquod crimen aut commisisse, aut fuisse machinatos,
ideoque leges odisse, quia justam censuram, and gravem plagam metuerunt. My
Lords, 2 Kin. 9.11.
You know the man and his communication.

Let me add but a word more. Amongst the Jews God made Exodus 21.29.
this Law, That, If an Ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and it
has been certified to his owner, and he has not kept him in, and he has kill
d a man or woman; the Ox shall be stoned, and the owner also shall be put to
death. The words (my Lords) have a tropological sense; it is obvious, and I shall
leave it to your Lordships wisdom to apply it.

And lastly (that I may knit both ends of my discourse together) I shall
conclude to, and for all, in the words of Holy David, Psalm. 19. Lord keep thy
servants from presumptuous sins, lest they get the Dominion over us, so shall
we be undefiled, and innocent from the great offense.

THE END.

