SIONS ENEMY DISCOVERED, OR The Worker of iniquity rebuked AND INNOCENCE
CLEARED, In a Reply to seven sheets of Paper Published by Jonathan Johnson of
Lincoln, and by him Entitled, The Quaker quasht, and his quarrel queld, etc.
JONATHAN,
I shall not here take notice of every polluted stream coming from the Fountain
of thy corrupt heart, which in thy papers thou have published: Thou runs on at
a high rate, as if there were not a righteous God that takes notice of, and
registers all the wrongs done unto his people; abide thou no longer in the dark
habitation of the Hipocrite, for though thou have told the World thou
expectedst my acknowledgment of my evil in writing against thee, as if that
were the cause thou kept thy papers almost these two years by thee, yet thy fig
leaves cannot cover thee, the light of Israel does discern thee, and thou shall
one day know they were sober lines which then were sent thee, when thou writst
last to me, and happy had thou been, if thou would have been warned by me.
Thou tells me (page 1) That I Bragadot^-like, said, I will not give one inch of
ground, or turn my back off the uncircumcised Philistine.

Let the sober Reader peruse my book and he may see that (in answer to thy
charge of the weakness and disarmed condition of those I am encamped with, and
that our weapon is but a bull rush.

I told thee, It was not th^^ nor thy Fathers legion, could make one Soldier
in the camp of the Lord give one inch of ground or turn his back off the
uncircumcised Philistine. Judge honest Reader; has not the wicked one wrested
my words? but when will he learn to speak truth? say Jonathan, do thou not
see thy bold presumption that would have thy engagement to be compared with
David, See his book p. 1.2.
and my words with Goltan; Come down son of ambition, David was a man after
Gods own heart, but thy hearr is not circumcised, therefore blush and be
ashamed.

I asked thee this question, Has every one that comes into the world heard
and read the preaching of Christ and his Apostles as they are transcribed in
the Bible? to which thou did positively answer, They have all heard, and yet
like a son of impudence in thy book thou deniest it; and chargest me, that I
have dealt falsely with thy answer; To which I reply, the Lord of heaven and
earth be judge betwixt us, whether them were thy words, or nay. And because
thou art so confident in thy darkness, I tell thee, millions of men and women
may witness against thee, that they never read the preachings of Christ and
his Apostles, as they are transcribed in the Bible. To my other question, How
is the Gospel preached to every creature under heaven which is the power of
God, if not by that principle of light in the conscience? In thy book thou
answerest thus, In the preaching of Christ and his Apostles, which works the
principle of light in the conscience, and whatsoever is not enlightened from
thence it is darkness, and not light: Be not these thy own words? Art thou an
elder Jonathan, or head or leader of a separated people, and so sottish to make
the letter the author of the light of Christ in the conscience, (which was
before the letter was given forth?) as if a man gave being to his maker; Sure
if thy Church were in God the Father of lights, they would see thy nakedness
and be ashamed: Thou multiplyest many words about the sound of accusing or
excusing in all consciences, I am satisfied that thou diddst confess, that the
sound of accusing or excusing is in all consciences, and knows it is accusing
not excusing, thee in thy conscience, for several sins thou commits against it:
And thy dark assertion, that it comes only by the hearing of faith preached by
the Apostles, does more manifest thy miserable nakedness, and thy gross
ignorance of Christ the power of God, and of his kingdom where it is, and what.

page 5.
Thou confesses, there was a principle of light in the people before Moses writ
the letter, and subtly speaks of Christ's sending the people to Moses and the
Prophets to hear them. Job. 5 46.


I grant thee, he did so, and I give thee this reason, recorded in scripture,
Had they believed Moses, they would have believed Christ, for Moses writ of
Christ. So now we desire people would wisely read and search the scriptures,
for they do testify of the light of Christ in the conscience, but many read
them foolishly as thou do, and think in them to have eternal life. but come
not to be guided by the light of Christ in the conscience, and so fall short of
eternal life. Charge me no more, with useing this phrase, the light of
conscience, 2 Pet. 1.19
for thou never receivedst it from me: Conscience is dark until it be awaked,
until the light of Christ in the conscience, arise and shine in the heart, nor
do the children of the day, or true Ministers of the light direct the hearts or
consciences of the people to any other thing then that sure word of Prophecy,
the light of Christ in the conscience, (who is the seed of the woman, the word
of God) though such as thou, believes not in it, and that's the reason you are
not saved by it, so sin has dominion over you, Romans 1.16
because you believe not in the light of Christ in the conscience, which is the
power of God unto salvation, to all that believe therein, and while thy carnal
mind is gazing after a Christ without as the Jews did, thou art not like to
find him within thee, but as a condemner of thee; and know this also I am not
ashamed to assirme unto thee, that the grace of God which brings salvation has
appeared unto all men, though all do not receive salvation by it, because they
believe not in it, no more do thou, while thus thou persecutes it, and smites
the innocent Lambs with the fist of wickedness. Isa. 58.4.
Wherefore have thou dealt thus unworthyly with me in thy ninth p. with thy
save only, etc, thus boldly to assirme that I granted to thee, that the light
in the conscience comes by the hearing of faith preached by the Apostles, as if
the letter were the author of the light. How have thou polluted thy garment
with a lie? but no better dealing do I look for, from thee, while blindness of
heart thus rests upon thee: Ephesians, 4.18:
I own that which Paul and Peter preached from, to be the spirit of the living
God, and what they spoke from the mouth of the Lord, I own to be the wind or
words of the Lord: Io. 8.12. Rev. 19.13.
But still afirming, as as I did before, that Christ (the light of the world) is
the word of God from whom the words proceeded, by whom the world was made, and
so the letter must give place to the spirit, the servant is not greater then
his master, the light was the life, and being of all the true Prophets and
Apostles, who spoke and writ the scriptures, and they preached the word to be
nigh even in the heart, and labored to turn men from darkness unto light,
and from the power of Satan unto God. Deu. 30.14. To. 10.8. 1 Io. 10. Io.
13.16. Act. 17.28


That which gave forth the leaves, said I. I own, and thou casts this upon me;
The printer gave forth the leaves, but I tell thee now as I did before, it was
the spirit of God, that gave the scriptures, and its that I own, and not the
Printer as the author of them; does the printer give or sell them? But Pro.
27.22.
bray a fool in a mortar, yet his folly will not leave him: Thy scornful
upbrayding me, with a mistake in the title page of my former book, 1 Cor. 15.10.
as if I had published my self a Minister of the Gospel, does not become thee,
nor (things well weighed) do I deserve it from thee. By the Grace of God I am
What I am, though no Minister (in that sense thy envious mind receives it) yet
a servant in my measure, not of the letter but of the everlasting Gospel: And I
want not witness within nor without, that I did neither then, nor does now so
appropriate that title to my self, but intended it to one, who then did well
deserve it. And had not the printer begun a new line where he should not, thou
had wanted this stone to have flung at the innocent. Thou busiest thy self
with babbling of the baptism of repentance, and spends many words to no purpose
about it; were it less in thy tongue and better witnessed in thy heart, it
were better for thee The Rev. 7.14
light of conscience as thou calls it, thou have again in thy mouth, happy were
it for thee if thy conscience were made clean with the blood of the lamb, and
purified with the light that is in it, which light once under thy own hand thou
did own to be the inlet to the spirit of promise, though n^w with impudence
thou denies it. And if ever thou own the truth as it is in Jesus, this thou will see, and confess with sorrow many things which are now denied by thee;
till thou, silence thou child of ignorance, and boast not above thy measure,
and lean no longer on a reed of Egypt, while the baptism of repentance from
dead works is not witnessed by thee. And tell the world no longer, 1 Timothy 6.13.
that we are denyers of that Christ Jesus who suffered at Jerusalem, for his
sufferings we own, who witnessed a good confession before Pontius Pilate; but
what is his sufferings unto thee whilst thou art an enemy to that Righteou^ Seed
within thee, which is a continual remembrancer unto thee, and reprover of thee.
As for thy aspersions unworthily cast upon me, as if I had denied his
sufferings without the gues at Jerusalem, who ever reads my book with a single
eye, may see thee slandring of the innocent and that's not the work of a
servant of Jesus Christ as thou have published thy self to be. Thy shunting
and railing terms to my queries mentioned in thy 17. page, is no good answer,
it may be if thou live two years longer, thou may more wisely consider of
them; In the mean time let the honest reader observe, tha^ although thou thus
unworthily They who live in sin are servants to sin and so out of the faith
which purifies the heart and givs victory over sin, and therefore such while
they are servants to sin are not saved or redeemed from their sins.
reproaches me as if I denied the sufferings of Christ; noe ground for this thou
have I know of; it is true, I said thou and they who feed your selves with the
mere frothy verbal faith in the sufferings of the man Christ Jesus at
Jerusalem, and yet wallow in your wickedness, are not saved or redeemed from
your sins. Now whether this be a denial of Christ's sufferings or not, let the
righteous witness in all consciences, judge between us: Besides I told thee
then, no other Jesus did I own but that lamb of God who was slain from the
beginning of the world, and that the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily in
him, he was appointed above his fellows, and yet the son of impudence tells
people I deny him, but my witness within me does herein justify me, and he is
greater then my false accuser without me: To what end is all thy loud outcries
against the harmless children of the light, ranking them among the worst of
men, and rendering them as odious to the world, with thy reproachful pen, as thy
wrathful heart could invent, if not to sharpen the edge of authority against
them; but the persecuting spirit is felt and fathomed, and its reward will not
be wanting. I do not deny but the Apostles preached all one Christ, and affirm
that there is a witness for God in all, though all receive him not, no more
do thou: he came to his own, and his own received him not, he that has ears
to hear let him hear; and it was Christ who preached in Paul and the rest of
the Apostles, and I tell thee Jonathan there are millions of men and women now
on earth who never heard of the sufferings of Christ without the gates at
Jerusalem, and yet the witness of God is within them, and is calling them to
come unto the Lord, that they may have life; 3 Col. 11.
and that is his voice which reproves for sin in the gate, though thou and thy
generation trample on him and reject him; there is no room for him in the Inn,
the manger must contain him; and so the pearl of great price is set at naught
by the wise and prudent of the world. Luke 2.7.
Thou spendest much paper in pleading for thy idol, to wit, outward water; and
no other baptism I am bold to say knows thou, but that which never washed thee
from thy sins, thou art not come to the bridling of the tongue, so all thy
religion is vain; John's Baptism I answer thee, was from God, it had its root
and rife from him, and in its time and place was serviceable, but it shall have
its end, he must increase says John, but I must decrease, spoke he this of his
person or of his ministration? let the voice of truth give answer to me; not do
I deny but that the Apostles in honor to John's ministry made use of John's
Baptism, by permission, I say, and therein I do not judge them; and prove thou
if thou can, that it was by precept or command from Christ. But all thy
twisting and twining cannot do it. I tell thee once more, the light of Christ
was in the Ephesians, and shined in their hearts, before their conversion to
the Son of God, Paul preached the light unto them or directed them to the same
principle of light within them; light shines in darkness, though darkness
comprehends it not: The true light was within them, though not a Savior to
them, because they believed not in it, nor was obedient to it. It was a
condemning voice to them, as it is to thee and so before they believed in it,
they were without God in the World, and so art thou. Be not angry if I tell
thee, Jonathan, that Gods faithful witness now suffers within thee, thy works
of iniquity wound the righteous soul within thee, with them he is pressed as a
cart with sheavs; he is a man of sorrows and suffers within thee, the just for
the unjust; he is in the grave and not risen in thee, and did he not suffer for
thee and within thee, thou should soon seel that consuming fire which is not
to be quenched; And as for my charging thee (...) thou said I killed the
scriptures, I tell thee Jonathan thou usedst these words to me, what light
according to the word of God is in thee, to crucify the Son of God again, and
kill his preaching; Answer me plainly Jonathan, do thou not own the
scriptures to be Christ's preaching? then wherein have I wronged thee? and now
let him who is found with a lie in his mouth, wash and be clean. 2 Ki. 5.13


Whether thou did call the scriptures dead letter or no, I shall leave the
sober minded reader to judge, when I come to answer the 37 and 38 pages till
then I spare thee, in the mean time I see thou would fain shuffle off the
words which I delivered concerning thee, in relation to those called Dippers:
peruse thy paper and try if those be not the words thou writst unto me. viz.
thou art forced to run for shelter and defense to those thou accounts thy
enemies, those who knows no other burial with Christ, but burial in water, and
with them tells me of sprinkling with water: but I tell thee, these chief
Princes of Meshech and Tuball will be all found together to band themselves
against the peaceable habitation and dwelling of the Saints? these are thy own
words Jonathan, though in thy foolish cover, thy wisdom is confounded, which
would have the world believe that these words of thine were applied to me, and
my geneneration; but tell me, and let the voice of truth answer me, do thou
believe I account my own generation to be my enemies? I know they are the
generation of the just which I do own, who know a better burial with Christ
then burial in outward water, so I appeal with boldness to the witness of God
in thy own conscience; whether I had not good cause to conclude as I did
concerning thee in this particular, and let the honest hearted reader, who
reads with an impartial eye, judge if thou have not sinned against thy own soul
in this foul and foolish shufling.

In my reply to the sixth position, I used these words, (which thou very
dceitsully have wrested Is thy sprinkling with water the baptism of Christ
Jesus yea or nay? And did the Lord command that to his disciples, yea, or nay?
And does the Lord require it of his people to this day? Now in thy letter thou
say, I bid thee prove whether Christ commanded baptism to his disciples yea
or nay? And did the Lord require it of his people to this day. I say, whether
thy dealing thus deceitfully with my words be not a lie, and whether this
deciptfull lie be not abominable, and whether nonsense be not lapt up in this
lie or no, let the discreet reader judge between us. And what though I told
thee, that I did never read nor know of one that pretends to more piety then
thou do, that ever excelled or equalled thee in the devilish art of lying?
Lying is his work who abode not in the truth, and in that work thou art found,
then what wrong have I done thee? I also told thee that a Notable servant thou
were to thy master, but I did not call thee Noble, for then I had wronged thee.
And as for my words, That I would peruse those places thy Father sent thee
with, to fight for his Kingdom. I still own them and thy works of iniquity
makes it manifest thou art not doing the will or work of the living God, and
therefore he is none of thy father, while the innocent ones thou slandrest; it is
the lying God thou servest, and he for his own ends makes use of scripture, to
war against that spirit of truth, which gave forth scripture, and this the
scriptures testify, Mat. 4.6. Thou spends three or four sides pleading for
outward water? I shall not follow thee in all thy crooked windings., but this I
say still, not thou, nor all thy generation, can by clear scripture prove:
convince me that Christ gave an express command to any of his disciples to
baptize with outward water; So that though they in their christian liberty did
use it, wherein I do not judge them, yet do I not justify thee and thy
generation in your sprinkling. I told thee some used circumcision in the flesh
as well as baptising with outward water, and I asked thee if their authority
were not of an equal parity, though the printer mistakeing, put an U for an A,
but what if I had said purity both by permission, not by precept, and let me
ask thee and thy generation this question, whether the commission which Christ
gave to his disciples in Mat. 28. 19, 20. be not the same which paul received
of him, or was his commission short or contrary unto theirs? answer plainly;
for Paul tells us plainly, he was not sent to baptize but to preach the Gosple.

Paul told the people, in him, that is in his flesh dwelt no good thing, does
he not explain his own words? when we were in the flesh (says he) the motions
of sin did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death, observe this,
He was not a christian when such fruits were brought forth; and are not such
fruits still brought forth in thee? Paul then spoke of a time past, but now
says he, The letter kills
we are delivered from the Law that we should serve in newness of spirit, not
in the oldnesse of the letter (lo he calls scriptures the letter, and are they
not so?) they that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8.8, 9. but ye are
not in the flesh (yet they were alive upon earth) but in the spirit; and I tell
thee Paul was filled with the holy Ghost, and he spoke wisdom amongst them
that were perfect, and what I sent thee, as to perfection, does stand over
thee: But why do thou tell me, 76 Ps. 4.
that I strive to get shut of the scriptures, and that their witness does
torment me? these two lies lie near one an other; and know thou O man the
scriptures testimony is for me, and not against the truth which I holdforth,
viz. That the light of Christ in the conscience is more glorious and excellent
then the letter, and all thy babbling against perfection, is palpable
contradiction to the doctrine of the Son of God, by him and his Apostles left
upon record in scriptures: Thou art forced to confess, That Abraham and the
rest of the holy men of God had the spirit of truth within them before the Law
written by Moses, And is not the Lord as good, as gracious now, as ever to his
people? I tell thee he is now in the midst of his people, and thousands
witness his kingdom come and the King of Sion sitting upon his throne in the
hearts and consciences of his people, though in thy dark mind thou would
exclude him, and confine or limit him above the stars; Christ when he was in
that prepared body upon earth, was conversant with the Apostles, i Pe. 3 19 Io.
5.25
and preached to the spirits in prison, and the dead that did hear the voice of
the son of God, did live; go learn what that means, and prove if thou can by
Scripture that the spirit of truth is received by the letter, or by believing
that to be the power of God unto salvation.

page 33.
Thou babblest of one Henry Nicholas, and pours out the dregs of thy wrath even
such bitter foame as thy vessel is filled with against the innocent lambs, who
deny not, but do receive salvation from the same Christ that suffered without
the gates at Jerusalem; Therefore silence thou deceitful tongue, for it is thy
self and thy generation, who though in words you confess him (as the Pope does)
yet by your works of iniquity you deny him, crying lo here, and lo there, but
the saints know their savior near them, he is within them, in their own
bosoms, though fools boast of they know not what. Had thou never read or
heard of Scriptures, thou had never known there is a Christ, or that the
bodies of his people are his temple. By thy pleading against the Saints
judging, I may judge what thou art; shall not, and do not the saints judge the
world? Is not thy heart in the world and worldly losts and vanities? yea
surely, and the judgments of the Son of God whom now thou persecutest in his
Saints, thou shall find and feel, if at this repoof thou turnest not.

In thy 34. and 35. pages, thou says, Thou judges me not, and asks where thou
have judged the people called Dippers, etc. To which I answer, if thou do not
judge me, what means all thy foul mouthed language in these, and thy former
papers against me, but I know him who thus judges me, his name is the false
accuser of the brethren, and as for those called Dippers, whether thou have not
judged them or no, I appeal to the righteous witness in thine, and their
consciences.

In thy 36 page thou speak thou know not what, of the spirit that
returns to God that gave it, I tell thee that spirit which invents and loves a
lie is for the lake: And it is that spirit which loves no iniquity that goes to
God, and it was that spirit of truth in the Apostles which loved not a lie,
that preached Christ and did work miracles, which spirit they never received
by reading Moses or the Prophets. And as for the wolf that would worry the
weak, (mentioned in thy 37 page) he lodges near thee, he is within thee, but
the pit is his portion.

Now because in thy 37 and 38 sides, thou have dealt so deceitfully,
misreporting thy own argument, and then putting a deceitful cover upon it, I
shall here lay down thy own words, and then take off thy polluted varnish. This
is thy argument; He that desires to be tried by the true touchstone, the
infalible Rule, the living principle of God, the light of Christ in the Saints
consciences, the spirit of truth, and would not be tried by the dead letter,
his spirit is of God, he is guided by the spirit of promise, but Jonathan
Johnson desires to be tried as above said, and not by the dead letter,
therefore his spirit is of God, he is guided by the spirit of promise.

Are not these thy own words? Then wherein have I wronged thee? but has not
the Lord herein confounded thy wisdom, and suffered thee to utter words thou
would not, and now to save thy head thou runs to inventions and says by
dead letter thou meanest the Quakers books, the writings of M M. and his
fellows. Ah Jonathan this mantle does not cover thee, this polluted garment
will not shelter thee, tell me Jonathan, and I charge thee by the Lord thou let
the voice of truth answer me, was not this the ground of that and other
arguments, whether the Scriptures or the spirit were the rule; not whether the
writings of those whom thou calls Quakers, or the spirit were the rule, were
ever such words exchanged between us? O that thy eye were opened, that thou
might see thy nakedness, and be ashamed.

In the 40 page thou tells the people, whosoever reads and observe me, will see
my desire to set up my selse as a wise master builder, but let the discreet
reader see what ground I gave thee, to write so scornfully concerning me, the
words in my book are these, according to the grace of God that is given unto me
as a wise master builder I have laid the foundation, says Paul, 1 Cor. 3.10.
He built upon the rock* now I say upon the same rock (which was Christ the
light whom Paul preached) my building is, and upon no other, which was in Paul'
before he preached him, and so by the same grace, I am what I am, but who can
escape the reproach of the envyous?

In thy 41 page speaking as to some words I used in my book, That which lay
dead, did at the hearing of the voice of the Son of God live, Thou answers,
That which here lay dead is, but I never told thee so, that which before I
called the Christ in all the Royal seed, the unction, the Lord of glory
crucified in them, so that by my doctrine (say thou) The Royal seed, the
unction, the Lord of glory and Christ in all lay dead, till it did at the
hearing of the voice of the Son of God, live, and then aske^ what greater
confused nonsense can be delivered, then to say Christ the Son of God lies
dead, until he hear the voice of Christ the Son of God and live, can such
babbling be without blasphemy? say thou,

To all which Jonathan, I reply, let the honest hearted reader peruse my book,
and Wisdom will be justified of her children, my words are these, If there had
not been a Royal seed of God left in every man and woman to have answered,
owned and received the Testimony of the Apostles, they might have wandered all
the World over, and have spent all their life time and not have gained one
convert, but there was a witness for God in all, and that which lay dead did
at the hearing of the voice of the Son of God live,. Here I have affirmed that
there was a witness for God in all, which cannot honestly be denied, and I
have affirmed also, and so do the Scriptures, that, that which lay dead, did at
the hearing of the voice of the Son of God, live; but did I ever affirm or
say, that the Royal Seed, the unction, the Lord of glory, and Christ in all lay
dead, till it did at the hearing of the voice of the Son of God, live? or that
Christ the Son of God lies dead, till he hear the voice of Christ the Son of
God, and live?

But it appears, thou knows not what that was which lay dead, to which the
Gospel was preached, and so in thy dark imagination, thou ignorantly concludes
thou knows not what, and casts a lie upon the innocent, for I never did
affirm these things thou reportest of me, so there thou art found with a lie
in thy mouth, and to be a false accuser of the innocent and the confused
nonsense and blasphemy is turned back into thy own bosom.

To that which remains, (thy unsavory riming excepted) this I write that the
answer of a good conscience is wanting in you, notwithstanding your imagined
water baptism, here I speak to thee and those in fellowship with thee* and do
appeal to Gods witness in all your consciences, whether your yea be yea, and
your nay, nay in all things, and whether you be not in the respect of persons
or vain customs and fashions of the heathen: and whether the true bridling of
the tongue be witnessed by you. As for Peter I know he baptized with outward
water upon permission, not by precept. And Paul did see that Ordinance or
practice idolized in his days and so laid it a side, saying, He was not sent
to baptize but to preach the Gospel.

And surely if that eye in you that should see, were not blinded, you might see
the hand of the Lord is held forth against you, and that his glory is departed
from you; is there nothing amiss among you, that the Lord thus scatters you
and breaks you in pieces like a potters vessel? let his witness search you,
have you not lost your first love? have you kept your garments pure? have you
abstained from idols? and as for your outward water, I shall now say no more
to that but this. 2. Kngs 18 4.
Remember the brazen serpent.

Written by a lover of your Souls Martin Mason.
Lincoln. 28. Day 5. Month 1659.
THE END.

