A mavelous medicine to cure a great Pain, If a Maidenhead be lost to get it
again.




^usie in study betwixt night and day,
(...) choice of inventions I had in my mind,
(...)od matters my mind did assay,
(...) to please me, I could not well find:
(...)nly casting my nose in the wind,
(...)out a Medicine both precious and plain,
(...) ^^lp silly maidens yt have bin some what kind
(...)l good order their maidenhead again.
(...) Maid must be brought into a sleep,
(...) da^s together before she awake,
(...) days after this dict must keep,
(...)se kind of compounds, the which she must take,
(...) eat neither roast meat, sed, neither bake
(...)d kind of dainties she must refrain,
(...) the Medicine, which if she take,
(...) restore etc.
The first day give her the slime of an Eel,
blown through a bag-pipe with ye wind of a bladder,
With two or three turning of a Spinning-wheel,
boyld in an egg-shell, and straind through a ladder:
The tongue of an Vrchin, the sting of an Adder,
boyld in a Blanket in a shower of rain,
with seven notes of music to make her ye gladder,
and it will, etc.
The second day give her the peeping of a Mouse,
with the drops of thunder that fall from the sky.
And temper it with three leaps of a lowse,
and put thereon three skips of a fly:
With a gallon of water from a widows eye,
that weeps for her husband that death has him slain
Let her take this medicine and drink by and by,
and it will, etc.




THe 3 day give her the chattering of a sparrow,
roasted in a Mitten of untan'd Leather,
Give it her with the tumbling of a Wheel-barrow,
and baste it with 3 yards of black Swans feather:
The juice of a Whetstone there put together,
with a Fart of a Friar brought hither from Spain,
Let her lay all this in an ell of Lowse Leather,
and lay it warm to her belly, to cure her great pain.
The fourth day give her the Song of a Swallow,
well tempered with marrow wrung out of a Log
With three pound and better of Stock Fish tallow,
hard-try'd in the left horn of a blew butchers dog
The hill of a Shovel, and humble bees brain,
give her this fasting with the grunting of a hog,
Let her take it though it put her to pain,
and it will, etc.
The fifth day give her twixt eight or nine,
some Gruel of Grantham boiled for the nonce,
The brains of a bird-bolt powdered very fine,
and beat in a Mortar of Genny Rens bones,
Boiled in a Nutshel betwixt two milstones;
with the Guts of a Gudgin before she be slain,
Let her be sure to take all that at once,
and it will, etc.
Now mark well ye sixth day what must be her trade,
she must have a Woodcock, a Shipe, or a Quail.
Baked fine in an Oven before it be made;
and mingle it with the blood of a Snail;
With four or five Inches of a Iack-a-napes tail,
what though for a while it put her to pain,
Yet let her take this without any fail,
and it will, etc.
The seventh day give her a pound of Maids m(...)
braid in a basket of danger and blame,
With conserves of Colwerts bound in a box,
to comfort her stomach with sirrup of shame,
Although she be past all hope of good name,
and to her honesty a very great stain,
Let her take this to remedy the same,
and it will, etc.
Lo these are the Medicines for Maids each one,
which in their Virginity amiss some what fell,
Pray if ever you hear them make moan,
and gladly would know the place where I dwell;
At the sign of the Whip and Egg-shell,
near Pancake Alley on Salisbury Plain.
There shall they find remedy using this well.
or else never recover their Maiden-head-again.
London, Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and J. Wright.


