ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in NEW ENGLAND,

Begun at Boston, the Thirty-first Day of May. 1693; And Continued by
Adjournment unto Thursday the Sixth Day of July following: Being the Second
Sessions.

Anno Regni Guilielmi, et Mariae, Regis et Reginae, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae,
et Hiberniae, Quinto.

BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green, and Sold by Samuel Phillips. 1693.

AN ACT For Coasting Vessels within the Province.
WHEREAS in and by an Act of Parliament, made in the Twenty Fifth Year of the
Reign of His late Majesty, KING Charles the Second (Entitled, An Act for the
Encouragement of the Greenland and Eastland Trades, and for the better securing
the Plantation Trade) Effectual care is taken and provision made for the
preventing of Frauds and securing the payment of the Rates and Duties, granted
by said Act, unto His said Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, upon Sugar,
Tobacco, Cotton-wool, Indico, Ginger, Fustick, and all other dying wood of the
growth, production and Manufacture of His Majesty's several Plantations in
America, Asia, and Africa; which shall be laden on board any Ship or other
Vessel, with intent to be transported and carried into any other of His
Majesty's Plantations; which said Rates and Duties are to be paid in the
respective places of the growth and production of the said goods and
Commodities before the Lading thereof.

It is therefore Declared, and Enacted, by the Governor, Council, and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, Liberty for carrying one Tun and half of the Enumerated Commodities, from
place to place in the Province without Entry etc.
That any of the before Enumerated Goods and Commodities, which are, or shall,
at any time hereafter, be brought into this Province from any other of Their
Majesty's Plantations, where the same do grow, and are produced, shall and may
be transported and carried from Port to Port, and Place to Place, within the
Province by Land or Water, for the supply of the Inhabitants and Trade within
the same, without any Entry or Clearing, Bond or Certificate, to be given or
taken out for the same.

And that no Boat or other Vessel using to pass or trade between port and port,
place and place, within the Province only, and not designed to go elsewhere,
shall be obliged to Enter or Clear; Provided that no such Boat or other Vessel
do take in or carry more than Six Hogtheads, or one Tun and half of the said
Enumerated Commodities, at any one time, turn, or Voyage.

Masters to Enter and give bond if they take in above that Quantity.
The Masters of all Boats or other Vessels so passing or trading from Port to
port, or place to place, within the Province, taking in more than Six
Hogsheads, or the quantity of one Tun and half of any of the said Enumerated
Commodities, at any one time, turn, or Voyage; shall before the taking in the
same, give bond at the Naval Office of one Thousand pounds, with one sufficient
surety, to Land all such Goods and Commodities at some other Port or place
within the Province, or in some other of Their Majesty's Colonies or
Plantations adjoining, and not elsewhere; on Pain of Forfeiting such Vessel and
goods, according as by the within recited Act of Parliament is directed. For
which bond, there shall be paid three Shillings, and no more; and no such bond
to be sueable after the end of Twelve Months, from the time of giving the same.

AN ACT For Partition of Lands etc. and the Recovery of Legacies at the Common
Law.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives, Convened in
General Court, and by the Authority of the same,

Partition of Lands betwixt Coparceners etc. to be forced by the common Law.
That all persons having or holding, or that hereafter shall have or hold, any
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, as Coparceners, Joint-Tenants, or Tenants
in Common, may be compelled by writ of Partition, at the Common Law to divide
the same; where the parties cannot agree to make Partition thereof by
themselves.

Provided, this Act shall not be understood to repeal, or any ways alter any
clause or clauses in the Act, for Regulating of Town-ships, referring to
undivided or common Lands.

And it is Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

Legacies to be Recovered at the common Law.
That where any certain Legacy is or shall be bequeathed and given by any
Person, in his or her last Will and Testament; As also where any residuary or
uncertain Legacy, is, or shall by the Account of any Executor be reduced to a
certainty, every such Legacy and Legacies as aforesaid may be Sued for, and
recovered at the common Law; and Law custom or usage to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An Additional ACT, For the Punishing of Criminal Offenses.
WHEREAS the Breach of sundry Criminal Laws of this Province, is only
Punishable by Fines, and many times the breakers of them have not Money to
satisfy the same.

Be it therefore Enacted, by the Governor, Council, and Representatives,
Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,

Criminal Offenses to be punished by Stocking etc where the Offenders cannot
otherwise satisfy the Law.
That henceforward it shall be in the power of any Justice of the Peace, that
shall have Cognizance thereof, to Punish breakers of the Peace; Prophaners of
the Sabbath, and unlawful Gamesters, Drunkards, or profane Swearers or
Cursers, by setting in the Stocks, or putting into the Cage, not exceeding
three Hours, or imprisonment Twenty four Hours, or by Whipping, not exceeding
Ten Stripes; as the case may deserve, and where the offender has not
wherewithal to satisfy the Law in that case provided.

FINIS.

