The Princes Standard SET UP In the Vice Admiral on the Downs near Sandowne
Castle.

His Highness Demand of twenty thousand pounds from the City of London: the
Declaration, and heads of two Letters sent to the City, and read at a Common
Council, signed with the Princes own Hand.

Also his Highness Message to Sir Michael Lieusay of Kent sent by a Trumpeter:
the burning of the town of Deal, and the Duke of York returned into Holland
for more men: With a Commission from the Prince, sent to the Governor of
Scarborough Castle.

C P
ICH DIEN printer's or publisher's device

LONDON: Printed for R. A. 1643.

A FULL RELATION OF The whole proceedings at the Siege before DEALE-CASTLE.
SIR,
UPon our laying close siege to Deale-Castle, the Defendents by Grenades and
red hot Loggets, fired part of the town, which we could not quench before it
had burnt down sixteen houses, because the wind sat North-East, and forced
the flame upon the whole town; we have raised a Fort between the Castle and
the Sea, which will keep off any ships for coming to annoy us: We have also
raised another Fort between this and Sandown-Castle, by which means no relief
or Forces can land there. Friday last we played with our Canon against the
Castle, and every night they send many Canon shot unto us in the town, which
was such a terror to the Inhabitants, that they have all forsaken their
dwellings: there be in the Caastle about two hundred men, women, and children;
when we sent some Grenades amongst them, upon sight of our giving fire, those
in the Castle keeping a watch, presently perceived what was coming amongst
them, upon which those, which were on the watch gave an alarm to the rest by
the sound of a Bell, which when they heard the rest in the Castle got down
into the Cellar, and avoided the fury of the execution; those which were taken
in the Princes Frigot the last week in the Isle of Thanet being examined say,
that the Sea agreed not with the health of the Duke of York, and thereupon he
is returned again into Holland: but others say, he is gone to strengthen
himself in men and shipping; the Prince with a Fleet of ships has rid within
sight of this Castle, and has set up his Standard in the Vice Admiral, and
diverse ships sailing for London have been stayed. The Earl of Warwick has
also set up his Standard for the Parliament, but no action has as yet happened
between them, we have not lost above six or seven men before Deale-Castle since
our sitting down before it, some execution has been made in the Castle, but
what their loss is, as yet we know not: Captain Green who commanded the
Frigot before mentioned, which was taken by Sir Michael Lieusay's men in the
Isle of Thanet, was to be tried for his life by a Council of War, but the
Prince sent a Trumpeter on shore in the interim with a white paper in his hat
signed, Charles, Prince of Wales.

In which paper his Highness required the said Captain Green should be sent
to him again by exchange or otherwise, and in it thought this motion will be
granted: the Message was sent, as we understand, to Sir Michael Lieusay, of
which I shall give you a further account by the next.

Sandwich, Aug. 2. 1648. Your assured Friend, T. M.

I have here enclosed sent you a copy of the Princes Commission, as it was
sent to the Governor of Scarborough Castle.

CHARLES P. Charles Prince of Great Britain, Duke of Cornwall and Albaine;
Highest Captain General under His Majesty, of all the Forces by Sea and Land
within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales.
Trusty and well-beloved,
WE do by these presents, out of the special trust and confidence We repose in
you, nominate, constitute, and appoint you to be Governor for His Majesty, of
the Town and Castle of Scarborough, and of the Garrison Soldiers, Forces, and
Inhabitants thereof (whom we hereby command to obey you in all things, as their
Governor, giving you full power and authority to command as well the present
Garrison of the said Town and Castle, as any other or greater Garrison that
shall hereafter be settled thereabouts, for His Majesty's service, and to
appoint and authorize by Commission all such Officers under you, as shall be
from time to time necessary for the government of the said Town and Castle, and
for the command of the Garrison and Inhabitants there, authorizing and
requiring you likewise, to keep and defend, with the assistance of the said
Garrison, or of any other Forces you can get, the said Town and Castle for His
Majesty's use, and service, against all invasions and attempts whatsoever. And
for the better defense of the same, to add such new Works, as you in your
judgment and discretion shall think meet, to the Fortification already made,
as also, to do and execute all such other things and duties as belong to the
office and authority of Governor of the said Town and Castle, and as you in
your judgment shall think fit, for the necessary defense thereof, and in as
large and ample manner as you now hold and exercise the same. In the execution
whereof, and of this our Commission, you are to obey and pursue such Orders as
you shall from time to time receive from His Majesty, from Us, or from such
person as we shall appoint.

Given under our Hand and Seal in the 24. year of the Reign of our Royal
Father the King.

Wednesday the 2. of July the Prince sent a Letter to the Merchant-Adventurers
of the City of London, but the matter therein contained was only to desire them
to deliver the enclosed to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, etc.

Signed Charles P.




According to his Highness request, the enclosed Letter was delivered and read
at a Common Council, and the effect of the Letter was to signify, that his
Highness had caused to be stayed diverse Merchants Ships, but would discharge
them again upon condition the City of London send him twenty thousand pounds,
with this Letter his Highness sent to the City his Declaration, That his
endeavor is to rescue the Kings Majesty his royal Father from base
imprisonment, restoring the rights, and liberties of the City of London. And so
for all the other particulars contained in a sheet called the Heads of the
Prince his Declaration, which is already printed, and is too large to be here
again inserted, This Letter and Declaration were both signed with the Prince
his own hand.



Dated, 1. August, 1648. CHALES P.


FINIS.

