AN ELEGY UPON THE DEATH OF MY LORD FRANCIS VJLLJERS.

AN Elegy upon the Death of my Lord Francis Villiers.
It Is true that he is dead: but yet to choose,
Methinkes thou Fame should not have brought the news*
Thou can discourse at will and speak at large:
But wast not in the fight nor durst thou charge.
While he transported all with valiant rage
His Name eternizd, but cut short his age;
On the safe battlements of Richmonds bowers
Thou wast espyd, and from the gilded Towers
Thy silver Trumpets sounded a Retreat,
Far from the dust and battails sulphry heat.
Yet what could thou have done? it is always late
To struggle with inevitable fate.
Much rather thou I know expectst to tell
How heavy Cromwell gnasht the earth and fell.
Or how slow Death far from the sight of day
The long-deceived Fairfax bore away.
But until then, let us young Francis praise:
And plant upon his hearse the bloody bays,
Which we will water with our welling eyes.
Tears spring not still from spungy Cowardice.
The purer fountains from the Rocks more steep
Destill and stony valor best does weep.
Besides Revenge, if often quenched in tears,
Hardens like Steel and daily keener wears.
Great Buckingham, whose death does freshly strike
Our memoryes, because to this so like;
Ere that in the Eternal Court he shone,
And here a Favorite there found a throne;
The fatal night before he hence did bleed,
Left to his Princess this immortal seed.
As the wise Chinese in the fertile womb
Of Earth does a more precious clay entombe,
Which dying by his will he leaves consignd:
Til by mature delay of time refind
The crystal metal fit to be releast
Is taken forth to crown each royal feast:
Such was the fate by which this Postume breathd,
Who scarcely seems begotten but bequeathd.
Never was any humane plant that grew
More fair then this and acceptably new.
It Is truth that beauty does most men dispraise:
Prudence and valor their esteem do raise.
But he that has already these in store,
Can not be poorer sure for having more.
And his unimitable handsomeness
Made him indeed be more then man, not less.
We do but faintly Gods resemblance bear
And like rough coyns of careless mints appear:
But he of purpose made, did represent
In a rich Medall every lineament.
Lovely and admirable as he was,
Yet was his Sword or Armor all his Glass.
Nor in his Mistress eyes that joy he took,
As in an Enemies himself to look.
I know how well he did, with what delight
Those serious imitations of fight.
Still in the trialls of strong exercise
His was the first, and his the second prize.
Bright Lady, thou that rulest from above
The last and greatest Monarchy of Love:
Fair Richmond hold thy Brother or he goes.
Try if the Jasmin of thy hand or Rose
Of thy red Lip can keep him always here:
For he loves danger and does never fear.
Or may thy tears prevail with him to stay?
But he resolved breaks carelessly away.
Only one argument could now prolong
His stay and that most fair and so most strong:
The matchless Chlora whose pure fires did warm
His soul and only could his passions charm.
You might with much more reason go reprove
The amorous Magnet which the North does love.
Or preach divorce and say it is amiss
That with tall Elms the twining Vines should kiss:
Then chide two such so fit, so equal fair
That in the world they have no other pair.
Whom it might seem that Heaven did create
To restore man unto his first estate.
Yet she for honors tyrannous respect
Her own desires did and his neglect.
And like the Modest Plant at every touch
Shrunk in her leaves and feared it was too much
But who can paint the torments and that pain
Which he professed and now she could not faigne?
He like the Sun but overcast and pale:
She like a Rainbow, that ere long must fail,
Whose rosiall cheek where Heaven it self did view
Begins to separate and dissolve to dew.
At last he leave obtaines though sad and slow,
First of her and then of himselse to go.
How comely and how terrible he sits
At once and War as well as Love befits!
Ride where thou will and bold adventures find:
But all the Ladies are got up behind.
Guard them, though not thy self: for in thy death
The Eleven thousand Virgins lose their breath.
So Hector issuing from the Trojan wall
The sad Jliades to the Gods did call
With hands displayed and with dishevelled hair
That they the Empire in his life would spare.
While he secure through all the field does spy
Achilles for Achilles only cry.
Ah ignorant that yet e're night he must
Be drawn by him inglorious through the dust.
Such fell young Villiers in the cheerful heat
Of youth: his locks entangled all with sweat
And those eyes which the Sentinel did keep
Of love closed up in an eternal sleep.
While Venus of Adonis thinks no more
Slain by the harsh tuske of the Savage Boar.
Hither she runns and has him hurried far
Out of the noise and blood, and killing war:
Where in her Gardens of Sweet myrtle laid
She kisses him in the immortal shade,
Yet dyed he not revengelesse: Much he did
Ere he could suffer. A who le Pyramid
Of Vulgar bodies he erected high:
Scorning without a Sepulcher to dye.
And with his steel which did whole troops divide
He cut his Epitaph on either Side.
Till finding nothing to his courage fit
He rid up last to death and conquered it.
Such are the Obsequies to Francis own:
He best the pomp of his own death has shown.
And we hereafter to his honor will
Not write so many, but so many kill.
Till the whole Army by just vengeance come
To be at once his Trophee and his Tomb.
FJNJS.

