News from SEA, CONCERNING Prince Rupert, Capt. Pluncket, Capt. Munckel, And
others: WITH SOME TRANSACTIONS BETWIXT THE King of Portingal, AND Them.
Together with the taking of certain Ships; and a Relation touching the strange
News of the BARBADOS.

ALSO, The discovery of a Plot in the Isle of Silly, for destroying of the
English; and the principal Actors tried by a Council of War.

LONDON, Printed for J. C. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, and in the Old-Bayley. 1650.

A LETTER FROM PLYMOVTH, Dated the 10th day of May 1650.
HE that by himself or by any other, begins any dangerous enterprise without
foreseeing the end and Issue thereof, brings himself and others into peril;
This has been a received maxim, and newly verified by the late overthrow given
to the forces lately landed in Scotland, (reported to be of Montrosses party,
consisting chiefly of Sweads and Danes) of which their is intelligence come
hither this day, that they have received a great overthrow, by a party of
Lieut. Genesis David Lestlies, who (says some Letters) have routed, killed and
taken at least three thousand, amongst whom Hurry himself, is reported to be
one of the Prisoners taken, and others of great quality; which coming from
such hands, as we have no cause to question the truth thereof, puts me in mind
of an old Proverb, viz. That they which take upon them more then of right
belongs, commiteth a great error, and seldom escape unpunished.

Four Straights Ships are come into this Harbor, (besides two East India Ships
hereafter mentioned) the Seamen report that many Pirates infest the narrow Seas:
the clearing of the Coasts of such implacable Enemies, would be a great
encouragement to Merchants, and therefore we are very joyful to hear that there
is a gallant Fleet prepared by the Parliament, and as we are informed, is
already fallen into the Downs, the knowledge whereof, strikes a terror into
the Enemy, who having persisted in their obstinacy, deserve not the least
favor; for how can it be safe for the Commonwealth not to revenge such
injuries done to the State: A Master of one of these Ships says, that he heard
that there was with Prince Rupert at Lisborne, Capt. Pluncket, Gapt. Muckell,
and several others eminent for their Rebellious actings against the
Commonwealth of England; but what has been done since the King of Portingall
refused to protect them, he knows not for that it is some weeks since he had
this Intelligence.

Truly Sir, it is not only my opinion, but the judgment of many others, well
wishers to the peace and tranquillity of this Nation, that if men would consider
how much it gives advantage to the common Enemy, which study nothing so much,
as to find an advantage to bring us into new miseries, there would not be such
divisions amongst men; but every one should rather join together as one for
defense of the whole body, and lay aside back-bitings, and reproachful speeches
which are oftentimes the cause of much evil, and draws others to do some
things which may be thought unreasonable. These kinds of distempers are
commonly moved first in disquiet spirits, who ordinarily crave more then is fit
to be granted, looking rather on what they fancy to be good, or in their own
private judgments imagine to be evil, then to inform themselves, that the first
degree to attain virtue and honesty, is to obey the Laws, and reverence those
that are in Authority over us, and for want of a due observation hereof, many
have plunged themselves into eminent dangers, and cause fears and jealousies
where needs not any; for as all men ought to be governed by Laws and certain
Rules, so ought there to be some persons that shall put those Laws in
execution, and thereby govern the people: Scipio says, it is the Saylors
endeavor to get a fair passage, the travel of the Phisician tends to
health, and a Captains labor is for victory: so should it be the glory and
virtue of every private man, to be dilligent in his Calling, and not to meddle
with those things that are too high for him.

This advice I have thought good to remember you of, yet it is not because you
have occasion to make use thereof in your own particular; but to the end you
may as oppertunity is ministered, persuade with others whom you find averse and
obstinate, and would stir up such Coals which should not only set their
Neighbors, but their own house on fire. I shall return again to our
Intelligence.

Two gallant Ships are arrived in this Harbor, appertaining to London
Merchants, they are richly laden, and intend by the next fair wind, to hoist
sail for the port of London, to which place, we make not any question but they
may come with safety. The Seamen in the said Ships, express a very good
affection to the Parliament of England, and say that they will willingly
sacrifice their lives upon occasion for defense of this Commonwealth, under
the present Government, without King or House of Lords, which is the more
remarkable, in respect the said words were uttered before they heard of the
Engagement, or had it tendered unto any of them. These Seamen are come home
very rich, and do much lament the loss of some of their Country men, whom they
hear to be lately taked by the French, yet if any such thing has been done,
the Parliaments and chief Governors of that Nation, are said to be no abetters
or countinancers thereof, pressing rather a desire of a continuance of a League
and friendship, then to grant Letters of Mart. The last Ship taken, was of a
considerable value, and was not taken without a hot fight, and the loss of many
men; and although in the combat the French, as such as were with them (men of
War and of greater force then their competitors) might get the better at first,
yet be it known unto the whole world, that the enterprises of Pirates and
banished persons are dangerous, and seldom come to a good end.

About three days since here arrived a man of War, which brings intelligence,
that as they stroke into harbor on the Coast of Holland, they heard it related,
that the King of Portingal had given P. Rupert a day certain to put forth to
Sea, not permiting him to stay beyond the time limited in any of his Harbors;
and the time being expired, it is reported that there has been a great fight
betwixt him, and Colonel Blake, in which conflict the victory is given to the
said Colonel Blake, and 5: of P. Ruperts Ships, are said to be sunk and taken,
without the loss of one of ours; but of this, I suppose you have better
intelligence at London then any with us.

Having taken liberty thus freely to discourse of such things, which either
hapen here or are credibly informed by good hands, give me leave to enlarge my
self a little further, in acquainting you what we hear concerning a plantation
belonging to the Commonwealth of England: called the Barbados, about which I
received a Letter the last night, what your intelligence was at LONDON, which
came only from a private hand, and renders no reason but Common fame; yet for
that, I have heard that vulgar reports are not always so much to be slighted,
as that no answer at all were necessary to be returned, I shall make bold to
inform you, in brief what is related here by the Seamen, touching that
business, which (say they) is only thus; An unskilful Pilot missing his
compass, and thereby failing of the intended harbor, to vindicate his own
reputation persuaded the Mariners, that the Island was removed out of the
place in which it formerly stood: And how far his Rhetoric might sway their
belief in this kind I know not, but of this I am sure, that it gains little
credit of any others that hear thereof.

POSTSCRJPT.
SInce the writing of these lines, news is come hither, that there is a great
difference betwixt the English and the Irish, in the Isle of Silly, and that
Noy could hardly appease the same without blows. A Colonel and some others
were tried by a Council of War, for having a hand in a plot to cut off the
English, who are fewer in number then the Irish. This broyle is like to take
some further rooting there, and probably will work such division, that will not
quickly be reconciled, if that young Preston carry not the Irish back into
their own Country: The Soldiers there are reported to be generally very poor,
the Island affording little accommodation, either for back or belly, and they
that go abroad in vessels, to fish or theeve for the rest will, be sure to have
the best share.

Vale.

