News from the North A POEM On the Late Most Horrible Conspiracy against his
Sacred MAJESTY, Wherein is given an Account of James, Duke of Monmouth.
Who was lately seen in IRELAND lord, Lord Gray, who was surpised at Wrexam;
together with a True Relation of R. Rumbold, and R. Nelthorp's Passages on the
Irish Seas, how they were driven to a certain place called the Devil's Gulf,
where Vengeance overtook them, with a fair warning, to all Traitors. --
By an Embroyan fancy of Anti-Jack-Presbyter.
Come, Whiggish Tyrants, now my Muse descrys'
Death in your steps, and horror in your Eyes;
^our ghastly Visage does portend no less'
^an the hight in abstract of all wickedness;
which acted here on Earth by you alone,
^ke Gorgon's head begins to turn me Stone:
(...) direful fact! for who could further look?
(...) further none, for admiration struck:
^ll boystrous blast, that with one Magic puff,
^^^ns Kingdoms glories to a farthing snuff;
^^w could you thus in Royal Blood imbrue,
^^ve in that Ocean, and yet never rue:
^e not the Storms which bred in inward parts'
^ath'd ou^ with Earthquakes from your trembling hearts
(...) could ye thus him worthy of death decree,
(...) whose chief part all worthies planted be;
(...) ^ight as boldly ventured to deny*
In former times bright heaven's Sulfurous flash
Against such fierce Tyrants surely blows did dash;
Heavens were but vain, if Gods add no supply,
To scourge usurping pride from Sovereignity,
No wonder such whilst that on Earth they dwell
In Earthly fetters feel a lasting Hell:
Sad case tho just, that Fathers might disown,
Their proper Sons (if such as Rouse or Hone;)
If not Surpised, Good God! where had they been?
Or Walcot here their Pupil Assassin;
This wonder far surpasses my conceit,
The Agents vile, how should the Act be great?
Was Monmouth base, the holy Saints object,
(whom they cannot well in any wise protect;)
But as he was from Royal blood descent,
Might be their bulwark and their Ornament.
(...)
Nor was his Princely Grace in this so free,
But might be termed the worst of all the three:
And now that he in Irish corner's lurks'
He Will never join in Armor with the Turks;
Who Traitors never admit, for such as those,
They harbor first as friends, then prove their foes.
Sad fate that Princes thus have made their suit,
To gain that favor which is past recruit;
See how that he is demeaned in whose bright eye,
They would the Copy of an Answer spy;
Whom dawn of day has seen to sit on high;
Him in the dust has seen the Evening Sky:
Experience that confirms, tho not so soon,
As if our morning Sun must set at noon;
Stars, I confess, when Phoebus does display,
The luster of his beams in midst of day:
Are not apparent, yet in dusk of Night;
They Are clearly seen by that their borrowed light.
Yet one of these by Night I spy from far
That never moves, but when Irregular:
And (the motion being such) I fear,
Will never be seen in all our Hemisphere.
No wonder then, if Sacred Princes are,
Heaven's primate objects and peculiar car^:
Since Traitors joy^tly thus combine in vain'
Conspire their hurt, and do disturb their Reign;
What mischiefs do arise; methinks I see,
That buisy Ketch and Lords can never agree.
So does he curse those rash attempts of late,
Greys sudden fall, and Arthur's dreadful fate;
Death with his pointed shaft, or nimble dart,
First Janus like on both sides acts it is part:
At length his Masters like Acteon's Hounds,
Pursues in vain, in vain the Trumpet sounds;
There Is no Retreat; The one despair surrounds:
The others heart the Kings Attorney wounds.
Unlucky Lord, who felt such Butchers hands,
Such Tigers that do far surpass the Vands
I think no less but that they would o'r-match
In Execution there our bloody Ketch:
There I much more condole thy wretched State
Than here beheaded Russel's direful Fate
A day of doom was that by Gods decree:
A day that Russel never wished to see:
Who in my conscience had he paid his fee:
One blow might well have served instead of three.
I would impugn his Speech but that it is known,
That neither style, nor method was his own:
The Vindication (as it is due,)
We do referr to Baxter and his Crew.
But what became of those that lately fled?
What do they still remain unpunished?
The Gods, when they their Ruin had decreed
Would make it thus their own erroneous deed.
For Rumbold here and Nelthorp too began,
To steer their course unto the Isle of Man;
( Storms soon arise, and rageing waves do swell,
By which they are driven to the Gulf of Hell:
Where Vengeance overtakes our Trayt'rous Foes)
I fear they end their lives in endless woes.
Come now poor Remnant here see what it is,
With your own blood to seal a lease of Bliss:
Ye would return, I know, but that ye fear,
That Ketch the Hangman might be to severe:
We must confess, he would rejoice to see,
You cutting Capers on the Gallow Tree;
And that which should be to your comfort said,
The Traitors now are drawn and quartered.
What greater torment can there ever be,
But to be Damned to all Eternity:
Ah fadeing pleasure that does soon annoy!
Oh glorious Title of a foolish joy!
Who would such horrid deaths as these embrace,
See how these Ruffians they do work apace:
Until the fatal bait is swallowed down,
Wherewith Ambition Angles for a Crown
Lo! the Traitors in those Snares are caught,
Which to inveagle others they had wrought.
I wish if such remain, that they mighi Swing*
At Tyburn like the rest,
God Save the King
LONDON Printed for J. Dean, 1683.


