News from the Coast (...)
A True Relation of a Brisk and Bloody Encounter which happened upon the 13th.
of February, between the Tiger Frigot, Captain Harman Commander; and the
Schaherless of Holland, Vice Admiral of Young Evertson's Squadron, Pasqual De
Wit Captain, near Cadize in Spain: Where the said De Wit, to Vindicate his
Honor (being suspected of Cowardice by the Spaniards, for quiting his Station
upon the Tigers approach) Challenged Captain Harman to Fight the next day: And
having double Manned his Ship, the Number being 270 Men, came up with the Tiger,
who had but a 180 Men on Board, within a League of Cadize Bay, within the View
of all the Inhabitants. These two Ships being come within half Pistol shot one
of another, Fired their Broadsides, where the Tiger did such Execution, that he
Disabled their Adversaries Topmast-Yard, Killed and wounded 80 of their men
without any considerable Damage to himself: And immediately Laying him Aboard
on the Bow, after half an hours Dispute, Entered his Men and made him Yield;
Carrying his Prize miserable Shattered and Torn, to the Admiration of all the
People: The Dutch having Lost 140 Men, besides 86 Wounded: And the English
Losing but Nine, and Fifteen wounded, amongst whom the Captain himself was Shot
under the Left-Eye by a Musket Shot, but is in good hopes of Recovery.

Tune of, Digby's Farewell.


COme all you brave Seamen of Courage so free,
Come lend your attention and listen to me,
for here is good News that is late come to Town
Which is for your Credit, and Englands Renown,
Of brave Captain Harman it is now I must tell,
Who near unto Cadiz behaved himself well
And taught a Dutch Captain whose name is de Wit,
To know he had Valor, and made him submit.
The Tiger from Tangier to Cadiz made way,
Whereas the de Wit, the Dutch Admiral lay,
But soon as the Dutchman our Frigate espied,
They straight into Port with all diligence hi'd;
Which caused the Spaniards about for to say,
He quitted his Station and durst not to stay;
VVhereat the proud Dutchman did fume and did fret,
And wished in his heart that they never had met.
Then taking advise of young Evertson straight,
A Challenge he sent with the Tiger to fight,
To regain his Honor if so it might be,
The which was accepted immediately,
His Ship with stout Seamen he then double Manned,
And thought that our English was merely Trappan'd,
But in the conclusion he found it not so,
They paid him his Reckoning before he did go.
Two hundred and seventy Men he had there,
And but half so many the Tiger did bear,
Of brave English hearts, and of Courage most free
That scorned to be dounted in any degree:
Then up they did come within half Pistol shot,
Their Broad-sides they fired, and Men went tot'h pot,
Whilst all the whole Town did come out to behold,
And see them Encounter shith Courage most bold.
With Broad-sides of Bullets and Shot that was Barred
We quickly disabled de Wits Topmast Yard,
And Fourscore men they had wounded and slain.
Which made them to fret but it was but in vain.
Q(...)
We(...)l bea(...) in upon (...)
We Will show them such Valor as never was shown,
I Will take their Ship Prize, or I Will venture my own.
Then quickly they Grappled, and then the dispute
Was desperate and bloody whilst Cannons were mute,
For half an hours space the hot Service was such,
Our Men remained Victors, and conquered the Dutch
And then they submitted themselves to be Prize,
Which all the brisk Spaniards, beheld with their eyes,
And our English Valor did highly commend,
Since Harman had forced the proud Dutch for to bend.
The Prize was so shattered and torn in the Fray,
They scarcely could get her safe into the Bay:
For to Harman's Honor, de Wit must confess,
He nere was so thumped before I do guess,
'Twill teach him hereafter more humble to be
To yield to his betters in every degree;
By woeful experience he now can relate,
What it is to sell Honor at so dear a rate.
Of Dutchmen one hundred and forty were slain,
And eighty six wounded, which languish in pain,
Of all our brave English we lost but just nine,
And therefore we have no great cause to repine,
Besides fifteen wounded the truth for to tell,
All which through God's merry we hope will do well.
Such Blessings the Lord has for England in store,
We lost not much more then a man to a score.
Brave Harman who fought where the Battle was hot
Was struck through the cheek with a chance Musket shot
But yet there is hopes he will recover again
And live for to win more Renown on the Main;
However his Valor is highly extolled,
Amongst our English Worthies he shall be enrol'd
Who fought for true Honor, glad Tidings to bring,
How well he had served both his Country and King.
Then cheer up brave Seamen, and Englishmen bold
You here by this story which here I have told;
No Seamen nor Soldiers can with us compare,
Although they have odds yet to fight them we dare j
Throughout the whole World a terror shall prove
If we can continue in union and Love:
And thus you may see by these Lines I have writ,
How stout Captain Harman did Conquer De Wit.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Veres, J. Wright and J. Clarke.


